portrait of Paul Rycaut, Consul of Smyrna and Fellow of the Royal Society

THE LIVES OF THE POPES, From the time of our Savior Jesus Christ, TO THE
REIGN OF SIXTUS IV.

Written Originally in Latin by BAPTISTA PLATINA Native of Cremona, And
Translated into ENGLISH.

And the same History continued from the Year 1471. to this present time;
wherein the most remarkable Passages of Christendom both in Church and State
are Treated of and Described.

By PAUL RYCAUT, Esquire;

LONDON:

Printed for Christopher Wilkinson at the Black Boy over against S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet, 1685.

TO THE Div. S.
READER.
THE History of Platina of the Lives of the Popes, being rendered into English
by an unknown hand, was delivered to me by the Bookseller; and considering that
Platina was an Author of good Reputation and Authority in the World, I often
wished that he had lived in that Age, in which he might have deduced his
History from ancient to the present times; or that some other of our learned
men would have continued the same in the Language of our own Country; for since
our Tongue is so well refined, and so copious, it ought justly to comprehend
all those Histories, Sciences and Arts, which are related and made known in
foreign Languages. But observing that this Work was neglected, and not thought
worthy the labor of better Pens, I essayed to do it in my own rude and plain
Style, without affectation or ornament, more than what the simplicity of naked
truth would afford me; in search of which I have always had recourse to the
best and to the most impartial Authors, who have neither disguised the Vices of
Men by flattery, nor out of prejudice branded those Actions with shame and
obloquy, which might have admitted of a fairer character. Nor have I mixed any
thing of Religion in this History, but where the nature of the relation could
not subsist without it: for in regard the Court, and not the Church of Rome, is
the subject on which I treat, I have made the Points of Religion accidental
only to the following Discourses.

But as to Platina himself, Trithemius in his Treatise of Ecclesiastical
Writers gives him this Character.

He was born (says he) at Cremona, was Breviary to the Pope, and a man learned
in all Sciences, he was an excellent Philosopher, and a famous Orator, of an
acute and ready wit, and persuasive eloquence; he was courageous, and so
constant to his principles, that under Pope Paul II. he was deprived of his
Estate and Preferments, and after having endured the wrack or torture, he was
cruelly cast into Prison, where he remained during the Reign of this Paul II.
afterward he was set at liberty by Sixtus IV. to whom he dedicated this
following History of the Popes. He died at Rome of the Plague, Aged 60 years,
A. D. 1481. Frederick III. being Emperor, and Sixtus IV. being Pope.

AN INTRODUCTION To the following HISTORY.
THIS continuation of Plaetina, (the subject of which is the Lives and Reigns
of the Popes,) is a Treatise purely historical, collected from feveral Latin,
French, and Italian Authors: whose design being solely to transmit matter of
Fact to posterity, did not intermeddle with points of Religion, but as they
accidentally occurred in the connection of History, there being a vast
difference between the Church of Rome, and the Court of Rome.

To this latter Notion, which consists of a Pope, who is Sovereign and of
seventy Cardinals, or more; who are his Counselors, besides a great number of
Prelates, we shall confine our Discourse. And whereas the Pope is a Prince, who
has a Temporal Dominion under his Government, and Jurisdiction; it is no
wonder if he, and the Creatures, and Confidents who attend him in all his
Counsels, should act by Maxims purely civil, and political: whence it is, that
Popes are approached with so much more awe, and profound Reverence, than is
performed toward Kings and Emperors, because the Spiritual comes in to
maintain and uphold the Authority of the Temporal, and both being united do
mutually support each other: hence proceed all the flatteries used in that
Court, all the contrivances which Ambition can suggest to raise Families, and
make those great who are in Authority. And in short, nothing is omitted, which
the Wit of Man, and the Artifices of the most refined Heads in the World, (such
as those are at Rome) can devise to conserve, and exalt the Interest and
Authority of that Court.

The Original of this Jurisdiction, which is increased to such The Original of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
a degree of Power and Greatness, as is become suspected by Kings, and
formidable to its people, sprang at first from those words of our Savior to
his Apostles, Whose sins ye shall forgive on Earth shall be forgiven in Heaven,
and whose sins ye shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven: the which large
and extensive privilege was attended with a Commission to feed Christ's Flock,
to preach the Gospel, and to administer the Sacraments, and with an exhortation
to all the faithful to love one the other, and to pardon, and forgive each
other their offenses. The Primitive Church which was always zealous to
reconcile the Brethren, and procure pardon of the Offender from the person
offended, did ordain according to the Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians,
that the Saints, or Christians 1 Cor. cap. 6.
should not maintain a process of Law one against the other at the Bar, or
Tribunals of Infidels, but that they should rather appoint, and constitute some
of the Faithful who were Men of approved wisdom, and integrity, to hear, and
examine, and determine all their differences. This manner of trial was
certainly submitted unto with great charity of the both parties, and with an
unbiassed sentence of the Judge; for the first had no power over them to enforce
execution, unless the constraint of their own Consciences, which bore witness
that the adjudgment was from God; Nor did the Ecclesiastical Judge pronounce
sentence without regret, sorrow, and grief for the Delinquent, as appears by
the words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. chap. 2. where the sorrow of the Offender is said
to be so great as to require comfort; and that the Judge also did partake in the
like affliction and anguish of heart with him.

This dispensation of the Ecclesiastical Censures, being a work of great
Charity, was an Office only proper for such as had attained to a good esteem
for piety, and to the degree and dignity of a Bishop. But as the Faithful
increased, and the Churches became numerous, so the deliberations on Causes
were too heavy, and burdensome for the Bishop alone; and therefore though the
Bills, and Processes at Law were received by the hands of the Bishop, they were
yet afterward transferred to the consideration of the Ancients, who were
called Presbyters, which being digested by them, received their ultimate
determination and sentence from the General Assembly of the Church: the which
practice was in use in the year of our Lord 250. as appears by the Epistles of
St. Cyprian, wherein he writes to the Presbyters of his Diocese of Carthage,
that he intended not to act in any thing without the counsel and advice of
them, and consent of the people, and that he would examine the Causes, and the
merits thereof in their presence: and moreover he reproves certain Priests for
their irregular proceedings in cases of judgment, threatening to give an account
thereof unto the people. This charity, and plain dealings of the Bishops gained
them such reputation, that their advice, and sentence was almost in all matters
followed, and admitted by the people, whose charity in after-Ages growing cold,
and careless of the mutual good and benefit each of other, came by degrees to
cast off this burdensome Office of Judgment, and to remit it solely to the
Incumbence of the Bishop, who also degenerating from the primitive humility,
easily gave way to the allurements of ambition, and under the disguise of
Charity, and Virtue embraced the Authority of passing sentence without the
assistance, or consultation with coordinate Judges. So soon as the
persecutions ceased great loads of business, Cases, and Trials at Law devolved
upon the Bishop, so that then he was forced to erect a Tribunal of Justice, and
contrive Methods, and rules for Judicial proceedings: howsoever in those times
of simplicity and innocence, things were not so wholly corrupted, but that
though the ancient Discipline of remitting matters to the determination of the
Church did cease, yet sincerity and uprightness in passing Sentence still
continued. The which when Constantine the Emperor observed, and considered the
great difference there was between the captious, and litigious proceedings of
secular Advocats, and Proctors, who made Lawsuits and wranglings their benefit
and Trade, and the honest and conscientious Methods, and determinations of the
Clergy; he ordained that the Sentence of the Bishop should be definitive and
without appeal, with power to grant an injunction to all proceedings at Common
Law, in case the party agrieved should desire to have recourse to the Episcopal
judgment, and jurisdiction in his case.

Hence it came to pass that the Sentence of the Bishop was The degrees by which
the greatness of the Clergy did arise.
made a judgment of Court, and put in execution by the hands of the secular
Magistrate: and this jurisdiction was farther amplified and increased in the
year 365. by the Decree of the Emperor Valens. But the extent of this
Authority, established by the Law of Constantine, being afterward abused by
the corruption of succeeding Bishops, was recalled by the Emperors Arcadius,
and Honorius, and confined to causes purely religious, without Courts or formal
processes of Law, and without power to intermeddle in civil differences, unless
the parties concerned should on both sides agree to remit their case by way of
Arbitration, or compromise to the Sentence of the Bishop. But in regard the
Bishops of Rome had for a long time been powerful in that City, little notice
was taken of this Injunction until in the year 452. it was again enforced, and
renewed by Valentinian the Emperor. But not long afterward the succeeding
Emperors restored part of that Authority which had been taken from them, and
Justinian again erected their Courts of Judicature, to which he assigned all
Causes about Religion, complaints, and differences between the Clergy,
Ecclesiastical Fines and forfeitures, with power to determine Cases between
Lay-persons who should by way of Umpirage, or Arbitration refer themselves to
the Episcopal Court: and in this manner did that charitable correction, and
that plain, and sincere way of ending and composing differences between
Brethren, instituted by Christ Jesus begin to degenerate into that Dominion
which our Savior had forbidden to his Apostles.

And farther to strengthen, and confirm this Episcopal Authority so soon as the
Empire was divided, and that the Western Provinces were separated from the
Eastern Dominions; then were many of the Bishops taken into the Councils of
Princes, whereby the Secular Power being annexed to their Spiritual capacity,
served much to advance, and raise the reputation, and Authority of the
Episcopal Dignity: so that two hundred years had not passed in this manner,
before the Bishops arrogated to themselves a Power to judge the Clergy in all
Cases both Criminal, and Civil; And to extend their Jurisdiction farther, they
framed a Term, called Mixed Actions, in which the Bishop, as well as the
Secular Magistrate might grant Process; that is, in matters where the Judge had
not been diligent, or cold, and remiss, or dilatory in his proceedings, then
the Bishop might take the Causes out of his hands: by which pretense and
usurpation little business remained for the Secular Courts. And farther, by
virtue hereof they established a general, standing Rule, as unalterable, as a
fundamental of Faith: that in Cases where the Magistrate was remiss, or delayed
to do Justice, those Causes did ipso facto, devolve to the cognizance of the
Bishop. Had the Prelates stuck at this point, and not proceeded farther, it had
been pretty tolerable; for then a Power might have remained still in the hands
of the Civil Magistrate, to moderate and retrench the excesses of
Ecclesiastical encroachments as occasion served: but those, who had imposed
this yoke on the people, thought fit for their own security, to rivet it in
such manner about their necks, that it could never be shaken off again; having
to that purpose forged a principle in their own Shops under the Title of a
fundamental point of Faith. That the Bishops power of judging in Causes, as
well temporal, as spiritual, took not its Original and Authority from the
Decrees, or connivence of Emperors, or from the will and pleasure of the
people, or by custom, or prescription; but from a right inherent in the
Episcopal Dignity and conferred thereupon by the institution of Christ himself.
As appears in the History of the Council of Trent wrote by Father Paul Sarpi.

This was certainly a bold and a hardy Assertion, which could so easily have
been refuted by those who had read the Codes of Theodosius, and Justinian, with
the Capitularies of Charles the Great, and Concessions and Ordinances of
succeeding Princes, both of the Eastern and Western Empire: in reading and
considering which, a Man must be strangely blind, or stupid, who cannot observe
by what ways, and Methods, the excess, and exorbitance of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was introduced into the World. And indeed it is strange to
consider, that on the bare foundation of that Spiritual Power to bind and
loose, given by Christ to his Church; and by that Ordinance of St. Paul to
compose differences between the Brethren, and prevent their going to Law before
Infidels, should by a long tract of time, and by several Artifices, and subtle
contrivances, be erected a Temporal Tribunal the most extensive, and most
considerable of any that ever was in the World: and that in the midst of diverse
Kingdoms and Principalities of Europe, there should be an other State
established, independent on the Public; which is such a Model, and form of
Political Government, as never any of the Ancient Legislators could ever
fancy, or imagine to be consistent with the Sovereignty of a Temporal Prince.

But such a Government as this, was long in growing, and The difficulties which
the Clergy met in making themselves great.
required much time to bring it to a maturity, because many difficulties
interposed in the way. For in the first place, the very foundation of
Christianity, which was humility, was diametrically opposite to Grandeur and
Dominion: then the Popes were chosen by the People, to whom they were
accountable for all their administrations, and to the Clergy for their
soundness in Faith, and Orthodox Doctrine; for which reason Pope Eugenius the
first was Interdicted by the Clergy from celebrating Divine Service in Santa
Maria Maggiore, until he had disclaimed publicly the Heresy he held of one
Operation or Will in Christ; the Assertors of which were called Monothelites;
and this Choice of the People required a confirmation from the Emperor, before
the Pope could be legally invested in his Authority; the which is apparent in
all History; and in regard the Seat of the Emperors was far distant, a Power
was delegated to the Exarch of Ravenna, to confirm the suffrages of the people,
in case the person they had chosen was not obnoxious, or displeasing to the
Emperor: and so it was, when Severinus was made Pope, that Isaacius the Exarch
of Italy, made a journey to Rome to confirm him, though before his departure he
plundered the Lateran of its Treasures: in which attempt, though he was opposed
by some of the Clergy, yet his Soldiers being too strong for them, he carried
away his prize, upon a pretense, that it was unreasonable the Clergy should
grow rich, and the State poor; and that they should amass vast sums into their
Coffers, when the Soldiers, who were their defense, and guard, were miserably
necessitous, and in a starving condition.

Nor had the Sea of Rome less difficulty in its advancement, by reason of the
long disputes, and contentions between that, and the Church of Constantinople
for precedence; to which several Princes gave encouragement, who asserted that
the Supremacy ought to be lodged at that place, which was accounted and
esteemed the Capital Seat of the Empire: On the other side the Roman Bishops,
termed Constantinople but a Colony of Rome, since the Greeks themselves styled
their Prince (...), the Emperor of the Romans; and the Constantinopolitans
themselves even in that age were called Romans, and not Greeks: the which
Controversy remained undecided until the time of Boniface the third, who by
great intercession, and a powerful interest obtained of the Emperor Phocas,
that the Sea of Rome should be acknowledged; and styled the Head of all the
Churches.

But notwithstanding this privilege given to the Sea of Rome, The Popes
depended on the Emperor.
the Popes continued still in their dependence on the Emperor's confirmation,
without which their Election was not valid. And though in the time of Mauritius
the Emperor, Pelagius the 2d. was made Bishop of Rome without the Imperial
consent and confirmation; and though the same was excused by a cause of
necessity occasioned by the Siege which the Lombards had laid to the City; yet
the Emperor was much displeased with this encroachment upon his Prerogative,
until such time as Gregory a Deacon a Person of great Piety, and Learning was
sent to Constantinople to appease his anger.

In this manner the Popes depended on the Emperors pleasure for their
confirmation until about the year 705. when Benedict the second was created
Pope, a Person of so much piety and virtue, and of compassion toward the poor,
that he gained an esteem, and veneration from all people of what degree soever;
and so great was his renown, that the report of his Virtue and Devotion
reaching the Ears of the Emperor; he conceived such a high Opinion of his
Sanctity, that he sent him a Decree, whereby he ordained and established, that
for the time to come, He whom the Clergy and people of Rome should choose Pope,
should be immediately acknowledged, without recourse to the Authority of the
Emperor, or his Exarchs according to former custom, when the confirmation of
the Emperor or his Lieutenant in Italy was esteemed necessary to the
establishment of a Pope.

But whence this Temporal Power was derived in its first How the Temporal Power
was derived to the Popes.
Original to the Popes, has been an enquiry of diverse Authors: There are those
who pretend a Donation from the Emperor Constantine, by which the City of Rome
it self, most part of Italy, Africa, and all the Islands of the Mediterranean
Seas were conferred upon them. But this Opinion is exploded by Guicciardin an
Author without exception in this case. And moreover, in all History these
particulars are very clear and apparent, as namely, That during the Exarchate,
the Popes had nothing to do with the Temporal Sword, but lived as Subjects to
the Emperor. That after the overthrow of the Exarchate, the Emperors
neglecting Italy, the Romans began to be governed by the advice and power of
the Popes. That Pepin of France having subdued the Kingdom of the Lombards,
gave unto Pope Gregory the 3d. and his Successors Ravenna, Urbin, Ancona,
Spoleto, with many other Towns, and Territories about Rome: in testimony and
remembrance of which there remains unto this day a Marble Stone engraven in
Latin with this Inscription thereupon, and Englished thus: Pepin the most pious
King of France was the first who gave example to Posterity, how and in what
manner the Power and Authority of Holy Church was to be amplified and
increased. After which Charlemagne, or Charles the Great the Son of Pepin,
having made his entrance into Rome in the time of Pope Adrian the first,
confirmed by Oath, and amply enlarged the Donation which his Father Pepin had
made to Gregory the 3d. which as our Platina says, contained in Liguria, all
that reaches from the long since demolished City Luna to the Alps, the Isle of
Corsica, and the whole Tract between Luca and Parma, together with Friuli, the
Exarchate of Ravenna, and the Dukedoms of Spoleto, and Beneventum. And though
the Popes having this Temporal Power began to set up for themselves,
maintaining, That the Pontifical Dignity was to give Laws to the Emperors, and
not to receive them: yet this Doctrine was not openly asserted, during the
Reign of Charlemagne, who challenged and exercised the ancient, and original
power to govern the Church, to call Councils, and to order the Papal Election.
The which Power continued for a long time in his posterity, and so afterward
remained, so long as wise and valiant Princes ruled; but when weak Princes, who
were distracted with great and dangerous Wars governed, then the Popes
prevailed, who were strong in their Councils, being for the most part composed
of subtle and designing Men: Howsoever these turns of Fortune were carried in
succeeding times with various changes and successes: the Emperor sometimes
tugging, and plucking from the Pope, and the Pope from the Emperor, winning,
or losing ground, as they were endued with abilities, courage and
understanding; or as the circumstances of the World were ordered, and disposed
in different times. So Hadrian the 3d. was a Man of so great a Spirit, that
immediately upon his advance to the Popedom, Anno 895. he proposed to the
Senate and people, that a Law should pass, that no regard should be hereafter
given to the Authority of the Emperor in the creation of a Pope: taking, as
Platina says, an advantage when the Emperor Charles was marched with his Army
out of Italy against the rebellious Normans. This must have been Charles le
Gros, and the year 885. according to those Authors who have written the History
of France.

But that which must have given this Pope courage herein, Charles the Bald
resigns the power of Election of the Emperor to the Pope.
was the weakness of Charles the Bald, a Prince bold in his undertakings, but
unable in the execution of them, for so soon as he received information of the
death of the Emperor Lewis the 2d. he resolved to seize the Empire, which at
that time was confined to the narrow compass of Rome, and all Italy; because
his two Uncles had miserably rent the French Monarchy in pieces, and divided
between them after the death of Lotharius those two Kingdoms which belonged
unto him. But to be short, Charles the Bald in order to his design raised all
the Troops he was able, and on a sudden passing the Alps, he so surprised the
Lombards, that not being provided of a Force to resist, they presenty yielded
themselves unto him; and therewith the Treasure of Lewis deceased, which he so
well employed at Rome, that he corrupted therewith both the Senate and the
Magistrates, and promised great matters to Pope John the 8th, if by his means
he might obtain the Imperial Crown. This Pope, whom we call Pope Joan, (the
Story of whom, being a Woman, and with Child, is related by diverse Authors, and
not wholly disbelieved by our Platina) acting according to the false wisdom of
this World, as appears in many particulars of which Baronius accuses him, (or
her,) thought fit to make advantage of this ambition of Charles, that thereby
he might for the future procure a right to Popes to elect and create Emperors.
But our Platina says it was John the 9th. but be it John the 8th, or the 9th.
he conferred with the Barons and principal Lords of Rome on this point, who
being already prepared by the bribes of Charles, and overjoyed to become
Electors, easily concurred with the Pope in the proposal he made to them in
favor of Charles; who being accordingly invited to Rome, made his entry there,
on the 18th. of December, in the year of our Lord 856, and on the 25th. day
following being Christmas day, the Pope proclaimed, and Crowned him Emperor in
St. Peter's Church with the consent of the Prelates, Chief of the Clergy, and
all the People of Rome.

But lest this assumption of Charles to the Empire should seem to proceed from
a right of Succession, and not of Election, like the other three French
Emperors his Predecessors: the Pope designing to put the matter out of
dispute, that so the Emperor might own his Title to be derived from him, and
his Nobles; and no other; he held an Assembly at Pavia, composed of Bishops and
Counts, where having first shamefully fiattered him with praises of notorious
falsity extolling him above Charlemagne; he declared, that his Election was an
effect of his merit, and piety, and agreeable to the Will of God, which had
long before been revealed to Pope Nicolas by divine inspiration: and in
pursuance hereof the Act of Election was signed, and confirmed by the whole
Assembly, and registered in the Books of that Court. In this manner the right of
those who were descended from Charlemagne, and the Sovereignty which the
Emperors had until that time exercised in Rome, and in all the Lands of the
Ecclesiastical State, was surrendered up into the hands, and power of the Pope:
in virtue of which, as it is most certain, that several succeeding Popes did
challenge a right of Creating Emperors, or at least to the confirmation of
them, by that right which they had to Crown them: so also it is apparent that
there have been Emperors, who after this time have exercised a Sovereign power
in Italy, and without regard to the base condescension of Charles the Bald,
have made themselves Masters of Rome, and of the Pope himself. An example
whereof we have in Otho the Emperor, who recovered three advantageous points,
which the Greek and French Emperors had enjoyed, and which Charles the Bald
had lost and betrayed to the Pope. Namely, 1. The Sovereign power in Rome it
self. 2. The right of Succession of his Children to the Empire. 3dly. A power
to Elect a Pope, or what amounts to the same thing; a Right to hinder any from
being chosen, who was not agreeable to his good will or pleasure: Nay farther,
it is apparent in History, that the Popes themselves; as well as others, did
take the Oath of Fidelity, as it was administered to them by the Emperor's
Commissioners: and it is as certain, that from the time that Justinian
recovered Rome from the Goths, the Emperors were ever Masters of the Election
in such manner, as that either it could not pass without his permission, or
being done, required his confirmation. Accordingly Otho the 3d. caused Bruno
his near Kinsman, Son of Otho Duke of Franconia and Suabia, his own
Cousin-German to be chosen Pope, who took upon himself the name of Gregory the
5th. But at length by other turns of fortune, Hildebrand who was Gregory the
7th. in the year 1073. raised the Papacy to the highest pitch of power and
honor that ever it was in. Upon consideration of which whole matter, it is
certain, that the Pope had some right in the Election of the Emperor: for when
the Kingdom of Italy with Rome it self was united to the Teutonick or German
Kingdom, and that by the Donation of Pepin the Popes were Masters of the
Exarchate, Urbin, Ancona, Spoleto, and other Towns and Countries, and confirmed
by Charles his Son; then the Pope himself representing the people of Rome by
his Legates with the Princes, Lords, and Deputies of the Towns of Italy, had a
privilege of giving his Votes at those Elections: and on no other foundation
than this could the Pope pretend co a right of Electing Emperors, nor in any
other manner than as he was Prince over a Dominion which had a right of
Election in concurrence with other States, Princes, and Feudataries of the
Empire. But when and in what manner, and by what Methods afterward this power,
of Election came to be transferred to the seven Electors, is not very clear in
History, How the Election of Emperors was transferred to the seven Electors.
there being many and various conjectures thereupon. Maimbourg in his History
called la Decadence de l'Empire, concludes, that this Institution was
established by the Authority of Gregory the 10th. in the year 1274. And farther
he proceeds to say:

That the second Pope from whom we may conjecture, that this Authority was
derived, was Leo the 8th. who by a Decree made by and with the consent of the
Clergy, and people of Rome, gives and grants unto the Emperor Otho the first,
and to those who should succeed him, a Right for ever to choose a Successor:
and certainly he could not mean a Successor to the Kingdom of Germany, which
was hereditary, and independent of the Roman See, and therefore it can only
have reference to the Imperial Dignity. Now whereas by the decease of Otho the
3d. who died without issue, this Right of the Emperor devolved to the States,
who succeeded to the Sovereign Authority; for it is a sure Maxim, That the King
cannot die: they therefore challenged, and appropriated to themselves the same
Right of choosing Emperors, the which afterward they resigned, and transferred
to the seven Electors, who exercise the same power unto this day; three of
which, viz. Mentz, Triers, and Colen are Ecclesiastics, being Archbishops and
ArchChancellours, to show and keep in remembrance, that the Ecclesiastical
State had once a Right in the Election of Emperors. But Historians are so much
at variance in this point, and relate it with such variety, that we shall not
search farther into this matter, but proceed to our purpose of the Election of
Popes, and of the formality therein used in this Age.

We have in our foregoing Discourse mentioned, that Popes were anciently chosen
by the Nobility, Clergy and people of Rome, which was certainly the Original
Custom. Though the Book of the Sacred Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome,
tells us, That St. Peter named Clemens for his Successor, provided, that it
might so seem good to the Senators of the Roman Church, that is, to the
Presbyters; of which St. Peter had constituted a College of twenty four before
his death, with power, and Authority to decide, and determine all matters of
difficulty arising in the Church. The which Presbyters having little or no
regard to the nomination, and appointment of St. Peter, chose Linus, and after
him Cletus, and then Clemens succeeded, who was rather recommended, than chosen
by St. Peter; that so it might more plainly appear, that Popes had not a Right
to Elect their Successors; for if that privilege was denied to St. Peter, much
more ought it to be unto those who succeeded him. These twenty four Presbyters
were in the time of Pope Sylvester the first, called Cardinals, that is,
Princes in the Church; Presbyters called Cardinals, and when.
on whom Innocent the 4th. at the Council of Lions bestowed the red Hat, as a
mark and badg of their Dignity: afterward Schisms, and Dissentions arising
amongst the Senators, the Clergy and people of Rome were admitted to be present
at the Election, but to have no Voice, or Suffrage therein: afterward the
force and violence of the people was such, that they would have a Voice, and
concur with others in their Votes. This popular way of Election caused such
heats and disturbances, that the Emperors were constrained for keeping the
peace to interpose by their Authority, and to Order, that no Election should
stand good until it was confirmed by the Imperial approbation. The Kingdom of
the Lombards being overthrown in the year 776. the Roman Empire was translated
from the Greek to the German Princes, and then Charles the Great assumed, and
exercised this power of Electing, or what is all one, the confirming of Popes.
Afterward a Series of pious Emperors succeeding, and considering, that the
Supreme Bishop was Instituted, and Ordained by Christ himself to be a Shepherd
to the Emperor, as well as to feed his other Flock, and to purge, and
spiritually to judge them, they renounced the power of confirming Popes, and
entirely transferred it to the Roman Presbyters, the Clergy and the people.
This popular manner of Election produced parties, Schisms and contentions,
which often broke forth into blood, and wounds; so that there was scarce a
Regular Election for a long time, the strongest always possessing the Chair,
until he was subverted by another more powerful than himself: so that in the
space of few years, nine several Men seized on the Papal Chair; namely,
Benedict the 9th. Sylvester the 3d. Gregory the 6th. Clement the 2d. Damasus
the 2d. Leo the 2d. Victor the 2d. Stephen the 9th, and Benedict the 10th. To
which last Nicolas the 2d. succeeding, a person of unparalled Sanctity and
Wisdom, did in the year 1051. study to cure and prevent these riotous courses
for the future, which upon the choice of every Pope were ready to bring, and
precipitate every thing into confusion. For a Remedy whereunto he established a
Law, which was afterward confirmed by the Council of Lateran, that the
election of the Popes should entirely rest, and remain in the power of the
Cardinals: the which Law or Canon was afterward Election of Popes by
Cardinals, and when begun.
confirmed by Alexander the 3d. and by Gregory the 10th. in the Council of
Lions, and at Vienna by Clement the 6th. The which happy Constitution has
tended much to the peace and quiet of the Church; and as a Rule hereof
Alexander the 3d. instituted at a General Council, that he only should be
esteemed to have been canonically elected, who had obtained his Choice by at
least two Thirds of the College of Cardinals.

This power of Election has ever since that time rested in the power of the
Cardinals, who after the Octaves appointed for solemnizing the Funerals of the
deceased Pope, have on the 9th or 10th. day entered the Conclave in order to a
new Election. The Conclave is for the most part held at the Vatican Palace:
where in a long Gallery are erected small Apartments, or Cells made of boards,
covered with purple Cloth for every Cardinal, which place is appointed for the
more convenient conference each with other: to every Cardinal is allowed no
more than two Servants, which are called his Conclavists, unless in case of
sickness or other infirmity, when three may be admitted. The Cardinals The form
and manner of Electing Popes.
being entered, the Conclave is strictly guarded with the City Militia, to
hinder all commerce, and intercourse of Letters from without. The Gallery also
is very closely watched, being kept by a Master of the Ceremonies; so that when
the Cardinals have their Dishes served up to them, they are visited and
inspected by him, lest any Letters, or Advices should be concealed within the
Meat. According to this first Institution; the Cardinals have a free use of
several dishes of Meat for the first three days: and whilst they are eating, or
doing any thing else in their Cells, the outward Curtains are to be open, and
undrawn, unless in the Night when they sleep, or at other times, that they take
their repose: when great care is taken, that no undecent noise, or disturbance
be given. It has been accustomary of late years, for the Cardinals to premise
certain particular points and Articles necessary and convenient for the better
government of the Church, which are subscribed by the whole Community, and
every one takes an Oath to observe them, in case he should prove to be the
person chosen, and promoted to the Pontifical Dignity. After which matters are
performed, they proceed to an Election.

There are three ways by which Popes are chosen, namely, by The several ways by
which Popes are Elected, and the methods and forms thereof.
Scrutiny, by Access, or by Adoration: the first is, when every Cardinal writes
in a Scroll of paper, the name of that person whom he designs to be elected,
folding it into five several pages, or columns. On the first of which he writes
these words, Ego eligo in summum Pontificem Reverendissimum Dominum meum
Cardinalem -- the which is written by the hand of the Conclavist, that the
Cardinal may not be discovered by his own writing. On this fold two others are
doubled down, and some Wax dropped thereupon, and sealed with some private Seal
made for that purpose; on the 4th. page the Cardinal writes his own name, and
covers the same with the 5th. folding. Then all the Cardinals sitting in their
Order on Benches in the Chapel, with the Scrolls they have prepared in their
hands; take their turns to ascend unto the altar, before which a Table is
placed covered with a purple Cloth, and a Chalice with a Patina, or plate set
thereupon: On the right side of which sits the first Cardinal Bishop, and on
the left the first Cardinal Deacon, then every one kneeling makes a short
Prayer, and arising puts his Scroll into the Chalice; which being done, and all
the Cardinals returned to their places; the first Cardinal Bishop takes the
Chalice with his right hand, and turns out all the Scrolls upon the Patina, or
plate which he holds in his left: then setting the Chalice again on the Altar,
he takes the Scroll which comes first to hand, and gives it to the Deacon
Cardinal, who reads it with an audible Voice; the Cardinals noting with their
pen and ink, or Table Book how many Voices every person has; and the Papers
being read, the Master of the Ceremonies comes in with a pan of coals, and
burns all the papers or Scrolls, so that no Man is known for which person he
has given his Vote. In case any person has gained two thirds of the number
there present, the election is good and he is presently declared Pope. And this
is the way of Scrutiny which is the most commonly used, and practiced in the
election of Popes. When the choice is not determined by Scrutiny, it is then
tried and proved by Access, or Accessus, which is performed in this manner: All
the Cardinals sitting in their Places, one arises, and goes to the Cardinal,
whom he designs to have elected, and says, Ego accedo ad Reverendissimum
Dominum meum talem, the which is noted by the other Cardinals, as are the names
of those, who make the Access and those to whom they are made. If two thirds
agree in their Access to one person, the election is determined by Access: if
not, the next day they proceed again to the Scrutiny, for it cannot be made
twice in a day. This way of Access seems to resemble the ancient manner of
giving Votes in the Senate of Rome; when those that concurred in the same
Opinion with an other, went from his place to that side, where the motion was
first made, whence came that saying, Ire in sententiam; and something we have
like it in our Parliaments when the House divides it self.

The third way by Adoration is performed almost in the same manner as that by
Access; the Cardinal approaching him, whom he desires to have created Pope,
with a profound reverence, and lowly bowing: but both the Access, and the
Adoration are to be proved, and confirmed by the Scrutiny.

There was anciently another way of Election which was The ways of Election by
compromise and inspiration.
called by Compromise, which was, when the divisions were high, and scarce
determinable by the Conclave, that then the Cardinals with common consent
referred all their Votes to the choice of three or five Cardinals, giving them
power to elect any person, whom all or the major part should choose; promising,
and obliging themselves to rest, and remain satisfied with such choice by them
made, provided, that the said election were concluded, and determined within
the time, that a Candle lighted by the common consent of all the Conclave did
last and continue. Hereupon, if any election were made during such time, the
person so chosen was acknowledged for Pope, and Universal Bishop.

Moreover, there is another way of election, called by Inspiration; that is,
when the Cardinals are Assembled in the Chapel, and that every one has taken
his place according to his degree, and order. Then the first Bishop arises, and
in a short Speech exhorts the Fathers to provide such a person for Government
of the Church, as by his Wisdom, and Sanctity may be capable to sustain so
great a burden. Then he demands of them the manner, by which they are pleased
to proceed, whether by Compromise, or by Scrutiny: telling them, that if his
Opinion, and Vote might prevail, he would choose no other than -- and
accordingly did elect him for Supreme Bishop, and Head of the Universal Church.
If in case all then present, or at least two thirds of the number did concur in
such person so nominated; he was then without farther process, or Scrutiny
canonically elected Pope. Which manner of election was frequently practiced
amongst the Ancients, and was called, by Inspiration, or designation of the
Holy Ghost.

The Pope being legally chosen by any of the foregoing Methods, he is conducted
into the Sacristia or Vestry; where being disrobed by the Cardinal-Deacons of
his own Habit, he is clothed in his Pontificalibus, or Papal Vestments, and
being thence brought forth with his Mitre on his Head adorned with Gold, and
Jewels into the Chapel, he is seated on the Altar; where the Cardinals perform
the ceremony of Adoration to him, every one in his order, kissing his feet,
hands, and mouth.

Whilst these Ceremonies are performing, all the doors, and gates of the
Conclave are opened; at which a multitude of people appearing, the Pope shows
himself, and blesses them. And then the first Deacon Cardinal proclaims with a
loud Voice to the people in these words: Annuntio vobis gaudium magnum, Papam
habemus: Reverendissimus Dominus Cardinalis -- electus est in Summum
Pontificem, and elegit sibi nomen. This being said, the Pope descends into St.
Peter's Church, the Cardinals leading the way with a Cross carried before them;
and going directly to the High Altar, he takes off his Mitre, kneels and prays
a while, and returns thanks to God, and the Blessed Apostles; and then arising
sits upon the Altar; and the first Bishop kneels, and sings Te Deum: and then
again the Cardinals perform their Act of Adoration, kissing the feet, hand and
mouth of the Pope. Which, and the short Office being finished, the Pope blesses
the people again; and then in the same order returns to his Apartment to take
his repose, and the Cardinals to their respective Lodgings.

The Pope being chosen, for the most part changes his Name, Why Popes changed
their names, and since that time.
it having been an ancient custom so to do, and observed unfortunate to those
Popes, who have retained their own baptismal Names without alteration. Our
Platina says, That the first who began this Form, was Sergius the Second, who
came to the Popedom at the same time, that Michael Emperor of Constantinople
died. This Sergius, it is said, was surnamed Bocca di Porco, or Hog's Snout,
which for shame he changed into Sergius, Anno 843. and from thence came the
custom down to our times, that when any one is made Pope, he laid by his own
Name and took one of some of his Predecessors, though all have not observed
it. Thus far are the words of Platina. And since that time the Popes have
commonly out of gratitude taken the Name of that Pope, by whose favor he was
first created Cardinal.

In all Histories we read of great Divisions, and Factions in the Elections of
Popes, even in the first times, when the popular tumults proceeded to the
height of Rage and Sedition: causing sometimes such difficulties in the
Elections, that after the decease of Nicolas the First: Platina reports, that
some Authors say, that the Sea of Rome was vacant eight years, seven months,
and nine days; and then Hadrian the 2d. was chosen in the year 868. Afterward
in the year 1051. when Nicolas the Second had cured these riotous courses by
transferring the whole power of Election into the hands of the Cardinals, the
Elections were then carried more smoothly indeed, and with less noise; but the
Factions were not abated, but oftentimes kept up with such Art and Interest,
that after the decease of Clement the 4th. the differences held for the space
of two years before the election of Gregory X. who was the next Successor,
came to be determined. And now even in these days many Intrigues are managed in
the Conclave before an Election can be perfected: for the Emperor, and the
Kings of France, and Spain must first be consulted; and every Cardinal has
some Patron, or Friend, or Interest of his own to advance; every one takes his
measures of the person, that may best suit and agree with his designs. And now
of late years, since the Monarchy of France has over-topped all the other
Sovereignties of Christendom which depend on the Papal See, that King must
first be consulted, and his assent taken before the Pope can be created; as
appears by the election of this present Pope Innocent XI.

In some convenient time after the Election, or upon the The Solemnities used
at the Coronation of Popes.
first great Festival ensuing, a day is appointed for the Pope's Coronation. It
would perhaps be very long, and tedious in a Preface of this nature to describe
distinctly all the Ceremonies thereof, the particulars of which take up the
space of a whole day from Morning until Night; so that in the midst of them the
Pope, and Cardinals are constrained to take a short repose, and refreshment to
support the labor of the day. For in the Morning early the Pope goes from his
Bedchamber into the Chamber called Papagalli; where he is clothed by the
Cardinal-Deacons, Subdeacons and other Officers belonging to that Chamber with
a white Cassock girt about with a long Girdle: over it, he wears his Stole and
Pluvial, or Robe of a Scarlet color, with a rich Mitre on his Head set with
many precious Stones: And in this Habit, having the train of his Robes carried
up by the Emperor, or some King then present; or in their absence by one of
the chiefest Princes then attending at that Ceremony; and a Canopy of State
over his Head supported by eight Ambassadors or Nobles, and the Cardinals in
their Habits walking before with a Cross for their Banner, they orderly proceed
to St. Peter's Church: where being entered, and having laid aside his Mitre,
and prayed a while, he arises and goes in the Chapel of St. Gregory, otherwise
called the Chapel of St. Andrew, where being sat in a Chair placed there for
that purpose, he receives all the Cardinals with their Caps on their Heads, to
kiss his Hand, and other Prelates to kiss his Feet: then the Pope arising
stands up, and blesses the people: after which the Subdeacon reads the
Epistle, and all the rest of the Office for the Coronation, which being
performed, the Pope vests himself with the Pontifical Habit according to the
Method prescribed for those Rites. According to the ancient constitution, it
belonged only to the Bishop of Hostia to consecrate the Pope; but of late
years, the first Cardinal Bishop performs that function: when the Pope is
consecrated, he is anointed with Oil on his Head, and on the palms of his
Hands; but the day of his Consecration is not always the day of his Coronation.
All the Ceremonies as we have said, being finished, and the Pope himself having
celebrated the Mass; they proceed then to the solemnities of the Coronation.
And in the first place the Pope goes to the stairs ascending to the Altar of
St. Peter and St. Paul, where a Throne is erected for him, on which being
seated, he is encompassed by his Prelates, and the people commanded to withdraw
at some distance: then the Dean-Cardinal takes off the Mitre from the Head of
the Pope, and places it on the left hand; and having the Triara ready, or the
Triple Crown, he sets it on his Head, the people making a loud Acclamation with
a Kyrie Eleison, or Lord have mercy upon us. Then the Dean publishes the
Indulgences which the Pope is pleased to (...); and when he proclaims them on
the right hand, he recites them in Latin, and on the left in the vulgar
Language.

After which, a Dinner is prepared for the Pope and Cardinals at the Palace of
the Arch-Presbyter of St. Peter's, and for the other Prelates at the Houses of
the Canons: and having taken their repast, the Cardinals mount on their Mules,
and the Pope on his Horse, and with a Noble train of all the Officers and
Nobles in their due rank and order, they march in solemn procession to the
Lateran; where the Pope alighting from his Horse, is met by the chief Canon of
the Church, who offers the Cross to be kissed by him, which the Dean-Cardinal
taking from his hands, puts it to the mouth of the Pope. Then the triple Crown
being taken from off his Head, is delivered to the custody of the Auditor of
the Rota, who is one of the chief Justices; and the Mitre is again planted on
the Pope's head; for the burden of the Triple Crown is so heavy, with the Gold
and Jewels, that it is not born on the head without much trouble. Platina
says, That Paul the Second so delighted to see his Triple Crown studded with
precious Stones, that he exhausted the Treasury of the Church to purchase
Jewels at any rate; which being fixed in his Crown, and Mitre, he looked like
the picture of a Cybele with Turrets on her Head; and were so weighty, and so
burdensome on his Brow, that they put his gross body into a violent heat, and
sweat, which produced an Apoplexy, of which soon after he died. But to proceed;
The Pope wearing his Mitre is conducted to the Seeds stercoraria, on which he
seems rather to lie, than to sit; from whence being raised with honor by the
Cardinals, the Hymn is sung. He has put down the mighty from their Seats, and
has exalted the humble and meek; he has raised the needy from the dust, that
he may set him amongst the Princes of his People. After which several other
Ceremonies being performed, and the Pope receiving again the Adoration of the
Cardinals, and Prelates, returns toward the Evening to his Palace of
Monte-cavallo. This is in short the sum of those Ceremonies practiced at the
Coronation of Popes, which we have extracted from the Book entitled the Sacred
Ceremonies used in the Roman Church.

The Popes Elected, and Crowned (as we have said) are Popes very aged before
they are Elected.
for the most part old, and decrepit with age, or of a weak and tender
constitution, that so they may not live long to the disappointment of others,
who live, and breath passionate desires after this Sublime exaltation: and
being thus decayed with years, and unable to support the weight of Government;
have commonly called to their aid, some Nephew, or near Relation, with the
Title of Cardinal-Nephew, or Cardinal-Patron, on whose Wit, and dexterous
management of Affairs the fortune and success of the Papal Dominion does
depend. And indeed a person under such circumstances had need to be qualified
with great endowments of Mind, and Body: for being always obliged to afford his
personal attendance on the Pope, who is to see, and hear with his Eyes, and
Ears, he can never be at leisure, or free from thoughts and business, either
relating to the Palace within, or direction of Affairs without. He is ever the
Chief, or President of Councils, he assists at all Congregations; he appoints
the days for Consistories, of Chapels, Visits, Audiences, and regulates every
thing which relates to the Spiritual or Temporal Government.

The Pope being established in his Throne, begins at first Popes usually
advance their Families.
to cast about by what way and means to raise and establish his Family, by
strong Alliances with Princes, and Noble Houses. He also divides the great
Offices of the Church amongst his Kindred: one is made Governor in one place,
and an other in another. The chief Favorite is made General of the Forces of
the Church, an other General of the Galleys, a third Governor of the Castle of
St. Angelo; and in like manner all the preferments are dispensed amongst the
Relations, according to that degree, and quality that every one possesses in
the good will, and esteem of the Pope.

But the great Atlas of State is the Cardinal-Nephew, whofe The great Art of
the Cardinal-Nephew, is how to comport himself toward foreign Ministers.
Wisdom is most exerted in his comportment toward the Ministers of foreign
Princes, and especially in taking true measures of Interest between France and
Spain: which is of such great concernment, that in a Book called il Livello
Politico, it is affirmed, That the Glory, and happiness of the Popedom, the
security, and honor of the Cardinal-Nephew, the Grandieur and prosperity of
the City of Rome consists in this one point, of a happy correspondence with
foreign Ambassadors, the failure in which has produced many unhappy Events:
witness the Government of the Barberini, who, for not knowing the true means
and Methods, how and in what manner to maintain a right and good understanding
with Christian Princes, and especially with those of Italy, reduced (as is
notorious to all the World) the Church unto a most unhappy, and turbulent
Estate.

And farther, in case we reflect with serious thoughts on the Reigns of diverse
Popes in these latter Ages, we shall find the truth of this assertion proved by
plain, and manifest experience. We shall find the Reigns of some Popes full of
Luster and Glory, as those of Paul the 2d. and Clement the 8th. others buried
in obscurity, and abased with sordid meanness, as those of Adrian the 6th. and
Gregory the 13th. Others have passed away in a quiet, silent and smooth current
of affairs, as those of Celestine, and Clement the 9th. Others have been
engulfed in a thousand troubles and intrigues, as were the Reigns of Alexander
the 6th. Clement the 7th. of Paul the 3d and 4th. and Urban the 8th. And if we
will search into the depth hereof we shall find, that the Ambition,
covetousness, and exorbitances of the Cardinal-Nephews to be the original cause
of all the troubles, and misfortunes which have rendered the Lives of some
Popes inglorious, or perhaps infamous. Though indeed to speak true, it is
almost impossible for a Cardinal-Nephew to hold the balance of his deportment
toward foreign Representatives residing in the Court of Rome, so equal, as not
to give a cause, or occasion of offense to some one or other: considering, that
what is pleasing and acceptable to one, dissatisfies, and interferes with the
interest of an other. Howsoever, there are some Men so dexterous and happy in
their Negotiations, that they carry all with a good Air, and if they are
enforced to disoblige some, it is done with such circumstances, and in such
manner, as takes off much of the anger and acrimony of the person offended.

Most Princes of Christendom, who are of the Roman Religion The reasons for
which the Christian
maintain their Ambassadors, Residents, or Agents at the Court of Rome: and
though many of these Princes have no Princes maintain their Ambassadors.
great zeal, or kindness for that Court, being disobliged perhaps by some
action of the Cardinal-Nephew, or some other prejudice taken against the Pope;
yet it may be that on some score of Interest of State, or of their Clergy, or
for the sake, or support of Monasteries, or for the determination of
differences which arise between them, and their Subjects, which are to be
decided at the Spiritual Judicatures; it is necessary for them to conserve an
Agent, or Resident at Rome.

The Emperor has seldom maintained an Ambassador at that Court; because he
ordinarily makes use of a Protector of the German Nation, to manage his
Affairs: and in case any matter of great importance occurs, which is to be
addressed unto the Pope, it is performed by some Cardinal in whom his Imperial
Majesty reposes a great confidence, unless he dispatches an Express.

The King of Poland follows almost the same Maxim; but yet professes a profound
Obedience to the Papal See, and exercises the power and interest he has there
with such modesty and caution, that though like other Kings, he might pretend
to a Right of nominating Cardinals of his own Nation, yet he seldom imposes
any, but such as the Pope shall offer of his own accord unto him.

Portugal for the most part maintains a Resident at Rome.

The State of Venice, and the G. Duke of Tuscany make greater applications,
than the other Princes of Italy, to that Court; perhaps from a sense of the
Pope's temporal power, whose Dominions border upon theirs, rather than out of
an affection to his Spiritual capacity.

But, it is certain, that amongst all the Christian Princes, none so warmly
interest themselves in the Affairs of the Roman Court, as France, and Spain,
the Kings of which do always maintain and keep up the honor of their
respective Embassies with splendid Equipage. And yet these two Kings do in a
different manner depend on the Court. France has no great Obligation or
dependency upon Rome, unless it be in some respects to the privileges of the
Gallican Church. But Spain is engaged in a kind of Partnership with Rome in
Government and Jurisdiction, and is beholden thereunto for a great part of its
Revenue. The Income of the Crusada granted by the Popes to the Kings of Spain,
is one of the chief branches of the Royal Revenue: The Tribunals of the
Inquisition are absolutely constituted by the Ecclesiastical Authority, which
gives such an unlimited power to the Nuntios, Judges, and Officers of the Pope
within the Catholic Dominions, as does very much eclipse, and diminish the
greatness of that Monarch: whereunto when we add the Tribute yearly paid by
that King to the Pope for the Kingdom of Naples; it seems, as if they two held
the reins of Government in partnership together: only with this difference,
that though the Pope has intermixed his power with the Temporal, yet the King
dares not interpose in matters Ecclesiastical.

Hence we may see, how dangerous it is, for Kings to admit Partners with them
in their Thrones: Never was the Monarchy of Spain more abased, and rendered
inglorious, than when the Inquisition was set up, and an other power introduced
to allay and attemper the Sovereign Authority: wherefore France having no need
of such dependencies has always kept up, and asserted the Right of Monarchy,
not suffering it to be debased by the Concessions of Regalia, or other mean
Compliances.

And indeed how much more happy now is the Crown of Great Britain, than in the
time of King John, who was forced to yield that of England to the Pope and his
Successors: and how considerable, and flourishing has it been, since it has
disowned all dependencies on foreign power either in Church or State: in defense
of which, may His Sacred Majesty King James the Second, who is the Supreme
Moderator and Governor thereof, upon Earth, live long, and Reign happily: and
when it shall please the King of Kings to translate Him from a fading to an
Immortal Crown, there may never fail one of his Royal Line to sit upon His
Throne, and defend His Loyal People against all the Encroachments, and
Usurpations of foreign Jurisdiction.

An Alphabetical TABLE OF THE POPES, Whose Lives were written by B. Platina.
A
ADeodatus, Page 114 Adrian I. 145 II. 169 III. 172 IV. 240 V. 281 Agapetus I.
90 II. 183 Agatho, 117 Alexander I. 15 II. 206 III. 242 IV. 269 V. 341
Anacletus, 12 Anastasius I. 66 II. 83 III. 179 IV. 240 Anicetus 21 Anterus 33 B
Benedict I. 97 II. 120 III. 166 IV. 177 V. 186 VI. 188 VII. 189 VIII. 196 IX.
199 X. 204 XI. 298 XII. 310 Boniface I. 72 II. 89 III. 102 IV. 103 V. 105 VI.
174 VII. 189 VIII. 294 IX. 330 C
Caius, 43 Calistus I. 28 II. 231 III. 383 Celestine I. 73 II. 236 III. 252 IV.
265 V. 293 Christopher, 178 Clemens I. 11 II. 201 III. 251 IV. 275 V. 299 VI.
312 Cletus, 9 Conon, 122 Constans, Constantine, 128 Cornelius, 35 D
Damasus I. 61 II. 201 Deus-dedit, 104 Dionysius, 40 Donus I. 115 II. 188 E
Eleutherius, 24 Euaristus, 14 Eugenius I. 112 II. 155 III. 238 IV. 357
Eusebius. 48 Eutychianus, 42 F
Fabianus, 34 Felix I. 41 II. 59 III. 80 Formosus, 173 G
Gelasius I. 81 II. 228 Gregory I. 99 II. 130 III. 134 IV. 157 V. 192 VI. 200
VII. 207 VIII. 250 IX. 260 X. 278 XI. 320 XII. 339 H
Hadrian V. Adrian. Hilarious, 78 Honorius I. 196 II. 233 III. 258 IV. 288
Hormisda, 85 Hyginus, 19 I
Innocent I. 68 II. 234 III. 254 IV. 265 V. 280 VI. 315 VII. 336 John I. 86 II.
90 III. 95 IV. 109 V. 121 VI. 125 VII. 127 VIII. 165 IX. 170 X. 176 XI. 180
XII. 182 XIII. 184 XIV. 187 XV. 190 XVI. 191 XVII. ibid. XVIII. 193 XIX. 195
XX. ibib. XXI. 198 XXII. 282 XXIII. 305 XXIV. 343 Julius I. 56 L
Landus, 179 Leo I. 76 II. 119 III. 149 IV. 162 V. 177 VI. 181 VII. 182 VIII.
186 IX. 202 Liberius, 56 Linus, 7 Lucius I. 37 II. 237 III. 247 M
Marcellinus, 44 Marcellus, 47 Marcus, 55 Martin I. 111 II. 171 III. 183 IV.
285 V. 347 Miltiades, 49 N
Nicolas I. 167 II. 205 III. 283 IV. 290 V. 373 P
Paschal I. 154 II. 220 Paul I. 141 II. 401 Pelagius I. 94 II. 98 S. Peter, 1
Pius I. 20 II. 389 Pontianus, 31 R
Romanus, 175 S
Sabinianus, 101 Sergius I. 123 II. 160 III. 178 IV. 196 Severinus, 108
Simplicius, 79 Sisinnius, 128 Sixtus I. 16 II. 39 III. 74 Soter, 23 Stephen I.
38 II. 138 III. 142 IV. 153 V. 172 VI. 174 VII. 181 VIII. 183 IX. 204
Sylverius, 91 Sylvester I. 50 II. 194 III. 199 Symmachus, 84 Syricius, 64 T
Telesphorus, 18 Theodore I. 110 II. 175 U
Valentine, 157 Victor I. 25 II. 203 III. 215 Vigilius, 92 Vitalianus, 113
Urban I. 30 II. 216 III. 248 IV. 273 V. 319 VI. 323 X
Xistus V. Sixtus. Z
Zacharias, 136 Zephyrinus, 26 Zozimus. 70

A TABLE Of those POPES Names, whose Lives are written in the Continuation.
A
A Drian VI. created Pope, Jan. 9. 1522. Page 40 Alexander VI. created Pope,
August 11. 1492. p. 12. Alexander VII. created Pope, April 7. 1655. p. 320 C
Clement VII. created Pope, November 19. 1523. p. 46 Clement VIII. created
Pope, January 30. 1592. p. 211 Clement IX. created Pope, June 20. 1667. p. 344
Clement X. created Pope, April 29 1670. p. 357 G
Gregory XIII. created Pope, May 13. 1572. p. 163 Gregory XIV. created Pope,
December 15. 1590. p. 207 Gregory XV. created Pope, Feb. 21. 1621. p. 267 I
Innocent VIII. created Pope, August 29. 1684. p. 8 Innocent IX. created Pope,
October 29. 1591. p. 210 Innocent X. created Pope, September 15. 1644. p. 293
Innocent XI. created Pope, September 21. 1676. p. 376 Julius II. created Pope,
November 1. 1503. p. 20 Julius III. created Pope, Febr. 17. 1550. p. 88 L
Leo X. created Pope, March 11. 1513. p. 29 Leo XI. created Pope, April 1.
1605. p. 225 M
Marcellus II. created Pope, April 9. 1555. p. 107 P
Paul III. created Pope, October 12. 1534. p. 67 Paul IV. created Pope, May 23.
1555. p. 109 Paul V. created Pope, May 16. 1605. p. 227 Pius III. created Pope,
September. 22. 1503. p. 19 Pius V. created Pope, December. 24. 1559. being
Christmas Eve, p. 119 Pius IV. created Pope, January 7. 1566. p. 157 S
Sixtus IV. created Pope, August 9. 1471. p. 1. Sixtus V. created Pope, April
24. 1585. p. 172 U
Urban VII. created Pope, September, 15. 1590. p. 205 Urban VIII. created Pope,
August 6. 1623. p. 271

THE LIVES OF THE BISHOPS and POPES OF ROME.
S. PETER the Apostle.
AFTER the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and the Completion of the days of
Pentecost; the Disciples received the Holy Ghost: and being filled with the
Spirit, they published the wonderful works of God in diverse Tongues, though
most of them, especially Peter and John, were looked upon as utterly illiterate
men. Their manner of living was measured by the common Good; none of them
challenged any propriety in any thing; and whatsoever Religious Oblation was
laid at their feet, they either divided it between themselves for the supply of
the necessities of Nature, or else distributed it to the Poor, These Disciples
had each of them his Province assigned to him; to St. Thomas was allotted
Parthia, to St. Matthew Aethiopia, to St. Bartholomew India on this side
Ganges, to St. Andrew Scythia, and Asia to St. John; who after a long series of
toil and care, died during his abode at Ephesus. But to St. Peter, the chief of
the Apostles, were assigned Pontus, Galatia, Bithynia and Cappadocia; who being
by birth a Galilean, of the City of Bethsaida, the son of John, and Brother of
Andrew the Apostle, sat first in the Episcopal See of Antioch for seven years
in the days of Tiberius.

This Emperor was Son-in-law and Heir to Augustus, and for the space Tiberius.
of twenty three years his administration of the Government had so much of
change and variety in it, that we cannot reckon him altogether a bad, or
absolutely a good Prince. He was a Man of great Learnning, and weighty
Eloquence; his Wars he managed not in Person, but by his Lieutenants: and
showed a great deal of Prudence in suppressing any sudden commotions. Having by
Arts of flattery enticed sevcral Princes to his Court, he never suffered them
to return home again: as particularly among others Archelaus of Cappadocia,
whose Kingdom he made a Province of the Empire. Many of the Senators were
banished, and some of them slain by him. C. Asinius Gallus the Pleader, son of
Asinius Pollio, was by his Order put to death with the most exquisite torments;
and Vocienus Montanus Narbonensis, one of the same profession, died in the
Baleares, whither Tiberius had confined him. Moreover Historians tell us, that
that his Brother Drusus was poisoned at his command. And yet upon occasion he
exercised so much lenity, that when certain Publicans and Governors of
Provinces moved him to raise the public taxes, he gave them this Answer, That
a good Shepherd does indeed shear, but not flay his sheep.

Tiberius dying, C. Coesar, who, with a jocular reflection upon his education
in the Camp, had the surname of Caliga signifying a Common Soldier's Hose.
Caligula, succeeded him in the Empire; he was the son of Drusus (son-in-law to
Augustus) and Nephew to Tiberius. The greatest Villain in the World, and one
who never did any worthy Action either at home or abroad. His Avarice put him
upon all manner of Oppression; his Lust was such, that he did not forbear to
violate the Chastity of his own Sisters; and his cruelty was so great, that he
is reported oftentimes to have cried out, Oh! That all the people of Rome had
but one Neck! At his Command all who were under proscription were put to Death;
for having recalled a certain person from banishment, and enquiring of him,
what the Exiles did chiefly wish for; the man imprudently answering, that they
desired nothing more than the Death of the Emperor; he thereupon gave order
that every man of them should be executed. He would often complain of the
condition of his times, that they were not rendered remarkable by any public
Calamities, as those of Tiberius had been, in whose Reign no less than 20000
men had been slain by the fall of a Theater at Tarracina. He expressed so much
envy at the renown of Virgil and Livy, that he was very near taking away their
Writings and Images out of all the Libraries; the former of which he would
censure as a man of no Wit and little Learning, the latter as a verbose and
negligent Historian; and it was his common byword concerning Seneca, That his
Writings were like a rope of Sand. Agrippa the son of King Herod, who had been
cast into prison by Tiberius for accusing Herod, was by him set at liberty, and
made King of Judoea; while Herod himself was confined to perpetual banishment
at Lions. He caused himself to be translated into the number of the Gods, and
ordered the setting up Images in the Temple of Jerusalem. At last he was
assaulted and slain by some of his own Officers, in the third year, and tenth
month of his Empire. Among his Writings were found two Rolls or Lists, one of
which had a Dagger, the other a Sword stamped upon it for a Seal; they both
contained the Names and Characters of certain principal men, both of the
Senatorian and Equestrian Order, whom he had designed to slaughter, There was
found likewise a large Chest filled with several sorts of Poisons, which being
at the Command of Claudius Coesar, not long after, thrown into the Sea, it is
reported that the Waters were so infected thereby, that there died abundance of
Fish, which the Tide cast up in vast numbers upon the neighboring shores.

I thought good to give this account of these Monsters of men, that thereby it
might the better appear, that God could then have scarce forborne destroying the
whole World, unless he had sent his Son and his Apostles; by whose blood
manking, though equal to Lycaon in impiety, was yet redeemed from destruction.
In their times lived that St. Peter, whom our Savior (upon his ackowledgment
of him to be the Christ) bespake in these words; Blessed art thou Simon Bar
Jona: for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which
is in Heaven; and, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church;
and I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Power of
binding and loosing. This Apostle being a Person of most unwearied industry,
when he had sufficiently settled the Churches of Asia, and confuted the Opinion
of those who maintained the necessity of Circumcision, came into Italy in the
second year of Claudius.

This Claudius, who was Uncle to Caligula, and had been all along very Claudius.
contumeliously treated and bussoon'd by his Nephew, being now Emperor, making
an Expedition into Britain, had the Island surrendered up to him; an Enterprise
which none before Julius Coesar, nor any after Claudius durst undertake: he
also added the Isles of Orkney to the Roman Empire. He banished out of the City
of Rome the seditious Jews, and suppressed the tumults in Judoea, which had
been raised by certain false Prophets. And while Cumanus was appointed by him
Procurator of Judoea, there were crushed to Death in the Porches of the Temple
of Jerusalem during the days of Unlcavened bread to the number of thirty
thousand Jews. At the same time also there was a great dearth and scarcity of
provision throughout the whole World; a Calamity which had been foretold by
^^^gabus the Prophet. Being secure of any hostilities from abroad he finished
the Aquaeduct that had been begun by Caligula, whose ruins are yet to be seen
in the Lateran. He attempted also to empty the Lake Fucinus, being prompted
thereto by the hope of getting not only honor and reputation, but profit and
advantage by it; since there was a certain person who proffered to undertake
that work at his own private charge, upon condition that the Land when it was
drein'd might have been granted to him for his reward. The Mountain being
partly undermined, partly cut through, the length of three miles, the Passage
was at the end of eleven years with much ado finished, there being no less than
30000 laborers continually employed in it. It was he likewise that made the
Harbor of Ostia, by drawing an Arm of the Sea on each hand, and so breaking
the violence of the Waves; a Work, the footsteps of which are not to be seen at
this day without Wonder. Having put to death his Wife Messalina for Adultery,
he afterward, against all Law both Humane and Divine, married Agrippina the
Daughter of his Brother Germanicus, by whom in the fourteenth year of his
Empire he was poisoned with Mushrooms prepared by her for that purpose.

In his time St. Peter came to Rome the principal City of the World; both
because he judged it a Seat best accommodated to the Pontifical dignity, and
because likewise he understood that Simon Magus, a certain Simon Magus.
Samaritan, had planted there; who by his Sorceries had so far seduced the
People, that they believed him to be a God. For his Statue had been already
erected at Rome, between the two Bridges, with this Latin Inscription Simoni
Deo Sancto, i. e. to Simon the Holy God. This man while he stayed in Samaria,
pretended Faith in Christ so far as to obtain Baptism from Philip one of the
seven Deacons; which afterward abusing to ill ends, he laid the foundation of
diverse Heresies. To him was joined one Sebene a shameless Strumpet, who was his
Companion and partner in Villainy. To such an height of impudence did this lewd
Fellow arrive, that he challenged St. Peter to work Miracles with him; and
particularly he undertook to raise to life a dead child; which indeed at first
seemed somewhat to move at his Charms: But it being manifest presently that the
Child nevertheless continued dead still, at St. Peter's command in the Name of
Jesus, it immediately arose. Simon being enraged hereat, proffered, as a further
trial which of them was the more holy man, and more beloved of God, to fly from
the Capitol to the Aventine in the sight of all the People, provided Peter
would follow him. While he was yet flying, at the prayer of Peter who with
hands lift up to Heaven, beseeched God not to suffer so great a multitude to be
deluded with Magical Arts, down he fell and broke his Leg, with grief of which
Mis-adventure he not long after died at Aricia, whither his followers had
conveyed him after this foul disgrace. From him the Heretics called
Simoniaci had their original, who pretended to buy and sell the Gift of the
Holy Ghost, and who asserted the Creatures to proceed from a certain superior
Power, but not to be from God.

After this St. Peter applying himself both by Preaching and Example S. Mark.
to the propagating of the Word of God, was by the Christian Romans earnestly
desired, that John surnamed Mark, who was his Son in Baptism, and a person of a
most approved life and conversation, might be employed by him in writing a
Gospel. St. Hierom says that he being a Priest in Israel, a Levite according
to the flesh, after his conversion to the Christian Faith, wrote his Gospel in
Italy; showing what he owed to his own Parentage and Extraction, and what to
Christ. Which Gospel, as we now have it, was approved by the testimony of St.
Peter. Being afterward sent into Egypt, as Philo the Jew a famous Writer tells
us, after that by Preaching and Writing he had well formed the Alexandrian
Church, being a man very eminent both for his Life and Learning, in the eighth
year of the Emperor Nero, he died and was buried at Alexandria; in whose place
succeeded Anianus.

The year before died James, surnamed Justus, the Brother of our James.
Lord, being the Son of Joseph by another Wife, or, as some will have it,
Sisters son to Mary Christ's Mother. Egefippus, who lived near the Apostles
times, affirms of him that he was holy in his Mothers Womb; that he drank
neither Wine nor strong drink, nor ever tasted flesh; that he neither shaved,
nor bathed, nor anointed himself, nor ever wore any other but linen garments.
He was often accustomed to enter into the Holy of Holies, where he continued so
incessantly in his Prayers for the Welfare of the People, that his knees were
grown hard and callous like those of Camels. But Festus leaving the Government
of Judoea, before Albinus his successor arrived there, the High Priest Ananus,
the son of Ananus, requiring James publicly to deny Christ to be the Son of
God, upon his refusal he gave order he should be stoned to Death; who, after he
had been thrown down headlong from a pinnacle of the Temple, continuing yet half
alive, and with hands stretched forth toward Heaven praying for his
persecutors, was at last killed outright with a blow of a Fullers Club.
Josephus reports him to have been a man of so great sanctity, that it was the
general belief that his murder was the cause of the destruction of Jerusalem.
This is that James, whom our Lord appeared to after his Resurrection, and to
whom, having blessed Bread and broken it, he said, Brother eat thy Bread,
because the son of man is risen. He presided over the Church of Jerusalem
thirty years, that is, to the seventh year of Nero. His Sepulcher with an
Inscription, hard by the Temple from which he had been cast down, was yet in
being in Andrian's time.

It is evident likewise that Barnabas, by birth a Cypriot, surnamed Joses,
Barnabas.
a Levite, died before St. Peter's martyrdom. He being chosen together with
Paul an Apostle of the Gentiles, wrote only one Epistle of matters concerning
the Church, and that too is reckoned Apocryphal There happening to be a
difference between him and Paul occasioned by Mark a Disciple, he accompanied
with the said Mark, went to Cyprus, where Preaching the faith of Christ he was
crowned with Martyrdom. Paul, Paul.
first called Saul, was descended of the Tribe of Benjamin, of a Town of
Judoea, called Giscalis; which being taken in War by the Romans, he with his
Parents removed to Tarsus a City of Cilicia. And being sent thence to Jerusalem
to study the Law, he had his Education under the learned Gamaliel. After this
receiving Letters from the High Priest, he became a Persecutor of those that
professed Christ to be the true God; and particularly was present and assistant
at the death of St. Stephen the Protomartyr. But as he was going to Damascus,
being by the Divine Spirit wonderfully converted to the Faith, he became a
chosen Vessel; and from that time took the name of Paul, from a Pro-consul of
Cyprus, whom by his preaching he had converted to Christianity. After this he,
together with Barnabas, having traveled through diverse Cities, upon his return
to Jerusalem, was by Peter, John, and James, chosen an Apostle of the Gentiles.
In the twenty fifth year after the death of Christ, which was the second of the
Emperor Nero, and the time when Festus succeeded Felix in the Procuratorship of
Judoea, he with his fellow-captive Aristarchus was as a free Denizon sent bound
to Rome; where continuing the space of two years under very little confinement,
he was daily engaged in disputation with the Jews. Being at length set at
liberty by Nero, he both preached and wrote many things. We have at this day
fourteen of his Epistles; one to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, one to the
Galatians, one to the Ephesians, one to the Philippians, one to the Colossians,
two to the Thessalonians. two to Timothy, one to Titus, and one to Philemon;
that to the Hebrews is generally said to be his, though because of the
difference of style and phrase from the rest, it be uncertain whether it were
so or no; and there have been anciently diverse who have entitled it, some to
Luke, some to Barnabas, some to Clemens. St. Peter also wrote two general
Epistles, though the latter be by many denied to be his for the same reason of
the difference of style. But being so taken up with Prayer and Preaching, that
he could not attend any other great variety of business, he constituted two
Bishops, viz. Linus and Cletus, who might exercise the sacerdotal Ministry to
the Romans and other Christians. The holy man applying himself entirely to
these things, gained thereby so great and universal a Reputation, that men were
ready to worship him as a God. The Emperor Nero being displeased hereat, began
to contrive his death; whereupon St. Peter, with the advice of his Friends,
that he might avoid the Emperors envy and rage, departed out of the City by
the Via Appia; and at the end of the first mile he traveled, to use the words
of Egesippus, meeting with Christ in the way, and falling down and worshipping
him, he said, Lord whither go thou? to whom Christ replied, I go to Rome to
be crucified again. There is yet remaining a Chapel built on the same place
where these words were spoken. Now St. Peter believing this saying of our
Savior to relate to his own martyrdom, because Christ might seem to be ready
to suffer again in him, went back to the City, and forth with consecrated
Clemens a Bishop, and in these words recommended to him his Chair, and the
Church of God; I deliver to thee the same power of binding and loosing which
Christ lest to me; do thou, as becomes a good Pastor, promote the salvation of
men both by Prayer and Preaching, without regard to any hazard of Life or
Fortune. Having set these things thus in order, at the Command of Nero in the
last year of his Empire, He was put to death together with St. Paul, though the
kinds of their Punishment were different. For St. Peter was crucified with his
Head toward the ground, and his Feet upwards, for so he desired it might be,
saying, That he was unworthy to undergo the same kind of death with his
Savior. He was buried in the Vatican, in the Via Aurelia, near Nero's Gardens,
not far from the Via Triumphalis which leads to the Temple of Apollo. He
continued in the Sea 25 years. But St. Paul being on the same day beheaded, was
interred in the Via Ostiensis, in the 37th year after the death of Christ. This
is confirmed by the testimony of Caius the Historian, who in a Disputation
against one Proculus a Montanist has these words; I, says he, can show you the
Victorious Ensigns of the Apostles; for you cannot pass the Via Regalis that
leads to the Vatican, nor the Via Ostiensis, but you will find the Trophies of
those Hero's that established this Church: where certainly he refers to these
two St. Peter and St. Paul. In the forementioned Gardens of Nero, were
reposited the ashes of a multitude of holy Martyrs. For a Fire happening in the
time of Nero, which raging for six days together, had wasted a great part of
the City, and devoured the substance of many wealthy Citizens, the blame of all
which was laid upon the Emperor; He, as Tacitus tells us, being very desirous
to quell the rumor, suborned false Witnesses to accuse, and lay all the blame
of that Calamity upon the Christians. Whereupon so great a number of them were
seized and put to death, that it is said the flame of their empaled bodies
supplied the room of lights for some nights together. There are those who say
this Fire was kindled by Nero, either that he might have before his Eyes the
Resemblance of burning Troy, or else because he had taken offense at the
irregularity of the old Houses, and the narrowness and windings of the streets;
neither of which are improbable of such a man as he, who was profligately
self-willed, intemperate and cruel, and in all respects more lewd and wicked
than his Uncle Caligula. For he both put to death a great part of the Senate,
and also without any regard to Decency would in the fight of the People sing
and dance in the public Theater. His dissolute Luxury was such, that he made
use of perfumed cold Baths, and fished with golden Nets, which were dragged with
Purple Cords. Yet he took such care to conceal all these Vices in the beginning
of his Empire, that men had generally great hopes of him. For being put in mind
to sign a Warrant according to Custom for the Execution of one that was
condemned to die, How glad, says he, should I be that I had never learnt to
write. Howas very sumptuous in his Buildings both in the City and elsewhere;
for the Baths called by his Name, and the Aurea Domus, and the Portico three
miles long were finished by him with with wondrous magnificence; besides which
he was at a vast expense to make the Haven at Antium, at the sight of which I
my self not long since was wonderfully pleased. I return to his Cruelty, which
he exercised toward his Master Seneca, toward M. Annoeus Lucanus the famous
Poet, toward his Mother Agrippina, and his Wife Octavia, toward Cornutus the
Philosopher Perfius's Master, whom he banished, toward Piso, and in a word
toward all those who were in any reputation among the Citizens. In the end, he
so highly provoked the rage and hatred of the people against him, that most
diligent search was made after him to bring him to condign punishment: Which
punishment was, that being bound, he should be led up and down with a Gallows
upon his neck; and being whipped with Rods to Death, his body should be thrown
into the River Tyber. But he making his escape four miles out of the City, laid
violent hands upon himself in the Countrey-house of one of his Freemen; between
the Via Salaria, and Nomentana, in the thirty second year of his Age, and of
his Reign the fourteenth.

S. LINUS.
LINUS, by Nation a Tuscan, his Father's name Herculeanus, was in the Chair
from the last year of Nero to the times of Vespasian, and from the Consulship
of Saturninus and Scipio, to that of Capito and Rufus.

In this space of time there were no less than three Emperors, Galba, Otho,
and Vitellius, each of them reigning but a very little while.

Galba, a Person descended of the most ancient Nobility, being created Galba.
Emperor by the Soldiers in Spain, as soon as he heard of the death of Nero,
came immediatey to Rome. But rendering himself obnoxious to all men by his
Avarice and Sloth, through the treachery of Otho, he was slain at Rome near
Curtius's Lake in the seventh month of his Reign; together with Piso a Noble
Youth whom he had adopted for his Son. He was doubtless a man, who before he
came to the Empire, was very eminent in the management both of Military and
Civil affairs; being often Consul, often Proconsul, and several times General
in the most important Wars. That which makes me speak this in his praise, is
the Learning of M. Fabius Quintilianus, whom Galba brought with him out of
Spain to Rome.

Otho, a man of better extraction by his Mother's than by his Father's Otbc.
side, who while he led a private life was very loose and effeminate, as being
a great and intimate Friend of Nero's, in the midst of tumults and slaughters,
as I hinted before, invaded the Empire. But being engaged in a Civil War
against Vitellius, who had been created Emperor in Germany, though he got the
better in three small Skirmishes, one at the Alps, another at Placentia, the
third at Castor; yet losing the day in the last and most considerable, which
was at Bebriacum, he thereupon fell into so deep a melancholy, that, in the
third month of his Empire he stabbed himself.

Vitellius, concerning whose Extraction there are different Opinions, Vitellius.
coming to Rome, and obtaining the Empire, soon degenerated into all manner of
lewdness, cruelty and gluttony, being used to make several Meals in a day, and
some of them to such an height of Luxury, that there have been at one Supper no
less than two thousand Fishes, and seven thousand Fowl served up to his Table.
But having intelligence that Vespasian, who had been created Emperor by the
Army in Judoea, was advancing with his Legions, he at first determined to quit
the Empire; yet being afterward encouraged by those about him, he took up
Arms, and forced Sabinus, Vespasian's Brother, with his Flavian Soldiers into
the Capitol; which being set on fire, they were all burnt. Hereupon being
surpised by Vespasian, and having no hope of pardon left him, he hid himself
in a private Chamber in the Palace, from whence he was most ignominiously
dragged and carried naked through the Via Sacra to the Scaloe Gemonioe, where
being quartered he was thrown into the River Tyber.

During this time Linus was Successor to St. Peter, though there are some who
place Clemens here, and wholly leave out Linus and Cletus; who yet are
sufficiently confuted not only by History, but also by the authority of S.
Hierom, who tells us, that Clemens was the fourth Bishop of Rome after Peter,
for Linus was accounted the second, and Cletus the third, notwithstanding that
most of the Romans immediately after Peter reckon Clemens. To whom, though St.
Peter had as it were by Will bequeathed the Right of Succession, yet his
modesty was so great that he compelled Linus and Cletus to take upon them the
Pontifical Dignity before him, lest any ambition of pre-eminence might be of
ill example to after Ages. This Linus by Commission from St. Peter, ordained
that no Woman should enter the Church but with her Head veiled. Moreover, at
two Ordinations which he held in the City, he made eighteen Presbyters and
eleven Bishops. He wrote also the Memoirs of St. Peter, and particularly the
Contention he had with Sinion Magus. In his time lived Philo, a Jew, by Nation
of Alexandria, in whose Writings there is Philo Judoeus.
so much Wit and Judgment, that, from the likeness there appears between them,
he deserved to have it proverbially said, Either Plato does Philonize, or Philo
does Platonize. By his Learning and Eloquence he corrected the rashness of
Appion, who had been sent Ambassador from the Alexandrians with Complaints
against the Jews. While he was at Rome, in Claudius his time, he contracted an
acquaintance with St. Peter, and thereupon wrote several things in praise of
the Christians. Josephus also, the son of Matathias, a Priest at Jerusalem,
Josephus.
being taken Prisoner by Vespasian, and committed to the custody of his son
Titus till that City was taken, coming to Rome during the Pontificate of Linus,
presented to the Father and the Son seven Books of the Jewish War, which were
laid up in the public Library, and the Author himself, as a reward for that
performance, had most deservedly a Statue erected to him. He wrote likewise
twenty four other Books of Antiquities, from the beginning of the World to the
fourteenth year of the Emperor Domitian. As for Linus himself, though he had
gained a mighty reputation by the sanctity of his Life, by his Power of casting
out Devils and raising the Dead, yet was he put to Death by Saturninus the
Consul, whose very Daughter he had dispossessed; and was buried in the Vatican
near the Body of St. Peter, on the twenty first day of September, when he had
sat in the Pontifical See eleven years, three months, and twelve days. There
are some who affirm that Gregory Bishop of Ostia, did, according to a Vow which
he had made, remove the Body of this holy Bishop to that place, and solemnly
interr it in the Church of St. Laurence.

S. CLETUS.
CLETUS, born in Rome in the Vicopatrician One of the Divisions of the City of
Rome, answering to one of our Wards in London.
Region, Son of Aemilianus, through the persuasion of Clemens, unwillingly took
upon him the burden of the Pontificate, though for his Learning, Life and
Quality he was a Person of very great esteem and Authority among all that knew
him. He lived in the time of Vespasian and Titus, from the seventh Consulship
of Vespasian, and the fifth of Domitian, to Domitian and Rufus Coss. according
to Damasus.

Vespasian, as I said before, succeeding Vitellius, committed the management
Vespasianus.
of the Jewish War, which had been carrying on two years before, to his Son
Titus, which he within two years after, with great resolution finished. For all
Judoea being conquered, the City Jerusalem destroyed, and the Temple levelled
to the ground, it is reported that no less than six hundred thousand Jews were
slain; nay Josephus a Jew, who was a Captive in that War, and had his life
given him because he foretold the death of Nero, and that Vespasian should in a
short time be Emperor, relates that eleven hundred thousand perished therein by
sword and famine, and that a hundred thousand were taken Prisoners, and
publicly exposed to sale. Nor will it seem improbable, if we consider that he
tells us this happened at the time of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when they
came from all parts of Judoea to Jerusalem, as into a public Prison; and
especially on the day of the Passover, upon which they crucified Christ: being
now to undergo the deserved punishment, both of their frequent revolts from the
Roman Government; and also of their villainy and perfidiousness in putting to
death the innocent Jesus. Upon this Victory over the Jews, the Father and Son
were honored with a Triumph, both riding in the same Chariot, and Domitian
upon a white Horse following them. The Monuments of this Triumph remain still
in the Via Nova, where are to be seen engraven the Candesticks and the Tables
of the old Law that were taken out of the Temple and triumphantly brought away.
Yet Vespasian exercised so much humanity toward the Jews, even when they were
conquered, that for all those whom he found among them remaining of the House
of David, as being of Royal descent, he had a very good esteem. And indeed he
always used his Power with great Moderation, being of so mild and merciful a
Temper, as to discharge even Traitors with no other than a verbal Correction,
and to slight the Discourses of insolent and talkative people, and in general
to be forgetful of Faults and Injuries. He was looked upon as too much inclined
to Avarice; and yet he used no oppression for the getting of Money, and what he
had he employed in Bounty and Magnificence. For he both finished the Temple of
Peace adjoining to the Forum, that had been begun by Claudius; and began that
Amphitheatre, a part of which is yet to be seen with admiration. He had so
great an opinion of the Bravery and Merit of his Son Titus, that upon occasion
of certain tumults, raised by some ambitious men who aspired to the Empire, he
said publicly, That either his Son, or no man, would be his Successor in the
Empire. And good ground he had to say so, for that Titus, both Titus.
for his Courage and Integrity was accounted the Darling and Delight of
Mankind. He was endued with an Eloquence excellency suited to the times of
Peace, and with a Courage to those of War; he was very merciful to Offenders,
and so kind and bountiful to all, that he never denied any man any thing. Upon
which occasion when some of his Friends took the liberty to find fault with him
as too profuse; he told them, It was not fit that any man should depart sad out
of the presence of a Prince. And remembering at a certain time that he had not
conferred any benefit in a whole day, he thereupon cried out to those about
him, My Friends, I have lost a Day. Never any Emperor was superior to him in
Magnificence; the Amphitheatre, together with the Baths near adjoining, being
perfectly completed and dedicated, and an Hunting of five thousand wild Beasts
exhibited by him. He recalled from Exile Mursonius Rufus a famous Philosopher,
and was much pleased with the conversation of Asconius Poedianus a most learned
man. He died in the second year of his Empire, and was carried to his Sepulcher
with so great and universal a lamentation, as if every man had lost a Father.

There are some who write that Cletus succeeded Linus in the second year of
Vespasian, who held the Empire ten years. Whether that were so or no, it is
certain that Cletus was a most holy and good man, and that he left nothing
undone that might contribute to the enlargement and increase of the Church of
God. In his time lived Luke, a Physician of Antioch, Luke.
one extraordinarily well skilled in the Greek Language, a follower of S. Paul
the Apostle, and his constant attendant and Companion in his Travels. He penned
the Gospel, which is commended by S. Paul, and which S. Paul for a good reason
calls his Gospel. He wrote also the Acts of the Apostles, being himself an
Eyewitness of them. He lived eighty four years, was married in Bithynia, and
buried at Constantinople, whither his bones, together with those of Andrew the
Apostle, were in the tenth year of Constantius, conveyed out of Achaia. At the
same time likewise Philip returning out of Scythia, which by his Example and
Philip.
Preaching he had kept steadfast in the faith for twenty years together, into
Asia, died at Jerusalem. As for Cletus himself, having settled the Church as
well as the Times would bear, and ordained according to St. Peter's command
twenty five Presbyters, he was crowned with Martyrdom in the Reign of Domitian,
and buried near the body of S. Peter in the Vatican, April 27. There were many
other Martyrs about the same time, among whom is reckoned Flavia Domicilla,
Sisters Daughter to Flavius Clemens the Consul who was banished into the Island
Pontia for the profession of Christianity. Cletus sat in the Chair twelve
years, one month, eleven days; and by his Death the Sea was vacant twenty days.

S. CLEMENS.
CLEMENS, born in Rome, in the Region of Mons Coelius, his Fathers name
Faustinus, lived in the time of Titus his Successor Domitian,

Who was more like to Nero or Caligula than to his Father Vespasian or Domitian.
his Brother; yet at the beginning of his Empire he kept within some tolerable
bounds, but soon after he broke out into very great enormities of Lust,
Idleness, Rage and Cruelty; crimes which brought upon him so great an Odium, as
almost quite defaced the Memory and Renown of his Father and his Brother. Many
of the Nobility he put to death, whereof most were by his order assassined in
the places whither he had banished them. He was so industriously idle as to
spend the time of his privacy and retirement in killing Flies with a Bodkin;
for which reason when a certain person coming out of his Presence was asked,
whether any one were with Coesar, he answered merrily, No, not so much as a
Fly. He arrived to such an height of Folly and arrogance, as to expect divine
Honors, and command that in all Discourses and Writings concerning him, the
Title of Lord and God should be given him. He was the second from Nero that
raised a Persecution against the Christians. Moreover, he gave order that all
those of the Lineage of David among the Jews, should by Interrogatories and
racking them to Confession be diligently searched after, and being found
utterly destroyed and extin guish'd. In the end, the divine Vengeance
overtaking him, he was in the fifteenth year of his Empire stabbed to death in
the Palace by his own servants. His Body was carried out by the common Bearers
and ingloriously buried by Philix at her Countrey-house in the Via Latina.

Clemens was now (as I have said) the fourth Bishop of Rome from S. Peter,
Linus being accounted the second and Cletus the third, though the Latins
generally reckon Clemens next after Peter; and that he was designed so appears
from his own Letter to James Bishop of Jerusalem, wherein he gives him the
following account of that matter; Simon Peter being apprehensive of his
approaching Death, in the presence of several Brethren, taking hold of my hand,
This, says he, is the person, whom having been my assistant in all affairs
since I came to Rome, I constitute Bishop of that City; and when I showed my
willingness eo decline so great a Burden, he exposulated with me in this
manner, Will thou consult only thine own convenience; and deny thy assistance
to the poor fluctuating Church of God when it is in thy power to steer it? But
he being a person of wonderful modesty, did freely prefer Linus and Cletus to
that dignity before himself undertook it. He wrote in the name of the Roman
Church a very useful Epistle to the Corinthians, not differing in style from
that of the Hebrews, which is said to be St. Paul's. This Epistle was formerly
read publicly in several Churches: there is another bearing his name which the
Ancients did not thing authentic; and Eufebius in the third Book of his
History, does find fault with a long Disputation between St. Peter and Appion,
said to be written by our Clement, It Is certain that John S. John.
the Apostle, son of Zebedee and Brother of James lived till this time, who was
the last Penman of the Gospel, and confirmed what had been before written by
Matthew, Mark and Luke. The reason why he wrote last is said to be, that he
might confront and defeat the Heresy of the Ebionites, who impudently denied
Christ to have had a being before his Birth of the Blessed Virgin; and
accordingly we find him very particular in demonstrating the Divinity of our
Savior. He wrote several other things, and among the rest his Revelation,
during his banishment into the Island Patmos by Domitian; who being afterward
slain and his Acts for their excessive severity rescinded by the Senate, he
returned to Ephesus in the time of Nerva; where he continued till the Reign of
Trajan, supporting the Churches of Asia by his Counsel and Writings, till at
last being worn out with Age he rested in the Lord the sixty eighth year after
the Passion of Christ. Our Clemens by his Piety, Religion and Learning made
daily many Proselytes to Christianity; whereupon P. Tarquinius the High Priest,
and Mamertinus the City Prefect stirred up the Emperor against the Christians;
at whose command Clement was banished to an Island, where he found near two
thousand Christians condemned to hew Marble in the Quarries. In this Island
there being at that time a great scarcity of water, which they were forced to
fetch at six miles distance, Clement going going to the top of a little Hill
hard by, sees there a Lamb, under whose right foot flowed miraculously a
plentiful Spring, with which all the Islanders were refreshed, and many of them
thereupon converted to the Christian faith. At which Trajan being enraged, sent
some of his Guards, who threw Clement into the Sea, with an Anchor tied about
his neck. But his blessed Body was not long after cast on the shore, and being
buried at the place where this miraculous fountain had sprung up, a Temple was
built over it. This is said to have happened September the fourteenth in the
third year of the Emperor Trajan. He was in the Chair nine years, two months,
and ten days; he divided the Wards of the City among seven Notaries, who were
to register the Acts of the Martyrs; and at the Ordinations which he held
according to Custom in the Month of December, he made ten Presbyters, two
Deacons, and fifteen Bishops. By his death the Sea was vacant two and twenty
days.

S. ANACLETUS.
ANACLETUS, an Athenian, son of Antiochus, was successor to Clement in the time
of Trajanus.

This Trajans Predecessor Nerva Cocceius, was an excellent Nerva.
person both in his private and public capacity, just and equal in all his
proceedings, and one whose Government was very advantageous to the Republic.
Through his procurement the Acts of Domitian being repealed by Decree of the
Senate, multitudes thereupon returned from banishment, and several by his
bounty had the Goods of which they had before been plundered, restored to them.
But being now very old, and drawing near to the time of his Death, out of his
care of the Public Weal, he adopted Trajan, and then died in the sixteenth
Month of his Reign, and of his Age the seventy second year.

Trajan himself, a Spaniard, surnamed Ulpius Crinitus, coming to the Trajanus.
Empire surpassed the best of Princes in in the glory of his Arms, the the
Goodness of his Temper, and the moderation of his Government. He extended the
bounds of the Empire far and wide, reduced that part of Getmany beyond the
Rhine to its former state, subdued Dacia, and several other Nations beyond the
Danow; recovered Parthia; gave a King to the Albanians; made Provinces beyond
Euphrates and Tygris; overcame and kept Armenia, Assyria, Mesopotamia,
Seleucia, Ctesiphon and Babylon; and proceeded as far as the borders of India,
and the Red Sea, where he left a Fleet to infest those Borders.

The Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions of Anacletus were as follows; viz.
That no Prelate or other Clerk should suffer his beard or hair to grow long;
that no Bishop should be ordained by less than three other Bishops; that the
Clergy should be admitted into holy Orders in public only; and that all the
faithful should after Consecration communicate or be put out of the Church. By
this means the Christian interest increased, that Trajan fearing lest the Roman
State might be impaired thereby, gave allowance to a third Persecution of the
Christians, in which multitudes were put to Death, and particularly Ignatius
Ignatius.
the third Bishop of the Church of Antioch after St. Peter. Who being taken and
condemned to suffer by wild beasts, as he was carried to Rome by his Guards,
whom he called his Ten Leopards, he all along in his passage encouraged and
confirmed the Christians, by Discourse with some, and by Epistle to others;
declaring his readiness to suffer in this manner; Come Cross, come Beasts, come
Wrack, come the torture of my whole body, and the torments of the Devil upon
me, so I may enjoy Christ. And upon the occasion of his hearing the Lions roar,
Corn, says he, I am, let me be ground by the teeth of these beasts, that I may
be found fine bread. He died in Trajan's eleventh year, and his bones were
afterward buried in the Suburbs of Antioch. But Plinius Secundus, who was then
Governor of that Province, being moved with compassion to see so many
executed, wrote to the Emperor Trajan, informing him that incredible numbers
of men were daily put to Death, who were persons of an unblameable life, and
who in no point transgressed the Roman Laws, save only that before daybreak,
they would sing Hymns to Christ their God, but that Adulteries and the like
Crimes were disallowed and abominated by them. Hereupon Trajan gave order, that
the Magistrates should not make search after the Christians, but only punish
those who voluntarily offered themselves. During this Persecution Simeon, the
kinsman of our Lord, son of Cleophas and Bishop of Jerusalem, was crucified in
the hundred and twentieth year of his Age. These things which we have spoken
were acted in the time of this Bishop and not of Cletus, as Eusebius in the
third book of his History would have it; for Damasus makes out that Cletus and
Anacletus differed both as to their Country and manner of Death, Cletus being
a Roman and suffering under Domitian, but Anacletus and Athenian and suffering
under Trajan. Our Anacletus having erected an Oratory to St. Peter, and
assigned places of burial for the Martyrs distinct from those of other men, and
at one Decembrian Ordination made five Presbyters, three Deacons, and six
Bishops; upon his Martyrdom the Sea was vacant thirteen days, after he had sat
in it nine years, two months and ten days.

S. EUARISTUS.
EUARISTUS, by birth a Grecian, his Father a Jew, named Juda, of the City of
Bethleem, lived in the time of Trajan. A Prince whom I take delight to mention,
because of his singular Trajan.
Justice and Humanity. Who behaved himself so acceptably toward all men, that
as far as the times of Justinian the usual acclamation of the People at the
Creation of an Emperor was this, Let him be more prosperous than Augustus and
better than Trajan. He was of a temper so courteous and condescending in
visiting the Sick, in saluting his Friends, in keeping Festivals, and being
present at Collations to which he was invited, that the fault which some found
with him for that very reason, gave the occasion of that worthy noble saying of
his, That a Prince ought to be such to his Subjects, as he desires they should
be to him. He impartially distributed Honors, Riches, and Rewards to all that
deserved well; never oppressed any man to fill his own Exchequer; granted
advantageous immunities to poor Cities; repaired the Highways, and made the
passages of Rivers secure; made a high large Mole at the Haven of Ancona, to
break the violence of the Waves; and indeed neither acted nor designed any
thing in his whole life but what tended to the public Good. Having gained such
Renown both in War and in Peace, he died of a Flux, at Seleucia a City of
Isauria, in the eighteenth year and sixth month of his Reign. His bones were
afterward conveyed to Rome, and there buried in an Urn of Gold, in the Forum
which himself had built, under the winding Pillar of an hundred forty foot
high, which is yet to beseen.

But we return to Euaristus, who, as Damasus tells us, divided the City of Rome
among the Presbyters into Parishes; ordained that seven Deacons should attend
the Bishop when ever he preached to be witnesses of the truth of his Doctrine;
and moreover that the accusation of a Layman should not be admitted against a
Bishop. He held Decembrian Ordinations, at which he made six Presbyters, two
Deacons and five Bishops. In his time lived Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, an
Auditor of Papias.
John, a person who took not so much delight in the Records of the ancient
Disciples of our Lord, as in the living Conversation of Aristion and John the
Elder. And it is manifest from the order he observes in setting down the names
of these two after the mention of almost all the Apostles, that the John whom
he places among the Apostles, was a distinct Person from this John the Aged,
whom hereckons after Aristion. He was certainly a very learned man, and
followed by many, as particularly Irenaeus, Apollinarius, Tertullian,
Victorinus Pictaviensis, and Lactantius Firmianus. Now also Quadratus, a
Disciple of the Apostles, did by his Industry Quadratus.
and Courage support the Church of God as much as might be in such dangerous
times. For when Adrian, who now passed the Winter at Athens, and was admitted a
Priest to the Goddess Eleusina, began to persecute the Christians, Quadratus
with his own hand presented to him a very honest and rational Book of the
Excellency of the Christian Religion. The like did Aristides, and Athenian
Philosopher, converted to Aristides:
Christianity; who at the same time with Quadratus, presented to Adrian a
Treatise, containing an account of our Religion. The effect of which
Apologeticks was, that Adrian being convinced of the injustice of putting the
Christians to death without their being heard, wrote to Minutius Fundanus the
Proconsul of Asia, ordering that no Christian should be executed, unless his
guilt were proved by a credible Witness. As for our Euaristus, some tell us
that he was martyred in the last year of Trajan; but they are more in the
right, who are of opinion that he suffered under Adrian before his being
reconciled to the Christians. For he was in the Chair nine years, ten months,
two days, and was buried in the Vatican, near the body of S. Peter, October the
twenty seventh. The Sea was then vacant nineteen days.

S. ALEXANDER I.
ALEXANDER, a Roman, Son of Alexander, a Person of Wisdom and Gravity far
exceeding his years, held the Pontificate in the time of Aelius Adrianus.

This Adrian, who was Son to Trajan's Cosin-German, at his first coming Adrian.
to the Empire proved an Enemy to the Christians, but afterward (as shall be
said anon) upon knowledge of their Religion and Devotion, became very kind and
propitious to them. From the great benefits which the Roman State received by
his Government, he was called the Father of his Country, and his Wife had the
Title of Augusta. He was excellently well skilled both in the Roman and Greek
Languages, made many Laws, created a goodly Library at Athens, being mightily
pleased with the Learning and Conversation of Plutarch, Sixtus, Agathocles and
Oenomaus the Philosopher; and at the request of the Athenians compiled Laws for
them according to the Model of Draco and Solen. Being admitted to the
Eleusinian Mysteries, he was very bountiful to the Citizens of Athens, and
repaired their bridge broken down by an Innundation of the River Cephysus. He
built also a Bridge at Rome, called by his own name, remaining to this day, and
a stately Sepulcher in the Vatican near the River Tyber, which the Popes now
make use of for a Citadel. Moreover, he made that most sumptuous and stately
Villa, now called Old Tiber, to the several parts of which he gave the names of
Provinces, and the most celebrated parts of the World. Coming to Pelusium, he
was at great expense in adorning Pompey's Tomb, and in Britain he built a Wall
of sixty miles to sever the Romans from the Natives. And because Septicius
Clarus the Captain of his Guards, and Suetonius Tranquillus his Secretary, with
several others, had without his leave conversed somewhat more familiarly with
his Empress Sabina than the Reverence of a Court admitted of, he removed them
all and put others into their Offices.

But to return to our Alexander, He was the first who for the remembrance of
Christ's Passion at the Communion added those words, Qui pridie quam pateretur,
to the Clause Hoc est corpus meum. He ordained likewise that the Holy Water (as
it is called) mixed with Salt and consecrated by Prayer, should be kept in
Churches and in private Houses, as a guard against evil Spirits. Moreover, he
instituted that Water should be mingled with the Wine, at the consecration of
the Elements, to signify the Union of Christ with his Church; and that the
Host should not be of leavened bread as was formerly used, but of unleavened
only, as being the more pure, and by which all occasion of cavilling would be
taken away from the Ebionite Heretics, who were very much addicted to Judaism.
In his time lived Agrippa Castor, who learnedly and Agrippa Castor.
effectually confuted the books which Basilides the Heretic wrote against
Bafilides.
the Holy Gospel; exposing to derision his Prophets Barcabas and Barthecab, and
his great God Abraxas, names invented by him to amuse and terrify the
ignorant. This Basilides died at that time when the Christians were very much
perfecuted and tormented by Cochebas, the Head of the Jewish Faction. But
Adrian soon repressed the pertinacy of this Rebel and the whole Nation of the
Jews, by an almost incredible slaughter of them; and then commanded that no Jew
should be suffered to enter Jerusalem, permitting only Christians to inhabit
that City, and having repaired the Walls and buildings of it, he called it
after his own name Aelia; Marcus being after the expulsion of the Jews, chosen
the first Gentile Bishop of it. In the time of this Bishop also Sapphira of
Antioch, and Sabina a Roman Lady suffered martyrdom for the faith of Christ;
and Favorinus, Palaemon, Herodes Atheniensis and Marcus Byzantius were famous
Rhetoricians. Our Alexander having at three Decembrian Ordinations made five
Presbyters, three Deacons, five Bishops, was, together with his Deacons
Euentius and Theodulus, crowned with Martyrdom, on the third day of May, and
buried in the Via Nomentana, where he suffered, seven miles from the City. He
was in the Chair ten years, seven months, two days. After his Death the Sea was
vacant twenty five days.

S. SIXTUS I.
SIXTUS a Roman, the Son of Pastor, or as others will have it, of Helvidius,
held the Pontificate in the time of Adrian, to the Consulship of Verus and
Anniculus.

Which Adrian is reckoned in the number of the good Emperors, upon the account
of his Liberality, Splendor, Magnificence and Clemency; an eminent instance of
the last of which good qualities was this, That when a Servant run madly upon
him with his Sword, he took no farther notice of the Action than to order him a
Physician to cure his Phrenzy. He visited the Sick twice or thrice in a day; at
his own charge he repaired Alexandria when it had been ruined by the Romans; he
rebuilt the Pantheon in Rome, and made Aromatic Presents to the People. Being
at the point of Death, he is said to have uttered these Verses;

Animula, vagula, blandula,
Hospes, comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca,
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec, ut soles, dabis, jocos.
He died of a Dropsy in the two and twentieth year of his Reign, and was buried
at Puteoli in Cicero's Villa.

Sixtus out of his care of the Church, ordained, that the Elements and Vessels
of the Altar should not be touched by any but the Ministers, but especially not
by Women; and that the Corporal, as it is called, should be made of
Linen Cloth only, and that of the finest sort. That no Bishop who had been
cited to appear before the Apostolic See, should at his return be received by
his Flock, unless he brought with him Letters Communicatory to the People. At
the Celebration he instituted the Hymn, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.
Anciently the Office of the Communion was performed in a plain manner, and
unclog'd with humane mixtures. St. Peter after Consecration used the
Paternoster; James Bishop of Jerusalem added some Rites, Bazil more, and others
more still. For Celestine brought in the Introitus of the Mass, Gregory the
Kyrie Eleyson, Telesphorus The Glory be to God on High, Gelasius the first the
Collects, and Hierom the Epistle and Gospel. The Alelujah was taken from the
Church of Jerusalem, the Creed was instituted by the Council of Nice, Pelagius
introduced the Commemoration of the Dead, Leo the third the Incense, Innocent
the first the Kiss of Peace, and Sergius ordered the Agnus Dei to be sung.
During the time of Sixtus the Persecution being so sharp, that few had courage
enough to own the Profession of Christianity, and the Christian Gauls desiring
a Bishop, to them he sends Peregrine a Citizen of Rome, who having confirmed
them in the Faith, at his return suffered Martyrdom in the Via Appia, at the
place where Christ appeared to Peter as he was leaving the City. His body was
by the faithful carried into the Vatican, and buried near S. Peter. Aquila also
by birth a Jew of Pontus, who with his Wife Priscilla had been banished by the
Edict of Claudius, is said by some to have lived till this time; he was the
second Translatour of the Old Testament, after the Seventy who lived in the
time of Ptolomey Philadelphus. As for Sixtus, having at three Decembrian
Ordinations, made eleven Presbyters, eleven Deacons, and four Bishops, he was
crowned with Martyrdom, and buried in the Vatican near St. Peter, having been
in the Chair ten years, three months, and one and twenty days. Upon his Death
the Sea was vacant only two days.

S. TELESPHORUS.
TELEPHORUS, a Grecian, the Son of an Anchorete, lived in the time of Antoninus
Pius. Antoninus Pius.


This Emperor was by his Fathers side a Cisalpine Gaul, and together with his
Sons Aurelius and Verus, he ruled twenty two years and three months with so
much moderation and Clemency that he deservedly gained the name of Pius, and
Father of his Country. He was never severe or rigorous toward any man in the
recovery of his own private Debts, or the exaction of public Taxes, but would
sometimes wholly remit them by burning the Bonds of his Debtors. What shall I
need say more of this Prince, who in the opinion of all good men was for
Religion, Devotion, Humanity, Clemency, Justice, and Modesty equal to Numa
Pompilius himself. When the River Tiber had by an inundation much impaired many
private and public buildings, he was at vast expense to assist the Citizens in
restoring the City to its former state again. Moreover, it was he who carried
on those prodigious Works which appear to this day, for improving the Havens of
Tarracina and Cajeta; and I believe that the famous winding Pillar, from which
the principal Ward of the City is denominated, was built at his charge.

As for our Telesphorus, he ordained that a Quadragesimal Fast should be
observed before Easter; and that on the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord there
should be three Masses; one at Midnight, at which time Christ was born in
Bethelehem, another at break of Day when he was discovered to the Shepherds,
the third at that hour wherein the light of Truth and our Redemption shone in
the World ( i. e. when our Savior was crucified) whereas at other times the
celebration of the Mass was forbidden till the third hour, or between the hours
of nine and twelve a Clock, the time when, as St. Mark tells us, he was fastened
to the Cross. He also appointed that the Hymn, Glory be to God on High, Justin
Martyr.
should be sung before the Sacrifice. In his time Justinus, a Philosopher of
Neapolis a City of Palestine, labored successfully in the defending
Christianity; presented to Antoninus and his Sons a book which he had written
against the Gentiles; and held a Dialogue with Tryphon a principal Jew. He
wrote also very warmly against Marcion, who adhering to the Heresy of Cerdo,
affirmed that there were two Gods, the one good, the other just, as two
contrary principles of Creation and Goodness. He opposed likewise Crescens the
Cynick, as a person gluttonous, fearful of Death, given over to Luxury and
lust, and a blasphemer of Christ. But being at length by this man's treacherous
practices betrayed, he suffered in the cause of Christianity Eusebius writing
of this Cynick, allows him only to have been a vainglorious Pretender, but not
a Philosopher. At the same time the Valentinian Heretics prevailed, who were
the followers of one Valentinus a Platonist; and held that Christ took nothing
of the body of the Virgin, but passed clean through her, as through a Pipe. Now
also Photinus Bishop of Lions, a man of singular Learning and Piety, as Isidore
tells us, suffered Martyrdom with great resolution, being ninety years old.
Telesphorus having at four Decembrian Ordinations, made fifteen Presbyters,
eight Deacons, thirteen Bishops, died a Martyr, and was buried in the Vatican
near Saint Peter. He was in the Chair eleven years, three months, twenty two
days. By his Death the Sea was vacant seven days.

S. HYGINUS.
HYGINUS an Athenian, Son of a Philosopher, succeeded Telesphorus, during the
Empire of Antoninus Pius,

W^^^se extraordinary merit compels me to add something farther Antonimus Pius.
in his praise, (...) I come to give an account of Hyginus. He was so far from
the vanity of valuing himself upon the glory of his Arms, that he made it his
business rather to defend the Provinces of the Empire, than to increase them;
and had often that saying of Scipio in his mouth, that he had rather save one
Citizen than destroy a thousand Enemies: being herein of a quite contrary
temper to that of Domitian, who from a consciousness of his own cruelty did so
hate and fear a multitude, that he would expose the Roman Army to the fury of
its Enemies, on purpose that it might return home thinner and less formidable.
Moreover, Pius was so famous for his Justice, that several Princes and Nations
did at his Command cease their Hostilities, making him the Arbitratour of their
differences, and standing to his determination as to the Justice of their
Pretensions. For these admirable qualities, the Romans after his much lamented
death, in honor to his memory, appointed Cirque-shews, built a Temple, and
(...) a Flamen, with an Order, called by his name.

At this time Hyginus prudently settled and confirmed the several Orders and
Degrees of the Clergy; and ordained the Solemn Consecration of Churches, the
number of which he would not have increased or diminished without leave of the
Metropolitan or Bishop. He forbad also that the Timber or other Materials
prepared for the building any Church, should be converted to profane uses; yet
allowing that with the Bishop's consent, they might be made use of toward the
erecting any other Church or Religious House. He likewise ordained that at
least one Godfather or one Godmother should be present at Baptism; and that no
Metropolitan should condemn or censure any Bishop of his Province, until the
cause were first heard and discussed by the other Bishops of the Province;
though some make this latter an Institution of Pelagius, not Hyginus. In his
time lived Polycarp, a Disciple of St. Polycarp.
John the Apostle, and by him made Bishop of Smyrna; the most celebrated man
for Religion and learning in all Asia. He coming to Rome, reduced to the
Orthodox Faith multitudes who had been seduced into the Errors of Marcion and
Valentinus; the former of which by chance meeting him, and asking whether he
knew him; Polycarp answered, that he knew him to be the firstborn of the
Devil. For this Heretic denied the Father of our blessed Savior to be God the
Creator, who by his Son made the World. But afterward in the time of M.
Antoninus, and L. Aurclius Commodus, who raised the fourth Persecution,
Polycarp was burnt at Smyrna by order of the Proconsul. Melito also an Asian,
Bishop of Sardis, and a Disciple of Fronto the Orator, presented to M.
Antoninus, a book written in desence of the Christian Doctrine. Tertullian
highly extols his Parts, and says, that most of the Christians looked upon him
as a Prophet. Moreover, Theophilus Bishop of Antioch wrote a book against the
Heresy of Hermogenes, who asserted an uncreated eternal matter, co-eval to God
himself. As for Hyginus himself, having deserved well of the Church, and at
three Decembrian Ordinations, made fifteen Presbyters, five Deacons, six
Bishops, he died, and was buried in the Vatican by S. Peter, January 11. He was
in the Chair four years, three months, four days. The Sea was then vacant four
days.

S. PIUS I.
PIUS, an Italian of Aquileia, son of Ruffinus, lived to the time of M.
Antoninus Verus, who together with his Brother L. Aurelius Commodus jointly
exercised the Government nineteen years.

These two Princes undertook a War against the Parthians, and managed Verus and
Commodus.
it with such admirable courage and success, that they had the honor of a
Triumph decreed to them. But not long after Commodus dying of an Apoplexy,
Antoninus was sole Emperor; a person who so excelled in all good qualities,
that it is more easy to admire than to describe him; for both because from his
very youth no change of his Fortune made any alteration in his mind or his
countenance, and because it is hard to determine whether the sweetness of his
natural temper, or the knowledge he learnt from Cornelius Fronto, were more
conspicuous in him, he deservedly gained the surname of Philosopher. And indeed
(as Capitolinus tells us) he was often wont to use that saying of Plato, That
then the World would be happy, when either Philosophers were Princes, or
Princes would be Philosophers. He was so great a lover of Learning, that even
when he was Emperor he would be present at the Lectures of Apollonius the
Philosopher, and Sextus Plutarch's Nephew; and he set up the Statue of his
Tutour Fronto in the Senate House as a Testimony of the Honor he had for him.

At this time Pius maintained a strict friendship and familiarity with Hermes
who wrote the book called Pastor; in which book he introduces Hermes.
an Angel in the form of a Shepherd. who commanded him to persuade all
Christians to keep the Feast of Easter on a Sunday, which Pius accordingly did.
Moreover, he ordained that every Convert from the Cerinthian Heresy should at
his reception into the Church be baptized. At the request of Praxedes a devout
Woman, he dedicated a Church at the Baths of Novatus to her Sister S.
Pudentiana; to which himself made several donations, oftentimes celebrated Mass
in it, and built a Font which he blessed and consecrated, and at which he
baptized a great number of Proselytes. He also appointed a punishment upon
those who were negligent in handling the body and blood of Christ. If through
the Priests carelessness any of the Cup had fallen upon the ground, he was to
undergo a Penance of forty days; if it fell upon the Altar, of three days; if
upon the Altar-cloth, of four days; it upon any other Cloth, of nine days.
Whithersoever it fell, he was to lick it up if he could, if not, the board or
stone to be washed or scraped, and what of it could be recovered thereby either
burnt or laid up in the Sacrary. In his time Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis
in Asia was much esteemed, Apollinaris.
who wrote an excellent Apology for Christianity, and presented it to Antoninus
the second. He wrote also against the Montanists, who with their two fanatic
Prophetesses Priscillia and Maximilla, pretended that the descent of the Holy
Ghost was not upon the Apostles, but themselves; an opinion which they had
learned from their Leader Montanus. At this time also the learned Tatianus was
in good reputation, so long Tatianus.
as he swerved not from the Doctrine of his Master Justin Martyr; but
afterward being puffed up with a great conceit of himself, he became the
Author of a new Heresy, which being propagated by one Severus, the followers
of it were from him called Severians. They drank no Wine, ate no Flesh,
rejected the Old Testament, and believed not the Resurrection. Moreover, Philip
Bishop of Crete now published an excellent book against Marcion and his
followers, whose Errors were the same with those of Cerdo. Musanus also wrote
a book against the Heretics called Encratitoe, or the Abstemious, who agreed
in opinion with the Severians, looking upon all carnal copulation as filthy and
unclean, and condemning those Meats which God has given for the use of
mankind. But to return to Pius, having at five Decembrian Ordinations, made
nineteen Presbyters, twenty one Deacons, ten Bishops, he died and was buried in
the Vatican near S. Peter, July 11. He was in the Chair eleven years, four
months, three days; and by his death the Sea was vacant thirteen days.

S. ANICETUS.
ANICETUS, a Syrian, the son of one John de Vicomurco, lived in the time of
Antoninus Verus, concerning whom we have spoken in the Life of Pius.

Which Antoninus though he were a great Phisopher, yet neglected not the
pursuit of Military glory. For together with his Son Commodus Antoninus, he did
with great courage and success gain a Victory and a Triumph over the Germans,
Marcomanni, Quadi, and Sarmatoe. At his first enterprizing this War, his
Exchequer being so low that he had not money to pay his Soldiers, he exposed to
public sale in the Forum Trajani all the furniture of his Palace, and all the
Jewels of his Empress, But afterward returning home victoriously, to those who
were willing to restore the Goods they had bought, he refunded what they paid
for them; but used no force against those who refused to relinquish their
bargains. Upon this Victory, he was very liberal to all who had done any good
service to the public; to some Provinces he remitted their accustomed Tribute;
he caused to be publicly burnt in the Forum the Writings by which any man was
made a Debtor to the Exchequer; and by new Constitutions moderated the severity
of the old Laws. By this means he became so much the darling of the People,
that any man had a particular brand of infamy set upon him, who had not
Antoninus his Effigies in his House.

Anicetus, that the reputation of the Church might not suffer by the
extravagancy of a few men, ordained that no Clergyman should upon any pretense
wear long hair; and that no Bishop should be consecrated by fewer than three of
the same Order (a Constitution which was afterward confirmed by the Council of
Nice;) and that at the Consecration of a Metropolitan all the Bishops of the
Province should be present. Moreover he ordained (as Ptolomy tells us) that no
Bishop should implead his Metropolitan but before the Primate or the Sea
Apostolic; (this being also a Constitution which was afterward confirmed by
the Council of Nice, and several succeeding Bishops of Rome;) and that all
Archbishops should not be called Primates, but only those of them who have a
particular title to that denomination; the Primates having also the (...) of
Patriarchs, whereas the others are simply Archbishops Egesippus.
or Metropolitans. In his time Egestippus was a great propugner of the
Christian (...), who, as an imitator of their manner of speaking, of whose
lives he had been a diligent observer, in a very plain unaffected style wrote a
History of Ecclesiastical affairs from the Passion of our Lord to the Age in
which he lived. He says of himself that he came to Rome in the time of
Anicetus, whom he calls the tenth Bishop from St. Peter, and that he staid
there to the time of Ele^, who had been Deacon to Anicetus. He inveighed much
against Idolators for building sumptuous Monuments and Temples to the Dead; as
particularly Adrian the Emperor, who in honor to his darling Antinous, had
instituted solemn Games and Prizes at the City which he built and called by his
name Antinoe, and also erected a Temple and appointed priests for his Worship.
Some say that Dionysius lived in the Pontificat of Anicetus but Writers are in
this place very confused in their Chronology, some placing Pius first, others
Anicetus, and so they are in their (...) too. However, in an History of things
so remote, and of which through the negligence of the Ancients we have so
slender an account, it will be better to say something of the matters
themselves, though it be some time before or after they were transacted, than
altogether to pass them by in silence. As for Anicetus, having at five
Decembrian Ordinations made nineteen Presbyters, four Deacons, nine Bishops, he
received a Crown of Martyrdom, and was buried in the Sepulcher of (...) in the
Via Appia, April the seventeenth. He was in the Chair eleven years, four months
and three days, and by his Death the Sea was vacant seventeen days.

S. SOTER
SOTER, a Campanian of Fundi, Son of Concordius, lived in the time of L.
Antoninus Commodus.

This Commodus was, (as Lampridius plays upon his name) Commodus.
very (...) and hurtful to all his Subjects; being in nothing like his Father,
save that he also, thanks to the Christian Soldiers for it, fought successfully
against the Germans. In that War, when the Army of Commodus was in great
straits for want of Water, it is said that at the Prayers of the Christian
Legion, God supplied and refreshed the Romans with rain from Heaven, and at the
same time destroyed the Germans with Thundershot. The truth of which the
Emperor himself testified by his Letters. But at his return to Rome, he
utterly renounced all Virtue and goodness, and shamefully gave himself up to
all manner of Luxury and uncleanness. He used, in imitation of Nero, to combat
with the Gladiators, and oftentimes encountered with wild beasts in the
Amphitheatre; many of the Senators he put to death, and those especially whom
he observed to be more conspicuous for extraction or merit.

Soter diverting his mind from the contemplation of this wretched Scene of
things to the care of Ecclesiastical affairs, decreed, That no Deaconess should
touch the Altar-cloth, or put the Incense upon the Censer, at the time of
celebration. There is extant an Epistle of his concerning that matter, written
to the Bishops of Italy. He ordained likewise that no Woman should be accounted
a lawful Wife, but she whom the Priest had formally blessed, and whom her
Parents had with the usual Christian solemnities given to her Husband. This
Constitution he made, to remove the danger and scandal that was incident to
new-married persons, from the juggling Magical tricks of lewd Fellows. Indeed,
Gratian ascribes this Decree to Euaristus, but whose due it is I leave the
Reader to judge, for it matters not much whether it be attributed to the one or
the other. During the Pontificat of Soter, as Eusebius tells us, lived
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, a person of so great parts and Industry, that he
instructed not only the people of his own City and Province, but also by his
Epistles the Bishops of other Cities and Provinces, For being thoroughly
acquainted with the Writings of St. Paul, he could the more easily keep others
within the bounds of their duty by the Authority which his Learning and
Sanctity had gained him. (...) also, an Asian, Scholar to Tatianus, wrote
several things in defense of our Religion; and in particular he very handsomely
exposed Apelles the Heretic, for worshipping a God whom he Apelles.
professed he did not know; for he denied Christ to be truly a God, and
affirmed him to be only in appearance a Man. Some say that the Cataphrygian
Heresy was at this time set on foot by Montanus. Moreover, Cataphrygae.
Clemens a Presbyter of Alexandria, and Master to Origin, was now a great
Writer; among other things he was Author of Strom. lib. 9. (...), lib. 8. and
one book against the Gentiles. There are some who make Pinytus, a person of
admirable Eloquence: (...), a famous Poet, who wrote the Halieutics or books
concerning Fishes; and Herodian the Grammarian Contemporaries to our Bishop
Soter; who having at five Decembrian Ordinations made eight Presbyters, nine
Deacons, eleven Bishops, he died and was buried in the Via Appia, in the
Sepulcher of Calistus. He was in the Chair nine years, three months, twenty one
days. And the Sea was vacant twenty one days.

S. ELEUTHERIUS.
ELEUTHERIUS, a Grecian of Nicopolis, Son of Habundius, lived also in the Reign
of L. Antoninus Commodus.

For whose flagitious Life the City of Rome smarted sorely; (...).
for in his time the Capitol, being fired with Lightning, together with the
famous Library which had cost the Ancients so much care in collecting, were
consumed; nor did the Neighboring Houses escape the same calamity. Not long
after another Fire brake forth, in which the Temple of Vesta, the Palace, and a
good part of the City were burnt to the ground. He was of so rash and freakish
a humor, that he caused the Head of a vast Colosse to be taken off, and that
of his own Statue to be placed in the room of it; and in imitation of Augustus,
he would needs have a month of his own name, ordering December to be called
Commodus. But these things were soon changed after his Death, and himself
adjudged an Enemy to mankind, such an hatred and detestation did all men
entertain of his Villainies. He was strangled in the twelfth year and seventh
month of his Reign.

Eleutherius, soon after his entrance upon the Pontificate, received a Lucius
Rex.
Message from Lucius King of Britain; wherein he expressed a desire that (...)
and his Subjects might become Christians. Hereupon Eleutherius sends Fugatius
and Damianus, two very religious men, to that Island to baptize the King and
his People; there were at that time in Britain twenty five Heathen Priests
called Flamens, and among them three styled Arch-flamens, in the place of
which, as Ptolomy says, were constituted three Archbishops; the ancient Church
being wont to fix Patriarchs there, where in the time of Gentilism
Proto-flamens had been seated. Furthermore, Eleutherius ordained that no person
should superstitiously abstain from any sort of meat which was commonly eaten:
and that no Clergyman should be degraded before he were legally found guilty
of the Crime laid to his Charge; following herein the Example of our Savior,
who so patiently bore the fault of Judas, being not yet convicted, though
really guilty, that whatsoever he acted in the mean time by virtue of his
Apostleship, remained firm and valid. He also prohibited the passing sentence
against any person accused, unless he were present to make his defense; which
was afterward confirmed by Damasus and the Pontifical Laws. In his Pontificate
the Church enjoyed peace and tranquillity, and Christianity was wonderfully
propagated in the World, but especially at Rome, where many of the best quality
with their Wives and Children received the Faith and were baptized. Only
Apollonius, a great Orator, was now a Martyr, having first in the Apollonius.
Senate made an excellent Speech in favor of Christianity, the doing of which
was then a capital Crime. Apollonius being dead, several Heresies very much
prevailed. For the Sect of the Marcionites was divided into several Parties;
some of them owning but one Principle, or God; others two; others three;
thereby utterly undermining the credit of the Prophets and other discoverers of
revealed Religion. Moreover Florinus and Blastus set up new Figments against
the Truth, asserting God to be the Author of all kinds of evil, in
contradiction to that Text, that every thing which God made was good. Opposite
to these Genesis 1.
were the Quotiliani, who denied God to be the author of any kind of evil, in
equal contradiction to that other Text, I the Lord create evil. Esaias 45.
Some are of Opinion that Galen of Pergamus the famous Physician, and Julian
the great Lawyer, and Fronto the Rhetorician, lived at this time; though
whether they did or no, in so great a confusion of time and Story, I shall
neither affirm nor deny. But I dare be confident concerning Modestus and
Bardesanes, the former of which wrote against Marcion, the latter against
Valentinus, being now as strenuous an opposer, as he had been formerly a
zealous follower of that Heretic. S. (...) upon the perusal of his books,
translated out of the Syriack language into Greek, affirms this Bardesanes to
have been a wonderfully brisk ingenious Writer; And if, says he, there be so
much smartness in the Translation, how much more shall we judge to be in the
Original? As for (...), having at three Decembrian Ordinations, made twelve
Presbyters, eight Deacons, fifteen Bishops, he died and was buried near S.
Peter in the Vatican, May 26. He was in the Chair fifteen years, three months,
two days, and the Sea was vacant five days.

S. VICTOR I.
VICTOR, an Asian, Son of Felix, was, as I believe, in the time of Aelius
Pertinax.

Which Aelius being seventy years of Age, was from the Office Aelius Pertinax.
of City-praefect created Emperor, by a Decree of the Senate. Being afterward
desired to declare his Lady Augusta, and his Son Coesar, he refused both,
saying, it was enough that he himself was Emperor against his Will. But
undergoing the reproach of that unprincely Vice, Covetousnes, being so sordid
as to cause the half of a Lettuce or Artichoke to be served up to his Table, he
was without any opposition slain in the Palace by Didius Julianus the Lawyer,
in the sixth month of his Reign. This is that Julian, who made the perpetual
Edict, Julianus.
and who in the seventh month after his coming to the Empire was vanquished and
slain in a Civil War by Severus at Pons Milvius.

Victor out of his care of the Affairs of the Church, decreed, that according
to a former constitution of Eleutherius, as Damasus tells us, Easter should be
kept upon the Sunday, which fell between the fourteenth and twenty first day
after the Phasis or appearance of the Moon in the first Month. Theophilus
Bishop of Coesarea Palestinoe was obedient to this Decree, and wrote against
those who observed that Feast, as the Jews did their (...), always upon the
fourteenth day of the Moon, whatever day of the Week it happened to be. But
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus very hotly declaimed against this Constitution,
stiffly contending, that according to ancient Custom it ought to be celebrated
precisely on that day on which the Jews kept their (...). For he maintained
that herein he (...) the Example of S. (...) the Apostle and others the
Ancients. We, says he, observe the exact day, neither anticipating nor
protracting it. Thus did Philip who died at Hierapolis; thus did John who
leaned on our Lords bosom; thus did Polycarp, Thraseas, Melito and Narcissus
Bishop of Jerusalem. (...) some tell us, that a Council was held in Palestine,
at which were present (...), Irenoeus, Narcissus, Polycarp, Bacchylus, all
Bishops of great Note in Asia. But the whole matter was afterward referred to
the Council of Nice, in which it was decreed that Easter should be kept on the
Sunday following the fourteenth day of the Moon, to avoid all appearance of
Judaizing. (...) also ordained that in cases of necessity Proselytes might at
their (...) be baptized in any kind of Water or at any time of the year. (...)
his Pontificate there flourished many learned men. As for instance, Appion, who
wrote the Hexaemeron, or account of the six days work of Creation; (...)
Samosatenus, who together, with Theodotus, held our Savior to have been a mere
man; Sixtus, who wrote of the (...), and Arabianus, who published several
Treatises of Christian Doctrine. Now also one Judas wrote a Cronology to the
tenth year of Severus the Emperor; wherein yet he is guilty of a mistake in
asserting that Antichrist would come in his time; an Error into which I
suppose him to have fallen from the observation he had made of the Cruelty and
other Vices of the Age, which he saw now grown to such an height, that he
thought Almighty God could not bear with mankind any longer. By which very
thing Lactantius and S. Austin themselves were after deceived. Our Victor,
having first written some books concerning Religion, died and was buried near
S. (...) in the Vatican, whose Feast we observe on the twenty eighth of July.
He was in the Chair ten years; three months, ten days, And the Sea was vacant
twelve days.

S. ZEPHYRINUS.
ZEPHERINUS a Roman, Son of Habundius, lived in the time of Severus the
Emperor.

Who being by birth an Asrican, of the Town of Leptis, upon (...).
the death of Julian succeeded in the Empire, and took the Surname of Pertinax.
He was first an Officer of the Exchequer, then a Colonel in the Army, till by
several steps he advanced himself to the Dignity of Imperator. He was of a very
frugal temper; the cruelty of his nature was heightened by the many Wars he had
been engaged in; and he exercised great Valor in defending, and great care in
governing his Subjects. He was eminent not only for his skill in Arms, but in
Letters too, taking very much delight in the study of Philosophy. He conquered
the Parthians and Adiabeni, and made Arabia Interior a Province of the Roman
Empire. For this Achievement he triumphed, and upon the Arch erected to him in
the Capitol he was styled Parthicus Arabicus and Adiabenicus. Moreover, he
adorned the City with public buildings. For he made those (...) from his own
name are called the Severian Baths, and erected the famous Septizonium; that
part of which noble Pile that is now remaining, hardly (...) being pulled down
some years ago by order of Pope Paul the second, to make the best of the stones.

But Bishop Zephyrinus (...) more intent upon Ecclesiastical than secular
Affairs, decreed, that every Deacon and Priest should be ordained in the
presence of the Faithful both Clergy and Laity: which was afterward (...) in
the Council of Chalcedon. He decreed likewise that the (...) at the Communion
should not be consecrated, as had been (...) used, in a wooden Chalice, but in
Glass. Though this (...) was altered in following times; wherein order was
given that it should (...) be in Wood, because of its spunginess, whereby some
of (...) might soak into it; nor of Glass, because of its brittleness, and the
(...) of its being broken; nor of any ordinary course metal by (...) the ill
taste it might contract from it; but only in (...) of Gold or Silver, or at
least of Pewter; as appears in the Canons of (...) Councils (...) and Reims. He
also ordained, that all (...) of fourteen years of Age should communicate every
year upon Easter Day, which in aftertimes Innocent the third extended not only
to Communion, but Confession too. He commanded likewise, that no Bishop being
(...) by his Patriarch, or Primate, or Metropolitan, should have sentence
passed against him but by the Authority of the Sea (...). Lastly, he ordained
that when the Bishop celebrated, all his Presbyters should be present. In his
time flourished Heraclius, who wrote a Comment upon the Apostle; Maximus who in
a (...).
large book (...) the great Controversy of this Age ( viz. concerning Maximus.
the Author (...) and the Original of Matter;) Candidus who com Candidus.
posed an (...); and Origin, who in the tenth year of Severus (...).
(...), a (...) being raised against the Christians, and his (...) (...) put to
death for his Religion, whom he himself being yet a Youth, did very much
confirm in his constancy and Resolution, was left with his Mother a Widow and
six Brethren in a very low condition; all his Fathers Estate being confiscated,
because they owned Christ to be the true God. Hereupon he was forced to teach a
Grammar School to get a livelihood for himself and his Relations; and among
others he had for his Scholar Plutarchus, who afterward became a Martyr. Not
long after applying himself wholly to Religion, he undertook the Office of a
Catechist or Preacher. He was a person of very great parts and skilled in all
Languages and kinds of Learning. He was wonderfully temperate and abstemious as
to meat and drink and all other things; imitating the poverty of Christ, and
for many years walking barefoot; and moreover in his younger days he made
himself an Example of that passage in the Gospel, there be Eunuchs which have
made Mat. 19. 12.
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake. Many were so encouraged in
Religion by his Pattern, that they did with great (...) lay down their lives
for Christianity, and particularly a Woman named (...), who was put to death by
pouring scalding Pitch upon her Head. As for Zephyrinus, having at four
Decembrian Ordinations, made thirteen Presbyters, seven Deacons, thirteen
Bishops; he died in the time of Severus, and was buried in the Via Appia, not
(...) from the Sepulcher of Calistus, August the 26th. He was in the Chair
eight years, seven months, ten days, and the Sea was vacant six days.

S. CALISTUS I.
CALISTUS, an Italian of (...), Son of Domitius, lived in the time of Severus,
an Emperor whose fortune changed with his mind;

For no sooner did he raise the fifth Persecution against the Christians, (...).
but he was presently exposed to a multitude of dangers, and engaged in several
Wars; on the one side by Piscennius Niger who was the cause of great Commotions
in Syria, on the other by Clodius Albinus, whom yet he vanquished with great
slaughter in Gaul. But passing over from thence into Britain, being deserted of
his Friends, and accompanied only with calamities, he died at (...) in the
fifth year of his Empire, leaving behind him two Sons, Bassianus and Geta; the
latter of which was looked upon and put to death as a public Enemy, both
because of his abominably dissolute (...), but especially because he had with
his own hand slain Papinian the great Asylum of the Civil Law. But Bassianus
receiving from the (...) the name of Antoninus, became possessed of the Empire;
and took the (...) of Caracalla from a kind of long Vests (...).
which he bestowed by way of largess among the (...). He was of a nature more
cruel than his Father; and so impotently vicious, thatthere was no kind of
Villainy which he was not guilty of. He is said to have slain his Brother Geta,
and to have married his own Stepmother. He left behind him nothing great and
magnificent to perpetuate his memory, save only the Antoninian Baths, (which
bore his name as being begun by him, but were indeed finished by the Emperor
Alexander Severus) and the Causey he made in the Via Nova. He made it Capital
for any to wear Amulets about their necks for the cure of Quartan or Tertian
Agues. But at length undertaking a War against the Parthians, he was surprised
by his Enemies between Edessa and Charroe, and stabbed in the seventh year of
his Reign, as he was alighting off his Horse to ease Nature.

But during the most confused state of things and (...) the Government of the
most dissolute Emperors, Calistus was not at all diverted from his purpose of
Establishing a solemn Fast three times in the year, to be observed on the
Sabbath or Saturday, particularly to implore a blessing upon the fruits of the
Earth, Corn, Wine and Oil; viz. in the fourth month, the seventh and the tenth,
beginning the year according to the custom of the Jews. Though afterward he
changed his opinion, and appointed it at the four seasons of the year, viz.
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; at which times in succeeding Ages holy
Orders were (...), which before was used to be only in the month of December.
He also ordained that Accusations against Clergymen should not be admitted of
in any Court if the informers were either infamous, or liable to just
suspicion, or avowed Enemies of the accused. Moreover, he adjudged those to be
Heretics, who maintained, that Priests after they (...) once convicted of any
notorious Crime, were not to be restored to their former Dignity, though they
showed never so great signs of their repentance. Damasus tells us, that he
built Saint Mary's Church in Trastevere; but I cannot imagine that of his
founding to be the magnificent vast one which continues there at this time,
since in those days of frequent Persecution all things were carried secretly,
and the Christians had only small Chapels, and those private and hidden, and
for the most part underground. He likewise built a Burialplace, (...) by his
own name, in the Via Appia, at the very place where the ashes of a multitude of
Martyrs had been formerly reposited; so that (...) Reader must not think it
strange that we have already said of several that they were (...) in the
Coemetery of (...), though it had not that name till now. I (...) self with
some of my Friends have religiously went to view it, (...) the ashes and bones
of the Martyrs are (...) to be seen, and (...) and Chapels in which the
Christians privately communicated, when through the Edicts of some Emperors
they could not do it publicly. In his time lived Tertullian, an Tertullian.
African, the Son of a Proconsular Centurion, whom S. Hierom reckons next to
(...) and Apollonius the principal of the Latin Writers. He was a man of
excellent Parts, and wrote a multitude of books. I have (...) (says (...)) at
Concordia a little Town in Italy one Paul, who said, that when he was very
young he was at Rome acquainted with S. Cyprian's Amanuensis, who assured him,
that S. Cyprian never passed a day without the reading of Tertullian. But
having continued half his lifetime a Presbyter at Rome, through the Envy and
Reproaches of the Roman Clergy he afterward (...) Montanist, and wrote several
Pieces against the Orthodox Doctrine, particularly those de Pudicitia de
Monogamia, and de (...). He also composed six Books against Apollonius. At the
same time likewise Origin flourished, and did great Origin.
service for the Church. For he opposed the Heresy of the Ebionites, who
asserted our (...) to be a (...) Man, the Son of Joseph and Mary, and pressed
the observation of Mosaical Rites; both which Errors were (...) by Symmachus.
Moreover, by his Learning he brought over to the Orthodox faith one Ambrosius,
who had been (as (...) (...)) a (...), or (as Hierom will have it) a
Marcionite; to whom with (...) a Presbyter, he dedicated his book de (...).
(...) that violent opposer of Christianity, and who was Origen's (...), cannot
yet sometimes (...) commending him; calling him (...) most learned and Prince
of Philosophers, acknowledging (...) he was prosoundly skilled in Platonism,
and finding no fault in him but his (...) a Christian. S. Hierom himself says
that he wrote six thousand Volumes; though that Father and S. Austin too tell
us, that he was erroneous in most (...) them, and particularly in his book of
Government, entitled (...); yet Pamphilus the Martyr, and Eusebius, and
Russinus a Priest of Aquileia, appear very much in his Praise and Defense. As
for Calistus, having at five Decembrian Ordinations, made sixteen Presbyters,
four Deacons, eight Bishops: he was crowned with Martyrdom, and was buried in
the Coemetery of Calepodius, in the Via Aurelia, three miles distant from the
City, October 14th. He was in the Chair six years, ten months, ten days. The Sea was then vacant six days.

S. URBANUS I.
VRBANUS, a Roman, Son of Pontianus, was Bishop of Rome in the time of the
Emperor M. Aurelius Antoninus, Anno Dom. 226. U. C. 970.

This Antoninus, supposed to be the base Son of (...), coming to Antoninus.
Rome, and being advanced to the Empire not without an universal expectation of
good from him, took the name of Heliogabalus from the Sun, so called by the
Phoenicians, to which he built a Temple and was himself a Priest of it. But he
led a life so contrary to the hopes and opinion men had entertained of him,
that he has left no other memory of himself, than that of his exorbitant
Villainies and all kinds of debauchery. For he violated the chastity of the
Vestal Virgins, made his Palace no better than a Stews, and in a rage commanded
Sabinus, a man of consular dignity (and to whom Ulpian the famous Civilian
wrote) to be immediately put to death. He conferred all places of trust and
honor upon the vilest of men, with whom he was wont sometimes to make himself
sport after this manner: he would make them lie down with him at Supper, but it
should be upon large bellows, which being raised and distended, they would all
of a sudden tumble down under the Table. He had such a loud and undecent way of
laughing, that in a full Theater his Voice might be heard above all the
Company. He was the first among the Romans who wore Velvet, and used Tables and
other Utensils of Silver. When some of his Friends advised him to beware that
by his luxury he did not reduce himself to want; Can I do better, says he, than
to make my self my own and my Wives Heir? He was once so extravagantly freakish
as to cause a Collection to be made of ten thousand pound weight of Spiders,
from whence he pretended an estimate might be taken of the bigness of the City
of Rome; and to get together ten thousand Mice, and as many Weazels, and Rats.
These mad pranks by degrees rendered him so contemptible in the eyes of all men,
that himself and his Mother were both slain in a Military Tumult. It Is said
that some Syrian Priests having told him, that he should undergo a violent
death; he (...) fairly provided himself of a decent Scarlet Silken Halter to do
his own work withal. He died in the fourth year of his Reign, at the same time
when the City of Nicopolis in Palestine (formerly called ( Emmaus) was built;
Africanus the Historian and Chronologer, undertaking an Embassy to promote
that Affair.

Urban, who lived in the time of this Monster, not of Dioclesian (as some would
have it) by his eminent Piety and Learning proselyted multitudes to the
Christian Faith; and among others particularly Valerianus, an excelient Person,
and contracted to S. Cecilia, with his Brother Tiburtius, both which afterward
suffered Martyrdom with great constancy of mind; as did also the espoused
Virgin her self, in her Fathers house, which was at her request consecrated and
made a Church by Urban. The same Urban also ordained that the Church might
receive Estates in Land or Houses, given and bequeathed to her by any of the
Faithful, but that the Revenues of them should not be any ones property, but
for the common good be distributed among the whole Clergy to every one his
share; a Constitution long since antiquated through the coverousness and
rapacity of following Ages. Some attribute to him the distinction of the four
stated annual Times of Fasting or Ember-weeks, which through men's ignorance
were before kept very confusedly. In his time lived Tryphon one of Origen's
Disciples, remarkable Tryphon.
markable for the book he composed concerning the red Heiser in Deuteronomy.
Minutius Felix also a famous Pleader at Rome, wrote a Dialogue, Minutius Felix.
in which he introduces a Christian and an Heathen disputing; besides another
book against the Mathematicians, of which Lactantius makes mention. Moreover
Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, at this Alexander.
time founded the famous Library there, by which he has gained so great a
reputation. As for Urban himself, having at five Decembrian Ordinations, made
nine Presbyters, five Deacons, nine Bishops; he received a Crown of Martyrdom,
and was buried in the Coemetery of Pretexatus, in the Via Tiburtina; having
been in the Chair four years, ten months, twelve days. And the Sea was vacant
thirty days.

S. PONTIANUS.
PONTIANUS, a Roman, Son of Calphurnius, lived in the time of the Emperor
Alexander, in the Year nine hundred seventy four from the building of Rome, and
the Year of our Lord two hundred forty five.

But between the Reign of Heliogabalus and Alexander there are reckoned three
other Emperors, Macrinus, Diadumenus and Albinus; whose Names I intended to
have left out, not only because they governed but a very little while, but
chiefly because they did nothing memorable: only Albinus became notorious to
Posterity for his Gluttony, eating, if we may believe the Authority of Cordus,
an hundred large Peaches, ten choice Melons, five hundred dried Figs, and four
hundred Oysters at one Meal. But to pass by these Monsters of men, I come to
Alexander, a singular pattern of Virtue, who being created Alexander Severus.
Emperor by the favor of the Senate and the Army, immediately applied himself
to the settling of the Commonwealth, which had been very much impaired by the
miscarriages of former Princes. To which end he made use of Julius Frontinus a
vert learned Man, and Ulpian and Paul, two excellent Civilians, as Assistants
and Coadjutors in that Affair. He was so upright in all his dealings, that no
man could ever complain of any Injury received from him: and so far removed
from any kind of Vanity or Ostentation, that he appeared but once in the costly
Robes belonging to his Office, while he was Consul. All those who in their
Addresses to him were sneakingly obsequious in their carriage, or affectedly
complaisant in their words, he would reject as fawning Fellows; for he was so
wise and discerning that no man could impose upon him; one instance of which
was his proceeding with Turinus, to whom, for his taking Bribes upon the
appearance of his being the Emperors mighty Favorite, he allotted this
remarkable punishment; that being bound to a Stake in the Transitory Forum, a
place of greatest Concourse, and the most public thorow-fare, he should be
suffocated with smoke; the common Crier in the mean time proclaiming these
words, He that sold smoke, is punished with smoke. Though his Mother Mammoea,
as she was a Woman, had a great love for Money, yet he was altogether above it;
and for Jewels, he slighted them, as feminine Trifles, being often wont to say,
that in Virgil (whom he called the Plato of the Poets) there were more, and
more precious Gems to be found. The Revenue which arose from Bawds, and Whores,
and Catamites, he forbad to be laid up in the sacred Treasury, and judged it
more fit to be assigned to the defraying some public Charge, as the repairing
of the Theater, the Cirque, the Amphitheatre, and the Stadium. Having after
great search gotten a Collection of the Images of Famous Men, he caused them to
be set up in the Transitory Forum; and likewise finished and beautified those
which are at this time called the Antonian Baths, having been begun by
Antoninus Caracalla. He had it in his design to acknowledge our Savior to be a
God, and build a Temple to him; and did actually set up the Effigies of Christ
and Abraham, and Orpheus in his Domestic Chapel. Being renowned for so many
excellent qualities, and created Emperor while he was very young, he
immediately engaged in a War against the Persians, and bravely vanquished their
King Xerxes. In reforming the Military Discipline he was so strict, that he
cashiered some whole Legions at once; which severity of his was the occasion of
his being slain in a tumult of the Soldiers at Mentz.

Pontianus being now Bishop of Rome, at the instigation of the IdolPriests,
both he and Philip a Presbyter, were at the Emperors Command transported from
the City of Rome to the Island Sardinia, much about that time when Germanus a
Presbyter of Antioch, and Beryllus a Bishop of Arabia, were converted to the
Truth by Origin. The Heresy of Beryllus was his denial that Christ had any
Being before his Incarnation. He wrote some small Pieces, and particularly
certain Epistles, in which he returns thanks to Origin for his sound Doctrine.
There is extant likewise a Dialogue between them, wherein Origin convicts
Beryllus of Heresy. As for Origin himself, he was a Person of so Origin.
great Wit and Learning that seven Amanuenses taking their turns, were scarce
sufficient for him. He had also as many Transcribers, and young Women
well-skill'd in Writing, all which he wearied out with the copiousness and
fertility of his Inventions. Being sent for from Antioch to Rome by Mammoea the
pious Emperors Mother; he was in great esteem with her, and having fully
instructed her in the Christian Faith, he returned to Antioch. But Pontianus,
having suffered diverse calamities and severe Torments for the Faith of Christ,
at length died in Sardinia; his body being afterward at the request of the
whole Clergy brought back with great Veneration to Rome by Bishop Fabian, and
interred in the Via Appia in the Coemetery of Calistus. At the Ordinations
which he held twice in the Month of December, he made six Presbyters, five
Deacons, and six Bishops. He was in the Chair nine years, five months, two
days, and from his Martyrdom the Sea was vacant ten days.

S. ANTERUS.
ANTERUS, a Grecian, the Son of Romulus, was made Bishop of Rome in the time of
Maximine; who Anno U. C. 987. having fortunately managed the War in Germany,
was elected (...) by the Army without any Authority of the Senate.

He was a Man of a mighty Stature, being above eight foot high; Maximine.
and had a Foot of such a magnitude, that it is since become Proverbial, when
men speak of a tall Silly Fellow, to say, he needs Maximine's Hose. His Wives
Bracelet served him only for a Ring; and his Appetite was so large, that he
would drink a Rundlet of nine Gallons of Wine at a Sitting. He raised the sixth
Persecution against the Christians, but in the third year of his Reign himself
together with his Son Maximine was slain by Pupienus at Aquileia a City which
he besieged, and so an end was put to his Life and that Persecution together;
by which means Mammea a Christian Lady, and the famous Origene, the blood of
both which he very much thirsted for, escaped his Cruelty. It Is reported, that
during this Siege of Aquileia, when their bowstrings failed, the Women of the
City supplied that want with their hair; for which reason in honor to those
Matrons the Senate dedicated a Temple to Venus the Bald.

Anterus was the first who, for the sake of one Maximus a Martyr, ordained that
the Acts of the Martyrs diligently searched after should be committed to
Writing by certain Notaries appointed to that purpose, and being written should
be reposited in the Treasury of the Church, that so the memory of good men
might not perish with their Lives. He ordered likewise that no Bishop should be
translated from his first Bishopric to another for his private Need or
Benefit, but only for the sake of the Flock committed to him, and by the leave
of the Supreme Bishop. A Constitution which at this day is made void by common
Practice; for now the Prelates being intent upon their own Profit and Pleasure,
are always looking out for a fatter; Not that they are at all inquisitive how
they may feed a larger Flock, but the great Enquiry is, how much any See may be
made worth yearly. There is very little discourse among them concerning the
care of Souls, but very much concerning the increase of their Revenues; that
thereby they may be able to keep more Horses, and have a greater Retinue of
Julius Africanus.
useless lubberly Servants. In his time flourished Julius Africanus, an eminent
Writer, who as (...) tells us, founded a famous Library at Coesarea, This (...)
(...) the Reign of M. Aurelius Antoninus, undertook an Embassy for the
rebuilding the City of Emmaus, which as I have already said, was (...)
Nicopolis. He wrote also an Epistle to Origin, showing that the story of
Susanna was not received among the Jews: against whom Origin afterward penned
a large Epistle upon that Argument. At this time likewise flourished Geminus, a
Presbyter of the Church of Antioch, and Heraclas Patriarch of the Church of
Alexandria. As for Anterus himself, having consecrated only one Bishop, he
suffered Martyrdom, and was interred in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via
Appia, on the third of January. He was in the Chair eleven years, one month,
twelve days, and the Sea was then vacant thirteen days.

S. FABIANUS.
FABIANUS, a Roman, the Son of Fabius, continued from the Reign of Gordianus
and Philip to that of the Emperor Decius.

Gordianus getting the Empire, and having given a mighty Defeat to Gordianus.
the Parthians that made head against him, in his return home to Triumph was
slain by the two Philips. His chief commendation was, that he is reported to
have had sixty two thousand books in his Library.

Philip, Anno U. C. 997. having brought home his Army out of Syria Philip.
into Italy, reigned together with his Son, whom he joined to him as a Partner
in the Empire, five years. He was the first Christian Emperor, and it is said
of him, that he never presumed to go to the holy Mysteries, before he had
confessed. After the third year of his Reign, the thousandth year from the
building of the City being completed, he caused to be celebrated the Secular
Games, which were wont to be repeated every hundredth year. They were first
instituted by Valerius (...) after the expulsion of the Kings, and had their
name from the Latin word seculum, which signifies the space of an hundred
years. But by the fraud of Decius, both the Philips were slain, though in
diverse places; the Father being put to death at Verona, the Son at Rome.

Fabianus distributed the several Regions of the City among the seven Deacons,
by whom the Acts of the Martyrs written by the Notaries were to be collected
and digested, for the example of others who professed the Faith of Christ. He
also built Monuments in the Coemeteries for the honor of the Martyrs. Further,
he ordained, that every year at some Sacrament the Chrism or holy Oil should be
new consecrated, and the old burnt in the Church. In his time sprang up the
Novatian Heresy. For Novatianus a Presbyter of the City of Rome, out of an
Novatianus.
eager desire of being Bishop put all things into a great disorder, that the
Pontificate might not come into the hands of Cornelius, who was Successor to
Fabianus. Having separated himself from the Church, he gave to himself and his
Followers the Denomination of the Pure; and denied that Apostates, though truly
penitent, ought to be received into the Church. Upon this occasion a Council of
sixty Bishops, as many Presbyters, and several Deacons was held at Rome, in
which the opinion of Novatianus was condemned as false, for that according to
the example of our Savior, Pardon is to be denied to no man that repents. At
the same time Origin opposed the heretical Doctrine of certain persons, who
affirmed, that the Souls of men died with their bodies, and were both together
to be raised again at the Resurrection; as also that of the Helchesaites, who
altogether rejected the Apostle S. Paul, and asserted, that though a man in his
Torments should outwardly deny Christ, yet he might be free from Guilt,
provided his heart were upright. The same Author wrote against Celsus an
Epicurean, who opposed the Christians; and sent Letters concerning Religion to
the Emperor Philip and his Wife Severa; and wrote also many things concerning
the order of Faith to Fabianus. Alexander Bishop of Cappadocia, having from a
desire to see the holy Places, made a Journey to Jerusalem, was there compelled
by Narcissus Bishop of that City and now grown old, to be his Assistant in the
Administration of that Bishopric. But the Persecution under Decius growing
hot, at the same that Babylas suffered Martyrdom at Antioch, he being carried
to Coesarea, was there put to death for the faith of Christ. As for Fabianus
(concerning whom it is commonly believed, that, when enquiry was made for a
Successor to Anterus, a Dove lighted upon his head in the same shape with that
which descended upon the head of Jesus at Jordan) he received a Crown of
Martyrdom, after that at five Ordinations, which he held in the month of
December, he had ordained twenty two Presbyters, seven Deacons, eleven Bishops;
and was interred in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia, Jan. the 19th.
He was in the Chair fourteen years, eleven months, eleven days, and by his
death the Sea was vacant six days.

S. CORNELIUS.
CORNELIUS, a Romam, the Son of Castinus, lived in the times of the Emperor
Decius,

Who being born at Buda in Hungary, upon the death of the Decius.
two Philips, assumed the Empire, proving a bitter Enemy to the Christians,
because those Philips had been favorers of their Religion. But having with his
Son Caesar reigned only two years, he was so suddenly cut off by the Goths,
that not so much as his dead body was ever found. A just Judgment upon him, who
raising the seventh Persecution, had put to death a multitude of most holy Men.

During the Pontificate of Cornelius, whose Judgment was, that Apostates upon
their Repentance ought to be received, Novatus irregularly ordained Novatianus
and Nicostratus; upon which occasion the Confessour's who had fallen off from
Cornelius, being of the same opinion with Maximus the Presbyter and Moses,
reconciled themselves to the Church again, and thereby gained the name of
Confessors indeed. But not long after, these Heretics pressing hard upon him,
Cornelius is banished to Centumcelioe; to him Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, being
himself imprisoned, wrote Letters, by which he came to understand both the
calamity of his Friend and the confirmation of his own Exile. There are extant
(...) other Epistles of Cyprian to Cornelius, full of Religion and Piety, but
the choicest of them is accounted to be that wherein he accuses and condemns
Novatus a certain Disciple of his. Concerning the same Heresy, Dionysius B. of
Alexandria, who had once been Scholar to Origin, wrote to Cornelius; and in
another Epislle reproves Novatianus, for having deserted the Communion of the
Roman Church, and pretending that he was forced against his will to take the
(...) upon him; to whom he thus replies, That thou were (says he) O Novatian,
chosen to that Dignity against thy Will, will appear when thou do voluntarily
leave it. Cornelius, before he went into banishment, at the Instance of Lucina
a holy (...), by night removed the bodies of S. (...) and S. (...) out (...)
the public burial places, where they seemed to be less secure, that of S. Paul
was by Lucina her self reposited in ground of her own in the (...) Oxiensis,
near the place where he suffered, and that of Peter was by (...) laid near the
place where he also was Martyred, not far (...) the Temple of Apollo. But when
Decius came to understand that (...) had received Leters from Cyprian, he
caused him to be brought from Ceutumcelioe to Rome; and in the Temple of
Tellus, the (...) Prefect being (...), he thus (...) with him, Are (...)
((...)) (...) to (...) thus (...), that neither regarding the gods, nor fearing
the commands and threatening of Princes, you keep a (...) tending to endanger
the public Weal? To whom Cornelius replied, That the Letters which he received
and returned, were only concerning the Praises of Christ, and the Design of the
Redemption of Souls, lut contained nothing in them tending to the Diminution of
the Empire. At this Decius being enraged, gave order that the holy man should
first be scourged with a kind of Whips that had small globes of Lead (...) to
the end of them; that afterward he should be carried to the Temple of Mars to
pay Adoration to his Image, and upon his refusal so to do, that he should be
put to death. The good man, as they were leading him to Punishment, disposed of
what he had to Stephen the Archdeacon; and afterward upon the fifth of May
was beheaded. Lucina, with some of the Clergy, buried his body by night in a
Grotto of hers in the Via Appia, nor far from the Coemetery of Calistus. There
are some who write that the Bishop suffered under Gallus and Volusianus, but I
rather give credit to Damasus, who affirms Decius to have been the Author of
his Martyrdom. Cornelius held two Ordinations in the Month of December, in
which he made four Presbyters, four Deacons, seven Bishops. He sat in the Chair
two years, three days, and by his death the Sea was vacant thirty five days.

S. LUCIUS I.
LUCIUS, by birth a Roman, his Father's Name Porphyrius, was chosen Bishop,
when Gallus Hostilianus was Emperor.

Gallus associated to himself in the Government his Son Volusianus; Gallus.
in whose times there arose so great a Plague to revenge the cause of
Christianity, that there were few Families, much less Cities and Provinces,
which had not their share in the public Calamity. But while Gallus and
Volusianus were engaging in a Civil War against Aemilianus, who had attempted
an alteration of the Government, they were both killed at (...), before they
had completed the second year of their Empire. Aemilianus, a person of obscure
birth, was slain e're he had possessed his Aemilianus
usurped Power three months; and soon after Valerianus and Gallienus were
chosen Emperors, the former by the Army in Rhetia and Noricum, the latter at
Rome by the Senate. Their Government proved very pernicious to the Roman State,
by the means of their own Pusillanimity and the (...) they exercised against
the Christians. For both the Germans had marched forward as far as Ravenna,
laying all (...) where ever they came with Fire and Sword, and also Valerianus
himself making Valerianus.
War in Mesopotamia, was taken Prisoner by the Parthians and forced to live in
the most ignominious servitude; for Sapores King of Persia made use of him for
a Footstool when he got up on Horseback. A Punishment which justly (...) him
for this reason, that as soon as he was seized of the Empire, he was the eighth
from Nero who commanded that the Christians should be put to Tortures, be made
to worship Idols, or upon their refusal be put to death. Gallienus, being
terrisied (...).
by this manifest Judgment of God, suffered the Christians to live quietly. But
it was now too late, for by the Divine Permission, the Barbarians had already
made Inroads upon the Roman borders, and certain pernicious Tyrants arose; who
overthrew at home what was left undestroyed by the foreign Enemy. (...) hereupon
leaves the care of the Public, and spending his time very dissolutely at
(...), was there slain.

Lucius, upon the death of Volusianus, being released from banishment, at his
return to Rome, ordained, that every Bishop (...) be accompanied wherever he
went with two Presbyters and three Deacons, as witnesses of his Life and
Actions. In his time suffered Saint Cyprian; who was first a Professor of
Rhetoric, and afterward, as St. S. Cyprian.
Hierem tells us, at the persuasion of Coecilius the Presbyter from whom he
took his (...)-(...), becoming a Christian, he gave his Estate to the Poor.
Having (...) first ordained a Presbyter, and then Bishop of Carthage, he was
(...) to death under (...) and Volusianus. His Life and Martyrdom were (...)
well written by Pontius a Presbyter and his Companion in (...). And it ought
not to be forgotten, that Cyprian before he (...) was reconciled to the Opinion
of the Church of Rome, that (...) were not to be rebaptized, but to be
received without any further Ceremony than that of Imposition of Hands; a
matter about which there had been formerly a great Controversy between him and
Cornelius. But to return to Lucius; before his Martyrdom, which he suffered at
the command of Valerianus, he delivered up his Ecclesiastical Power to (...)
the Archdeacon. He conferred holy Orders thrice in the month of December,
ordaining four Presbyters, four Deacons, seven Bishops. He was interred in the
Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia, Aug. the 25th. He was in the Chair
three years, three months, three days, and by his death the Sea was vacant
thirty five days.

S. STEPHANUS I.
STEPHANUS, a Roman, the Son of Julius, was chosen Bishop when the Roman Empire
seemed to be utterly ruined; and particularly at the time when Posthumus (...)
his Usurped Power in Gallia, though not without great advantage to the Public.

For he governed very well ten years together, freed the Country Posthumus.
from Hostility, and restored that Province to its ancient Form. But being
afterward killed at Mentz in a tumult of the Soldiers, Victorinus succeeded
him, who was indeed an excellent Soldier, but being exces Victorinus.
ssively incontinent and adulterous, was slain at Cologne.

Stephanus applying himself to the Regulation of the Church, ordained that the
Priests and other Ministers should not use their sacred Vestments any where but
in the Church, and during the performance of Divine Offices; lest otherwise
they should incur the Punishment of Belshazzar King of Babylon for touching the
holy Vessels with profane hands. Concerning the Re-baptization of those who
returned to the Faith, he was of the same Judgment with Cornelius his
Predecessor, and thought it by no means lawful to communicate with those who
rebaptized them; Whereupon Dionysius, who had formerly concurred in opinion
about the matter with those of Carthage and the East, both his and their
Sentiments of it being now altered, writes to Stephen, and encourages him from
the assurance that both the Asian and African Churches were now reconciled to
the Judgment of the Roman See concerning it. About the same time Malchion a
Presbyter of Antioch, a person Malchion
of extraordinary Eloquence, became very useful to the Church of God, in
Presbyter.
writing against Paulus Samosatenus the Bishop of that place, who endeavored
to revive the Opinion of Artemon, affirming Christ to have been a mere man, and
that he had no Existence till he was conceived by the Virgin Mary. An Opinion
which being afterward condemned in the Council of Antioch by general consent,
this Malchion in the name of the Synod wrote a large Epistle to the Christians
concerning it. As for Stephanus, when he had by his Example and Persuasion
converted a multitude of Gentiles to Christianity, being seized by Gallienus,
as some say, or else by those who upon the Edict of Decius were appointed to
persecute the Christians, he himself, together with many others his Proselytes,
was hurried away to Martyrdom; and having suffered, he was interred in the
Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia, August the 2d, after that he had at two
Decembrian Ordinations, made six Presbyters, five Deacons, three Bishops. He
was in the Chair seven years, five months, two days; and the Sea was vacant two
and twenty days.

S. SIXTUS II.
SIXTUS, an Athenian, of a Philosopher became a Christian the Decian and
Valerian Persecution yet continuing.

But it will not be foreign to our present purpose to go on, as we have begun,
to give some account of the other Tyrants, till we come to the true Successor.
Victorinus therefore being slain in Gallia, Tetricus a Senator, being at that
time Governor of Aquitain, was in his absence chosen Emperor by the Soldiers.
But while these things were transacting in Gallia, Odenatus overcomes the the
Persians, defends Syria, and (...) Mesopotamia as far as Ctesiphon.

At this time in Ptolemais, anciently called Barce, a City of Pentapolis, there
was broached a Doctrine, full of blasphemies against God the Father, and
against Christ, whom it denied to be the Son of the most high God and the
firstborn of every Creature, and against the Holy Ghost, whose being it
disowned. The Assertors of it were called (...), from Sabellius the author of
this perverse Sect. What shall I Sabellius.
say of that carnal opinion of Cerinthus? who affirmed, that Christ Cerinthus,
should personally Reign upon the earth a thousand years, (from whence by the
Greeks he was called a Chiliast.) Being himself a man of unbounded Lust and
Luxury, he feigned a great plenty of delicious Viands and a great variety of
beautiful Women to be the principal Ingredients of the happiness of that
Kingdom, Of the same opinion likewise was Nepos, a Bishop in some parts of
Egypt, who affirmed, that the Saints Nepos.
were to Reign with Christ on the Earth, in the highest enjoyment of all
sensual delights and pleasures; (from whom his brutish followers were called
Nepotiani.) Sixtus had it some time in his mind to baffle and suppress these
opinions, but being accused for preaching the faith of Christ contrary to the
Emperors Edict, he was taken and led to the Temple of Mars, where he must
either offer sacrifice to the Idol, or upon his (...) be put to death. As he
was going forth to punishment, Laurence his Archdeacon thus bespake him;
Whither art thou going, O my Father, without thy Son? Whither, O best of
Bishops, art thou hastening without thy Attendants? To whom Sixtus answered, I
do not forsake thee, O my Son; there are yet greater conflicts behind which
thou art to undergo for the faith of Christ; within three days, thou as a
dutiful Deacon shall follow me thy Bishop; in the mean time, if thou have any
stock lying by thee, distribute it all to the Poor. On the same day with
Sixtus, which was the eighth of August, there were executed six Deacons, viz.
Felicissimus, Agapetus, Januarius, Magus, Innocentius, Stephanus. And on the
third day after, August the tenth, the same Lawrence, with Claudius the
Subdeacon, and Seuerus the Presbyter, and Crescentius the Reader, and Romanus
the Doorkeeper, were all put to death together, though with several kinds of
Tortures; among which it is said that Laurence was broiled upon a Gridiron.
Vincentius, who had been Scholar to Sixtus, being gone into Spain, could not be
present at this Martyrdom. Sixtus, during his Pontificate having at two
Decembrian Ordinations made four Presbyters, seven Deacons, two Bishops, his
body was interred in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia. The other
Martyrs lie in the Coemetery of Proetextatus in the Via Tiburtina, Sixtus sat
in the Chair two years, ten months, twenty three days. And the Sea was vacant
thirty five days.

S. DIONYSIUS.
DIONYSIUS, whose original Damasus could not trace, being of a Monk advanced to
the Pontifical Dignity, forthwith allotted to the several Presbyters in the
City of Rome their several Churches and Coemeteries, and to others elsewhere
(...) their respective Parishes and Dioceses; that so every one might be
confined within his own bounds and limits.

His contemporary Emperor I take to have been Claudius, who Claudius.
when by consent of the Senate he had undertaken the Government, made War upon,
and with incredible slaughter defeated the Goths who had for fifteen years
together wasted Illyricum and Macedonia. Hereupon it was decreed by the Senate,
that in the Council-house a golden Shicld, in the Capital a golden Statue
should be erected to his Honor. But falling sick at Sirmium, he died before
the second year of his Empire was completed. Upon his death Quintillus his
Brother Quintillus.
was straightway chosen Emperor by the Army; a person of singular moderation,
and the only man who deserved to succeed his Brother; but he also governed a
very little time, being slain in the seventeenth day of his Reign.

During the Pontificate of Dionysius, Paulus Samosatenus deserting the Paulus
Samosatenus.
Orthodox Faith, revived the Heresy of Artemon. This Paul being made Bishop of
Antioch in the room of Demetrianus, behaved himself with excessive haughtiness
and affectation; for as he passed along he affected to read and dictate
Letters, a great throng of Attendants going before and following him; so that
for the sake of his Arrogance, multitudes were very strongly prejudiced against
the Christian Religion. But had they lived in our times, wherein Pride and
Pomp, not to say Luxury it self, are at their height; what would they think to
see Prelates led on by so many young Sparks, and brought up by a crowd of
Presbyters, all mounted upon high-fed and gay-trapped Horses? Certain I am they
would abhor and execrate them, and say, that they were false and hypocritical
pretenders to the Religion of the blessed Jesus. But I return to Paul, whom I
may more securely reprove. He was highly self-opinionated and ambitious, and
denied our Saviors eternal Generation, or that he had a being till his
conception of the blessed Virgin. For this reason at the Council of (...), he
was publicly condemned by the consent of all the Bishops that were present;
but especially by the sentence of Gregory Bishop of Coesarea, a most holy man
who was present at the Council, and afterward suffered Martyrdom for the faith
of Christ. Malchion also a Presbyter of Antioch disputed and wrote much against
this Paul, for the reason that I have already mentioned. Dionysius himself
could not be at this Council because of his great Age, but of all the
transactions there he had full intelligence given him by Maximus Bishop of
Alexandria. Dionysius dying, was buried in the Coemetery of Calistus; after
that at two Decembrian Ordinations he had made twelve Presbyters, six Deacons,
seven Bishops. He sat in the Chair six years, two months, four days; and the Sea was vacant six days.

S. FELIX I.
FELIX, a Roman, Son of Constantinus, lived in the time of Aurelianus,

Who came to the Empire A.U.C. 1027, and being an excellent Aurelianus.
Soldier gained a great Victory over the Goths at the River Danow. From thence
passing into Asia, at a place not far from Antioch, by the terror of his name
rather than by fighting, he overcame Zenobia, who from the time that her
Husband Odenatus had been slain was possessed of the Eastern Empire. Her he led
in Triumph together with Tetricus, by his defeating of whom at Chaalons, Gallia
was again recovered. Yet by the Humanity and Clemency of Aurelianus, Zenobia
lived all her time very honorably in the City, from whom the Zenobian Family
in Rome derives its Original; and Tetricus being saved, was afterward made
Governor of the Lucani. The Emperor now applying himself to works of peace,
repaired the Temple of Apollo, and the Walls of the City with great
Magnificence. But not long after raising the ninth Persecution against the
Christians, the divine Vengeance meeting with him, he was slain at a small Fort
between Constantinople and Heraclea, called Zenophrurium.

Felix out of the great regard he had to the honor of the Martyrs, ordained,
that upon their account Masses should be celebrated yearly; and that the
Sacrifice of the Mass should be celebrated by no other persons but such as were
in holy Orders, and in no places but such as were consecrated, cases of
necessity being always excepted. But if through the age or loss of Records it
were doubtsul concerning any Church whether it had been consecrated or no, he
commanded that it should be consecrated anew; saying, that nothing could
properly be said to be repeated, of which it is uncertain whether ever it were
once done at all. During his Pontificate one Manes a Persian, had the Impudence
Manes.
to profess himself to be the Christ, and that he might gain the greater credit
to his Imposture, he associated to himself twelve Disciples. But as that Manes
was detested and abhorred for his pride and blasphemy, so Anatolius the Bishop
of Laodicoea was as much extolled and magnified for his Religion and Learning.
At the same time also Saturninus, relying upon the assistance of his Army,
enterpriz'd the building of a new Antioch; but when it appeared that he
designed to invade the Empire too, he was slain at Apemoea. Felix, after that
at several Decembrian Ordinations, he had made nine Presbyters, seven Deacons,
five Bishops, suffered Martyrdom, and was buried in the Via Aurelia, May the
30th. in a Church which he had built, two miles distant from the City. He sat
in the Chair four years, three months, (...) days; and the Sea was vacant seven
days.

S. EUTYCHIANUS.
EUTYCHIANUS, a Tuscan, his Fathers name Maximus, was in the time of the
Emperor Aurelianus.

Who being slain was succeeded by Tacitus, a man who both Tacitus.
for his Valor and Justice, was certainly very fit for Government, but he was
slain in Pontus in the sixth month after he came to the Empire; as was also his
Successor Florianus in Tarsus, before he had reigned Florianus.
three months.

Eutychianus ordained, that the fruits of the Earth, as Beans and Grapes, etc.
should be blessed upon the Altar; and also that no persons should bury the
Martyrs in any but Purple Vestments; unless with his knowledge and leave. Some
write that in his time Dorotheus the Eunuch Dorotheus.
flourished, a man questionless of very great skill in the Greek and Hebrew
Language; and with whose Learning it is said, the Emperor Aurelianus was
wonderfully delighted. For in the beginning of his Reign he was such a Favourer
of the Christians, that he severely censured the Sect of Paulus Samosatenus.
But being afterward corrupted by evil Counsels; and, as has been said,
raising a Persecution against the Christians, having sent Dispatches concerning
that Affair to the several Governors of Provinces, he was cut off by the
Divine Hand. Eusebius when he was young was an Auditor of Dorotheus at his
Expositions of Scripture. At this time also Anatolius an Alexandrian, Bishop
Anatolius.
of Laodicea, a man of great Learning, wrote several excellent things in
Mathematics and Divinity; and was very severe against the Manichoean Heresy
which then very much prevailed. These Manichees to their other Errors, brought
in two Substances, the one good, the other evil, and held that Souls flowed
from God, as from a Fountain. The Old Testament they all together disowned, and
received but some parts of the New.

Eutychianus, after that at several Ordinations, he had consecrated fourteen
Presbyters, five Deacons, nine Bishops, was crowned with Martyrdom, and buried
in the Coemetery of Calistus, July the 25th. He sat in the Chair one year, one
month, one day; and by his death theSee was vacant eight days. There are some
who say he lived in the Pontificate eight years, ten months; but I rather give
credit to Damasus, who is the author of the former Assertion.

S. CAIUS.
CAIUS, a Dalmatian, the Son of Caius, a kinsman of the Emperor Diocletian,
lived in the times of Probus, Carus and Carinus.

(...), a person renowned for Military skill, having undertaken the Probus.
Government, was very successful in recovering (...) that had been possessed by
the Barbarians. He also vanquished Saturninus, who was attempting to usurp the
Empire in the East, and Proculus and Bonosus at (...). But this Valiant and
Just man was notwithstanding slain in a Tumult of the Soldiers at (...), in the
sixth year of his Reign. After whom Carus Narbonensis entered upon the Empire,
and held it two (...).
years. He having admitted his two Sons Carinus and Numerianus to a their in
the Government, and having in the Parthian War taken (...) and (...) two famous
Cities, was in the Camp slain by a Thunderbolt. Numerianus, who was returning
with his Father, was murdered by the fraud of his Father-in-law Arrius Aper.
But Carinus a person most dissolutely lewd, was overcome after a sharp and
doubtful Engagement, by (...) in (...); and at length suffered the just
punishment of his Villainies.

Caius stated the several Orders in the Church, by which as by certain steps
and degrees the Clergy were to rise to the Episcopal Dignity. These were the
Doorkeeper, the Reader, the Exorcist, the Acolythus, the Subdeacon, the
Deacon, the Presbyter, and the Bishop. He also, as (...) had done before him,
allotted several Regions to the Deacons, who were to Register and compile the
Acts of the Martyrs. He ordained likewise, that no Laick should commence a Suit
of Law against a (...)-man, and that no Pagan or Heretic should have power to
accuse a Christian. In his time lived Victorinus Bishop of Poictiers, who
Victorinus.
(...) diverse Commentaries on the Scriptures; and was very sharp and severe
against the Heresies then prevailing, though he had greater skill in the Latin
than the Greek Tongue, as Hierom will have it, who tells us, that the sense of
his Writings was great, but the style mean. Pamphilus also a Presbyter and the
intimate Friend of Eusebius Bishop (...).
of Coesarea, was so eagerly greedy of divine Learning, that with his own hand
he transcribed a great part of Origen's Books; which Books Eusebius affirms
himself to have seen in the Library of Coesarea, with as great satisfaction as
if he had gained the Riches of Croesus. The same Pamphilus wrote the Defense of
Origin, as Eusebius himself also did not long after.

But in the Reign of Diocletian, there arising against the Christians a
Persecution sharper than ever was before, Caius lay a long time concealed in
certain Grotts and Vaults underground; but being at length discovered and taken
from thence by the Persecutors, together with his Brother Gabinius and his
Niece Susanna, he was crowned with Martyrdom, and buried in the Coemetery of
Calistus in the Via Appia, (...) the 22d. Some write that Lucia, Agatha, and
Agnes became Martyrs not long (...). Caius sat in the Chair eleven years, four
months, twelve days; in which time at four several Decembrian Ordinations, he
made twenty five Presbyters, eight Deacons, five Bishops; and by his death the Sea was vacant eleven days.

S. MARCELLINUS.
MARCELLINUS, a Roman, the Son of Projectus, was in the times of Diocletian, a
Dalmatian of obscure birth, and Maximian.

Diocletian, A. U. C. 1041. being elected Emperor by the Army, Diocletian.
slew that Aper who had murdered Numerianus. But a Commotion arising in Gallia,
which was a Sedition rather than a War, thither Diocletian sent Maximianus
Herculeus, by whom the Peasants were soon quelled. But Wars breaking out on
every side, Diocletian not being able singly to bear the (...) of so many
dangers, associates Maximian by the name of Augustus, and Constantius, and
Maximian Galerius by the name of Coesars. Maximian Herculeus, after that
Carausius was killed by the treachery of Alectus, in ten years time makes
himself Master of Britain. And Constantius, after one unsuccessful Engagement
in Gallia, renewing the Fight a second time, flew several thousand Germans, who
were Mercenaries there, and thereby restored peace to that Province. In the
mean time Diocletian took Alexandria, which being bravely defended by
Achilleus, held out a Siege of eight months, and gratified his Soldiers with
the plunder of it. But Maximian Galerius having behaved himself gallantly in
two Fights against Narseus, was at length routed between Galietium and Carroe;
and his Forces being (...) and lost in that unfortunate Battle, he is forced to
fly to Diocletian, who received him with such disdain, that it is said, he
suffered him in his Imperial Habit to run on Foot several miles before his
Chariot. Maximian being nettled at so foul a disgrace, undertakes the War
afresh, and in the end becomes Victorious.

Affairs being thus settled, Diocletian in the East, and Maximian Herculeus in
the West, commanded that the Churches should be destroyed, and the Christians
tortured and put to death; and so raised the tenth Persecution, which lasted
longer, and was more vehement and bloody than any before. For now Bibles were
publicly burnt; all Christians who were in any Office ignominiously cashiered;
Servants who continued constant to their Profession cut off of all hope of
being ever made Free, and the Christian Soldiers compelled either to offer up
sacrifice to Idols, or else to lay down their Arms and their Lives together; by
an Imperial Edict publicly affixed in the Forum. This Edict, a certain person
being so hardy as to pull down and tear in pieces, he was thereupon ordered to
be fley'd and to have Vinegar mixed with Salt poured upon his raw flesh till he
died; which he patienty endured being confirmed and encouraged in his
sufferings by Dorotheus and Gorgonius two very eminent men. At the same time
the Royal Palace at Nicomedia happening to be on fire, the Emperor groundesly
suspecting it to be caused by the Christians, commanded multitudes of them to
be put to the sword, and several others to be thrown alive into the flames. The
same severity was exercised against them in Mitylene, Syria, Africa, Thebais,
and Egypt by the several Governors of those Provinces, and in Palestine and
Tire great numbers of them were exposed to be devoured by wild beasts. Indeed
there was no kind of Torment could be invented which the Christians did not
undergo. Some had their flesh scraped and torn off with Potsherds, to others
sharp Reeds were thrust under their Nails, and to the Women run up into their
privities. A certain City in Phrygia was set on fire and burnt to the ground,
because the Citizens, who were kept constant to the Faith by Adauctus a pious
Roman, refused to offer sacrifice to Idols. In the end their inhuman Tormentors
came to such a height of Cruelty, that they would first burn out their Eyes
with searing Irons, and then wreak the remainder of their fury and rage against
them. At this time were also put to death for the profession of Christianity
Anthimus Bishop of Nicomedia, and Lucianus the Learned Presbyter of Antioch,
and Pamphilus of Coesarea, and Philoeas an Egyptian and Bishop of Thmyis; this
last being beheaded, because he had written a Book in praise of the Martyrs,
and had courage enough to tell his unjust Judges their own. I need not
enumerate more Instances, since Damasus affirms, that there were no less than
seventeen thousand persons of both Sexes who suffered Martyrdom through the
several Provinces in the space of thirty days. I shall not mention those who
were banished to the Islands, or condemned to work in the the Mines or
melting-Houses, or to dig Sand, or to hew Stones, or to other the like kinds of
Servitude, whose numbers were almost infinite.

But our Marcellinus, being carried to the Heathen Sacrifices, and his
Tormentors with menaces urging him to offer, he being overcome with fear
submitted to their importunities, and joined with them in their Idolatries. But
not long after a Council of an hundred and eighty Bishops being held at
Sinuessa a City of Campania, thither goes Marcellinus clothed in Sackcloth,
with all the marks of an humble penitent, and beseeches them to inflict upon
him the just punishment of his Cowardice and inconstancy. Yet in so numerous a
Council there was not a man who would pass any Sentence against him, they all
agreeing that he had lapsed only after the same manner that S. Peter himself
did, and that by his tears and sorrows he had already sufficiently suffered for
his Fault. To Rome returns Marcellinus full of Resentment, hastens to
Diocletian, and boldly reproves him for causing him to sacrifice to false Gods.
Hereupon, by Diocletian's order he was forthwith led to Execution, together
with Claudius, Cyrinus, and Antoninus, three other assertors of Christianity.
As he went along, he admonished Marcellus his Presbyter not to submit to the
command of Diocletian in matters appertaining to Religion; and forbad him to
suffer his Body to be buried, saying, that since he had denied his Savior, he
was unworthy of the least acts of Humanity. Though indeed by Diocletians order
the bodies of all these four Martyrs lay unburied in the Highway the space of
thirty six days. Afterward at the Command of S. Peter the Apostle, who
appeared to Marcellus in a Dream, they were buried in the Via (...) in the
Coemetery of Priscilla, near the body of S. Crescention, May the 27. After so
long a series of miseries, God at length, as Eusebius words it, opened his
Eyes, and to free the Christians from such a Plague, so wrought upon
Diocletian's mind, that he voluntarily resigned the Empire and retired to a
private Life. The same did also Maximian, his Partner in the Government, and as
violent a Persecutor as himself, who some years after being (...) with diverse
diseases, and after incessant Torment being smitten with distraction, and
haunted with the reflections on his guilt, at last laid violent hands on
himself. It is the judgment of (...), that this Calamity befell the Christians
by Gods permission, as a just punishment for the great corruption of manners
which the liberty and indulgence which they before enjoyed, had occasioned
among them all in general, but especially among the Clergy, to the hypocrisy
of whose Looks, the fraud of their Words, and the deceit of their Hearts, the
divine Justice designed to give a check by this Persecution. Indeed the Envy,
Pride, Animosity and Hatred with which they strove among themselves was grown
to (...) an height, that it seemed rather a Centention between haughty Tyrants
than humble Churchmen; and having forgotten all true Christian Piety, they did
not so much perform as profane the Divine Offices. But what Calamity shall our
presaging minds prompt us to expect in our Age, in which our Vices have
increased to such a magnitude, that they have (...) left us any room for Gods
mercy. It would be to no purpose for me to mention the great Covetousness of
the Clergy, especially of those who are in Authority; their Lust, their
Ambition, their Pomp, their Pride, their Idleness, their Ignorance of
themselves and of the Doctrine of Christianity, their little Piety, and that
rather seign'd than true, and their great Debauchery, so great that it would be
abominable even in the profane (for so they superciliously call the Laics;)
this I say, it would be to no purpose for me to tell, since they themselves do
avow their sins so openly, that one would think they judged Vice to be a
laudable quality, and expected to gain Reputation by it. The Turk (believe me,
though I wish I may prove a false Prophet) the Turk is coming, whom we shall
find a more violent Enemy to Christianity than Diocletian or Maximian. He is
already at the gates of Italy; while we idly and supinely wait the common ruin,
every one consulting rather his one private pleasure than the public Defense.
I come now again to Marcellinus, whom I would to God we might at last imitate,
and return to a better mind. For he, as I said before, finding his Error in
falling away from his Profession, came to himself, and did with great constancy
sufter Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ; after that at two Decembrian
Ordinations, he had made four Presbyters, two Deacons, five Bishops. He was in
the Chair nine years, two months, sixteen days; and by his death the Sea was
vacant twenty five days.

S. MARCELLUS.
MARCELLUS, a Roman, of the Region called Via lata, the Son of Benedict, was in
the Chair from the time of Constantius and Galerius, to Maxentius.

For Diocletian and Maximian having laid down their Authority, Constantius and
Galerius undertake the Government and divide Constantius and Galerius.
the Provinces between them. Illyricum, Asia, and the East fell to the share of
Galerius; but Constantius being a person of very moderate desires, was
contented with only Gallia and Spain, though Italy also was his by Lot.
Hereupon Galerius created two Coesars, Maximinus whom he made Governor of the
(...), and Severus to whom he entrusted Italy; he himself holding Illyricum, as
apprehending that the most formidable Enemies of the Roman State would attempt
their passage that way. Constantius, a man of singular meekness and clemency,
soon gained the universal love of the Gauls, and the rather for that now they
had escaped the danger they had been in before from the craft of Diocletian,
and the cruelty of Maximian. But in the thirteenth year of his Reign, he died
at (...) in England, and by general consent of all men was placed in the number
of the Gods.

Marcellus being intent upon the affairs of the Church, and having persuaded
Priscilla a Roman Matron to build at her own charge a Coemetery in the Via
Salaria, constituted twenty five Titles or Parishes in the City of Rome for the
more advantageous and convenient administration of Baptism to those Gentiles,
who daily in great numbers were converted to the Faith, having a regard
likewise to the better provision which was thereby made for the Sepultures of
the Martyrs. But Maxentius understanding that Lucina a Roman Lady had made the
Church her Heir, was so incensed thereat, that he banished her for a time, and
seizing Marcellus, endeavored by menaces to prevail with him to lay aside his
Episcopal Dignity and renounce Christianity; but finding his Commands despised
and slighted by the good man, he ordered him to be confined to a Stable, and
made to look after the Emperors Camels and Horses. Yet this ignominious usage
did not so discourage the good Bishop, but that he kept constantly to stated
times of Prayer and Fasting, and though he was now disabled in person, yet he
neglected not by Epistle to take due care for the regulating of the Churches.
But before he had been there nine months, his Clergy by night rescued him from
this loathsome restraint; whereupon Maxentius being yet more enraged, secured
him the second time, and condemned him to the same filthy drudgery again, the
stench and nastiness of which at length occasioned his death. His body was
buried by Lucina in the Coemetery of Priscilla in the Via Salaria on the
sixteenth of January. In time following when Christianity flourished, a Church
was built upon the ground where this Stable stood, and dedicated to S.
Marcellus, which is to be seen at this day. We read moreover, that Mauritius
together with his whole Legion of Christian Soldiers suffered themselves to be
tamely cut off near the River Rhone; to whom may be added Marcus, Sergius,
(...), Damianus, with multitudes more who were slain in all places. Marcellus
being in the Chair five years, six months, twenty one days, at several
Decembrian Ordinations made twenty six Presbyters, two Deacons, twenty one
Bishops; and by his death the Sea was vacant twenty days.

S. EUSEBIUS.
EUSEBIUS, a Grecian, Son of a Physician, entered upon the Pontisicate when
Constantinus and Maxentius were Emperors.

For Constantius, Grandson to Claudius, dying, Constantine his Son by
Constantine.
Helena, whom yet he afterward divorced to gratify Herculeus, was with
universal consent made Emperor of the West. But in the mean time the
Praetorian Guards at Rome in a tumultuary manner declare for Maxentius, Son to
Maximian Herculeus, and give him the Title of Augustus. Hereupon Maximian
himself being raised to some hopes of recovering the Empire, leaves his
Retirement in Lucania and comes to Rome, having by Letter endeavored to
persuade Diocletian to do the same. To suppress these Tumults, Galerius sends
Severus with his Army, who besieged the City, but being deserted by the
treachery of some of his Soldiers who favored Maxentius his pretensions, was
forced to sly to Ravenna, and there slain. And indeed Maximian himself did very
narrowly escape the revenge of his Son Maxentius, who eagerly sought his
Fathers life for endeavoring by promises and bribes to gain the good will of
the Soldiers for himself. But going into Gallia to his Son-in-law Constantine,
he there laid a design to ensnare and circumvent him too, till his Plot being
discovered by his Daughter Fausta, who revealed the whole matter to her
Husband, he betook himself to flight, but was taken and put to death at (...),
thereby suffering the just punishment of his Villainies; or, as others tell us,
his condition being desperate, he laid violent hands upon himself.

During the Pontificate of Eusebius, on the third of May the Cross of Inventio
Crucis.
our Savior was found, and very much adorned, and had in great (...) by Helena
Constantine's Mother; Judas also who found it was baptized, and his name being
thereupon changed, was afterward called Cyriacus. This Bishop admitted
Heretics to the Communion of the Church upon their retractation by the
imposition of Hands only. Moreover he ordained that no Laick should commence a
Suit against a Bishop. In his time lived Lactantius Firmianus a Scholar of
Arnobius. Lactantius.
Who being a Professor of Rhetoric at Nicomedia, and discontented that he had
so few Scholars in a City of Greece, he thereupon betook himself to Writing,
wherein he became so excellent that he gained a Reputation next to that of
Cicero himself. He wrote many things, but his works that are (...) extant, are
those against the Gentiles, concerning the Creation of Man, and the Anger of
God. In his old Age he was Tutor to Constantine's Son, Coesar Crispus, in
Gallia. Eusebius also Bishop of Coesarea Eusebius.
in Palestine, a Partner with Pamphilus in the diligent search after divine
Learning, wrote a vast number of Books; particularly those de Proepar.
Evangelica; an Ecclesiastical History; against Porphyry a violent opposer of
the Christians; six Apologies for Origin; and three Books of the Life of
Pamphilus the Martyr, whose name he added to his own for a surname, as a
testimony of the strict friendship there had been between them. But our
Eusebius the Bishop of Rome, having at one Decembrian Ordination made thirteen
Presbyters, three Deacons, fourteen Bishops, died at Rone, and was buried in
the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia, October the second. He sat in the
Chair six years, one month, three days, and by his death the Sea was vacant one
day.

S. MILTIADES.
MILTIADES, an African, was Co-temporary with Maxentius, Maximine, and Licinius
a Dacian, who for his being an Excellent Soldier, was admitted by Galerius to a
partnership in the Empire.

These being sensible that Constantine was well beloved and highly esteemed by
all men, did for that reason seem less enraged against the Christians. Yet
Maxentius sent his Soldiers about with private Instructions Maxentius.
to massacre all they could secretly meet with; and taking delight in Magic,
at the performance of the hellish Rites belonging to that black Art, he would
send for great-bellied Women, especially Christians, and rip them up for the
sake of their unborn Infants, whose ashes he made use of in his Sorceries,
thereby showing that Tyranny might be supported and kept up even by Villainy.
Maximine also exercised Maximine.
the like rage and cruelty in the East, giving Rewards and Preferments to the
Professors and Teachers of Witchcraft and Sorcery; and being himself very much
inclined to give credit to Auguries and Divinations, became the more bitterly
incensed against the Christians, because they despised such superstitions. He
commanded likewise, that the decayed Idolatrous Temples should be repaired, and
Sacrifices offered to the Gods in them after the ancient manner. Against them
Constantine advancing with his Army, gained so perfect a Victory over Maxentius
at Pons Milvius, that his grief to be so shamefully defeated, caused him to
forget the snares which himself had laid, and so passing over a Bridge which he
had deceitfully contrived to entrap his Enemies, he himself with the greatest
part of his Guards were drowned in the River. Having also both by Sea and Land,
overcome his Sisters Husband Licinius, he forced him at Nicomedia to yield
himself, and to live privately Licinius.
at Thessalonica; a confinement which he justly deserved, because having
apostatized from the Faith merely through Envy, he had been a grievous
Persecutor of the Christians for the good will they bare to Constantine. As for
Maximine, he became manifestly the object of Divine Vengeance; his bowels and
entrails being on a sudden so swollen and putrefied, that there appeared no
difference between him and a putrid carcass; Worms in great abundance breeding
in his flesh, and rottenness with intolerable stench overspreading his body.
This dreadful punishment had been long (...) for by his wicked practices; for
he had forbidden the Christians to assemble at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs,
and had given out that at Antioch an Image had spoke and proclaimed aloud, that
the Christians must be banished out of the Cities, when indeed they were
certain knavish Priests whom himself had suborned, who from their adjoining
private recesses had uttered these words; and moreover, he had distributed
Rewards through the several Provinces to the Idolpriests who were active
against the Christians. But at length the Physician plainly telling him the
danger of his condition, the Tyrant began to relent, and by a publict Edict
forbad all persons to molest or injure the Christians, and suffered them to
enjoy their liberty. But this forced Repentance slood him in no stead; for
having been a long time (...) with grievous pain and disease, at last died this
cruel and inconstant man, who had been sometimes an Encourager, sometimes a
Persecutor of the Christians. During these Calamities multitudes of Christians
were put to death, and particularly Dorothea, a most virtuous and Beautiful
Virgin, who chose rather to die than to yield to the Tyrants Lust. Sophronia
also having been oftentimes solicited by Maxentius, like the Noble Lucretia,
slew her self to avoid the danger her Chastity was in from him.

Miltiades ordained, that no Christian should keep a Fast upon a Sunday or
Thursday, because those days were observed and kept holy by the Pagans; and the
Manichoean Heresy being at that time very prevalent in the City of Rome, he
made several Constitutions concerning Oblations. These things being settled, he
was by Maximine's order crowned with Martyrdom; as were also Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, Lucianus a a Presbyter of (...), a man eminent for Piety and
Learning, Timothy a Presbyter of Rome, and diverse others both Bishops and
Priests. Miltiades was buried in the Coemetery of Calistus in the Via Appia
December the tenth. During his Pontificate, he did at one Ordination make seven
Presbyters, six Deacons, twelve Bishops. He sat in the Chair four years, seven
months, nine days; and by his death the Sea was vacant seventeen days.

S. SYLVESTER.
SYLVESTER, a Roman, the Son of Ruffinus, was Bishop in the time of
Constantine, A. V, C. 1091. Anno Dom. 339.

Under this Prince the Christians, who had been continually harrassed by
Tyrants, began to have some respite. For Constantine Constantine.
was equal to the best of Princes in all endowments of Body and Mind, very
desirous of Military Glory, successful in War, and yet freely granting Peace to
them who asked it. When his other great Affairs permitted, he took very much
delight in the study of the Arts; by his Bounty and Goodness he gained the love
of all men; many good Laws he enacted, repealed those that were superfluous,
and moderated those that were too rigorous. Upon the Ruins of Byzantium he
built a City of his own Name, and endeavoring to make it equal in stateliness
of buildings to Rome her self, he ordered it to be called New Rome, as appears
from the Inscription under his Statue on Horseback.

This great Prince well weighing and considering all things, when he came to
understand the Excellency of the Christian Religion, how it obliges men to be
moderate in their Enjoyments, to rejoice in poverty, to be gentle and
peaceable, sincere and constant, etc. he thereupon heartily embraced it; and
when he undertook any War, bore no other Figure on his Standard but that of the
Cross, the form of which he had seen in the Air as he was advancing with his
Forces against Maxentius, and had heard the Angels near it saying to him (...)
(...) by this do thou overcome; which accordingly he did, freeing the necks of
the people of Rome and the Christians from the Yoke of Tyranny, and
particularly defeating Licinius, who had expelled the Christians from City and
Camp, and persecuted them with banishment, Imprisonment, and Death it self;
exposing some of them to the Lions, and causing others to be hung up and cut to
pieces limb by limb like dead Swine.

Sylvester having so potent and propitious a Prince on his side, leaves the
Mountain Soracte, whither he had been banished by the Tyrants, or, as some say
had voluntarily retired, and comes to Rome, where he soon prevailed with
Constantine, who was before well inclined toward the Christians, to be now
very zealous in deserving well of the Church. For as a particular testimony of
the honor he had for the Clergy, he allowed to the Bishops of Rome the use of
a Diadem of Gold set with precious Stones. But this Sylvester declined, as not
suiting a person devoted to Religion, and therefore contented himself with a
white Phrygian Mitre. Constantine being highly affected with Sylvesters
Sanctity, built a Church in the City of Rome in the Gardens of Equitius, not
far from Domitians Baths, which bore the name of Equitius till the time of
Damasus. Upon this Church the munificent Emperor conferred several donations
of Vessels both of Gold and Silver, and likewise very plentifully endowed it.

While these things were transacting at Rome, at Alexandria a certain Arius.
Presbyter named Arius, (a man more remarkable for his Person, than the inward
qualifications of his mind, and who sought more eagerly after Fame and
vainglory than after Truth,) began to sow dissension in the Church. For he
endeavored to separate the Son from the Eternal and ineffable Substance of God
the Father, by affirming that there was a time when he was not; not
understanding that the Son was Coeternal with the Father, and of the same
substance with him, according to that assertion of his in the Gospel, I and my
Father are one. Now Alexander Bishop of Alexandria having in vain attempted to
reclaim Arius from this his Error, by Constantines Appointment, and at his
great Charge, The Council of Nice.
a General Council was called at Nicoea a City of Bithynia, at which three
hundred and eighteen Bishops were present. The Debates on either side were long
and warm. For diverse persons subtle at Arguing, were favorers of Arius, and
opposers of the simplicity of the Gospel; though one of these a very learned
Philosopher, being inwardly touched by the Divine Spirit, all on a sudden
changed his opinion, and immediately embraced the sound and Orthodox Doctrine
which before he had pleaded against. At length the matter being thoroughly
discussed in the Council, it was concluded that the Son should be styled (...),
i. e. acknowledged to be of the same substance with the Father. Of those who
were of Arius's Opinion, affirming the Son of God to be created, not begotten
of the very Divinity of the Father, there were seventeen. But Constantine,
coming to understand the truth of the Controversy, confirmed the Decree of the
Council, and denounced the punishment of Exile to those who contradicted it.
Hereupon Arius with only six more were banished, the rest of his Party coming
over to the Orthodox Opinion. In this Council the Photinians were condemned,
who had Photinians and Sabellians.
their name from Photinus a Bishop of Gallogroecia, who taking up the Heresy
of the Ebionites, held that Christ was conceived of Mary by the ordinary way of
generation; as were likewise the Sabellians, who affirmed, that the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost were but one Person. In this Council also, the Bishops
according to Custom, gave in Bills of Complaint to Constantine, wherein they
accused each other, and desired Justice from him; but the good Emperor burnt
all their Accusations, and told them, that they must stand or fall by the
Judgment of God only, and not of men. In this Council moreover it was decreed.
That no person who upon pretense of allaying the heat of his Lust had castrated
himself, should be admitted into Orders; that no new Proselyte, without a very
strict Examination should be ordained, and being so, that it should not be
lawful for him to co-habit with any other Women than his Mother, or Sister, or
Aunt; that none should be promoted to the Order of a Bishop, unless by all or
at least by three Bishops of the Province; and that one Bishop should not
receive any person whether Clerk or Laick who stood excommunicated by another.
It was decreed likewise, and that very sacredly to prevent all oppression, that
there should be a Provincial Synod held every year, whither any who thought
themselves injured by the Bishop might appeal; and I cannot see why this
wholesome Institution should be abolished by the Prelates of our Age, unless it
be because they dread the Censures of the pious and Orthodox. It was decreed
also, that they who in time of Persecution fell away before they were brought
to the Torture, should from thenceforward continue five years among the
Catechumens. Finally, it was decreed, that no Bishop should upon the account of
Ambition or Covetousness leave a smaller Church for a greater; a Canon which is
quite laid aside in our days, wherein with eager Appetites like hungry Wolves
they all gape after fatter Bishoprics, using all importunities, promises, and
bribes to get them. The Constitutions of Sylvester himself were reckoned these
that follow, viz. That the holy Oil should be consecrated by the Bishop only;
that none but Bishops should have the power of Confirmation, but a Presbyter
might anoint any person baptized upon the occasion of imminent death. That no
Laick should commence a Suit against a Clergyman; that a Deacon while he was
doing his Office in the Church should use a Cope with Sleeves; that no
Clergyman should plead for others or himself before a Secular Judge. That a
Presbyter should not consecrate the Elements upon a Pall of Silk or dyed Cloth,
but only upon white Linen, for the nearer resemblance of the fine white Linen
in which the Body of Christ was buried. He also fixed the several degrees in
the Orders of the Church, that every one might act in his own sphere, and be
the Husband of one Wife. But Constantine being desirous to promote the
Christian Religion, built the Constantinian Church (called the Lateran) which
he beautified and enriched with several great Donations, the Ornaments and
Endowments which he conferred upon it, being of a vast value. Among other
things, he set up in it a Font of Porphyry-stone, that part of it which
contains the Water, being all Silver; in the middle of the Font was placed a
Pillar of Porphyry, on the top of which stood a golden Lamp full of the most
precious Oil, which was wont to burn in the night during the Easter
Solemnities. On the edge or brink of it stood a Lamb of pure Gold, through
which the Water was conveyed into it; not far from the Lamb was the Statue of
our Savior of most pure Silver. On the other side stood the Image of John
Baptist of Silver likewise, with an Inscription of these words, Behold the Lamb
of God which takes away the sins of the World. There were besides seven Hearts
placed round about it and pouring Water into it. For the maitenance of this
Font he gave several Estates in Land and Houses. Moreover Constantine at the
motion of Sylvester built and dedicated a Church to S. Peter the chief of the
Apostles, in the Vatican, not far from the Temple of Apollo, where he very
splendidly reposited the body of that Apostle, and covered his Tomb over with
Brass and Copper. This Church likewise he magnificently adorned, and (...)
largely endowed. The same Emperor also at the instance of Sylvester built a
Church, which he enriched and endowed as he had done the former, in the Via
Ostiensis, in honor to S. Paul, whose body he entombed after the same manner
with that of S. Peter; By his order also a Church was built in the Sessorian
Atrium, by the name of S. Cross of Jerusalem, wherein he reposited a part of
the holy Cross which was found out by his Mother Helena a Lady of ineomparable
Piety and Devotion. Who, Inventio Criccis.
being promted thereto partly by the greatness of her own mind, and partly by
Visions in the Night, went to Jerusalem to seek after the Cross upon which
Christ was crucified. To find it was a very difficult task, because the ancient
Persecutors had set up the Image of Venus in the same place, that so the
Christians might by mistake worship her in stead of their Savior. But Helena
being animated with Zeal, proceeded on to dig and remove the rubbish till at
last she found three Crosses lying confusedly one among another; on one of
which was this Inscription in three Languages, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the
Jews. Macarius, the Bishop of that City was at first mistaken in his opinion
which was the right; but at length all doubt concerning it was removed by an
Experiment upon the body of a dead Woman, who was raised to life at the
application of the true one. From the sense of so great a Miracle, Constantine
published an Edict, forbidding any Malefactor to be from thenceforward punished
by Crucifiction. Helena having first built a Church upon the ground where this
Cross was found, returned, and brought the Nails with which our Saviors body
was fastened to it, as a present to her Son. Of one of those Nails he caused to
be made the bit of the bridle with which he managed the Horse he used in War,
the other he wore on the Crest of his Helmet, and the third he threw into the
Adriatic Sea to suppress the rage and tempestuousness of it. That part of the
Cross which the devout Lady brought along with her in a Silver Case set with
Gold and precious Stones, was placed in this Sessorian Church. To which
Constantine was very liberal and munificent. Some tell us, that the Church of
S. Agnes was built at Constantin's Command, upon the request of his Daughter
Constantia, and a Font set up in it, where both his Daughter and his Sister of
the same name, were baptized, and which in like manner he largely presented and
endowed. The same Emperor built also the Church of S. Laurence without the
Walls, toward which he was not wanting to express his usual Beneficence.
(...), in the Via Lavicana he built a Church to the two Martyrs, (...) the
Presbyter, and Peter the Exorcist; not far from which he built a stately
Monument in honor to his Mother, whom he buried in a Sepuichre of Porphyry.
This Church also received signal Testimonies of his exemplary Bounty. Besides
these Churches in the City of Rome, he built several others also elsewhere. At
Ostia not far from the Port, he built a Church in honor to S. Peter and Paul
the blessed, Apostles and John Baptist; near Alba he built a Church peculiarly
dedicated to (...) Baptist; at Capua also he built in honor to the Apostles,
that which the called the Constantinian Church, all which he enriched as he had
done the former. At Naples he built another, as Damasus tells us, but it is
uncertain to whom he dedicated it. And that the Clergy of New Rome also might
be sharers in the Emperors (...), he built likewise two Churches at
Constantinople, one dedicated to Irene, the other to (...) Apostles, having
first quite destroyed the Delphick Tripods which had been the occasion of a
great deal of mischief to superstitious People, and either demolished the Pagan
Temples, or else transferred them to the use and benefit of the Christians.
Besides all the foregoing instances of Constantine's Munificence, he
distributed moreover among the Provincial Churches and the Clergy a certain
Tribute or Custom due to him from the several Cities, which Donation he made
valid and perpetuated by an Imperial Edict. And that Virgins and those who
continued in Celibacy, might be enabled to make Wills, and so to bequeath by
Testament something to the Clergy, (from whence I believe the Patrimony of the
Church to have received a great increase) he repealed a Law which had been made
for the propagating of mankind, by which any Person was rendered incapable of
entering upon an Estate who had lived unmarried till five and twenty years of
Age; a Law upon which the Princes had founded their Jus trium liberorum, the
Right or Privilege of having three Children, of which they often took advantage
against those who had no Issue. All these things are exactly and fully
delivered to us by Socrates and Zozomen the Historians. In the time of
Sylvester flourished several persons of extraordinary Note, by whose labor and
industry many Countries and Nations were converted to Christianity, and
particularly by the preaching of Julianus, Frumentius and Edisius, whom certain
Philosophers of Alexandria had carried thither. The Iberi also a remote People
were brought to the knowledge and Belief Christianity a certain Captive Woman,
through the Assistance and Persuasion of their King Bacurius. At this time
likewise the Authority of Antony the holy Hermit did much toward the
Reformation of Mankind; Anthony
Helena did oftentimes both by Letter and Messengers recommend Hermit.
her self and her Sons to his Prayers; he was by Country an Egyptian, his
manner of living severe and abstemious, eating only Bread and drinking nothing
but Water, and never making any Meal but about Sunset; a man wholly rapt up in
Contemplation. His Life was written at large by Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria. As for Sylvester himself, having at seven Decembrian Ordinations
made forty two Presbyters, thirty six Deacons, sixty five Bishops, he dyed and
was buried in the Coemetery of Priscilla, in the Via Salaria three miles
distant from the City, on the last day of December. He was in the Chair twenty
three years, ten months, eleven days, and by his death the Sea was vacant
fifteen days.

MARCUS I.
MARCUS, a Roman, Son of Priscus, lived also in the Reign of Constantine the
Great, concerning whom Historians differ in their Writings.

For some affirm, that Constantine toward the latter end of his Reign,
recalled Arius from banishment, and became a favourer of his Heresy through the
persuasion of his Sister who always insisted, that it was nothing but Envy that
had caused his Condemnation. These I believe to be deceived by the nearness of
their names, and so to ascribe that to the Father which was the act of the Son.
For it is not probable that that wise Prince, who had all along before
disapproved of the Arian opinion, should now begin to incline to it in that
part of his Age wherein men are usually most judicious and discerning. They
write moreover, that Constantine was baptized by Eusebius, an Arian, Bishop of
Nicomedia. But that this is a mistake appears both from the Emperors great
bounty toward the Orthodox, and also from that stately Font upon that occasion
erected with wonderful Magnificence at Rome; at which after he had been
successful in expelling the Tyrants, he, with his Son Crispus, were instructed
in the Faith and baptized by Sylvester. They who are of the other opinion tell
us, that Constantine deferred so great an Affair till the time that he might
come to the River Jordan, in which he had a great desire to be baptized, in
imitation of our Savior; but that in an Expedition against the Parthians,
making Inroads upon Mesopotamia, in the thirty first year of his Reign and of
his Age the sixty sixth, he died on the way at Nicomedia, before he could reach
the River Jordan for the purpose he designed, and was there baptized at the
point of Death. But let these men confound and perplex the matter as they
please, we have reason to believe according to the general opinion, that
Constantine, who had so often overcome his Enemies under the Standard of the
Cross, who had built so many Churches to the honor of God, who had been
present at holy Councils, and who had so often joined in Devotion with the holy
Fathers, would desire to be fortified against the Enemy of mankind by the
Character of Baptism, as soon as ever he came to understand the excellency of
our Religion. I am not ignorant what Socrates, and Zozomen, and most other
Writers say concerning it, but I follow the Truth, and that which is most
agreeable to the Religion and Piety of this excellent Prince. The vulgar story
of his having been overspread with Leprosy, and cured of it by Baptism, with a
previous fiction concerning a Bath of the blood of Infants before prescribed
for his Cure, I can by no means give credit to, having herein the Authority of
Socrates on my side, who affirms, that Constantine being now sixty five years
of Age fell sick, and left the City of Constantinople to go to the hot Baths,
for the recovery of his health, but speaks not a word concerning any Leprosy.
Besides, there is no mention made of it by any Writer either Heathen or
Christian; and certainly had there been any such thing, Orosius, Eutropius, and
others who have most accurately written the Memoirs of Constantine, would not
have omitted it. One thing more concerning this great Prince is certain, viz.
That a Blazing Star or Comet of extraordinary magnitude appeared some time
before his Death.

Marcus applying himself to the care of Religion, ordained that the Bishop of
Ostia, whose place it is to consecrate the Bishop of Rome, might use a Pall. He
appointed likewise that upon solemn days immediately after the Gospel, the
Nicene Creed should be rehearsed with a loud voice both by the Clergy and
People. He built also two Churches at Rome, one in the Via Ardeatina, in which
he was buried, the other within the City; these Churches Constantine presented
and endowed very liberally. In the time of this Emperor and Bishop lived
Juvencus
Juvencus a Spaniard of Noble birth and a Presbyter, who in four Books Hispanus.
translated almost verbatim into hexametre Verse the four Gospels; he wrote
also something concerning the Sacraments in the same kind of Meter. Our Marcus
having at two Decembrian Ordinations, made twenty five Presbyters, six Deacons,
twenty eight Bishops, died and was buried in the Coemetery of Balbina in the
Via Ardeatina, October. the fifth. He was in the Chair two years, eight months,
twenty days, and by his death the Sea was vacant twenty days.

JULIUS I.
JULIUS, a Roman, the Son of Rusticus, lived in the time of Constantius, who
sharing the Empire with his two Brethren Constantine Constantius.
and Constans, reigned twenty four years.

Among the Successors of Constantine the Great is sometimes reckoned Delmatius
Caesar his Nephew, who was certainly a very hopeful young Gentleman, but was
soon cut off in a Tumult of the Soldiers, though by the Permission rather than
at the Command of Constantius. In the mean time the Arian Heresy mightily
prevailed, being abetted by Constantius, who compelled the Orthodox to receive
Arius. In the second year of his Reign therefore a Council was called at
Laodicea a City of Syria, or, as others have it, at Tire, Thither resort both
the Catholics and Arians, and their daily debate was, whether Christ should be
styled (...), of the same substance with the Father, or no. Athanasius Bishop
of Alexandria asserted it, and pressed hard upon them with his Reasons and
Arguments for it; which when Arius found himself not able to answer, he betook
himself to Reproach and Calumny, accusing the holy Man of Sorcery, and to
procure credit to his Charge, producing out of a Box the pretended Arm of
Arsenius, whom he falsely asserted that Athanasius had killed, and was wont to
make use of that dead Arm in his Incantations. Hereupon Athanasius was
violently run down and condemned by the Emperor, but making his escape he lay
concealed in a dry Cistern for six years together without seeing the Sun; but
being at length discovered by a certain Servant (...), when his Enemies were
just ready to seize him, by Divine Admonition he (...) to the Emperor
Constans, who by Menaces compelled his Brother Constantius to receive him
again. In the mean time Arius, as he was going along in the streets attended
with several Bishops and multitudes of people, stepping aside to a place of
Easement, he voided his Entrails into the Privy, and immediately died,
undergoing a Death agreeable to the filthiness of his Life.

Our Bishop Julius having been very uneasy amidst this confusion of things, at
length after ten months banishment returns to Rome; especially having received
the news of the death of Constantine the younger, who making War upon his
Brother Constans, and fighting unwarily near Aquileia, was there slain. But
notwithstanding the present face of things, Julius desisted not from censuring
the Oriental Bishops, and especially the (...), for calling a Council at
Antioch without the command of the Bishop of Rome, pretending it ought not to
have been done without his Authority, for the pre-eminence of the Roman above
all other Churches. To which they of the East returned this Ironical Answer,
That since the Christian Princes came from them to the West, for this reason
their Church ought to have the preference, as being the fountain and spring
from whence so great a blessing flowed. But Julius laying aside that
Controversy, built two Churches, one near the Forum Romanum, the other in that
part of the City beyond Tyber. He erected also three Coemeteries, one in the
Via Flaminia, another in the Via Aurelia, the third in the Via Portuensis. He
constituted likewise, that no Clergyman should plead before any but an
Ecclesiastical Judge. He appointed likewise, that all matters belonging to the
Church should be penned by the Notaries or the Protonotary, whose Office it was
to commit to writing all memorable Occurrences. But in our age most of them
(not to say all) are so ignorant, that they are scarce able to write their own
Names in Latin, much less to transmit the actions of others. Concerning their
Morals, I am ashamed to say any thing, since Pandars and Parasites have been
sometimes preferred to that Office. During the Reign of Constantine and
Constantius, Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, was a man of considerable Note, and
wrote several things, particularly against the Arians. Asterius and
Apollinarius wrote against him, and accused him of the Sabellian Heresy, as
did likewise Hilarious, whom while Marcellus is confuting, his very Defense
shows him to be of a different Opinion from Julius and Athanasius. He was
opposed likewise by Basilius Bishop of Ancyra in his Book de Virginitate; which
Basilius, together with Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia, were the principal men
of the Macedonian Party. About this time also Theodorus Bishop of Heraclea in
Thrace, a person of terse and copious Elequence, was a considerable Writer, as
particularly appears by his Commentaries upon S. Matthew, S. John, the Psalms
and Epistles. As for Julius himself, having at three Decembrian Ordinations,
made eighteen Presbyters, three Deacons, nine Bishops; he died, and was buried
in the Via Aurelia in the Coemetery of Calepodius, three miles from the City,
Aug. the 12th. He sat in the Chair fifteen years, two months, six days, and by
his death the Sea was vacant twenty five days.

LIBERIUS I.
LIBERIUS, a Roman, the Son of Augustus, lived in the times of Constantius and
Constans. Constantius and Constans.


For Constantine, as I said before, engaging unadvisedly in a War against his
Brother Constans, was therein slain. And Constans himself, having fought with
various success against the Persians, being forced by a Tumult in the Army to
join Battle at midnight, was at last routed, and designing afterward to make
an example of his seditious Soldiers, he was by the fraud and treachery of
Magnentius slain at a Town called Helena, in the seventeenth year of his Reign,
and the thirtieth of his Age.

Constans being dead, the old Boutefeaus of the Arian Heresy began afresh to
make head against Athanasius. For in a Council held at Milain, all those that
favored Athanasius were banished. Moreover, at the Council of Ariminum,
because the subtle, (...) Eastern Prelates were too hard at Argument and (...)
for the honest well-meaning Bishops of the West, it was thought good to let
fall the Debate for a time; the Orientalist denied Christ to be of the same
substance with the Father. This because Bishop Liberius did at first oppose,
and because he refused to condemn Athanasius at the Emperors Command, he was
banished by the Arians, and forced to absent from the City for the space of
three years. In which time the Clergy being assembled in a Synod, in the place
of Liberius, made choice of Felix a Presbyter, an excellent person, and who
immediately after his choice did in a Convention of forty eight Bishops
excommunicate Ursatius and Valens, two Presbyters, for being of the Emperors
opinion in Religion. Hereupon, at their request and importunity Constans
recalls Liberius from Exile: who being wrought upon by the kindness of the
Emperor, though he became, as some tell us, in all other things heretical, yet
in this particular Tenent he was on the Orthodox side, that Heretics returning
to the Church ought not to be rebaptized. It Is said, that Liberius did for
some time live in the Coemetery of S. Agnes, with Constantia the Emperor's
Sister, that so through her assistance and intercession he might procure a safe
return to the City; but she being a Catholic, and apprehending he might have
some ill design, utterly refused to engage in it. At length Constantius, at the
Instance of Usatius and Valens, deposed Felix and restored Liberius. Upon which
there arose so fierce a Persecution, that the (...) and other Clergy were in
many places murdered in their very Churches. Some tell us that they were the
Roman Ladies at a Cirque-shew, who by their entreaties obtained of the Emperor
this Restoration of Liberius. Who, though he were of the Arian opinion, yet
was very diligent in beautifying consecrated places, and particularly the
Coemetery of S. Agnes, and the Church which he built and called by his own
Name, near the Market place of Livia. During these calamitous times lived
Eusebius Bishop of Emissa, who wrote very learnedly and elegantly against the
Jews, Gentiles, and Novatians. Triphyllius also Bishop of Ledra or Leutheon in
Cyprus, wrote a large and exact Commentary upon the Canticles. Moreover,
Donatus an African, (from whom the Sect of the Donatists are denominated) was
so industrious Donatus.
in writing against the Catholic Doctrine, that he infected almost all Africa
and (...) with his false Opinions. He affirmed the Son to be inferior to the
Father, and the holy Spirit inferior to the Son, and rebaptized all those whom
he could pervert to his own Sect. Several of his heretical Writings were extant
in the time of S. Hierom, and particularly one Book of the Holy Spirit,
agreeing exactly with the Arian Doctrine. And that the Arians might neglect no
ill Arts of promoting their Opinions, Asterius a Philosopher of that Faction,
at the Asterius.
Command of Constantius, compiled diverse Commentaries upon the Epistle to the
Romans, the Gospels, and the Psalms, which were diligently read by those of
that Party to confirm them in their Persuasion. Moreover, Luciser Bishop of
Cagliari, together with Pancratius the Presbyter, (...).
and (...) the Deacon, were sent in an Embassy from the Bishop to the
Emperor; and being by him banished for refusing to renounce the Nicene, under
the name of the Athanasian Faith, he wrote a Book against Constantius, and sent
it to him to read. But notwithstanding this provocation he lived till the time
of Valentinian. It Is said also, that Fortunatus Bishop of Aquileia, had been
tampering with Liberius just before his (...), and endeavoring to bring him
over to the Arian Heresy. (...) likewise, who for his great parts had (...)
given him the Surname of Scholasticus, compiled an excellent Book against
(...), nor could all the menaces of the Emperor make him desist from the open
Confession of the Truth; but on the contrary, hoping to have rendered
Constantius more favorable to Athanasius the Great (so called from the
constant and unwearied Opposition which he always kept up against Pagans and
Heretics) into his presence he boldly goes, nor did the Threats of so great a
Prince cause him to stir one step backward from his Constancy and Resolution.
As for Liberius. having at two Ordinations held in the City of Rome, made
eighteen Presbyters, five (...), nineteen Bishops; he died, and was buried in
the Coemetery of (...) in the Via Salaria, April the 23d. He sat in the Chair
six years, three months, four days, and by his death the Sea was vacant six
days.

FELIX II.
FELIX the Second, a Roman, the Son of Anastasius, was Bishop of (...) in the
Reign of Constantius.

Who by the death of Constans, slain by Magnentius.. becoming (...).
now sole Emperor, sent into Gallia to suppress a Sedition arisen there, his
Cousin German Julian, whom he had created (...); who in a short time by his
great Valor and Conduct reduced both the Gauls and Germans; whereby he gained
so much the Affections of the Army, that by universal (...) they made him
Emperor. At the News of this Constantius, who was engaged in a War with the
Parthians, suddenly strikes up a Truce with them, and forthwith marches forward
to oppose Julian; but in his March being feiz'd with an Apoplexy, he died
between Cilicia and Cappadocia at a Town called Mopsocrene, in the 24th year of
his Reign and of his Age the 45th. The Physicians were of Opinion that the
excessive grief and anxiety of mind which the Rebellion of Julian had brought
upon him, was the occasion of that fatal distemper to him. He was, (excepting
always the Case of the Christians, against whom he was unjust and cruel) a
Person of so great moderation and clemency, that according to the Ancient
custom he deserved an Apotheosis. Upon his first undertaking the Government, at
his entering triumphantly by the Via Flaminia into the City of Rome in his
golden Chariot, he did with wonderful condescension take notice of and Salute
the Citizens that went out to meet him, affirming that of Cyneas the
Ambassador of Pyrrhus to be true, that he saw at Rome as many Kings as there
were Citizens. In one thing only he was the occasion of laughter to the people,
viz. that as he passed through the lofty gates of the City, and the stately
Triumphal Arches, though he were a man of a very little Stature, yet as though
he feared to hit his head against the tops of them, he bowed it-down low, like
a Goose stooping as she goes in at a Barn-door. Being conducted to view the
Rarities of the City, and beholding with admiration the Campus Martius, the
Sepulcher of Augustus Coesar, adorned with so many Statues of Marble and Brass,
the Forum Romanum, the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, the Baths, the Porticoes
enlarged like so many Provinces, the Amphitheatre built with Tiburtine stone of
so vast a height that a man's Eye could scarce reach to the top of it, the
Pantheon built with stately Arches of a wonderful Altitude, the Temple of
Peace, Pompey's Theater, the great Cirque, the Septizonium of Severus, so many
Triumphal Arches, so many Aquaeducts, so many statues erected here and there
throughout the City for Ornament; beholding all this, I say, he at first stood
astonished, and at length declared, that certainly Nature had laid out all her
stock upon one City. At the sight of the famous Horse of Brass set up by
Trajan, he desired of Hormisda an excellent Workman, whom he had brought along
with him, that he would make such another for him at Constantinople, to whom
Hormisda replied, that the Emperor ought then to build such another Stable
(meaning the City of Rome.) The same Hormisda being asked by Constantius, what
he thought of the City of Rome, returned an Answer becoming a Philosopher, That
all which pleased him in it was, That he understood that there also men were
wont to die.

Felix, who, as we have said, was put into the place of Liberius by the
Orthodox, (though Eusebius and S. Hierom, which I much wonder at, affirm it to
have been done by the Heretics) presently after his entrance upon the
Pontificate pronounces Constantius the Son of Constantine the Great a Heretic,
and rebaptized by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia in a little Town called Aquilo,
not far from Nicomedia. And hereby may be discovered the Error of those who
accuse Constantine the Great himself of this Heresy; an Imputation which
certainly, as appears by History, neither ought nor can be fastened upon that
Great Prince, and great favourer of the Christian Religion. While this great
Contention which we have spoken (...) between Liberius and Felix lasted, the
Arian Heresy branched it self into two Factions. For on the one side Eunomius
(from whom they were called Eunomians) a man Eunomius.
Leprous both in body and mind, and who had a Falling-(...) as well within as
without, affirmed, that in all things the Son was unequal to the Father, and
that the Holy Spirit had no Community of Essence with the Father or the Son. On
the other side Macedonius, whom the (...).
Orthodox had made Bishop of Constantinople before he became erroneous in his
Opinions, was renounced by the Arians, for holding the Son to be equal with the
Father, though he uttered the same blasphemies against the Holy Spirit that
themselves did. It Is said, that Felix held a Council of forty eight Bishops, in
which it was decreed, that all Bishops should attend in person at every General
Council, or else by Letter give a good account why they could not; which Decree
was afterward renewed in the Council of Carthage. In his time lived Acacius,
for his having but one Eye called Monophthalmus, Bishop of Coesarea in
Palestine, who wrote largely upon Ecclesiastes, and who by his fair Speech and
swimming carriage had gained such an Ascendant over Constantius, that he
himself undertook to appoint Felix an Arian to be (...) in the room of
Liberius; this S. Hierom tells us, though I much marvel at it, since, as we
have already said, it is evident that Felix was a Catholic, and a constant
Opposer of the Arians. At length, after Felix had done all that in him lay for
the propagation and defense of the true Faith, he was seized by his Enemies,
and together with many other Orthodox Believers was slain and buried in a
Church which himself had built in the Via Aurelia, two miles from the City,
November the 20th. He was in the Chair only one year, four months, two days,
through the means of a Sedition raised by Liberius (whom I have inserted into
the number of Bishops, more upon the Authority of Damasus, than for any deserts
of his own.)

DAMASUS I.
DAMASUS, a Spaniard, Son of Antonius, lived in the Reign of Julian,

Who was certainly an extraordinary person, if we regard his Julian.
fitness either for Civil or Military affairs. He had his Education under
Eubulus the Sophist, and Libanius the (...), and made such proficiency in the
liberal Arts, that no Prince was his Superior in them. He had a capacious
Memory, and a happy Eloquence, was bountiful toward his Friends, just to
Foreiners, and very desirous of Fame. But all these qualities were at last
sullied by his Persecution of the Christians, which yet he managed more
craftily than others had done; for he did not persecute at first with Force and
Torture, but by Rewards, and Honors, and Caresses, and Persuasions, he seduced
greater numbers of them than if he had exercised any manner of Cruelties
against them. He forbad the Christians the study of Heathen Authors, and denied
access to the public Schools to any but those who worshipped the Gentile Gods.
Indeed he granted a Dispensation to one person, named (...), a most learned
man, to teach the Christians publicly; but he with disdain refused to accept
of that Indulgence. He prohibited the conferring Military (...) upon any but
Heathens, and ordered that no Christians should be admitted to the Government
or Jurisdiction of Provinces, upon pretense that the Laws of their Religion
forbad them the use of their own Swords. He openly opposed and banished
Athanasius, at the instigation of his (...) and South-sayers, with whose Arts
he was wonderfully pleased, they complaining to him that Athanasius was the
cause why their Profession was in no greater esteem. At a certain time as he
was sacrificing to Apollo at Daphne in the Suburbs of Antioch, near the
Castalian Fountain, and no Answers were given him to those things concerning
which he enquired; expostulating with the Priests about the cause of that
silence, the Devils replied, that the Sepulcher of Babylas the Martyr was too
near, and therefore no responses could be given. Hereupon Julian commanded the
Galileans, for so he called the Christians, to remove the Martyrs Tomb farther
off. This they applied themselves to with wondrous exultation and cheerfulness,
but rehearsing at the same time that of the Psalmist, (...) be all they that
serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols; They hereby so (...) the
rage of Julian, that he forthwith commanded multitudes of them to be put to
death, which he did not before intend. I much wonder that Julian should act
after this manner, having had before experience of the vanity of diabolical
Arts. For entering once into a Cave in company with a Magician, and being sorely
(...) when he heard the Demons howl, in the surprise he used the sign of the
Cross, at which the Demons immediately (...). Upon this telling his Companion,
that certainly there must needs be something miraculous in the Sign of the
Cross; the Sorcerer made him this Answer, That indeed the Demons themselves did
dread that kind of punishment. By this slight account of the matter Julian
became more (...) than before, so strangely was he addicted to Magical
delusions, though he had formerly, to decline the displeasure of Constantius,
seignedly embraced the Christian Religion, publicly read the holy Scriptures,
and built a Church in honor to the Martyrs. Moreover, this Emperor on pur
pose to spite the Christians, permitted the Jews to rebuild their Temple at
(...), upon their declaring that they could not sacrifice in any other place.
By which concession they were so mightily (...) up, that they used all their
endeavors to raise it more magnificent than the former. But while they were
carrying on the Work, the new Fabric fell down in an Earthquake, by the fall
of which multitudes of the Jews were crushed to death, and the Prophecy a
second time verified, That there should not be left one stone upon another. On
the following day the very Iron Tools with which the Workmen wrought were
consumed by fire from Heaven; a Miracle by which many of the Jews were so
wrought upon that they became Proselytes to Christianity. After this Julian
undertakes an Expedition against the Persians, of whom he had Intelligence that
they were endeavoring a Change in the Government; but before he set forth, he
spared not to threaten what havoc he would make among the (...) at his return.
But having vanquished the Enemy, and returning Conqueror with his Army, though
in some disorder, he died of a Wound given him near (...). Whether he received
it from any of his own men or from the Enemy, is (...); (...) us, that he was
pierced through with an Arrow sent no (...) knew from whence, as also that when
he was just expiring, with (...) lift up to (...), he cried out, Thou (...)
overcome me, O (...), for so in contempt he was wont to call our Savior, the
(...), or the (...); upon which was grounded that Answer of a young (...) to
(...) the Sophist, asking him by way of derision What he thought the Carpenters
Son was doing; To whom the youth replied, That he was making a Coffin for
Julian; a witty and Prophetic Reply; for soon after his saying so Julians dead
body was coffined up and brought away. We are told, that this Emperor had once
been in holy Orders, but that afterward he fell away from the Faith, for which
reason he is commonly called the Apostate. He died in the (...) month of his
Reign, and in the thirty second year of his Age.

Him Jovinian succeeded, who being voted Emperor by the Army, refused (...)
to own that Title, till they should all with a loud Voice confess themselves
to be Christians. This they having done, and he having commended them for it,
he took the Government upon him, and freed his Army out of the hands of the
barbarous, with no other composition but that of leaving Nisibis and part of
Mesopotamia free to Sapores the (...) King. But in the eighth month of his
Reign, whether from some crudity upon his stomach, as some will have it, or
from the faint and suffocating steam of burning Coals, as others, or by what
means soever, certain it is that he died suddenly.

Damasus being chosen to the Pontificate, was soon rivall'd in that Dignity by
Ursicinus a Deacon, whose Party having assembled themselves in a Church,
thither also Damasus's Friends resorted, where the Competition being managed
not only by Vote, but by force and Arms, several persons on both sides were
slain in the very Church. But not long after the matter was compromis'd, and by
the consent both of the Clergy and People, Damasus was confirmed in the
Bishopric of Rome, and Ursicinus was made Bishop of Naples. But Damasus being
afterward accused of Adultery, he made his Defense in a public Council
wherein he was acquitted and pronounced innocent, and Concordius and Calistus
two Deacons, his false Accusers, were condemned and excommunicated. Upon which
a Law was made. That if any man did bear false Witness against another, he was
to undergo the same punishment that the person accused should have done if he
had been guilty. The affairs of the Church being at length settled, Damasus
taking great delight in study, wrote the Lives of all the Bishops of Rome that
had been before him, and sent them to S. Hierom. Notwithstanding which, he
neglected not to increase the number of Churches, and to add to the Ornaments
of Divine Worship. For he built two Churches, one near Pompey's Theater, the
other at the Tombs in the (...) Ardeatina, and in elegant Verse wrote the
Epitaphs of those Martyrs whose Bodies had been there buried, to perpetuate
their names to Posterity. He also dedicated a Marble Table with an Inscription
to the Memory of S. Peter and S. Paul at the place where their Bodies had once
lain. Moreover, he enriched the Church which he had built in honor to S.
Laurence, not far from Pompeys Theater with very large donations. He ordained
likewise that the Psalms should be sung alternately in the Church; and that at
the end of every Psalm the Gloria Patri should be added. And whereas formerly
the Septuagint only had been in vogue, Damasus first gave Authority to (...)
Translation of the Bible, which began to be read publicly, as also his Psalter
faithfully rendered from the Hebrew, which before, especially among the Gauls,
had been very much depraved. He commanded also, that at the beginning of the
Mass the Confession should be used as it is at this day. But having at sive
Ordinations made thirty one Presbyters, eleven Deacons, sixty two Bishops, he
died and was buried with his Mother and Sister in the Via Ardeatina, in the
Church built by himself, December the 11th. He sat in the Chair nineteen years,
three months, eleven days, and by his death the Sea was vacant twenty one days.

SIRICIUS I.
SIRICIUS, a Roman, Son of Tiburtius, lived in the time of Valentinian,

Who, for his being a Christian, had been very unjustly dealt (...).
withal, and cashiered from a considerable Command in the Army by Julian. But
upon the Death of Jovinian being by the universal consent of the Soldiers
elected Emperor, he admitted his Brother Valens his Colleague in the Empire,
and assigned to him the Government of the East. Afterward, in the third year
of his Reign, at the persuasion of his (...) and her Mother, he created his
young Son Gratian Augustus. And whereas one (...) had raised a (...) and set up
for himself at Constantinople, him with his Adherents the Emperor very
suddenly overthrew and put to death.

But Valens having been baptized by Eudoxius an Arian Bishop, and (...).
becoming a bigoted (...), presently fell to persecuting and banishing the
Orthodox, especially after the death of Athanasius, who while he lived was a
mighty support to the Christian State for forty six years to gether. Lucius
also another Heretical Bishop was extremely violent and outrageous against the
Orthodox Christians; nor did he spare so much as the Anchorets and Eremites,
but sent parties of Soldiers to invade their Solitudes, who either put them to
death or else sent them into Exile. Amongst this sort of men they who at that
time had the greatest esteem and authority, were the two Macarii in Syria, the
Disciples of Anthony, one of which lived in the upper, the other in the lower
Desert; as also (...), Panucius, Pambus, Moses, Benjamin, Paulus (...), Paulus
Phocensis, and Joseph in Egypt. While Lucius was intent upon the banishment of
these men, a certain inspired Woman went about crying aloud, that those good
Men, those Men of God ought by no means to be sent into the Islands. Moreover
Mauvia, Queen of the Saracens having by frequent Battles very much impaired the
Roman Forces, and harrassed their Towns on the borders of Palestine and Arabia,
refused to grant the Peace which they desired at her hands unless Moses, a man
of most exemplary Piety, were consecrated and appointed Bishop to her People.
This Lucius willingly assented to; but when Moses was brought to him, he
plainly told him, that the multitudes of Christians condemned to the Mines,
banished to the Islands and imprisoned through his cruelty, did cry (...)
against him, (...) that therefore he would never (...) the imposition of his
polluted hands. (...) Bishops (...) to consecrate him, he was presented to the
(...), and (...) a (...) concluded. But (...) and (...) still to (...) their
(...) against the Orthodox, though (...) was (...) more favorable toward
(...) by the Letters of (...) the (...). (...) also (...) of the (...) of his
people which (...) for their (...).

In (...) by his Valor (...) Conduct (...) and (...). But while he was making
(...) a War (...) the (...) who had spread (...) through the two (...) he died
at a little Town called (...), through a sudden (...) of Blood. At this time
the (...) their own (...) had (...) themselves of all (...) (...) (having
first, (...) too (...) and Monks, and (...) to (...) in (...) his Army (...)
(...) An overthrow which (...) to the (...) and (...).

(...) (...) into any (...) from the (...) to the (...) Dignity it (...). That
the (...) of (...) not be conferred at once, but at certain distances (...).
(...), (...) the (...) who (...) in the City, the (...) of the faithful; but
(...) that upon (...) and return to the Orthodox Faith they should be (...)
into the Church, upon condition they would undertake a (...) course of (...),
and (...) themselves to Fasting and Prayer all (...) which, (...) it (...) that
their Conversion (...), (...) at (...) approach (...) as their (...). (...) but
a Bishop should have power to (...) a (...); (...) whosoever married a Widow,
or second (...) should be degraded from his Office in the Church, and that
(...) upon their Repentance should be received with only the Imposition of
Hands. In his time lived (...) Bishop of (...), who (...) twelve (...)
Books (...) the (...) and one against (...) not long (...) he (...) at (...).
(...) also an (...) who had (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
(...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) old Age so great a Proficient in those Arts which most require the
assistance of sight, particularly in Logic and Geometry, that he wrote some
excellent Treatises in the Mathematics. He published also Commentaries on the
Psalms, and the Gospels of Matthew and John, and was a great opposer of the
Arians. Moreover, Optatus an African Bishop Optatus Milevitanus.
of Mela, compiled six Books against the (...); and Severus Aquilius a
Spaniard, who was kinsman to that Severus to whom Lactantius penned two Books
of Epistles, wrote one Volume called (...). As for our Siricius, having settled
the Affairs of the Church, and at five Ordinations, made twenty six Presbyters,
sixteen Deacons, thirty two Bishops, he died and was buried in the Coemetery of
Priscilla in the Via Salaria, Febr. 22. He was in the Chair fifteen years,
eleven months, twenty days, and by his death the Sea was vacant twenty days.

ANASTASIUS I.
ANASTASIUS, a Roman, the Son of Maximus, was made Bishop of Rome in the time
of Gratian.

This Gratian was a young Prince of eminent Piety, and so Gratianus.
good a Soldier, that in an Expedition against the Germans that were now
harrassing the Roman Borders, he did in one Battle at Argentaria cut off thirty
thousand of them, with very little loss on his own side. Returning from thence
to Italy, he expelled all those of the Arian Faction, and admitted none but the
Orthodox to the execution of any Ecclesiastical Office. But apprehending the
Publick-weal to be in great danger from the attempts of the Goths, he
associated to himself as a Partner in the Government, Theodosius a Spaniard, a
person eminent for his Valor and Conduct; who vanquishing the Alans, Hunns and
Goths, reestablished the Empire of the East, and entered into a League with
Athanaricus King of the Goths, after whose Death and magnificent Burial at
Constantinople, his whole Army repaired to Theodosius, and declared they would
serve under no other Commander but that good Emperor. In the mean time,
Maximus usurped the Empire in Britain, and passing over into Gaul, slew Gratian
at Lions: whose death so (...) his younger Brother Valentinian, that he
forthwith fled for refuge to Theodosius in the East. Some are of opinion, that
those two Brethren owed the Calamities which befell them to their Mother
Justina, whose great Zeal for the Arian Heresy made her a fierce Persecutor of
the Orthodox, and especially of S. Ambrose, whom against his will the people S.
Ambrosius.
of Milain had at this time chosen their Bishop. For Auxentius an Arian, their
late Bishop being dead, a great Sedition arose in the City about choosing his
Successor. Now Ambrose, who was a man of Consular dignity, and their
Governor, endeavoring all he could to quell that disorder, and to that end
going into the Church, where the people were in a tumultuary manner assembled,
he there makes an excellent Speech tending to persuade them to Peace and Unity
among themselves; which so wrought upon them, that they all with one consent
cried out, that they would have no other Bishop but Ambrose himself. And the
event answered their desires; for being as yet but a Catechumen, he was
forthwith baptized, and then admitted into holy Orders, and constituted Bishop
(...) Milain. That he was a person of great Learning and extraordinary
Sanctity, the account which we have of his Life, and the many excellent Books
which he wrote do abundantly testify.

Our Anastasius decreed, that the Clergy should by no means sit at the singing,
or reading of the holy Gospel in the Church, but stand bowed and in a posture
of (...); and that no Strangers, especially those that came from the parts
beyond the Seas, should be received into holy Orders, unless they could produce
Testimonials under the hands of five Bishops. Which latter Ordinance is
supposed to have been occasioned by the practice of the Manichees, who having
gained a great esteem and Authority in Africa, were wont to send their
Missionaries abroad into all parts, to corrupt the Orthodox Doctrine by the
infusion of their Errors. He ordained likewise, that no person (...) of body,
or maimed, or defective of any Limb or Member should be admitted into holy
Orders. Moreover, he dedicated the Crescentian Church, which stands in the
second Region of the City, in the Via Marurtina. The Pontificate of this
Anastasius, as also that of Damasus and Siricius his Predecessors, were
signalized not only by those excellent Emperors Jovinian, (...), Gratian, and
Theodosius, but also by those many holy and worthy Doctors, both Greek and
Latin, that were famous in all kinds of Learning. Cappadocia, as Eusebius tells
us, brought forth (...) Nazianzen, and Bazil the Great, both extraordinary
Persons, and both brought up at Athens. Basil was a Bishop of (...) of (...)
(...), a City formerly called Mazaca. He wrote diverse excellent Books against
Eunomius, one concerning the Holy Ghost, and the Orders of a Monastic life. He
had two Brethren, Gregory and Peter, both very learned Men, of the former of
which some Books were extant in the time of Eusebius. Gregory Nazianzen, who
was Master to S. Hierom, Greg. Nazianzen.
wrote also many things; particularly in praise of Cyprian, Athanasius and
Maximus the Philosopher; two Books against Eunomius, and one against the
Emperor Julian, besides an Encomium of Marriage and single Life in Hexameter
Verse. By the strength of his reasoning and the power of his Rhetoric, (in
which he was an imitatour of Polemon a man of admirable Eloquence) he brought
off the Citizens of Constantinople from the Errors with which they had been
infected. At length being very aged, he chose his own Successor, and led a
private life in the Country. Basil died in the Reign of Gratian, Gregory of
Theodosius. About the same time (...) Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus,
(...). (...).
a strenuous oppugner of all kinds of Heresies; as did also Ephrem a Deacon of
the Church of Edessa, who composed diverse Treatises in the (...) Language,
which gained him so great a Veneration, that in some Churches his Books were
publicly read after the Holy Scriptures. (...). having at two Decembrian
Ordinations, made eight Presbyters, five Deacons, ten Bishops, died and was
buried April 28. He was in the Chair three years, ten days, and by his death
the Sea was vacant twenty one days.

INNOCENTIUS I.
INNOCENTIUS, an Alban, Son of Innocentius, was Bishop in part of the Reign of
Theodosius,

Who with great Conduct and singular Dispatch overcame Theodosius.
the Usurper Maximus, and at Aquileia whither he had fled, retaliated upon him
the Death of Gratian. A fate which the good Bishop (...) had foretold to
Maximus himself, when he was going against all Right and Justice to invade
Italy, having dreined Britain of its Military Forces, and left it an easy prey
to the Scots and Picts. Moreover, Theodosius, relying wholly upon the Divine
aid, in a very short time defeated not only Andragatius Maximus's General, and
Victor his Son, but Argobastus and Eugenius two other Usurpers; which was the
occasion of that strain of the Poet Claudian upon this Emperors success,

O nimium dilecte Deo, tibi militat Ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica Venti!
Englished,
Darling of Heaven, with whom the Skies combine,
And the confederate Winds in Battle join!
He was not only a great Soldier, but a very pious and devout man; as appears
by his carriage upon the repulse he found at the Church of Milain; for being
forbidden entrance by Ambrose the Bishop of it, till he should have repented of
a certain Crime committed by him, he so well resented the Bishop's plain
dealing with him, that he frankly gave him thanks for it, and completed his
course of Penance for the Fact that had been the occasion of it. By his
Empress (...) he had two Sons Arcadius and Honorius. Being once in a great
transport of rage against the Citizens of Thessalonica, for their having killed
a Soldier, or as others say a Magistrate of his, all the Clergy of Italy were
scarce able to keep him from destroying the whole City upon that provocation.
But afterward coming to himself, and understanding the matter better, being
convinced of his Error, he both bewailed the Fact which he had only willed but
not executed; and also made a Law, that the punitive Decrees of Princes should
be deferred for three days, that so they might have space left for compassion
or retractation. It is reported of him, that when at any time he was in a
sudden heat of Anger, he would force himself to repeat over distinctly all the
Letters of the Alphabet, that so in the mean time his Anger might evaporate.
It Is said also, that he contracted a great Friendship with one John an
Anchorete, whose advice he always used both in War and Peace. But in the
fiftieth year of his Age he died at Milain.

Innocentius improving the opportunity of such a peaceable state of Affairs,
and so propitious a Prince, made several Constitutions concerning matters of
the Church. He appointed that every Saturday should be a Fast, because our
Blessed Savior lay in the Grave, and his Disciples (...) on that day. He made
certain Laws concerning the Jews and Pagans, and for the regulation of Monks.
By the consent of Theodosius he banished from the City and confined to a
Monastic life the Cataphrygian Heretics of the gang of Montanus, Priscilla
and Maximilia. Moreover, he condemned the Heresy of Pelagius and Coelestinus,
who preferred Free Will before the Divine Grace; and asserted, that men by
their own natural strength were able to perform the Laws of God; against whom
S. Austin wrote largely. But Pelagius persisting obstinately in his opinions
against all Conviction, went into Britain and infected the whole Island with
his Errors, being assisted by Julian his Companion and Confederate in that
wicked Design. He also consecrated the Church of Gervasius and Protasius,
erected and beautified at the Cost of a Lady named Vestina, whose Goods and
Jewels bequeathed by Will, were sold according to a just appraisement, and
employed to that purpose. This Church was endowed with several Estates both in
Houses and Land within and without the City, and the Cure of it, and that of S.
Agnes, given to Leopardus and Paulinus two Presbyters. In his time lived
Apollinarius Bishop of Laodicea, (from whom the Apollinarians Apollinaris.
had their name and original) a man vehement and subtle at Disputation; who
maintained, that our Savior at his Incarnation took only a Body, not a Soul;
but being pressed hard with Arguments to the contrary, he at length granted
that he had indeed an animal Soul but not a rational one, that being supplied
by his Divinity. An Opinion which had been before exploded by Damasus and Peter
Bishop of Alexandria. But Martianus Bishop of Barcellona, a man eminent for his
Chastity and Eloquence, was very Orthodox in matters of Faith, and a great
opposer of the Novatian Heresy. Cyril also Bishop of Jerusalem, Cyril.
who before had been several times deposed and as often restored; at length
under Theodosius the Emperor held his Episcopal Dignity peaceably and without
interruption eight years together, and became a great Writer. Euzoius, who in
his youth had been Condisciple to Gregory Nazianzen at Coesarea under
Thespesius the Rhetorician, took a vast deal of pains in amending and
rectifying the corrupted Copies of the Works of Origin and Pamphilus, and was
himself a considerable Author. At the same time Hieronymus a Presbyter living
in Bethlehem, was a very successful propagator of Christianity, as appears by
his Writings. Now also the Synod of Bourdeaux condemned the Doctrine of
Priscillian, an Heresy patched up out of the Tenets of the Gnostics and
Manichees, of whom we have spoken above. Our Innocentius, having at four
Ordinations made thirty Presbyters, twelve Deacons, fifty four Bishops, died
and was buried July the 28th. He sat in the Chair fifteen years, two months,
twenty five days, and by his death the Sea was vacant twenty two days.

ZOSIMUS.
ZOSIMUS, a Grecian, his Fathers name Abraham, lived during the Reign of
Arcadius and Honorius, who succeeded their Father Theodosius in the Empire.

These divided the Government between them, Arcadius ruling in the Arcadius and
Honorius.
East, and Honorius in the West. Though Theodosius had left them to the Tuition
of three of his Generals, who as their Guardians and Protectours were to manage
Affairs in their Minority; Russinus in the East, Stilico in the West, and Gildo
in Africa. But they moved with Ambition and a thirst after greatness, and not
doubting to get the advantage of the young Princes, set up every one for
himself. Against Gildo, who was engaged in a Rebellion in Afrique, his injured
and incensed Brother Mascezel is sent with an Army, and soon defeats and puts
him to flight, who not long after dies either through grief or by poison. And
Mascezel himself, being so puffed up with this success, that he falls into a
great contempt of God and cruelty toward men, is killed by his own Soldiers.
Russinus also, who endeavored to possess himself of the Empire of the East, is
surprised and punished by Arcadius. At this time Rhadaguisus King of the Goths
invaded Italy, and laid all waste with fire and Sword where ever he came; but
by the Roman Army under the Command of Stilico, he was vanquished and slain on
the Mountains of Fiesoli. Him Alaricus succeeded, whom Stilico, to work his own
ambitious designs, very much countenanced and assisted, when he might have
conquered him. But in the end Alaricus being now at Polentia, on his way to
Gaul, part of which Honorius had granted to him and his followers to inhabit,
had disturbance given him by one Saul, an Hebrew by birth and Religion, whom
Stilico to the foul breach of Articles had sent with a Party for that purpose.
It was an easy matter to surprise and disorder the Goths, who little suspected
any such Practices, and were peaceably celebrating the Feast of Easter. But the
day following Alaricus engaging with them slew Saul, and made an universal
slaughter of his men, and then changing his former course toward Gaul, moves
against Stilico and the Roman Army. These he overcame, and then after a long
and grievous Siege, takes the City of Rome it self, Anno U. C. MCLXIIII. A. C.
CCCCXII. Notwithstanding this Success Alaricus exercised so much Moderation and
Clemency, that he commanded his Soldiers to put as few to the Sword as might
be, and particularly to spare all that should fly for refuge to the Churches of
S. Peter and S. Paul. After three days Plunder he leaves the City, (which had
suffered less damage than was thought for, very little of it being burnt) and
marches against the Lucani and Bruti, and having taken and sacked Cosenza, he
there dies. Whereupon the Goths with one consent made his kinsman Athaulphus
his Successor, who returning to Rome with his Army, was so wrought upon by the
Emperor Honorius's Sister Galla Placidia whom he had married, that he
restrained his Soldiers from committing any farther outrages, and left the City
to its own Government. He had it certainly once in his purpose to have razed to
the ground the then City of Rome, and to have built a new one which he would
have called Gotthia, and have left to the ensuing Emperors his own Name, so
that they should not any longer have had the Title of Augusti, but Athaulphi.
But Placidia not only brought his mind off from that project; but also
prevailed with him to enter into a League with Honorius and Theodosius the
second, the Son of Arcadius deceased.

Zosimus, notwithstanding all these disturbances made several Ecclesiastical
Constitutions; allowed the blessing of Wax-Tapers on the Saturday before Easter
in the several Parishes; forbad the Clergy to frequent public Drinking-houses,
(though allowing them all innocent liberty among themselves,) or any Servant to
be made a Clergyman, because that Order ought to consist of none but free and
ingenuous persons. Whereas now not only Servants and Bastards, but the vile
offspring of the most flagitious Parents are admitted to that Dignity; whose
Enormities will certainly at long-run prove fatal to the Church. It Is said that
Zosimus at this time sent Faustinus a Bishop, and two Presbyters of the City to
the Council of Carthage, by them declaring, that no Debates concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs ought to be managed any where without permission of the
Church of Rome. During his Pontificate lived Lucius a Bishop of the Arian
Faction, who wrote certain Books upon several Subjects. Diodorus also Bishop of
Tarsus, during his being a Presbyter of Antioch was a great Writer; following
the sense of Eusebius, but not able to reach his style for want of skill in
secular Learning. Tiberianus likewise who had been accused together with
Priscillian, wrote an Apology to free himself from the suspicion of Heresy.
Euagrius, a man of smart and brisk parts, translated into Latin the Life of S.
Anthony written in Greek by Athanasius. Ambrosius of Alexandria, a Scholar of
Didymus wrote a large Volume against Apollinarius. At this time flourished
those two famous Bishops, Theophilus of Alexandria, and John of Constantinople,
for the greatness of his Eloquence deservedly surnamed Chrysostom; who so far
prevailed upon Theodorus and Maximus two Condisciples of his, that they left
their Masters Libanius the Rhetorician, and Andragatius the Philosopher, and
became Proselytes to Christianity. This Libanius lying now at the point of
death, being asked whom he would leave sucsessour in his School; made answer,
that he desired no other than Chrysosiom, were he not a Christian. At this time
the Decrees of the Council of Carthage being sent to Zosimus, were by him
confirmed, and thereby the Pelagian Heresy condemned throughout the World.
Some tell us, that Petronius Bishop of Bononia, and Possidonius an African
Bishop, had now gained a mighty reputation for Sanctity; that Primasius wrote
largely against the Heresies to Bishop Fortunatus; and that Proba, Wife to
Adelphus the Proconsul, composed an Historical Poem of our Saviors Life,
consisting wholly of Virgilian Verse; though others attribute the honor of
this performance to Eudocia Empress of Theodosius the younger. But certainly
the most learned person of the Age he lived in, was Augustinus, Saint Ambrose
his Convert, Bishop of Hippo in Africa, a most strenuous Defender of the
Christian Faith both in Discourse and Writing. As for Zosimus, having ordained
ten Presbyters, three Deacons, eight Bishops, he died, and was buried in the
Via Tiburtina, near the body of Saint Laurence the Martyr, December 26th. He
sat in the Chair one year, three months, twelve days, and by his death the Sea
was vacant eleven days.

BONIFACIUS I.
BONIFACE, a Roman, Son of Jucundus a Presbyter, was (...).
Bishop in the time of Honorius.

At this time a great dissension (...) among the Clergy; for though Boniface
was chosen Bishop in one Church of the City (...) one Party, yet Eulalius was
elected and set up against him by a contrary Faction in another. This when
Honorius, who was now at Milain, came to understand, at the Solicitation of
(...) Placidia and her Son Valentiman, they were both banished the City. But
about seven months after (...) was re-call'd, and confirmed in the Pontifical
Dignity.

In the mean time Athaulphus dying, Vallias was made King of the (...), (...)
being terrified by the Judgments inflicted on his People, restored Placidia,
whom he had always used very honorably, to her Brother (...), and entered into
a League with him, giving very good Hostages for the confirmation of it; as did
also the Alanes, Vandals and (...). This I lacidia Henorius gave in marriage to
Constantius whom he had declared (...), who had by her a Son named Valentinian;
but she being afterward banished by her Brother, went into the East with her
Sons (...) and Valentinian.

Our Bonisace ordained, that no Woman, though a Nun, should touch the
consecrated Pall or Incense; and that no Servant, or Debtor should be admitted
into the Clergy. Moreover, he built an Oratory upon the ground where S.
Felicitas the Martyr was buried, and very much adorned her Tomb. During his
Pontificate flourished diverse famous men, (...) (...) a Presbyter, Son of
Eusebius, born at a Town called S. (...).
(...), seated in the Confines of Dalmatia and Hungaria, but demolished by the
Goths. It is not to my purpose to rehearse how great benefit the Church of God
reaped from his Life and Writings, since he is known to have been a person of
extraordinary (...), and his Works are had in so great honor and esteem, that
no Author is more read by learned Men than he. He died at Bethlehem on the last
day of September in the ninety first year of his Age. Besides him there were
also Gelasius, Successor to Euzoius in the Bishopric of Caesarea Palestinae,
a man of excellent Parts; Dexter, Son of Pacianus, who compiled an History
inscribed to S. Hierem; Amphilochius, who wrote concerning the Holy Ghost in an
(...) style; and (...), commended by S. (...) (...) his learned Book of the
Destruction of (...). It Is said also that at this time Lucianus a Preshyter,
directed by a divine Revelation, found out the Sepulchers of S. Stephen the
Protomartyr, and Gamaliel S. Paul's Master, of which he gave an account to all
the Churches by an Epistle in Greek, which was afterward translated into Latin
by (...) a (...), and sent to Orosius. Some likewise tell us, that John
Cassianus and Maximine two very learned Men lived in this Age; but though it be
doubtful of them, it is not so concerning Eutropius S. Austin's Scholar, who in
a handsome style Epitomized the Roman History from the building of the City to
his own times; and who moreover wrote to his two Sisters, Recluses, concerning
Chastity, and the Love of Religion; to whom we may add Juvenal the Bishop of
Constantinople, and Heroes, a Disciple of S. Martin, the wrongfully deposed
Bishop of Arles, both men of great reputation for Sanctity. As for Boniface
himself, having at one Ordination made thirteen Presbyters, three Deacons,
thirty six Bishops, he died October the 25th, and was buried in the Via
Salaria, near the body of S. Felicitas the Martyr. He fat in the Chair three
years, eight months, sevendays; Boniface being dead, some of the Clergy
recalled Eulalius, but he either through indignation at his former repulse, or
from contempt of Worldly greatness, disdained the revocation, and died the year
following. The Sea was then vacant nine days.

CAELESTINUS I.
CAELESTINE, a Campanian, lived in the times of Theodosius the younger.

This Theodosius, upon the death of that excellent Prince Honorius, Theodosius
secundus.
creates the Son of his Aunt Placidia, Valentinian, Coesar, and commits to his
charge the Western Empire. Who being immediately by the universal consent of
all Italy acknowledged their Emperor, and actually entering upon the Government
at Ravenna, was wonderfully prosperous in subduing the Enemies of the Roman
State, and particularly John the Usurper. In the mean time the Vandals, Alemans
and Goths, a barbarous and salvage people, passing over out of Spain into
Africa, under the conduct of their King Gensericus, not only miserably
depopulated and harrassed that Province with Fire and Sword, but also corrupted
the Catholic Faith there with the mixture of Arianism, and banished some
Orthodox Bishops; during which Troubles S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo died in
the third month of the Siege of that City August 28. in the seventy seventh
year of his Age. The Vandals having taken Carthage, failed to Sicily, and made
the like havoc in that Island; as also did the Picts and Scots in the Island
of Britain. In this Extremity the Britains implored the Aid of Aetius a
Patrician and a famous Soldier, but he not only denied them his assistance; but
having other ambitious Designs to carry on, solicited the Huns to invade Italy.
The Britains being thus deserted by Aetius, call over the Saxons or English to
their help, whom they soon found more their Enemies than Assistants; for being
in a little time over run by them, they lost both their Country and their
Name. While these things were transacting, Theodosius dying at Constantinople
in the twenty seventh year of his and his Uncle Honorius's Reign, Bleda and
Attila two Brothers, Kings of the Hunns, invading Illyricum, laid waste, and
burned all places to which they came.

Notwithstanding our Coelestine ordained several Rites appertaining to divine
Worship; as that, besides the Epistle and Gospel, before the Mass the Psalms of
David should be sung by all alternately. Martinus Cassinas tells us, that the
Psalm Judica me Deus, Give sentence with me O God, and defend my cause, etc.
which is used at the beginning of the Sacrifice, was introduced by him; as
likewise the Gradual is ascribed to him. Many other Ecclesiastical
Constitutions he made, to be seen in the Archives of the Church. He also
dedicated and enriched the Julian Church; At this time Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople endeavored to Nestorius.
sow a new Error in the Church, asserting, that Christ was born of the Virgin
Mary a mere Man, and that the Divinity was conferred upon him of Merit. To this
impious Doctrine Cyril Bishop of Alexandria and our Coelestine opposed
themselves very strenuously. For in a Synod of two hundred Bishops held at
Ephesus, Nestorius himself and the Heresy denominated from him, together with
the Pelagians who were great favorers of the Nestorian Party, were by
universal consent condemned in thirteen Canons levelled against their foolish
Opinions. Moreover, Coelestine sent Germanus Bishop of Auxerre into England to
oppose the Pelagian Heresy, and reduce the Inhabitants to the Orthodox Faith;
and Palladius, whom he had made a Bishop to the Scots, who desired to be
instructed in the Christian Religion. And indeed it cannot be denied but that
by his endeavors, and the industry of those whom he employed to that purpose,
a great part of the West were converted to Christianity. It Is said, that at
this time the Devil assumed humane shape, and pretended himself to be Moses,
and imposed upon a multitude of Jews by undertaking to conduct them out of the
Island of Crete into the Land of Promise through the Sea as upon dry Land, in
imitation of the ancient Miracle wrought for that People at the red Sea. Many
of them followed this false Moses, and perished in the Waters; those only being
reported to have been saved who presently owned Christ to be the true God. Our
Coelestine having at three Decembrian Ordinations, made thirty two Presbyters,
twelve Deacons, sixty two Bishops, died, and was buried in the Coemetery of
Priscilla in the Via Salaria, April the 6th. He sat in the Chair eight years,
ten months, seventeen days, and by his death the Sea was vacant twenty one days.

SIXTUS III.
SIXTUS, the third, a Roman, Son of Sixtus, lived in the time of Valentinian.

Who, being Governor of the Western Empire, entered into a Valentinian.
League with Gensericus King of the Vandals, whom he permitted to inhabit part
of Africa, confining themselves within certain Boundaries agreed upon between
them. Genseric being afterward instigated by the Arians, became very zealous
in propagating their Errors, and violently persecuted the Orthodox Bishops.
And Valentinian going to Constantinople, and there marrying Theodosius's
Daughter, the Vandals in the mean time, under Genseric's Conduct, re-took and
sacked Carthage in the five hundred eighty fourth year since its first being in
the hands of the Romans. While these things weret ransacting in Afric, Attila
King of the Huns, not contented to have invaded the two Hungaries, miserably
harasses Macedonia, Mysia, Achaia and the Thraces; and then, that he might have
no sharer in the Kingdom, puts to death his Brother Bleda. Soon after his
growing ambition prompts him to endeavor the gaining of the Western Empire;
and therefore getting together in a very little time a great Army, he begins
his March upon that Design. This Aetius having intelligence of, forthwith sends
Ambassadors to Toulouse to King Theodorick to strike up a Peace; with whom so
strict a League was concluded, that they both jointly engage in the War against
Attila, at a common charge and with equal Forces. The Romans and Theodorick had
for their Auxiliaries, the Alanes, Burgundians, Franks, Saxons, and indeed
almost all the people of the West. At length Attila comes upon them in the
Fields of Catalaunia; and Battle is joined with great Valor and Resolution on
either side. The Fight was long and sharp, a Voice being overheard, none
knowing from whence it came, was the occasion of putting an end to the Dispute.
In this Engagement were slain on both sides eighteen thousand men; neither Army
flying or giving ground. And yet it is said that Theodorick, Father of King
Thurismond, was killed in this Action.

Sixtus had not long enjoyed the Pontificate, before he was publicly accused
by one Bassus; but in a Synod of fifty seven Bishops he made such a Defense of
himself, that he was by them all with one consent acquitted. Bassus his false
Accuser, was with the consent of Valentinian and his Mother Placidia,
excommunicated and condemned to banishment, but with this compassionate
provision, that at the point of death the Viaticum of the Blessed Sacrament
should be denied him; the forfeiture of his Estate, was adjudged not to the
Emperor, but the Church. It Is said, that in the third month of his Exile he
died, and that our Bishop Sixtus did with his own hands wrap up and embalm his
Corpse, and then bury it in S. Peter's Church. Moreover, Sixtus repaired and
enlarged the Church of the Blessed Virgin, which was anciently called by the
name of Liberius, near the Market place of Livia, then had the name of S. Mary
at the Manger, and last of all was called S. Mary's the Geeat. That Sixtus did
very much beautify and make great additions to it, appears from the
Inscription on the front of the first Arch in these words, Xystus Episcopus
Plebi Dei; for according to the Greek Orthography the name begins with X and y,
though by Custom it is now written Sixtus with S and i. To this Church that
Bishop was very liberal and munificent; among other instances adorning with
Porphyry stone the Ambo or Desk where the Gospel and Epistles are read. Besides
what he did himself, at his persuasion the Emperor Valentinian also was very
liberal in works of this nature. For over the Confessory of S. Peter, which he
richly adorned, he placed the Image of (...) Savior of Gold set with Jewels,
and renewed those Silver Ornaments in the Cupola of the Lateran Church which
the Goths had taken away. Some are of an Opinion that in his time one Peter, a
Roman Presbyter, by Nation a Sclavonian, built the Church of S. Sabina upon the
Aventine, not far from the Monastery of S. Boniface, where S. Alexius is
interred. (...) I rather think this to have been done in the Pontificate of
Coelestine the first, as appears from an Inscription in Heroic Verse, yet
remaining, which expresses as much. It Is said also, that at this time (...)
Eusebius of Cremona and Philip, two Scholars of S. Hierom, both very elegant
Writers; as also Eucherius Bishop of Lions, a man of great Learning and
Eloquence; and Hilarious Bishop of Arles, a pious Man, and of no mean parts. Our
Sixtus having employed all his Estate in the building and adorning of Churches,
and relieving the poor, and having made twenty eight Presbyters, twelve
Deacons, fifty two Bishops, died, and was buried in a Vault in the Via
Tiburtina, near the body of S. Laurence. He was in the Chair eight years, nine
days, and by his death the Sea was vacant twenty two days.

LEO I.
LEO, a Tuscan, Son of Quintianus, lived at the time when Attila, having
returned into Hungary from the Fight of Catalonia, and there recruited his
Army, invaded Italy, and first set down before Aquileia a Frontier City of that
Province, which held out a Siege (...) three years. Despairing hereupon of
success, he was just about to raise the Leaguer, when observing the Storks to
carry their young ones out of the City into the Fields, being encouraged by
this Omen, he renews his Batteries, and making a fierce assault, at length
takes the miserable City, sacks and burns it, sparing neither Age nor Sex, but
acting agreeably to the Title he assumed to himself of being God's Scourge. The
Huns having hereby gained an Inlet into Italy, overrun all the Country about
Venice, possessing themselves of the Cities, and demolishing Milain and Pavia.
From hence Attila marching toward Rome, and being come to the place where the
Menzo runs into the Po, ready to pass the River, the holy Bishop Leo, out of a
tender sense of the calamitous state of Italy and of the City of Rome, and with
the advice of Valentinian, goes forth and meets him, persuading him not to
proceed any farther, but to take warning by Alaricus, who soon after his taking
that City was by the Judgment of God removed out of the World. Attila takes the
good Bishops Counsel, being moved thereunto by a Vision which he saw while they
were discoursing together, of two men (supposed to be S. Peter and S. Paul)
brandishing their naked swords over his head, and threatening him with death, if
he were refractory. Desisting therefore from his design, he returns into
Hungary, where not long after he was choked with his own blood, violently
breaking out at his Nostrils, through excess of drinking.

Leo returning to the City, applies himself wholly to the defense of the (...)
Faith, which was now violently opposed by several kinds of Heretics, but
especially by the Nestorians and Eutychians. Nestorius (...) of Constantinople,
affirmed the Blessed Virgin to be Mother not of God, but of Man only, that so
he might make the Humanity and Divinity of Christ to be two distinct persons,
one the Son of God, the other the Son of Man. But Eutyches Abbot of
Constantinople, that he might broach an Heresy in contradiction to the former,
utterly confounded the divine and humane Nature of Christ, asserting them to be
one, and not at all to be distinguished. This Heresy being condemned by
Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, with the consent of Theodosius, a Synod is
called at Ephesus, in which, Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria being President,
Eutyches was restored, and Flavianus censured. But Theodosius dying, and his
successor Marcianus proving a Friend to the Orthodox Doctrine, Leo calls a
Council at Chalcedon, wherein by the authority of six hundred and thirty
Bishops, it was decreed as an Article of Faith, that there are two Natures in
Christ, and that one and the same Christ is God and Man; by which consequently
both Nestorius and Eutyches, the pestilent Patron of the Manichees were
condemned. Moreover, the Books of the Manichees were publicly burnt; and the
pride and heretical Opinions of Dioscorus discountenanced and suppressed. In
the mean time Valentinian being treacherously murdered, Maximus usurps the
Empire, and against her will marries Eudoxia the Widow of Valentinian. Upon
this occasion the Vandals being called out of Afric, Genseric being their
Leader, force their entrance into the City of Rome, throw the Body of Maximus,
who had been killed in the Tumult by one Ursus a Roman Soldier, into the River
Tyber, plunder and burn the City, pillage the Churches and refuse to hearken to
Bishop Leo begging them, what ever spoils they carried away, only to spare the
City it self and the Temples. However, on the fourteenth day from their
entrance into Rome, they left it, and taking away with them Eudoxia and her
Daughter, with a great number of other Captives, they returned into Africa. Leo
being now very intent upon making good the damages sustained from this People,
prevailed upon Demetria, a pious Virgin, to build upon her own ground in the
Via Latina three miles from the City a Church to S. Stephen; and did the same
himself in the Via Appia in honor to S. Cornelius. The Churches which had been
in any part ruined, he repaired; and those of the sacred Vessels belonging to
them, which had been bruised and broken, he caused to be mended, and those
which had been taken away to be made anew; Moreover, he built three Apartments
in the Churches of S. John, S. Peter and S. Paul; appointed certain of the
Roman Clergy, whom he called Cubicularii to keep and take charge of the
Sepulchers of the Apostles; built a Monastery near S. Peter's; introduced into
the Canon of the Mass, the Clause, Hoc sanctum sacrificium, this holy
Sacrifice, etc. and ordained, that no Recluse should be capable of receiving
the Consecrated Veils, unless it did appear that she had preserved her Chastity
spotless for the space of forty years. But while the good man was employed in
these things, there started up of a sudden the Heresy of the Acephali, so
called because they were a company Acephali.
of foolish, undisciplined Schismatics, or, if it be not a quibble, because
they wanted both Brains and Head. These men decried the Council of Chalcedon,
denied the propriety of two Substances in Christ, and asserted, that there
could be but one Nature in one Person. But our Leo abundantly confuted their
absurd Doctrines in his elegant and learned Epistles written to the Faithful
upon that Argument. Men of Note in his time, were Paulinus Bishop of Nola,
Prosper of Aquitain, a learned man, and Mamercus Bishop of Vienne,; who, as
it is said, was the first that appointed processionary Supplications, or
Litanies, upon the occasion of the frequent Earthquakes with which Gaul was at
that time very much afflicted. To conclude, Leo having ordained eighty one
Presbyters, thirty one Deacons, and eighty one Bishops, died, and was buried in
the Vatican near S. Peter, April the 10th. He sat in the Chair twenty one
years, one month, thirteen days, and by his death the Sea was vacant eight days.

HILARIOUS I.
HILARIOUS, a Sardinian, the Son of Crispinus, continued in the Chair till the
time of the Emperor Leo,

Who being chosen Emperor upon the death of Marcianus, Leo Emperor.
creates his Son, of his own name, Augustus. During his Reign the Roman State
suffered very much by reason of certain Ambitious men, who endeavored to get
the Government into their own hands. And Genseric the Vandal King being tempted
with so fair an opportunity, sails out of Afrique into Italy with design to
gain the Empire for himself. Leo having intelligence hereof, sends Basilicus a
Patrician, with a mighty Fleet, to the Assistance of Anthemius the Emperor of
the West; These two with joint force and courage meet Genseric near Populonia,
and force him to an Engagement at Sea, in which being routed with a great
slaughter of his men, he was glad to make an inglorious flight into Africa
again. In the mean time Ricimer a Patrician, having on the Mountains of Trent
conquered Biorgus King of the Alanes, and being puffed up with that Victory,
was purposed to attempt the City of Rome, had not (...) Bishop of Pavia made
him and Anthemius Friends.

Hilary, notwithstanding this confused state of things, did not neglect the
care of Ecclesiastical Affairs. For he ordained, that no Bishop should choose
his own Successor; (a Constitution which belongs as well to all other
Ecclesiastical Degrees as that of Episcopacy) he also made a Decretal which he
dispersed throughout Christendom; and wrote certain Epistles concerning the
Catholic Faith, by which the three Synods of Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon were
confirmed, and the Heretics Eutyches, Nestorius, and Dioscorus, with their
Adherents, condemned. In the Baptistery of the Lateran Church he built three
Oratories, which were adorned with Gold and precious Stones, their Gates of
Brass covered with wrought Silver; those he dedicated to S. John Baptist, S.
John Evangelist, and S. Cross. In the last of these was reposited some of the
wood of the Cross, nclosed in Gold and set with Jewels; and a Golden Agnus upon
a Pillar of Onyx. He added moreover the Oratory of S. Stephen, built two
Libraries adjoining, and founded a Monastery. I shall not here recite the
almost numberless Donations which he made to several Churches, of Gold, Silver,
Marble, and Jewels. Some tell us, that Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus
Bishop of Troyes lived in his time, both great supporters of the Christian
cause, which was now very much undermined by the endeavors of (...) (...) and
Pelagians. Gennadius also Bishop of Constantinople did great service to the
Church by the integrity of his Life and the excellency of his Parts and
Learning. During the Pontificate of our Hilary, Victorinus of Aquitain, a
famous Arithmetician, reduced the Easter account Victorinus.
to the course of the Moon; far out-doing Eusebius and Theophilus, who had
attempted it before him. And among those that flourished at this time, by some
is reckoned Merline the famous English Merline.
Bard, concerning whom we are told more than enough. As for Hilary himself,
having performed the duty of a good Bishop, both in building and adorning of
Churches, and also in Teaching, Admonishing, Censuring and giving Alms where
need required; and having also ordained twenty five Presbyters, five Deacons,
twenty two Bishops; he died, and was buried in the Sepulcher of S. Laurence,
near the body of Bishop Sixtus. He sat in the Chair seven years, three months,
ten days, and by his death the Sea was vacant ten days.

SIMPICIUS I.
SIMPLICIUS, Son of Castinus, born at Tivoli, was Bishop during the Reigns of
Leo the second, and Zeno.

For Leo the first falling sick, makes choice of Leo the second, Leo II. and
Zeno.
Son of Zeno Isauricus, and his own Nephew by Ariadne his Sister, to be his
Successor; who not long after being seized by a violent Distemper, and
apprehending himself to be at the point of death, leaves the Empire to his
Father Zeno. In the mean time Odoacer invading Italy with a great Army of his
Heruli and Turingians, conquers and takes Prisoner Orestes, a Noble Roman, near
Pavia, and then causes him to be put to death in the sight of his whole Army at
Placentia. Hereupon Zeno pitying the calamitous state of Italy, speedily sends
Theodoric King of the Goths, a man whom he had before very much esteemed, with
a mighty force to oppose him, who having in a pitched Battle not far from
Aquileia near the River Sontio overcome Odoacer's Captains, and having
oftentimes the like success against Odoacer himself, at length he besieged him
three years together in Ravenna, and reduced him to that extremity, that, with
the advice of John the Bishop of that City, he consented to admit Theodoric as
his Partner in the Empire. But the day following both Odoacer and his Son, were
contrary to promise and agreement slain; by which means Theodorick possessed
himself of the Government of all Italy without any opposition.

In the mean time Simplicius dedicated the Churches of S. Stephen the
Protomartyr on Mons Caolius, and that of S. Andrew the Apostle not far from S.
Mary's the Great; in which there appear to this day some footsteps of
Antiquity, which I have many a time beheld with sorrow for their neglect, to
whose charge such noble piles of building now ready to fall are committed, That
this Church was of his founding appears by certain Verses wrought in Mosaic
work which I have seen in it. He dedicated also another Church to S. Stephen
near the Licinian Palace, where the Virgins body had been buried. He also
appointed the Weekly-waitings of the Presbyters in their turns at the Churches
of S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. Laurence the Martyr, for the receiving of
Penitents, and baptizing of Proselytes. Moreover, he divided the City among the
Presbyters into five Precincts or Regions; the first of S. Peter, 2. S. Paul,
3. S. Laurence, 4. S. John Lateran, 5. S. Maria Maggiore. He also ordained,
that no Clergyman should hold a Benefice of any Layman, a Constitution which
was afterward confirmed by Gregory and other Popes. At this time the Bishop of
Rome's Primacy was countenanced by the Letters of Acacius Bishop of
Constantinople, and Timothy a learned man, in which they beg him to censure
Peter Mog Bishop of Alexandria, an assertour of the Eutychian Heresy. Which
was accordingly done, but with Proviso, that he should be received into the
Communion of the Church again, if within a certain time prefixed he retracted
his Errors. Some say, that during his Pontificate lived Remigius Bishop of
Reims, who (as History tells us) baptized Clodoveus the French King. Now also
Theodorus Bishop (...) Syria wrote largely against Eutyches, and compiled ten
Books of (...) History in imitation of Eusebius Coesariensis. At this time
almost all Egypt was infected with the heretical Doctrine of Dioscorus,
concerning whom we have already spoken; and Huneric King of the Vandals, a
Zealot (...) the (...) Faction, raised a Persecution against the Orthodox
Christians in Afrique. Upon this Eudocia, Niece to Theodosius, a Catholic
Lady, and Wife to Huneric, left her heretical Husband upon pretense of a
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem to perform a Vow which she had made; but upon so long
a Journey, the effect of which proved intolerable to the tenderness of her sex,
she there soon died. It Is said, that at this time were found the bones of the
Prophet Elisha, which were carried into Alexandria; as also the body of S.
Barnabas the Apostle, together with the Gospel of S. Matthew, written with his
own hand. As for Simplicius himself, having by his Constitutions and Donations
very muchpromoted the interest of the Church of Rome, and having at several
Ordinations made fifty eight Presbyters, eleven Deacons, eighty six Bishops, he
died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church on the second day of March; He was
inthe Chair fifteen years, one month, seven days, and by his death the Sea was
vacant twenty six days.

FELIX III.
FELIX, by birth a Roman, Son of Felix a Presbyter was Bishop from the time of
Odoacer, whose power in Italy lasted fourteen years, till the Reign of
Theodoric.

Who though he made Ravenna the seat of the Empire, yet the City Theodoric.
of Rome was much indebted to his Bounty. For he rebuilt the Sepulcher of
Octavius, exhibited shows to the people according to ancient custom, repaired
the public Buildings and Churches, and indeed neglected nothing that became a
good and generous Prince. And to confirm and establish the Empire, he married
Andefleda Daughter of Clodoveus King of France, and gave in marriage his Sister
to Huneric King of the Vandals, and one of his Daughters to Alaric King of the
Visigoths, and the other to King Gondibate.

Felix now fully understanding that Peter Mog the Eutychian, who had been
banished for his heretical Opinions upon the complaint and at the desire of
Acacius, was by the same Acacius recalled from Exile, suspected that there was
a private Agreement between them, and therefore excommunicated them both by the
authority of the Apostolic See, which was confirmed in a Synod of the
Orthodox. But three years after the Emperor Zeno testifying that they were
penitent, Felix sends two Bishops, Messenus and Vitalis, with full power, upon
enquiry into the truth of their repentance, to absolve them. These Legates
arriving at the City Heraclea, were soon corrupted with bribes, and neglected
to act according to their Commission. Whereupon Felix, out of a just
indignation, having first called a Council upon that occasion, excommunicates
them too, as Simoniacks and betrayers of the trust reposed in them. Though
Messenus, who confessed his fault, and begged time to evince the sincerity of
his repentance, had it accordingly granted him. The same Felix also built the
Church of S. Agapetus, near that of S. Laurence, and ordained that Churches
should be consecrated by none but Bishops. It Is said, that at this time
Theodorus a Greek Presbyter wrote against the Heretics a Book of the Harmony
of the Old and new Testament; and some reckon among the men of Note in this
Age, the Learned and famous Divine John Damascene, who wrote the Book of
Sentences, imitating therein Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, and Didymus
of Alexandria, and compiled also certain Treatises of Medicin, in which he
gives an account of the Causes and Cure of Diseases. Our Felix having at two
Decembrian Ordinations made twenty eight Presbyters, five Deacons, thirty
Bishops; died, and was buried in the Church of S. Paul. He sat in the Chair
eight years, eleven months, seventeen days, and by his death the Sea was vacant
five days.

GELASIUS I.
GELASIUS, an African, Son of Valerius, was Bishop of Rome at the time when
Theodoric made War upon his Wives Father Theodoric
Clodoveus the French King, for that he had slain his Daughter's Husband Alaric
King of the Visigoths, and seized Gascoigne. They were both allied to him by
marriage; but the cause of Alaric seemed to him the more just, and therefore he
preferred his Son-in-law, before his Father-in-law. And gaining the Victory
over the French in a very important Battle, he recovers Gascoigne, and
undertakes the present Government of it, till Almaric the son of Alaric should
come to Age. The same Theodoric to his Conquest of Italy added that of Sicily,
Dalmatia, Liburnia, Illyricum, Gallia Narbonensis, and Burgundy. He also walled
round the City of Trent, and to secure Italy from a foreign Invasion, upon the
Frontiers of it near Aost placed the Heruli, whose King being yet a Minor he
made his adopted Son.

Gelasius in the mean time condemns to banishment all the Manichees that should
be found in the City, and causes their books to be publicly burnt near S.
Mary's Church. And being satisfied of the repentance of Messenus, who had given
in his Retractation in Writing, at the request of the Synod he absolved him,
and restored him to his Bishopric. But having intelligence that several
murders and other notorious outrages were committed in the Greek Churches by
the factious followers of Peter Mog and Acacius, he forthwith sends his Legates
thither, with Commission to Excommunicate for ever all those who did not
immediately recant their Errors; a new and unusual severity, whereas the
Primitive Church was wont to wait long in hopes that Separatists would at
length return to her Bosom. At this time John Bishop of Alexandria, an Orthodox
Prelate, and who had been very much persecuted by these seditious people, fled
for resuge to the Bishop of Rome, who very kindly and courteously received him.
The Churches which Gelasius consecrated were, that of S. Euphemia the Martyr in
Tivoli, that of S. Nicander and Eleutherius in the Via Labicana, and that of S.
Mary in the Via Laurentina, twenty miles from Rome. He had a great love and
honor for the Clergy, and was very liberal and charitable to the poor. He
delivered the City of Rome from many dangers, and particularly from that of
dearth and scarcity. He composed Hymns in imitation of S. Ambrose, published
five Books against Eutyches and Nestorius, and two against Arius, made very
elegant and grave Orations, and wrote weighty and learned Epistles to his
Friends of the household of Faith; all which Works of his are at this time to be
seen in the public Libraries. Some tell us that he Excommunicated Anastasius,
successor to Zeno in the Eastern Empire, for favoring Acacius and other
Heretics; which is an argument as clear as the Sun, that the Bishop of Rome
has power to Excommunicate any Prince who is erroneous in the Faith, if he
continue refractary after Admonition. The same course likewise he took with the
Vandals and their King, who being infected with the Arian Heresy, proved now
very cruel and barbarous persecutours of the Orthodox. At the beginning of his
Pontificate lived Germanus and Epiphanius, the latter Bishop of Pavia, the
former of Capua; men who by the authority which the Sanctity of their Lives had
gained them, and by their humble and obliging deportment, wrought so much upon
the minds of the barbarous Invadors, that afflicted Italy fared the better for
their sakes. At the same time also Lannociatus Abbat of Chartres, with
Aurelianus and Mezentius of Poictiers, persons of great Piety and Learning,
gained so much ground in Gaul, that they persuaded Clodoveus the French King,
and his Queen Crocildis to become Christians, and to undertake the protection
of the Catholic Faith throughout their Dominions; though some attribute this
honor to Remigius, as has been already said. Gelasius having ordained thirty
two Presbyters, two Deacons, sixty seven Bishops, died, and was buried in S.
Peter's Church, November 21. He was in the Chair four years, eight months,
seventeen days, and by his death the Sea was vacant seven days.

ANASTASIUS II.
ANASTASIUS the second, a Roman, Son of Fortunatus, was Contemporary with the
Emperor Anastasius.

At which time Transamund, King of the Vandals, shut up the Anastasius.
Churches of the Orthodox Clergy, and banished one hundred and twenty Bishops
into the Island of Sardinia. It Is reported also that one Olympius, an Arian
Bishop, having publicly in the Baths at Carthage declared his detestation of
the Doctrine of the Trinity, was immediately smitten and his body burnt with
three flashes of Lightning. And when Barbas, another Bishop of the same
Faction, was going to baptize a certain person in this form of words, Barbas
baptizeth thee in the name of the Father, by the Son, and in the Holy Ghost,
it is said, the Water disappeared; which Miracle so wrought upon the man who was
to be baptized, that he immediately came over to the Orthodox.

It was this Bishop Anastasius, as some Writers tell us, who Excommunicated the
Emperor Anastasius for favoring Acacius; though afterward being himself
seduced by the same Heretic, and endeavoring privately to recall him from
Exile, he thereby very much alienated the minds of his Clergy, who for that
reason, and also because without the consent of the Catholics, he communicated
with Photinus a Deacon of Thessalonica, and an assertour of the Acacian (...),
withdrew themselves from him. It Is generally reported, that the divine
vengeance pursuing him for this Apostasy, he died suddenly, and some say that
the particular manner of his death was, that going to ease Nature he purged out
his Bowels into the Privy. In his time Fulgentius an African, Bishop of
Fulgentius.
Ruspoe, though he were among the other Orthodox Bishops of Africa banished
into Sardinia by Transamund, yet neglected nothing that might contribute to the
propagating of the Catholic Faith, whether by Exhortation, Preaching, or
Admonition. He likewise published several Books of the Trinity, of Free Will,
and the Rule of Faith; and besides the several elegant and grave Homilies he
made to the people, he wrote against the Pelagian Heresy. The Learned
Egesippus also, who composed Egesippus.
Monastical Constitutions, and in an elegant style wrote the Life of S.
Severinus the Abbat was at this time very serviceable to the Church. Moreover,
Faustus a Gallican Bishop was now a considerable Writer, but among all his
Works the most in esteem was his Tract against Arius, wherein he maintains the
persons in the Trinity to be Co-essential. He wrote also against those who
asserted any created Being to be incorporeal, demonstrating both by the
Judgment of the Fathers, and from the Testimonies of holy Writ, that God only
is purely and properly incorporeal. But I shall here conclude the Pontificate
of Anastasius, who at one Decembrian Ordination, having made twelve Presbyters,
and sixteen Bishops, was buried in S. Peter's Church November 19. He sat in the
Chair one year, ten months, twenty four days, and by his death the Sea was
vacant four days.

SYMMACHUS I.
SYMMACHUS, a Sardinian, Son of Fortunatus, succeeded Anastasius, though not
without great Controversy and after a long bandying of two contrary Factions.
For while one part of the Clergy choose Symmachus in the Church of S. John
(...), another part of them in S. Maria Maggiore make choice of one Laurence;
whereupon the Senate and people of Rome being divided into two Parties, the
dissension rose to such an height, that to compromise the business, a Council
was by mutual consent called at Ravenna; where the whole matter being discussed
in the presence of Theodoric, he at length determined on the side of Symmachus,
and confirmed him in the Pontificate, who by a singular act of Grace made his
very Competitour Laurence Bishop of Nocera. Yet about four years after some
busy and factious Clergymen, being countenanced and assisted by Festus and
Probinus two of the Senatorian Order, set up for Laurence again; upon which
King Theodoric was so highly displeased, that he sends Peter Bishop of (...) to
Rome, to depose them both and possess himself of the Chair. But Symmachus
called a Synod of an hundred and twenty Bishops, wherein with great presence of
mind he purged himself of all things (...) to his Charge, and by a general
suffrage obtained the banishment of Laurence and Peter who had occasioned all
this mischief. Hereupon so great a (...) arose in the City, that multitudes
both of the Clergy and Laity were slain in all parts, not so much as the
Monastic Virgins escaping. In this Tumult Gordianus a Presbyter and a very
good man was killed in the Church of S. Peter ad Vincula; nor had an end been
put to slaughter here, had not Faustus the Consul, in compassion to the Clergy,
appeared in Arms against Probinus the Author of so great a Calamity.

After this the Christians having some small respite, Clodoveus banishing the
Arian Heretics, restores the Orthodox, and Constitutes Paris the Capital City
of his Kingdom.

Symmachus at this time expelled the Manichees out of the City, and caused
their Books to be burned before the Gates of S. John Lateran. Several Churches
he built from the ground, and several others he repaired and beautified. That
of S. Andrew the Apostle near S. Peter's he entirely built, enriching it with
diverse Ornaments of Silver and Gold; and he adorned S. Peter's it self and its
Portico with checkered Marble, making the steps of Ascent into it more and
larger than they were before. Moreover, he erected Episcopal Palaces. He built
also the Church of S. Agatha the Martyr in the Via Aurelia, and that of S.
Pancrace. He repaired and adorned with painting the Cupola of S. Paul's; and
built from the foundations the Church of SS. Silvester and Martin; the Altars
of which he very richly adorned. He made also the steps that lead into the
Church of S. John and S. Paul, and enlarged S. Michaels. He built from the
ground the Oratories of Cosmus and Damianus, being assisted in that work by
Albinus and Glaphyras, two men of principal Note. Besides this, near the
Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul, he builded two Hospitals, making provision of
all things necessary for the poor who should dwell in them. For he was in all
respects very charitable and sent supplies of Money and Clothes to the Bishops
and other Clergy in Africa and Sardinia, who had suffered banishment for the
profession of the true Religion. He repaired the Church of S. Felicitas, and
the Cupola of that of S. Agnes which was decayed and almost ready to fall. He
also at his own charge redeemed multitudes of Captives in several Provinces. He
ordained that on Sundays, and the The days on which they suffered were
anciently so called.
Birth-days of the Martyrs the Hymn, Glory be to God on High should be sung,
and indeed, left nothing undone which he thought might tend to the Glory of
Almighty God. In his time Gennadius Bishop of Marseille, a great imitatour of
S. Augustine, did good service to the Church. He wrote one Book against
Heresies, wherein he shows what is necessary to every man in order to his
Salvation, and another de viris illustribus, in imitation of S. Hierom. As for
Symmachus, having at several Ordinations made ninety Presbyters, sixteen
Deacons, one hundred twenty two Bishops, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's
Church July the 19th. He sat in the Chair fifteen years, six months, twenty two
days, and by his death the Sea was vacant seven days.

HORMISDA I.
HORMISDA, the Son of Justus, born at (...), lived in the time of Theodoric and
Anastasius, as far as to the Consulship of Boethius and Symmachus.

These two, upon suspicion of designing against his Government, were by
Theodoric at first banished, and afterward imprisoned. Boethius during his
confinement wrote several things extant to (...).
this day, and translated and made Commentaries upon the greatest part of
Aristotle's Works. He was thoroughly skilled in the Mathematics, as his Books of
Music and Arithmetic clearly demonstrate. But at length both he and Symmachus
were put to death by the order of Theodoric. Some tell us, that the cause of
Boethius his sufferings was the zeal he showed in opposing the Arians, who were
favored by Theodoric; but I think the former Opinion to be more probable.

Hormisda, with the advice of Theodoric, held now a Provincial Synod at Rome,
in which the Eutychians were again condemned by universal consent. He also sent
Letters and Messengers to John Bishop of Constantinople, admonishing him to
renounce that Heresy, and to believe there are two Natures in Christ, the
Divine and Humane. But John continued refractory, trusting to the interest he
had with the Emperor Anastasius, who not long after was struck dead by a
Thunderbolt, which was believed to be a just Judgment upon him, both for his
patronizing so pernicious an Heresy, and especially for his ill usage of the
Legates sent to him by Hormisda, whom contrary to the Law of Nations he treated
very contumeliously, and sent them home in a shattered leaky Vessel, ordering
them to return directly into Italy without touching at any shore in Greece.
It Is said, that he bid them tell the Bishop, that he must know it to be the
part of an Emperor to Command, not to obey the Dictates of the Bishop of Rome
or any other. These Legates were Euodius Bishop of Pavia, Fortunatus Bishop of
Catina, Venantius a Presbyter of Rome, and Vitalis a Deacon. Anastasius dying
in the twenty seventh year of his Reign. Justine a Patron of the Catholic
Faith succeeds Justinus.
him, who forthwith sends Ambassadors to the Bishop of Rome, to acknowledge
the Authority of the Apostolic See, and to desire the Bishop to interpose his
Ecclesiastical Power for the settling the peace of the Church. Whereupon
Hormisda, with the consent of Theodoric, sends Germanus Bishop of Capua, John
and Blandus Presbyters, and Felix and (...) Deacons his Legates to Justine, by
whom they were received with all imaginable expressions and testimonies of
Honor (...) Respect, John the Bishop of Constantinople with multitudes of the
Orthodox Clergy and other Persons of principal Note going forth, in Complement
to meet them and congratulate their Arrival. But the followers of Acacius
dreading their coming, had shut themselves up in a very strong Church, and upon
Consultation what to do, sent Messengers to the Emperor, declaring that they
would by no means subscribe to the determination of the Apostolic See, unless
an account were first given them why Acacius was Excommunicated. But Justine
soon forced them out of the Church and City too; and Hormisda dealt in the same
manner with the Manichees, who began to spring up afresh in Rome, whose Books
he caused to be burned before the Gates of S. John Lateran.

About this time Transamund King of the Vandals dying in Afric, his Son (...),
whom he had by the Captive Daughter of Valentinian, succeeded him in the
Kingdom. He inherited none of his Fathers Errors, but following the Counsel of
his religious Mother, re-call'd all the Catholics whom Transamund had
banished, and permitted them the free exercise of their Religion. At this time
also several rich Presents were sent to Rome for the Ornament of the Churches
there by Clodoveus King of France and Justine the Emperor. King Theodoric also
richly adorned the Church of S. Peter; nor was Hormisda himself behind these
Princes in bounty and munificence to the Church. Having settled things according
to his mind, and ordained twenty one Presbyters, fifty five Bishops, he died,
and was buried in S. Peter's Church, August the 6th, in the Consulship of
Maximus. He sat in the Chair nine years, eighteen days, and by his death the Sea was vacant six days.

JOHN I.
JOHN by birth a Tuscan, Son of Constantius, was in the Chair from the
Consulship of Maximus to that of Olybrius, in the time of King Theodoric and
the Emperor Justine,

Who out of his great zeal for the Orthodox Faith, and that he might utterly
extinguish the name of Heretics, banished the Arians, and gave their Churches
to the Catholics. This was so highly resented by Theodoric, that he sends John
himself with Theodorus and the two Agapeti his Ambassadors to Justine to
advise him to restore the Arians, or upon his refusal to let him know that he
would pull down all the Catholic Churches in Italy. These Ambassadors were at
first very kindly and honorably received. But having given an account of their
Embassy, and finding Justine wholly averse to grant what they desired, they
betook themselves to Tears and Prayers, humbly beseeching him to prevent the
ruin of Italy and all the Orthodox Christians in it; by which means the good
Prince was prevailed upon to recall the Arians, and to grant them a Toleration.
Some write that it was in this Bishops time that Symmachus and Boethius were
brought back from Exile, imprisoned, and slain by the cruelty and rage of
Theodoric. However, certain it is that they were put to death by Theodoric's
order; and it matters not much whether it were in the Pontificate of Hormisda
or John. Which John returning from Constantinople, Theodoric was so highly
incensed against him for his agreement with the Emperor Justine both in Faith
and manners, that it was a chance that he had not taken away his life
immediately; but throw him into Prison he did at Ravenna, where through stench
and nastiness and want of necessary provision, the good man at length died. A
Cruelty for which the divine Vengeance sorely punished Theodoric not long
after, for he died suddenly of a fit of an Apoplexy, and his Soul (if you will
take the word of a devout Hermit who reported it) was cast into the flames of
the Island Lipara.

Theodoric was succeeded in the Kingdom by his Daughter Amalasuntha, with her
Son Athalaric, whom she had by her Husband Eucherius. A Woman who with a
prudence above her Sex, rectified her Fathers ill Decrees, restored the
confiscated Estates of Boethius and Symmachus, to their Children, and caused
her Son to be instructed in all kinds of good Literature, though she were
herein opposed by the Goths, who cried out, that their King was not to be bred
a Scholar but a Soldier. Much about this time died Justine, being very Aged,
leaving the Empire to his Sisters Son Justinian; and Clodoveus King of France,
leaving four Sons his Successors in that Kingdon. Persons of Note and esteem at
this time were Benedict of Nursia, who settled among the Italians the Rules and
Benedict.
Canons of the Monastic life; and Bridget a devout Virgin of Scotland, Bridget.
and John Presbyter of Antioch who wrote much against those that held that
Christ should be worshipped in one Nature only. To these Isidore adds one
Cyprignius a Spanish Bishop who wrote elegantly upon the Apocalypse.

Our John before he went to Constantinople had repaired three Coemeteries,
namely that of Nereus and Achilleus in the Via Ardeatina, that of the Martyrs
SS. Felix and Adauctus, and that of Priscilla. He also adorned the Altar of S.
Peter's with Gold and Jewels. He likewise brought with him from Constantinople,
a Paten of Gold, and a Chalice of Gold set with precious stones, the Presents
of the Emperor Justine; but these I suppose to have been lost together with
his life. At several Ordinations he consecrated fifteen Bishops. It Is said that
his Body was brought from Ravenna to Rome, and buried in S. Peter's Church,
July the 27th. Olybrius being then Consul. He sat in the Chair two years, eight
months, and by his death the Seewas vacant fifty eight days.

FELIX IV.
FELIX the fourth, a Sammite, the Son of Costorius, lived in the time of the
Emperor Justinian,

Whose General Belisarius was victorious over the Persians, and passing into
Afric by his singular courage and conduct subdued and almost quite rooted out
the Vandals, whose King Gilimer he took Prisoner, and brought him home with him
in Triumph. About this time Amalasuntha having a long time lived very uneasily
with her malecontented Goths, and having buried her wayward and unruly Son
Athalaric, associates her kinsman Theodatus in the Government. This Theodatus
was so great a Proficient in Greek and Latin Learning, that he wrote an elegant
History of his own times, and was thoroughly skilled in the Platonic
Philosophy. And though he were not naturally of an active Martial temper, yet
at the desire of Amalasuntha he undertook a War against the Burgundians and
Alemanni, and managed it very succcesfully.

Felix in the mean while being careful of the affairs of the Church,
excommunicated the Patriarch of Constantinople for Heresy, and built in the
Via Sacra near the Forum Romanum the Church of S. Cosmus and Damianus, as
appears from the Verses yet remaining, wrought in Mosaic work. He also
rebuilt the Church of S. Saturninus in the Via Salaria, which had been
consumed by fire. Some write that in this Age lived Cassiodorus, who while he
was a Senator wrote several Cassiodorus.
things in Politics, and when he became a Monk composed a Comment upon the
Psalms. It Is said also that Priscian of Caesarea, the famous Priscian.
Grammarian, now wrote his Book of Grammar. Arator likewise a Subdeacon of
Rome translated the Gospels into Hexameter Verse; and Justinian Bishop of
Valence, was had in great esteem for what he preached and wrote concerning the
Christian Faith. As for Felix himself, having ordained fifty five Presbyters,
four Deacons, twenty nine Bishops, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's
Church, October the 12th. He was in the Chair four years, two months, thirteen
days, and by his death the Sea was vacant three days.

BONIFACE II.
BONIFACE the second, a Roman, Son of Sigismund, was also in the time of
Justinian,

A Prince whose vast Parts and Learning qualified him for that great Work which
for the public Good he undertook, of collecting and methodizing the scattered
Roman Laws, and retrenching those which were useless and superfluous. Yet
herein he made use of the Advice and assistance of John a Patrician,
Trebonianus, Theophilus, and Dorotheus, men of great Learning and Authority.
With their help an immense number of near two thousand Volumes of Decrees made
from the building of the City to this time, confusedly heaped together, were
digested under their respective Titles into fifty Books, which are sometimes
called Digests, and sometimes Pandects, because they contain the whole Civil
Law. He made also an Epitome of the Laws in four Books, which go under the name
of Institutes, or Justinian's Code. Moreover, some tell us that Justinian wrote
certain Books concerning the Incarnation of our Lord, and that at his own
charge he built the Temple of S. Sophia, than which there is not a more noble
and magnificent Pile of Buildings in the World.

In his Reign (...) was made Bishop of Rome, though not without some
opposition; for the Clergy being divided, one Party of them chose Dioscorus
into the place of Felix deceased. The Contention about this matter lasted
twenty eight days, but the death of Dioscorus put an end to the Controversy.
Things being quiet, Boniface applied himself to the settling of the Church, and
decreed, that no Bishop should appoint his own successor, which was afterward
confirmed by several following Bishops of Rome. He decreed also, that upon the
decease of any Bishop of Rome, another should be chosen to succeed him, if it
might be, within three days, to prevent any bandying or dissension which might
be occasioned by delay. He ordained likewise, that the Clergy should be
separated and placed distinct from the Laity at the time of Celebration. At the
same time many of the Roman Nobility were so wrought upon by the Sanctity of
Benedict that they retired to Mount Cassino and became Monks there; among whom
the more eminent were Maurus and Placidius. Other men of Note and esteem were
Dionysius the Abbat, famous for the extraordinary Skill and Judgment which he
showed in his Paschal Cycle; Famundus, whose writings against certain
Eutychians then springing up were very much commended; and Martin, who by his
Preaching and Writings converted the People of Soissons from the Arian Heresy
to the Truth. But Boniface having sat in the Pontifical Chair two years, two
days, died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then vacant two
months.

JOHN II.
(...) the second, a Roman, Son of Projectus, lived in the time of Justinian,
and soon after his entrance upon the Pontificate condemned Anthemius an Arian
Bishop; some say that he had been Bishop of Constantinople. Justinian, to show
his (...) to the Roman See, sent Hypatius and Demetrius two Bishops to (...),
both to complement John in his name, and to make to S. Peter's Church several
rich Presents. During this Embassy, Mundus Justinian's General, took the
strong City of Salona, and gained a Victory over the Goths, though not without
great loss on the Conquering side. For Mundus himself, together with his Son a
Valiant and brave young Gentleman, was slain in that Engagement; the news of
which misforfortune was extremely laid to heart by Justinian, he having always
had a great value for that Leaders Courage and Fidelity. Our Bishop John, of
whom Historians say very little, having at one Ordination made (...)
Presbyters, twenty one Bishops, died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, May
27. He sat in the Chair two years, four months, and by his death the Sea was
vacant six days.

AGAPETUS I.
AGAPETUS, a Roman, Son of Gordianus a Presbyter of the Church of S. John and
S. Paul, being created Bishop by Theodatus, who was by him forthwith sent to
the Emperor Justinian, was highly incensed against that King for his having
first banished Amalasuntha the Mother of Athalaric into the Island of the Lake
of Bolsena, and afterward caused her to be put to death there. For she was a
Woman so well acquainted with Greek and Latin Learning, that she durst engage
in Disputation with any professed Scholar. Moreover, she was so thoroughly
skilled in the Languages of all the barbarous Invadors of the Roman Empire,
that she could discourse any of them without an Interpreter. Her Death
Justinian so highly resented, that he threatened to make War upon Theodatus for
that reason. Hereupon Agapetus was sent to him, who being received with great
honor and affection, and having obtained the peace he was sent to sue for, he
was then practiced with to confirm the Eutychian Opinions. But Justinian
finding that the good man utterly detested any such proposal, from desiring and
(...) he fell to Threats and Menaces. Upon which Agapetus told him, that he
should have been glad to be sent to Justinian, a Christian Prince, but that he
found a Diocletian an Enemy and Persecutor of Christians. By this boldness of
Speech and Gods appointment Justinian was so wrought upon that he embraced the
Catholic Faith, and having despos'd Anthemius Bishop of Constantinople, who
patronized the Eutychian Heresy, put into his place Menas one of the Orthodox,
who was consecrated by Agapetus himself. But not long after Agapetus died at
Constantinople, and his body being wrapped up in Lead was conveyed to Rome, and
buried in S. Peter's Church. He sat in the Chair eleven months, twenty one
days, and by his death the Sea was vacant one month, twenty nine days.

SYLVERIUS.
SYLVERIUS, a Campanian, Son of Bishop Hormisda, was chosen Bishop of Rome at
the command of Theodatus, though till this time the Emperors only, not the
Kings, had interposed their Authority in that matter. But the Menaces of
Theodatus prevailed, who had threatened to put to death every man of the Clergy
who would not subscribe his name to the choice of Sylverius.

For this reason, and that he might also revenge the death of Amala. suntha,
Justinian sends Belisarius a Patrician with an Army into Italy. In his passage
thither he first put in at Sicily, and brought that Island to the Emperors
devotion. In the mean time Theodatus dying, and the Goths having chosen
themselves a King against the will of Justinian, Belisarius quits Sicily that
he might deliver Italy from the Tyranny of the Goths. Coming into Campania, and
the City of Naples refusing to obey the Emperors Summons, he took it by Storm
and plundered it, putting to the Sword all the Goths that were in Garrison
there, and a great part of the Citizens, carrying away their Children and what
other spoil they could lay their hands on. The Soldiers pillaged the very
Churches, violated the chastity of Cloystered Virgins, and committed all the
outrages which are wont to be acted by an enraged victorious Enemy. Marching
hastily from thence with his Army to Rome, and entering the City by night, he
struck such a terror into the Goths, who defended it, that they all left the
Gates and the Walls and fled to Ravenna. But Belisarius apprehending that
Vitiges might surprise him with a mighty Force, which he should not be able to
fight in open Field, with all possible dispatch fortified the City with
Trenches and Bulwarks where occasion was for them. Soon after Vitiges according
to his expectation coming toward him with a mighty Army, for it consisted of
an hundred thousand men, Belisarius, who had not above five thousand, thought
it best to keep within the City. Vitiges encamped between two Aqueducts, the
one of which ran toward the Via Latina, the other toward the Via Proenestina,
and both met five miles from the City. And that the City might not be supplied
with Water, he cut off all the Conduits and conveyances which were fourteen.
Moreover, he sent part of his Army who possessed themselves of the Port, and
thereby reduced the Romans to the double Calamity of War and Famine.

In the mean time, at the motion of Vigilius a Deacon and Surrogate of Rome,
the Empress Theodora laid her Commands, joined with Threatenings, upon
Sylverius, to banish Menas from Constantinople, and to restore Anthemius, who,
as we have said, had been deposed for patronizing the Eutychian Heresy. Which
when he refused to do, she writes to Belisarius, ordering him to depose
Sylverius, and to put Vigilius into his place. But Belisarius being wholly
taken up with the defense of the City, left that affair to the management of
his Wife Antonina, who upon the depositions of certain Witnesses suborned by
Vigilius, attesting that Sylverius had a design to betray the City into the
hands of the Goths, not only compelled him to quit the Pontificate and to enter
into a Monastic life, but also banished him to the Island Pontia, where he
died, not without the reputation of having been a very holy man. It Is said, that
at this time the Gauls dispatched Messengers to Benedict, desiring him to send
to them any one of his Disciples to instruct them in the Rules of the Monastic
life. Upon which Benedict sent Maurus, who by his own Example instructed them
in a good and happy course of living, and also set up several Monasteries among
them. Vigilius, at the desire of the Roman Clergy, in pursuance of Antonina's
determination, was created Bishop of Rome; Sylverius after his possession of
the Chair one year, five months, and twelve days, died, as we have already
said, in Pontia, and was buried June the 20th. Upon his death the Sea was
vacant six days.

VIGILIUS I.
VIGILIUS, a Roman, his Father a man of consular Dignity, was likewise in
Justinian's Reign created Bishop of Rome, in whose time a fifth Synod was held
at Constantinople against Theodorus and other Heretics, who held that the
Blessed Virgin brought forth Man only, not God-man; in this Synod therefore it
was decreed, that the Blessed Virgin should be styled (...) i. e. the Mother of
God.

Belisarius had now defended the City one whole year and nine days, and having
in this time received fresh supplies of Men, he resolved to march out and to
engage the Enemy in a pitched Battle. But Vitiges distrusting his own Force,
sets fire to his Tents, and hastens by great Marches to Ravenna. Belisarius
with all possible speed follows him, and entering the City, takes Vitiges
himself Prisoner with all his Family and a great part of his Nobles; and having
recovered almost all Italy, in the fifth year from his arrival there, he
carries them with him to Constantinople. The same Belisarius with incredible
expedition quelled the Moors who were harassing Africa, and out of the spoils
of that Victory he made two very rich Presents to S. Peter's Church in Rome. He
built also two Hospitals for Strangers at his own charge, one in the Via Lata,
the other in the Via Flaminia; and founded the Monastery of S. Juvenalis at a
Town called Orta, endowing it with an Estate in Land for the maintenance of the
Monks in it.

At this time Theodora was earnest with Vigilius to come to Constantinople, and
according to his Promise, to restore Anthemius. But Vigilius denies the doing
it, for that unjust Promises are not to be performed, and he was of Opinion
that the proceedings of Agapetus and Sylverius against that Heretic were
legal, and that therefore their Acts were by no means to be made void by him.
Theodora being hereat enraged, with the assistance of some of her Creatures at
Rome, causes Vigilius to be impleaded upon two Accusations; one, that he had
fraudulently procured the banishment of Sylverius; the other, that by his Order
a certain Youth had been beaten to death by his Nephew Vigilius Son of Asterius
the Consul. And that he might not escape with impunity, she sends one Anthemius
to Rome, with instructions to bring Vigilius by force to her, if he refused to
make his appearance. He coming to Rome, in pursuance of his Commission, feiz'd
the Bishop in the Church of S. (...), as he was according to custom
distributing Gifts to the People upon his Birthday; and being assisted by some
Romans, conveys him to Constantinople. It Is said, that at Vigilius his passage
down the River Tyber, the People followed him with Curses, pelting him with
sticks and stones, and particularly using this exprobration, Mischievous have
thou been to the City of Rome, and may mischief go along with thee. Being
arrived at Sicily, by the permission of those who had him in custody, he
ordained several Persons, and among them Ampliatus a Priest, and Valentinus a
Bishop, who were to have the inspection of the Clergy and Church of Rome in his
absence. Coming near Constantinople, Justinian with a great Retinue went out to
meet him, and they both entered the City together, the Clergy going before them,
as far as the Temple of S. Sophia. Theodora had now opportunity to tamper with
Vigilius, and persuade him to the performance of his Promise. But he told her,
that he had rather suffer the greatest punishment in the World, than change his
Resolution in the Case. She therefore and her Attendants beginning to menace
him, and he saying that he was come to a Diocletian, not as he thought to
Justinian, he was thereupon so roughly handled and beaten that it almost cost
him his life. And flying from their rage to the Church of S. Euphemia, not far
distant, he was from thence dragged by certain rude People, who put an Halter
about his Neck, and led him like a common Rogue publicly through the City till
the Evening. After this he was imprisoned, and forced for some time to live
upon nothing but Bread and Water, which yet he bore with so much patience and
temper, that he would often say that he had deserved worse than all this, and
was not yet punished according to his Demerits. Those of the Clergy who had
accompanied him from Rome, were some of them banished, others condemned to dig
in the Mines. But at the request of the Romans who had now a better Opinion of
him, and upon the importunity of Narses, whom Justinian had sent to Rome to
oppose the Goths, Vigilius and all the others who were confined, had liberty
granted them to return into Italy. But in their passage thither being come as
far as Syracuse in (...), Vigilius who had outlived so many Calamities and
Troubles, died there of the Stone, and his body was carried to Rome, and buried
in the Church of S. Marcellus in the Via Salaria. He lived in the Pontificate
at Rome and elsewhere seventeen years, six months, twenty six days, and by his
death the Sea was vacant three months, five days.

PELAGIUS I.
PELAGIUS, a Roman, lived in the time when Totilas King Totilas.
of the Goths advancing with a great Army from Treviso, overrun and spoiled
Italy in such a manner, that from his salvage Cruelty he was called God's
Scourge. Coming as far as Mount Cassino, in his way to Campania, though he were
in the habit of a common Soldier, yet he was discovered by S. Benedict, who
spared not by threatening of divine Vengeance to terrify him from raging so
furiously against the Christians. Moving thence toward Abruzzo, he dismantled
(...), besieged Naples, took Cumoe, where yet he exercised an extraordinary
Respect and Civility toward the Roman Women whom he found in it, permitting
them to go to Rome to their Friends without any violence or rudeness offered to
them. After this having taken Naples, and made himself Master of all that part
of Italy which lies toward Sicily, he marches to Rome; and having first seized
the Port, by which (...) should come to the City, he reduced them to such
extremity for want of Provisions, that some were forced to feed upon
Mans-flesh. At length, forcing his entrance at the Gate which leads to Ostia,
he possessed himself of the City, which having plundered, he set on fire. Some
tell us, that Totilas designed to save the Buildings of the City, and sent
Messengers about by Night to publish his pleasure in that particular, but his
Orders therein were not obeyed. Justinian having Intelligence of these
proceedings, speedily dispatches Narses the Eunuch Narses.
with a great Army into Italy. It Is said, that this Narses was at first a
Bookseller, but being advanced to an Office near the Emperor's Person,
Justinian finding him to be a man of great merit, raised him to the Dignity of
a Patrician. And indeed, in all the accomplishments of Religion, and Virtue,
and Clemency, and Generosity, and sweetness of temper, he was a most exemplary
and extraordinary Person. Narses, with the addition of some Auxiliary Forces
from Alboinus King of the Lombards, advances against the Goths, routs them, and
makes a great slaughter in the pursuit of them. Totilas lost his life
ingloriously at Brissello, and Theias who was chosen King in his stead, though
he behaved himself bravely, yet was slain by Narses not far from Nocera. And
thus both the Name and Power of the Goths were extinct together, in the seventy
second year after that their King Theodoric first entered Italy. Not long after
died Justinian, in the fortieth year of his Reign; a Prince worthy to have his
memory perpetuated to all Posterity, and who according to the custom of
preceding Emperors, deserves the additional Titles of Alemanicus, Gotthicus,
Wandalicus, Persicus, Africanus, though he only advised, but did not act in the
successful Expeditions made against those Nations.

Pelagius, in the midst of these disturbances not neglecting the Affairs of the
Church, ordained, that Heretics and Schismatics might be suppressed by the
Secular Power, when they would not be reclaimed by Reason and Argument. Being
accused that he was the occasion of the Calamities that befell Vigilius, as
having a greater interest with Justinian than Vigilius had, in the sight of the
Clergy and People, he laid his hand upon the Cross and the Gospel, and by a
solemn Oath purged himself from that Charge. Narses coming to Rome, made a
Procession from the Church of S. Pancras to S. Peter's, with Thanksgiving for
his late success; and set himself with all possible application to repair the
Damage which the City had received by the Goths. In conjunction with Pelagius,
he ordained that no Person should be admitted to any holy Orders or
Ecclesiastical Dignity by the way of canvassing or Birbery. Pelagius making his
Notary Valentinus, a very religious person, Treasurer of the Church, begins the
building of the Church of SS. Philip and James. Some tell us that the learned
Monk Cassiodorus, who had been (...).
first Consul, then a Senator, and afterward renouncing all human Greatness
embraced a Monastic life, lived to this time; and that Victor Bishop of Capua
now wrote a Book concerning Easter, in which he (...).
particularly discovered the mistakes of Dionysius the Roman Abbat, who had
with little care and skill composed a Paschal Cycle. Moreover, Sabinus Bishop
of Canosa, and Gregory Bishop of Langres, and Vedastus a Scholar of S. Remigius
and Bishop of Arras were Ornaments to the Pontificate of Pelagius; and
Herculanus Bishop of Perugia, who had been put to Death by Totylas, was
Canonized. Pelagius, having at two Decembrian Ordinations made twenty six
Presbyters, eleven Deacons, thirty nine Bishops, died, and was buried in S.
Peter's. He was in the Chair eleven years, ten months, twenty eight days. The Sea was then vacant twenty six days.

JOHN III.
JOHN the third, the Son of Anastasius, descended of a Noble Family, lived in
the time of Justine, who succeeded Justinian, but was in nothing like him.

For he was Covetous, lewd, rapacious, a contemner of Justine.
God and Men to such a degree, that his Vices made him srantick; so that his
Wife Sophia managed all affairs till the time of Tiberius the second. This
Woman, being prompted thereto by some envious persons who hated Narses, recalls
him out of Italy in these reproachful words, That she would have the Eunuch
come home and spin. This he very highly resenting, as well he might, returns
answer, That he would spin such a Web, as none of his Enemies should ever be
able to unweave. And he was as good as word. For he presently sends and invites
Alboinus King of the Lombards, with all his people, then possessed of Pannonia,
to come and seat themselves in the more plentiful Country of Italy. Alboinus
complying with the proposal of Narses, and entering Italy with a vast number of
men with their Wives and Children, first possesses himself of Friuli and Marca
Trivigiana; thence passing into Insubria, he takes and sacks Milain, and at
length makes himself Master of Pavia, after it had held out a Siege of three
years. Being thus slush'd with Victory, he goes to Verona, which he constitutes
the the Capital City of his Kingdom; where being once at an Entertainment
overheated with Wine, he compelled his Wife Rosimund to drink out of a Cup
which he had made of her own Fathers Skull, whom he himself had slain. Now
there was in Alboinus's Army one Helmechild, a very handsome young Gentleman,
and an excellent Soldier; and who was Rosimund's particular Favorite. Him she
discourses privately, and by proposing to him the hopes of succeeding in the
Kingdom, prevailed with him to murder Alboinus. But they were both so hated for
the Fact by the Lombards, that they not only failed of their hopes, but were
glad to fly for protection to Longinus the Exarch of Ravenna; where not long
after they poisoned each other, and died together. At this time Italy, by
reason of the Incursions which the barbarous Nations made into it, was in a
very calamitous state; which had been portended by Prodigies, and Apparitions
of flaming Armies in the Air, and also by an extraordinary inundation of the
River Tyber which had very much damaged the City of Rome.

In the mean time our John repaired the Coemeteries of the Saints, and finished
the Church of SS. Philip and James which had been begun by Vigilius, and drew
Narses, who had been an avowed Enemy to the Romans for their ill opinion of him
and their misrepresenting him to the Empress Sophia, from Naples to Rome; where
he not long after died, and his Body was conveyed in a Coffin of Lead to
Constantinople. In such a consusion of things the State of Italy must needs
certainly have been utterly ruined, if some eminently holy men had not
supported and prop'd up the tottering Nation. Among others, Paul Patriarch of
Aquileia, and Felix Bishop of Treviso interceded successfully with Alboinus,
when he first entered Italy, in the behalf of the Inhabitants. Moreover,
Fortunatus a person of extraordinary Learning and Eloquence, very much
civilized and polished the Gauls by his Books and Example; compiling a Treatise
of Government inscribed to their King Sigebert, and writing in an elegant style
the Life of S. Martin. Some write that at this time lived Germanus Bishop of
Paris, a person of wonderful Piety, who kept the Kings of France within the
bounds of their duty to such a Degree, that each strove to excel the other in
Religion and Piety, in Goodness and Clemency. So prevalent is the Example of a
good Pastor, such an one as Germanus was, in whom they saw nothing but what
was worthy of their imitation. After this one farther Remark, that in our
John's time the Armenians were converted to Christianity, I shall say no more
of him, but that having been in the Chair twelve years, eleven months, twenty
six days, he died, and was (...) in S. Peter's. Upon his death the Sea was
vacant ten months, three days.

BENEDICT I.
BENEDICT, a Roman, the Son of Boniface, lived in the time of Tiberius the
Second, whom Justine had adopted, and appointed his Heir to the Empire.

An Honor which he well deserved, as being a Person Tiberius II.
adorned with all the Princely Accomplishments of Clemency, Justice, Piety,
Religion, Wisdom, Resolution, and unshaken Fortitude. Among his other Virtues
he was eminent for his Bounty and Liberality toward all, especially the poor;
and God supplied him in an extraordinary manner for it. For walking once
hastily in his Palace, and spying the figure of the Cross upon one of the
Marble stones in the Pavement, that it might not be trampled under foot, he
devoutly caused it to be removed from thence, and laid up in a more decent and
honorable place. At it is taking up, there was found under it another stone
with the same figure on it, and then a third, under which he discovered such a
vast heap of Gold and Silver as was requisite to furnish and maintain his large
Bounty; a great part of which Treasure he distributed to the poor. It Is said
also that he had brought to him out of Italy a great Estate which Narses had
got there, which in like manner he employed in Liberality and Munificence. To
Sigebert the French King, who had sent Ambassadors to him, besides the other
Presents that he made, which were very considerable, he sent certain Medals of
Gold of very great weight, on the one side of which was the Effigies of the
Emperor with this Inscription, Tiberii Constantini perpetuo Augusti; on the
other side was a Chariot with its Driver and this Inscription, Romanorum
Gloria. And to complete his Successes, the Army which he had sent against the
Persians returning victoriously, brought away with twenty Elephants so vast a
Booty, as no Army had ever done in any Expedition before. Thus signally was he
rewarded for his good services to mankind in general, for his Religion toward
God our Savior, and for his Beneficence particularly to the people of Rome;
whom he not only protected and desended from their Enemies as much as could be
by his Arms, but also at the Prayers and Intercession of our Bishop Benedict,
whom he had a wonderful Love and Esteem for, he delivered them from Dearth and
Famine by sending a supply of Corn out of Egypt. For the Lombards by a long and
tedious War, had so harrassed Italy far and wide, that from their devastations
there arose a great want and (...) of all things. While things went thus in
Italy, John Bishop (...) Constan, inople, by Reading, Disputing, Writing,
Admonishing and Teaching, kept the Oriental Church as much as might be right in
the Faith, though he met with many opposers therein. The same did also the
equally Learned and Eloquent Leander Bishop of Toledo, or as others think of
Sevil, who wrote several Treatises both to confirm the Orthodox Doctrine, and
to confute the Arian Heresy, which, like a contagious Pestilence, the Vandals,
driven out of Africa by Belisarius, had brought with them into Spain. As for
Benedict, some write that he laying sadly to heart the (...) which now befell
Rome and all Italy, died of grief; after he had been in the Chair four years,
one month, twenty eight days. The Sea was then vacant two months, ten days.

PELAGIUS II.
PELAGIUS, a Roman, Son of Vinigildus, was from the time of Tiberius, to that
of his Son-in-law the Emperor Mauritius,

To whom though he were a Cappadocian, yet the Empire was committed, Mauritius.
upon the account of his great Courage, and Ability in the management of
Affairs. At this time the Lombards, having after the Death of Alboinus for
twenty years (...) governed by Dukes, make Autharis their King, whom they also
called (...); a Name which was afterward used by all the Kings of Lombardy.
But Mauritius endeavoring to drive the Lombards out of Italy, hires Sigebert
the French King to engage in a War against them; who forthwith raising a great
Army of Gauls and Germans, fights Autharis, but with great loss is discomfited.
The Lombards being flushed and heightened by this Victory, marched on as far as
to the Streights of Sicily, possessing themselves all along of the Cities of
Italy, and at length besieging for a long time Rome it self; of which certainly
they had made themselves Masters, had they not been driven from its Walls by
the great Rains, which sell so violently and incessantly, and made such an
Inundation, that men looked upon it as a second Noah's Flood.

This was the only cause why Pelagius was made Bishop of Rome without the
consent of the Emperor; the City being so closely besieged that none could
pass to know his pleasure therein. For at this time the Roman Clergie's
Election of a Bishop was not valid unless they had the Emperor's Approbation.
Hereupon Gregory a Deacon, a man of great Piety and Learning, was sent to
Constantinople to appease the Emperor; where having effected what he came for,
he neglected not to employ his time and parts, but both wrote Books of Morals
upon Job, and also at a Disputation in the presence of the Emperor himself, he
so basfled Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople, that he was forced to retract
what he had written in a Book of his concerning the Resurrection; in which he
asserted, that our Bodies in that glory of the Resurrection should become more
thin and subtle than the Wind or Air, and so not tangible. Which is contrary
to that of our Savior, Handle me and see, for Luke 24.
a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. As for Pelagius, having
at the request of the Citizens of Rome recalled Gregory, turned his Fathers
House into an Hospital for poor old men, and entirely built the Coemetery of
Hermes the Martyr, and the Church of Laurence the Martyr, he died of the
Pestilence, which at that time was very epidemical throughout Europe, after he
had been in the Chair ten years, two months, ten days, and was buried in S.
Peter's in the (...). The Sea was then vacant six months, twenty eight days.

GREGORY I.
GREGORT, a Roman, Son of Gordianus, one of the Senato rian Order, was against
his will unanimously chosen Bishop of Rome, Anno Dom. 590. Now because, as I
have already said, the consent of the Emperor was required herein, he
dispatches Messengers with Letters, (...) Mauritius that he would not suffer
this Election of the Clergy and People of Rome to stand good. These Letters
were intercepted and torn by the (...), and others written, by which the
Emperor was requested to confirm him who was by universal suffrage thus
chosen. There could nothing be more pleasing and acceptable to the Emperor
than the News of this Choice, for the conversation of Gregory, while he was at
Constantinople, had been very grateful to him, and moreover he had Christened
his Son. Mauritius therefore speedily sends word back to Rome, that he did
confirm the Election of Gregory, and that in such a (...) state of things they
should compel that holy man to undertake the Government of the Church. He
therefore, not consulting his own inclination, but the (...) of Mankind, and
the honor of God, which, as he was a most devout and religious man, he had
ever preferred before all other things, without any regard to Riches, or
Pleasures, or Ambition, or Power, takes the burden of the Pontificate upon him.
And he behaved himself so well in it, that no one of his Successors down to
our times has been his Equal, much less Superior, either for Sanctity of Life,
or for (...) in managing Affairs, or for his Learning and Writings. He composed
a Book of the Sacraments; wrote Commentaries upon (...), and, as I have already
said, upon Job, and Homilies upon the Gospels; four Books in Dialogue, and that
which he called the Pastoral, to (...) Bishop of Ravenna concerning the way of
governing the Church. Moreover, he introduced several Rites, and made several
Additions to the Offices of the Roman Church; and particularly he first
instituted the greater Litanies or (...), and appointed a great part of the
Stations. And that the good man might not in any thing be wanting to the
Church, he held in S. Peter's a Synod of twenty four Bishops, wherein he took
away many things which might prove pernicious, and added many which might be
beneficial to Religion. He also (...) into England, Auguscine, Melitus, and
John, and with these diverse other Monks, all persons of approved lives, by
whose Preaching the (...) were then first entirely converted to Christianity.
By his means likewise the Goths returned to the Union of the Catholic Church.
We are told by some Writers, that Gregory sent his Dialogues concerning Morals
to Theudelinda Queen of the Lombards, by the reading of which she might smooth
and polish the rugged temper of her Husband (...), and bring him to a better
sense of Religion and Morality. She was an excellent Lady, and a zealous
Christian, and not only built the Church of S. John Baptist at Monza a Town ten
miles distant from Milain, but also furnished it with Vessels of Gold, and
liberally endowed it.

It Is said, that at the time when (...) was put to death by his Father Levigild
King of the Goths, because he professed the Catholic Faith, the (...) Coat of
Christ, which fell by Lot to one of the Soldiers, was found in the City Zaphat,
laid up in a Marble Chest there; Thomas being then Bishop of Jerusalem, John
Bishop of Constantinople, and Gregory Bishop of Antioch. In the mean time
Mauritius, having in (...) and Terra di Lavoro, by his General Romanus the
Exarch, gained the better of the Lombards, who from a confidence grounded upon
their former successes were now degenerated into all manner of Vice, makes a
Law, that no person who had listed himself in the Roman Army, should be at
liberty to withdraw and take upon him a Religious life, till either the War
were ended, or the man himself (...) or disabled. Gregory being moved hereat,
admonishes him not to oppose the Religion of that God, by whose bounty he had
been raised from a very mean condition to the highest Degree of Dignity.
Moreover, John Bishop of Constantinople, having in a Synod which he held,
procured himself to be styled the Ecumenical, i. e. Universal Bishop, and
Mauritius hereupon requiring Gregory to yield obedience to John; He, being a
person of great Courage and Constancy, returns answer, That the Power of
binding and loosing was committed to Peter and his Successors, not to the
Bishops of Constantinople, and therefore warns him to desist from provoking the
wrath of God against himself, by being too (...) in sowing Dissension in the
Church. But Mauritius not content with the mischief he had done already,
re-calls his Soldiers which were in Italy, and encourages the Lombards to
assault the Romans, without any regard to the League they had entered into with
them. Hereupon Agilulphus moving from Lombardy, and laying waste all Tuscany
through which he passed, invests and very much annoys the City of Rome one
whole year; in which time Severus Bishop of Aquileia becoming Heretical, was
the occasion of many Evils. For after his Death the Patriarchate of Aquileia
was divided into two; Agilulphus King of the Lombards constituting John of
Aquileia and our Gregory, Candianus of Grado, Bishops to the people of Friuli.
But Agilulphus quitting all hopes of gaining the City, (...) the Siege, and
returns to Milain. Mauritius now began to treat Gregory more respectfully, but
it proceeded not from a voluntary but forced Repentance; he having heard that a
certain person in the habit of a Monk, with a drawn Sword in his hand, had
proclaimed aloud in the Marketplace of Constantinople, that the Emperor
should in a short time die by the Sword. The same was confirmed to him by a
Dream of his own in which he saw himself, his Empress, and their Children
murdered. And accordingly not long after the Soldiers being discontented for
want of Pay, create Phocas, who was a Centurion in the Army, Emperor, and
Assassine Mauritius, in the nineteenth year of his Reign. But Gregory, having
added what Ornaments he could to the Churches in Rome, and dedicated by the
name of S. Agatha the Martyr, the Church of the Goths in Suburra, built by
(...). Ricimerius a man of Consular Dignity, converted his Father's House into
a Monastery, wherein he received and entertained Strangers, and supplied with
meat and drink the poor which from all parts slocked to it. He was certainly a
person every way praiseworthy, whether we regard his Life and Conversation, or
his Learning, or his Abilities in things both Divine and Humane. Nor ought we
to suffer him to be censured by a few ignorant men, as if the ancient (...)
Buildings were demolished by his Order, upon this pretense which they make for
him, lest Strangers coming out of Devotion to Rome, should less regard the
consecrated places, and spend all their Gaze upon Triumphal Arches and
Monuments of Antiquity. No such reproach can justly be fastened upon this great
Bishop, especially considering that he was a Native of the City, and one to
whom, next after God, his Country was most dear, even above his Life. It Is
certain that many of those ruined Structures were devoured by Time, and many
might, as we daily see, be pulled down to build new Houses, and for the rest,
it is probable that for the sake of the Brass used in the concavity of the
Arches and the conjunctures of the Marble or other square stones, they might be
battered and defaced not only by the barbarous Nations, but by the Romans too,
if Epirotes, Dalmatians, Pannonians, and other sorry people who from all parts
of the World resorted hither, may be called Romans. Now Gregory having used all
means to establish the Church of God, died in the second year of the Emperor
Phocas, having been in the Chair thirteen years, six months, ten days; and, the
loss of him being lamented by all men, was buried in S. Peter's, March 12. By
his Death the Sea was vacant five months, nineteen days.

SABINIANUS I.
SABINIAN Gregorie's Successor, deserved not to have the place of his Nativity
remembered; being a person of mean Birth and meaner Reputation, and one who
violently opposed the great things which his Predecessor had done.
Particularly, there being a great (...) during his Pontificate, and the poor
pressing him hard to imitate the pious Charity of Gregory, he made them no
other Answer but this, That Gregory was a man who designed to make himself
popular, and to that end had profusely wasted the Revenues of the Church. Nay,
the ill-natured wretch arrived to such a degree of Rage and Envy against
Gregory, that he was within a very little of causing his Books to be burned.
Some tell us that Sabinian was, at the instigation of some Romans, thus highly
incensed against Gregory, because he had mutilated and thrown down the Statues
of the Ancients which had been set up throughout the City; but this is a Charge
as dissonant from truth as that of his demolishing the old Fabrics, concerning
which we have spoken in his Life; and considering the Antiquity of these
Statues, and the casualties which might (...) them, and the designs which men's
Covetousness or Curiosity might have upon them, it is fairly probable that they
might be mangled or lost, without Gregorie's being at all concerned therein.
But to go on with Sabinian, it was he who instituted the (...) of Canonical
hours for Prayer in the Church, and who ordained that Tapers should be kept
continually burning, especially in the Church of S. Peter. Some tell us, that
with the consent of Phocas, a Peace was now made with the Lombards, and their
King Agilulphus's Daughter, who had been taken Captive in the War, restored to
him. At this time appeared diverse Prodigies, portending the Calamities which
ensued. A bright Comet was seen in the Air, at Constantinople a Child was born
with four feet, and at the Island (...) were seen two Sea Monsters in humane
shape. Some write that in the Pontificate of Sabinian, John Patriarch of
Alexandria, and (...) Bishop of Carthage, both persons famous for Piety and
Learning, did wonderfully improve the Dignity of those Churches. Moreover,
(...) a very learned man, and an intimate Friend of (...), wrote very much
against Vincent Bishop of Saragoza, who had sallen off to the Arian Heresy; he
also wrote to his Sister a Book concerning Virginity, entitled Aureolus. But
Sabinian, having been in the Chair one year, five months, nine days, died, and
was buried in the Church of S Peter. By his Death the Sea was vacant eleven
months, twenty six days.

BONIFACE III.
BONIFACE the third, a Roman, with much ado obtained of the Emperor Phocas,
that the Sea of S. Peter the Apostle, should by all be acknowledged and styled
the Head of all the Churches. A Title which had been stickled for by the Church
of Constantinople, through the encouragement of some former Princes, who
asserted that the Supremacy ought to reside there, where the Seat of the Empire
was. But the Roman Bishops alleged that Rome, of which Constantinople was but
a Colony, ought to be accounted the chief City of the Empire, since the Greeks
themselves in their Writings styled their Prince, (...), i. e. the Emperor of
the Romans, and the Constantinopolitans even in that Age were called Romans,
not Greeks. Not to mention that Peter the Chief of the Apostles bequeathed the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to his Successors the Bishops of Rome, and left
the Power which God had given him not to Constantinople, but to Rome. This only
I say, that several Princes, and particularly Constantine, had granted to the
Roman See only, the privilege of calling and dissolving Councils, and of
rejecting or confirming their Decrees. And does not a Church which has with so
much integrity and constancy bastled and (...) all manner of Heresies as the
Roman See has done, deserve think you the preference of others. The same
Boniface in a Synod of (...) two Bishops, thirty Presbyters, and three Deacons,
ordained, that upon pain of Excommunication no person should succeed in the
place of any deceased Pope or other Bishop, till at least the third day after
the death of his Predecessor; and that whoever should by Bribes or by making
of Parties and Interests endeavor to raise themselves to the Popedom or any
other Bishopric should undergo the same Penalty. He decreed likewise, that the
choice of any Bishop should be by the Clergy and People, and that the Election
should then stand good, when it were approved by the Civil Magistrate, and when
the Pope had interposed his Authority, in these words, (...) and Command. An
Institution in part very necessary, for our times especially, so many
corruptions daily creeping in. For it is probable, that, the Election being
free, the Clergy and People will choose, and the Magistrate approve of no other,
than such an one as deserves and is fit to be Governor in the Church. Though
(if I may speak it without offense to any that are good) the truth is,
multitudes do now aspire to the Dignity of Bishops, not as they ought to do for
the sake of the public good, but that they may satisfy their own Covetousness
and Ambition. For the great Question is, what any Bishopric is worth, not how
great a Flock there is to take the charge of. But enough of this; I return to
Boniface, whose Decrees, as it appears, were extinct with his Life. He died in
the ninth month of his Pontificate, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter.
The Sea was then vacant one month, six days.

BONIFACE IV.
BONIFACE the fourth, born in Valeria a City of the Marsi, the Son of John a
Physician, obtained of the Emperor Phocas the Pantheon, a Temple so called,
because it was dedicated to Cybele and all the Gods, and having cast out all
the Heathen Images that were in it, he consecrated it on May the 12th. in
honor to the Blessed Virgin and all the Martyrs; (...) it was afterward
called S. Maria Rotunda, and Virgo ad Martyrs.

At this time the Persians, under the Conduct of their King (...), making an
irruption into the Roman Provinces, and having routed Phocas's Army, possess
themselves of Jerusalem; profane and pillage the Churches of the Christians,
carry away the Wood of our Savior's Cross, and take Captive Zacharias the holy
Patriarch of that City. Hereupon Phocas falling into contempt with all men, but
especially the Senate, was deprived of his Empire and Life by Heraclius General
of the Forces and Governor of the Province of Afrique. Now also Caganus King
of the Avares, forcing his entrance through Pannonia and Illyricum into Italy,
was so much too hard for the Lombards, that he was very near making himself
Master of the Province it self; and through the treachery of Romilda, who was
enamored of him, he did actually take Friuli, and sacked it in such a manner
that scarce any footsteps of it were left remaining. While things went thus in
Italy, John Bishop of Girone proved a great Defense to Christianity both by his
Preaching Johannes (...).
and Writings. He being a Goth, born in Portugal, so soon as he came to the
years of discretion traveled to Constantinople, and parted thence so well
skilled in Greek and Latin Learning, that at his return into Portugal, he was
able easily to (...) the Arian Heresy which very much prevailed there. For
this reason he was by the Heretics confined in Barcellona. But afterward upon
the death of King Lemungildus, who countenanced those Heretics, he came back
into his own Country, and both wrote very much concerning the Christian
Religioon, and also founded a Monastery, and prescribed Rules of living which
the Monks thereof were to guide themselves by. Eutropius also Bishop of
Valentia, was now by his Learning and Example very instrumental to keep the
Spaniards sound in the Faith. Moreover, Columbanus an Abbat, a very holy man,
by descent a Goth, coming first out of Scotland into Burgundy, built there the
stately Monastery of Luxevil; and thence passing into Italy, built another fair
one at Bobio. Pope Boniface, that he might not be behind-hand in this matter
with either of them, converted his Father's House into a Monastery, and gave
his Estate for the maintenance of the Monks in it. But not long after he died,
having been in the Chair six years, eight months, seventeen days, and was
buried in the Church of S. Peter; in a time of Dearth, Pestilence, and great
Innundation of Waters. By his Death the Sea was vacant seven months, twenty
(...) days.

DEUS-DEDIT I.
DEUS-DEDIT, a Roman, Son of Stephen a Subdeacon, being unanimously chosen to
the Pontificate, proved a great Lover and Encourager of the Clergy. It Is
reported that he was a person of so great Sanctity, that meeting with a man who
had a Leprosy, he cured him of that Disease with a Kiss. He ordained, that the
Son should not marry any Woman to whom his Father had been Godfather.

At this time Heraclius with a great Army recovered several Provinces which the
Persians had possessed themselves of; dismounted and slew their General in a
single Combat; vanquished their King Chosdroes, and took his Son Prisoner, whom
having first Christened, he released and sent home again. Entering Persia, he
took a strong Tower in which (...)'s Treasure lay, part of which he distributed
among his Soldiers, and assigned another part for the repairing of the Churches
which the Persians had pillaged and spoiled. Returning to Jerusalem with seven
Elephants loaded with other great Booty, he brought along with him the Cross of
our Blessed Savior which the Persians had taken away, and laid it up in the
place where it was before. Those of the Persians whom he had taken Prisoners,
he suffered to return into their own Country. After this being arrived at
Constantinople, and taking delight in study, he applied himself to Astrology.
But yet this great Emperor, against all Law both Divine and Humane married his
own Sister's Daughter; and to add one Crime to another, as is usual when men
once become guilty, he falls off to the Eutychian Heresy. This happened at the
time when Anastasius a Persian, being converted to Christianity, and having
entered upon a Monastic Life, was seized by his own Contrymen, and suffered
Martyrdom for the sake of his Religion; whose body was afterward conveyed to
Rome and reposited in the Monastery of S. Paul. It Is said, that at this time
Sisebute King of the Goths, reduced several Cities of Spain which had revolted
to the Romans; and that by Torment he forced all the Jews which he discovered
in his Kingdom to profess the belief of Christianity. This it is reported he
did at the request of Heraclius, who had been fore-warned to beware of the
Circumcised; but yet afterward, he being not sufficiently careful to prevent
his Fate, was crushed by the Saracens who observed Circumcision. Thus things
went in the East, nor did the West want it is Assertours of the Christian Faith.
For Arnulphus Bishop of Metz, by his Piety and Prudence kept Dagobert the
French King within the bounds of his Duty; being therein assisted by Amandus,
an excellent person, and a vigorous defender of the Christian Religion. Among
the Spaniards, Isidore Bishop of Sevil, successor to Leander, wrote several
things very beneficial to the State of Christianity; particularly, of the Chief
Good, of Famous Men, of Grammar, and Etymology; an History from Adam to the
times of Heraclius, the Lives of several Saints, the History of the Lombards,
and a short Cosmography. Some say that this Isidore was a German, though the
Spaniards lay claim to him; but whatever Countryman he were, it is certain
that he was a most excellent person, both for his great Learning, and his
greater Sanctity.

As for Deus-dedit, the time of whose Pontificate, besides what we have already
mentioned, was rendered remarkable by an Earthquake, and a Scab so near
approaching to a Leprosy that it deformed men beyond each others knowledge, he
died in the third year, and twenty third day of his being in the Chair, and was
buried in the Church of S. Peter, November the 8th. By his Death the Sea was
vacant one month, sixteen days.

BONIFACE V.
BONIFACE the fifth, a Campanian, his Father's name John, was chosen Pope at
the time when Eleutherius a Patrician, being sent by Heraclius to Rome, and
having revenged the Death of John the late Exarch of Ravenna, usurped the
Kingdom of Italy. But in his way to Rome he was put to Death by his own
Soldiers, and his Head sent to Constantinople. Upon which Isaacius of
Constantinople, another Patrician, was made Exarch in his stead. Theudelinda
now after the Death of her Husband Adoaldus, governing together with her Son
the Kingdom of the Lombards very prudently and justly, maintained a Peace
between her People and the Italians for ten years together; made several
Presents and Donations to several Churches, and endowed them with Lands for the
better maintenance of the Clergy belonging to them. In the twelfth year of
Heraclius, Mahomet an Arabian as some will have him, or as others a Persian,
Mahomet.
descended of a Noble Family, his Father a Gentile, his Mother a Jewess, was
the Author of so much mischief to the Christian State, that I am afraid lest
his Sect should utterly extinguish the Remains of Christianity; especially in
our Age, wherein we are grown listless and unactive, and stand still tamely
exspecting our own Ruin. His Sect prevails and increases now more than ever;
All Asia and Africa, and a great part of Europe is subject to Mohammedan
Princes; the Turks press bard upon us by Sea and Land, that they may ferret us
like Coneys out of these Burrows in Europe. In the mean time we sit idly,
looking upon one another, as if the whole State of Christianity were not at all
in danger. The Clergy expect that so important and necessary a War should be
undertaken by the Laity. The Laity expect that the Clergy should expend their
Money to bear the Charge of a War for the Defense of Religion, and not put it
to worse Uses, as most of them are wont to do, laying out their Stock gotten by
Alms and Martyr's Blood upon huge large Vessels of massy Gold and Silver, while
themselves in the mean time carry it arrogantly toward Men, are contemners of
God, whom they serve only for Gain, and are not at all solicitous for the time
to come. But I return to Mahomet, a man of so wily a Temper and so sharp a Wit,
that having long conversed among the Christians, and acquainted himself with
all the Sects that had been before him, he introduced a new kind of
Superstition, which has, as we see, almost rooted out Christianity. Moreover,
having got together a great Army of Arabians, he was so hardy as to encroach
upon the Borders of the Roman Empire, but Heraclius soon put a stop to his
Motion, having by Promises and Bribes prevailed with his Soldiers to make a
Revolt from him.

As for Pope Boniface, he was a person of singular Humanity, Clemency, and
obliging Deportment toward all men, and neglected no part of the Duty of a
good Bishop. He ordained, that Criminals who fled for Refuge to Churches,
should not be taken thence by force; that the Acolythi should not meddle with
the Relics of the Martyrs, that belonging to Presbyters and Subdeacons; and
that in every place those who were guilty of sacriledg should be
Excommunicated. He built and dedicated the Coemetery of S. Nicomedes, and was
in an extraordinary manner liberal and munificent toward those of the Clergy
who led exemplary Lives. At this time Gallus a Scholar of S. Columbanus lived
so devoutly, that he deserved to be canonized a Saint even in his lifetime.
Eustachius the Abbat followed his Example, and so did S. Aurea, in honor to
whom Eligius built a Nunnery. It Is said also, that at this time one Basilius
was very famous for his Life and Learning, and in both equal to Isidore
himself. Our Boniface having been in the Chair five years, ten days, died, and
was buried in the Church of S. Peter. By his death See was vacant thirteen days.

HONORIUS I.
HONORIUS, a Campanian, Son of Petronius, a man of Consular Dignity, entered
upon the Pontificate at the time when Theudelinda died, and her Son Adoaldus
was deposed, Arioaldus being made King in his stead. At which time Heraclius,
who had been victorious over the Persians, was very urgent to have all the Jews
who were Subjects to the Empire baptized. Hereupon the Saracens and Arabians
taking up Arms, Anno Dom. 623. gained such a Victory over Heraclius's Army,
that they rendered that successful Man the most unfortunate. This was done under
the Conduct of Mahomet, who pretending himself to be the great Prophet of God,
and deluding the Asians and Africans by Magical Arts, put such vigor into the
people who embraced his new Religion, that he was very near to have ruined the
Empire; having taken Alexandria, and several important Cities of Syria and
Cilicia. He had for his followers the Saracens, so called from Sarah Abraham's
lawful Wife, as if they were the only legitimate Successors and Heirs of the
divine Promise. The crafty man herein followed the Example of Jeroboam, who
prescribed distinct Rules of Worship to his Tribes, that they might not be
subject to the Jewish Government. The same also afterward did the Greeks who
dissented from the Catholics, not only for the sake of Religion, but Empire,
upon the score of which they followed the Errors of the Nestorians, Jacobites,
and Ebionites. But in the end their pertinacy reduced them to that pass, that
their Religion and Government were dissolved together, and they brought into
the vilest servitude. But Mahomet (as we see in the Alcoran) that he might
separate his Disciples as far as possible from Christianity, in composing his
Laws followed the Example of several Heretics, and especially the Nestorians;
collecting here and there, and reducing into one Body, many things repugnant to
the Law of Moses and the Gospel. It Is said that at this time Heraclius,
distrusting his own strength, struck up an inglorious Peace with the Saracens,
and that being imposed upon by the Arts of Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople,
and Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria, he fell off to the Heresy of the Monothelites,
a Sect so called from their asserting one Will only in Christ. But these
Seducers, at the Instance of Honorius who was very diligent to reclaim
Heraclius, were afterward banished. And Honorius having now some respite from
other cares, by his Learning and Example proved a great Reformer of the Clergy.
The Church of S. Peter he covered with Brass taken out of the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus; repaired that of S. Agnes in the Via Nomentana, as appears by an
Inscription in Verse therein, and likewise that of S. Pancras in the Via
Aurelia; built those of S. Anastasius, S. Cyriacus, seven miles from Rome in
the Via Ostiensis, and S. Severinus in Tivoli; all which he made very stately,
and adorned with Gold, Silver, Porphyry, Marble, and all manner of Ornamental
workmanship. He repaired also the Coemetery of SS. Marcellinus and Peter in the
Via Labicana, and was at the charge of building other Churches, besides those
beforementioned. Moreover, he ordained that every Saturday a Procession with
Litanies should be made from S. Apollinaris to S. Peter's. But having been in
the Chair twelve years, eleven months, seventeen days, he died, and was buried
in the Church of S. Peter, October the 12th. By his death the Sea was vacant
one year, seven months, eighteen days.

SEVERINUS I.
SEVERINUS, a Roman, Son of Labienus, being chosen in the place of Honorius
deceased, was confirmed therein by Isaacius Exarch of Italy, the Election of
the Clergy and People being at this time reckoned null and void, without the
Assent of the Emperors or their Exarchs. Now Isaacius having made a Journey to
Rome upon the occasion of confirming this Pope, that he might not lose his
labor, fairly sets himself to plunder the Lateran Treasury, being assisted in
that attempt by several Citizens, though he were resisted for a time, but in
vain, by the Clergy of that Church, the principal of which he afterward
banished. The ground of this Action, was Isaacius's Resentment that the Clergy
alone should grow rich, without contributing to the Charge of the Wars,
especially at a time when the Soldiers were reduced to the greatest want and
extremity. Part of the spoil he distributed among the Soldiers, part he carried
away with him to Ravenna, and of the rest he made a Present to the Emperor.
Those of the Saracens, who had been listed by Heraclius, being discontented for
want of Pay, marched into Syria, and made themselves Masters of Damascus, a
City subject to the Empire. Then joining with the other Arabians, and being
furnished with Provisions and Arms, and heated by Mahomet's Zeal, they overrun
Phoenicia and Egypt, and put to the Sword all those who refused to subscribe to
their Government, and Mahomet's Religion. Advancing thence against the
Persians, and having slain Hormisda the Persian King, they ceased not to commit
all manner of outrages upon that People, till they had entirely reduced them to
subjection. But Heraclius having intelligence of what work these Saracens made,
especially upon their taking of Antioch, and searing that they might possess
themselves of Jerusalem it self, (which they not long after did,) took care to
have the Cross of our Savior conveyed to Constantinople, that it might not
again come into the hands of the Agarens, (for so the Greeks in contempt call
the Arabians, as descending from Agar Abraham's Servant.) But Mahomet, as we
are told, dying at Mecha, was succeeded in the Command by Calipha, and he by
Hali; who being laid aside for his being too superstitious, the Egyptians make
another Calipha their Commander. It Is said also, that to complete the
Calamities of the Roman Empire, Sisebute King of the Goths, did at this time
recover out of the hands of the Romans all the Cities of Spain; and so a period
was put to the Roman Government in that Country.

As for (...), who was a person of extraordinary Piety and Religion, a Lover of
the Poor, kind to those in affliction, liberal to all, and in adorning of
Churches very munificent, having been in the Chair one year, two months, he
died, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, August the 2d. The Sea was then
vacant four months, twenty days.

JOHN IV.
JOHN the fourth, a Dalmatian, Son of Venantius, entering upon the Pontificate,
forthwith expressed a wonderful Compassion, in employing the remainder of the
Treasury of the Church which Isaacius had left behind him, for the redemption
of a multitude of Istrians and Dalmatians who had been taken Captive. In the
mean time Rhotaris, who succeeded Arioaldus in the Kingdom of Lombardy, though
he were a person eminent for Justice and Piety, yet became a Favourer of the
Arians, and permitted that in every City of his Kingdom, there should be at the
same time two Bishops of equal Authority, the one a Catholic, and the other an
Arian. He was a Prince of great Parts, and reduced the Laws, which Memory and
Use alone had before retained, methodically into a Book which he ordered to be
called the Edict. His Excellency in Military Skill appeared, in that he made
himself Master of all Tuscany, and Liguria, with the Seacoast as far as
Marseille. But in the sixth year of his Reign he died, and (...) the Kingdom to
his Son Rhodoaldus. It Is reported, that a certain Priest entering by night into
the Church of S. John Baptist, and there opening the Tomb in which the Body of
Rhotaris lay, robbed it of all the things of value with which the Bodies of
Kings are wont to be interred. Hereupon John Baptist, a Saint to whom Rhotaris
had been in his lifetime very much devoted, appeared to the Priest, and
threatened him with Death, if he ever entered his Church again. The like happened
even in our times to Cardinal Luigi, Patriarch of Aquileia, whose Sepulcher was
broke open and pillaged by those very men whom he himself had enriched and
raised from a mean condition to the Sacerdotal Dignity. Rhodoaldus entering upon
the Government of the Kingdom, marries Gundiberga the Daughter of Queen
Theudelinda, who imitating her Mother's Devotion, built and richly adorned a
Church in Honor to S. John Baptist at Terracina, in like manner as Theudelinda
had done at Monza. But Rhodoaldus being taken in Adultery, was slain by the
Husband of the Adulteress. Successor to him was Aripertus Son of Gudualdus,
and Brother of Queen Theudelinda; he built our Savior's Chapel at Pavia, and
very much beautified and plentifully endowed it.

Pope John fearing now lest the Bodies of Vincentius and Anastasius might
sometime or other be violated by the barbarous Nations, took care to have them
safely conveyed to Rome, and with great Solemnity reposited them in the Oratory
of S. John Baptist, near the Baptistery of the Lateran. We are told, that in
his Pontificate Vincentius Bishop of Beauvais, and Muardus Archbishop of
Reims, were in great esteem for their Learning and Sanctity. Moreover,
Reginulpha a French Lady was very eminent for Piety, and Renaldus Bishop of
Trajetto famous for his Life and Miracles. Jodocus also was not inferior to
any of these, who though he were the Son of a King of the Britains, yet
despising worldly Greatness, he became for some time an Hermit, and died at
length in an obscure Village. Pope John having been in the Chair one year, nine
months, nine days, died, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter, October the
12th. The Sea was then vacant one month, thirteen days.

THEODORUS I.
THEODORUS, a Grecian, Son of Theodorus a Bishop, born at Jerusalem, was no
sooner in the Chair, but he applied himself, like a good Bishop, to all those
things which he thought might tend to the advancement of the Christian
Religion; being a person obliging to all men, but extraordinarily bountiful to
the poor.

At this time Heraclius died of a Dropsy in the thirtieth year of his Reign,
having a little before made Theodorus, surnamed Calliopa, his Exarch in Italy,
in the place of Isaacius deceased. Heraclius was succeeded by his Son
Constantine, who in the fourth month after his coming to the Empire was
poisoned by the procurement of his Stepmother Martina and her Son Heracleon,
whom, it is said, Pyrrhus the Patriarch prompted to commit that Villainy.
Heracleon upon the Death of his Brother takes upon him the Government, at that
time particularly when Cyrus, Sergius, and Pyrrhus reviving the Heresy of the
Acephali, maintained the Opinion of one only Nature in Christ, one Operation,
and one Will. Among these Pyrrhus hearing of the Death of Heraclius, and being
very desirous to return out of Asrica, whither he had been banished, into his
own Country, coming to Rome, and making an hypocritical Retractation of his
Errors, was restored by Theodorus, and received from him a Form of Belief. But
he lost his Life before he could accomplish the end which he sought to compass
by such ill means. For the Senate and people of Constantinople being acquainted
with the cause of Constantine's Death, first seize Martina and Heracleon, and
having cut off his Nose, and cut out her Tongue, banish them both; then
apprehending Pyrrhus who endeavored to make his escape, they put him to Death.
Constantius the Son of Constantine, who had been thus treacherously murdered,
they create Emperor; and instead of Pyrrhus make Paul their Bishop; whom yet
Theodorus deprived for being in the like kind Heretical, his pertinacy therein
being favored by Constantius, who was unadvisedly fallen into the same
Heresy. But the Pope laying aside this Controversy, and applying himself to
other cares, caused the bones of the Martyrs Primus and Felicianus to be
removed out of a sandy Grotto in the Via Nomentana to Rome, where he reposited
them in the Church of S. Stephen the Proto-martyr, sparing no cost in Ornaments
both of Silver and Gold upon their Tomb. He also built and adorned a Church in
the Via Flaminia, as likewise two Oratories, one near the Lateran Church
dedicated to S. Sebastian, the other in the Via Ostiensis to Eupolus the
Martyr. Having finished these things, and been in the Chair six years. five
months, eighteen days, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, May the 14th. The Sea was then vacant fifty two days.

MARTINUS I.
MARTINUS the first, born at Todi, Son of Fabricius, succeeding Theodorus,
forthwith dispatches his Legates to Constantinople, to admonish Paul to quit
his Errors, and at length to return into the way of Truth. But he not only
disobeyed the Popes Commands, but also, being countenanced therein by
Constantius, offered great indignities to these Legates, and then banished them
into several Islands. Martinus highly resenting this usage, calls a Synod of an
hundred and fifty Bishops at Rome, wherein he renews the Condemnation of Cyrus
of Alexandria, Sergius, and Pyrrhus, and excommunicates and deprives Paul the
Patriarch with the bitterest Anathemas imaginable.

While these things were transacting, the Peace of Italy, which had lasted
between the Romans and the Lombards, thirty years, began now to be disturbed.
For the Lombards took mightily upon them, and imposed such unjust conditions
upon the Romans as they could not submit to; particularly Rhotaris being
himself an Arian, had scarce any City over which he did not set up an Arian as
well as a Catholic Bishop. This was an Evil which both Theodorus and Martine
had often endeavored to remedy, but in vain. For this reason, and also at the
instance of Theodorus the Exarch, a War was proclaimed with the Lombards,
whereupon they take up Arms, and near Scultenna a River of Modena, a sharp
Engagement there was on both sides. But in the end Theodorus was vanquished and
routed, and lost in the fight near seven thousand of his Men. Rhotaris being
flushed with this Victory, in a short time easily made himself Master of all
Liguria. Now Constantius hoping that the change of his General might change his
Fortune too, recalls Theodorus, and sends Olympuis his Exarch into Italy, with
Instructions, both to propagate the Sect of the Monothelites throughout Italy,
and also either to put Pope Martine to Death, or else to take care to have him
sent Prisoner to Constantinople. Olympius coming to Rome, where there had been
already a Synod held against this and other the Errors of the Oriental Church,
and finding that he could not disperse the Contagion as he thought to do, sends
one of his Officers to seize Martine in the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, and
either to bring him to him, or else to kill him if he refused and made
resistance. The Officer being just ready to execute this Order, was by Miracle
suddenly struck with blindness; and so by divine Providence Martine escaped the
danger. The Saracens taking heart upon this great dissension between the
Eastern and Western Church, set sail from Alexandria with a great Fleet, and
arriving at Rhodes, and taking the City, they destroyed the famous and
celebrated Coloss there, with the Brass of which it is said they loaded nine
hundred Camels; this Coloss being seventy foot high, the Workmanship of Chares
the Scholar of Lysippus. Afterward having possessed themselves of several
Islands in the Archipelago, and thence sailing to Sicily, they very much
infested the Inhabitants of that Island. Hereupon Olympius at the entreaty of
Pope Martine, makes an Expedition and forces them thence; though not without
the loss of many of his Ships and Men, and even that of his own Life too, for
he fell sick in Sicily and died there. But Constantius, who was not in the
least bettered by all these Calamities, commands Theodorus Calliopa again into
Italy, with express Order, that he should forthwith send Pope Martine bound to
him; and to assist him in that Affair, he joins Paulus Pellarius with him, who
was to take care to see it done. Theodorus having been honorably received by
the Romans, and going upon pretense of making a Visit to the Pope, seizes and
puts him in Fetters, and so sends him to Constantinople, from whence he was
afterward banished to the Chersonese, the place where Clemens Romanus had
formerly been an Exile. Now Martine being thus compassed with Calamities, and
pinched with extreme want, at length dies in Banishment, after he had been in
the Chair six years, one month, twenty six days. And because it was long before
there came certain intelligence of his Death, the Sea was vacant fourteen
months.

EUGENIUS I.
EUGENIUS, a Roman, Son of Ruffinianus, succeeded Martine about the time that
in the place of Paul the Heretic, Peter was made Patriarch of Constantinople.
Who though he were a little more Orthodox than Paul, yet did not in all things
agree in Doctrine with the Roman Church. His Letters sent to Rome, in which he
denied two Operations and Wills in Christ, were so exploded, that the Clergy
took upon them to interdict the Pope's celebrating Mass in S. Maria Maggiore,
till he had first publicly declared his dislike of them.

In the mean time Grimoaldus Duke of Beneventum, leaving his Son to govern at
home, and marching with a great Army into Lombardy, forced Pertheri and
Gundibert, the two Sons of Aripertus, to quit Pavia and Milain. Of which
Clodoveus the French King having intelligence, he out of compassion to the
young Princes, immediately sends a considerable Force into Italy, to recover
their Right for them. Beyond the Po Battle is joined, and the Dispute managed
very briskly on both sides, the young Princes being eager to retrieve their
paternal possessions, and he endeavoring as much to keep what he had gained by
War. At length Fortune inclined to Grimoaldus his side, and the French were
routed, and driven out of Italy. We are told by some, that the French were
outwitted by the Enemy after this manner; The Lombards dissembled a Flight,
leaving their Tents furnished with plenty of all manner of Provisions, and
especially of Wine, but not far off they made a halt watching their
opportunity; the French entering their Tents, and thinking they had been really
fled, fall to feasting, and eat and drink to such excess, that the Enemy coming
upon them and finding them dead asleep and lying about like beasts, they made
such a slaughter of them, that there was scarce one left alive to carry the
News to Clodoveus. Grimoaldus growing confident upon this Victory, quickly
makes himself Master of the whole Province. As for Pope Eugenius, who was a
person of very great Piety, Religion, Meekness, Humanity and Munificence,
having been in the Chair two years, nine months, he died, and was buried in the
Church of S. Peter, June the 2d. The Sea was then vacant one month, twenty
eight days.

VITALIANUS I.
VITALIANUS born at Segna a Town of the Volsci, the Son of Anastasius, entered
upon the Pontificate at the time when Caesarea the Persian Queen, attended only
with a few of her Confidents, and without the knowledge of her Husband, came to
Constantinople, in the year 683. She was very honorably received by the
Emperor, and not long after baptized, for the sake of which it was that she
came thither. The Persian King having intelligence hereof, forthwith sends
Ambassadors to Constantinople to demand his Wife of the Emperor. To them the
Emperor answered, That it was in the Queen's choice to stay or go, and
therefore they should enquire of her pleasure. The Queen being asked, made
Answer, That she would never return into her Country, unless the King would
become a Christian. Who being acquainted herewith, comes forthwith in a
peaceable manner with forty thousand men to Constantinople; where being
received by the Emperor with all expressions of kindness, he together with his
Soldiers were baptized, and then he returned with his Queen into his own
Kingdom. After this Constantius, having associated to himself in the Government
his Son Constantine, and prepared a great Fleet, setting sail from
Constantinople, arrives at Tarentum, bringing with him in Ships of burden a
great Force of Land-Soldiers. From thence he advanced by Land into Abruzzo,
with design to besiege Beneventum. But understanding that that City was very
strongly Garrisoned, and plentifully furnished with Provisions by the care of
Rhomoaldus, he marched to Lucera, which he took, and plundered, and then
levelled with the ground. Passing from hence to Acherontia, and not being not
able to make himself Master of so well fortified a place, he again attempts the
Siege of Beneventum, but soon raises it, upon intelligence that Grimoaldus
would suddenly be there with a great Army, to assist his Son Rhomoaldus.
Hereupon Constantius moving first toward Naples, though very much incommoded
in his passage, and having left (...) a Roman Citizen with twenty thousand men
at Formiae to oppose the Enemy, at length he comes to Rome, the Pope, and
Clergy, and People in honor to him going six miles out of the City to meet
him. And being conducted through the City with great Acclamations to the Church
of S. Peter, he there made a very rich Present. In the mean time Rhomoaldus,
presuming upon the Supplies he received from his Father, joins Battle with
Saburrus, conquers him, and puts to the Sword a great number of the Greeks.
Constantius being enraged and growing almost desperate upon this misfortune, on
the fifth day after his entrance into the City, falls a plundering, takes away
all the Statues of Brass and Marble set up in the principal parts of the City,
and the rich Ornaments of the Churches, and lades his Ships with them; and in
seven days did more damage to Rome, than the barbarous Nations had done before
in two hundred and fifty eight years; so that ill men, ignorant of History,
have no reason to say, that the Statues and Monuments of Antiquity were
demolished by Pope Gregorie's Order. On the twelfth day the vile and perfidious
paultry Greek (...) Rome, with a vengeance to him, goes toward Naples, thence
to Sicily, being so severe in his exaction of Tribute wherever he came, as to
take away Children out of the embraces of their Parents who could not pay him.
But the covetous wretch, staying some time in Sicily, as he was bathing for
pleasure at Syracuse, was slain; and Mezentius, who is thought to have been the
contriver of his Death, was by the Soldiers made Emperor in his stead. This
Constantius, was a person of a strange (...) and inconstancy of Mind. For at
first, hearing that Vitalianus was chosen Pope, he sent his Ambassadors to
congratulate him, and to make a Present of the Gospels written in letters of
Gold and set with Jewels, to S. Peter. Whereas afterward his mind being
changed, he cast off all regard to God and Man, and turned all things both
divine and humane topsy-turvy. But Vitalianus being intent upon sacred things,
composed Ecclesiastical Canons, and regulated singing in the Church,
introducing Organs to be used with the Vocal Music. He also sent, with ample
Power of binding and loosing, Theodorus an Archbishop and Adrian an Abbat, two
very learned and pious men into England, that by their Preaching and Example
they might keep that people steadfast in the Faith; which the good men did what
they could to perform. This Theodorus also wrote a Book, showing, by what
Penance every sin may be washed off; though some ascribe that Work to Pope
Theodorus. Now Vitalianus having governed the Church as well as lay in his
power fourteen years, six months, died, and was buried in S. Peter's, January
the 27th. The Sea was then vacant four months, fifteen days.

ADEODATUS I.
ADEODATUS, a Roman, Son of Jovinian, was of a Monk created Pope, at the time
when Lupus Duke of Friuli endeavored to posses himself of the Kingdom of
Italy. For Grimoaldus being (as we have said) called by his Son Rhomoaldus Duke
of Beneventum to aid him against Constantius the Emperor, at his departure
commended his People to the care of Lupus, and so, according to the Proverb,
left the Sheep to the keeping of the The Author's quibble upon the name of the
Tyrant, Lupus being the Latin word for a Wolf.
Wolf. For Lupus taking the advantage of Grimoaldus his absence, involves all
Tuscany, Romandiola, and a great part of Lombardy in tumult and confusion.
Hereupon Grimoaldus by gifts and promises prevails with Caganus to advance with
his Avares against Lupus; which he did, and in the first Engagement had the
worst of it. But the next day renewing the Fight, he overcame and slew Lupus,
and then sacked and laid waste all Friuli. Grimoaldus, upon Constantius his
leaving Italy, returns into Lombardy, and in his way on the Saturday before
Easter takes Forlimpopoli; puts all the Inhabitants of it to the sword,
plunders it, and then levels it to the ground, upon the score of an injury
which he had received there from the people of Ravenna, in his passage to the
Aid of his Son. Now Arnefites the Son of Lupus, being assisted by the
Dalmatians, endeavored to recover his Father's Dukedom; but near the River
Natisone, he was vanquished and slain by the Lombards. The Inhabitants of
Vderzo had a share in his Misfortune, being forced to quit their Country for
having countenanced him in his pretensions. At this time Sicily also was in a
bad condition; for Soldiers were sent thither out of all the Provinces of Italy
to make head against Mezentius by whose treachery Constantius had been
murdered. Who being overcome and slain, and the Soldiers again dispersed, the
Saracens arriving with a great Fleet surprise Syracuse and possess themselves
of the whole Island. After some time they return to Alexandria loaded with
spoil, and carry away with them those Ornaments of the City of Rome, which
Constantius had brought to Syracuse with design to transmit them to
Constantinople. These miseries and Calamities had been portended by a Comet
which appeared three months together; by great Rains and frequent Thunders,
such as had not been at any time known before. But such is the blindness of
Mankind, that though they be warned of future Evils, yet they do not, as they
ought, provide against them. It Is reported, that all the standing Corn which
had been lodged by the continued Rains, grew yet up again, and came to
maturity, especially in Lombardy. In the mean time Adeodatus, being a person of
great Piety and Humanity, merciful toward Offenders, bountiful to the poor,
hospitable toward strangers, and compassionate toward all in Calamity,
repaired and dedicated the Church of S. Peter in the Via Portuensis. He also
added to the Building and Revenues of the Monastery of S. Erasmus on Mons
Coelius, wherein himself had been a Monk. Moreover, he appointed frequent
Litanies upon the account of those Prodigies which we have said appeared at
that time. At length having been in the Chair four years, two months, five
days, he died, and was with general lamentation buried in S. Peter's, June the
26th. The Sea was then vacant four months, twenty days.

DONUS I.
DONUS, a Roman, Son of Mauritius, was made Pope at the time when Grimoaldus
King of the Lombards, drawing a Bow high to shoot at a Pigeon, and thereby
straining his Nerves and Veins, though it were nine days after he had been let
Blood in the Arm, yet thereupon it fell a bleeding afresh, and could not be
stanch'd till he died. There were in this King several excellent Endowments
both of Body and Mind. He was a person of great Wisdom and Prudence in all
Affairs; and added several things very useful to Rhotaris his Edict, which
afterward received the Form of a Law. He was of a middle Stature, strong
Constitution, had a bald head, and long beard; and was every way fitted for
Action. He was buried at Pavia in the Church of S. Ambrose, which he had built
at his own charge. Pertharis, Son of King Aripertus, who as we have said, had
been deprived of his Right by Grimoaldus, passing now during his Exile out of
France into Britain, was prompted by a Voice which he knew not from whence it
came, that Grimoaldus being dead he should seek to recover his paternal
Inheritance. Encouraged by this Voice, though the Author of it were uncertain,
he returned into Italy, and within three months after Grimoaldus's Death became
repossess'd of his Father's Kingdom without any opposition. About the same time
died Dagobert the French King, a subtle and crafty Prince, and who was equally
fitted for Counsel and Action; whose Soul, when it had been carried by Devils
almost as far as the Island of Lipara, is reported to have been delivered out
of their Clutches, by Dennis and Maurice the Martyrs, and Martin the
Confessor, Saints for whom as his Patrons he had all his lifetime a great
veneration, and had been very liberal in beautifying and enriching their
Churches. Now Pope Donus consulting the honor of the Church, paved the Porch
of S. Peter's, called Paradise, with Marble, which he took as I suppose from
the Pyramide over against Castle S. Angelo. Moreover, he repaired and dedicated
in the Via Ostiensis the Church of the Apostles, and in the Via Appia that of
S. Euphemia. He also appointed the several degrees of honor and distance to be
yielded to the several Orders of the Clergy. And discovering in the Boethian
Monastery a Company of Syrian Monks who were of the Nestorian Heresy, them he
censured and dispersed into diverse other Monasteries, assigning their own to
Roman Monks. By his eminent Learning and Piety, and through the submission of
Theodorus Bishop of (...), he reduced to Obedience to the Apostolic See the
Church of Ravenna, which had for a considerable time separated it self from
that of Rome, and upon that account had got the name of Allocephalis. Some tell
us that in his time Projectus a Bishop, underwent the torment and acquired the
glory of Martyrdom for the cause of Christianity; and that Mezelindis a Woman
of incomparable Chastity, being solicited by her Lover Ardenius, and upon her
not yielding to his desires put to diverse Torments by him, yet prayed so
fervently even for her Persecutor, whom God for this Crime had struck with
blindness, that upon her Prayers his Sight was restored to him. Our Donus
having been in the Chair five years, ten days, died, and was buried in S.
Peter's, April the 10th. The Sea was then vacant two months, sixteen days.

AGATHO I.
AGATHO, a Sicilian, was Anno Dom. 702. of a Monk made Pope; a person of great
Piety, and who cured a Leper, whom he chanced to meet with, only by a kiss. He
was a man of so obliging a temper, that no person went away sad out of his
Presence. And being so happy as to have a Contemporary Emperor like himself,
he designed to hold a Council upon the account of the Monothelites. Only he
waited the time till Constantine should return from the War, who had vanquished
the Saracens, and made them tributary to the Roman Empire. But the Bulgarians
advancing out of Scythia into Thrace, and the Emperor endeavoring to put a
check to their motion, he was with great loss routed between Hungary and
Moesia. Hereupon, he found himself obliged to strike up a peace with them upon
disadvantageous terms, permitting them to inhabit Hungary and Moesia; though
that Concession in the event proved a great benefit to the State of
Christianity. For these are the men who for this seven hundred and seventy
years since have maintained a continual War, and been the Bulwark of
Christendom against the Turks. Well, a Peace being upon these Conditions
concluded, Pope Agatho sends to Constantinople his Legates John Bishop of
Porto, and John a Deacon of Rome. Them Constantine received with all
expressions of respect, and very affectionately advised them to lay aside all
Cavils and sophistical wranglings and Controversies, and sincerely to endeavor
the uniting the two Churches. There were present at this Synod two hundred and
eighty nine Bishops; and by the Command of the Emperor there were brought out
of the Library of Constantinople those Books, from whence the Opinions and
Determinations of the Ancients might be collected. Gregory Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Macarius Bishop of Antioch, perverting the sense of the
Fathers maintained only one Will and Operation in Christ. But the Orthodox
pressing hard with their Reasons and Authorities, they thereby reclaimed
Gregory; and Macarius adhering obstinately to his Opinion, they (...) him and
his Followers, and made Theophanes, an Orthodox Abbat, Bishop of Antioch in his
stead. This Affair being thus successfully managed, that thanks might be
returned to God for this Union of the two Churches in heart and mind, John
Bishop of Porto, on the Octave of Easter, in the presence of the Emperor,
Patriarch and the People of Constantinople, in the Church of S. Sophia
celebrates the Mass in Latin, all that were present approving that way, and
condemning those that thought otherwise. This was the sixth General Council,
consisting of two hundred and eighty nine Bishops, held at Constantinople,
wherein upon the Authority of Cyril, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory, Dionysius,
Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, and Hierom, it was concluded that there were two
Wills and Operations in Christ, and their pertinacy was exploded who asserted
one Will only, from whence they were called Monothelites. The first General
Council, of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, was, as we have already said,
held at Nice, in the Pontificate of Julius and the Reign of Constantine,
against Arius, who asserted several Substances in the Trinity. The second at
Constantinople of an hundred and fifty Bishops in the Reign of Gratian and the
Pontificate of Damasus, against Macedonius and Eudoxus who denied the Holy
Ghost to be God. The third in Ephesus, of two hundred Bishops, in the Reign of
Theodosius the second, and the Pontificate of (...), against Nestorius Bishop
of Constantinople, who denied the Blessed Virgin to be the Mother of God, and
made Christ's Humanity and Divinity two Persons, asserting separately one to be
the Son of God, the other the son of Man. The fourth at Chalcedon, a City over
against Constantinople, of six hundred and thirty Prelates, in the Pontificate
of Leo and the Reign of Martian, against Eutyches Abbat of Constantinople, who
durst affirm, that our Savior after his Incarnation had but one Nature. The
fifth at Constantinople, against Theodorus and all other Heretics, who
asserted the Virgin Mary to have brought forth Man only, not God-man; in which
Synod it was concluded, that the Blessed Virgin should be styled (...), or the
Mother of God. Concerning the sixth Synod we have spoken already, in which the
Letters of Damianus Bishop of Pavia, and Mansuetus Archbishop of Milain were
very prevalent; the principal Contents of them these, viz. The true Faith
concerning Christ, God and Man, is, that we believe two Wills and two
Operations in him; Our Savior says with respect to his Divinity, I and my
Father are one; but John 10. 30.
with relation to his Humanity, My Father is greater than I. Moreover, John 14.
28.
as Man he was found asleep in the Ship; as God he commanded the Winds and the
Sea. As for our Agatho, (in whose time after two Ecclipses, one of the Moon,
another of the Sun, there followed a grievous Pestilence,) having been in the
Chair two years, six months, sifteen days, he died, and was buried in S.
Peter's, January the 10th. The Sea was then vacant one year, five months.

LEO II.
LEO the second, a Sicilian, Son of Paul, was as appears by his Writings, a
person thoroughly learned in the Latin and Greek Languages. Having also good
skill in Music, he composed Notes upon the Psalms, and very much improved all
Church Music. He ordained likewise, that at the Celebration of the Mass the
Pax should be given to the people. Moreover, he so vigorously maintained and
asserted the sixth Synod, of which we have spoken in the Life of Agatho, that
he Excommunicated all those whom in the presence of Constantine that Synod had
condemned. He also repressed the pride of the Bishops of Ravenna, a matter
before attempted by Pope Agatho, and ordained that the Election of the Clergy
of Ravenna should be invalid, unless it were confirmed by the Authority of the
Roman See; whereas before they presuming upon the power of their Exarchs,
managed all things arbitrarily, owning no subjection to any, but mating even
the Popes themselves. He likewise solemnly decreed, that no person promoted to
the dignity of an Archbishop should pay any thing for the use of the Pall, or
upon any other score, a Decree which I could wish it were observed at this day,
seeing how many Evils have arisen through Bribery. While Leo was busied in
these matters, Rhomoaldus Duke of Beneventum, having raised a great Army,
possessed himself of Taranto, Brindisi, and all Puglia, and his Wife Theodata,
a devout Lady, out of the spoils of the War built a Church in honor to S.
Peter not far from Beneventum, and a Nunnery. Rhomoaldus dying was succeeded by
his Son Grimoaldus, who deceasing without Issue male, left the Dukedom to his
Brother Gisulphus.

Our Leo, who besides his great Learning and Eloquence, was also an
extraordinary person for Devotion and Charity, and by his Doctrine and Example
very much promoted Justice, Fortitude, Clemency, and Good Will among all men,
having been in the Chair only ten months, died, and June the 28th, was
accompanied to his burial in the Church of S. Peter with the tears of all men,
who deplored the loss of him as of a Common Father. After his Death the Sea was
vacant eleven months, twenty one days. The time of his Pontificate was short,
but the Reputation he gained therein so great, that one would think he had
lived longer than he did, by the celebrated Name which he had deservedly
acquired in so little time.

BENEDICT II.
BENEDICT the second, a Roman, his Father's Name John, being from his Youth
brought up to the Clergy, was so intent upon the study of Holy Writ, that he
became an extraordinary Proficient in Divinity. He was likewise a person of
great Compassion, Charity, and good Will toward all, espcially the Poor;
Virtues by which he so won the Hearts of men, that he was pitched upon as the
only person, who by general consent was fit to succeed in the Place of Leo
deceased. The Emperor Constantine out of the Veneration he had for this man's
Sanctity, sent him a Decree, in which it was established that for the time to
come He whom the Clergy and People of Rome should choose Pope, should be
forthwith acknowledged Christ's true Vicar, without expecting the Authority of
the Emperor or his Exarchs, according to former usage, when the confirmation
of the Emperor or his Vicegerent in Italy was necessary to the creation of a
Pope. Pertheris now King of the Lombards, in imitation of the Religion and
Charity of Benedict, built a Monastery in honor to S. Agatha at Pavia; and his
Wife Rhodelinda prompted by the Example of her Husband built the Church of S.
Mary ad Perticas without the Walls of Pavia. This they did out of a Principle
of Emulation, understanding that Pope Benedict had with vast expense repaired,
beautified and enriched the Churches of S. Peter at Rome, that of S. Laurence
in Lucina, that of S. Valentine in the Via Flaminia, and that of S. Mary ad
Martyrs. Pertheris had designed greater things of this Nature, but he was
diverted by Alalchis Duke of Trent, who being pust'd up by a great Victory
which he had gained over the Bavarians, turns his Arms against his King. But
Pertheris raising an Army, at the first Engagement routs him, besieges Trent
whither he had fled for Refuge, and though Alalchis had first made his escape
thence by night, takes the City. However, Pertheris was a Prince of so great
Clemency as to receive him again into favor upon his submission, and to make
him Duke of Brescia. Some tell us, that in Benedict's time an extraordinary
Star was seen near the Vergiliae several Nights together in a clear Sky between
Christmas and Epiphany. I deny not but that a Comet then appeared, and
portended something; but it is Neighborhood to this Constellation is
incoherent, unless we make that prodigious too. For the Vergiliae rise at the
Vernal Equinox, when the Sun enters the Sign Aries, about the twenty fourth of
March, and begin to set at the Autumnal Equinox. But that out of Vesuvius, a
Mountain in Campania, so great a (...) did at this time burst forth, that it
burnt up all the places round about it, may seem less wonderful, considering
that Pliny the Natural Historian, leaving the Ships which he commanded under
Trajan, and approaching too near it out of curiosity to find out the causes of
it is burning, lost his life by that means. However, it is certain, that not long
after these things there followed Slaughters, Rapines, Fires, the Death of
great Men, and particularly of Pope Benedict, who, as he was universally
beloved in his lifetime, so after his Death he was famous for his Piety, and
the good Offices he had done to mankind. He was in the Chair only ten months,
twelve days, and was buried in S Peter's, May the 15th. By his Death the Sea
was vacant two months, fifteen days.

JOHN V.
JOHN the fifth, by Nation a Syrian born at Antioch, his Father's Name
Cyriacus, was created Pope about the time when the Emperor Constantine died,
in the seventeenth year of his Reign, and left the Empire to his Son Justinian
the second. The Saracens now invaded Lybia and Africa, and possessed themselves
easily of all the places that lay toward the Sea. But Justinian, having in
some measure settled the affairs of his Empire, and raised a competent Army,
advancing against these Saracens, struck such a terror into Abimelech their
Chief, that without engaging he sued for a Peace, and was glad to restore all
his Acquests in Africa. And a Peace, it is said by some, was granted them for
ten years, but upon Condition, that they should pay a thousand pieces of Gold
and a Slave of their own Nation on Horseback every day to the Emperor. At this
time John, a person of great Piety and Goodness, being by general suffrage
chosen Pope in the Constantinian Church, was consecrated in the same manner
with Leo the second by the three Bishops of Ostia, Porto and Veletri; a
Precedent which so obtained, that it was afterward constantly practiced. His
Pontificate was rendered remarkable by two extraordinary persons. Felix the
Uncle of Flavianus, and John Bishop of Bergamo, men of such eminent Learning
and Sanctity, that they received from Princes themselves marks of the highest
respect and Veneration. Pope John, who both before and during his Pontificate
was a sickly man, having written a Book concerning the Dignity of the Pall,
died in the first year after his coming to the Chair, and was buried in S.
Peter's, August the 2d. By his Death the Sea was vacant two months, nineteen
days.

CONON I.
CONON, by birth a Thracian, educated in Sicily, and thence entering into Orders
at Rome, was of a Presbyter made Pope. For there happening a Controversy about
the Election, the Citizens being for Peter an Archbishop, and the Soldiers for
one Theodorus a Priest: at length after a long Contention both Parties agreed
in the Choice of Conon. And indeed he did every way deserve so great a Dignity;
being a man of great Learning and very good Life, pious and devout, of a comely
Person and most Venerable, or as some called it, Angelical Aspect; of wonderful
Simplicity and Sincerity, Modesty and Justice, Resolution and Prudence. For
these excellent Endowments of his all persons concerned with mighty
acclamations of Applause immediately confirmed his Election; as did also
Theodorus Exarch of Ravenna, who being deceased, was not long after succeeded
in the Exarchate by John Platina, whom I believe to have given the name to the
place of my Nativity, called Platina, within the Territory of Cremona. For
there being frequent Wars between the Exarchs and the Kings of Lombardy, it is
not improbable, considering that that place was situated almost in the midway
between Ravenna and Pavia, one of which was the Seat of the Lombard Kings, the
other of the Exarchs, there might at some time be a Battle fought or a Camp
pitched there, from whence we know that names are oftentimes given to places,
as particularly in the same Country there is Vitelliana, a Town so called from
Vitellius his encamping there, and Bebrignano not far from Bebriacum famous for
the defeat which Otho there received. I return to Conon, who presently after
his entrance upon the Pontificate falling sick, Paschal an Archdeacon and
manager of the Church-stock, endeavors to bribe John the Exarch, to procure
him to be chosen Pope upon the Death of Conon. The Exarch took the Money,
though he afterward performed none of the promises he had made upon that
account. And indeed such a covetous and ambitious wretch deserved to be
frustrated in his designs, who made a Bribe of that Treasure of the Church,
which according to Conon's Will should have been laid out in relieving the poor
and repairing of Churches. A Crime to be abhorred in all men, but most
detestable in an Ecclesiastic. Such a breach of trust would not have been
committed by Hubert, who was now a Bishop in Bretagne, of great Note for his
Learning and Piety; nor Leodegarius the Martyr Bishop of Autun, who was put to
Death by Theodoric King of France, for his frequent and free reproofs; nor by
Audoenus Bishop of Roan, a man who was second to none for Knowledge and
Sanctity. These were men removed from Ambition and Avarice, fixing all their
trust in God and Religion, and gaining thereby Reputation among men in this
World, and eternal happiness from God in the other. As for Conon, having been
in the Chair only eleven months, and three days, he died, and was buried in S.
Peter's, September the 21st. The Sea was then vacant two months, twenty three
days.

SERGIUS I.
SERGIUS, a Syrian, born at Antioch, son of Tiberius, coming to Rome in the
time of Pope Adeodatus, was admitted into the number of the Reman Clergy.
Afterward through his Industry and Improvements in divine Knowledge, advancing
gradually he was ordained Parish Priest of the Church of S. Susanna. He
thereupon beginning more and more to frequent the Coemeteries, and there to
perform sacred Offices, by this means he gained so great a reputation, that
upon the Decease of Conon, he was chosen his Successor, though indeed after a
long debate. For the People being divided into two Parties, one stood up for
Theodorus, and the other for Paschal the Arch deacon. Theodorus with his Party
had forced his entrance into the inner part of the Lateran Palace; the outer
from the Oratory of S. Sylvester to the Church of the house of Julia, was
possessed by Paschal. But the Contention and debate growing so high, that every
one thought they would come to blows, each Party resolving not to give place to
the other unless by force compelled thereunto, the principal of the Citizens,
Clergy and Soldiery assembled together to consult what were best to be done to
lay this Tumult. At length having duly considered the whole matter, and judging
it not fit to commit the Popedom to either of those who to (...) their own
ambition had been the cause of so great disorders, by divine direction they
make choice of Sergius without the least opposition; and taking him out of the
midst of the crowd upon their shoulders, they carry him first into the Oratory
of S. Caesarius the Martyr, then into the Lateran Palace, breaking open the
doors by force, and driving out those who were in it before. Theodorus seeing
how all agreed in the choice, salutes Sergius by the name of Pope, and kisses
him. Paschal the other Competitour did the same, though sorely against his
Will, and being only awed thereinto by the armed multitude. For secretly and
underhand he did by Letters, Messengers and Promises so strongly solicit
John Exarch of Ravenna to perform at length what he had promised him for his
Money, that the said John comes forthwith to Rome, without sending any advice
before, that so he might have the advantage of coming upon them unprovided, and
while they were off their guard. But when he understood that Sergius was by
universal consent declared Pope, and urged the performance of what Paschal had
promised him, upon Sergius's expressing a high dislike and detestation of any
such bribery, he violently seizes and carries away several things of value from
the Church of S. Peter. As for Paschal, the occasion of this mischief, he being
accused and convicted of Sorcery, was deprived of his Arch-Deaconry; and for
Penance was confined to a Monastery, whereing after his having continued
obstinate for five years, he died. In the mean time Justinian, being strangely
inconstant toward God and Men, both attaques the Saracens and Bulgarians
contrary to the Articles of Peace he had concluded with them; from whom yet it
is certain he received more damage, than he did to them; and also returning to
Constantinople, being generally hated by the Citizens for his not restraining
the cruelty of the City-prefect, he held a Synod, wherein some Decrees passed
not agreeing with the Orthodox Faith; which also Sergius his Apocrisiary, or
Nuntio,, then residing at Constantinople, very foolishly confirmed by his
Subscription. But these Decrees being afterward brought to Rome and there
exploded by Sergius, who held that there were two Natures in Christ, and that
the Blessed Virgin was the Mother of God, Justinian enraged thereat, sends
Zacharias Protospatharius (which we may render the Captain of the Guards) to
Rome, to bring Sergius bound to him. Which when the Soldiers of the Exarchate
of Italy understood, they immediately took up their Arms, and not only defended
the Pope from violence, but were very near having slain Zachary, had he not
saved himself by flying for refuge to the Pope, who kept him for some time in
his Bedchamber, and afterward sent him back privately to the Emperor. While
these things were transacted at Rome, Leontius, encouraged by (...) the
Patriarch, having excited the People of Constantinople to take up Arms, and
broke open all the Prisons of the City, whereby multitudes of Prisoners were
set at liberty, deposes Justinian, and cutting off his Nose banishes him to the
Chersonese of Pontus. Abimelech Admiral of the Saracens having intelligence
hereof, and hoping to make his advantage of these Tumults, presently invades
Africa; whither Leontius with all expedition sends his Army to check their
motion. But not long after a mutiny arising among the Soldiers, they create one
Tiberius a Citizen of Constantinople Emperor; who immediately returning with
the Army to Constantinople, seizes Leontius, and having retaliated upon him
what we have said he did to Justinian, throws him into Prison, reserving him
there for future greater ignominy. Moreover, he banished Philip the son of
Nicephorus a Patrician, and one who had been assistant to him in getting the
Empire, only because he had told his Companions how he dreamt that he saw an
Eagle covering his head with her Wings; which Tiberius feared might be a
presage of the young man's coming to the Empire. While things went thus at
Constantinople, Pipin Duke of Austrasia laid the foundation of gaining the
Kingdom of France. For understanding that one Bertarius, a mean fellow whom
King Theodoric made use of as his chief Minister, was generally hated by all
People, he marches with a vast Army into France, and being encountered in his
passage by Theodoric and Bertarius, he engages in Battle with them and defeats
them. Bertarius saved himself by flight; but Theodoric retreating, by agreement
upon a Truce constitutes the victorious Pipin Mayre of the Palace, and
principal Administratour of his Kingdom. After this Pipin returned to Austrasia
upon intelligence that the Germans and Sueves infested his People; and having
quelled them, he sets forward toward France again, upon the News that
Theodoric being dead, the Kingdom had fallen to his Brother Childepert.
Arriving there, and being very kindly received by the King, after he had put
his son into the place of Mayre of the Palace, he again returns enraged at the
Sueves and Germans, who were now the second time in Arms.

At this time Sergius, having (...) the banishment of Justinian enjoyed Peace
and Tranquillity, repaired the Church of S. Peter, and restored to it its
ancient beauty. The Front of it he adorned with Mosaic work, made the
Candlesticks and other Ornaments of it of Gold and Silver; found a part of our
Saviors Cross in a little brass Coffer, and because the body of S. Leo had
hitherto lain less regarded than his merits required, he reposited it in a more
honorable and celebrated place. The Statues of the Apostles defaced with Age
he renewed, and either repaired or made wholly new the Ornaments of many
Churches which it would be tedious to enumerate. Moreover, he ordained that at
the breaking of the body of our Lord should be sung, O Lamb of God, that take
away the sins of the World, have mercy upon us; and that on the day of the
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, and of S. Simon there should be yearly a
Procession with Litanies through the City, setting out at S. Hadrian. He made
Damianus Archbishop of Ravenna, and Berslauardus Archbishop of Britain. By
his Learning and Authority he brought over to the Truth the Church of Aquileia,
which before consented not wholly to the fifth Synod. Some tell us, that at
this time Lambertus a Person of great Sanctity suffered Martyrdom at Liege,
because he was so hardy as to reprove Pipin for slighting his Wive's Bed and
keeping Alpais a Whore. The author of his Death is said to have been her own
Brother, who afterward died of the lousy Disease. It Is written also that by
the exemplary Sanctity of Sergius the Saxons were now first wrought upon to
embrace Christianity. The good man having by these means gained a great
reputation; and having been in the Chair thirteen years, eight months, twenty
three days, he died, and was with the lamentation of all men, who wept as at
the loss of a common Father, with great Solemnity buried in the Church of S.
Peter, September the 8th. The Sea was then vacant one month, twenty days.

JOHN VI.
JOHN the sixth, a Grecian, was elected Pope at the time when Theophylact the
Exarch in his passage to Italy arrived first at Sicily. Which being known to
the Italian Soldiers, who having of late times usually sided more with the
Popes, than the Emperors, were afraid that his coming might betoken some ill,
they resolved to kill him at his entrance into Rome. But by the Authority of
Pope John, who made himself Umpire between them, Theophylact was protected, and
all things being made up and accommodated, he goes for Ravenna. In the mean
time Gisulphus Duke of Beneventum, taking heart upon this disagreement of the
Exarch and Soldiers, invades Terra di Lavoro, possesses himself of Sora and
Arpino, burns Villages, makes the Villagers his Prisoners, and drives away
their Cattle. The Pope being deeply sensible of this Calamity, sends his
Ambassadors to Gisulphus, to admonish him to quit those places which he had no
Right to, and to return into Abruzzo; which if he refused to do, he should soon
feel the vengeance of Almighty God upon him. Gisulphus being terrified hereby,
restores the Towns he had taken, and returns to Beneventum. Of those which were
carried away Captive, Pope John redeemed all he could sind out, as (...) as the
Treasure of the Church would reach for their ransom.

At this time (...), who, as we have said, had been banished by Leontius to the
(...) of (...), making his escape thence comes to Cacanus King of the Avares,
who at first treated him with the greatest respect and kindness, and promised
him his Daughter in marriage; but afterward being corrupted with bribes by
Tiberius, he designed to betray his Guest and Son-in-law into his hands.
Justinian having notice hereof, flees to Trebellius Prince of the Bulgarians,
by whose aid he was in a little time after restored to the Empire. While (...)
things were transacted in Europe, the (...) being possessed of Libya and
Africa, set sail from Septa, and passing over into Spain, made themselves
Masters of it all, except that part inhabited by the Asturians and Biscains;
who as they had been the last People of Spain who were subdued to the Roman
Empire, and the last who revolted from it, and the only People who shook off
the Yoke of the Visigoths; so now having received the Christian Faith, they
were the men who continued steadfastly with the greatest resolution to defend
themselves by Arms against the perfidious Saracens. So then, Africa, which
being recovered by Belisarius General to Justinian the first, had been subject
to the Roman Empire an hundred and seventy years, and also Granada in Hispania
(...), being at this time seized by the Saracens, have been obedient to their
Laws and Customs now this seven hundred and forty years, to the great reproach
of Christianity; the Spaniards, who are wont to boast of their Wit and Valor,
not being able to drive them out of Europe. Some tell us that Bid, who lived
in these times, by (...).
Letters written to several Christian Princes did very much bewail this
Calamity, that thereby he might excite them to enter into a War against these
Enemies of God and Men. This (...) was not only extraordinarily well skilled in
the Greek and Latin Tongues, but also for his eminent Piety and Modesty, gained
the surname of (...). He wrote many things upon the Acts of the Apostles, and
upon S. Luke; he published a Book of Chronology, and several Homilies, which
are much used by the Gallican (...). Moreover, of Strabo and Haymo, two very
learned men, said to be Bede's Brethren, one composed diverse elegant Homilies,
and the other commented upon Genesis. As for Pope John, having repaired the
Church of S. Andrew in the Vatican, and the roof of that of S. Mark, and
adorned with Pillars on each hand the Altar of S. Peter's, in the third year
and third month of his Pontificate he died, as some think, a Martyr; but by
whom he suffered Martyrdom, does not sufficiently appear. It Is said he was
buried in the Coemetery of S. Sebastian in the Via Appia. By his Death the Sea
was vacant one month, nineteen days.

JOHN VII.
JOHN the seventh a Grecian, Son of Plato, entered upon the Pontificate at the
time when Justinian being returned to (...), caused Tiberius and Leontius, by
whom he had been deposed, to be publicly put to Death.

Many of his Enemies he cut off by sundry kinds of Death, and many he
imprisoned; some one or other of which he would every day order to be killed,
when the wiping of his Nose put him in mind of the injury that had been done
him. Moreover, having caused the eyes of Callinicus the Patriarch of
Constantinople to be put out, he banished him to Rome; and made Cyrus an Abbat,
who had maintained him in Pontus, Patriarch in his stead. Being acted by the
same foolish humor, as he had been before his loss of the Empire in the time
of Pope Sergius, he sends to Rome two Metropolitans, to persuade Pope John to
hold a Synod, wherein they of the Western Church might confirm the truth of
what those of the East believed concerning the Consubstantiality of the Son
with the Father; sending to him the Articles to which he would have him
Subscribe. The Pope sends the Men back again to the Emperor without doing any
thing in the matter; but yet he did not by his Censures and Interdicts correct
the erroneous (...) concerning God, as it was fit he should, and as it would
have become a steady and resolute Pope to have done. Some write, though without
good authority, that Arithpertus King of the Lombards from a religious
Principle, gave the Cottian Alps and all the Tract that reaches from Piedmont
to the Coast of Genoa to the Church of Rome. Others say, that this Donation was
only confirmed by Arithpertus. But since there is no certainty concerning the
Donation it self, and the Lawyers call it the Chaff, because it yields no Corn,
and it appears in no respect to have been the Gift of Constantine, how can
there be any evidence of its Confirmation? I return to Pope John, a Person who
spoke and lived very well, and who built an Oratory in the Church of S. Peter
in honor to the Blessed Virgin, upon the Walls of which on each hand were
wrought in Mosaic Work the (...) of several of the holy Fathers. Moreover, he
repaired the Church of S. Eugenia, which had long before been decayed through
Age. He adorned also the Coemeteries of the Martyrs Marcellinus and Marcus, and
Pope Damasus. Finally, he beautified diverse other Churches with the Pictures
and Statues of the Saints, wherein the Painters and Statuaries had so well
imitated the Gravity and Majesty of his own aspect, that whosoever looked upon
them thought they saw the Pope himself. Having been in the Chair two years,
seven months, seventeen days, he died, and was buried October the 18th. in the
Church of S. Peter before the Altar of the Blessed Virgin which himself had
built. The Sea was then vacant three months.

SISINNIUS.
SISINNIUS, or (as others call him) Sozimus, a Syrian, his Fathers name John,
lived in the Pontificate no more than twenty days in which time it is said the
body of S. Benedict was by stealth conveyed away from Mount Cassino, by reason
of the solitude of the place, and carried into France. Now Sisinnius, though he
were so afflicted with the Gout both in his Hands and Feet, that he could
neither walk nor feed himself, yet he took such (...) both of the City and
Church of Rome, as to leave nothing undone which became a good Pope. He had
already prepared all materials for the raising the decayed Walls of the City,
and the repairing and beautifying of the old ruined Churches; but he died
suddenly, and was buried in S. Peter's February the 6th. The Sea was then
vacant one month, eighteen days.

CONSTANTINE I.
CONSTANTINE, another (...), his Father's name likewise John, was created Pope
at the time when there happened to be a Famine at Rome which lasted three
years; in which exigence he was so charitable to all, but especially the poorer
sort, that men thought him to have been sent down from Heaven for their relief.
In the mean time (...) out of the hatred he bore to the name of Pontus, sends
Mauritius one of the Patrician Order, and Helias one of his Guards, with a
Fleet to the Chersonese where he had been in Exile, with Commission to put all
above the age of fourteen to the Sword; which, to glut the Emperors Rage, they
accordingly put in execution. And that we may not think that Cruelty was his
only Vice, he became guilty of so great Ingratitude as in an hostile manner to
surprise King Trebellius, by the Aid of whose Forces he had been restored to
the Empire, at a time when he was engaged in a War with the Thracians; But
Trebellius not only bore the Choque, but also forced him to retreat with Loss.
There was no alteration from his former course of Life wrought in him by the
Calamities he had underwent, in any thing save in this, that he now venerated
and defended the Apostolic See contrary to (...) he had formerly used to do.
For when Felix, having been consecrated Archbishop of Ravenna by the Pope, was
required according to custom to send in writing his ackowledgment of the Papal
Authority and Money to Rome, which he stiffly refused to do; Justinian, upon
knowledge of the matter, presently sends order to Theodorus, a Patrician, his
Admiral, with the first opportunity to leave Sicily and go against the
Ravennates. He obeying the Emperors Order, and having in (...) gained a
Victory over them, exercises the greatest cruelty toward them, and sends Felix
bound in Chains to Constantinople; whom Justinian afterward banished into
Pontus, having first deprived him of his sight, after this Manner; He caused
him to fix his Eyes long upon a redhot Concave-vessel of Brass, out of which
there issued a firey Pyramid, which easiy overcame his Eyes and blinded him.
Yet Constantine did by no means approve of this Cruelty, being more desirous of
his (...), than his Punishment.

While the Pope and Emperor were thus employed, Aisprandus endeavoring with
the Aid of the Bavarians to recover the Kingdom of his Ancestors, comes into
Italy, and engaging in a pitched Battle with Arithpertus, vanquishes him, and
gains the Kingdom of the Lombards; Arithpertus himself by a too fearful and
hasty flight being drowned in a swift River. But Aisprandus not long after
dying, did with general approbation leave his Son Luithprandus Successor to
his Kingdom.

Justinian being now very desirous to see Pope Constantine, having sent Ships
to convey him safely, makes it his request that he would come to him.
Constantine yielding thereunto, and approaching now near to Constant inople.
Tiberius, Justinian's Son, with a Princely Retinue, and Cyrus the Patriarch
with all the Clergy, in honor to him go out eight miles to meet him; and being
dressed in his Pontificalibus, they conduct him with solemn Pomp into the City,
and lead him into the Palace. Going from thence to Nicomedia, whither also the
Emperor was to come from Nice, he was received there after the same manner as
at Constantinople. Justinian entering the City soon after, (...) only embraced
the Pope, but also kissed his Feet in sign of honor. Having on the days
following discoursed of several Affairs between themselves, and Justinian
having confirmed the Popes Decrees, Constantine at his taking leave advises him
not to proceed too severely against Philippicus, then an Exile in Pontus,
apprehending some mischief might arise thereupon, because he understood that
Philippicus was a Person of great Fortitude and Prudence. But Justinian not
following the Popes good Counsel, sends a Fleet to Pontus with design to
dispatch Philippicus; who upon a Revolt of the Soldiers to him, with the same
Fleet makes toward Constantinople, and at twelve miles distance from the City
engaging with Justinian and Tiberius, got the Victory and slew them, and with
universal Acclamation was declared Emperor. This Philippicus Philippicus.
afterward banishing Cyrus the Patriarch into Pontus, for his consenting in
belief with the Pope, puts one John a Monk and an ArchHeretick into his place;
whose Opinions he forthwith sent in writing to Rome, requiring all to subscribe
their Assent to them. But Constantine holding a Synod, not only condemned the
Opinions of Philippicus and John the Monk, but also appointed the Images of
those holy Fathers, who had been present at the Councils universally approved
of, to be painted in the Portico of S. Peter's, upon Intelligence that in a way
of Contempt they had been rubbed off from the Walls of S. Sophia, by Philippicus
his Order. Moreover, the same Pope ordained, That the name of no Heretical
Emperor should be inserted in any Public or Private Writings, or impressed
upon Brass or Silver or Lead. But Anastasius, Anastasius.
surnamed Arthemius, by force of Arms deposes Philippicus, in the first year
and sixth month of his Empire, and seizing him, puts out his Eyes. This (...)
sends Letters to Pope Constantine, in which he promises to be a zealous
Defendour of the Catholic Faith, and the sixth Synod. Tbeodosius.
But he also, within three years, being flighted by the Soldiers was deposed,
and compelled by Theodosius, who succeeded him, to take Holy Orders, that so he
might never afterward pretend or aspire to the Empire. Theodosius, a Catholic
Emperor, forthwith gave order for the restoring of the Images of the Holy
Fathers, which, as we have said, had been destroyed by Philippicus. And Felix,
who had been banished into Pontus, quitting his former Obstinacy, returned home
and was restored to his See, of which he had been deprived. At this time also
it was declared, that the Bishop of Pavia was subject only to the Sea of Rome,
and not to the Archbishop of Milain; concerning which matter there had been a
great and long Controversy between the two Prelates. Some write that two Kings
of the Saxons, under the Obligation of a religious Vow, came now to Rome, and
that they there died, as I think, of the Pestilence. Not long after them died
Constantine, having been in the Chair seven years, twenty days, and was buried
in S. Peter's, February the 11th. The Sea was then vacant one month, eleven
days.

GREGORY II.
GREGORY the Second, a Roman, Son of Marcellus, entering into Holy Orders in the
time of Sergius, was upon the Reputation of his great Fidelity and Integrity
made the Popes Almoner and Library Keeper. Being afterward ordained Deacon, he
attended Pope Constantine to Constantinople, where there being a warm Debate
concerning some Articles of Religion, he disputed so smartly, that all men
admired his Learning, Wit, and Eloquence, by which he easily confuted those who
held any erroneous Opinions. Soon after his being created Pope, he rebuilt the
Walls of the City which in several places were fallen down through age; and
repaired the decayed Churches of S. Peter, and S. Laurence without the Walls,
laying in the Water anew, by mending the battered and disjoined Pipes which
formerly had conveyed it into them. He repaired also, and enriched with
Presents of Gold and Silver diverse other Churches, which it would be tedious to
enumerate. Yet I will not pass by in Silence his reviving a Monastery in the
Via Ostiensis not far from S. Paul's, whose Ruins are yet to be seen, and also
that of S. Andrew, settling Monks therein who were to be continually employed in
the exercise of Devotion. Moreover, it was the peculiar Commendation of this
Pope, that through his means the Germans were converted to Christianity; he
having sent among them Boniface a Monk, to bring them out of darkness by
setting up the light of the Truth. Of these Germans a great number came to
Rome, and were baptized with the Popes own Hands. He also by his Authority
compelled Luithprandus, who at first resused it, to confirm the Donation of
Arithpertus, of which we have spoken before; which Luithprandus did at the
beginning of his Reign both possess himself of a great part of Boiaria, and
also besiege and take (...). In the time of this Pope there was such an
Inundation of the River Tiber, which flowed into the City through the Porta del
popolo, that in the Via Lata the Water was almost a man's height, and from Ponte
Molle to the Steps of S. Peter's men rowed about in large Boats. This
Inundation continued seven days to the great Loss and Damage of the Citizens,
it having born down Houses, and rooted up Trees, Corn, Plants and Herbs. The
Moon also being now in an Eclipse, appeared of a bloody color till midnight;
and there was seen a Comet, with its Tail extending toward the North,
betokening some future Calamity. Whereupon Gregory, that he might avert the
displeasure of Almighty God from the Christians, ordered frequent Litanies in
Procession through the whole City. While the Pope was thus employed at Rome,
there came Advice, that the Lombards under the Duke of Beneventum had surpised
the Fort of Cuma; at which Gregory being very much disturbed, sends to admonish
them to restore this Fort which contrary to the Articles of Peace they had
unjustly possessed themselves of, or otherwise they would soon feel the
Indignation of Almighty God upon them. But after several Messages of the like
nature they not quitting it, he encourages the Neapolitans, upon the promise of
a sum of Money, and the sending some Roman Soldiers for their assistance, to
recover it by Force. Theodunus the ArchDeacon having the management of this
Affair, the Neapolitans set briskly to the Work, and re-take the Fort, killing
three hundred of those who were in Garrison therein, and taking five hundred
Prisoners, whom they carried to Naples, where the Soldiers forthwith received
the reward which had been promised them. Gregory now enjoying Peace, applied
himself to Church-work. For he repaired the Church of S. Cross in Jerusalem,
which had long lain neglected, and newarch'd and roof'd the Porches on every
side of it; he built from the foundations the Oratory of S. Susanna on Mount
Coelius; and after the Death of his Mother dedicated his Fathers House to the
honor of S. Agatha, building it into a Monastery, which he plentifully endowed
for the maintenance of the Monks therein.

The Saracens now encouraged by the Discord they observed among the Christians,
setting sail from Septa in Afrique, and arriving in Spain, ravage all the
Country, except Granada which was inhabited by those of their own Nation
already, and at length with their Wives and Children pass as far as Aquitain,
designing to possess themselves of that Province also. Charles Martell the Son
of Pipin was at this time famous Charles Martell.
throughout the World. This Pipin, after the Death of Grimoald, had two other
Sons left, Caroloman and Charles Martell; which Charles, this Brother also
dying, gained afterward to himself the Kingdom of France, though not without
great opposition, especially of Eudo Duke of Aquitain and Chilperic whom some
of the French upon the Death of Theodoric had set up to be their King. But
Martell having passed the River Seine, and advanced to Orleans, at the first
Attaque puts them to flight, and becomes sole Possessour of the Kingdom of
France. After this he passed the Rhine, and conquered the Saxons, Alemans,
Sueves and Boiarians. But having Intelligence that the Saracens had been
invited by Eudo into France, by great Marches he comes forth against them, and
obliging them to fight, gains a mighty Victory not far from Tours. Historians
write that in this Battle there were slain of the Saracens three hundred and
sixty thousand, but of the French only one thousand one hundred and fifty, and
it is said, that Eudo hereupon came over to Martel's side. The Saracens being by
this means through Martel's Valor diverted from any farther Attempts upon the
Spaniards and French, turn all the Rage and Indignation which upon so great an
Overthrow had been raised in them, upon the Constantinopolitans, whose City
they besieged by Sea and Land the space of three years. But suffering all the
extremities of War, being pinched with Hunger and Cold, and a Pestilence
moreover raging among them, they raised the Siege, and returned home. It Is
said, that of this Plague there died in Constantinople three hundred thousand.
As for the Affairs of Italy, the Lombards now under the Conduct of Luithprandus
after a long Siege took and sacked Ravenna, carrying away from thence to Pavia
all things of considerable value, and amongst the rest, as I believe, the
famous Statue on Horseback in Brass. Thus according to the usual Vicissitude of
humane Affairs, it so fell out, that what Theodoric and other Kings of the
Goths, and after them the Exarchs, had taken from Rome and carried to Ravenna,
was by others afterward scattered about and dispersed into several places. In
the mean time there was at Rome a Plot laid by some seditious people against
the Pope; the Heads of the Conspiracy being Basilius, Jordanus a Notary, John a
Subdeacon surnamed Lurion and Marinus an Officer of the Guards, who at this
time was Governor of Rome under the Emperor. But upon the Emperor's
recalling Marinus, the business was deferred to another time. The Conspiratours
tampered also with Paul the Exarch, being willing in a matter of so great
importance to have him to head them. The whole Design being at length
discovered by the people of Rome, they appear in Arms, kill John Lurion, and
dissipate the other Conspiratours. Basilius was confined to a Monastery, where
he died. The forementioned Paul being highly enraged at the Pope for
prohibiting his levying new Taxes, did by the Emperor's Order seek all ways,
both secret and open, of taking away the good man's life; but the Romans and
Lombards taking up Arms defended him. The Emperor Leo hereupon publishes an
Edict, commanding all those who were Subjects of the Roman Empire to raze out
and take away all the Pictures and Images of Saints, Martyrs and Angels out of
their Churches; with design, as he ptofessed, thereby to prevent Idolatry; and
declaring, that whosoever refused so to do should be accounted a public Enemy.
But Gregory not only not obeyed this Order, but also encouraged all Catholics
to stand up stoutly against it. Whereupon the people of Italy were so animated,
that they were near choosing another Emperor, had not Gregory by his authority
interposed to prevent it. Notwithstanding which there arose such a Dissension
at Ravenna, some pleading for Obedience to the Emperor, others to the Pope,
that Paul the Exarch, together with his Son, was slam in the Tumult. To succeed
in whose place the Emperor sends Eutychius an Eunuch, who by Gifts and
Promises was to endeavor to break the Friendship and Alliance between the
Lombards and the Pope. But that Attempt having been often made in vain, was
dropped for a time; and the Pope being freed of this trouble, began to visit the
Hospitals and Churches, and to repair those of them which through age or
neglect had fallen to decay. Moreover, he made a Peace between the King of the
Lombards and the Dukes of Spoleto and Beneventum, which that King had intended
to crush; but having marched in a peaceable manner as far as Rome to confer
with the Pope about the matter, Gregory by his Christian Counsel so mollified
his mind, that laying aside all thoughts of War, he offered up his Sword, and
other Arms, in the Church of S. Peter. The Emperor Leo now in another wild
humor, commanded all the Images, either of Wood, Brass or Marble to be brought
to him, which he forthwith caused to be burnt; and seized upon and put to Death
those who refused to bring them. Germanus the Patriarch, who vigorously opposed
it, he banished, and put into his place Anastasius an Heretic; whom Gregory
afterward in a Synod deprived, and interdicted the Exercise of sacred Offices,
if he refused to return to the Catholic Faith. Furthermore, as became a pious
Prelate, he oftentimes by Letters admonished the Emperor to quit the erroneous
Opinions into which some ill men had seduced him, and at length to embrace the
Truth, and to cease the destroying of the Images of the Saints, by whose
Example and Memory men might be excited to the Imitation of their Virtues. Some
write that in this Popes time Boniface came out of Britain to Rome, and for his
sanctity was of a Monk made a Bishop, and sent into Germany, that by his
Preaching and Example he might confirm that People in the Faith; which he
performed so well, that he was deservedly made Bishop of Mentz; but passing
thence into Africa, he was for his preaching the Word of God put to Death by
the Enemies of Christianity. It Is said also, that S. Aegidius, a Grecian, was
now famous for the holy Life he led, and the miracles he wrought; and that
Petronax, a Citizen of Brescia, did by Vow repair at his own Charge the
Monastery of S. Benedict, which was almost quite left desolate. As for Gregory,
who by his good Example excited all men to the practice of Piety and Virtue,
having been in the Chair sixteen years, nine months, eleven days, he died, and
was buried in S. Peter's, February the 11th. By his Death the Sea was vacant
thirty five days. He is said to have consecrated during his Pontificate one
hundred forty eight Bishops.

GREGORY III.
GREGORT the third, a Syrian, his Fathers name John, was unammously elected
Pope in the Year seven hundred fifty nine. He was a Person of singular
Learning, very well skilled in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and of such an
Insight into the Sense of Holy Writ, that no man was more ready at the
expounding of the abstruse and difficult places in it. Nor (...) he work upon
the People merely by his Preaching and Eloquence, but in all respects he gave
them such a prevailing Example, that it is difficult to determine whether he
spoke or lived better. He was so valiant a (...) of the Catholic Faith, that
he thereby contracted the displeasure and hatred of the greatest Princes; but
by no Force, or Power, or Menace was removed one step from his Resolution.
Finally, his goodwill toward all men was such, that he cherished and relieved
the Poor, redeemed Captives, released insolvent Debtours, and asserted the
Cause of Widows and Orphans against potent Oppressors in such a manner, that
he deserved the Name of a common Father and (...). Soon after his entrance upon
the Pontificate, with the Consent of the Clergy of Rome he excommunicated and
deposed the Emperor Leo for his having rased the Pictures of the Saints out of
the Churches and destroyed their Images, and also for not being Orthodox in
Opinion concerning the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father. In the
mean time Luithprandus King of the Lombards, from an ambitious desire of
enlarging his Dominions, having possessed himself of all the Towns round about,
lays Siege to Rome it self; whereupon Gregory forthwith dispatches Messengers
by Sea, it not being safe for them to pass by Land, to Charles Prince of the
French, to pray him that he would speedily aid the distressed City and Church
of Rome. Indeed formerly the Popes when they were in any great Danger from
abroad, had been wont to seek for succor from the Emperor of Constantinople;
but Gregory now declined it, both for the Causes we have just before mentioned,
and also especially because Leo was now hard put to it to defend Constantinople
it self against the Saracens, and therefore little able to protect others. By
which means it came to pass, that the Constantinopolitan Emperors being for
the time to come unapplied to, the Protection of the Church was from
henceforward put into other hands. Upon Gregorie's Request Charles undertaking
the Church's Patronage, desires Luithprandus as his Friend, and particularly
upon the account of his Son Pipin his near Allie, to quit his Enterprise, and
not give the Pope any disturbance; whereupon Luithprandus raises the Siege. The
(...) of Italy being thus composed, Charles turns his Army with success against
the Burgundians; crushes the Idolatrous Prison's; takes Lions, Arles, and
Marseilles from the (...), who thereupon invite to their Aid Athimus the King
of the Saracens. Who passing the Rhone takes Avignon by Storm, intending to
make use of the convenience of that place for a Citadel. But Charles upon
Intelligence hereof, hastens thither with his Army, and re-takes Avignon,
putting to the Sword all the Saracens who were in Garrison in it. From thence
he marched to Narbonne, whither he understood that Athimus had fled. But having
advice that Amoreus, another Saracen King of Spain was coming with a great Army
to the Aid of Athimus, he quitted the Siege of Narbonne, and marched to the
Valley of Corbiere, not far off, wherein there was a fair Plain very commodious
to join Battle in. Amoreus thinking that Charles having been routed had fled
thither, enters the Valley, and prepares to engage; which Charles did not
decline, though the number of the Adversaries Army was incredibly great. The
(...) having continued for some time very warm, and Amoreus himself having been
slain at the beginning of the Engagement, at length the Saracens were forced to
betake themselves to slight, and a great part of them were killed in the Fens
and (...) thereabouts. Athimus, as good luck would have it, making his Escape
by Sea toward the farther part of Spain, in Rage and Despair, laid (...) by
Fire and Sword all the Islands which he arrived at in his passage. Much about
this time the Body of S. Augustine, which two hundred and fifty years before,
when the Vandals wasted Africa, had been carried away from Hippo into Sardinia,
was by the care of Luithprandus translated thence to Pavia, and reposited in a
very honorable place of Interrment. The Saracens being now pretty well tamed,
kept themselves within the Pyrenean Hills; upon which all the Visigoths who
possessed the hither parts of Spain and part of France, being not able to
defend themselves, were subdued by Charles; and so that People who had
domineered for almost three hundred years were utterly extinguished, except
some few who were saved by the People of Barcelona. Some write that Charles was
in this War assisted by Luithprandus with Men, who after the Victory returned
home laden with Booty. In the mean while Pope Gregory not neglecting to improve
the time of Peace he now enjoyed, applied himself to Churchwork. The Altar of
S. Peter's he made more stately by erecting a Row of six Pillars of Onyx on
each hand of it, where as many of the same magnitude and figure had formerly
stood, but were now decayed through (...). Upon these Pillars were Architraves
gilt with Silver; on which he set up the Images of our Savior and the Apostles
at equal distances. He built also an Oratory in the same Church, in which he
reposited some of the Relics of almost all the Saints, and ordered Mass to be
therein daily performed, in the Canon of which he added these words, which were
engraven upon the Marble round the Oratory, Quorum Solennitas in conspectu tuoe
Majeslatis celebratur, Domine Deus noster, toto in Orb terrarum. etc. i. e.
Whose Anniversaries are celebrated in the sight of thy Majesty, O Lord our God,
throughout all the World, etc. which Clause is not in the general Canon now
used. Moreover, he gave to this Church several Vessels of Silver; and caused to
be made at his own Charge the Image of the Blessed Virgin with our Savior in
her Arms, of Gold, which he placed in the Church of S. Mary ad Proesepe. He
also repaired the Roof of the Church of S. Chrysogonus, appointing Monks for
the daily performance of divine Service therein, and settling an Estate for
their Maintenance. Several Monasteries he either repaired, or built from the
ground, to the Recluses whereof he prescribed Rules of strict and holy living.
He rebuilt also the ruined Walls of the City of Rome, and in like manner those
of the almost desolate Civita Vecchia. Furthermore, he ordained the Celebration
of Mass in the Church of S Peter almost without Intermission, both by the
Priests in Weekly Attendance, and by the Monks; upon which account we may
observe the Cells of the Monks and the Houses of the Secular Priests to be in
several places contiguous, each of them striving to out do the other in
diligence at their Devotion, Our Gregory having well discharged his Duty
toward God and Men, died in the tenth year, eighth Month and twenty fourth day
of his Pontificate, and was with general lamentation buried in S. Peter's
November the 28th. The Sea was then vacant only eight days.

ZACHARIAS I.
ZACHARIAS, a Grecian, the Son of Polychronius, is reckoned in the number of
the best Popes. For he was a Person of a very mild Disposition, and wonderfully
sweet Conversation; every way deserving; a Lover of the Clergy and People of
Rome; slow to Anger, but very forward to exercise Mercy and Clemency; rendering
to no man evil for evil, but in Imitation of our Savior overcoming evil with
good, and that to such a degree, that after his arriving to the Papal Dignity
he preferred and enriched those who had envied and hated him. At the beginning
of his Pontificate finding Italy enflamed in War, in order to procure a Peace
he forthwith sends Legates to Luithprandus King of the Lombards, who now made
War upon Transamundus Duke of Spoleto. But these Legates not effecting the
Design, he himself goes in person, accompanied with the Roman Clergy, into
Sabina; and it is said that in sign of honor the King met him eight miles from
Narni, and alighting off his Horse, accompanied him on Foot into the City. The
day following, while they were at Mass, the Pope made publicly an Elegant
Oration, wherein he set forth the Duty of a Christian King both in the time of
Peace and War; and it is reported that the King was so wrought upon by it, that
he presently put the sole Power of accommodating matters into the Pope's hands.
The King had already deposed Transamund, and invested Agrandus, his Nephew, in
the Dukedom. Yet at the Pope's Intercession Transamund was received into
favor; but he quitting all Pretensions to the Dukedom, entered into holy
Orders. All the Towns which had been taken in Sabina were restored; as also
Narni and Ancona, and whatever places the Lombards had for thirty years past
made themselves Masters of in Tuscany. Moreover, all who had been made
Prisoners during the War were set at Liberty. Luithprandus, having been treated
by the Pope with all imaginable expressions of Indearment and Respect, marched
thence peaceably with his Army, and not long after died, in the thirty second
year of his Reign. He was a person who deserved that Kingdom both for his
extraordinary Wisdom and Prudence, and also for his Valor and warlike Temper,
in which no man excelled him; so eminent also for Justice and Clemency, that it
is hard to judge whether of these two Virtues were more conspicuous in him. His
Nephew, Aldeprandus, succeeded him in the Kingdom, which having held only six
months he also died; and Duke Rachis, a Prince whose Piety and Integrity
deserve the highest praise, was unanimously chosen in his stead. By him also a
League was renewed with the Pope, to whose Legates the devout and religious
King graciously granted whatever they desired. But having reigned four years,
he quitted his Government, and betook himself to a Monastic Life, encouraging
his Wife and his Sons to do the like. His Brother Aistulphus succeeded him,
whose crafty and fierce Temper threatened disturbance to all Italy, but
especially to the Pope and the Romans, whom he designed by Force to bring under
his Jurisdiction. In the mean time Charles Martel, being seized with a violent
sickness, at the persuasion of his Friends divided his Acquests between his two
Sons; of whom Caroloman, the elder, had Austrasia and Suevia, and (...)
Burgundy and part of France. And so that valiant and wise man died at Cressey
sur Serre, in the thirty fifth year of his Office of Mayre of the Palace, and
was buried at Paris in the Church of S. Dennis. He had had by a former Wife
another Son named Grypho, whose rapacious Temper suited with his Name; he
prevailed with the warlike Saxons to assist him in making War upon his
Brethren. But (...) and Pipin entering Saxony with an Army, force their Prince
Theodoric to submission. After this Expedition Caroloman comes to Rome, and
there renouncing the Pomp and Glory of Empire, he goes to Mount Cassino, and
takes the habit of a Monk of S. Benedict. But Pipin being of an aspiring Mind,
sends Ambassadors to the Pope, desiring that by his Authority he would confirm
to him the Kingdom of France. The Pope upon the score of former good Services
performed by his Family, and the ancient Friendship which had been between them
and the Popes his Predecessors, yields to his Request, and accordingly
confirms him, An. Dom. 753. and so from Mayre of the Palace, who was the first
Officer of the Kingdom, Pipin was advanced to the Kingdom of France it self,
from whom the succeeding Kings derive their Original. It Is reported that
Caroloman, who, as we have said, had taken the habit of a Monk, came now, with
others of the same Order, from Mount Cassino to Pope Zachary, desiring that by
his mediation they might gain leave to remove the Body of S. Benedict, which
had by (...) been carried away to the Abbey of Fleury in the Kingdom of France.
The Pope granted their Desire, and thereupon sent a Message to King Pipin, who
upon Information in the matter, freely gave way to it. Zachary now enjoying
Peace on every side, set himself to the repairing of several decayed Churches.
The Tower and Portico before the Lateran Church he built from the ground, made
the Windows and Gates of Brass, and upon the Frontispiece of the Portico caused
a Map of the World to be delineated. He renewed the defaced Images of the
Saints; enlarged and beautified the Lateran Palace; repaired the Palatine
Library, and assigned to every Church a Revenue for the maintenance of Oil for
their Lamps. He gave to S. Peter's an Altar-Cloth embroidered with Gold and set
with Jewels, having the Essigies of our Blessed Savior wrought upon it. He
built the Church of S. George in Velabro, and reposited the head of that Saint
therein; as also the Church of S. Coecilia, in the Via Tiburtina, six miles
from the City, and in it an Oratory in honor to S. Cyrus the Abbat; settling a
maintenance for the Priests that ministered in it. He rebuilt the Roof of the
Church of S. Eusebius, which happened in his time to tumble down. He also gave
order that his Servants should daily distribute and give out at the Lateran
Palace Alms to the Poor of all sorts. Moreover, he forbad the Venetians, upon
pain of Excommunication, the selling of Christian Slaves to Saracens and
Heathens, which those Merchants were before wont to do. Finally, that we may
not think that his Advancement to so great a Dignity made him neglect his
Studies, he translated out of Latin into Greek four Books of Gregory in
Dialogue; that so the Grecians might be instructed in the Rules of good living.
But having with such Integrity to the Satisfaction of all men governed the
Church ten years, three months, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, March
the 15th. By his Death the Sea was vacant twelve days.

STEPHEN II.
STEPHEN the Second, a Roman, Son of Constantine, from one Degree in the Church
to another, ascended at length to the Papal Dignity; although upon the Death of
Zachary the People presently made Choice of another Stephen a Priest; who on
the third day of his Pontificate awaking out of Sleep, and beginning to settle
his domestic affairs, was suddenly seized with a fit of an Apoplexy, of which
he died. After whom our Stephen the Second, (for we reckon not his short-lived
Predecessor of that name in the List) was unanimously elected by the Clergy
and People in the Church of S. Mary ad Proesepe, and being highly beloved by
all was carried upon men's shoulders to S. Savior's, called also the
Constantinian Church, and from thence into the Lateran Palace. He was a Person
of extraordinary Piety and Prudence, a Lover of the Clergy, a Repairer of
Churches, a diligent Preacher and Writer of the Doctrine of Christianity, a
Father of the Poor, a zealous Defender of Orphans and Widows, and in going
through with any thing he undertook, hardy and resolute, but not obstinate. For
Aistulphus now making Inrodes upon the Borders of the Romans, he at first
endeavored by Persuasions and Presents to bring him off. But that covetous
Prince requiring the payment of a Tribute of so much a head yearly from the
People, the Pope thereupon was forced to seek for help from abroad, and
accordingly he sent Nuntio's to Constantine the Emperor of Constantinople, to
desire Aid of him against Aistulphus, who gave disturbance to all Italy, and
had already taken Ravenna the Seat of the Exarchate, and a great part of
Romagna. But finding no hope of succors from him, he resolves to go to Pipin
of France; and therefore sends to that King to desire that he would prevail
with Aistulphus to permit him safe passage through his Country; which
Aistulphus at Pipin's Request consented to. Stephen now reaching the Borders of
the Kingdom of France, Pipin's Son Charles, who from his mighty Achievements
was afterward surnamed the Great, in token of honor goes forth an hundred
miles to meet him. Pipin himself met him three miles from the City, and
alighting off his Horse kissed his feet and led the Horse upon which he rode by
the Bridle till he had conducted him into the City, and brought him to his
Apartment. Aistulphus now fearing that the Pope was practicing against him,
sends Caroloman a Monk to his Brother Pipin, to persuade him not to make War
upon the Lombards in Stephen's Quarrel; which Pipin not only refused to grant,
but also confined the Monk to a Monastery in Vienne, where not long after he
died of Grief. But it not being a fit season of the year to undertake an
Expedition, and Pipin allowing much to the ancient Friendship there had been
between them, he sends Ambassadors to Aistulphus, to advise him to restore the
Places he had taken, or otherwise to let him know that he should be obliged in
a short time to recover them by force of Arms. Aistulphus hearkened not to this
good Counsel; whereupon Pipin, the Spring now approaching, advances with an
Army against the Lombards; and having sent before some light-harnessed Soldiers
to force Aistulphus's Guards to quit the Passes of the Alps, he marches down
into the Plain of the State of Milain, and having without any opposition sacked
and harassed all places he came to, at length he invests Pavia the Seat-Royal
of the Kings of Lombardy, which Aistulphus and those that were in Garrison with
him defended. But Stephen moved with Compassion at the numerous Calamities
which this obstinate man had brought upon himself and his People, voluntarily
offers Aistulphus a Peace, upon condition he would restore what he had taken;
which Aistulphus at length consented to, and promised upon Oath more than was
demanded. Pipin reckoning that the Pope had now satisfaction, raises the Siege,
and returns into France, leaving Varrenus the Arbitratour of this Peace between
them. Stephen and Varrenus go to Rome, not doubting but that Aistulphus would
in a little time perform his promise; instead of which he presently mustering
up from all parts what Forces he could, with a tumultuary Rout rather than a
just Army, follows them, and besieges Rome, laying waste and burning the
Suburbs and Places adjacent, insomuch that the People of Rome suffered more
Damage by the Outrages he then committed, than they had received in three
hundred forty four years before from the declining of the Empire. Hereupon
Pipin being again sued to by the Pope to aid the distressed City of Rome
against the Perfidiousness and Cruelty of Aistulphus, he with all possible
expedition raises an Army for that purpose. In the mean time the Turks willing
to mend their Quarters, overrun and conquer the Alanes first, then the
Colchians and Armenians, after them the People of the Lesser Asia, and lastly
the Persians and Saracens, An. Dom. 755. Some Writers tell us, that these were
of the Race of those Scythians whom Alexander the Great kept within the
Hyperborean Mountains with Iron-Bars, meaning by that Metaphor, that he had
shut up that wild Nation there as into a Prison. But after much mischief done
and received on both sides, a Peace being concluded between the Saracens and
Turks, it was agreed that the Turks which dwelt in Persia should be called
Saracens; and by this means the Saracens did more patiently suffer the Turks to
bear sway in Asia, especially apprehending moreover that they might soon be
brought to embrace the Mahumetan Religion. But we return to Pipin, who coming
again with his Army into Italy, was met by Gregory principal Secretary to the
Emperor Constantine the fourth; who desired him in his Master's name, that is
he should prove victorious over the Lombards, he would not give the Exarchate
of Ravenna to the Pope or the Romans, it belonging of right to the Emperor. To
which Pipin answered, that he came into Italy to do the Pope and People a
kindness, and that he should consult their advantage to the utmost of his
Power. After this he marched to Pavia, and reduced Aistulphus to such
extremity, that he was forced to accept of the former Conditions of Peace.
Hereby the Exarchate was restored to the Romans, together with all the Tract
contained between the Po and Apennine, from Piacentino to the Gulf of Venice,
and whateyer lies between the River Isara, the Apennine and the Adriatic, with
all that Aistulphus had taken in Tuscany and Sabina. Pipin stayed at the Foot
of the Alps till Conditions should be performed, having left Holcadus an Abbat
with part of his Army to oblige Aistulphus to perform what he had promised, and
moved no farther till he understood that Aistulphus had died of an Apoplexy
while he was hunting, before the surrendry was fully made. Upon his Death,
Desiderius, Duke of Tuscany, forthwith raises an Army of Lombards, with design
to possess himself of the Kingdom. The same also did Rachis, Aistulphus's
Brother, who had before, as we have already said, taken the habit of a Monk;
and indeed the Lombards generally, except those of Tuscany, were on his side.
But Desiderius by making large Promises to the Pope and the Romans, wrought
them into a favor of his Pretensions; and accordingly they with all speed sent
Ambassadors, and among them Holcadus the Abbat to Rachis to require him to lay
down his Arms, and submit to Desiderius. And so Faenza and Ferrara were at last
delivered to the Pope, and the name of the Exarchate, which had continued from
the time of Narses to the taking of Ravenna by Aistulphus an hundred and
seventy years, was extinguished. Things being now peaceably settled, and the
Jurisdiction of the Church greatly increased, Stephen holding a Synod, takes an
account of his several Flocks and their Pastors; gently chastises those who had
offended; directs such as had gone astray; teaches and instructs the ignorant;
and finally sets before them the Duty of a Bishop, of a Presbyter, and of all
Orders in the Clergy. Moreover, he appointed Litanies for the appeasing of the
Divine Anger; the Procession on the first Saturday to be to S. Marie's ad
Proesepe, on the second to S. Peter's in the Vatican, on the third to S. Paul's
in the Via Ostiensis. He also repaired several Churches which had been damaged
by Aistulphus while he laid Siege to the City; yet he did not recover the
Relics of the Saints which that King had carried with him to Pavia, and there
reposited not dishonourably in diverse Churches. The good man having by these
means proved serviceable to God, his Country, and the Church, died in the
fifth year and first month of his Pontificate, and was buried April the 26th,
with general lamentation as for the loss of a Common Father. The Sea was then
vacant thirty two days.

PAUL I.
PAUL, a Roman, son of (...), Brother of Stephen the second, became well
skilled and practiced in all things belonging to a Churchman by his having been
educated in the Lateran Palace under Pope Gregory the second, and Pope Zachay,
by which latter he was, together with his Brother, ordained Deacon; and when
upon the Vacancy of the Popedom by the Death of Stephen, some persons proposed
Theophylact the Archdeacon for his Successor, yet others stood for Paul, as
one who both for the Integrity of his Life, and great Learning, deserved to
succeed his Brother in that Dignity. After a long Dispute therefore Theophylact
was rejected, and Paul by general suffrage chosen, in the time of Constantine
and Leo. This Paul was a person of an extraordinary meek and merciful Temper,
and who in Imitation of our Savior never returned to any man evil for evil,
but on the contrary by doing good to them he overcame those ill men that had
oftentimes injured him. He was of so kind and compassionate a Nature, as that
he would go about by night with only two or three Attendants to the Houses of
poor sick people, assisting them with his Counsel, and relieving them with his
Alms. He also frequently visited the Prisons, and paying their Creditors,
discharged thence multitudes of poor Debtours. The Fatherless and Widows that
were over-reached by the tricks of Lawyers he defended by his Authority and
supported by his Charity. Moreover, having assembled the Clergy and People of
Rome, he did with great solemnity translate the Body of S. Petronilla S.
Peter's Daughter, with her Tomb of Marble upon which was this Inscription,
Petronilloe Filioe dulcissimoe, from the Via Appia into the Vatican, and placed
it at the upper end of the Church dedicated to her Father. At this time the
Emperor Constantine having in all places plucked down the Images, and put to
death Constantine Patriarch of Constantinople for opposing him therein, and
made Nicetas an Eunuch, his Abettour in the Sacriledg, Patriach in his stead,
the Pope consulting by all means the Interest of Religion, sends Nuntios to
Constantinople to advise the Emperor to restore and set up again the Images he
had taken away, or upon his refusal so to do, to threaten him with the Censure
of Excommunication. But Constantine persisting obstinately in what he had done,
not only despised this good Counsel, but also granted Peace to Sabinus King of
the Bulgarians, because he also made the like havoc of Images with himself,
though he were before engaged in a War against him. Having also associated to
himself into part of the Empire his Son Leo the fourth, whom he had married to
the most beautiful Athenian Lady Irene, he enters into a League with the
Saracens, thereby to despite and provoke the Orthodox Christians. In the mean
time Pipin entirely subdues Taxillo Duke of the Bojarians, and admits of a
League with the Saxons, but upon this Condition, that they should be obliged to
send three hundred Horsemen to his Assistance as often as he should have
occasion to make an Expedition. Against the Aquitains he maintained a tedious
War, which at length he committed to the management of his young Son Charles,
himself being so worn out with Age that he could not be present at it. This War
being ended, Charles takes by Storm Bourbon, Clermont, and several other Towns
of Auvergne. But Pipin, who as we have said was now very old, not long after
dies, leaving in the Kingdom his two Sons Charles and Caroloman. Some tell us
that Aistulphus King of the Lombards, who, as is above declared, had carried
away the Bodies of diverse Saints from Rome to Pavia, died at this time; and
that he had built Chapels to those Saints, and also a Cloister for Virgins. in
which his own Daughters became Nuns. He was an extraordinary Lover of the
Monks, and died in their Arms, in the sixth year and fifth month of his Reign.
At the beginning of his Government, he was fierce and rash, in the end
moderate; and a person of such Learning, that he reduced and formed the Edicts
of the Lombards into Laws. He was, as has been said, succeeded by Duke
Desiderius; the Valor of the Lombards beginning now to dissolve and lose it
self in Luxury. Our Paul, having repaired some old decayed Churches, died in S.
Paul's in the Via Ostiensis, in the tenth year and first month of his
Pontificate; and his Body was with very great Solemnity carried into the
Vatican. The Sea was then vacant one year, one month.

STEPHEN III.
STEPHEN the third, a Sicilian, Son of Olibrius, entered upon the Pontificate,
A. D. 768. a learned man, and in the management of Affairs, especially those
belonging to the Church, very active and steady. Coming to Rome very young, by
appointment of Pope Gregory III. he took Orders and became a Monk in the
Monastery of S. Chrysogonus, where he was inured to the stricter way of living,
and instructed in Ecclesiastical Learning. Being afterward called by Pope
Zachary into the Lateran Palace, and his Life and Learning generally approved
of, he was constituted Parish Priest of S. Caetilia; and for his great
Integrity and readiness in Business both Zachary and his Successors, Stephen
and Paul would always have him near their Persons. But upon the Death of Paul,
whom our Stephen never deserted to his last Breath, Desiderius, who, as we have
said, was by the Assistance of Stephen II. made King of Lombardy, being by
Pipin's Death rid of all fear, encourages Toto Duke of Nepi to promote his
Brother Constantine to the Pontificate by force of Arms, if he could not
compass it by canvassing and bribery. He accordingly marches to Rome with an
Army, and with the Assistance of some whom he had corrupted and made his
Friends by Gifts and Promises, gets Constantine to be elected Pope. Indeed
there were those who set up one Philip against him, but he was presently forced
to quit his Pretensions, and Gregory Bishop of Praeneste compelled to initiate
Constantine, who at the time of his choice was a Laick, into holy Orders, and
then to consecrate him Bishop; the hands of which Gregory are said thereupon by
Miracle to have so withered that he could not reach them to his Mouth. But
Constantine having persisted to exercise the Papal Function for one year, was
at length in great Rage and Disdain deposed by the People of Rome, and Stephen
unanimously chosen in his stead. Upon which Constantine being brought into S.
Savior's Church, and the sacred Canons read, he was publicly and solemnly
divested of the Pontifical Habit, and commanded to lead a private life in a
Monastery. After this, Stephen being consecrated by three Bishops in the Church
of S. Adrian, and saluted as the true Pope by all the Clergy and People of
Rome, applied himself to the censuring and suppressing of the Practices of some
ill men who endeavored to break the Unity of the Roman Church. Therefore
calling a Council, he writes to Charles desiring him to send to Rome, as soon
as might be, some Bishops of France, by their Learning and Integrity well
qualified for the Affair. The same also he writes to the other Christian
Princes; who all complying with him therein, a Council is held in the Lateran
Church, where the Fathers having discoursed among themselves diverse things
tending to the settling of the Church, they ordered Constantine to be brought
before them. For the underhand-dealings of Desiderius King of the Lombards, and
Paul Aphiarta having occasioned frequent tumults among the People; Desiderius
endeavoring all he could to alienate the Affections of the Romans from Charles
to the Emperor; hereupon several were killed on both sides, and Constantine,
the occasion of all the mischief, had his Eyes put out by the contrary Faction,
though Stephen declared against it, and did what he could to prevent it; but
there is no opposing a furious, enraged Multitude. Constantine appearing before
the Council, and being accused that he had usurped the Apostolic See not being
in any holy Orders, lays all the fault upon the People, and especially upon
some particular Persons who forced him against his Will to take the Pontificate
upon him. Then prostrating himself upon the floor, and humbly begging Pardon,
the persons present moved with Compassion, ordered him to be dismissed, and put
off the Debate of his whole Case to the next day, intending then more maturely
to deliberate what ought to be done in the matter. But the next day Constantine
returning to the Council, was quite of another mind, and remonstrated that he
had Precedents of former Prelates for what he had done; that Sergius ArchBishop
of Ravenna, and Stephen of Naples, had been of Laics consecrated Bishops. The
Fathers resenting this Impudence, caused him to be cast out with Disgrace, and
having nulled his Decrees, applied themselves to the settling of the State of
Christianity. Among other things it was unanimously decreed by them, That no
Laick, but such only as had passed through the several Degrees in the Clergy,
should presume to take the Popedom, upon pain of Excommunication. It was
ordained likewise, that those who had attained to the Episcopal Dignity in the
time of Constantine, should renounce that Character, and fall back into the
same Rank and Order which they were of before; but with this Reserve, that if
their Life and Doctrine were approved by the People, it then pleased the
Council, that upon their application to the Apostolic See, they might be
consecrated anew. The same was judged meet concerning Presbyters and Deacons;
yet it was forbidden that any of them should arrive to the greater Degrees,
upon a Jealousy, as I believe, lest some Error or Sect might thence arise, as
from a Seminary of Discord and Sedition. Moreover it was decreed, that all the
sacred Offices which Constantine had performed, should be deemed null, except
only Baptism and Confirmation. Finally, having made void the Constantinian
Synod, in which the Greek Prelates had decreed that the Pictures and Statues of
the Saints should be defaced and thrown out of Churches, it was ordained that
those Images should be in all places (...), and an Anathema passed upon that
execrable and pernicious Synod, by which the condition of the Immortal God was
rendered worse than that of Men; it being allowed us to erect the Statues of men
who have deserved well of the Public, both for the expressing of our
Gratitude, and the raising our Emulation of their brave Deeds, but forbidden to
set up the Image of our Savior, whom we ought if it were possible to have
always before our Eyes, whether we consider the mighty Obligations he has laid
upon Mankind, or the Dignity of his Divine Nature. These things having thus
passed according to the Popes mind, it was Decreed, that on the following day
there should be a Solemn Procession, both to return thanks to God, and also in
order to the averting of his Displeasure. This Procession was made from the
Lateran Church to S. Peter's, with universal great Devotion, the Pope himself,
with all that were present, walking Barefoot. But in our times Piety and
Devotion are grown so cold, that such Expressions of Humility are not only laid
aside, but men are so proud as (...) to vouchsale to pray at all. Even the more
eminent and dignisied persons, instead of weeping at Procession or at Mass, as
these holy Fathers were wont to do, are employed in indecent and shameless
laughter; (...) of singing Hymns, which they disdain as a servile thing, they
are breaking (...). and telling Stories among themselves to make each other
merry. What should I say further? the more petulant and full of Buffoonry any
one is, the more he is commended in such a corrupt Age. Our present Clergy does
dread severe and grave Men; as being more desirous to live thus licentiously,
than (...) be obedient to good Admonitions. and subject to wholesome Restraints;
by which means the (...) Religion does daily suffer and decline. I return to
Stephen, who when the Procession was over, forthwith caused the Acts of the
Council to be first openly pronounced by his Commissary, and then published in
Writing, threatening Excommunication against any who should presume to oppose
what the Holy Synod had decreed. But not long after Sergius Archbishop of
Ravenna dying, Michael, Register of that Church, with the Assistance of King
Desiderius and Maurice Duke of Rimini, whom he had corrupted with Bribes,
though a mere Laick, possesses himself of the Sea, in opposition to Leo the
Archdeacon whom the Clergy were very desirous to choose. Yea these Abettours of
his presumed so far. as to send Ambassadors to Pope Stephen to bribe him into
the Consirmation of this Michael. But Stephen not only resused their offers of
Money, but also published an Excommunication against him, if he resigned not
the Sea which he had against all Right usurped. However, he forcibly kept
possession of it so long as he had any thing (...), either of his own or
belonging to the Church, whereof to make a (...) to greedy (...). Upon which
the Pope sending his Nun-tio's, and King Charles his Ambassadors to Ravenna
about that Affair, who declared the Popes pleasure therein, Michael was
forthwith deposed, and Leo chosen, and confirmed by the Pope. Who being for
that Reason secretly despited and mischief'd by Desiderius, begs Charles to
oblige Desiderius to cease injuring him any farther. This Charles performed
with great diligence, though he were not in a condition to restrain the Lombard
by Force, because upon the Death of his Brother, who had reigned jointly and
amicably with him for two years, he was necessarily engaged in several Wars at
once. The Aquitains, against whom his Father had begun a War, he brought into
subjection, and subdued the Gascons inhabiting part of Aquitain. Then passing
the Pyrenean Hills, he routed the Saracens, pursuing them to the River Betis,
as far as Granada, the part of Spain wherein the Saracens are now seated. In
the mean time Stephen, a most vigilant Pastor, and true successor of Peter and
imitatour of Christ, having been in the Chair three years, five months, twenty
seven days, died and was buried in S. Peter's. The Sea was then vacant nine
days.

ADRIAN I.
ADRIAN the first, a Roman, Son of Theodorus one of the prime Nobility, entering
upon the Pontificate, degenerated not at all from his Ancestors; being a
Person who for his greatness of Mind, Prudence, Learning and Sanctity may be
compared with the best of Popes; and of whose Interest and Authority Desiderius
King of the (...) had such Apprehensions, that he presently sent Ambassadors
to treat of a Peace and Alliance with him. But Adrian being acquainted with the
extreme Perfidiousness of that King, deferred the concluding any thing therein
to another time. Now after the Death of Caroloman, his Relict Bertha, out of
Envy toward the Grandeur of Hildegarda the Great Charles's Consort, by the
Advice of one Adoarius flies with her Sons into Italy to King Desiderius; who
received her very kindly and honorably, both because he thought he should by
this means be less in danger from the Power of France, and also reckoned that
the French upon setting up Caroloman's Sons would the sooner appear in Arms
against King Charles if he should give him any Disturbance. But not being able
by Entreaties to prevail with Adrian to anoint these sons of Caroloman Kings,
he applies himself to forcible means, and invading the State of Ravenna, which
was under the Popes Jurisdiction, he takes Faenza and Comacchio. Ravenna was at
this time under the Government of its Archbishop and three Tribunes, who
forthwith desired Aid of Adrian. The Pope at first sends to Desiderius,
admonishing him to contain himself within his own Territories, and not to
invade the Rights of the Church. But understanding afterward that this King
had also possessed himself of Urbin, Senigaglia, and Eugubio, he then began to
threaten him with the Approach of Divine Vengeance toward him for the
Violation of Peace. To which the Lombard made no other Reply, than that Adrian
ought to quit the Interest of the French King, and to be of His side. For it
was his great Design to make a Breach between Chorles and the Pope; which when
he could not obtain by Solicitations and Promises, he threatened to besiege Rome
it self within a little time. He was already come to Spoleto, with Aldagasius
Caroloman's Son; but intended to march from thence to Rome, though in a
peaceable manner, and, as he pretended, out of Devotion. But Adrian having
caused the Relics of all the Churches without the Walls to be brought into
the City, sends three Bishops to Desiderius to forbid him entering the Confines
of Rome upon pain of Excommunication; who thereupon fearing lest he might
incurr the divine Displeasure, presently returned into Lombardy. In the mean
time Charles receiving from Adrian Intelligence of the injury which had been
done him, sends Ambassadors to Desiderius to persuade him to restore what he
had wrongfully taken from the Pope, or otherwise to let him know that he would
soon visit him with such an Army as should oblige him to it. Desiderius
notwithstanding all this refuses it; and so on both sides great Armies are
prepared. But Charles having sent some part of his Forces before to (...) the
Passes of the Alps, with wonderful Expedition leads the main Body of his Army
over Monte Cenisio into Itely, where encountering Desiderius, he vanquishes and
puts him to flight, and then takes and spoils his whole Country. Desiderius
after so great an Overthrow despairing to get the better in a pitched Battle,
retreats to Pavia, having sent his Wife and Children to Verona. And the people
of Spoleto, Ricti, and all the Lombards inhabiting those Parts, hearing his
Misfortune, betake themfelves to Rome, and commit their Persons and Estates to
the Popes Protection, taking an Oath of Fidelity to him, and shavfng their
Heads and Beards, which among that People was the greatest sign and Token of a
perfect Submission to his Power and Jurisdiction. By their Example those of
Ancona, Osimo, and (...) did the like. Now to such of these Lombards as were
unwilling to return into their own Country, the Vatican Hill was granted them
to inhabit and seat themselves in; whither afterward there was from all parts
a great concourse of other their Contrymen, who chose to live there. But
Charles leaving his Cousin-German Bernardus at the Siege of (...), marches with
part of his Army to Verona, which City upon the inclination of Bertha and
Caroloman's Sons to the French side, in a little time after surrendered to him;
though Aldegisius, Desiderius his Son, escaping thence fled to the Emperor of
Constantinople. Almost all the Cities of Lombardy beyond the Po, having in like
manner yielded to Charles, he goes toward Rome, that he might there celebrate
the Feast of Easter with the Pope. At his Approach to the City, he was in
Complement met by three thousand Judges, as (...) tells us, calling them Judges
who were not Handycrafts-men or did not exercise any mean Trades. Adrian with
his Clergy expected him at the Steps of S Peter, and at his coming embraced him
with all imaginable Affection, but could not restrain the humble King from
kissing his Feet. The usual Salutations and Respects having passed on both
sides, they entered the Church, and being come up to the Altar, Charles and the
Pope, the Romans and the French, took a mutual Oath to maintain a perpetual
Friendship, and to be Enemies to the Enemies of each other. After which,
Charles making his Entrance into the City, devoutly visited all the Churches,
and made several Presents to them. Four days after his being there, he by Oath
confirmed, and amply enlarged the Donation of his Father Pipin to Gregory the
third, containing, according to Anastasius, in (...) all that reaches from the
long since demolished City Luna to the Alps, the Isle of Corfica, and the
whole Tract between Luca and Parma, together with Friuli, the Exarchate of
Ravenna, and the Dukedoms of Spoleto and Benevent. These Affairs being thus
settled, Charles taking his leave of Adrian returns into Lombardy, and becomes
Master of Pavia on the sixth month after the investing of it. Toward
Desiderius however he was so favorable, as that though he berest him of his
Kingdom, yet he spared his Life, and only confined him with his Wife and
Children to Lions. Advancing thence again Arachis Duke of Benevent, who was
Son-in-law to Desiderius, and had been an Abettour of his rash Proceedings, he
soon forced him to sue for a Peace, and received his two Sons for Hostages.
After this in his Passage farther he religiously visited Mount Cassino, and
confirmed all the Grants which had been made by other Princes to the Monastery
of S. Benedict. And so the Affairs of all Italy being composed, and strong
Guards left in the most important places of Lombardy, he returns with great
Spoil and mighty Glory into his Kingdom or France, carrying with him his
Brother Caroloman's Relict and Sons, whom he always treated with Respect and
Honor; and also Paul a Deacon of the Church of Aquileia, a Person for his
Parts and Learning highly beloved by Desiderius, to whom he gave his Freedom,
and had for some time a great Esteem for him. But understanding afterward that
the man was assisting to a Design of Desiderius's his Flight, he banished him
into the Island of Tremiti; from whence after some years making his Escape, and
coming to Arachis, at the Request of Adelperga Daughter to Desiderius and the
Wife of Arachis, he added two Books to the History of Eutropius, giving an
account of what passed from the time of the Emperor Julian to that of
Justinian the first. After the Death of Arachis, he betook himself to the
Monastery of Cassino, where leading the remainder of his life very devoutly, he
oftentimes wrote elegant and obliging Letters to Charles, and received again
the like from that King, who had preserved him for the sake of his Learning.
Thus ended the Kingdom of the Lombards, in the two hundred and fourth year
after their coming into Italy, and in the year of our Lord seven hundred
seventy six. Charles now without any delay marches against the idolatrous
Saxons, who during his absence in Italy had rebelled; uttterly subdues that
People, with whom he had been engaged in War for thirty years before, and
compells them to receive Christianity. Then turning his Army against the
Spaniards, who were also fallen away from the Faith, he took the Cities of
Pampelona and Saragoza, and permitted his Soldiers to plunder them; not
granting a Peace to these Spaniards, but upon condition they would entirely
embrace the Christian Doctrine. After this returning into France, matters
having went according to his mind, as he passed the Pyrenean Hills he fell into
an Ambuscade of the Gascons, in engaging with whom though he gallantly defended
himself, yet he lost Anselmus and Egibardus two brave Commanders. Some tell us
that in this Encounter Rolandus, Charles's Sister's Son, perished, after he had
made a great slaughter of the Enemy; though whether he died of Thirst, as is
commonly said, or of the wounds he received, is uncertain. At length these
Gascons were vanquished by Charles, and received from him the deserved
Punishment of their Revolt and Perfidy. At this time Taxillo Duke of Bojaria,
Desiderius's Son-in-law, having gained the Huns to be on his side, made an
Attempt of War against the French, which yet Charles by his great Expedition
almost made an end of before it was quite begun; and to him also, upon Hostages
given, he granted a Peace. While these things were transacting in France,
Constantine Emperor of the East, was seized with a Leprosy, (from whence
perhaps arose the groundless Opinion of the Leprosy of Constantine the Great,
through the confusion of their Names) and dying left Leo the fourth his
Successor; who so strangely doated upon precious Stones, that robbing the
Church of S. Sophia of its Jewels, he made with them a Crown of a vast weight
and value, which he wore so often, that either through the Weight, or from the
coldness of the Stones in it, he shortly fell sick and died. The same I believe
to have happened in our Time to Paul the Second, who so effeminately prided
himself in such Ornaments, almost exhausting the Treasury of the (...) to
purchase Jewels at any rate, that as often as he appeared publicly, instead of
wearing a plain Mitre, he looked like the Picture of Cybele with Turrets on her
Head; from whence, what with the weight of the Jewels and the sweat of his
gross Body, I am apt to think arose that Apoplexy of which he died suddenly.
After the Death of Leo, his Relict Irene and his Son Constantine managing the
Empire, in a Council of three (...) and fifty Bishops held the second time at
Nice, it was (...), that whosoever mantained that the Images of the Saints were
to be destroyed, should be censured with perpetual Excommunication. But young
Constantine, through the persuasion of some ill men about him, treading in the
Footsteps of his Father, soon after revoked this Constitution, and wholly
deprived his Mother of any share in the Administration of Affairs. Then putting
away his Wife, he received to his Bed, and caused to be crowned Empress,
Theodora one of her Maids. Moreover, he gave Order to those Commanders he had
in Italy, to give disturbance to their Neighbors; but they were at the first
Message terrified from any Attempts by the prevailing Authority of Charles, who
at this time was advancing with his Forces against the Sclaves and Hunns, (or
we may call them Hungarians) because by their Incursions they had molested all
the Country about the Danow; whom having vanquished, he marched into Franconia
the Country of his Ancestors, from whence the Franks or French derive their
Name; which Province he having with ease brought to his Devotion, two years
after Theophylact and Stephen two Bishops of great Note held a Synod of Frank
and German Bishops, wherein that which the Greeks called the Seventh Synod, and
the Felician Heresy touching the Destruction of Images, was condemned. Adrian
being now by the Interest and Power of Charles secured from the fear of any
warlike Incursions, applies himself to the repairing the City, beautifying the
Churches, restoring the Aqueducts, and such like public Works, which I need
not particularly enumerate, performed at his vast Expense. But while he was
employed in these matters, there happened such an Inundation of the River
Tyber, as bore down a principal Gate, and Bridge, and several Buildings of the
City, and did otherwise great Damage. In this Extremity Adrian took care to
send Boats to convey Provisions to such as while the Waters were so high could
not stir out of their Houses. And afterward he comforted with his Advice, and
supported with his Charity, the principal sufferers in that Calamity; nor did
he spare any Cost in repairing the public Loss. In short, Adrian left nothing
undone, that became a good Prince and excellent Pope; defending the Christian
Religion, maintaining the Roman Liberty, and asserting the Cause of the Poor,
the Orphans and Widows. After he had held the Chair with great honor, twenty
three years, ten months, he died, and was buried in S. Peter's, December the
27th.

LEO III.
LEO the third, a Roman, Son of Azzupius, was upon the account of Merit
advanced to the Pontificate, having been from his Youth so thoroughly educated
and instructed in Ecclesiastical Learning, that he deserved to be preferred
before all others. A modest, upright, and well-spoken Person, and such a
Favourer of learned Men, that he encouraged them by the Proposal of generous
Rewards to resort from all Parts to him, and was wonderfully pleased with their
Conversation. Moreover, to visit and exhort the sick, to relieve the Poor, to
comfort the dejected, and, to reduce the erroneous by his Preaching and
Admonition, in which through his Art and Eloquence he had gained a great
Perfection, was his peculiar Providence. He was naturally of a meek Temper, a
Lover of all Mankind, slow to Anger, ready to commiserate, eminent for Piety,
and a vigorous Promoter and Defender of the Honor of God and his Church.
Hereupon he was (as I have said) unanimously elected to the Papal See on S.
Stephen's day, and the day following with general Acclamations seated in S.
Peter's Chair. At this time Irene, Mother of Constantine the Emperor, not
being able to bear her Son's ill Courses, and being instigated thereto by
certain of the Citizens, returns to Constantinople, puts out his Eyes, and
throws him into Prison, where as an undutiful Son he miserably ended his days.
In the mean time Charles having Disturbance given him on many sides, sends his
Son Pipin against the Hungarians, whom having worsted in several Engagements,
he at length totally subdued. Adelphonsus likewise King of Asturia and
Gallicia, having received Auxiliary Forces from Charles, vanquished the
Saracens and took Lisbon; upon the hearing of which Victory of his, the
Garrison of Barcelona forthwith yielded up to Charles. Moreover, the Bavarians,
who made Inroads upon the Inhabitants of Friuli, were now overcome by Henry,
Charle's Lieutenant there. At this time Leo, with the Clergy and People, being
employed in the Solcmn Procession (...) by Pope Gregory, he was through the
treachery of Paschal and Campulus two of the principal Clergy, seized near the
Church of S. Sylvester, stripped of his Pontifical Habit, so cruelly beaten and
misused that it was thought he had been deprived both of his Sight and Speech,
and then closely imprisoned in the Monastery of S. Erasmus. From whence yet
soon after by the diligence of Albinus, one belonging to his Bedchamber, he
made his Escape, and was secretly conveyed to the Vatican; where he lay
concealed till Vinigisius Duke of Spoleto, being privately invited thereunto,
came and with a (...) Guard of Soldiers to secure him on his way from any
Violence which his Enemies might offer to him, carried him off safely to
Spoleto. The Factious being not now able to wreak their malice upon the Persons
of Leo and Albinus, express their Rage in pulling down their Houses; nay so
hardy and daring were they, as to go to Charles, who was now making War upon
the Saxons, and to whom they understood Leo had repaired, on purpose to
complain of and accuse the Pope. But Charles deferring the debate of the matter
to another time, sends the Pope to Rome with an honorable Retinue, promising
that himself would be there in a little time, in order to the composing of the
Affairs of Italy. Leo in his passage being come as far as Ponte Molle, was
there in Honor met by the Clergy and People of Rome, who congratulated his
Return, and introduced him into the City. And Charles without making any long
stay, passing through Mentz and Noremberg into Friuli, severely chastises the
Citizens of Treviso for having put to Death Henry their Governor; and having
constituted another to succeed him in that Office, he thence goes first to
Ravenna, and presently after to Rome, where his Presence was earnestly desired
and expected. At his Entrance into the City all imaginable expressions of
Honor, as good reason was, were made to him. On the eighth day of his being
there, in the presence of the People and Clergy, assembled in S. Peter's
Church, he asked all the Bishops, who had come thither out of all the parts of
Italy and France, what their Opinion was concerning the Life and Conversation
of the Pope. But Answer was made by all with one Voice, that the Apostolic
See, the Head of all Churches, ought to be judged by none, especially not by a
Laick. Hereupon, Charles laying aside any farther Enquiry into the matter, Pope
Leo, who extremely wished that he might be put upon that way of purging
himself, going up into the Pulpit, and holding the Gospels in his hands,
declared upon his Oath that he was innocent of all those things which were laid
to his Charge. This was done on the thirteenth day of December, A. D. 800.
While things went thus at Rome, Pipin by his Fathers Order advancing against
the Beneventans, who under Grimoald's Conduct made Inroads upon their
Neighbors, and having given them so many Defeats, that at length they were
scarce able to defend themselves within the Walls of their City; he left the
farther management of that War to Vinigisius Duke of Spoleto, and returned to
his Father, who was now in a short time to be crowned Emperor. For the Pope,
that he might make some Requital to Charles who had deserved so well of the
Church, and also because he saw that the Emperors of Constantinople were
hardly able to maintain that Title; upon which account Rome and all Italy had
suffered great Calamities; after Mass in S. Peter's Church, with the Consent
and at the Request of the People of Rome, declares with a loud Voice the said
Charles to be Emperor, and put the Imperial Diadem upon his Head, the People
repeating thrice this Acclamation, Long Life and Victory to Charles Augustus,
whom God has Crowned, the Great and Pacifick Emperor. Then the Pope anointed
him, and his Son Pipin, whom in like manner he pronounced King of Italy.
Charles being now invested with Imperial Power, gave Order that Campulus and
Paschal, the Conspiratours against the Pope, should be put to Death; but the
Pope, who was all Clemency, obtained a Pardon of their Lives, and they were
only banished into France. After this, there were some who would have persuaded
Charles to ex pell all the Lombards out of Italy. But that not appearing to be
a safe course, because they had mingled in Blood and Affinity with multitudes
of Families in Italy, it was determined both by Charles and Leo, that the Name
of Lombard should remain there only, where that Nation had chiefly had their
Seat. Pipin being now returned to Bonevent, and having continued the Siege of
that place for several months without success, he turns his Arms against the
City Chieti, of which having after some Opposition made himself Master by
Force, he plundered and burnt it. Upon the terror whereof at his marching
thence he had the Cities of Ortona and Luceria surrendered to him, and in the
latter he took Grimoald Duke of Benevent; who not long after died of Grief. In
the mean time, the Empress of Constantinople sending Ambassadors into Italy,
enters into a League with Charles, their several Pretensions to Italy being
thus adjusted, viz. Irene was to have that Part which beginning on the one side
from Naples, and from Siponto (a City now called Manfredonia) on the other,
lies extended between the two Seas, Eastward, together with Sicily; all Italy
beside, only excepting always those places which were under the Jurisdiction of
the Church, were by the Articles of Peace adjudged to be Charle's own. But
Nicephorus a Patrician stomaching to submit to the Dominion of a Woman, having
craftily seized Irene, and banished her into Lesbos, by his Ambassadors renews
the League before entered into with Charles. Which Charles at this time
compelled the Saxons, who had so often revolted, to remove with their Wives and
Children into France, following them close in their Passage with his Army to
prevent their committing any Disorders as they went along. Pope Leo, being
perpetually disturbed by one Sedition after another, leaving Rome, goes to
Mantua, to see the Blood of Christ which was now in great esteem for the
Miracles said to be wrought there by it. Having been received with great
Respect and Affection by the Mantuans, and approved it to be indeed Christ's
Blood upon frequent Trial of the miraculous Effects of it, he makes a Journey
to Charles, who was very desirous to know the Truth of this matter, that he
might certify him concerning it, and also that he might discourse with him
about settling the Affairs of Italy. Returning then to Rome, and being assisted
by King Pipin who had his Father's Order therein, he proceeded to a gentle
punishment of some of the chief Plotters and movers of Sedition. Charles being
now very aged; having intelligence that Pipin was dead at Milain, declares
Lous, his younger Son, King of Aquitain and his Successor in the Empire, and
Bernard his Nephew King of Italy, to whom he gave Charge that he should in all
things be obedient to Louis. To the Extent of the Empire he set these bounds;
in Gallia the Rhine and the Loyre, in Germany the Danow and the Saw; and to
these Provinces he added Aquitain, Gascoigne, a great part of Spain, Lombardy,
Saxony, both the Pannonia's, Istria, Croatia, and Dalmatia, excepting only
those parts of it situate on the Seacoast, which were subject to the Emperor
of Constantinople. Having thus settled Affairs, while he was at Aken for the
recovery of his Health by the use of the hot Baths there, he died of a Fever
and Pleurisy, in the seventy second year of his Age, January the 28. An. Dom.
815. His Body was with all imaginable Pomp and Solemnity interred in the Church
of S. Mary which himself had built at Aken, with this Inscription on his Tomb,
MAGNI CAROLI REGIS CHRISTIANISSIMI, ROMANORVMQVE IMPERATORIS CORPUS HOC
SEPVLCHRO CONDITUM JACET. He was indeed, whether we regard his management of
Civil or Military matters, so illustrious and excellent an Emperor, that none
of his Successors have either excelled or equalled him. Moreover, when leisure
from other weighty Affairs permitted him, he took such delight in the study of
Learning, that it was he who, at the persuasion of Alcuinus, first made Paris
an University. Of three Tables of Silver which he had, one, on which was
engraven the City of Constantinople, he gave to the Church of S. Peter;
another, on which the City of Rome was described, to the Church of Ravenna; the
third, which some tell us was of Gold, on which was a Map of the whole World,
he left to his Sons.

As for Pope Leo, having repaired the Roof of S. Paul's, which had fallen down
in an Earthquake; built from the ground a very capacious Hospital for Strangers
near S. Peters's; and ordained Litanies on the three days before Ascension-day;
on the first of which the Procession was to be from S Marie's ad Proesepe to
the Lateran Chruch; on the second, from the Church of S. Sabina to S. Paul's;
and on the third, from S. Cross to S. Laurence's without the Walls; in the
twenty first year of his Pontificate he died, which year there appeared a
Comet, thought by some to have been a Presage of so great a calamity. He was
buried in S. Peter's, June the 12th. and the Sea was vacant ten days.

STEPHEN IV.
STEPHEN the fourth, a Roman, Son of Julius, in the third Month of his
Pontificate went into France to the Emperor Lewis; though the reason of his
Journey is not certainly known. Some conjecture that it was to secure himself
from the Relics of the Faction and Conspiracy of Campulus, which upon the
Death of Leo prevailed afresh. The Emperor Lewis, surnamed the Godly, was now
at Orleans, who as soon as he had intelligence of the Popes coming, forthwith
sends all the Persons of principal Quality to meet him; and among others
particularly Theudolphus Bishop of Orleans, with the Clergy, and a great part
of the People. And Louis Himself going forth a whole Mile for the same purpose,
as soon as he saw him alighted off his Horse, and after mutual Salutations had
passed between them, introduced him very honorably into the City, the Clergy
going before and after repeating the Hymn, called Te Deum Laudamus. For Stephen
was not only a Person of Noble Extraction, but of such Learning and Integrity,
that he easily gained a general Veneration for Sanctity, having been well
instructed by an advantageous Education under those two pious Popes Adrian and
Leo. Being entered into the City, supported by the Emperor because of the crowd
of the People who pressed out of a desire to see him, he was conducted to the
Apartment appointed for him in the Palace; where he often had Conferences with
the Emperor about the composure of the Affairs of Italy, besides the other
frequent mutual Entertainments and Civilities that passed between them. (...)
would have detained the Pope longer with him, had he not now been engaged in
such important Wars, that it was necessary he should oppose the Enemy in
Person. For both the Gascons had revolted, whom in a short time he reduced; and
those of Bretaigne began to endeavor a change of Government, whom in like
manner by his Arms he kept in Obedience; and moreover at an Assembly held at
Aken, he granted Peace to the Ambassadors sent from the Saracens inhabiting
Saragosa. Stephen being now upon his departure, in Imitation of our Savior,
who spared even his Enemies, obtained of Louis, that all those whom Charles had
punished with Banishment or Imprisonment for their Conspiracy against Leo,
might have their Liberty. He also carried with him a Cross of great Weight and
Value, made at the Charge of Louis, and by him dedicated to S. Peter. But
returning to Rome, he died in the seventh month of his Pontificate; and was
buried in S. Peter's; and by his Death the Sea was vacant eleven days.

PASCHAL I.
PASCHAL, a Roman, Son of Bonosus, was created Pope without any Interposition
of the Emperors Authority. Whereupon at his first Investiture in that Office,
he forthwith sends Nuntio's to Louis, excusing himself, and laying all the
blame upon the Clergy and People of Rome, who had forcibly compelled him to
undertake it. Louis accepting this for Satisfaction from Paschal, sends to the
Clergy and People, admonishing them to observe the ancient Constitution, and to
beware how they presumed for time to come to infringe the Rights of the
Emperor. Also, in the Assembly held at Aken, he associated to himself in the
Empire his eldest Son Lotharius, and declared Pipin his second Son King of
Aquitain, and Louis his third Son King of Bavaria. But Bernardus King of Italy,
having upon the Instigation of certain Bishops and seditious Citizens, revolted
from the Empire, and compelled some Cities and States to swear Allegiance to
himself, Louis being hereat incensed, sends a strong Army into Italy; whose
Passage over the Alps Bernardus endeavoring to oppose, he was vanquished. The
Heads of the Rebellion being taken were presently cut off, and Bernardus
himself, though he very submissively begged forgiveness, was put to Death at
Aken, Those Bishops who had been Authors of the mischief were by a Decree of
Synod confined into several Monasteries. This Tumult, for so it was rather than
a War, being thus composed, Louis moves with his Army against the Saxons,
rebelling now afresh, and overcomes and slays Viromarchus their hardy Chief,
who aspired to the Kingdom. After this, he sends his Son Lotharius, whom he had
declared King of Italy, to the Pope; by whom he was anointed in the Church of
S. Peter's; with the Title of Augustus. But there arising great Commotions in
Italy, and Lotharius seeing himself unable to withstand them, he goes to his
Father in order to provide greater Force. Upon which Theodorus the Primicerius,
and Leo the Nomenclator, having had their Eyes first pulled out were murdered
in a Tumult in the Lateran Palace. There was some who laid the blame of this
Disorder upon Paschal himself; but he in a Synod of thirty Bishops did both by
Conjectures, and by Reasons, and by his Oath purge himself of it. Louis rested
himself satisfied herewith, and as Anastasius tells us, that no future
Disturbance might arise from uncertain Pretensions, writing to Paschal, he
declared in his Letters what Cities of Tuscany were subject to the Empire, viz.
Arezzo, Volterra, Chiusi, Florence, which had been repaired and enlarged by his
Father Charles the Great, Pistoia, Luca, Pisa, Peragia, and Orvieto; the others
he allowed to be under the Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome. He added
moreover Todi in Umbria, and Romagna beyond the Appennine, with the Exarchate
of Ravenna. The same Anastasius says, that Louis granted to Paschal a free
Power (the same which he also tells us was given by Charles to Pope Adrian) of
choosing Bishops, whereas before the Emperors were wont to be advised, and
their consent and Confirmation desired in the Case. Our Paschal, who for his
Piety and Learning had been by Pope Stephen made Prior of the Monastery of S.
Stephen in the Vatican, being now in the Chair, both caused the Bodies of
several Saints which before lay neglectedly to be conveyed into the City with
great Solemnity, and honorably interred; and also by paying their Creditors
procured the Release of diverse poor Prisoners. He also built from the ground
the Church of S. Praxedes the B. Martyr, not far from the old one, which
through Age and the Clergy's neglect was run to Ruin. This Church having
consecrated, he oftentimes celebrated Mass in it, and also reposited therein
the Bodies of many Saints which lay about unregarded in the Coemeteries. In the
same Church was an Oratory dedicated to S. Agnes, which he made very stately
and ornamental. Moreover, he built the Church of S. Cecily (as appears still by
an Inscription on the Nave of it) in which he in like manner reposited the
Bodies of that Virgin her self and her affianced Husband Valerianus, as also of
Tiburtius and Maximus, Martyrs, and Urban and Lucius, Bishops of Rome, adorning
it with all kinds of Marble, and enriching it with Presents of Gold and Silver.
He also repaired the Church of S. Mary ad Praesepe, that had been decayed by
Age, and altered the Nave of it to advantage. In fine, having been very
exemplary for Religion and Piety, Good Nature and Bounty; after he had been in
the Chair seven years, two months, seven days, he died, and was buried in S.
Peter's. The Sea was then vacant only four days.

EUGENIUS II.
EUGENIUS the second, a Roman, Son of Boemundus, was for his Sanctity,
Learning, Humanity and Eloquence unanimously chosen into the Pontificate, at
that time particularly when Lotharius coming into Italy, made choice of a
Magistrate for the Administration of Justice, and Execution of the Laws among
the People of Rome, who after a long and heavy Servitude had enjoyed some
Liberty under the Emperor Charles and his Sons. In the mean time Louis after
he had for forty days been spoiling and laying waste the Country of Bretagne
with Fire and Sword, having received Hostages, he goes to Roan, and there gives
Audience to the Ambassadors of (...) Emperor of Constantinople, who came to
consult what his Opinion was concerning the Images of the Saints, whether they
were to be utterly abolished and destroyed, or kept up and restored again. But
(...) referred them to the Pope, who was principally concerned to determine in
the Matter. After this he marched against the Bulgarians who were now making
Inrodes into the Pannonia's, and at first repelled them; but Haydo Governor of
Aquitain, upon confidence of (...) Forces from Abderamann King of the Saracens,
having rebelled, he was obliged to quit this War; and so the Bulgarians, in an
hostile manner marched without control through the middle of the hostile
manner marched without control through the (...) of the Pannonia's into
Dalmatia. But before Louis advanced (...), a great part of Spain had revolted
to Haydo, who sent out a (...) which annoyed the Seaport Towns all about. Only
(...) of Barcelona, though he had disturbance given him (...) Land, yet
continued firm to the Emperor. Our (...) in the Gifts of Body and Mind, and
despising the (...) Fortune, applied himself to Works of Bounty and (...) and
particularly took so much care in the matter of Provision, (...) sorts of it
and especially Grain was no where cheaper than at (...). Moreover, he supported
the Lives, and defended the Cause of the Poor, the Fatherless and Widow in such
a manner, that he deservedly gained the name of the Father of the Poor. The
same course (...) living he also took before his Pontificate; both while he was
a (...) of S. Sabina in the Aventine, which Church when he came to be Pope he
beautified, and also while he was Archpriest of the Lateran Church, from which
place he was afterward for his great Merit by an unanimous Choice advanced to
the Papal Chair. By his Procurement and Intercession likewise all the Prisoners
and Exiles in France returned at (...) to Rome; who being stripped of all they
(...), were relieved and supported by his Charity. Nor was it his fault that
Sico Duke of Benevent did not quit the Siege of (...), which he at this time
reduced to great Straits, and carried from thence the Body of S. Ianuarius to
Benevent, where he honorably (...) in the Great Church with Desiderius and
(...). For the Pope (...) voured to persuade Sico to undertake an Expedition
against the Sara cens, who had already possessed themselves of Palermo in
Sicily. (...) good Man having after this manner continued four years in the
(...), died lamented of all, who grieved for themselves rather (...) for him,
to whom Death was a welcome Passage into (...) was buried in S. Peter's.

VALENTINE I.
VALENTINE, a Roman, son of Leontius, being only a Deacon, not a Priest, was
yet for his extraordinary Sanctity deservedly preferred to the Pontificate. Nor
will it appear strange, if we consider that having from his Youth upwards been
instructed in Learning and Piety by chose good Popes Paschal and (...), he did
not give his Mind to Pleasures and Sports, as most young men are wont to do,
but applied himself to the acquiring of knowledge by the reading of the
Ancients, and the Rule of good living from the Example of holy Bishops. He was
moreover a Person of such ready Parts, and prevailing Eloquence, that he had a
great Facility in persuading to, or against, what he pleased; without offering
any thing that was not found, learned, and decent. Finally, both in his private
Station, and while he was Pope, he came (...) none of his Predecessors, in
Devotion, Mercy, and Charity. For these Reasons he was unanimously elected to
the Chair; but (...) as a punishment upon the sins of that Age, he died on the
fortieth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Peter's; all People
lamenting that they were bereft of such a Man, who if he had lived would have
been an almost impregnable Support to the Roman Liberty and the Christian
Religion. While the Sea was vacant, Sicardus Duke of (...), who after his
Father's Death ruled tyrannically, for the want of a Bride which he expected,
cast Deus-dedit Abbot of Monte Cassino into Prison, where he died with the
Reputation of being a Holy Man.

GREGORY IV.
GREGORY the fourth, a Roman, Son of John, and Cardinal of S. Mark, entered upon
the Pontificate at the time when the Saracens possessed of Asia shut up the
Passage to the Holy Land from the Christians, and the Moors passing with their
Fleet into (...), wasted a great part of that Island, having (as is already
said) made themselves Masters of Palermo. Nor could the Venetians, though at
the Desire of Michael Emperor of Constantinople, they sailed thither, check
their Proceedings; the Moors having more Ships and Men than they. The State of
Venice was now in its Increase, having had it is Original from the Veneti, at
the time when Attila with his (...) took and destroyed Aquileia, Concordia,
Altino, with other Cities of the Province anciently called Venetia; that People
having no other (...) against the Cruelty of the (...), but only the Fens and
(...). (...) Patricius was now Duke of Venice. whose (...) choose to mention,
because in his time the Body of S. Mark was by some Venetian Merchants brought
from Alexandria to Venice, where that Saint is now had in great Veneration, a
most magnificent Church being in the principal part of the City built and
dedicated to him, and adorned and enriched with very great Donations. And srom
hence it was that the Venetians first bore upon their Standards and Banners the
Picture of S. Mark, as the Patron of their City. But Gregory understanding that
the Venetians were not able to expel these Barbarians out of the Island, sends
to Louis and Lotharius, desiring them to send Aid to the Sicilians at the first
Opportunity. They were very shy of the Business, allcdging that that War
belonged to Michael Emperor of Constantinople; but yet declared themselves
ready to (...) their share of Men and Moneys for the undertaking of it. But in
the mean time, while Ambassadors were sent srom one to the other about that
Assair, Boniface Earl of Corsica, with his Brother Bertarius, and the
Assistance of some of the People of Tuscany, sailing into Asrica, engaged four
times with the Enemy between Vtica and Carthage, where he made so great a
Slaughter, that the Moors were forced, as formerly in Scipio's time, to re-call
their Forces from Sicily to the Succor of their own Country in Distress, and
by this means Sicily was delivered from them. Boniface then returns with his
victorious Fleet, laden with vast Spoils, from Africa into Corsica. Some there
are that write, that during this (...) in Italy, the Emperor Lotharius envying
the preference that his (...) Louis did in all matters give to his youngest
Brother Charles, afterward surnamed the Bald, he put him in Prison, but soon
after set him sree; and that the Barbarians taking hold of the opportunity,
embarked in a great Fleet from Asrica for Italy, and arrived at Centum Celloe,
which City (since called Civilavecchia,) some will have to be demolished by'em;
and that from (...) marching to Rome, they took that City: but this is not
probable. What is said concerning Centum-Celloe I shall not deny, and I doubt
not but that they attempted the taking of Rome it self, but Guy Marquess of
Lombardy defended it so stoutly, that having burnt the Suburbs and the Churches
of SS. Peter and Paul in the Via Latina, they withdrew to Monte-Cassino, where
they destroyed the Town of S. German and the Monastery of S. Benet which slood
on the Hill, and going down to the Seaside near the River Garigliano (whither
their Fleet was brought from Ostia) they invaded Tarentum and Sicily; and, as I
said before, were recalled home by their own Contrymen at that time broken
in War by the Valor of Boniface. I take it to be about this time, that the
Body of the Apostle S. Bartholomew was translated from Lipari in Sicily to
Beneventum by Sicardus Prince of that place (who was personally present in this
great War) lest the Body of the Holy Apostle should fall into the hands of the
Enemies of the name of Christ. But to return to Gregory. He was a person of so
much Modesty, that though he were chosen as well by the Clergy as People of
Rome, yet he would not take upon him the Office of Pope, till he was confirmed
by those Ambassadors of the Emperor Louis, who had been dispatched by him to
Rome that they might (...) an Election of so great moment. This was not done by
Louis out of Pride, but with respect to the Preservation of the Imperial
Prerogative, he being naturally very kind and gracious, and one that always
took care of the Dignity and Privileges of the Church. For he ordained that
they who should take upon 'em a Religious Life should be exempt from all
secular services, and that every Church should be endowed with such a certain
income, as that the Priests might live without being forced for want of
necessaries to forsake the Divine Service or to take up any Trade. Beside in
the Year 830. he held a Synod of a great many Bishops, designed for the honor
of God and the advantage of the Church, wherein it was ordained, that noither
Bishops nor (...) degree soever should (...) in sumptuous and gaudy Apparel,
(...) Silk, (...) or embroidered; nor that they should wear on their Fingers
any precious stones (except Prelates at Mass) nor that Gold or (...) should be
used on their Girdles, Shoes or Pantosles, which (...) is far from all
Religion and a manifest sign of great (...) and vanity. Would to God, Lewis,
thou might live in our times. Thy holy Institutions, thy Censures are
wanting in the Church at this present, when the Clergy let themselves loose to
all manner of luxury and pleasure. You may see now not only the Men in Scarlet
and Purple, which perhaps would be no great matter, but even their Horses and
Beasts of Carriage; and when they march in State, a number of Footmen must go
before them, and they must be followed by another retinue of Priests, not
riding upon Asses, as Christ did (who was the Author of our Religion and the
only pattern of well living on earth) but upon Steeds pampered add betrapped as
if they came in triumph (...) a vanquished Enemy. 'Twould be to no purpose to
speak of their Silver Vessels, their choice Houshold-stuss and Dishes of Meat,
when in comparison of them the dainties of Sicily, the most magnificent Apparel
and the Plate of Corinth would be thought of no value. What will be the effect
of this Exorbitance I shall not determine here, lest I should seem to pry into
the decrees of Heaven. I return to Lewis, who by these means taking care as
well for Religion as the Public (...) died in the 36. year of his Empire and
lies buried in the Church of S. (...). He was not long after followed by our
Pope Gregory, remarkable for his birth, famous for his sanctity, notable for
Learning and Eloquence, and worthy of admiration for his care and diligence in
both Spiritual and Civil affairs: For he did after an extraordinary manner
consult the good of the People, by containing the wealthy in their duty, by
feeding the poor, comforting the hopeless, and reducing those that went astray
into the right way by wholesome admonitions; he also restored many Churches
which time had ruined. Those that were (...) to H. Orders he kept to their duty
as long as he lived by his advice and example. This holy Pope translated the
Body of S. Gregory, and very much adorning it he placed it where now it lies,
where many people in those times either out of devotion or for the sake of some
Vow, were wont to keep watch. (...) said that the Bodies of S. Sebastian and
Tiburtius were also translated by him from the Cemeteries in which they lay
before, to the Church of S. Peter. Some Authors say, that Gregory at the
request of Lewis instituted the Feast of All Saints on the first day of
November, which act of his was much commended both in Prose and Verse by
Rabanus a Monk. a famous Divine; for in both those ways of writing that learned
Man was excellent, especially considering the Age he lived in. The same (...)
also wrote Commentaries on the Books of Chronicles and (...). He made eloquent
Sermons to the people, but that of his is chiefly celebrated which he made upon
All Saints day. Gregory died in the 16. year of his Pontificate, and was buried
in S. Peter's Church, after which the Sea was void 15. days.

SERGIUS.
SERGIUS the second, a Roman, whose Father was named Sergius, of the fourth
Ward, came to the Popedom at the same time that Michael Emperor of
Constantinople died. It Is said that this Sergius was surnamed Bocca di Porco or
Hogs-mouth, which for shame of it he changed for Sergius, and that from thence
came the Custom down to our times, that when any one is made Pope he laid by
his own name and took one of some of his Predecessors; though all have not
observed it. However it was, it is certain, (...) Sergius came of a noble Family
and degenerated not from his Ancestors, being assisted in his good Inclinations
by Leo III. Stephen IV. Eugenius II. and Gregory IV. under whose tuition he
lived so well, that upon the Death of Gregory he alone was thought worthy of
the Pontifical Dignity. At that time there was so great a feud between the Sons
of Lewis, about the division of the Empire, that Lewis and Charles gave their
Brother Lotharius Battle in the Country of Auxerre near Fontenay, where many
on both sides were slain; Lotharius losing the day, fled first to Aken, but
being forced from thence by the pursuing Enemy, he conveyed himself with his
Wife and Children to Vienna. Hither also he was followed by his Brother with
their Army, to whom not only many of the great men of the Empire came, but
several also were sent by Pope Sergius to endeavor to make Peace between them,
the chief of whom was George Archbishop of Ravenna, who having been before to
make up the matter, was present with Lotharius in the second Battle, and the
Victory inclining to (...) and Lewis, he lost all his Train there (of 300
Horsemen) and hardly escaped alone from the slaughter. But these men at last
looking with pity upon the misery and ruin under which the whole Empire lay,
procured a Peace upon these terms, viz. That the Western part of the Empire
which reached from the British Ocean to the Maese, should be subject to
Charles, and the name of Franks should continue to the Inhabitants: That all
Germany as far as the River Rhine, and so much on the other side of it as his
Father had been possessed of, should be allotted to Lewis; and that Lotharius
should with the title of Emperor hold the City of Rome with Italy and that
part of France which was formerly called Gallia Narbonensis, now Provence. To
this they added, that Country lying between the Rivers Scheld and Roan, which
as I suppose now took the name of Lotharingia [Lorain] from Lotharius. Matters
being thus composed, Lotharius sends his Son Lewis, whom he had taken into a
Partnership in the Empire, into Italy with a mighty Army, giving him for
Companions Drogon Bishop of Metz, and others of the Clergy eminent for Prudence
and Gravity, by whose advice he was to govern himself. But the young man being
puss'd up with his great fortune wheresoever he marched, sill'd the Country
with slaughter, rapine, and destruction. Yet when he approached the City and
the Citizens of Rome came out of respect to meet him, laying by his Gaulish
sierceness he grew more mild, because contrary to his expectation he found that
he might enter the City without force of Arms. The Religious also came a mile
out of the City to meet him with their Crucifixes singing, Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the Highest. Thus they accompanied
him as far as the steps of S. Peter's Church, where meeting the Pope they
reciprocally kissed and greeted each other and went together to the Silver
Gates which were not opened. Then said the Pope, If thou come hither with
peaceable and friendly intentions, and if thou, have more regard to the
advantage of Christianity than to the pleasure of exercising cruelty and
rapine, then with my good will thou may enter; if thou art otherwise minded,
touch not these Gates, for over thy head hangs a Sword, which will certainly
avenge any such wickedness. But when he had given the Pope assurance,
immediately the doors were thrown open. Hereupon a multitude of Romans and
Franks entering pel-mel, as soon as they came to the Altar of S. Peter, they all
kneeling down together gave thanks to God Almighty and to the Prince of the
Apostles, that matters had been carried according to their minds without hurt
to any body; this was done upon the Monday after Whitson-day. But soon after
the Suburbs were sacked by the Soldiers, and it wanted little but that they had
got into the City for the same end, so that the eighth day aster their coming
the Pope anointed Lewis with the holy Oil, crowned him and declared him King of
Italy. Soon after came Siconolfus Prince of Beneventum to congratulate him, and
then the multitude was such that the Trees were lopt, the Beasts driven away
and even the standing-Corn cut down, that their Horses might not want
Provender. The Pope therefore easily agreed to all their requests, if they were
reasonable, that he might the sooner rid the City of them: and the Romans being
now delivered from the fear of their tyrannical Barbarity celebrated their Pope
as the true Vicar of Christ and the only Father of his Country. He betaking
himself to the beautifying of Churches, reslor'd that of SS. Sylvester and
Martin which time had ruined, and in it together with those of the two
Confessors, he placed the Bodies of Fabianus, Stephanus, Sotherius, Asterius,
Cyriacus, Maurus, Smaragdus, Anastasius, Innocentius, Quirinus, Leo, Arthemius,
Theodorus and Nicander. He built also near that Church from the foundation a
Monaslery dedicated to SS. Peter and Paul, where Mass was incessantly sung. But
at last this holy Pope having managed the assairs of the Church with great
integrity and success, in the third year of his Pontisicate, died and was
buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was vacant upon his death fifteen days.

LEO IV.
LEO the fourth, a Roman, son of Radulphus, was in the year 848. by a general
consent elected Pope, and very deservedly; for he was one that whilst he lived
a private life, was very eminent for Religion, Innocence, Piety, Good Nature,
Liberality and especially for Ecclesiastical Learning. He was a person of so
much Prudence and Courage that as the Gospel directs, he could, when it was
necessary imitate either the Wisdom of the Serpent or the Innocence of the
Dove. So general was the good Report of him that Pope Sergius II. was persuaded
to create this pattern of Virtue a Priest from a Subdeacon and to give him the
Title and Church Sanctorum quatuor Coronatorum, from whence upon the death of
Sergius he was brought to the Lateran Church and placed in S. Peter's Chair,
being universaily saluted as Pope, all that were present, according to ancient
Custom kissing his feet. There are some of opinion, that by the prayers of this
good man it was, that God was moved to repress the rage of the Saracens by
drowning their Fleet as they were returning home laden with Spoil. For they
having overcome Theodotius, Admiral to the Emperor Michael in a Sea Fight near
Tarentum, they ravaged far and near through Italy without opposition, and
having taken and sacked Ancona and harassed the Coast of Dalmatia, when they
were returning triumphantly to their own Country, it pleased God they were
cast away at Sea by storm. So that Leo being free from his fear of the
Saracens, betook himself to public works, and caused Benches of Marble to be
placed in the entrance to the Lateran Cloister and finished the Gallery which
Leo III. had begun. This good Prelate ordained that yearly in the Church of S.
Paul, on the Birthday of that Apostle Vesper's should be said by all the
Clergy. He prohibited all Laymen entrance into the Chancel during Divine
Service. About this time at his command solemn Supplications were made to avert
Gods anger, which the frequent Earthquakes seemed to threaten. He adorned after
an extraordinary manner the Cross which Charles the Emperor had given to the
Basilica Constantiniana, which had been pilfer'd of the precious stones that
belonged to it. It Is sure he was a man of so great sanctity, that by his
Prayers he drove away out of an Arch in S. Lucie's Church, a Basilise (called
by the Latins Regulus) which with its breath and poison had killed many; and by
the sign of the Cross he stopped a great fire, which had burned down the quarter
where the Saxons and Lombards lived, and reached very near S. Peter's Church.
This happened the eighth day after the Assumption of our Lady, which day was
afterward kept as a Festival without the walls not far from S. Laurence's
Church, where stood a Church dedicated to the B. Virgin, to which this
munificent Pope had made many donaries of Gold and Silver. Beside this he
finished the Mosaic work in the Churches of SS. Martin and Silvester in
montibus, and the Pargetting which Scrgius had begun, as the Inscription shows
which is all that is lest; the painting being long since perished either for
want of care or by time and rottenness. He took care also that the Cross of
Gold which uses to be born before the Pope, was decked with precious stones,
and neglected no manner of Ornament that might contribute to the honor of the
Christian name. He re-edified the City-Walls and Gates that had suffered by
Age, and raised from the Ground fifteen Forts (...) the defense of the City; of
which two were very necessary, one (...) the right, (...) other on the left
hand of the Tiber below the Hills Janiculus and Aventinus, to hinder the Ships
of any Enemy from entering the Town. He by his diligence found out the Bodies of
the Sancti quatuor coronati, and built a Church to them after a magnificent
manner; and reposited their bodies under the Altar, viz. Sempronianus,
Claudius, Nicostratus, Castorius; to which he added those of Severus,
Severianus, Carpophorus, Victorinus, Marius, Felicissimus, Agapetus,
Hippolytus, Aquila, Priscus, Aquinus, Narcissus, Marcellinus, Felix, Apollos,
Benedict, Venantius, Diogenes, Liberalis, Festus, Marcellus (the head of S.
Protus) Cecilia, Alexander, Sixtus, Sebastian, Praxedes. But while he was
diligently intent upon these Affairs, as became so holy a man, news was brought
that the Saracens were coming with a huge Fleet to sack the City, and that the
Neapolitans and the Inhabitants upon that shore would come to his assistance;
whereupon with what forces he could raise he marched to Ostia, and summoned
thither the Auxiliaries, designing upon the first opportunity to fight the
Enemy. But first this holy Pope exhorted his Soldiers to receive the
Sacrament, which being devoutly performed, he prayed to God thus, O God whose
right hand did support the blessed Peter when he walked upon the Waves, and
saved him from drowning, and delivered from the deep his fellow-Apostle Paul
when he was thrice shipwrack'd, hear us mercifully and grant that for their
merits the hands of these thy faithful ones fighting against the Enemies of thy
holy Church, may by thy almighty arm be confirmed and strengthened; that thy
holy Name may appear glorious before all Nations in the Victory that shall be
gained. Having pronounced this, by making the sign of the Cross he gave the
signal for Battle, and the onset was made by his Soldiers with great briskness
as if they had been sure of Victory, which after a tedious Dispute was theirs,
the Enemies being put to flight; many of them perished in the fight, but most
were taken alive and brought to Rome; where the Citizens would have some of
them hanged without the City for a (...) to the rest, very much against the
mind of Leo, who was very remarkable for Gentleness and Clemency, but it was
not for him to oppose the rage of a multitude. Those that were taken alive Leo
made use of in (...) those Churches which the Saracens had heretofore ruined
and burnt, and in building the Wall about the Vatican, which from his own name
he called (...) Leonina. This he did lest the Enemy should with one slight
assault take and sack the Church of S. Peter, as heretofore they were wont. The
Gates also had his Prayers, for upon that which leads to S. Peregrin this was
graven in Marble, O God, who by giving to thy Apostle S. Peter the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven did (...) upon him the Pontifical Authority of binding and
loosing, grant that by the help of his intercession we may be delivered from
all mischievous Attempts, and that this City which now with thy assistance I
have newly founded may be free or ever from thine anger, and may have many and
great Victories over those Enemies against whom it is built. And on the second
Gate near S. Angelo that leads into the fields were these words, O God, who
from the beginning of the World did vouchsafe to preserve and establish this
holy Catholic and Apostolical Church of Rome, mercifully blot (...) the
handwriting of our iniquity, and grant that this City which we assisted by the
Intercession of the Apostles Peter and Paul have newly dedicated to thy holy
name, may remain secure from the evil machinations of its Enemies. The third
was on the front of the Gate by which we go to the Saxons School in these
words, Grant we beseech thee, almighty and merciful God, that crying to thee
with our whole heart, and the blessed Apostle Peter interceding for us, we may
obtain thy favor. We continually beg of thy mercy, that the City which I thy
servant Leo IV. Bishop of Rome have dedicated anew and called Leonina from my
own name, may continue safe and prosperous. This City he began in the first
year of his Pontificate and finished in his sixth, and gave it to be a
habitation for the men of Corsica, who had been driven out of that Island by
the Saracens, to each of whom also he assigned a piece of ground for his
maintenance. But I wonder now that another Inscription is to be read on these
Gates in dull Hexameter Verse, which I cannot by any means think to be Leo's,
though it go under his name. Of the Spoils of the Saracens he made several
donations of Gold and Silver to the Churches of Rome. Some write that 'twas by
his command that S. Mary's Church in the new street and the Tower in the
Vatican next S. Peter's now to be seen, were built. Beside he restored the
Silver-door of S. Peter which had been pillaged by the Saracens. He held a
Synod of 47. Bishops, wherein Anastasius Presbyter Cardinal of S. Marcellus was
by the Papal Canons convict of several Crimes, upon which he was condemned and
excommunicate, the chief allegation being that for five years he had not
resided in his Parish. Moreover he brought Colonies from Sardinia and Corsica
(which now upon the repulse of the (...) had some respite) and planted them in
Hostia, which partly by reason of the unhealthiness of the Air and partly by
being so often (...) was left without Inhabitants. Lastly, he fully satisfied
Lotharius, who having been informed that Leo was upon a design of translating
the Empire to the Constantinopolitans, came himself to Rome. But the Informers
being caught in Lies received condign punishment, and the friendship was on
both sides renewed. It Is said that Johannes Scotus, a learned Divine, lived at
this time, who coming into France, by the command of K. Lewis, translated S.
Dionysius's Book de Hierarchia out of Greek into Latin, but was soon after (as
they say) stabbed with a Bodkin by some of his Scholars: but the occasion of
this villainous act is not any where recorded. It Is said too, that now
Ethelwolph K. of England, out of devotion, made his Country tributary to the
Church of Rome, by charging a penny yearly upon every house. Our holy Pope Leo
having deserved well of the Church of God, of the City of Rome and of the whole
Christian name for his Wisdom, Gravity, Diligence, Learning and the
Magnificence of his works, died in the eighth year, third month and sixth day
of his Pontificate, on the 17. day of July, and was buried in S. Peter's
Church. The Sea was then void two months and fifteen days.

JOHN VIII.
JOHN, of English Extraction, but born at Mentz, is said to have arrived at the
Popedom by evil Arts; for disguising her self like a Man, whereas she was a
Woman, she went when young with her Paramour, a learned man, to Athens, and
made such progress in Learning under the Professors there, that coming to Rome,
she met with few that could equal, much less go beyond her, even in the
knowledge of Scriptures; and by her learned and ingenious readings and
disputations, she acquired so great respect and authority, that upon the death
of Leo, (as Martin says) by common consent she was chosen Pope in his room. But
suffering afterward one of her Domestics to lie with her, she hid her
big-belly a while, till as she was going to the Lateran Church between the
Colossean Theater (so called from Nero's Coloss) and S. Clement's, her travail
came upon her and she died upon the place, having sat two years, one month and
four days, and was buried there without any pomp. Some say, the Pope for shame
of the thing does purposely decline going through that street when he goes to
the Lateran, and that to avoid the like Error, when any Pope is first placed in
the Porphyry Chair, which has a hole made for the purpose, his Genitals are
handled by the youngest Deacon. As for the first I deny it not; but for the
second, I take the reason of it to be, that he who is placed in so great
authority may be minded that he is not a God but a man, and obnoxious to
necessities of Nature, as of easing his body, whence that Seat has the name of
Seeds stercoraria. This story is vulgarly told, but by very uncertain and
obscure Authors, and therefore I have related it barely and in short, lest I
should seem obstinate and pertinacious if I had omitted what is so generally
talked; I had better mistake with the rest of the World; though it be certain,
that what I have related may be thought not altogether incredible. Some say,
that at this time the Body of S. Vincent was brought by a Monk from Valentia in
Spain to a Village in Albigeois in France. They say too, that Lotharius being
now aged, taking on him a Monastic habit, (...) the Empire to his Son Lewis,
who passing into Germany by his presence composed matters there which otherwise
threatened a War.

BENEDICT III.
BENEDICT the third, by birth a Roman, Son of Peter; he was deservedly called
Benedictus for the Sanctity of his Life and his knowledge in Divinity. For while
he lived under Gregory, he was made by him Subdeacon, and thenceforward led so
exemplary a life, that upon the death of Leo, he only was thought worthy to
succeed so great a Pope. To him therefore they address themselves, as to a kind
Angel by God sent down to them, and presently declare him Pope. He weeping and
calling God and his holy Saints to witness professed himself utterly unworthy
of so high a dignity. But the Election being universally liked and applauded,
he at last unwillingly accepted of the Office, was brought to the Lateran and
placed in S. Peter's Chair, whence he was led upon a white Horse to the Church
of S. Mary maggiore, where he spent three days in Fasting and Prayer, begging
God to grant that he might govern his Church with integrity and holiness. The
third day past, the People came thither again, and according to custom, kissed
his feet, especially those of the faction of Rhodoardus Bishop of Porto, who
the day before had attempted to set up instead of Benedict one Anastasius an
obscure man, who had been turned out of his Bishopric by Leo; but now finding
their error, they asked pardon, and becoming of the right opinion, they also
made the usual adoration to this holy man. As likewise did the Ambassadors
sent to Rome by the Emperor Lewis to confirm the Election of the Clergy and
Laity. The next day he was attended by the People to S. Peter's Church, where
being according to custom and ancient tradition, publicly consecrated, he
received the insignia of his Office with unanimous shouts and acclamations. For
he was a man of so sweet a temper and so great modesty both in his mind and
aspect, that as well in his public managements as in his private station he
gained the love and respect of all men. And now setting his mind on the service
of God he repaired many Churches almost tottering with age, and increased their
Treasures. He ordained that the Pope and Clergy should accompany the funerals
of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as well to honor their Corpse as to pray for
their Souls; and that the Clergy should in like manner attend the Funerals of
Popes; and what he had thus ordained himself observed punctually as long as he
lived, for he was always present at the burials of the Priests. He was a
frequent visiter of the sick, a nursing Father to the poor, a comforter of the
miserable and hopeless, a zealous patron of the Widow and Fatherless. And in
thus doing having spent a most holy life, late enough for himself, but too soon
for the people of Rome, he died, having sat two years six months and nine
days, and was buried before S. Peter's Church-doors. The Sea then was vacant
fifteen days.

NICOLAS I.
NICOLAS the first, a Roman born, Son of Theodosius, was ingenuously and
religiously educated from his Childhood and made first Subdeacon by Sergius,
then Deacon by Leo. In which Order he stood, when with great piety and many
tears he laid the body of Benedict in the Grave, whose Exequies being
performed, it was necessary to think of a Successor, and the People hereupon
pressed the Divine Majesty with prayers, watchings and fastings, that he would
vouchsafe them as good a Pope as him they had lost. After a long consultation
in the Church of S. Denis Pope and Confessor (where they convened for this
purpose) they chose this Nicolas Pope; but he was absent and upon hearing the
news fled into the Vatican, and there hid himself to avoid the Dignity, where
at length they found him, brought him to the Lateran, and placed him however
unwilling in the Apostolical Chair. Being consecrated in S. Peter's Church and
agreeably to custom having put on the Pontifical Mitre, he concerted several
affairs with the Emperor Lewis relating to the Popedom and to the Empire. Lewis
afterward leaving Rome, staid at a place the Romans call Quinto, whether it is
said Nicolas went attended by the great men of the City, and was honorably
received, for the Emperor came a mile to meet him, and alighting took his
Horse-bridle in his hand and led him into the Camp. And indeed he was a man of
so great veneration and majesty, and of so much learning and eloquence, that
like the Deity, he (...) respect from all men. After some repast, they held a
long and private Conference, and then having kissed each other, the Pope
returned to Rome; which he found so overflowed by an extraordinary rise of the
Tiber, that there was no passing from street to street but in boats. S.
Laurence's Church and the Monastery of S. Sylvester, with all the low part
between Via lata, Campidoglio and the Aventine was so much under water, that
another deluge was feared; many houses were born down by it, Trees forced up by
the roots and Corn that was sown was quite washed away; and the same happened
again the same year in December. To make up these losses or to make them more
tolerable, the Pope omitted no manner of good Office or kindness to the
Citizens. At this time Michael Son of Theophilus Emperor of Constantinople sent
Ambassadors with Presents to Rome, to visit the Apostolic Sea and his
Holiness. The Presents were a large Paten and Chalice of Gold with precious
stones of great value. This was that Michael, who having taken Basilius to be
his Partner in the Empire, was murdered by him, that he might reign alone. His
Ambassadors were kindly received and sent home with Presents. Nicolas being
earnestly intent upon the Conservation of the Pontifical Dignity, deprived John
Arch Bishop of (...) for (...) to obey a Citation from the Apostolic Chair to
answer some accusations. Whereupon he goes to Pavia, and procures of the
Emperor Lewis commendatory Letters to the Pope, and to his Ambassadors, that
they should get leave that Archbishop John should have a safe conduct to come
to Rome and plead his own Cause, which the Pope readily granted: And John in a
great Convention of Prelates being allowed liberty of Speech, only confessed
himself guilty, and begged pardon of the Pope and of all that were present. By
which Confession and the Intercession of the Auditors the Pope was persuaded to
receive him into favor upon these Conditions; That he should (...) his Error
before the Synod; that he should promise to come to Rome once a year, if
possible; that he should not be capable of consecrating any Bishop in Romagna,
however canonically elected, without leave first obtained from the Sea
Apostolic; and that he should not hinder any of those Bishops from coming to
Rome as often as they pleased; that he should not introduce any exaction,
custom or usage contrary to the sacred Canons; and lastly, that under the
penalty of Anathema he should not alter or meddle with the treasure of holy
Church without the consent of the Pope, nor should without the same allowance
receive any thing secular. These holy Institutions were so highly approved by
the whole Synod, that thrice they all shouted, Righteous is the judgment of the
supreme Prelate, just is the decree of the Universal Bishop; All Christians
agree to this wholesome Institution. We all say, think and judge the same thing.
Then John in the sight of them all took his Oath and gave it under his hand,
that he would observe the Articles. Thus the Convocation was dissolved and John
returned to Ravenna. The Pope having overcome this trouble rebuilt the Church
of our Lady (then called the Old, afterward the New Church) and adorned it
with excellent Paintings. He by Letters and good Admonitions converted the King
of Bulgaria to the Christian Faith with all his Realm, to whom he sent Bishops
and Priests to confirm the young (...), driving out Photinus who had craftily
disseminated erroneous Opinions among them. He procured a Peace between Lewis
the Emperor and Andalisio Duke of Benevent and repelled the Saracens who had
made an Incursion as far as the same Benevent. Lastly, with the consent of the
Emperor he decreed that no Emperor or other Layman should thrust himself into
any Convocation of the Clergy, except the debate was concerning matters of
Faith, and then his Opinion was that they might reasonably be present. It Is
said, that at this time S. Cyril brought the body of S. Clement from the
Chersonese in Pontus to Rome, and placed it in the Church now called S.
Clement's, where a little while after, himself also was buried. Nicolas now,
who was a great exemplar of all the Virtues one man could be endued with, died
the seventh year, ninth month, and thirteenth day of his (...), and was buried
according to his last Will in S. Peter's Church porch. Some Authors say that
the Sea was then vacant eight years, seven months, and nine days.

HADRIAN II.
HADRIAN the second, a Roman, Son of Talarus a Bishop, was a familiar friend of
Pope Sergius, who having once given him forty Julio's, when he came home he
gave them to his Steward to give to the Beggars and poor strangers that were at
his door; which the Steward going to do, saw the number was so great, that
'twould not serve a quarter of them, and so he returned and told Hadrian: Who
hereupon takes the money and coming to the poor folks gave every one three
Julio's and reserved to himself as many for his own use; at which Miracle the
Steward being astonished, Do thou see (says Hadrian) how good and bountiful
the Lord is to those that are liberal and charitable to the Poor? By this and
other Virtues he grew into so high estimation with all men, that when the
Consultation was held for making a new Pope, they unanimously elected him, and
brought him against his will from the Church of S. Mary ad Proesepe to the
Lateran, and immediately created him Pope, nor regarding the consent of any
person in a proceeding so tumultuary: which gave great offense to the
Ambassadors of the Emperor who came on purpose upon this occasion, but could
not (as they ought) interpose the Imperial Authority in this Election. But
satisfaction was made to them by remonstrating that it was impossible in so
great a tumult to moderate the violent inclinations of the multitude; they were
desired therefore to concur with the Clergy and People and according to custom
to congratulate as Pope this excellent man whom they had chosen; This at last
the Ambassadors did, though they saw plainly, that the Clergy and People did
arrogate to themselves the full power of creating a Pope, without expecting the
consent of any Temporal Prince; and this perhaps in order to enlarge the
Liberties of holy Church by making it a Custom. Soon after arrived Letters from
Lewis highly applauding this action of the Romans, and commending them that
they had proceeded so religiously and sincerely in this Affair; without waiting
for the approbation of any one, whose ignorance of the fitness of the
Canditates might render them incompetent Judges in the case. For how (said he)
can it be, that one that is a Foreiner and a Stranger should be able in another
Country to distinguish who is most worthy? To the Citizens therefore does it
properly belong and to those who have had familiarity with, and knowledge of the
Competitors. Hadrian then being made Pope, took diligent care of all matters
relating to Religion, and by word, example and authority both of himself and
his Predecessors exhorted all men to good and holy lives, particularly he
showed himself a strenuous desender of those that had been oppressed by
Injustice and the power of great men. He caused a Council to be called at
Constantinople, where Photius a seditious person was deposed and Ignatius
restored who had been wrongfully turned out before. In this Council a long
debate was held, whether the Bulgarians (whose Ambassadors were present) should
be subject to the Roman or Constantinopolitan Sea; And by the favor of the
Emperor Basilius they were adjudged to the Sea of Rome, whereupon the
Bulgarians making their (...) to Hadrian, that some man of good life and
ability might be sent into their Country, by whose authority and example they
might be retained in the Christian Faith, he sent three most religious men with
plenary power to settle the Churches there as they should see fit. They were
Sylvester the Subdeacon, Leopardus of Ancona, and Dominic of Trevisa, who soon
composed the whole Affair to the Popes mind; though 'twas not long ere the
Bulgarians corrupted with gifts and promises by the Constantinopolitans,
expelled the Latin Priests and received the Greeks; and this Sedition gave
occasion to many quarrels betwixt the Greeks and Latins. Hadrian still opposing
himself to all the Enemies of the Church as much as was possible, when he was
about to anoint Charles Emperor in the room of Lewis now deceased, died himself
in the fifth year, ninth month and twelfth day of his Popedom. A little before
his death it rained blood for three days together at Brescia, and France was
miserably wasted with Locusts; both certain presages of his much lamented death.

JOHN IX.
JOHN the ninth, a Roman, Son of Gundo, as soon as he was made Pope, declared
Charles (surnamed the Bald, who came to Rome for that purpose) Emperor, which
so enraged the Sons of his elder Brother Lewis King of Germany ( Charles
surnamed the Gross and Caroloman) that levying an Army, they invade Italy,
resolving to deprive their Uncle of his Crown and Life. Charles hereupon makes
haste toward Verona with his forces, intending to cut off the passage of his
Nephews by Trent, but was taken ill at Mantua and there poisoned (as 'twas
thought) by one Zedechias a Jew, whom he made use of for a Physician. Upon this
news Pope John used his utmost endeavor, that Charles his Son Lewis (surnamed
the Stammerer) King of France might be made Emperor; but the great men of Rome
opposed it, desiring rather that Charles III. King of Germany might succeed,
who with his Brother Caroloman had now overrun a great part of Italy. So great
was the Sedition, that though many favored Lewis, yet they took the Pope and
clapped him in prison. But by the help of some Friends he soon made his escape
into France to Lewis, where he slaid a year, anointed him King, and ended some
Controversies depending between the Ecclesiastics. For Gibertus Bishop of
Nismes had by force turned Leo an Abbot out of his Monastery. This Monastery
was dedicated to S. Peter and in it lay buried the body of S. Giles, it is
situate in a place called Flaviano, from a Valley of that name given to S.
Giles by a certain King named Flavius, and he built there a Monastery to the
honor of SS. Peter and Paul. The Pope in the presence of many Bishops and
Judges heard the Cause, and adjudg'd the Monastery to Leo. This was done at
Arles, from whence John departing with the approbation of Lewis he held a
Council at Troyes, where he made several Decrees about religious affairs, and
appointed a Bishop for the Flemings, who having left their Woods and fastnesses
now betook themselves to an orderly way of living. But Italy all this while
being harrass'd by the Saracens, who had taken and plundered the Monastery of
Monte-Cassino, John was called home to Rome, and with the help of some
Christian Princes drove the greatest part of them out of Italy and Sicily: and
at last that he might live the more quietly in the City, he placed the Imperial
Crown on the head of Charles III. who quickly after marching against the
Normans then infesting the borders of France and Lorain, defeated them so, that
their King Rothifredus was forced to sue for peace and to become a Christian,
the Emperor himself being his Godfather and taking him into favor. This
writes Anastasius the Roman Library Keeper, who was then highly in vogue, being
so skilful in both Tongues, that by the persuasion of the Emperor Charles he
translated out of Greek into elegant Latin the seventh General Council and
Dionysius the Areopagite's Book de Hierarchia, with the lives of several
Saints. Some say, that this Charles built many Monasteries and was liberal to
the Church; but it is certain that it was his particular commendation, that he
put many learned men upon writing, for Milo a Monk of S. Amand wrote the Life
of that Saint very exactly, and Joannes Scotus did very solidly and acutely
handle many points of our Religion: nor was our Pope John without desert in the
same way, having while he was Deacon excellently composed the Life of Gregory
I. in four Books. When he had sat ten years and two days he died and was
buried in S. Peter's Church.

MARTIN II.
MARTIN the second, a Frenchman, Son of Palumbus, succeeded John. Some perhaps
deceived by the likeness of the names call him Marinus. This Martin (the story
of whose Life is so short because of the small time he held the Chair) was Pope
at the time when the Sons of Basilius, Leo and Alexander, were Emperors in the
East, and Charles III. in the West, who we told you, was crowned by John VIII.
and who broke the forces of the Normans infesting France in so many Battles,
that he forced them to submit to him and receive the Christian Faith. Some
write, that 'twas this Martin that with his tricks (of which somewhat will be
said in the Life of Formosus) did so plague Pope John with Seditions, as to get
him thrown into prison and force him to fly. But having by ill means gotten the
Popedom, he soon died, having sat but one year and five days, and in that time
doing nothing remarkable, either because his time was short, or because no
occasion offered it self from whence he could acquire repute; except we may
suppose it to be the Will of God, that those who attain to Power by indirect
means should lose that true glory, which is the chief aim of every good Prince.

HADRIAN III.
HADRIAN the third, a Roman, Son of Benedict, was a man of so great a Spirit,
that immediately upon his entrance on the Popedom, An. Dom. 895. he proposed to
the Senate and People, that a Law should pass, that no regard should hereafter
be given to the Authority of the Emperor in the creation of any Pope, but that
the Election of the Clergy and People should be free; this Institution was
rather attempted than begun before by Nicolas I. as was said; but I believe
Hadrian took now the opportunity, when the Emperor Charles was marched with his
Army out of Italy against the Rebellious Normans. He went with a design utterly
to extirpate that unquiet people; but perceiving that would be difficult, and
not to be done without great slaughter of his own men, he granted them that
part of Prance to live in, which lies beyond the River Seine, and is still
called from the name of the people, Normandy. They were bound to pay a yearly
tribute to the Crown of France, to mind them that they stood possessed of the
Country, not by their own power, but by the bounty of the Emperor Charles. At
this time William surnamed the Godly, Duke of Aquitain and Earl of Auvergne,
not having any Heirs male, began magnificently to build the Monastery of Clugny
in his Fathers Manor in a Village of Burgundy, and made Berno Abbot of the
place, having set out an Income for the maintenance of the Monks: But he dying
left it unfinished, having constituted Ebbo Earl of Poictou his Heir, who
should take care according to his Last Will of the whole matter. And now
Hadrian, of whom, for his courage and haughty Spirit, the Clergy and People of
Rome had conceived so great hopes, died in the first year and second month of
his Popedom, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, with the general lamentation
of the People for the unseasonable loss of such a Father.

STEPHEN V.
STEPHEN the fifth, a Roman, Son of one Hadrian of the Via lata, was made Pope
at the time when the Normans assisted by the Danes contrary to their Treaties
had well-nigh overrun all France. For fear of these Invaders the body of S.
Martin was carried from Tours to Auxerre, and placed in the Church of S.
German; which begot a feud among the Monks, who could not agree by the name of
which of the two Saints the Church should be called; to solve this doubt, they
took this way; They set a Leper in the midst between the two Saints Bodies, who
grew whole only on that side which was toward S. Martin, and then turning the
other side toward him, he was quite healed. This Miracle determined the
Controversy, which S. German is thought to have suffered his new Guest to
perform, (...) it should be thought that the Body had lost any of its Sanctity
by being translated. Authors say, that during this Popes time Charles the
Gross, who had been Emperor twelve years was deposed by his Nobles for his
sloth and dullness, and Arnulphus his Nephew was set up in his stead, who was
the seventh Emperor from Charles the Great. This troublesome state of things
tempted the Huns a Scythian Nation (according to Vincentius and Martinus) to
make a descent into Tannonia, where joining their Brother-Tribe, the Hungari,
they possessed themselves of the Country driving thence the Gepidi and Avares:
and from hence marching with their forces into Germany, they pierced as far as
Burgundy, destroying all with fire and sword. Stephen in this confusion of
Affairs, was yet not a little comforted with the sanctity of Luithprandus
Deacon of Pavia, Waldrad of Bavaria, and Bernard of Picardy, by whose lives and
conversation the Christian Religion got so great Reverence that many
Monasteries and Churches were sumptuously built throughout France. In the sixth
year and eleventh day of his Papacy, he died, and the Sea was vacant five days.

FORMOSUS.
FORMOSUS Bishop of Porto succeeded Stephen, and in the beginning of his
Pontificate adorned S. Peter's Church with some slight Paintings. This Formosus
had formerly for fear of Pope John, left his Bishopric and fled to France; and
denying to return when he was recalled, he was anathematized, and then coming
to Rome he was deprived of all his Preferments Ecclesiastical, and put on
profane manners with his secular habit. Some think the reason that Formosus was
thus persecuted was for that he was a Party, if not Ringleader of the Faction
that put John into Prison. However Formosus was so enraged at this hard usage,
that he swore he would never return either to Rome or to his Bishopric; but
Pope Martin, who succeeded John, absolved him from his Oath, and restored him
to his Country and to his former Dignity, whence not long after he came to the
Popedom, rather by bribery than for the sake of any good that was in him, many
men opposing his Election. Arnulphus now, the seventh Emperor from Charles the
Great, as we said before, marching valiantly against the still rebellious
Normans gave them several Overthrows, but was too much puffed up with his
success and became so intolerably imperious to all men, especially to the
Clergy, that it pleased God, he died soon after of the lousie Disease. In whose
room Lewis was put up for Emperor, but we read not that he was ever Crowned,
for (as Martinus writes) Berengarius Duke of Friuli descended of the old Kings
of Lombardy, renewing his claim to the Kingdom of his Ancestors, and bringing
his pretensions to the decision of War, though at first he was overcome by
Lewis, yet giving him Battle again at Verona, Lewis was vanquished and with
great slaughter of his men being taken Prisoner had his eyes put out. And thus
the Empire which the Franks had enjoyed almost 100 years, was transferred to
the Lombards, Constantine the Son of Leo being Emperor of the East. I know not
how it fell out, that at this same time that the Emperors showed so little
Courage, the Popes too were as greatly wanting in Virtue and Integrity, which
rendered those times very miserable, Subjects being very apt (as Plato says) to
follow the Examples of their Princes. I return to Formosus, whose times (left
they should have been the most unhappy that ever were) were honored with the
Learning and good Life of Remigius of Auxerre, who wrote diverse Commentaries,
especially upon the Gospel of S. Matthew and S. Paul's Epistles. Some say
indeed, that Author was not the person of whom I speak, but Remigius of Rhemes;
however that be, it is certain they were both very learned men. Formosus died in
the fifth year and sixth month of his Pontificate, and the Sea was vacant two
days.

BONIFACE VI.
BONIFACE the sixth, a Tuscan, was created Pope in the room of the deceased
Formosus, but how long he continued in the Papacy is a great question, for some
Writers say longer, others say shorter. I am of opinion with the most, that he
sat but twenty six days, and that which makes me think so is, that Historians
make little or no mention at all of him; and how can it be, that (as some say)
he should sit twelve years in the Chair of S. Peter, and yet his Reign be past
over unregarded? I have placed him therefore in the Catalogue of Popes, not for
any thing done by him, for he did nothing (indeed what could be expected to be
done in so short a time?) but because he was regularly and canonically elected
Pope. He died, as I said before, in the 26. day of his Pontificate, and was
buried in S. Peter's Church.

STEPHEN VI.
STEPHEN the sixth, a Roman, Bishop of Anagni being made Pope, persecuted the
memory of Formosus with so much spite, that he abrogated his Decrees and
rescinded all he had done, though it is said that 'twas Formosus that conferred
the Bishopric of Anagni upon him. But this I take to be the effect of his
Ambition; the Clergy being come to that pass, that they were so far from
needing compulsion, as formerly, to take upon them the Pontificate, that now
they sought it with bribery; and hence it was that Stephen, because Formosus
had hindered him before of this desired Dignity, exercised his rage even upon
his dead body; for Martin the Historian says, he hated him to that degree, that
in a Council which he held, he ordered (...) Body of (...) to be dragged out of
the Grave, to be stripped of his Pontifical habit and put into that of a
Layman, and then to be (...) among secular persons, having first cut off those
two Fingers of his right Hand, which are principally used by Priests in
Consecration, and thrown them into the Tiber, because contrary to his Oath, as
he said, he had returned to Rome and exercised his Sacerdotal Function, from
which Pope John had legally degraded him. This proved a great Controversy and
of very ill example; for the succeeding Popes made it almost a constant Custom
either to break or abrogate the Acts of their Predecessors, which was certainly
far different from the practice of any of those good Popes whose Lives we have
written. In our own time Paul II. a Venetian had like to have taken upon him
the name of Formosus, (which would have been agreeable enough to him, being a
proper man and of a venerable aspect) but that the Cardinals remembering this
story dissuaded him, lest that should happen to him after his Death, which did
to this Formosus; but Paul was hardly wrought upon, as thinking nothing but
this Name to be wanting to his Felicity. Mean time the Emperor of
Constantinople taking occasion from the sloth of the Popes, sends one
Symbaticus, a Nobleman, his Sword Bearer with an Army into Italy, who after a
Siege of three months takes Beneventum, after it had been in the possession of
the Lombards 330 years; but three years after Guy of Lombardy retook it and
drove out the Greeks, and so it fell to the Lombards again. But to return to
Stephen; he died in the first year and third month of his (...), and the Sea
was vacant three days after his death.

ROMANUS.
ROMANUS a Roman, as soon as he was got into the Pontificate, disavowed and
rescinded all the Acts and Decrees of Stephen. And indeed these (...). (...).
1551.
Popelings studied nothing else but to extinguish the memory and honor of
their Predecessors, than which nothing is more mischievous or a more certain
sign of a narrow Soul; for they that trust to such tricks as these are only
such as wanting all manner of Virtue endeavor to rob the well-deserving of
that Fame which themselves can never attain to. Indeed you shall never find any
man envying the good name of another, but one that being obnoxious to all
manner of reproach is hopeless of rendering his own name honorable to
Posterity. Such men as these maliciously, falsely and craftily backbite, slander
and find (...) with those that have deserved well of Mankind, like useless and
cowardly Dogs that dare not seize a wild (...), but will venture to snap at
them when they are fast chained. I was obliged however at least to mention this
Pope Romanus, because he obtained S. Peter's Chair after the ordinary manner,
in which after he had sat three months he died.

THEODORUS II.
THEODORE the second, a Roman, followed the steps of these Mutineers, for he
restored the Decrees of Formosus and (...) his Friends. Arnulphus (according to
some Writers) still ruled in Italy, and in France Charles the Simple,
Constantine the Son of Leo being Emperor of the East, at which time the
Saracens invading Apulia, possessed themselves of Mount S. Angelo, and took
abundance of Men and Cattle; but the Italians hastily got together an Army, set
upon them and recovered all with (...) slaughter of the Enemies. While Affairs
went thus in Italy, William Earl of (...), surnamed Sector-ferri, of the lineage
of Charles the Bald, ordered the Relics which had been taken from the
Chartreux Friars at the time of the Norman Invasion to be restored, for now
that the Normans were quieted, he (...) there would be some uproar about them,
if they were not restored. Who the Normans were is not on all hands agreed: but
they are said to have come into France from Norway. Theodorus in the 20th day
of his Papacy died, leaving through the shortness of his time nothing memorable
of himself.

JOHN X.
JOHN the tenth, a Roman, was next created Pope, and immediately reasserted the
cause of Formosus, a great part of the People of Rome being against it, who
raised such a tumult, that it wanted little of a Battle. He therefore removed
to Ravenna, where calling a Synod of seventy four Bishops, he damns all that
Stephen had done and restores the Decrees of Formosus, declaring it irregularly
done of Stephen to re-ordain those on whom Formosus had conferred Holy Orders.
These Popes by their constant inobservance of all Apostolical Practices were
the occasions (in my Opinion) of these turmoils, especially joining with that
the Cowardice and Negligence of the Princes of Christendom; whose interest it
was that the Ship of S. Peter should labor with Tempests, that so the Master
being unable to animadvert upon them, might not throw them like naughty
Mariners overboard. Arnulphus was immersed in pleasures and Charles King of
France was truly worthy of his Surname of Simple or rather Blockhead. So that
the Hungari a fierce and wild people tempted by this prospect of things, with a
formidable Army invade first Italy, then Germany and France, without any
considerable resistance, consuming all with fire and sword, and sparing no Sex
or Age wherever they marched. The Moors too invaded Calabria, of a great part
whereof they possessed themselves, but whilst they besieged Cosenza, their King
was killed by Thunder from Heaven, whereupon they were dispersed and returned
home. Thus God himself punished with his own hand the Enemies of the name of
Christ out of pity to his people who were miserably forsaken by the Princes of
the Earth, which if he had not done, the name of Italy and the Holy Church had
been no more, Such sluggish and sorry fellows were the Potentates of those
times. John died after he had been Pope two years and fifteen days, leaving
nothing behind him worthy notice, but that he renewed some old quarrels which
had been almost forgotten.

BENEDICT IV.
BENEDICT the fourth, a Roman, for his good nature and mildness was made Pope,
but nothing was done in his time worthy of any great commendation. In his Age
it happened, as to others it does sometimes, that a strange negligence of all
manner of (...) had possessed mankind, no incitements being applied by which
the minds of men should be stirred up to Actions that are praiseworthy, which
yet are never wanting under good Princes or well constituted Governments. At
this time (as I said before) Lewis the Son of Arnulphus endeavoring to recover
his Fathers Empire was taken and killed at Verona by Berengarius; and then the
posterity of Charles the Great first lost their Titles to France and the Empire
of Germany. So true it is that which Salust says, Every rising has its setting
and every increase its wane. The Empire which had arrived to so great a height
lost its splendour by the sluggishness of the great men and people of Rome, when
they once grew remiss in the exercises of Virtue, and emasculated their bodies
with Luxury and with studied softnesses. And this we may say, was the case of
the Papacy, for at first the Pontifical Dignity (without Wealth and among
Enemies and furious Persecutors of Christianity) was illustrious with a
holiness and learning not to be attained without great pains and a consummate
Virtue; but now the Church of God was grown wanton with its Riches, and the
Clergy quitted severity of manners for lasciviousness; so that there being no
Prince to punish their excesses, such a Licentiousness of sinning obtained in
the World as brought forth these Monsters, these Prodigies of wickedness by
whom the Chair of S. Peter was rather seized than rightfully possessed. Yet
this may be said for Benedict, that in this debauched Age he carried himself
with gravity and constancy, and died in the third year and fourth month of his
Pontificate, after which the Sea was vacant six days.

LEO V.
LEO the fifth, whose native Country Historians mention not, succeeded him,
but was soon taken and thrown into Prison by one Christopher a Chaplain of his
own, who aspired to the Popedom, which was not done without great tumults and
the loss of many men's lives. How lightly the Papal Authority was now esteemed
(by fault of former Popes) may be seen in this, that a private person should in
a moment be able to seize so great a Dignity. But that saying is certainly
true, that great places receive more honor than they confer upon the persons
that supply them, as appears in the Roman Censorship, which at first was
slighted as a mean Office, but when several of the Nobility had once
condescended to execute it, the Office became so honorable, that the Nobleman
who had not once in his life been Censor was looked upon as very unfortunate.
Leo had sat but forty days when Christopher got into the Chair, which
Indignity he laid so to heart, that in a little while after he died for grief,
deeply resenting it that he should be robbed of his Dignity by one that had eat
of his bread; according to that of Theocritus, Nurse up a Wolf, and he will devour
you.

CHRISTOPHER.
CHRISTOPHER, whose Country and Family is, (because of the meanness of his
extraction) not known, having got the Popedom by ill means lost it as ill; for
after seven months he was justly deposed and forced to take on him a Monastic
life, the only refuge of men in trouble, for at that time Clergymen that had
deserved ill were as it were banished into Monasteries by way of punishment.
There are those that say, Christopher was deposed in the Reign of Lewis III.
while others ascribe him to the times of Berengarius, who (we told you) was
from Duke of Friuli created Emperor, as descending from the Longobardian Kings
of Italy, and as being the only man in whom for his valor and nobility they
could place any hopes of seeing the honor of the Empire retrieved. And that I
should suppose Berengarius to have reigned at this time I am persuaded by
considering the short lives of the Popes before-going (who, as Monsters, were
soon snatched away by a divine Power) and (...) length of the Reign of that
Emperor, who having vanquished Guido Duke of Spoleto and slain Ambrose Count of
Bergomo, who were his first Adversaries, was crowned Emperor by Formosus, and
lived nine years after. What became of Christopher after his being deposed,
shall be spoken in the Life of Sergius.

SERGIUS III.
SERGIUS the third, a Roman, Son of Benedict, entering upon the Pontificate, re
edified the Lateran Church which was then ruined, and taking Christopher out of
his Monastery, put him in Prison; and then settling his Affairs he took a
Journey to France; after his return from whence, being now strengthened with
the favor and friendship of the French King Lotharius, he totally abolished
all that Pope Formosus had done before, so that Priests who had been by him
admitted to Holy Orders were forced to take new Ordination. Nor was he content
with thus dishonouring the dead Pope, but he drags his Carcass again out of the
Grave, beheads it as if it had been alive, and then throws it into the Tiber,
as unworthy the honor of humane Burial. It Is said that some Fishermen finding
his Body as they were fishing brought it to S. Peter's Church, and while the
Funeral Rites were performing, the Images of the Saints which stood in the
Church bowed in veneration of his Body, which gave them occasion to believe,
that Formosus was not justly prosecuted with so great ignominy. But whether the
Fishermen did thus or no, is a great question: especially it is not likely to
have been done in Sergius's lifetime, who was a sierce Persecutor of the
favorers of Formosus, because he had hindered him before of obtaining the
Pontificate. And now, Reader, pray observe how very much these Popes had
degenerated from their Predecessors: they, good men, refused this dignity when
it was freely offered them, choosing rather to spend their time in Study and in
Prayer: these on the contrary, sought the Papacy with ambition and bribery; and
when they were got in, slighting the Worship of God, (...) animosities among
themselves with the violence of the fiercest Tyrants; to the end that when no
one should be left to animadvert upon their Vices, they might the more securely
immerse themselves in pleasures. It Is my opinion, that Sergius acted thus, by
the instigation of Lotharius, (...) 'twas by Formosus's means that the Empire
was translated from the French to the Lombards. Sergius leading his life after
this rate died in the seventh year, fourth month and sixteenth day of his
Papacy, several fiery Apparitions and blazing Stars with unusual motions having
been seen in the Heavens a little before. Soon after the Hungari invaded Italy
with an Army, and several defeats were on both sides given and taken.

ANASTASIUS III.
ANASTASIUS the third, a Roman, came to the Chair at the time when Landulphus
Prince of Benevent fought a fierce Battle with the Greeks and defeated them in
Apulia. For Patricius General of Leo Emperor of Constantinople had invaded
Italy, and threatened a general ruin, if they did not immediately acknowledge
Subjection to Leo: but (as was said) by the valor of Landulphus his (...) and
his rage came to nothing, though Berengarius also was bringing an Army together
to meet him; but they made rather a terrible show than were truly of force. But
Anastasius not acting any thing worth mention, died after he had been Pope two
years and was buried in S. Peter's Church. This Pope we may commend in this one
instance, that he did not persecute with ignominy and scandal the memory of any
of his Predecessors; for he lived quietly and soberly, and had nothing
chargeable upon him that was blameworthy.

LANDUS.
LANDUS, a Roman, succeeded Anastasius; but his life was so obscure, that some
do not reckon him for a Pope, especially Vincentius the Historian. But Martin,
and Cusentinus are of another mind, together with Gothifredus who writes, that
this Landus (...) his Authority hindered a Battle between Berengarius and (...)
Son of Count Guido; though others say, that Rodulphus overcame Berengarius near
Verona, and enjoyed the Empire three years. There was indeed at this time a
great contention for the Empire between the Italians, Germans and French, which
was the cause of many cruel Wars which were not ended without great destruction
of men and mischief to each Country. The Romans and Italians labored might
and main to preserve the Empire in their own Country against the Power of
those barbarous people, but they wanted some man that could lead them on in so
great an Enterprise; for those noble Spirits, who had rendered the name of Italy
famous through the World, were now not only extinct, but even those virtuous
Inclinations were quite stisled which gave life to such glorious actions.
Landus died in the sixth month and twenty first day of his Pontificate, and was
buried in S. Peters's Church.

JOHN XI.
JOHN the eleventh, a Roman, natural Son to Pope Sergius, in the year 909.
succeeded. He was before Archbishop of Ravenna and had been deposed by the
people in a Tumult; but upon the death of Landus, he obtained the Papal Chair,
and showed more of the Spirit of a Soldier than of a Clergyman. Indeed the
Church and all Italy had then need of such a Pope: For the Greeks (as we said
before) being vanquished by Landulphus, had called the Saracens into Italy, who
marching through Calabria and Apulia into Lucaia and Campania threatened sudden
destruction to the City of Rome. The nearness of the danger alarmed Pope John,
who taking Albericus Marquess of Tuscany to his assistance, musters up an Army,
fights the Saracens and gets the better, and beats them out of the territories
of the City; but not looking upon his Victory as considerable, except he
followed the pursuit, he attaques them at Minturnoe upon the shore of the River
Garigliano, and conquers them with so great a slaughter, that they resolved to
leave Italy, only burning first all those places on that shore which were in
their hands. But they altered their minds afterward and fortifying Mount
Gargano they harassed the Country thereabout with their Incursions. Mean while
John taking all the honor of this action to himself makes his entrance into
Rome after the manner of a Triumph, which gave so great distaste to Albericus,
that a Tumult arose upon it, in which Albericus was repulsed and flying to
Orta, fortified the Town and Castle, and enticed the Hungari into Italy, who
brought more destruction and ruin upon the Country than the Saracens had done
before, for they carried away the Youth of both Sexes, killing all that were
stricken in years; nor did they spare the very Tuscans, for whose indemnity
Albericus had agreed in the Treaty with them; nay they were more cruel to them
than to other Italians, for they burnt and demolished all the Towns they had
possessed. It Is my Opinion, that Berengarius (who then held Lombardy only)
gave them liberty of passage into Tuscany, upon condition they marched quietly
through his Country without hurting his Subjects. But the Hungari having once
tasted the sweet Spoils of Italy, did frequently visit it afterward; which
Calamities so much enraged the Romans, that not being able to wreak their spite
upon the Enemy who was too mighty and fierce for them, they took Albericus and
beheaded him. John also in a Mutiny of the Soldiers, was by the followers of
Count Guido taken and put in Prison. In his room another John was put up; but
because he seized the Chair by force and was soon deposed, he deserves not to
be among the Popes.

LEO VI.
LEO the sixth, a Roman, was canonically elected Pope, acted nothing
tyrannically in his whole life, but lived soberly and modestly, taking care of
Religion as far as an Age of so corrupt manners would bear. For he made it his
endeavor to quiet the minds of the Citizens, (who through the rashness and
folly of former Popes were inclining to Tumults) to compose the Affairs of
Italy, to make Peace with foreign Enemies and to drive the Barbarians from the
skirts of his Country, than which nothing could be done to better purpose or
more commendably in so short a time; for in the seventh month and fifteenth day
of his Pontificate he died, and was buried in S. Peters's Church, to the great
grief of the Citizens of Rome.

STEPHEN VII.
STEPHEN the seventh, a Roman, (according to some Authors) came to be Pope at
the time when the Hungari who were overrunning Germany and Saxony were by
Henry King of Germany overcome with a great slaughter near Merspurg. It Is said
also that at this time Rodulphus King of Burgundy made his descent into Italy
with a great Army against Berengarius II. who by the treachery of his own men
was driven out of his Kingdom and fled to the Hungarians for refuge, who taking
up Arms in his cause, the third year after his expulsion, under the conduct of
one Salardus invade Italy with huge forces and take Pavia by storm, destroying
the greatest part of it with fire and sword. The Italians hereupon finding
Rodulphus to want strength and courage, call in Hugh Count of Arles. It was not
without contention that Rodulphus gave place to him, but his Enemies bearing
hard upon him, he retreated into Burgundy. After this (...) finding occasion to
mistrust those Persons that called him in, banished many of them; who fled to
Arnoldus Duke of Bavaria, a man (...) of Rule, and persuade him to make War
upon Italy. He passes the Alps and is immediately received within the Walls of
Verona by the Citizens with great kindness and friendship, but Hugh marching
against him, beats him in a pitched Battle and soon re-takes Verona. Mean while
Berengarius dies in Bavaria, or as others say, in (...), and Berengarius III.
Grandson of Berengarius I. by his Daughter, comes into Italy and in the year
935. gets the Empire. Some there are that ascribe these Actions I have
mentioned, to the time of this Pope; but I would rather assign them to some of
those Popes that preceded and succeeded; because, though I have set them down
in short, yet they must needs require a long time to be brought about. But in
so great a diversity of opinions concerning times, I chose rather to place them
somewhere than utterly to omit things which were certainly once done, for the
uncertainty of Writers. For the sake of Posterity we would not be so
superstitious as to disbelieve that which various Authors have here or there
thought good to record. To the times of this Pope may justly also be ascribed
S. Ugibert a Nobleman of Lorain, who in a short time at his own charge built
the Monastery of Gemblours after a magnificent manner. At this time also it is
said that Spireneus Duke of Bohemia first received the Christian faith. Those
that were then called Dukes being now, upon the increase of their wealth and
strength, entitled Kings of Bohemia. But Stephen having led a peaceable and a
religious life died in the second year, first month and twelfth day of his
Popedom, and was buried in S. Peter's Church.

JOHN XII.
JOHN the twelfth, a Roman, Son (as some say) of Pope Sergius, came to be Pope
when a Fountain at Genoa streamed blood in great quantities (as Vincentius and
Martinus relate) a sure presage of the ensuing Calamities; for soon after Genoa
was taken and sacked by the Saracens who came from Afric, and the Hungarians
entering Italy utterly destroyed all things far and near: but as they passed
laden with Prey by the Confines of Sulmona, the people of Tagliacozzo on a
sudden taking Arms, they were routed by them and lost their lives and plunder
together. Racherius, who of a Monk had been made Bishop of Verona, was now a
great Writer, but was banished to Pavia by King Hugh, because he inveighed
against his manner of living with too great freedom. John died after he had
been Pope four years, ten months and fifteen days. The Sea was vacant twelve
days.

LEO VII.
LEO the seventh, a Roman, was created Pope during the reigns of Hugh and
Lotharius in Italy, but did nothing worthy (...) mentioning. But his time was
made famous by the Lives of Spireneus (according to Martinus) Duke of Bohemia a
man of signal Devotion and Justice; and of his Son Wenceslaus who degenerated
not at all from his Father, killed by his Brother (...) who desired to reign.
This Wenceslaus was afterward justly canonized for a Saint, upon proof made of
the holiness of his Life and of Miracles wrought by him both while he lived and
after his death. Leo after he had sat three years, six months and ten days,
died and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then vacant 3 days.

STEPHEN VIII.
STEPHEN the eighth, a German, coming to the Papacy was so molested by the
Romans with Factions, that he could do nothing remarkable; nay, (as Martinus
relates) they wounded him so foully in one Tumult that he was ashamed to appear
abroad: King Hugh prepared to avenge his quarrel but died in the mean time, to
whom succeeded his Son Lotharius, but he made no mention of the matter, either
because he had a kindness for the Citizens of Rome, or because his Reign was
short, for he outlived his Father but two years. Otho King of Germany did now
undertake to revenge the murder of Winceslaus King of Bohemia upon Boleslaus
his Brother who had killed him, and marching against him, after several Battles
won and lost at last took him Captive. Stephen died when he had been Pope three
years four months and twelve days. The Sea was vacant ten days.

MARTIN III.
MARTIN the third, a Roman, imitated the meekness and peaceable carriage of
Stephen, for being made Pope he laid aside thoughts of War, and employed his
mind in religious matters, repairing Churches that were ready to fall with age,
and relieving the poor with his Charity. Not but that in his time Europe was
very much torn with cruel Wars: For Otho attempting to enter Italy against the
will of Lotharius much blood was spilt on both sides, but Pope Martin persuaded
them to lay down their Arms, because (among other reasons) there was a great
famine in the Land, by reason the Trees were felled, the standing Corn trodden
down, and even the Husbandmen with their Cattle were in this grievous War taken
away. At Constantinople also were great Tumults, the Citizens making their
Emperor a Prisoner, and shaving his head, banished him to a certain Island; but
soon after Constantine Son of Leo getting the Empire, punished these sactious
Citizens after the same shameful manner and banished them to the same Island.
Martin died in the third year, sixth month and tenth day of his Popedom and was
buried in S. Peter's Church; the Roman Sea was vacant twelve days.

AGAPETUS. II.
AGAPETUS the second, a Roman, was created Pope at a time when Italy was full
of Warlike hurly-burly; for the Hungarians having invaded Italy with a (...)
Force had overrun all the Country beyond the River Po, Henry Duke of Bavaria
takes up Arms immediately and getting an Army together marches against them,
and in two fierce Battles routs them, though not without great damage to the
Inhabitants thereabouts, and seizes all the Country from Aquileia to Pavia;
from whence yet he soon departed into Austria, when he heard that Berengarius
was coming against him with a great Army. Berengarius being therefore now
Master of Italy takes to himself the name of Emperor, and calls his Son
Albertus King of Italy, casting into Prison Alunda, Lotharius's Brothers
Daughter, lest she should lay claim to the City of Pavia which was her Dowry.
Pope Agapetus and the great men of Italy, (observing the arrogance of
Berengarius and that he made pretensions to every thing without regard to right
and justice,) sent for Otho King of Germany into Italy, who entering by the way
of Friuli with fifty thousand men quickly dethroned Berengarius and Albertus
and taking Alunda out of Prison, married her, of whom he had a Son, afterward
succeeding him by the name of Otho II. And now Otho leaving Italy, showed a
great deal of moderation by permitting to Berengarius and his Son the
Government of a Province and making Peace between him and the Pope. This Otho
assisted Lewis King of France with a great Army against Hugh Earl of Paris,
though his Brother-in-law, who with the help of some of the great men of that
Country had well-nigh outed him of his Kingdom. But Albertus Son of
Berengarius, who then was Governor of Ravenna, aided with some Forces and
Ships from Comachio, pirated upon the Merchants of Venice much against the mind
of Pope Agapetus; at which the Venetians were so enraged, that they immediately
rigged out a Navy and took Comachio and burnt it. Whilst these things were
doing, Pope Agapetus a harmless man and a great lover of the Church, died in
the ninth year seventh month and tenth day of his Pontificate; about the same
time that Otho Abbot of Clugny also slept in the Lord; whose Disciple Do
maielus is supposed to be, that wonderfully holy man and great restorer of
Monastic Discipline.

JOHN XIII.
JOHN the thirteenth, a Roman, by the power of his Father Albericus of the Via
lata gets into the Chair. His name was before Octavian; he was one that from
his youth up had been debauched with all manner of Vice and wickedness; and if
he had any time to spare from his lusts, he spent it in Hunting and not in
Prayer. The Romans had at this time two Consuls annually and one Prefect, who
was a Judge among the Citizens. Out of the People were created twelve
Decarchons, who were instead of the Senate; neither were the Romans without
some kind of Dominions; for the neighboring Towns of Tuscany between Orvieto
and Todi; and all that lies between the City and Benevent, Naples, Tagliacozzo
and Riete, were subject to the City of Rome. What lies beyond was possessed
partly by the Greeks and partly by the Saracens. It is not altogether certain,
who then held Marca di Ancona and the Duchy of Spoleto. In the City thus free
Octavian favored by the power of his Father assumes the Papal Dignity, a
weight for which his shoulders were very unfit; which gave so great offense
that two Cardinals who were nettled at it, sent to Otho, beseeching him to come
and deliver the Clergy and the People of Rome out of the hands of Berengarius
and this Pope John, otherwise telling him that the Christian Religion and the
Empire too would both be ruined. Otho was at that time great in the estimation
of all people, having (as we said before) conquered Boleslaus King of Bohemia,
and routed the Hungarians, that (...) Germany, in three fierce Battles, taking
three of their Princes, who were hanged up by the Germans, against the mind of
the Emperor. While Otho was expected, the whole design was betrayed to John,
who took both the Cardinals, and cut off the Nose of the one and the hand of
the other. This moved Otho to hasten his march into Italy, where first he took
Berengarius and his Son Albertus Prisoners, and banished one to Constantinople,
the other into Austria; and soon after entering Rome, he was splendidly received
even of John himself, and Crowned (as some write) Emperor of Germany and
Hungary, the Empire being now first translated to the Germans. There are
Authors yet that place this to the times of Leo VIII. of whom we shall speak
hereafter; whose Opinion is followed by Gratian in his Decree; though Ricardus
and Cuseulinus disallow not the former: but the Lateran Library Keeper writes
that Otho came to Rome in John's time, but says not a word of his Coronation;
so perplexed and confused are the Affairs of those times by the carelessness and
neglect of their Writers. Otho however having somewhat settled the State of the
City, had some conference in private with John, dissuading him kindly from his
naughty way of life and exhorting him to reform; but when he found fair words
would not avail, he made use of threats and declared for a General Council,
convening all the Bishops of Italy to judge of the way of life of this wicked
Fellow. The Censures of these good Men he apprehended would be heavy, and
therefore fled to Anagni, sculking up and down in by-places like a wild Beast:
So that Otho by the persuasion of the Clergy creates Leo, a Roman, a keeper of
the Archives in the Lateran, Pope. But upon the departure of the Emperor, the
Kinsmen and Friends of John turn out Leo, and recall him, who within few days
after was struck dead (as was thought) from Heaven, lest the Church of God
should be ruined by so pernicious a Sedition as was then growing on. Some
indeed write that this wicked Wretch, or Monster rather, was taken in Adultery
and there stabbed. However this put not an end to the Schism; for the Romans
upon the death of John put up Benedict in his room, and were earnest with the
Emperor (who was then at Spalato) to confirm their choice. But the Emperor was
highly displeased, and not only denied their request as unjust, but (as shall
hereafter be told) compelled them by force of Arms to abrogate Benedict and
receive Leo. Many Prodigies are said to have been seen at this present time in
Italy; for in a mighty tempest of wind and rain there fell a stone of a
wonderful (...) from the Sky; and in the garments of many persons the figure of
a bloody Cross appeared miraculously; which portents were looked upon to (...)
great Slaughters and calamities to the Church. This John who was certainly the
most pernicious profligate Fellow of any that preceded him in the Pontifical
Chair, died in the ninth year, third month and fifth day of his Popedom; upon
whose death during the Sedition the Sea was vacant twelve days.

BENEDICT V.
BENEDICT the Fifth, a Roman, in the Sedition was of a Deacon made Pope chiefly
by the assistance of the kindred and Dependents of John, to whom the Preferment
of Leo by Otho gave great disgust. But the Emperor disapproving this Election,
flatly the confirmation of it to the Romans who earnestly sought it, and
wasting the territories of the City with fire and sword, forced them not only
to turn out, but to yield up Benedict, and submit to Leo, with an Oath not to
attempt any alteration in what the Emperor had established in the affair of the
Popedom. Matters thus composed in Italy, Otho goes back for Germany, taking
Benedict with him, who soon after died at Hapspurg, whither he was banished. He
held the Papacy six months and five days. The Sea was after vacant thirty days.

LEO VIII.
LEO the Eighth, the Proloscriniary (as I said before) upon the expulsion of
John was created Pope by the Clergy and People of Rome. For when John led such
an abominable and exorbitant life, that the Romans urged the Emperor to depose
him and set up another Pope, he answered that the Election belonged to the
Clergy and People; and let them choose a Man they took to be most fit, he would
confirm him immediately. Hereupon when they had chosen Leo, and the Emperor had
confirmed him, soon after altering their minds, they deposed him and put up
Benedict, which so angered Otho that he compelled them by force of Arms to yield
up Benedict and accept of Leo again, who was so teiz'd with the mutinous humor
of the Romans, that he transferred the whole power of electing of Popes from
the Clergy and People to the Emperor. But he lived not long after, dying in the
sixteenth month of his Popedom.

JOHN XIV.
JOHN the Fourteenth, Bishop of Narni, a Roman, Son of John a Bishop, succeeded
Leo. But the Romans having got the trick of expelling their Popes, vexed this
Man also with seditions; for having called to their assistance Geffrey Lord of
Terra de Lavoro, they broke into the Lateran Palace and feiz'd upon John, whom
they first cast into the Prison of Castle S. Angelo, and soon after banished to
Capua; but Geffrey with his only Son being slain by John Prince of Capua, the
Pope returned straight to Rome in the eleventh month of his Exile. Otho also
upon notice of the Pope's distress, together with his Son Otho and a good Army
by long journeys came to Rome, and immediately threw the Consuls, the Praetor
and the Decarchons into Prison in order to a Trial for their Treason; who being
by torture forced to confess, the Consuls were banished into Germany, the
Decarchons were hanged up, and Peter the Praetor, the cause and Ringleader of
all the mischief, was several times dragged most ignominiously and whipped with
Rods through the most public places of the City and then sent Prisoner to
Germany. Others say, his Punishment was thus, Being delivered to suffer at the
will of the Pope, his Beard was first shaved off, then he was hanged by his
hair upon the head of the Statue of Constantine's Horse, for the terror of all
such ill Men; from whence being taken, he was set upon an Ass with his face
backward and his hands tied under his tail and so led through the City, being
as he went whipped almost to death with Rods; and then banished into Germany. The
like severity (for examples sake) was used by the Emperor against Count Geffrey
and his Son, who were killed (as I said before) by John Prince of Capua, their
carcasses being dragged out of their Graves and denied Christian burial. At this
time the Selavi, who (when Hadrian III. was Pope, under Sueropylus Prince of
Dalmatia had received the Christian Faith, crossed the Sea into Italy, gave the
Saracens a great rout at Monte Gargano and drove them thence; and the
Hungarians by their example so broke their remaining force by recovering
Cosenza out of their hands, that it became easy for Otho Son of the great
Otho, (who came for that purpose with his Army) to make a perfect Conquest of
them; nor was he content to have vanquished the Saracens, but he subdued too
the Greeks who had made a League with the Moors, and drove them out of almost
all Apulia and Calabria. Some say indeed that (...) made this War upon the
Greeks, because Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople had denied to give him to
Wife his Daughter, who had been espoused to him before. This is certain, that
Otho, who was a generous young Man, deposed Nicephorus, and made his Son John
Emperor, himself marrying his Sister Theophania, who together with her Husband
were crowned by this Pope in the Lateran Church with an Imperial Diadem, by the
consent of Otho the Father, who had made his Son his Partner in the Empire.
During. the great and universal rejoicing upon this occasion, Pope John raised
the Church of Capua to a Metropolitan Sea. But Otho (...) worn with old Age
returning into Germany, died at Vienna; whom John also followed not long after,
he dying after he had sat six years eleven months and five days, after which
the Sea was vacant thirteen days.

BENEDICT VI.
BENEDICT the Sixth, a Roman, succeeded John in his Office and in his troubles,
for being taken Prisoner by Cincio a potent Citizen, he was put into Castle S.
Angelo, a Jail for Malefactors, or rather for innocent persons, where in a
little while he was strangled, or (as Cusentinus says) famished. I cannot but
admire that the actors of so great an outrage were never punished neither by
the Citizens of the adverse Party, nor by the Emperor Otho, who was reputed an
excellent Man and a stout defender of the Church of Rome. But I am afraid
Cincius did not worse by him than he deserved; not but that how faulty soever
Benedict might be, it was ill done of Cincius to lay violent hands upon the
Pope, since the censure of him did not belong to a private Man. But see the
turn of humane affairs; The Popes of our times make nothing to clap up Citizens
into the same place and there starve 'em, whether they deserve it or are only
a little too powerful than they desire. I believe Otho was too much taken up
with other business, so that he could not help him. He died when he had been
Pope one year and six months.

DONUS II.
DONUS the Second, a Roman, a Man of great moderation, and though there were
nothing done by him worthy of high commendation, yet he was never charged with
any injustice or dishonorable action. There were however many memorable
actions of great of holy Men which render his times not altogether obscure. For
in his time Baianus a great Magician, Prince of the Bulgarians, so harrass'd
with War Basilius and his Son Constantine Emperor of Constantinople, that he
narrowly missed of taking the Town, which by the negligence of the Greeks was
left almost empty; but at last upon hard terms a Peace was concluded between
'em. Adalbertus also a Bohemian, Bishop of Prague, flourished now, who was a
Man of so great Sanctity, that he (by the impulse of the Divine Spirit)
traveled into Hungary, and baptized the King thereof, and by his good life and
godly example taught the Bishops of the Country to seek the grace of God; from
whence passing into Prussia, preaching the Gospel of Christ with great
diligence, he was there crowned with Martyrdom. At this time too S. Edward King
of England, was for his Sanctity in great honor; but was murdered by the
fraud and villainy of his Stepmother. Richardus the Historian adds to these S.
Maiolus Abbot of Clugni, who left a great Name behind him for his Miracles and
holy life. Donus died in the first year of his Pontificate, and was buried in
S. Peter's Church, whereupon the Sea was vacant two days.

BONIFACE VII.
BONIFACE the Seventh, whose Family and Country (I suppose because of their
baseness) Writers mention not, got the Popedom by ill arts and lost it as ill;
for he was no sooner got into the Chair, but the honest part of the Citizens
confederating, he was forced out of the City, taking with him the most precious
things out of the Church of S. Peter, and fled to Constantinople, where he
only tarried till by the sale of what he had so sacrilegiously got, he had
amassed vast sums of Money, with which he returns to Rome, not doubting but by
the help of that to retrieve his dignity, by bribing the Citizens. He met yet
with great opposition from all good Men, but especially from John, a Deacon
Cardinal, whom by the assistance of some wicked Bravo's, he caught, and put out
his Eyes. But his Enemies increasing about him, whether for fear or remorse for
his great wickedness, this Author of so many mischiefs miserably ended his
life. Observe, I beseech you, how these Popes did degenerate from their
Predecessors, who left the Church so ample and magnificent at the expense of
their blood. The Pope of Rome the Father and Protector of things sacred, does
himself steal 'em away, and he that should punish sacriledg is the Author of
it; but thus it must needs fall out in any Government where the Pride and
Covetousness of ill Men shall prevail over the Virtue and Wisdom of the good.
To great benefices none of the Clergy ought to be chosen, but such of whose
Life and Learning there is a certainty; not those who having nothing of Virtue
or Religion seek by Ambition and Simony to get into places of Power. Boniface
lived seven months and five days in his Pontificate, and then the Sea was
vacant twenty days.

BENEDICT VII.
BENEDICT the Seventh, a Roman, as soon as he was made Pope he called a
Council, in which he restored Arnulphus Bishop of Rhemes who had been expelled
in a Sedition. At this time Otho II. having conquered Henry Duke of Bavaria,
who had endeavored some Alterations in the State, marched against Lotharius,
who had possessed himself of Lorain, a Province of the Empire, and laid waste
the Territory of Aken: and gaining a Victory over him, he overran the Country
of Soissons and set fire to the Suburbs of Paris; but upon his retreat with his
Forces he received some damage near the River Aisne. After this raising a
greater Army, he brought it into Italy against Basilius and Constantine, the
Greek Emperors, who had seized Calabria and that part of Italy that lies toward
Sicily, but receiving a defeat at Basanello, he was forced to make his escape
by Sea, where he was by chance taken by Pirates, and carried into Sicily. The
Sicilians paid his Ransom, and sent him to Rome, and soon after caught the
Pirates and put them to death. Otho now gets his Army together again and
designed to chastise severely the Romans and Beneventans, because they
occasioned the loss of the Battle at Basanello, by flying first; but it was not
thought safe to begin with the Romans, and therefore he turns against Benevent,
which he takes and consumes with fire, translating from thence the body of S.
Bartholomew, and placing it at Rome, in an Island of the Tiber, formerly called
Hostia Jovis Lycaonia, which was of the shape of the poop of a Galley. Nay even
to this day, as you view it from Tivertino, the Island resembles a Galley, so
made, I suppose to represent that which brought Aesculapius to Rome; there is
also to be seen engraven in stone the Serpent (in the form whereof that God is
said to have arrived) and the Ribs of the Galley: so studious were the
excellent Men of those times to bring Nature to Art as well as Art to Nature.
But to return to Otho; he soon after the aforesaid translation of the Body of
S. Bartholomew, died at Rome, and was honorably buried in a Porphyry Tomb,
still to be seen on the left hand as you go in, in the Portico of S. Peter's
Church (called Paradise). Whilst Consultations were held about choosing a new
Emperor, some insisting upon Otho III. Son of Otho II. Others standing up for
Henry Duke of Bavaria, Otho's Nephew by his Brother, the Italians being earnest
for one Crescentius of Lamentana, an eminent Man; the Germans on the sudden, of
whom there were many then at Rome, chose Otho III. The Pope, good man, all the
while urging them, that in their Election, they would have a regard to the
Church of Christ, which needed a Governor of great ability and diligence; but
at last to prevent tumults, he approved of what the Germans had done. He died
after he had been Pope eight years and six months, upon which the Sea was
vacant five days. In his time Valdericus Bishop of Hamburg was famous for his
great Learning and Sanctity.

JOHN XV.
JOHN the Fifteenth, a Roman, or (as some will have it) a Pavian, had not been
Pope three months but he was taken by the Romans and put into the public Jail
of Castle S. Angelo, where he pined away so long with the stink of the Prison,
want of necessaries and trouble of mind, that he died. Some write that he was
made away by Ferruccio Father of Boniface VII. a Man of great Power, because he
had been an Enemy to his Son in his Pontificate. However that be, it is certain
he died in Prison and was buried in S. Peter's Church. Whether he was deposed
for his Tyranny and Arrogance, or by the malice and envy of seditious people,
is not certain, so confused are the Accounts we have of those times. In his
time lived Odo Abbot of Clugnis and Berengarius of Tours, Men famous for
Learning and holy Lives, though it is said of Berengarius, that through his
confidence in his vast Learning he erred in the Faith, holding a wrong Opinion
of the Eucharist, which in a General Council holden at Rome he afterward
recanted, and leaving off his study of controversial matters, though he were
Archdeacon of Anjou, he gave all that he had to the poor, and got his living
by the labor of his hands.

JOHN XVI.
JOHN the Sixteenth, a Roman, Son of Leo a Priest, born in the Ward of Gallina
bianca, being got into the Popedom, hated the Clergy strangely, and was
deservedly for the same mutually hated of them, and more especially because
whatever he could get either of things sacred or profane he gave to his Kindred
and Relations, without any regard to the glory of God or the honor of the
Church, and this evil humor has descended to his Successors, even to our own
times, than which naughty custom nothing can be more pernicious, when our
Clergy seem not to seek the Popedom for the sake of Religion and the Worship of
God, but that they may with the profits of it satisfy the luxury and avarice
of their Brethren, Nephews or Domestics. They write that a Comet appeared
about this time portending the coming Calamity, for there followed a long
Pestilence and Famine, and both Benevent and Capua suffered much by an Earth
quake: and these were generally looked upon as judgments for the Pride and
rapacious temper of the Pope, and his contempt of God and Man. But it pleased
God, that after a Pontificate of eight months he died and was buried in S.
Peter's Church.

JOHN XVII.
JOHN the Seventeenth, a Roman, succeeded when Otho was Emperor, but had not
yet been Crowned. He was a Man of great Learning, and (as Martinus Writes) was
the Author of several elegant things. He was so teiz'd with Seditions by
Crescentius the Consul of Rome, who claimed to himself an absolute Power in the
City, that he gave place to the Man's Ambition, and withdrew into Tuscany. But
Crescentius understanding that John was so extremely enraged, that he had sent
for Otho and his Army into Italy, he dispatched all the Pope's Kinsmen and
Friends that were left in Rome, to him to desire him to lay by all thoughts of
bringing Otho to his assistance, but to come to the City there to exercise his
most ample Power, promising perfect obedience in all matters. John, being moved
with the entreaties of his Friends and partly fearing lest if Otho should enter
Italy with his Army, he might do more hurt than good, went to Rome, where
Crescentius with all the Magistrates and a multitude of Citizens meeting him,
he was brought to the Palace of Lateran, in the Porch whereof Crescentius and
all the heads of the Faction kissed his feet and begged his Pardon; and thus
matters being composed they afterward lived quietly together. At this time
Henry Abbat of Loby in Lorain, Adolfus Bishop of Utrecht who wrote much in
praise of the Blessed Virgin and of the Holy Cross, and Albo Abbat of Fleury
(who afterward in Gascoign suffered Martyrdom for the faith of Christ) Men
famous for Learning, Religion and Sanctity are said to have flourished. This
John died after he had been Pope ten years, six months and ten days; and the
Sea was vacant six days.

GREGORY V.
GREGORY the Fifth, a Saxon, Son of Otho, before called Bruno, by the Authority
of Otho III. for Kindred sake was made Pope. But upon the return of Otho into
Germany, being vexed by the Roman factions, he fled first into Tuscany, and
thence into Germany to the Emperor. Mean while the Romans vest Crescentius with
an absolute Consular Power, who immediately creates Pope, John, a Greek, Bishop
of Piacenza, not more wealthy than learned; whose name, I confess, is by some
left out of the Catalogue of Popes, as not regularly created; but others make
him John XVII. because he was chosen by the Clergy and People of Rome, to whom
of right the Election belongs. Crescentius upon the news of Otho's approach
with his Army, fortifies the Walls and Gates of the City with all diligence; he
fortifies too the Castle S. Angelo, and places strong Guards in every Post that
required, so that for some time after it was called Crescentius's Castle,
taking the name of him that fortified it instead of that of the Builder. At
length the Emperor arrived and investing the City, when the Romans perceived
themselves unable to withstand so great Forces, trusting to the clemency of
Otho, they opened their Gates to the Germans. And now Crescentius and John
being without Friends and at their wits end, fled into Castle S. Angelo, and
defended themselves well; till upon hopes of Pardon coming forth to address
themselves to the Emperor, Crescentius receiving many wounds from the
Multitude, was killed; but John having his Eyes first put out, lost both his
Popedom and life together; and Gregory after he had been expelled nine months,
was restored. He taking notice of the weakness of the Empire and the
uncertainties of Chance, and being willing to preserve the Empire among the
Germans, and that he should be preferred before other who excelled in worth and
Virtue, with the consent of Otho, he made a Decree concerning the Election of
an Emperor, An. Dom. 1002. which has continued in force to this day: To wit,
that it should belong to the Germans alone to choose a Prince who should be
Coesar and King of the Romans, till the Pope should have confirmed him, and
then to have the Titles of Emperor and Augustus. Ptolemy writes that at first
the power of Election of Emperor was in the Archbishop of Mentz for Germany,
the Archbishop of Triers for France, and the Archbishop of Cologn for Italy.
To these were added four Secular Princes, the Marquess of Brandenburgh, who
after the Election, is Chamberlain to the Emperor, the Count Palatine, who is
chief Sewer, the Duke of Saxony, who is Swordbearer, and the King of Bohemia,
the seventh Elector, (and Cup bearer,) was added, they say, to prevent discord
between parties, for if the rest were equally divided, his Vote turned the
Scale. This, it is said, gave distaste to the French; but because the Line of
Charles the Great being extinct in Lewis the Son of Lotharius, that Realm was
fallen into the hands of Hugh Capet the chief Minister at that time (the great
affairs of that Kingdom for some time not being managed by Kings) they waved
all thoughts of retrieving the Empire; but the main reason was that the new
Possessors were well enough yet satisfied with their fortune, and dared not
attempt any thing further, 'till they were certain that their late acquired
Regal Power stood upon a good foundation. Robert the Son and Successor of the
Great Hugh is much and deservedly praised for his Courage, Justice, Modesty and
Religion; for though he exercised himself very much in the Art Military, yet he
found time so often to frequent the Churches of God and to celebrate the Divine
Service, as if he had been in holy Orders. He is said to have made the Hymn,
Sancti spiritus assit (...) gratia; and by these Arts not less powerful than
his Arms he gained the hearts of the People, and drew those honorable respects
to his Family which they had before given to that of Charles the Great. Robert
a certain Bishop of Chartres is about this time said to have been in great
repute for Learning and Sanctity; he having written much and reduced the
singing in Churches to a better method. Gregory died after he had been Pope two
years and five months. The Sea was vacant fifteen days.

JOHN XVIII.
JOHN the Eighteenth, Bishop of Piacenza, by the power of Crescentius the
Consul (as we said) whom he had corrupted with his Money, in the time of
Gregory V. was made Pope by a Faction; for he brought so much Money with him
from Constantinople, that even the good Men might be bribed to serve his ill
ends, much less might he prevail with the Covetousness and Ambition of
Crescentius. I wonder that Historians place this John in the number of the
Popes, he having got into the Chair while Gregory was alive; unless that in
writing the Lives of Popes it may be thought fit, as in a continued History, to
set down the outrages of Usurpers and Tyrants as well as the worthy Actions of
good and lawful Princes, that Readers may observe the difference between good
and bad, and upon the sight of examples of both be deterred from vicious, and
encouraged to virtuous practices, and lead a blessed and happy life in the
Earth. Which blessedness and felicity John wanted; for being a Robber and a
Thief in his Pontificate, and coming not in, as he ought, by the Door, He died
with ignominy enough in the tenth month of his Usurpation. The Sea was vacant
twenty days.

SYLVESTER II.
SYLVESTER the Second, before called Gilbert, a French Man, got the Popedom (as
they say) by ill Arts. When he was young he was entered and sworn a Monk of
Fleury in the Diocese of Orleans; but he left the Monastery to follow the
Devil, to whom he had wholly delivered himself up, and went to Sevil in Spain
to study humane Sciences; being extremely greedy of Knowledge and Learning, in
which he made such progress, that of a Scholar he soon became an excellent
Master. Martinus writes, that the Emperor Otho, King Robert of France, and
Lotharius a Man of noble birth and great learning, afterward Arch bishop of
Sens were his Scholars. Gilbertus therefore full of Ambition and pushed on with
the diabolical desire of Rule, by Simony first gets the Archbishopric of
Rhemes and then of Ravenna; at last the Devil helping him with an extraordinary
lift, he got the Popedom, upon this Condition, that after his death he should
be wholly the Devils, by whose assistance he had arrived at so great a Dignity.
Being greedy of Rule, he asked the Devil once, how long he should enjoy the
Pontificate, the Enemy of mankind answered (as he is wont) ambiguously, that he
should live long, if he came not near Jerusalem. So that when in the fourth
year, first month and tenth day of his Papacy he was at Rome at Mass in the
Church of Holy Cross in Jerusalem, it came into his mind that now he must die;
where he heartily repenting confessed his fault before the people, exhorting
them all to lay aside Ambition and to withstand the Stratagems of the Devil,
betaking themselves to a holy and pious life: then he desired them, that after
his death they would lay the trunk of his Body however torn and dismembered, as
it deserved to be, in a Cart, and there to bury it where the Horses should of
their own accord carry it: and then (as it is said) that wicked Men might see
that yet there was some room for pardon left with God for them, if they at any
time repent, by the Divinc Will and Providence, the Horses of their own accord
went to the Church of the Lateran, where his body was buried. Martinus writes
beside, that as well from the clattering of this Pope's bones, as from the
Sweat or rather moisture of his Tomb, People are wont to gather Presages and
those most manifest of the approaching death of any Pope, and that this is
hinted in the Epitaph on his Tomb. Whether it be true or no, let the Pope's,
whom it concerns, look to it.

JOHN XIX.
JOHN the Nineteenth, whose Surname and Family because of their baseness are
not recorded, died four months and twenty days after he was made Pope. So that
because of the shortness of his Pontificate there was nothing memorable done
either by himself or any other in the time: unless that many Prodigies,
Apparitions and Comets were seen, and many Towns ruined by Earthquakes,
foreshewing the Calamities that were to come: Some ease in which yet was given
by Hugh, the Viceroy of Italy under Otho and Governor of Tuscany; for he
managed his Province with so great Justice and Integrity, that no one
complained for want of an excellent Prince. Who afterward dying at Pistoia, the
Tuscans universally bewailed him as a public Parent, not suffering any manner
of Respect to be wanting to his Funeral. In this place I therefore thought good
to mention the deserved praises of Hugo, that Governors of Countries may know,
that it is much better by a just and generous administration to acquire glory
and honor, than by unjust ways to heap up Riches with everlasting shame and
ignominy.

JOHN XX.
JOHN the Twentieth, a Roman, of the Ward of Port-Metropolitan, being made
Pope, indulged himself in an easy way of living, and did nothing worth
mentioning: But Robert King of France deserved the highest commendations, who
at this time led a Life as devout as Kingly, excelling all the cotemporary
Christian Kings in Knowledge and religious living, and being himself excelled by
no Man in controversial Learning; he not owning that Opinion which the Princes
of our times have embraced, that it is not worth a Potentates while to be
learned; but that it behooves them that are to rule the Nations, to take their
rules of Government from the precepts of others, which yet cannot be done
without reading and study. What else indeed is an illiterate Prince, but the
Image of a Lion commanding the other beasts? It Is necessary they should be able
to moderate their own passions as well as the peoples, who would be thought fit
to govern others. With great reason therefore it is that we speak well of
Robert, whose devotion was such, that as ost as he had leisure from his warlike
Employments, he would sing the canonical hours with the Priests; and so great
were his merits in this way, that once when he had beleaguered a Town of his
Enemies, and neglected the Siege to attend the canonical hours, the Walls
miraculously sell down and his Men immediately rushing in, took the place. But
John (according to some Authors) having sat in the Chair four years and four
months died and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then vacant
nineteen days.

SERGIUS IV.
SERGIUS the Fourth, a Roman, Son of Martin, succeeded; a Man of a most holy
life and sweet conversation both before and in his Pontificate. He was
charitable to the poor, cheerful among his Friends and Acquaintants, merciful
to those who were faulty, and mild even with the perverse. Beside he was so
prudent, that in all the time he sat in the Chair, nothing was committed which
could reflect any charge of negligence upon his Government. For placing all his
thoughts in Heaven (which all Popes ought to do) and having a mind imbued with
much natural goodness he brought about all things to his mind. By his counsel
and advice the Princes of Italy entered into a League for driving the Saracens
out of Sicily, and accordingly made equal preparations of Men. There were then
in Italy most of the Sons of Tancred the great Duke of Normandy, among whom was
William surnamed Ferrebach, a Man of so great courage, that taking for his
Companion in the Expedition, Malochus General of the Forces of Michael
Catalaicus Emperor of Constantinople, he in a short time cleared that Island of
Saracens, the Princes of Capoua and Salerno lending some assistance. Afterward
Malochus using injustice in the division of the Spoil, William thought good to
dissemble for the time, but returning into Italy with forty thousand Normans
who were just come from the Holy War, he seizes upon all Apulia which was
subject to the Greeks, and at Melfi meets Malochus with his Army, fights and
defeats him: and thus by the valor of William the Kingdom of Apulia was
transferred from the Greeks to the Normans; for he dying without Heirs his
Brother Drogo succeeded him, and to him succeeded Humfrey a younger Brother,
from whom descended Robert Guiscardi and his Brother Roger. While this past in
Apulia, Italy and almost all the World too laboring under a Famine and
Pestilence, the holy Man Sergius died in the second year and fifteenth day of
his Popedom, and was buried in S. Peter's Church. The Sea was then vacant eight
days.

BENEDICT VIII.
BENEDICT the Eighth, born at Frascato, his Father's name was Gregory, as soon
as he was made Pope Crowned Henry I. of Bavaria, Emperor in the room of Otho
III. deceased, according to the Decree of Gregory V. Some say, that Otho died
at Rome and that his body was carried into Germany; others say 'twas buried in
S. Peter's Church. However that may be, it is certain, that Henry Duke of
Bavaria, who was an excellent and a most holy person was now created Emperor,
and that he had an Empress equally praiseworthy for Charity, Devotion and
Affability. But whilst he was employed in composing the affairs of Germany, the
Saracens entered Italy, took Capua, and besieged Bari, the Inhabitants whereof
being reduced to extremity for want of Provisions, the Venetians with their
Fleet relieved them, and with the assistance of the Greeks, set upon the
Saracens who sat before it, and with great slaughter of them, raised the
Siege, An. Dom. 1008. at the same time that Jerusalem was taken by the Turks,
without any violation of the Holy Sepulcher, the Church of Mount Sion or
Bethlehem. The Venetians had a design to have relieved Jerusalem too, but that
they were with held by their Enemies of Zara, to whom yet at Loreto they gave
so total a rout, that they durst never after by War molest any of their
Neighbors. But Henry having settled the state of Germany, coming to Rome,
received the Imperial Crown, and then marching to Capua, drove the Saracens out
of it, and carried on the War against Bubagano a General of the Greeks, who
favored the Moors, with so much vigor, that he dispossessed him of Troy, a
City he had built in the confines of Apulia, in a place where Hannibal was said
heretofore to have encamped. The Emperor Henry and his Wife Cunigunda are
reported to have led such chaste and holy lives, that they grew famous for
working Miracles, omitting no action which might contribute to the glory of
God. He founded the Bishopric of Bamberg, and married his Daughter to the King
of Hungary, by whose means that King and all his Subjects received the
Christian Faith; but Henry died in the eighth year of his Empire, to the great
loss of his Subjects. He being dead, of whom in all exigencies Benedict made
use as his Protector, he was expelled by a Faction and another Pope chosen in
his room, though he soon after agreed the matter with his Adversaries, who
turned out again the Pseudo-Pope, and restored Benedict with honor. He died in
the eleventh year, first month and thirteenth day of his Popedom and was buried
in S. Peter's Church. It Is said, that a certain Bishop walking in a solitary
place, Benedict appeared to him sitting upon a black Horse, whereupon the
Bishop asked him the reason of his appearance in that manner; he answered, that
his business was to desire him to take some Money which he had hid in a certain
place to which he directed him, and to give it to the poor, as from him; for
that the Money had been of no profit to him, it consisting of what had been
given of Alms or gotten by Rapine. The Bishop executed his request, and
immediately surrendered his Bishopric and led a Monastic life. Vincentius
writes, that Gerard Bishop of Canobio was in great account about this time for
his Learning and exemplary Life; as also was Gutherus Bishop of Prague, who for
his great abilities and holiness suffered Martyrdom from the Enemies of the
Christian Religion. At this time also so great a Pestilence raged in the World,
that 'twas thought fewer survived it than died of it: which Calamity was
fore-shew'd by a Well of wholesome Water in Lorain being turned into blood.

JOHN XXI.
JOHN the twenty first, a Roman, Son of Gregory, was, as some will have it,
Bishop of Porto, though others say, he never was in holy Orders at all; he was
made Pope at the same time that Conrade of Schwaben was by a just suffrage
elected Emperor in the room of Henry, who had been dead three years. In this
Interregnum I suppose it was, that several Cities of Italy revolted from the
Empire and stood up for their liberty; wherefore Conrade, who was a great
Soldier and had been for many years in great Command in the Wars under Henry,
raising an Army speedily enters Italy, and marching first against the
Milaneses, the chief Authors of this defection, he sits down before the Town,
burns the Suburbs and breaths forth nothing but utter ruin to the City; but
quickly raises his Siege, by the persuasion of the Archbishop of Cologn, who
assured him, that as he was at Mass, S. Ambrose appeared to him, and threatened
destruction to them all, except they departed from the City of which himself
was Patron. Conrade therefore holds on his Journey to Rome, where at the hands
of Pope John he received the Imperial Crown, and then marched against the
Hungarians and Sclavonians, who had assisted the rebellious Italians and soon
subdued them. Rodolphus also Duke of Burgundy being vexed by the Seditions of
his Subjects, put himself under the protection of Conrade, and therefore
Burgundy has been ever since (...) for a good part of it, a Province of the
Empire. It is said of Conrade, that he made several very useful Laws; among
which one was, that it should be death for any Prince of the Empire to disturb
the peace of it; and upon that account he was a fierce Persecutor of Leopold a
German Count, who was a Ringleader of some disturbances in his Country. He
sent Ambassadors to charge the Greeks and Normans (who were quarrelling about
the Kingdom of Apulia) to lay down their Arms; and threatened ruin to the
Romans, if they persisted, as they had begun, to teize their Pope with
Seditions. In his time Religion was adorned in France by the strict life and
holiness of several Abbats, and Himericus Son of S. Stephen King of Hungary had
great reputation for his Miracles. But John who is very much to be praised for
his life, died after he had been Pope eleven years and nine days. The Sea was
then vacant eight days.

BENEDICT IX.
BENEDICT the Ninth, as some say, the Nephew of John, born at Frascati, Son of
Albericus, came to the Pontificate when Canutus a King of England, out of
devotion and for performance of a Vow came to Rome, which having done, as he
returned home he married his Daughter to Henry the Son of Conrade. Soon after
Conrade dying, his Son Henry II. succeeded his Father, and raising an Army
gives battle to Uldericus King of Bohemia; but the Victory being doubtful, he
renewed the fight, overcame him and took him Prisoner, but setting him under
Tribute he discharged him from his imprisonment; then marching against the
Hungarians who were contending about the Crown, he restored Peter to his Throne
who had been driven out by Alboinus. In the mean time the Romans deposed
Benedict, who was a sluggish Fellow and good for nothing, and set up in his
room John Bishop of Sabina, by the name of Sylvester III. who also after a
Popedom of nine and forty days was turned out and Benedict restored; and he
finding himself still liable to the same danger again, of his own accord
resigned the Chair to John Archdeacon of S. John at Port Latin, afterward
called Gregory VI. though some affirm that he sold it to him. Wherefore
Benedict was ill spoken of by all Men deservedly and condemned by the divine
judgment; for it is certain that after his death he was seen in a most monstrous
likeness, and being asked, why having been Pope, he appeared in such a horrid
shape? Because (says he) I led my life without Law or Reason, it is the will of
God and S. Peter, whose Seat I defiled with all manner of wickedness, that I
bear the shape rather of a Monster than of a Man. After he had by intervals
held S. Peter's Chair ten years, four months and nine days, he died, upon which
the Sea cannot be said to have been vacant at all, because he sold it.
Historians write, that at this time Gerard, a Venetian, Bishop of the
Hungarians, an excellent Man and of great Learning, cheerfully suffered
Martyrdom by the Enemies to the name of Christ; being bound to a Cart, and from
a high Hill let down upon a Precipice and torn to pieces.

SYLVESTER III.
SYLVESTER the Third, a Roman, Son of one Laurence, was substituted into the
room of Benedict when he was expelled, but held it not long, for after nine and
forty days Benedict was restored by his own Faction. The Popedom was now
brought to that pass, that he who was most ambitious and would give most for
it, not he who was most religious and learned surely obtained this high Office,
to the great oppression and discouragement of all good Men; a naughty custom
which I wish were laid by even in our own times; and yet this mischief is not
so great, but that I fear (except God avert) we shall see much worse. I return
to Sylvester, who being Cardinal of Sabina, was made Pope not by the College of
Cardinals, for that had been tolerable, but merely by Simony, as some write;
and soon after justly deposed, having entered like a Thief and a Robber, not by
the Gate, but by the back door. Benedict indeed was restored, but the City
continued in a hubbub, sometimes desiring this Man and then another to be put
up; which uses to be the case of a Mobile who wanting a Governor to steer
their giddy humors generally prefer the worse to the better Men.

GREGORY VI.
GREGORY the Sixth, Archdeacon of S. John at PortLatin, received (as we said)
the Chair of Benedict. But the Emperor Henry II. hearing of these miscarriages,
with a great Army enters Italy, and calling a Council, causes Benedict IX.
Sylvester III. and Gregory VI. all to be deposed for so many wretched Monsters,
and creates Syndegerus Bishop of Bamberg, Pope, by the name of Clement II. Yet
Gilbertus the Historian, affirms this Gregory to have deserved very well of the
Church, having by his Authority and great Spirit in a short time reasserted the
dignity of the Sea Apostolic, which had been much weakened in its Powers by the
negligence of some of his Predecessors; for he recovered the Patrimony of the
Church, and first with Excommunications and Curses and (when they availed not)
with downright force of Arms he destroyed the Banditi who lurking near the
City, would cruelly murder Pilgrims as they came to Rome, for devotion sake.
For this reason some wicked Rogues slandered him commonly with the names of
Murderer, Simoniac and Blood-thirsty; nay even some Cardinals would say so
too; which so moved Gregory, that whilst he lay ill of that sickness of which
afterward he died, he sent for those Cardinals and rebuked them sharply for
finding fault with that which was done with so much justice and honesty; And
that you may know, (says he) whether I have done that which is right or no,
when I am dead, carry my Corpse to the Church-doors, which first let be locked
up, and if they do miraculously open, then think that I am an honest Man and
worthy of Christian burial; if not, that both Soul and Body is damned, and you
may cast out my Corpse where you please. The Cardinals did accordingly, and the
doors were thrown open by a strong Wind that rose on a sudden, and the Body
brought in, to the admiration of all Men and to the great reputation of his
Sanctity. This is the substance of what various Authors write of Gregory, who
sat in the Chair two years and seven months, during the Schism.

CLEMENT II.
CLEMENT the Second, before called Syndegerus, Bishop of Bamberg, was made Pope
in the Council, by the consent, or rather Authority and Command of Henry II.
who having received at this Popes hands the Imperial Crown, caused the Romans
to take an Oath after a form he prescribed, not to meddle in the Election of
any Pope, except by a command from him; for the Emperor saw things to be come
to such a height of Licentiousness, that any factious and potent fellow,
however ignoble, could arrive at that Dignity by purchasing the suffrages of
the Electors, which ought not to be conferred but by the Spirit of God upon
those that excelled in Learning and a holy life. From hence he went to (...),
where he settled all things and having listed those Soldiers, who had so
stoutly resisted the Saracens, he returned by Rome for Germany. He was no
sooner gone (as some write) but the Romans contrived to poison the Pope,
because made so without their assent, in the ninth month of his Popedom; nay
some Authors say, the venomous Potion was prepared for him by that Stephen, who
by the name of Damasus II. succeeded him, at the time when Odo, Abbat of Clugny
a Man of extraordinary holiness dying, Hugo was made Abbat after him, a noble
Personage, pious, devout, affable and learned, Henry II. at this time reigning
in France, Alphonsos in Spain and Michael with his Son Constantine being
Emperors of Constantinople, which Empire was now in great weakness and distress.

DAMASUS II.
DAMASUS the Second, a Bavarian, surnamed Bagnario or Pepone (as some say)
seized the Papal Chair by force, without any consent of the Clergy and People.
So deep root had this licentious custom taken, that any ambitious fellow durst
invade the Seat of S. Peter. But the just God avenged himself upon this
Villain, that he might be an example to the rest, who should seek by ambition
and Simony that which ought to be the reward of Virtue; for on the 29th day of
his Pontificate he died. Some would not have this Man put in the Catalogue of
Popes, because he came not regularly to that Dignity, and admire that the
Romans were not moved with the villainy of the action, contrary to their Oath to
Henry, to compel him to lay down his Office; but because he lived so short a
time, that the Citizens could not so soon bethink themselves what to do, I
think they are not to be blamed. We shall then pass to Leo.

LEO IX.
LEO the Ninth, a German, An. Dom. 1049. was made Pope after this manner. The
Romans having sent Ambassadors to the (...) to entreat him to send them a good
Pope, he immediately nominated to them Baunon Bishop of Toul, a good Man and of
great integrity. Who taking his journey toward Rome in his Pontifical habit,
was met by the Abbat of (...) and Hildebrand a Monk, born at Soana, who
persuaded him to lay by his Pontifical habit, and to enter Rome, for that Henry
had no power from God to create a Pope, but it belonged of right to the Clergy
and People of Rome. With these words Leo was so moved (and because as he came
along he had heard a Voice saying, Ego cogito pacis cogitationes, non
afflictionis,) that he laid by his habit and entered Rome as a private Man,
accusing himself that he had chosen to obey the Emperor rather than God. The
Roman Clergy then by the persuasion of Hildebrand elected Baunon Pope, and so
much the more readily, because he had prosess'd the right of electing Popes
ought not to be in the Emperor, but in the Clergy. And yet the Vices of several
Popes were (as we have said) so great, that it seemed to be done by the
judgment of God, that this Power should be taken from the Clergy, that they
might amend their flagitious lives and sinful inclinations, and that the Church
of Christ might not suffer ruin in the hands of such evil Prelates. Thus Baunon
having got the Papacy, and having changed his name to Leo IX. he immediately
created Hildebrand a Cardinal-Deacon and gave him the Government of S. Paul's
Church; so that it seemed as if they had divided the Pontifical charge between
them, one ruling the Church of S. Peter, the other that of S. Paul. In the mean
time Drogo Chieftain of the Normans in Apulia dying, his Brother Gisulphus
succeeded him and possessed himself by force of the City of Benevent which was
the Popes by surrender; for when the Emperor Henry having built a Church at
Bamberg to the honor of S. George, and had a great mind it should be made a
Cathedral, Benedict VIII. consented upon condition the said Church should pay
yearly, as a kind of Tribute, a hundred Marks of Silver, and a white Horse with
his caparisons; which yearly payment Leo IX. remitted to the Church of Bamberg,
receiving of the Emperor in lieu thereof the City of Benevent. Leo therefore
strengthened with the justice of his Title and the Emperor's Forces, marches
against Gisulphus with an undisciplined Army, and is by him defeated and taken
Prisoner; but was soon remitted to Rome with an honorable retinue. It Is storied
that in his time Robert Guiscardi bringing an Army out of France into Italy,
and driving the Greeks and Saracens before him, possessed himself of Apulia,
where he chanced to find a Statue, with these words engraven in a brass Circle
round the head, The first day of May at Sunrising I shall have a golden head;
which words being well considered by a certain Saracen who was Robert's
Prisoner, a skilful Magician, he marked how far the shadow of the Statue
extended, and on the first day of May at Sunrise having dug up the place he
found a great Treasure, with which he bought his liberty of Robert. But to
return to Leo, who was certainly a Man of great devotion, innocence, benignity
and religion, particularly so eminent sor hospitality, that his Palace was
always free for Pilgrims and poor People; nay once when he found a poor Leper
at his door, he with pity ordered him to be taken in and laid in his own bed;
but in the Morning when the Doorkeeper opened the door, the Leper being not to
be found, it was thought that it was Christ himself that lay there as a poor
Man. In matters relating to the Faith he used great diligence and industry, for
in a Council holden at Vercelli he condemned Berengarius for a Heretic, and by
his Monitories put the Emperor of Constantinople upon repairing the holy
Sepulcher at Jerusalem, which had been spoiled by the Barbarians. At this same
time lived Theobald a noble Frenchman famous for his holy life at Vicenza, and
Vincentius Bishop of Liege, a person remarkable for Learning and Piety, wrote
many things skilfully and acutely concerning the Quadrature of the Circle to
Hermannus, a Man of an excellent Wit. Leo died when he had been Pope five years
two months and six days.

VICTOR II.
VICTOR the Second, before called Glaberdus, a Bavarian, succeeded Leo rather
by the favor of the Emperor Henry, than by a free Election; For the Clergy and
People of Rome stood in great fear of the Power of Henry, whom they had before
offended by putting up new Popes, and therefore lest contrary to their Oath
they should seem to make any Innovations, they propose this Victor, and by
Hildebrand their Ambassador to Henry all things were managed to both their
satisfactions. Victor being by universal consent placed in the Chair, with the
approbation of the Emperor he called a Council at Florence, where he deprived
a multitude of Bishops of their Bishoprics for Simony and for Fornication, and
admonished the Clergy of their duty, threatening severity against those that
should transgress the Canons. Some write, that Victor made a Visit to Henry,
and that he was splendidly entertained by him; but I am of opinion, that
Hildebrand only went thither, who by virtue of his Legantine power, created
Henry III. the Son of Henry, Coesar. Capua was now besieged by the Saracens,
which struck terror into all the neighboring Cities, but Robert Guiscardi
taking up Arms, set upon the Saracens and defeated them, thereby delivering at
once Capua from a Siege and their Neighbors from their fears. Of what
extraction this Robert was is not certain, some accounting him a Frenchman,
others a Norman; however it be it is sure he was a person of a noble Spirit and
an excellent understanding, so that he deserved the Crown he held of Apulia.
Pope Victor, whose life we are upon, died in the second year, third month and
fourteenth day of his Pontificate; after which the Sea was vacant eleven days.

STEPHEN IX.
STEPHEN the Ninth, before named Frederick, a Lorainer, Abbat of Monte-Cassino,
was no sooner made Pope, but he took care that the Church of Milan, which for
almost two hundred years had withdrawn its subjection to that of Rome, was now
at length reduced to obedience thereto, as to the Mother and Nurse of all
Churches, which obedience she has since persevered in, as becomes true
Daughters to do to a pious Mother. Near about this time Henry III. succeeded
his Father deceased, and Alexius succeeded Nicephorus Emperor of
Constantinople; Robert Guiscardi also in a mighty Battle overthrew the Greeks
and drove them out of Calabria, leaving none but Greek Priests, who even to our
times kept their own Language and Customs: Indeed the Constantinopolitan Empire
was now so broken by the Saracens, that they had much ado to preserve Thrace,
Galatia, Pontus, Thessaly, Macedon and Achaia, and even out of these either the
Turks or Saracens every day cantled out one place or other. But Stephen, when
he had been Pope seven months and eight days, died at Florence, where he was
honorably buried, as Martinus writes. Some say that Pope Stephen accused the
Emperor Henry of Heresy for endeavoring to diminish the Papal Authority,
without regard to Religion and the immortal God.

BENEDICT X.
BENEDICT the Tenth, a Capuan, before named Nuntius, Bishop of Veletri, was by
a faction of Noblemen created Pope, at the same time that Agnes Mother of Henry
III. constituted Gilbert of Parma, a Man of great abilities, Viceroy of Italy.
There was then in Italy also, Godfrey the Husband of the Countess Mathild a
most noble Lady, who was very powerful; for Beatrix the Mother of Mathild had
been Sister to the Emperor Henry II. and had married one Boniface a potent Man
and of an honorable Family, of the City of Lucca in Tuscany; upon whose death
all his Estates fell first to Beatrix, and after her decease were devolved upon
Mathild and her Husband Godfrey; so that they stood possessed of Lucca, Parma,
Reggio, Mantua and that part of Tuscany now called S. Peter's Patrimony. But to
return to Benedict; he was deposed by Hildebrand, because he came not in by the
right way, but by force and Simony: for the generality of the Clergy had passed
their words to Archdeacon Hildebrand, when he went to Florence, that they
would not proceed upon any Election of a new Pope, till his return to the City.
When he was come back therefore, together with Gerard Bishop of Florence, he
inveighed most bitterly against them all, especially against those who had
promised to stay till his return. But there arising great contention upon this
matter, many approving of Benedict, as a very good and prudent Man, though they
disallowed that Election of him, with great clamours that it was irregularly
and illegally done; yet at last by the persuasion of Hildebrand, Gerard, a Man
worthy indeed of so high a Dignity, was by a majority of Votes created Pope,
and Benedict turned out. Some will have this Election to have been made at
Siena, because a free choice could not be had at Rome, by reason of the
partialities of some Men in Power there. Benedict was deposed after he had sat
nine months and twenty days, and then was confined to Veletri.

NICOLAS II.
NICOLAS the Second, a Provencal, at first named Gerard, Bishop of Florence,
for his Virtue and excellent spirit, upon the expulsion of Benedict, (who was
not regularly so created) was made Pope at Sienna, and immediately thereupon
withdrew to Sutri, where An. Dom. 1059. he called a Council, whither came not
only the Bishops, but many of the Noblemen of Italy, where he forced Benedict
to resign the Office and Habit of Pope and to retire to Veletri: from hence he
went to Rome, where in the second Lateran Council he procured a Law to be
enacted, very wholesome for the Church of Rome, which is to be seen among the
(...), to this purpose, That if any one either by Simony, or by the favor of
any powerful Man, or by any tumult either of the People or Soldiery shall be
placed in S. Peter's Chair, he shall be reputed not Apostolical, but an
Apostate, one that transgresses the rules even of common Reason; and that it
shall be lawful for the Cardinals, Clergy and devout Laity, with Weapons both
spiritual and material, by Anathema's and by any humane aid him to drive out
and depose; and that Catholics may assemble for this end in any place
whatsoever, if they cannot do it in the City. In the same Council Berengarius
Deacon of the Church of Anjou, was reclaimed from his Error concerning the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, in the Bread and Wine whereof he affirmed the true
and entire Body and Blood of Christ was not present, but only by a sign,
figure or mystery; which Error at the instance and persuasion of Nicolas and
Albericus a Deacon, a very learned Man, he recanted, affirming the Eucharist to
be the true and entire Body and Blood of Christ. We have said that this Error
was condemned by Leo IX. but never amended, the praise of which belongs wholly
to Nicolas, as Lanfranc writes, a Man at that time very learned, who in an
excellent Work of his confuted the Tenets of Berengarius. While these things
were acted at Rome by Pope Nicolas, Godfrey the Norman, who succeeded his
Brother Drogo in the Earldom of Apulia and Calabria, dying, left his Son
Bagelardus his Heir, which Robert Guiscardi his Brother (as some will have it)
not liking, he drove out his Nephew and seized upon the Earldom, taking in
Troia also which had long been Subject to the Sea of Rome. At this the Pope was
not a little enraged at Robert, till by his invitation taking a journey into
Apulia, whatsoever the Church had lost was returned again, and then he not
only took Robert into favor, but making him a feudatary of the Church, he was
constituted Duke of Calabria and Apulia. After this receiving of him a great
assistance of Forces and returning to the City, he subdued the Prenestines,
Tusculans and Nomentans, who had revolted from the Church; and crossing the
Tiber, he sacked Galese and took in other Castles of Count Gerard as far as
Sutri, rendering the territories of Rome hereby much more secure. It Is written
also that Henry III. was crowned by Nicolas with the Imperial Diadem, and out
of gratitude for it, all his time never attempted any thing against holy
Church. But Nicolas having concluded this life with great praise of all Men,
died when he had been Pope, three years six months and twenty six days. The Sea
was then vacant twelve days.

ALEXANDER II.
ALEXANDER the Second, whose name at first was Anselm, a Milanese, Bishop of
Lucca, upon the death of Nicolas, though absent, was for his good temper,
affability and Learning elected Pope. But the Bishops of Lombardy thinking for
the honor of their Country, that it was just a Pope should be chosen out of
their number, Gilbert of Parma at that (...) very powerful taking their parts
vigorously, they obtained of the Emperor Henry, against the mind of his Wife
Agnes, that they might set up an other Pope. Whereupon the Bishops holding a
consult made one Cadolus Pope, who was Bishop of Parma, to whom all Lombardy
straightway submitted, except Mathild a noble Lady who had great reverence for
the Roman Sea. Cadolus being soon after called to Rome by the Adversaries of
Alexander, both Parties engaged in Battle in the Prati di Nerone at the foot of
the Hill Montorio, in which fight many were slain on both sides. Alexander and
Godfrey the Husband of Mathild staid in the Lateran Palace, not knowing where
to trust themselves, all places were so full of treachery; though some say,
that Alexander to avoid the bloody sight, did before the Battle retire to Lucca
and lived there securely for some time, which kind Protection from the
Luccheses he gratefully acknowledged by granting both to their Church and City
very notable Privileges. Cadolus was repulsed at Rome, but rested not long at
quiet in his Country, being invited again by some Citizens, (who found that to
satisfy their Avarice it was their Interest that the City should be kept in
confusion) and getting together a greater Army than before, he comes to Rome
and by force seizes the Citta Leonina and S. Peter's Church. But the Romans
with the Forces of Godfrey falling forth, struck such a sudden terror into the
Enemy that they betook themselves to their heels, and Cadolus narrowly missed
being taken having been forsaken by his Friends, but Cincius Son to the Prefect
of Rome, with a strong Squadron carried him safe through the whole adverse Army
with great disficulty into Castle S. Angelo; where being besieged for some time
and seeing little hope of getting out free, he corrupted the Besiegers with
three hundred pounds in Silver, and mounting a lean Horse he escaped all alone.
In the mean while Otho Arch bishop of Cologn before Henry the young Emperor
charged his Mother Agnes with meddling too much with the affairs of State in
Christendom, to the great dishonor of the Empire, whereupon a Commission was
given to him to compose the Church-divisions according to his discretion, and
he coming to Rome at first rebuked Alexander with very hard words, for entering
upon the Papacy without the consent of the Emperor contrary to Law and Custom;
but Archdeacon Hildebrand took him up and stiffly defended what the Pope had
done, proving that both by Law and ancient Usage the Election of Popes belonged
to the Clergy, and convinced Otho so far, that the Emperor Henry being also at
last conscious of his Error, desired Alexander to call a Council and promised
to come thither himself. The City of (...) was pitched upon as most fit; and
thither every one came who was concerned for the safety and protection of the
Church; where all things being settled, the Emperor himself not only got the
favor of the Pope, but begged and obtained of him a Pardon for Cadolus who
submitted to him, and for Gilbert, the Author (as we said) of all this
mischief, the Archbishopric of (...); The first of these the Pope easily
agreed to, by the example of our Savior, who even prayed for his Persecutors;
but the second he granted much against his will, and not till tired with the
importunity of Henry, fearing what fell out afterward, that it would be very
pernicious to the Church of Rome. The Pope departing from Mantua and passing
through Lucca consecrated the great Church there, of which he had been Bishop,
with great solemnity, intending to stay there till Archdeacon Hildebrand had
settled matters a little in Apulia; who having received some auxiliary Forces
of the Countess (...), not only opposed the Power of Richard and William, but
forced them to restore what they had taken from the Church: And then Alexander
came to the City and after a Pontificate of eleven years and six months he
died, and was buried in the Church of S. John in the Lateran, no manner of Pomp
being spared, (that could be at the funeral of a Pope) either by the Clergy or
People. In his time flourished John Gualbertus a Monk of (...) and first of the
Order, a most holy Man and famous for Miracles.

GREGORY VII.
GREGORT the Seventh, formerly called Hildebrand, a Florentine of Soane, whose
Father's name was Bonicius, was chosen Pope by consent of all good Men: The
words of the Election are these; We, the Cardinals, Clerks, Acolytes,
Subdeacons and Priests, with the Bishops, Abbats, and many others both of the
Laity and Clergy, do choose this day, ( April 22. at the Church of S. Peter in
chains in the year 1472.) as Christ's true Vicar, Archdeacon Hildebrand, a Man
of much learning, piery, prudence justice, constancy, religion, modesty,
sobriety and contincncy: who governs his Family very well, is hospitable to the
poor, having been ingenuously brought up in the bosom of our holy Mother the
Church, whom we think sit to govern the Church with the same Authority as St.
Peter by God's commandment formerly did. And when he had gotten the Popedom, he
immediately admonished Henry the Emperor, that he should not for the time to
come take any bribes, and (...) Bishoprics or Benefices in a Simoniacal
manner; for, if he did, he and those that bought them should suffer the
severity of Ecclesiastical Censures. But Henry was so far from obeying his
Admonitions, though they were very grave, that he deprived Agnes the Empress of
all her share in the Government for telling him soberly what ought to be done
in point of Religion. And she upon that went to (...), where she lived not long
ere she died for grief: At last after many Embassies to and fro, the Emperor
and Gregory were reconciled, and Gregory was by him confirmed in his
Pontificate, as then it was the custom for Emperors to do. But when Henry, who
was fickle in good, and obstinate in ill resolutions, persisted in his Simony,
though often admonished, the Pope laid an Anathema upon all those, who had
gained Bishoprics and Benefices by bribery. And that he might not seem to have
done it in an heat, he called a Council in the Lateran (at which many Bishops
were present, particularly Gilbert, Archbishop of Parma, born at Ravenna)
where he gave a reason why he laid such Censures upon Simoniacks, and said, He
would do the same to the Emperor unless he altered his mind. Gilbert, when the
Council was dismissed, having gotten a fair occasion to accuse Gregory, and
withal being ambitious of the Popedom, incensed Cincius, a Roman Citizen (Son
to Stephen, who was Governor of the City) no less rash than seditious against
the Pope; and promised him great things in the Emperor's name, if he would do
as he would have him. Thereupon Cincius laid wait for the Pope, and whilst he
was saying Mass upon Christmas day at midnight in St. Mary's the Great, he
broke in upon him with others of his gang; took him as he was just administering
the Eucharist, haled him away and shut him up in a well fortified Tower. The
next day the people of Rome, when they knew of it, took up Arms against
Cincius, set the Pope at liberty, demolished his House, and the Tower, and
expelled all his Family out of the City with their Noses cut. But Cincius
himself who was the Author of all that Roguery, escaped, and got through by
ways to the Emperor in Germany. Gilbert, who was the contriver of that
Stratagem, seeing his Design frustrated, dissembling his (...) to him got leave
of the Pope to retire to Ravenna, meaning there to set on foot much worse
intrigues. For he induced Theobald Arch Bishop of Millain, and many other
Prelates of Lombardy to conspire against Gregory; besides Hugo Candidus, a
Cardinal, who though he had done the same before, and was reconciled too, yet
at this time he seemed to be ill affected. For he endeavored all he could to
instigate the Emperor and the Normans, who were at variance about the Empire,
to make a Peace with one another and join against the Pope. Which when Gregory
understood, he called a Synod in the Lateran, and giving his reason for so
doing, deprived Gilbert and Hugo of their Dignities and laid a Curse upon them.
Whilst these things were transacted at Rome, Henry who had fought with his
Enemies, the Saxons, very successfully, was so puss'd up with his good fortune,
that he called an Assembly at Worms, of which Sigifred Archbishop of Mentz
was President, where he was so bold as to prohibit all people from obeying the
Pope in any case whatever. And from that Assembly came Romandus a Clerk of
Parma, by Henry's order, to Rome, where he publicly interdicted Gregory from
doing any thing for the future, that belonged to the Office of a Pope:
commanding the Cardinals to leave Gregory and come to him, for they were like
to have another Pope. Gregory not able to endure such an affront upon God and
the Church, deprived Sigifred and the rest of the Clergy that took Henry's
part, of all their dignities and preferments; and likewise laid a Curse upon
the Emperor himself, after he had degraded him from his Imperial Honor. And
of this Degradation or Deprivation, the form was as follows; Blessed Peter!
Prince of the Apostles! I beseech thee hearken unto me, and heat thy servant,
whom thou have educated from my infancy, and preserved to this day from the
hands of wicked men, that hate and persecute me for the faith I have in Thee.
Thou art my best Witness, Thou and the holy Mother of Jesus Christ, together
with Paul thy fellow Martyr, that I did (...) enter upon the Papacy without
reluctance: not that I thought it robbery lawfully to rise into thy Chair, but
I was more willing to spend my days in Pilgrimage, than at that time to supply
thy place for ostentation and vainglory. I must needs confess, that it was thy
goodness and not my deserts that brought me to the Cure of Christendom, and
gave me the power of loosing and binding; and therefore in confidence of that,
and for the honor and safety of the Church, I do deprive King Henry, son to
Henry who was formerly Emperor, of all Imperial Power, in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for that He so boldly and rashly laid violent hands
upon thy Church: and I absolve all his Christian Subjects from their Oaths,
that bind 'em to pay Allegiance to true and lawful Kings. For it is fit that he
should lose his honor, who would diminish the Honor of the Church. And
furthermore, because he has contemned mine (or rather thy) admonitions
concerning his own and his peoples salvation, and separated himself from the
Church of God, which he would fain destroy, I set him under a Curse, as being
well assured, that thou art Peter, upon whose Rock, as a true foundation,
Christ Jesus our King has built his Church. There were at that time a great
many that talked of Peace, when the Execration was past: to whom Gregory made
answer, that he did not (...) conditions of Peace, if Henry would first make
his peace with God. You, said he, must needs know, what injury he has done the
Church, and how often I have admonished him to reform his life and
conversation. And this I did in respect to Henry his Father's memory, who was
my very good Friend, but to no purpose, he having entertained principles quite
contrary to his Father's. Nevertheless some of those that were present
continued to urge him, and persuade him that a King ought not to have been
anathematized so hastily. To whom the Pope replied; When, said he, Christ
committed his Church to Peter and said, Feed my sheep, did he except Kings? No,
when he gave Peter the power to bind and loose, he excepted none, nor exempted
any man from his Authority. Wherefore he that says, He cannot be bound by the
Churches power, must needs confess, he cannot any more be absolved by it: now
whosoever is so impudent as to affirm this, makes himself a perfect Separatist
from Christ and his Church. When Henry heard what Gregory had done, he wrote
many Letters to several Nations, complaining that he was condemned by the Pope
against all Law and Reason. (...) Gregory, on the other hand demonstrated not
only by words and Letters, but also by Reason and Witnesses in the face of the
World, that he had done nothing but what was just and right. But in the mean
time part of the Kingdom revolted from Henry, and the Saxons prepared for a War
against him: upon which the German Princes, fearing some misfortune might (...)
their Country, decreed in a public Assembly, that if Gregory would come into
Germany, Henry should humbly beg his pardon: and the King swore he would do it.
Thereupon the Pope, who was induced by the promises and prayers of the
Archbishop of Treves, Henry's Ambassador, was going on his journey toward
Augst, but when he came to Vercelli, was privately informed by the Bishop of
that place, who is Chancellor of all Italy, that Henry was coming against him
with an Army. At which the Pope forbear to go any further, but went to Canosso,
a Town near Rheggio, under the Countess Matilda. Henry also made thither as
fast as he could with his whole Army, and laying aside his regal Habit, he went
barefoot to the gate of the Town (to move the Townsmens pity) and desired to be
let in. But he was denied entrance, and took it very patiently, or at least
seemed so to do, though it were a sharp Winter, and all things bound up in
frost. Notwithstanding he tarried in the Suburbs three days, and begged pardon
continually, till at last by the intercession of Maude, and Adelaus an Earl of
Savoy, together with the Abbat of Clugny he was introduced, absolved and
reconciled to the Church; having sworn to a Peace, and promised future
obedience. The form of the Kings Oath was this: I King Henry do affirm that I
will keep all the conditions and engagements that are in the Peace, which our
Lord, Gregory the Seventh, has drawn up according to his mind: and will take
care, that the said Pope shall go where he pleases without the least
molestation either to Him or his Attendants, especially through all our
Dominions, and that I will be no hinderance to him in the exercise of his
Pontifical authority in any place whatsoever; and this I swear I will observe.
Done at Canosso January the 28. Indiction the 15th. But when he had succeeded
according to his wish, and all people were gone to their several homes, Henry
moved toward Pavia, but lost Cincius by the way, who died of a Fever: and yet
Henry (though that Villain was gone) did not desist from innovation. For he
broke the Peace, and thereby vexed the German Princes to such a degree, that
they declared Rodolphus Duke of Saxony King, and rejected Henry. That moved
Henry to petition the Pope, that he would disposses Rodolphus of the Kingdom by
Excommunication. But seeing he could not obtain so great a favor, he betook
himself to his Arms, and engaged him in a bloody Battle, where the Victory was
uncertain on both sides. And then they each sent Ambassadors to the Pope, to
beg of him, that he would assist 'em: to which he made no other answer, but
that he would have 'em quit their Arms. But notwithstanding Henry and Rodolphus
fought a second time without any odds: and therefore when they had engaged the
third time, and killed a great many men on both sides, Henry (who seemed to
have a little the better of it) would not hear Rodolphus's Ambassadors that
came to him for Peace, but wrote to the Pope again, that he would please to
Anathematize Rodolphus, who endeavored to get possession of his Kingdom. Which
Gregory refusing to do, Henry was so angry, that he studied day and night to
ruin the Pope. In the mean while, lest Sedition should be wanting in
Christendom, Michael and Andronicus his Son, who had been by force deprived of
the Empire of Constantinople by Nicephorus Bucamor, came for refuge to Gregory;
who not only excommunicated Nicephorus, but employed Rogerius a feudatary of
the Roman Church to restore Michael, with whom he discoursed at Ceperano, to
the Empire. In pursuance of which command he got a Navy, and leaving his
younger Son Rogerius in Italy, he took Boemund his other Son along with him;
and sailed first to Valona, but pitched his Camp near Durazzo, resolving to
make sure of that City which was so convenient for the carrying on of the War.
But Dominick Sylvius, Duke of Venice, who was of Nicephorus's party, beat
Rogerius from the Siege, with great loss on both sides. But not long after
Nicephorus was betrayed by Alexius Mega, General of his Forces and made a
Prisoner, the City being given up for three days to be plundered by the
Soldiers, according to compact. Nicephorus himself was taken in the Church of
Sancta Sophia, but his life (...) upon condition, that he would take upon him
the habit of a Monk for as long as he lived. Gregory seeing that Henry was
incited against the Church by some seditious Bishops, called a great Synod, and
forbad Gilbert Archbishop of Ravenna (for his pride and malice) the exercise
of his Episcopal or Priestly function, under pain of an Anathema or Curse. For
when he was summoned to appear before the Sea Apostolic, being conscious of
his crimes he would not obey the Citation, for which alone he deserved the
penalty of an Anathema. He likewise censured Roland of Treviso, for that when
he was Legate in order to a Peace between him and Henry, he sowed the seeds of
discord and not unity, to get a Bishopric by the bargain. (...) did he spare
Hugo Cardinal of St. Clements, who had seditiously and heretically conspired
with Cadolus Bishop of Parma. In fine, he chose three at the same Assembly, to
wit, Bernard the Deacon, the other Bernard Abbat of Marseilles, and Odo
Archbishop of Treves, to go Legates a Latere from the Sea Apostolic to
compose all differences between Henry and Rodolphus. For the wise Pope saw,
that such a quarrel, unless it were timely ended, would occasion great
calamities one time or other to Christendon. But because he well knew that
there would not be lacking such mischievous men as would endeavor to hinder it
(because it was their interest to foment rather than remove the dissension) he
gave the Legates Letters Apostolical to the several Princes and States, written
after this manner: We taking notice of the weakness, covetousness and ambition
of mankind, do charge all manner of persons, whether Kings, Archbishops,
Bishops, Dukes, Counts, Marquesses, or Knights, that either out of pride,
cunning or covetousness they give no hindrance to our Legates, whilst they
negotiate the Peace. And whosoever shall be so rash, as to contravene this
Order (which I hope none will,) and shall hinder our Legates from composing a
Peace, I bind him under an Anathema both in Spirituals and Temporals, by
Apostolic Power; and take away from him the advantage of any Victory he has
gained, that he may at least be confounded and be converted by a double
penance. He likewise commanded the Legates to call a Diet in Germany, and
deliberately examine who of the two Kings had the right, and accordingly by the
consent of all good Men to assign him the Kingdom, whose cause was justest: and
that He, when he should hear what they had determined, would confirm it by the
authority of God and S. Peter, than which there cannot be greater. But in the
mean while Gregory, lest the Church of Rome should suffer by Simony, called a
Council, and therein confirmed the Decrees of his Predecessors made to put a
stop to that evil, in these words: We, following the example of our
Predecessors, as we have formerly in other Councils, do decree and ordain by
the authority of Almighty God, that whoever for the future accepts of a
Bishopric, an Abbacy, or any other Ecclesiastical preferment from a Layman,
shall not by any means be esteemed a Bishop, an Abbat, or a Clergy man; nor let
the same person dare to approach the Apostolical Sea, before he has repented
and left the place that he gained by ambition and contumacy, which is the sin
of Idolatry. And under the same Censures we bind Kings, Dukes, and Princes, who
shall dare to confer Bishoprics or other Ecclesiastical Dignities upon any
person against Law and Reason. Furthermore, we confirm the sentence of Anathema
which was justly given against Theobald Archbishop of Milan and Gilbert
Archbishop of Ravenna, as also against Roland Archbishop of Treviso; and we
lay the same Censure upon Peter, who was formerly Bishop of Redona, but is now
an Usurper in the Church (...) Narbonne. Moreover, we deny S. Peter's favor,
and entrance into the Church to all such, till they have repented and satisfied
for their offenses; be they Normans, Italians or any other Nation, who have in
the least injured, or violated the Marcha di Termo in Ancona; the Duchy of
Spoleto, Campagna di Roma, Sabina, Tivoli, Palestrina, Frascati, or Alba, or
the parts that lie toward the Tuscan Sea. Add to these the Monastery of St.
Benedict, and all the Country of Cassino, as also Benevent in Abruzzo. But if
any one pretends a just cause for taking what he has not yet restored, let him
demand justice of us or our Officers; and if they are not satisfied, we grant
them leave to take back as much as will satisfy them; not excessively, like
Robbers, but as becomes Christians, and such Men who only retake what is their
own and desire not other men's goods; fearing the anger of God and the Curse of
S. Peter. After that he confirmed the Curse against Henry afresh in these
words: Blessed Peter! and thou Paul, Doctor of the Gentiles, I beseech you to
hearken unto me a little, and hear me in mercy; for you are Disciples and
Lovers of Truth; and what I say, is true. I undertake this cause for Truths
sake, that my Brethren whose salvation I desire, may obey me more willingly,
and that they may know how I rely upon your assistance, next to that of Christ
and his Virgin Mother, whilst I resist the wicked, and am a present guard
continually to the faithful. For I did not ascend this Sea willingly, but
against my inclinations, even with tears in my eyes, that they should think
such a worthless Man as me fit to sit in such a lofty Throne. But this I say,
because I did not choose you, but you me, and imposed this heavy burden upon my
shoulders. But the Sons of Belial are risen up against me since I have ascended
the Mount, because I cry aloud and tell the people of their crimes, and the
Sons of the Church of their sins, and have laid violent hands upon me even unto
blood. For the Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Princes of the World, with
some Ecclesiastics and others have conspired against the Lord, and me his
Anointed; saying. Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their yoke from
us, and this they did, that they might either kill or banish me. Of these one
was King Henry, as they call him: Henry, I say, Son to Henry the Emperor, who
exalted his horns, and lifted up his heel too proudly against the Church of
God, in a conspiracy with many Bishops of Italy, Germany, and France, whose
ambition your authority has yet opposed. This same person came to me in
Lombardy, when he was rather forced by necessity than sober in his resolutions,
and begged to be absolved from his Anathema: and accordingly I received him,
because I thought him a Penitent; but only admitted him to the Communion of the
Church, not restored him to his Kingdom from which I had justly expelled him in
the Council at Rome; nor did I give the Subjects of the Kingdom leave to pay
him their former Allegiance. And this I did, that if he delayed his
reconcilement with the neighboring Nations whom he had always vexed, and
should refuse to restore as well Ecclesiastical as Secular Estates, according
to his word, he might be forced to his duty by Anathema's and Arms. Some
Bishops of Germany made use of this opportunity, as also certain Princes who
had been long tormented by this wild beast, thought fit to choose Rodolphus for
their King and Governor, since Henry had lost his Throne by his flagitious
actions. And truly Rodolphus like a modest and just King sent Ambassadors to
let me know, he was forced to take the Government into his hand, though he was
not so desirous of Dominion, but that he would rather obey us than those that
had chosen him to the Kingdom. That he would always be at Gods and our
disposal, and that we might believe him he offered his Sons for hostages for
his performance. Thereupon Henry began to rage, and first to desire us, that we
would use our spiritual Sword to depose Rodolphus. I answered him, That I would
see who had most right, and would send Agents thither to examine the matter,
and then I my self would judge whose cause was the juster. Henry would not
suffer our Legates to determine the matter, but killed a great many men both
Ecclesiastical and Laick, plundered and profaned Churches, and by this means
made himself obnoxious to an Anathema. Wherefore I trusting in Gods mercy and
judgment, in the patronage of the blessed Virgin, and relying upon your
Authority, do lay Henry and his accomplices under a Curse; and once more
deprive him of his regal Power, interdicting all Christians (whom I absolve
from all Oaths of Allegiance to him) from obeying Henry in any case whatever;
but command 'em to receive Rodolphus as their King, whom many Princes of the
Realm have chosen, since Henry was deposed. For it is fit, that seeing Henry is
deprived of his Power for his pride and contumacy, Rodolphus who is beloved by
all should be invested with the Kingly power and dignity, for his Piety and
Religion. Go to then ye Princes of the holy Apostles, and confirm what I have
(...) by your authority, that all men at last may know, that if you can bind
and loose in Heaven, that We also upon Earth can take away and give Kingdoms,
Principalities, Empires, and whatsoever is in the possession of Mortals. For if
you can judge of things divine, what may we think of things profane here below?
And if you may judge of Angels that govern proud Princes, what may you not do to
their Servants? Let all Kings and Princes of the World take notice by his
example what you can do in Heaven; how God esteems you, and then let 'em not
contemn the Decrees of the Church. And I (...) you suddenly to execute judgment
upon Henry, that all may see, that son of Iniquity did not lose his Kingdom by
chance, but by your permission and consent. And this I have requested of you,
that he may repent, and be saved in the day of Judgment by the help of your
prayers. Given at Rome the 5th. of March, Indiction III. After that he degraded
Gilbert (the Author of all this discord and Schism) from the Church of Ravenna,
and commanded all Priests belonging to that Church, to pay no obedience to him,
who was the cause of all their misfortunes, and therefore Anathematized. And
that the people might not want a Governor, he imitated Peter (who used to send
(...) in his own room, upon occasion) and sent 'em another Arch bishop with
full power, to extirpate Gilbert's Faction and confirm men's minds in the faith.
But then Henry (who was rather provoked than chastized by these Censures, and
had taken the Bishop of Ostia then Legate, as he returned home,) called a
Council of the disaffected Bishops and chose Gilbert, formerly Archbishop of
Ravenna, Pope, and called him Clement. But being teazed by the (...) he left
his new Pope for a time, and went against them, where he engaged and received a
great overthrow. Rodolphus though he was Conqueror yet was found dead at a
little distance, of a wound which he received. They say, Henry was so
affrighted at that bloody engagement, that he could scarce be found in
seventeen days, and that the Germans in the mean time had put his Son Henry in
his room by the name of Henry IV. Both these coming after with an united Body
of Men into Italy to settle their Pope Clement in the Pontificate, and to turn
(...) Gregory, they easily subdued Maude who came to meet 'em with a small
Army. This same Maude, when her first Husband died, not long before that time
was married to Azo Marquis d'Este, her former Husbands near kinsman by blood
and related to her in the third degree of Affinity. But when the matter was
known she was divorced from Azo, at Gregory's persuasion. Henry having
conquered Maude at Parma, marched to Rome, and her Husband Azo after an hostile
manner, and pitched his Camp in the Prati di Nerone, and going into the Borgo
di Sancto Pietro, he and his Pope Clement profaned St. Peter's Church, and
demolished the Portico, and did the like by St. Paul's. But seeing he could not
get into the City, he went to Tivoli, from whence as from a Castle he made
daily incursions upon the Romans, till by wasting all that came near him, he
reduced them to such necessity that they desired Peace upon any terms, of which
notice being given to Henry by some deserters who got out of the Town, he drew
his men up and entered in; whereupon the Pope, who could not trust the People,
betook himself into the Castle St. Angelo, where he was besieged for some time,
they within maintaining the place stoutly. Gregory's Nephew had not the like
fortune, who retreated to the Sittizonio di Severo, and wanting courage to
defend it, basely delivered it up. But Henry hearing that Guiscard Duke of
Puglia was coming to assist Gregory, he thought it no time to dally, and
therefore contrived this stratagem: He sent the Bishop of Clugny to Gregory in
the Castle, to offer him, that if he would crown him in the Lateran, he would
return into Germany with his Army immediately: and the Roman people requested
him to do it too. Gregory answered he would do it, if Henry would amend his
errors and beg pardon. This he not only refused to do, but hearing that
Guiscard was near with his Army, he crowned Clement the Antipope with the
Pontifical Crown publicly in the Lateran, the Bishops of Bologna, of Cervia
and Modena attending at the (...). After which he went to Siena and took
Clement along with him. But Guiscard breaking in at the Porta del popolo, burnt
the City all along to Domitian's Triumphal Arch, though the people did what
they could to resist him. The Citizens had fortified the Capitol, and defended
themselves briskly against Guiscard, who had already taken the Lateran. From
whence there were a great many skirmishes and sallies made on both sides, and
that part of the City which lies between the Lateran and the Capitol was
demolished, and the Capitol it self at length taken by storm and laid almost
even with the ground. Having thus made himself Master of Rome, and given the
Citizens goods as plunder to his Soldiers, he marched to Castle St. Angelo,
where the Pope lay besieged, and freeing the miserable man at last from all his
foes, he carried him along to Cassino and Salerno with him. Where in a short
time after he made a godly Exit, after he had sat in S. Peter's Chair twelve
years, one month, and three days. He was a Man, no question, that God loved,
prudent, just, merciful, a Patron of the poor, the Widows and the fatherless,
and the only Champion of the Church against Heretics and wicked Princes who
strove to make themselves Masters of the Churches patrimony by Violence.

VICTOR III.
VICTOR the Third, before called Defiderius, Abbat of Mount Cassino, being
chosen Pope immediately took example by Gregory. And therefore I suppose it was
that Henry and he were Enemies, by whose contrivance he was taken off with
Poison, conveyed into the Chalice as he was administering the Eucharist (as
St. Martin writes,) though Vincentius says on the contrary, that he died of a
Dysentery, which may possibly seem not altogether unlike poisoning, since those
that are poisoned do sometimes fall into a Dysentery by the corruption and
relaxation of the Intestines. But Guiscard would have revenged so great a
Villainy, if he had not chanced to die too soon; for when he had subdued the
Greeks he went to Corfu and died; to whom (because Boemund was absent) Roger
his younger Son succeeded in the Duchy of Puglia. At that time there was a
famine throughout most part of the World, by means whereof the King of Gallitia
took (...) from the Saracens after he had besieged it many years, and gave it
to the Christians. But Henry had ill success against the Saxons in Germany,
being defeated with the loss of four thousand Soldiers, God permitting this
calamity, that he might at last desist from harassing the Church. There are who
say that there appeared a great many Prodigies at that time; as, that the
domestic birds, as Hens, Geese, Pigeons, and Peacocks fled into the Mountains
and grew wild; that Fishes in general both in Rivers and in the Sea died; and
that some Cities were so shaken with Earthquakes, that the great Church at
Syracuse fell down at Vespers and killed all those that were in it, saving only
the Deacon and Sub (...) who were miraculously saved. It Is said, the body of St
Nicolas was translated to Bari by the Merchants about this time, and there much
honored; as Martin Scotus a Man of great Learning and singular Morals tells us
in his History. But Victor, by whose procurement Deusdedit reduced the book of
Canons into method, died in the first year and fourth month of his Pontificate,
not without suspicion of being poisoned.

URBAN II.
URBAN the Second, before called Otho, or Oddo, at first a Monk of Eboina, and
after that Cardinal of Ostia, was at last deservedly made Pope about five
months after Victor's death. For he was a very learned and an holy Man, and fit
for any great Employment. At that time Roger took his opportunity (now Gregory
was dead and a new Successor come into the place) to take Capua and all places
that belonged to them betwixt that and Tiber, from the Pope and the Romans.
Thereupon Urban who could hardly trust the Romans, by reason of their former
inclinations to Novelty, went to Melfi. Where being resolved to call a Synod,
it was convenient to secure all people in their passage to it; and therefore he
commanded Roger and Boemund who were at variance about the Duchy of Puglia, to
quit their Arms; upon this condition, that Roger should let Boemund have part
of Puglia, and himself enjoy all the rest of his Father's Dominion. And when he
had thus settled the Italian affairs to his mind, and put the Church in a good
condition (as far as was possible in such an hurry) he went to Toia, to enquire
what the Clergy of that place did, and to correct the errors of some ill-livers
among 'em. But in the mean time Boemund, whilst his Brother Roger made War in
Sicily against the Saracens, took Melfi by surprise. Whereupon Roger returning
from Sicily, besieged his Brother Boemund at Melfi with twenty thousand
Saracens which he hired to come along with him, though those within the City
defended it very stoutly. The Pope, seeing he could have no quiet in Italy,
designed a Journey into France, but first held a Council at Piacenza, in which
he wonderfully curbed the licentiousness of some Clergymen. From thence he went
into France, and began a thing very memorable. For he called a Council at
Cleremont, wherein he so far animated the Princes of France toward the retaking
of Jerusalem, which had been so long in the hands of the Sarazens, that in the
year 1484. three hundred thousand Men enrolled themselves as Soldiers under
Christ's Banner. After which he returned to Rome, with an intention, that when
he had composed things in Italy, he would excite the Italians also to the same
end. In the mean time King Henry wicked man, ceased not to affront Robert Earl
of Flanders and provoke him to Battle, that he might divert him from the holy
Expedition. Notwithstanding many followed one Peter an Eremite, who was a man
of incomparable sanctity, and traveling through Germany and Hungary, arrived
at Constantinople, then the common Seat of War. And they were not long after
followed by Eustathius, and Baldwin surnamed of Bulloign, men famous for feats
of Arms. But besides these there was the Bishop of Pois, Raymund Earl of St.
Giles, Hugo Magnus King Philip of France's Brother, and the two Roberts
(whereof one was Earl of Normandy and the other of Flanders) together with
Stephen Earl of Chartres, who passing over the Alps into Italy came first to
Rome. Where when they had visited the SSts. Tombs and Shrines, and received the
Pope's Benediction, they went to Brundusium with an intent to go from thence
into Albania. But because one Port would not hold'em all, some went to Bari and
some to Otranto. But Boemund, who, we told you, had taken Melfi, being desirous
of glory, left Melfi, and went upon the same Expedition with twelve thousand
choice and young Italians. And this his Valor so prevailed with his Brother
Roger, that he laid down his Arms and promised that for the future all things
betwixt him and his Brother should be equally shared: and presently sent his
Son Tancred, who was desirous to go into the War along with his Brother. By
this time Peter the Eremite was come to Constantinople, and pitching his Camp
in the Suburbs, did so much damage to the Citizens, not voluntarily, but
through the licentiousness of his Soldiers, that the Greeks wished 'em all cut
off. Alexius the Emperor was very much concerned for the injuries which his
Subjects suffered, and therefore forced Peter for want of forage to pass the
Bosphorus before he was willing. However being compelled to it Peter and his
Men went over, and first going to Nicodemia, and then to Nicopoli, attaqued
that City though it was well guarded by the Saracens. But they wanting
provisions to maintain the Siege, and the Christian Soldiers dying apace, they
were worsted by the Sarazens, and forced to raise their Siege; but besides
that, received such damage in their flight, that Reginald General of the
Germans renounced the Christian faith, and surrendered himself to them; and
Peter went as it were back, like an Ambassador to Constantinople without any
Soldiers to attend him. This was welcome news to Alexius, who hoped, that the
Christians, upon such a discomfiture, would quit that Expedition. But in the
mean while other supplies came in, and Alexius finding that he could not beat
'em back with open force, he set upon 'em in the Night time as they were
pitching their Camp in the Suburbs of Constantinople, but to no purpose; for
they that were posted there maintained their Camp with great courage, till the
rest of the Soldiers awaked got to their Arms. They fought too the next day
with small damage on either side. Then Boemund was sent to Alexius in the name
of the Army, and partly by Menaces, partly by Promises induced him to enter
into a League upon these terms: That they should not only pass through his
Territories with safety, but have all necessaries supplied, and that whatever
they took from the Saracens should be his, except Jerusalem. When he had so
done, he repassed the Bosphorus, and arrived first at Nicomedia, and then at
Nicopolis, which was briskly defended by the Turks within: Both Saracens and
Turks being Allies at that time, in the War against the Christians, sixty
thousand Turks who lay upon the adjacent Mountains, made signs to the Townsmen
to sally out, while they set upon the Christian Camp; but were so briskly
repulsed that they returned to the Mountains without doing any execution. Yet
it was difficult to take the City, because all kind of Provisions were carried
into it by a Lake that joins to it, till the Lake being filled with small
Vessels from Constantinople, the Townsmen were so straightened for want of
necessaries, that fifty two days after the beginning of the Siege they
surrendered; the Turks, who were in Garrison there, being permitted to march
out with their Arms and Baggage. After which the Christians fortified Nicopoli
and then left it: and being forced to travel through Deserts, they divided
their Army into two parts. But it so happened that Boemund sound out a (...)
place near a certain River, where designing to stay and refresh his Men who
were weary of traveling; on a sudden the Turks and Saracens under the conduct
of Soliman, set upon him, and had certainly overpowered him with multitudes,
had not Hugo and Godfrey with forty thousand Horse come to his aid (...) as
they heard of it. They fought very smartly and a great while on both sides, nor
could the Battle be ended but by the Night coming upon them: and in that fight
it was found next day, that there were forty thousand men slain, either Turks,
Medes, Syrians, Chaldeans, Saracens or Arabians. But nevertheless Soliman made
all the haste possible from thence, and bragging in all places that he was
Victor, he met ten thousand Arabs who were acoming to the Army; whom he carried
with him into Lycaonia to intercept the Christians passage and hinder
Provisions from being carried thither. But the Christians being supplied by the
Corn then almost ripe upon the ground, arrived first at Iconium (the chief City
of that Country) and having taken that by surrender, possessed themselves of
Heraclea, and Tarsos with the same success. Then Baldwin, a Man of great
Courage and Wit, first got a Signiory in Asia; for he had Tarso and all that he
took in that Country bestowed upon him: and not long after made himself Master
of Edessa and Manista. From thence the bigger Army went into Cilicia, now
called Armenia minor, which submitting upon the first Onset, they made
Palinurus an Armenian who had fought on the Christian side, Governor of it.
Afterward they took Coesarea in Cappadocia, and then marched on toward Antioch
over the high Mountains. At that time Cassianus was King of Antioch, formerly
called Reblata: but that same King who formerly governed all Asia double walled
it, and called it by his own name; and built about it four hundred and sixty
Towers. Here was also once St. Peter's Sea; and here were born Luke the
Evangelist, and that Theophilus, to whom Luke directs his Gospel and the Acts
of the Apostles: and here Men that were regenerate by Baptism were first called
Christians, and lived there a thousand years under Christian Government.
Moreover, it appears that there were one hundred and sixty Bishops under the
Patriarch of Antioch before the Barbarians took it: and that there were in it
three hundred and sixty Parish Churches. In the year therefore of our
Redemption 1491. Antioch began to be besieged with great application. At which
time Urban, who was vexed with tumultuous insurrections, shut himself up for
two years in the House of one Peter Leo a noble Citizen, near St. Nicolas's
Church. But when John Paganus, a most seditious Fellow, was dead, he was a
little more at liberty, and then he applied himself to settle the State of the
Church. For he received into favor the Archbishop of Millain (before deposed,
because he had been consecrated by one Bishop against the Canon and custom of
Holy Church) he having by way of penance changed his habit and lived in a
Monastery voluntarily and holily upon that account. And when he petitioned with
all humility to send him a Pall he did it, and restored him to his Authority in
this form of words: We are persuaded by thy Letter to send thy Brotherhood a
Pall together with the Blessing of the Sea Apostolic; which kind of Honor was
never before conferred upon any person absent from us. After that he gave a
Pall and several privileges to the Arch bishop of Toledo (who came to Rome and
swore fidelity to the Pope) and made him Primate of all Spain. But he laid a
Curse upon the King of Portugal and all the Diocese of St. James: because he
had thrown the Bishop of that Province into Prison without hearing what he had
to say for himself. About the same time Henry Bishop of Soissons came to Urban
at Rome, and freely quitted his Bishopric which he had received from the King
of France, without any hopes of Restitution. Whereupon Urban (lest his Diocese
should suffer for want of a Bishop) restored him to his Bishopric, though he
were unwilling to take it; but he was sworn in this manner: I for the future
will not communicate with any that are excommunicated by this Sea, wittingly
and willingly: nor will I ever be present at the Consecrations of those that
accept of Bishoprics or Abbeys, against Law and Reason, from Laymen; and, so
help me God, and this holy Gospel, I never intend to break my resolution. So
also they say he dealt with the Bishop of Bellay: Nor can any one say he was
pertinacious for doing so; for he knew how and when to alter his mind upon
occasion, which every good Man should do. For when he had admitted a Clerk,
whom Gibert the Antipope had made a Sub deacon, to second Orders, he changed
his mind, because it was a thing of ill Example, and like to be of very
pernicious consequence. He confirmed the Order of Cistercians which was first
set up in Burgundy; and some say, the Carthusians began their Order in his
time: though others say it was in the time of Victor III. But when Urban had
settled the Church of God, not only by his pains and Example, but by his
Writings too which he set forth against the Heretics, he died near St.
Nicolas's in the House of Peter Leo, an eminent Citizen, twelve years, four
months, and nineteen days after he came to the Popedom, upon the 28th. of
August. His Body was carried over Tiber, to avoid the contrivances of his
Enemies, who would have done him an injury (if possible) after death, and
buried very honorably in St. Peter's at the Vatican.

PASCHAL II.
PASCHAL the Second, before called Raynerius, an Italian of Romagna, whose
Father's name was Crescentius, and his Mother Alphacia, was chosen Pope about
that time when the Christians fought in Asia and took Antioch, into which they
were let by Pyrrhus, an eminent Citizen. For he admired Boemunds valor so
much that he promised to surrender the City to 'em, if the rest of the
Christians would let Boemund be Governor of it. The Christians when they
entered the City, spared almost all, but only that they were severe upon the
Saracens: and Cassianus their King who fled to the Mountains, was killed by the
Armenians. They had taken all but the Castle; which whilst Boemund attaqued,
he was shot through the thigh with an Arrow, which pained him so, that he was
fain to desist from the Siege for several days. But when Corbanes the King of
persia's General came up, with Sensadolus Castianus's Son, to retake Antioch,
Boemund was by that time well of his Wound, met and would have engaged 'em. But
the Enemy kept up in the Mountains and could not be tempted to fight by any
means. Whereupon Boemund being necessitated for lack of Provisions was resolved
to fight 'em though the place was much to his disadvantage. So he ordered that
Lance wherewith Longinus pierced Christ's side (which they found in St.
Andrew's Church at Antioch) to be carried before 'em as the best Ensign they
could have; and marching up to 'em he defeated them with the slaughter of an
hundred thousand, though at first they made a brisk resistance. Besides that,
they say there were fifteen thousand Camels taken in their Camp; and so much
plunder carried off, that from the greatest extremity of want they were
advanced to the greatest abundance of all things necessary. The Governor of
the Castle when he knew of it, surrendered the Castle to Boemund and embraced
the Christian Faith: and all that were in the Garrison, if they would do the
like, were permitted to march off with Bag and Baggage whither they pleased.
After that there arose a great debate betwixt Boemund and Raymund, when Boemund
demanded Antioch, and Raymund said, it belonged to the Emperor of
Constantinople, by the contract they had before freely made. But the Priests,
to whom it was referred, gave it to Boemund without any more ado. In the mean
time Hugo Magnus (who was gone to Constantinople to compose things) died, and
then the other Officers (all but Raymund, who besieged Caesarea in Cappadocia)
resolved to go to Jerusalem with their Army, and rendezvouz'd in Lycia. But by
the way they attempted to take Tortosa, and after they had spent three months
in vain, they raised the Siege, and marched to Tripoli, the petit King of which
place furnished 'em liberally with Money, Provisions and Arms, and thereby
obtained a Peace upon Condition, that he, if Jerusalem were taken, should
embrace the Christian Religion. Hence they removed, and passing by Coesarea in
Palestine, came at five encampings to Jerusalem; which stands upon an high
Hill, and is divided also by several Dales, so that it cannot be besieged but
by a very great Army. Beside, there wants Fountains and River-waters, which are
necessary for an Army. For there is no other rivolet but Siloe, and that very
little in the Summer time (and sometimes nothing at all) which runs down Mount
Sion into the Valley of (...). Yet there are a great many Cisterns in the City
and the Country, to furnish the Citizens with Water, but cannot supply great
Armies and Beasts of carriage. Notwithstanding the Christians got what
Provisions they could and attaqued the City in four places very fiercely,
(whilst the Jerusalemites defended it as stoutly) and upon the 13th of July
they took it by storm, the thirty ninth day after they began to besiege it, in
the year 1499. four hundred and ninety years after the Saracens took it under
the Reign of Heraclius. Godfrey was most to be commended in that action; for
that he first mastered that part of the Wall which was allotted for him and his
Brother to storm; and helped Balion down into the City to open the Gates for
the Christians: at whose entrance there was such a slaughter both in the City,
and especially in the Temple, that Men were above the ancles in blood. And the
same day they had taken the Temple too, if Night had not come upon 'em. However
the next day the Attaque was nenew'd, and quarter given to all that desired and
would lay down their Arms. But the Christians, after such a Victory, when they
had rested eight days from the toil of War, and had visited the holy places of
the City and our Lord's Sepulcher, took Godfrey upon their shoulders, and
carried him into the Palace, where by universal consent they chose him King.
And he, though he did not refuse the Title of King, yet he would not have a
golden Crown; because he thought it unseemly for any one to wear a golden
Diadem, where Christ, the King of Kings wore one of Thorns when he redeemed
mankind. Then also was Arnulphus the Priest made Patriarch and consecrated by
the Bishops that were there present. The Citizens of Neapolis in Assyria were
so frighted at this Victory, that they sent Ambassadors to Godfrey to
surrender themselves and all they had. Soon after news came that a mighty Army
of Soliman King of Babylon was come to Ascalon (a City twenty miles from
Jerusalem, was always in (...) with the People of it,) Godfrey resolved to meet
'em: and therefore left Peter the Hermit to guard the City, and recalled
Eustace, and Tancred, whom he had sent to Neapoli, with two Legions. As he
marched against the Enemy, he was informed by the Prisoners he took, that
Clement was Soliman's General, and had fifty thousand Men under him and a Navy
laden with Provision and Artillery; but notwithstanding was resolved to fight
him; which he did, and Godfrey, who had the day, killed thirty thousand of his
Men, as the story goes: But Clement, who led the Enemy, escaped away. The
Ascalonites having received such a blow, delivered up their City straight to
Godfrey: in which he found as much Gold and Silver, as ever was seen together
before. Jerusalem being thus retaken, many of the Princes who had performed
their Vow and had their desire, began to take their journeys home into Europe;
among the rest the Earls of S. Giles and Troyes. But Godfrey and his Brothers,
who had great success, took Joppa a Seaport Town, and Rama, which hindered the
Christians passage from Ascalon to Jerusalem. He also besieged Cassa, otherwise
called Porfiria, at tho foot of Mount Carmel, four miles from Acon. But whilst
the Siege lasted, Tiberias, a Town of Galilee surrendered of their own accord,
and Caffa was not long after yielded upon terms. But nothing, that Men call
Happiness, is very lasting. For a year after the taking of Jerusalem, which
cost so much labor and pains, Godfrey died of a Fever: and the Christians to
prevent any damage that might happen by an Interregnum, (...) Brother Baldwin
in his room, A. D. 1101. But to return to Paschal, whom Gregory the Seventh
made Cardinal Priest of S. Clements, for his Learning and Virtue. He was chosen
Pope by the Clergy after Urban's death: though he could have been well
satisfied with a private life: for he was formerly a Monk, and made Pope
against his will; denying himself to be capable of so great a Charge; but yet
at the desire of the People, because the Clergy chose him unanimously, and the
College of Cardinals approved of it, he did take upon him the Pontificate: but
not till they had thrice repeated these words with acclamations [St. Peter has
chosen Rainerius, a very good Man, Pope,] and the Secretaries and Clerks after
that gave him the Title of Paschal. Then he put on his Scarlet Cloak or Robe,
with a Mitre on his Head, and was attended to the Lateran by the Clergy and
People, upon a white Horse, until he came to the South Portico that leads to
St. Saviors, Where when he had sat some time in a Seat made on purpose, as
the custom is, he went up into the Court of the Lateran, and put on a Girdle
upon which hung seven Keys and seven Seals; to let him know, that according to
the seven fold grace of the Holy Ghost, he had Power to govern the Church under
God, and to bind, loose, open or shut. Then with a Papal Scepter in his hand he
visited those places which are to be entered only to (...): and the day
following he received his Consecration at St. Peter's, where Oddo, Bishop of
Ostia, Maurice, of Porto, Gualter, of Alba, Bono, of Lavico, Milo, of
Palestrina, and Offo, of Nepeso, anointed him with Chrism: at which Ceremony
the Bishop of Ostia had the chief Place, which continues so till this day.
After his Unction he returned into the City, and took his Crown according to
the Custom. That this would so happen, Albert Bishop of Alatri had formerly
foretold. For being asked by a Friend of his, who he thought would succeed
Urban, God, said he, will choose Rainerius for his faith and constancy. Nay,
they say that the same Albert foretold also the exact time that he should live
in his Pontificate. But Paschal who consulted the good of the Church, then like
to be ruined by seditious Men, sent out his Forces against Gibert the
Antipope, the Ring leader of all the mischief: And to render himself
sufficient for so great a War, he borrowed several Troops of Roger Earl of
Sicily and a thousand ounces of Gold. Gibert, that Villain, lived then at Abba
de Marsi: and when he understood that the Enemy was coming, he durst not trust
to his own strength, which he had procured of Richard Count of Capua, but left
Alba and went with all speed into the Mountains near Aquila, where not long
after he died suddenly and paid for all his iniquities. But
notwithstandstanding his being taken off, the Church of God did not rest
altogether from troubles. For Richard, who, we told you, supplied him with Men
and Money, put up in his room one Albert a Citizen of Aversa, between (...) and
Capua: who was compelled immediately by the well-affected Party to quit the
place, and go into banishment. But the People of Cava near Palestrina,
following the Example of Richard's solly and arrogance, made one Frederick,
Pope. But they also repented of what they had done, and one hundred and five
days after turned him out of his Pontificate, compelled him to take upon him
the habit of an Anchorite, and lead a private life. Besides these there was a
Third also, one Maginulphus a Roman, who was so bold as to usurp the Title of
Pope at Ravenna. But the Romans banished him, and those of Ravenna, when he had
no Friend left, expelled him their City. The Roman Church being thus settled,
Paschal, who was a Man of great Wit and Courage, diverted his Mind from
Religion to Arms, and by the help of Roger, retook Castellana and Benevento
from the Enemies. But in the mean time Peter Columna, a Roman Citizen, by the
advice of Richard Count of Capua (whose main design was to divide the Pope's
Army) seized upon Cava a Town in the Pope's Dominions. Thereupon the Pope
marched against him, and not only retook Cava, but also took from him Zangarola
and Columna, two Castles of his paternal Inheritance; from whence the Family of
the Columneses took their Title. There was another Family at Rome (called the
Corsi) very powerful and so true to Gregory VII. that their Houses which were
under the Capitol were burnt by Henry down to the ground; yet afterward
Stephen, the chief of that Family, changed sides, and in Paschal's absence
surpised St. Paul's Church, and the Castle hard by: from whence he continually
teazed the City of Rome with inroads very strangely. For this reason the Pope
omitted all foreign Affairs, and returned with all speed to the City, from
whence he drove Stephen; who went safely off, disguised in a Monks Habit and so
deceived those that came to take him. At that time many Authors say, there
appeared a great many Prodigies; as, that the (...) gained in some places full
twenty paces into the Land more than ordinary: and on the other side, in some
places, retired from the shore an hundred. And the like I saw at Pozzuoli the
last year by some old weather beaten Marble Pillars, that were wasted to three
Cubits; though the Inhabitants told me that three years before they were washed
by the Sea. They tell you likewise that a Comet appeared of a vast bigness,
that was seen at Sunsetting. Paschal however was not disturbed at any of these
things, because he knew 'em to be natural: But when he heard the Bishop of
Florence should say, that Antichrist was born, he went immediately thither, and
calling a Council, who discussed the matter very nicely, he perceived the
Bishop was only ambitious of being the Author of some great matter, and
therefore when he had chid him he sent him away, and went himself into
Lombardy, where he called an Assembly at Guardastallo of many Princes and
Bishops, and held a long debate about Homages, Fees, and the Oaths of Bishops
that had been or should be administered to Laymen. And hearing of the scandalous
lives of the French Priests, he went into France, and at Troyes he called a
Synod, in which having taken order for the more decent adorning of Churches,
and partly expelled, partly chastised their Incumbents, he returned in haste
into Italy, because he heard all things were there in an uproar. For Stephen
Corsus had taken Montalto, and Pontechio from that part of Toscany which now
they call St. Peter's Patrimony, and had fortified them with Castles, from
whence he pillaged the whole Country with frequent inroads; but the Pope fell
upon him, and beat him out of one of his Castles; though he could not storm the
other by reason of its situation, and the Winter season which was at hand.
Going therefore into Puglia to compose the differences of those parts, he
committed the care of the Church to the Bishop of Lavico; to Peter the Son of
Leo, and to Leo the Son of Fregepan, the City and all its concerns, and to
Ptolemy Lord of Subiaco, the territories adjacent, leaving his Nephew Godfrey,
General, to assist them in the defense of the Churches jurisdiction. But in the
Pope's absence, Ptolemy the reputed Author of all that mischief threatened he
should never return to the City any more, and all these revolted from the
Church: to wit, Peter Columna, whom the Pope had taken into favor, the Abbat
of Farfa, together with those of Anagni, Palestrina, Tivoli, Frascati, and
Sabina. The same Ptolemy also raised an Army and besieged Alba in Campagna di
Roma, which the Citizens very stoutly defended. But when the Pope and the
Prince of Cajetta came up, together with Richard of Aquila, two excellent
Commanders, they drove out these Usurpers that would have possessed themselves
of the Church Revenues, and freeing Alba from the Siege, he also had the other
revolting Towns surrendered up to him, except that he was fain to storm Tivoli,
which stood out very obstinately, and occasioned much damage on both sides:
though he took Montalto and turned out Stephen, and quieted the whole Patrimony
in a short time. As Soon as he had made Peace here, he applied himself to the
War in Asia, and to that end wrote Letters and sent Nuntios to all Christian
Princes to exhort and animate 'em to it as much as possible; because he heard
that (...) the death of Godfrey the Saracens brought great Armies to Jerusalem
designing to re-take it; as also that the Christians had received a great
overthrow, that the Earl of Burgundy was slain in the fight, that Boemund was
taken alive, and that Baldwin himself, Godfrey's Brother, then King, had made a
narrow escape, so that the City was well-nigh taken. But the Barbarians, though
they had gotten such a Victory yet they durst not attempt Jerusalem. For
Tancred who had defended Antioch very valiantly, did also take Laodicea, which
belonged to the Emperor of Constantinople, by storm, because he heard that
Alexius was pleased to hear that so many Christians were killed, and hindered
our Men from passing out of Europe into Asia. Baldwin the King encouraged by
the good fortune and resolution of Tancred, raised an Army as fast as he could,
he resolved to march against (...), having sent to Genoua and Venice for
Auxiliaries: from whence he had eighty Ships of War, besides many Galleys that
were sent to the place: insomuch that the City was besieged both by Land and
Sea very closely, and in twenty days was taken; and the Saracens that came to
defend it, utterly routed and defeated. Tancred showed great piety toward his
Uncle Boemund who had been kept in Prison by the Enemies for three years, and
restored him to the Principality of Antioch, after he had redeemed him with a
great Ransom of Silver and Gold. After that (...) committed the care of Antioch
to Tancred, and went first into Italy and then into France, and married
Constantine King Philip of France's Daughter: but hearing that Alexius Emperor
of Constantinople infested the Seaport Towns near Antioch, he returned into
Italy, and getting a Navy (...) sailed into Dalmatia, where he besieged
Durazzo, that he might divert Alexius from the War in Asia, as he soon did; and
Alexius desiring a Peace, Boemund granted it, upon condition, that he should
put an end to the War against Antioch and let the French Soldiers pass through
his Country into Asia without any hindrance. Peace thus made, Boemund sailed
for Asia with the Navy which he had provided against Alexius, and did so
recruit and cheer the spirits of the Christians, that King Baldwin stormed and
took Baruti, a Maritime Town of Phaenicia, between Sidon and Biblos, whose
Metropolis is Tire, after he had besieged it two months, but not without great
loss of Men: so that he was very severe with 'em, and gave the City as a Colony
to the Christians. At the same time was Sidon also taken. But amidst these
successes of the Christians: Boemund, that famous Prince died (which caused an
(...) sorrow) and left his little Son Boemund whom he had by his Wife
Constantia, and who was to be his Successor in the Principality of Antioch,
under Tancred's Tuition till he grew up. In the mean time Henry the Fourth,
when his Father was dead (whom he had defeated at Liege in a pitched Battle)
having composed all things in Germany came into Italy, but tarried at Sutri,
knowing he should scarce be welcome to Paschal; because he had demolished many
Churches in the Wars, and given Bishoprics as he pleased to any body against
Law and Reason. But when Ambassadors had been sent from one to the other, and
the Emperor had sworn that he would come peaceably into the City, and force
all the Bishops that were possessed of Bishoprics either by bribery or violence,
to quit their preferments immediately; it was agreed he should enter the City.
Then Henry removed from Sutri to Monte Guadio, or, as some will have it, to
Monte Malo, (by others called Monte aureo) and pitched his Camp there: and from
thence by consent of the People, and attended by all the Nobility, he marched
first into the Borgo di Santo Pietro, the Priests leading the way in their
Vestments, and carrying the relics of Saints along with 'em from St. Angelo;
for he went that way into the Borgo di Santo Pietro as far as St. Peter's
Church; and upon the steps that ascend to it he kissed the Pope's feet, who
came so far with the Cardinals to meet him. And when he had quartered his
Soldiers according to his mind, he went into the Church upon the Pope's right
hand; where when he had said his Prayers at the Altar, he desired the Pope to
confirm the Bishops that he had made, though he had sworn that he never would
ask it; which Paschal denying, he gave the signal and in came his Soldiers, who
presently took Paschal and all the Cardinals, and carried him and a great many
of the Clergy, whom they had plundered before; into their Camp. The People of
Rome were so incensed at this affront, that they rose in Arms and beat the
Germans out of the Borgo and shut all the Gates. Thereupon the Emperor went to
M. di Santo Silvestro and put the Pope and Cardinals in straight Prison, with
Guards round about, lest they should escape: which done, he went back with the
rest of his Men to attaque the City, and came as far as the River Aniene. From
whence when he had first made himself Master of Ponte Mammolo (which takes its
name from Mammea the Mother of Alexander the Emperor, who founded it) he burnt
all the Villages round about, and made continual incursions upon the Romans. At
which the Pope, who was concerned for the calamity of the Citizens and wearied
with their entreaties, desired to be brought (as he was) to Ponte Salaro, where
he sent for Notaries out of the City, to write down the Contract, and (though
he was unwilling, yet) did confirm all the Bishops that Henry had chosen.
Things being thus composed and Prisoners on both sides dismissed the Emperor
was Crowned by the Pope in S. Peter's; but the City Gates were first shut, lest
the People should break out; and the very Church had a Guard set upon it by
Henry's Order. By this means he had what he wished for, and so returned into
Germany not long after. But the Pope, when Italy (...) little settled, exhorted
the Pisans who were skilful Seamen, to leave the Baleares (two Islands called
Majorca and Minorca, which they had in their possession for some time before)
and sail against the Saracens, who infested our Seas and all the shores of
Christendom. The Pisans were desirous of Honor and provided a great Navy,
manned with most of their young Men, and went against the Enemy. But whilst
they staid at Volterra for a Wind, the Luccheses invaded their City, which had
no body to defend it; and had taken it, had not the Florentines at the request
of the Pisans beat back the Luccheses, and manfully maintained it. For which
kindness the Pisans when they came back victorious over the Saracens, presented
the Florentines with two Prophyry Pillars, still to be seen at the Gate of St.
John Baptist's Chapel. In the mean time Paschal held a Council at the Lateran,
and revoked all that he had promised to Henry; because he was forced to do what
he did, either out of fear of Henry or in pity to the Cardinals that were in
bonds, or to the People of Rome, whom Henry harassed after an hostile manner,
to make a Peace upon any terms. He therefore thought it better to retract what
he had done amiss (since he was compelled) than to let other Princes take that
for a Precedent, and think that lawful for them to do, which Henry only
extorted from him against his will. At that time Maude the Countess died of age
and left the Church of Rome, in her Will, all that tract of ground that lies
betwixt the River Pissia, and Santo Quirico in Sienois, to Ceperano between the
Apennine and the Sea; as also Ferrara, which is still tributary to the Church
of Rome. There are some Authors (of which Vencentius is one of the best) who
write that this Lady died at Florence in a great Fire (that burnt down most of
the City, and destroyed two thousand Persons) and that her Body was carried
thence afterward into (...), and buried in a Monastery of St. Benedict, twelve
miles from Mantoa. My Opinion is, that she died at Mantua and was carried to
St. Benedict's (which she built) by her own Order, and Anselm's care, who was a
very holy Man and the cause of her building that stately Edifice. And I am sure
Anselm himself who was Bishop of Lucca, was buried there too, but translated
afterward to the Cathedral of Mantua, lest the neighborhood should have
stolen him out of his grave, because he was every day more and more famous for
Miracles. The Lucceses say that they have Maud's body, which I cannot believe,
because Guido Gonzaga, whilst he repaired the Monastery of St. Benedict found
and removed the body (as he ought) to a better place: Some Authors also write
that there was another Anselm at the same time, a very learned Man, and of such
esteem in England, that he was in a short time from a Monk made an Abbat, and
then Archbishop of Canterbury; the same Person who wrote several Books of
Meditations; Why God should be made Man; of free Will; of Parables; of the
Cross; and of St. John Baptist. These happy times produced Sigebert the Monk of
Gemblours, a Man of excellent Learning; and Bernard of Castillon in (...), a
Man of a noble Family: He, when he was twenty two years of age took upon him
the habit of a Monk (under Stephen the Abbat, who was the third after the Order
of Cistercians was erected) with thirty Fellows more, and was so much commended
for his Learning and Piety, that in a short time he was made Abbat of
Clarevalle, a Monastery built by one Robert a Nobleman of great honor, and
there he lived and governed with great reputation for thirty six years. And
when he (that is Bernard) died, he left, besides the same of his sanctity, a
great many Monuments of his Wit in writing: especially his Commentaries upon
the Canticles, and his considerations of divine Contemplation dedicated to
Eugenius the Pope, from whence he might learn the duty of a Pope. He likewise
wrote many Epistles; one above the rest to the Romans, in which he much blames
'em: as also an Apology, and some Sermons upon solemn occasions. But to return
to Paschal, who decreed in a Council held at Guardastallo, that no Cities of
Romagna, as Piacenza, Parma, Reggio, Modena, nor Bologna should be any longer
subject to Ravenna which had been formerly the Metropolis and Mother Church:
because the Bishops of Ravenna had often exalted their horns against the Roman
Sea. But when the Pope came back to the City, the People desired him that he
would make Peter's Son Governor of the City, upon the death of his Father who
was so in his life time: which the Pope denying to do by reason of his nonage
(for he was scarce ten years old) there was such a tumult of a sudden, that he
was forced to leave the City, for fear of some great mischief; for there were
many, that said it was not fit that such a Boy should be entrusted with such a
weighty Employment. But that would not do; for when he was at Alba, and heard
that Peter Leo (a great friend to the Church) was set upon in his own House by
the adverse Faction, he immediately sent Ptolomy from Ariccia with a good
competent number of Men to assist him; who drove the Enemy over the Tiber,
killing some and taking others whom he divided among the several Towns, to be
kept. But there soon appeared great inconstancy in Ptolomy. For those whom he
had taken but a little before, he set upon by surprise as they went through the
Selva del Aglio by his Order to the several Towns, and took 'em again and
carried 'em with him to Ariccia: among whom was also the dead Governor's Son.
Nor was Ptolomy content to do so only, but he possessed himself of Sarmoneta
Nymphaeo, Tiberia, and the Seacoasts, In the mean time Henry came out of
Germany into Italy with an Army which struck terror into all that heard of it.
But when he was come to Rome in the Pope's absence, (who at that time held a
Council in Puglia) and thought himself deprived of his Imperial Dignity,
together with the Power of bestowing Bishoprics, he was Crowned a second time,
before St. Gregory's body, by the Arch bishop of Braga, who was banished by his
own Country, and so went home again. But Paschal when the Council was
dismissed, came out of Puglia to Rome with an Army of Normans and retook many
Towns from the Enemy, and at (...) gave willing Audience to the Ambassadors of
Calo Johannes Emperor of Constantinople (who succeeded his Father Alexius) and
bid 'em be sure to animate their Master against the Sarazens. Then the Abbat of
Farfa and Ptolomy, whose ill actions were too great to be pardoned, sculk'd
about a good while, till at last Paschal, who was a very mild Man, took 'em
into favor. When things were thus settled and a Church dedicated to Agapetus,
built at Palestrina, which he consecrated, he returned from thence in Pomp to
Rome where he was met by the whole City: in which crowd he fell sick, and
perceiving his approaching death, he received the Sacrament, exhorted the
Clergy to Peace and Concord; and died, after he had been Pope eighteen years,
six months and seven days, upon the 14th. of January, and was honorably buried
in the Lateran Church. He in his Pontificate, made fifty Priests, thirty
Deacons, and an hundred Bishops. He also consecrated fifteen Churches at Rome;
especially that of St. Adrian intrefori, which had been profaned by some of
the factions; and the Church of St. Mary in Monticello.

In fine, he repaired and consecrated the Church of the Sancti quatuor Coronati
which was defaced, when Robert Guiscard Prince of Salerno set that part of the
City on fire, which goes from the Lateran to the Capitol; as I have said in the
life of Gregory the Seventh.

GELASIUS II.
GELASIUS the Second, before named John, born at Gaeta, his Father's name was
Crescentius of a noble Family, from his youth up well educated and learned, in
Monte-Cassino under the religious Abbat Odrisio he learned the fundamental
Principles of the Christian Faith. For this Reason he was sent for to Rome by
Urban II. who knew him to be trusty and virtuous and ever had a great esteem
for him. But his fidelity was then most conspicuous, when Pope Urban was
besieged by the Germans and sectators of Gilbert the Antipope in the Isle of
S. Batholomew, between the two Bridges; for he only and that noble Person Peter
Leone never abandoned him. Urban therefore, when he was in his prosperity
again, mindful of so great kindness and for his learning and fidelity made him
his Secretary, and because he had an elegant way of writing, he committed to
him the charge of reforming the style of the Court of Rome which by the
ignorance and negligence of former Ages, was very much corrupted. And
afterward observing the great worth of the Man, he resolved to make him a
Cardinal, and proposed it often in the Consistory with the good liking of all.
But Urban dying soon after, Pope Paschal taking notice of his great deserts,
immediately made him Cardinal-Deacon; and upon the death of Pascbal, when the
Consultation was held for the electing of a new Pope, all the Cardinals being
to that purpose assembled in the Monastery below the Palace of Leo and Cincio
Frangipane, by an universal consent John of Gaeta was chosen Pope by the name
of Gelasius. This Election put Cincio Frangipane into so great a rage, because
the College had rejected a Creature of his, whom he had proposed to them to be
Pope, that accompanied with many armed Men he (...) into the Monastery,
breaking down the doors, and beating down whomsoever he met in his way, and
taking the Pope himself by the Collar, he slung him upon the ground and kicked
him, and then made him a Prisoner. The Cardinals, who endeavored to make their
escape, he threw (...) their Horses and Mules, not sparing any manner of
contumely, that could be put upon so venerable an Assembly. But the People of
Rome would not endure the assront, but gathered together in Arms before (...)
House, and threatened death and ruin to himself and his Family (...) he did not
immediately set (...) safe and sound at liberty. The Frangipani complied with
all their demands, and Leo in the sight of all falling at the Pope's feet,
kissed (...), and most humbly begged his Pardon. The Pope then mounted his white
Horse, and attended by the Clergy and People of Rome he rode to the Lateran,
and was there Crowned according to custom. At this time Baldwin (who had been
exhorted by the Pope, both by Letters and Messengers, to withstand (...) the
Barbarian Forces till some supplies could be sent into Asia to his assistance)
took Sobal, a strong place in Syria, and fortified it, that it might be a
receptacle for the Christians in their War against the Infidels. Boemund also
the younger dying, Tancred who was his Uncle and Guardian, was by all the
Christians declared Prince of Antioch, which Principality having settled, he was
sent for by Baldwin King of Jerusalem, to come with all his force to aid him
against the Turks, Saracens and Arabs, who with a great Army had invaded his
Kingdom. Tancred arriving there, and observing the small forces of the
Christians, dissuaded Baldwin from joining Battle with the Enemy, by that means
putting the whole affair of Christendom under a great hazard, but all in vain;
for Baldwin giving them an opportunity of fighting was overcome with great
slaughter, himself and a few Men retreating with great difficulty to Jerusalem,
and Tancred by several by-ways escaping to Antioch. The Enemies puffed up with
this great Victory, seized Mount Tabor and pulling down the Monestery there,
put all the Monks to the sword. Gelasius in the mean time could not be at rest
from a foreign Enemy; for the Emperor Henry had entered Italy with his Army,
wasting all as he marched, was just about to enter Rome in a hostile manner; to
escape whom the Pope at first retired to the House of Volcamino a noble
Citizen, but not deeming that altogether safe, he went with his Attendants
aboard a couple of Galleys prepared for that purpose, and sailed down the Tiber
to Ostia, the German Soldiers pursuing him and shooting at him with Darts and
Arrows. Coming to Ostia, he dared not venture any whither by Sea, it was so
stormy, but he traveled hy Land to Ardea, accompanied still wherever he went
by Hugh Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles, an illustrious Prelate; Soon after the
Sea growing more calm, he returned to (...), from whence he sailed first to
Terracina and then to Gaeta, where he was very kindly entertained by his
Countrymen. Hither came to meet him William Duke of Puglia, Robert Prince of
Capua and Richard of Aquila, who all promised him their utmost service, as
became loyal Feudataries of the Church of God. Henry hearing these Princes were
raising an Army against him, set up for an Anti pope Maurice Archbishop of
Braga, by the name of Gregory, to oppose Gelasius, and recommended him to the
Family of Frangipani; and not content to have acted so pernicious a thing, he
entered the Country of Anagni, and plundered and ruined all before him; he had
just laid Siege to Turricolo a strong place, when on a sudden news was brought
that Gelasius with the Princes of Puglia, approached with a great Army,
whereupon he decamped and as he retreated out of Italy, he sill'd all places
with slaughter and rapine. (...), upon his retreat, dismissed the (...)
Princes, supposing now that Henry was gone, all things would be in a peaceable
condition at Rome hereafter; but he was very much deceived in his opinion; for
he was soon after informed that the Antipope upheld by the power of the
Frangipani continued still at Rome, out of fear of which Family he staid
privately a while in the House of a Friend; but afterward as he was saying Mass
in the Church of Praxede, his Enemies with their Party rushed in, and he had
much ado to escape out of their hands by flight, some of the Corsi and
Normanni, two great Families, with his Nephew Crescentius fighting briskly in
his defense. The next day guarded by his Retinue and Friends in Arms, he
returned to the City from S. Paul's (whither he had fled) and consulting with
his Cardinals, he resolved to leave the City, lest the Uproars every day
increasing some great mischief might ensue. Having therefore left to Peter
Bishop of Porto, the Vicegerency in Ecclesiastical affairs at Rome, and to Hugo
Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles the care of Benevento, he sailed first to Pisa,
not conceiving the way by Land to be secure for himself and the Cardinals who
accompanied him; where he in the audience of the whole City related the causes
of his departure from Rome, and was received with great kindness by the Pisans;
thence setting sail for France, he arrived at S. Giles's, and was there
entertained by the Abbat of Clugni and his Monks with many others who came for
that purpose, very magnificently and splendidly. Then he crossed the middle of
France with a venerable rather than sumptuous attendance, (which now adays is
the fashion) by the way dedicating the Churches of S. Cecily in Stagello, S.
Sylvester in Burgundy and S. Stephen in Tornay, and with Stones determining the
Bounds of each Church. Coming at last to the Monastery of Clugni, he was taken
with a Plurisie, and died, having been Pope one year and five days. He was a
most holy Man and very praiseworthy both for his life and doctrine; so that I
cannot doubt, considering the integrity of his life, and his religious
constancy amidst the many storms and troubles he underwent, but that he now
enjoys Eternity among the blessed in Heaven. He was buried in the Porch of the
said Monastery. Some write, that in his time the Order of Knights Templers
first began, who living not far from the Holy Sepulcre, entertained Pilgrims
and accompanied them in Arms in their journeys to and from the holy Places,
which by their means might be visited with all safety. These Knights Cusentinus
commends highly for their holy Christian Lives.

CALISTUS II.
CALISTUS the Second, first named Guy, a Burgundian, Archbishop of Vienna,
descended of the Blood Royal of France, was chosen Pope by those Cardinals who
were at Clugni at the death of Gelasius, but he would not take upon him the
(...), till he heard the Election was approved by those Cardinals also who were
left at Rome and elsewhere in Italy; which being certified to him by Letters
and Messengers, he went to Rome, and the Nobility and People meeting him
congratulated his Promotion and their own good fortune, not doubting but he
would be a restorer of peace and tranquillity to the City of Rome. Here he
settled matters to his mind, and went to Benevento, where all the Princes
thereabout were met to salute him (according to custom) of whom the principal
were William Duke of Puglia, Jordan Count of (...), Arnulphus Count of Ariano,
and Robert Count of Lauretello, all Men of great honor, and without doubt the
most powerful Lords of that part of Italy, who took their Oath of fealty to the
Pope. But Calistus having nothing more in his thoughts than the holy War, where
it was much feared the Christian Cause would not be able to sustain it self
against so many barbarous Nations, returning to Rome, dispatched away Lambert
Bishop of Ostia, a Saxon, Cardinal of S. Stephen in monte Celio, and Gregory
Cardinal of S. Angelo, to the Emperor to treat of a Peace, which having
procured without much difficulty, they hanged up a Table of the Articles
thereof in the Lateran Church, to the incredible joy of all People. But this
lasted not long, for Roger Count of Sicily in the absence of Count William, had
seized upon Calabria and Puglia, the charge of both which Countries William
(going to Constantinople to espouse the Daughter of Alexius the Emperor) had
committed to the care of the Pope. Upon this therefore the Pope left Rome and
went to Benevento, from whence he sent Cardinal Hugo to Roger as he was
besieging the Rocca di Niceforo, to persuade him to lay down his Arms and quit
the Siege, but he little regarded the Pope's Order, rather pursuing the War
more vigorously, fearing lest if his Cosen William should arrive before he had
possessed himself of those two Countries, it might render his design unfeasible.
The Pope then began to raise an Army, when on a sudden both himself and many of
the Cardinals were taken ill of Fevers, which forced him to return to Rome
without performing any thing; so that Roger not meeting any resistance easily
made himself Master of Calabria and Puglia. Thus was William (...) of his
Country and of the Wife he expected, and being forced to betake himself to live
in the Court of the Prince of Salerno, he died a little while after without
Heirs; and Roger having lost so considerable an Enemy, arrogates to himself the
Title of King of Italy. Calistus as soon as he recovered his health, held a
Council in the Lateran of nine hundred Fathers, where it was consulted, how
with the first opportunity they might send Recruits to the Christian Army in
Asia, then much weakened; the news whereof gave such courage to Baldwin King of
Jerusalem, that he set upon Gazis a King of the Turks that inhabited Asia
minor, who was coming against him with a great Army, vanquished him and took
him Prisoner; and with like success he encountered the King of Damascus who was
marching against Jerusalem, whom he defeated having killed two thousand of the
Enemy and taken a thousand. But Balahac King of the Persians coming on with
numerous sorces, and Baldwin not staying till the Auxiliaries could arrive, he
rashly adventured to fight him, and was totally routed, and himself and many of
his Nobles made Captives. This made Pope Calistus hasten their assistance, lest
the remainder of the Christians should be destroyed having no King: and by the
mediation of Veramundus Patriarch of Jerusalem a learned and a good Mam, he
animated the Venetians with hopes of glory and reward to man out a stout Fleet
upon the service, in the year 1121. Dominico Michiele being Duke; which
arriving at Joppa, then straightly besieged both by Sea and Land by the
Saracens, they overcame them with great slaughter and raised the Siege. Hence
they went to Tire, which after a long and bloody Siege they took, having first
made it their bargain, that half Ascalon and Tire should be theirs, if by their
means they happened to be taken. But Emanuel Emperor of the Greeks, Successor
to Calo-Joannes enving these great successes to the Latins or those of the
Roman Communion, commanded the Venetians to recall their Admiral, which they
did and he obeyed, but he was so enraged, that in his return he sacked Rhodes,
Chios (from whence he translated to Venice the body of S. Theodore the Martyr)
Samos, Mitilene and Andros, Islands belonging to the Emperor. He took Modone
and (...) it; and subjected the Island Trau (before in the hands of the
Hungarians) to the Venetian Commonwealth. He brought also along with him to
Venice the Stone upon which at Tire Christ is said to have sat. In the mean
time Baldwin, who we said was taken Prisoner, being ransomed, returned to
Jerusalem, and for a while kept up the Christian Cause; so that Calistus having
now a little leisure from foreign troubles, creates twelve Cardinals, rebuilds
several Churches that were ruined with age; repairs the City Walls, makes
Conduits, (...) Castles belonging to the Church and distributes great Donaries
of Silver and Gold to several Churches, purchases several pieces of ground to
augment S. Peter's Revenue and within the Court builds the Church of S.
Nicolas. But so great felicity cannot long be enjoyed on Earth, without
interruption, for Gregory the Antipope, before named Bordino, attempting to
usurp the Papacy kept at Sutri, where with the assistance of some Roytelets
thereabout he did great damage to the Romans by his incursions, and plundered
all the Strangers he could meet with that traveled to Rome either out of
devotion or about business. Calistus therefore gets together an Army on a
sudden, and sending before John de Crema Cardinal of S Chrysogon with the most
expedite part of Soldiery, himself follows and defeating the Enemy takes Sutri,
and sets Bordino upon a Camel, leading him so in triumph to Rome; and then
forgave him his life, but thrust him into the Monastery of Cave. At last
Calistus having deserved well both of God and Man died in the Lord; after he
had been Pope five years ten months and six days. The Sea was then vacant eight
days.

HONORIUS II.
HONORIUS the Second, at first named Lambert, born in the Country of Imola, was
made Pope about the time that Baldwin being ransomed from his imprisonment
added the Principality of Antioch to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, all the Heirs
being dead, to whom of right it belonged. But so great a Province not being to
be governed without a Lieutenant, he made Raymund Son to William Duke of
Austria their Governor, whose Wife was the Daughter of Boemund the elder; and
having thus settled matters, he went against the King of Ascalon, who being
assisted with forces from Egypt infested the (...) of Jerusalem, and him he
utterly routed in one Battle. Afterward Baldequan a petit King of Damascus
attempting the same thing, but with greater forces, he overthrew him in three
fierce Battles, his men in their flight being killed up and down like sheep. To
return to Honorius; though his Parentage was mean, yet for his excellent
Learning and conversation he was every way worthy of so high a Dignity; not but
that the methods by which he obtained it were not altogether commendable, the
Election having been procured rather by the ambition of some private Men than
by unanimous consent. For when upon the death of Calistus, the Consultation was
held about choosing a new Pope, Leo Frangipane imposed upon the Conclave, that
the Election should be deferred for three days, under pretense of more mature
deliberation and a stricter search into the Ecclesiastical Canons; though
neither of these were part of his design, but it was craftily and politickly
done by him, to gain time in which Votes might be procured for the choice of
Lambert. The People were extremely desirous to have had the Cardinal of S.
Stephen, which Frangipane also pretended, that so he might by this trick draw
over the People and the unwary Fathers; which some of the Cardinals observing,
because they would not have a Pope according to his mind, they set aside the
Cardinal of S. Stephen, and chose Theobald Cardinal of S. Anastasio, Pope, by
the name of Coelestine. Leo now thought it no time to dally, but perceiving the
People were displeased at that choice, declares Lambert aforesaid for Pope,
with great acclamations of the Citizens, the Clergy also approving it; and that
the People might not have time to change their minds, he immediately clothes
him with the Pontifical Vestments in the Scinie, a place near S. Sylvester's
Church. He, though it was not without slight that he got the Popedom, yet was
afterward universally saluted and owned as such. As soon as he was made Pope,
he created several worthy Persons Cardinals, of whose assistance he constantly
made use in all his difficult affairs; being very much delighted with the
conversation of excellent Men, which was the reason that he detained at Rome
with him Pontius Abbat of Clugni, a very diligent person; and showed great
respect to the extraordinary parts of Hildebert Bishop of Man's, whom for the
sake of his skill at Heroic or Elegiac Verse he promoted afterward to the
Archbishopric of Tours. This age was rendered also more illustrious by Hugo de
Sancto Victore, a famous Doctor of Paris, who then flourished, who lest behind
him several lasting Monuments of his admirable Learning: as his Book concerning
the Sacraments, his Book of Sentences, another written by way of Dialogue,
entitled Didascalus, another of care of the Soul, and a Book entitled, of Arts
and Sciences. All these learned Men Pope Honorius loved to that degree, that he
neglected no opportunity of preferring them. One foul deed yet was acted in his
time much to be abhorred; for one Arnulphus an excellent Preacher of the
Religion of Christ, was murdered at Rome by the procurement of the Priests,
because he inveighed bitterly against their incontinence and sensuality, and
reproved their pompous living and insatiable appetite after Wealth, proposing
the Poverty and pure Integrity of our Savior for their Imitation. This Man the
Roman Nobility and Gentry looked upon as a true Prophet and Disciple of Christ,
and extolled him to the Skies; which begat (...) much envy and rage as cost the
good Man his life. Whether this holy Man was a Priest, a Monk, or a Hermit, is
not certain. Historians write that Honorius was very much troubled at the fact,
but could never find the Authors of it: He aster having reigned well in S.
Peter's Chair five years two months and a day, died to the general grief, and
was buried with the greatest solemnity in the Lateran Church; and the Sea was
thereupon vacant one day. His name is in an Inscription in Marble (...) the
Church of Praxede, but I know not what it means.

INNOCENT II.
INNOCENT the Second, a Roman, born in Trastevere, being made Pope, raises an
Army and marches against Roger, Son and heir of the former Roger Lord of
Sicily, who endeavored to possess himsess of Puglia, upon the death of William
the Duke thereof, in whom the whole Family of Robert Guiscard was extinct. In
this expedition the Romans showed so much courage and fortitude, that at the
first onset they overthrew the Enemy then encamped at S. Germans, and taking
the Town, they followed Roger to (...) and there besieged him. But in the mean
time (...) Duke of Calabria, his Son, with a good Army comes upon them and in
one Battle defeats them, not only delivering his Father from the Siege, but
taking the Pope Prisoner with all the Cardinals that then attended him: all
whom yet soon after Roger using wonderful moderation, freely released. For
which reason the Pope afterward was easily persuaded to grant any thing he
desired, except the Title of King, which he earnestly solicited with great
expense and large Promises. During these actions one Peter Son of Peter Leone a
potent Citizen of Rome, by some seditious Fellows was set up for an Antipope
by the name of Anacletus, who by spoiling several Churches in the City and
rifling their Treasures (particularly breaking into S. Peter's Church, whence
he took a Cross of Gold with its appendent Ornaments) had raked together so
much wealth, that he was able with it to corrupt to his side any of the
Citizens who were desirous of change. So that Innocent upon his return to the
City finding all places full of uproars, and that these must needs end in the
slaughter of many men, he retired of his own accord, and first sailing to Pisa,
from thence he went to Genoa and at last to France. Anacletus then being rid of
so considerable an Adversary, endeavored as much as he could by liberal
Pensions to bring over those who were for Innocent to his side, and that he
might more firmly oblige Roger, (then inclining to his party) to his interest,
he created him King of both Sicilies. Innocent in the mean while holds (...)
Council at Clermont, in which the Antipope and his followers were condemned;
from whence he went to Orleans, and having visited King Philip, by whom he was
kindly received, he passed into la Beausse, where at Chartres he discoursed
with Henry King of England who came to meet him, whom he endeavored with many
arguments to persuade to undertake an expedition against the Saracens. Hence he
took a turn into Lorain, and finding Lotharius newly made King of the Germans,
at Liege, who made him many large Promises of assistance toward his
Restoration, he made him take an Oath, that he would make such sufficient
preparations for the enterprise, as that he should return to Rome with
security. After this having held another Council at Rhemes, and, upon his
return into Italy, one other at Piacenza, he came to Pisa, where he composed
the animosities that had long been between the Pisans and Genoeses. He also
raised the Bishopric of Genoa, which before was in the Province of the
Archbishop of Milan, to an Arch-hishops Sea, to which he subjected three
Bishops of Corsica and the Bishop of Bebio. The same he did by that of Pisa,
making it an Archbishopric, with Jurisdiction over the other three Bishops of
(...), and the Bishop of Populonia. Lotharius by this time was come into Italy
with a great Army, which having by the Pope's advice divided with two distinct
Bodies he marched to the City; where making himself Master of Janicolo he
entered that way, while Innocent with another party by another way crossing the
River Anien over Ponte Mamolo gets into the Lateran, the Antipope not
appearing at all. So that Lotharius with marvellously good fortune quashed that
Faction and as much as in him lay took care that Innocent should not thereafter
be (...) by them. The Pope was so extremely obliged by these great services of
Lotharius, that Henry being now dead, he created him Emperor of the Romans and
crowned him with an Imperial Diadem. Which done, Lotharius returned into
Germany, to reduce the Leutici then in Rebellion; but while the Pope called a
Council at Pisa, to consider of the State of Christendom and of the
preservation of Religion; the Antipope who was condemned in this Council also,
with the assistance of Roger and some factious People, again bestirs himself
against the Pope. Hereupon the Emperor Lotharius having repressed his own
Rebels, once more advances toward Rome with his Army, and the Pisans on the
Pope's behalf fit out a powerful Fleet; and with these Forces they not only
quelled the Sedition at Rome, but attacked Roger so stoutly both by Sea and
Land, that they stripped him of all that he held in Italy, and drove him to his
own Sicily in a short time. John Emperor of Constantinople, who had no
kindness for Roger, hearing of these great successes, sent Ambassadors to
congratulate Lotharius upon that occasion; one of which Embassy was a
Sophister, who would undertake to prove that the Latin Church professed a great
Error, in declaring contrary, as he said, to the opinion of the Nicene Council,
which was that ( the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father) that the said Holy
Ghost did proceed from the Father and the Son. But among those who managed the
Controversy was one Peter a Deacon, a learned Man and a great Disputant, who
replied thus: If the Latins (says he) are to be condemned because they add that
the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son also; why are not the Greeks much more to
be condemned who say, the H.G. proceeds from the Father alone; whereas the
Council said no more than that it proceeded from the Father? The bold man was
so gravel'd with this acute Answer, that he laid down the Controversy and
disputed no more. The Emperor Lotharius being about to depart, and Innocent
fearing that when he was gone Roger would attempt to regain what he had lost in
Italy, he created Raino one of Lotharius's Commanders, (left by him to secure
the Country with some Troops) Duke of Puglia. The Antipope soon after died and
was buried privately by his Friends, and the Cardinals who had been his
Sectators were reconciled to the Pope, so that the Church seemed to be in a
likelihood of enjoying a little Tranquillity; when on a sudden some Citizens of
Rome seeking to enlarge their Power by tumults, set up several Senators of
their own to take into their hands the whole Government of the affairs and
territories of the City. Whilst the Pope withstood these attempts, he holding a
Council in the Lateran, wherein it was ordained that no Layman should lay
violent hands on a Clergyman, he died, having been Pope fourteen years, seven
months and thirteen days, A.D. 1114. At which time were in great esteem,
Gilbert an English Man, a Person of so great knowledge, that he was called, the
universal Scholar, and Ambert Archbishop of Rhemes, not inferior to his
Master Gilbert for parts and learning. That piece of Mosaic work which is still
to be seen in the Vault of S. Mary in Trastevere was done by this Pope.

CELESTINE II.
CELESTINE the Second, at first named Guido, Cardinal Priest of S. Mark, a
Tuscan, born at Citta di Castello, called by the Ancients Tiphernum, was by
universal consent chosen Pope in the room of the deceased Innocent, at the time
when Baldwin King of Jerusalem dying, Fulk Earl of Anjou, his Son-in-law
succeeded him in that Kingdom, which with the help of his two valiant Sons, he
defended stoutly for some time. For when the Turks who inhabited near the
Persian Gulf, had made incursions into the territories of Antioch, he not
only defeated them, but slew three thousand of their number and took as many
Prisoners. Which loss so enraged Alaph the Turk, that with some Babylonian
Auxiliaries, he sat down before Edessa a City of Mesopotamia, called by Jews
Arach, (which we told you Baldwin had begged of his Brother Godfrey) and took
it, the Barbarians plundering and spoiling all without mercy, putting all those
Christians to the sword who would not deny the Faith, and ravishing the
principal Women, even upon S. John Baptist's Altar, because they knew it was
had in high reverence by the Christians. But while an Army was raising, King
Fulk (I know not by what ill luck) fell from his Horse, as he was riding too
rashly after a Hare, and died of his fall, to whom Baldwin the third of that
name, succeeded in the Throne. And Celestine, after he had sat five months,
died, and was buried in the Lateran. He was happy in one thing, that he was not
pestered with any Seditions in his Pontificate, which yet perhaps is to be
attributed to the shortness of his time.

LUCIUS II.
LUCIUS the Second, a Bononian, his Father's name was Albert, came to the
Popedom at that time when the news of the taking of Edessa was brought to
Italy. This Edessa was the City to which Holy Scripture says, Tobias sent his
Son, and which the Apostle Thaddaeus converted to the faith of Christ, being
since honored with the relics of S. Thomas, and hence it was that Agbarus
King of the place sent a Letter to our Savior, to which he vouchsafed to write
an Answer with his own hand. Upon the tidings of this great loss, Bernard Abbat
of Clairvaux, a personage famous for Sanctity and Learning, as I have said
before, took to heart the defense of Christianity, and by Letters and
Messengers animated all Christian Princes to take upon them the Cross and
Banner of Christ against the Saracens; and prevailed upon Conrade of Schwaben,
who had succeeded Lotharius in the Empire, to engage in the Expedition. While
provision was thus made for the defense of the Christian Religion, in France
and Germany, Roger by the Pope's negligence returns into Italy and regains all
that he had lost without meeting any resistance, which success gave him so much
courage and strength, that passing with a Fleet into Africa, he so plagued the
King of Tunis, that to buy his peace, he made him promise him a yearly tribute,
which he paid for thirty years afterward. Conrade having in the mean while got
together a great Army under the Cross, marched to Constantinople, where Emanuel
II. Emperor of the Greeks over-persuaded him to take his journey straight on
to Iconium, without taking care of provision, assuring him that himself would
supply the Army with whatsoever should be necessary. Whereupon that City, well
fortified both by Art and Nature, was closely besieged a great while; but the
wicked Emperor showed them a Greek Trick, and mixed Lime with their Meal, with
which the bread was made for the whole Army of the Christians, and this killed
so many of the Soldiers, that they were forced to raise the Siege and return
into France, without having done any thing. Some advantage yet this Expedition
may be said to have given the Christians, because King Baldwin IV. of Jerusalem
took such courage upon it as to besiege and take by storm the City of Ascalon,
having also a little before rebuilt the ancient City Gaza, (then almost
deserted by the Enemy) giving it for a dwelling place to the Knights Templars.
Beside the same Baldwin gave a bold repulse to some Turkish Chieftains who
infested the Inhabitants of Jericho, of whom in one single Battle he is said to
have killed five thousand. Moreover Noradine Governor of Damascus invading the
territories of Jerusalem was met withal by Baldwin, and totally routed, so that
in the pursuit the Christians were with much ado kept off from entering the City
of Damascus pel-mel with the Enemy. But to return to Pope Lucius; he omitted no
care nor pains in promoting that so considerable and necessary Expedition; and
I suppose, he was much the more concerned in his mind for it, because before he
was Pope, he was Cardinal Priest of S. Cross in Jerusalem, the Church whereof
he almost wholly rebuilt. By his approbation, a national Council was held in
France of several Bishops and Abbats, against Peter Abelardus a Peripatetic
Philosopher, and a very learned Man, who had maintained some heterodox
Opinions; but was in the presence of King Lewis, so effectually convinced, that
he not only changed his mind, but took upon him the life and order of a Monk,
and afterward together with some of his Scholars led a most holy life secluded
from the World in a desert place. Lucius, after he had been Pope eleven months
and four days, died and was buried in the Lateran.

EVGENIVS III.
EVGENIVS the Third, a Pisan, Abbat of S. Anastasius having been chosen a Monk
by that holy Man Bernard, was created Pope in the Church of S. Caesarius; for
when the Cardinals could not well agree whom to choose out of their own number,
moved by an impulse from above, they pitched upon this most religious Man
Eugenius. He finding the Romans would be urgent upon him with threats, to
procure his confirmation of their Senators, he fled by night to Sabina,
accompanied by the College of Cardinals, and was consecrated in the Monastery
of Farfara; and despising not only the big words of the Romans, but defying
the worst they could do, he drove those Senators to such a straight, that he
forced them to resign their Offices. Hereupon he returned to Rome, but
perceiving the Citizens were reconciled to him only out of design and not
heartily, and being afraid lest some trap should be laid for him, he escaped to
Tivoli, the Romans throwing at him Darts and other missile Weapons as he
departed. After this he went to Pisa and from thence by Sea to France, where he
persuaded King Lewis to engage in the holy War against the Turks and Saracens,
who arriving at Constantinople, was no better used by the Emperor Emanuel than
Conrade of Schwaben had been before him; for Lewis taking his advice to pass
through the deserts of Syria at a very unseasonable time, was reduced to such
extreme necessity, that he was compelled to march his Army (harrass'd with the
bad way and want of all things) to Antioch, without entering upon any action.
This falsity of Emanuel procured him the enmity of Roger King of Sicily, who
man's out a Navy for Greece, and seizes from him the Island of Corfu, Corinth,
Thebes and Euboea, and had gone up to Constantinople it self, if the Venetians
had not equipped a Fleet of sixty Galleys to hinder his design. Roger
therefore, as God would have it, turns to the coast of Asia, where the Saracens
Fleet had blocked up Lewis King of France, (then intending to set sail for
Palestine from Porto di S. Simon,) and having got them at an advantage sets
upon 'em and routs 'em, delivering by this means this Christian King and his
Army from destruction. In the mean time the Venetian Fleet which was altogether
on Emanuel's side, retakes all those places which Roger had possessed himself of,
but had been left by him unfortified and without Garrisons; Roger then leaving
King Lewis at Joppa, sets sail directly for Constantinople, where he burnt the
Suburbs in the very sight of the Emperor, and carried his Victory so far, that
for some time he besieged even his Palace, and with his own hand gathered fruit
out of his Garden. But having got his Fleet together in order to return into
Sicily, he fell unawares upon the Venetian Navy which was ready prepared for a
Battle, and was by them defeated with the loss of twenty of his Galleys,
himself hardly escaping by flight. While these things were doing, Conrade,
Lewis and Baldwin, with joint forces and courages attacked Damascus, which City
was built by the Servants of Abraham, in a Champain Country and naturally
subject to drought, but by Art rendered fertile and plentiful; for the ground is
watered by Channels and guts dug in the Earth and by that means made to abound
with all things. There is but one small River in that Country, which running
not far from the City Walls, makes a little tongue of Land in which their Camp
was pitched, whereby they easily could hinder the Citizens from fetching Water;
but a certain Assyrian, to whom in difficult matters Baldwin was wont to give
great credit, over-persuaded him to remove his Camp to the other side of the
Town, pretending that it might with more ease be there expugnable, because the
Walls were not so strong; which was no sooner done, but those of Damascus
possessed themselves of the place where our Men had encamped, and having
entrenched themselves stopped all the Water and Provisions that the Christians
wanted: So that being pressed with hunger and thirst, they were forced
dishonourably to raise the Siege, from which Baldwin went to Jerusalem, and
Lewis and Conrade took their march to Europe, whither they returned An. Dom.
1152. with their Armies, which by several accidents were very much shattered.
Eugenius after having (as aforesaid) stirred up the Christians to this
Expedition, returned to Rome, where he was pompously and heartily entertained
by the Citizens; but having recovered Terracina, Sezza, Norba and Rocca di
Fumone, places which had been seized from the Church by several Lords of the
adjacent Country, he retired to Tivoli for his diversion, where soon after he
died, having sat in the Papal Chair eight years four months and twenty days.
His body was carried to Rome, and buried with great state (as reason good) in
St. Peter's Church. By his Order and at his charge the Portico of S. Mary
Maggiore was built or rather re-edified, as appears by the Inscription.

ANASTASIVS IV.
ANASTASIVS the Fourth, a Roman, Son of Benedict, was before Abbat of S. Ruffo
in Velitro, and now of a Cardinal was made Pope, at that time when Alphonso K.
of Spain died in his return from the Holy War, to whom succeeded his Son
Sanctius, who soon after being slain in the Christian quarrel in a Battle in
Arabia, his Brother Ferdinand succeeded him in the Throne. Anastasius having
obtained the Popedom, gave a Chalice of most excellent workmanship and vast
price to the Lateran Church, and in a short time raised a noble structure near
the Pantheon, now called S. Marca rotunda; and many other things he designed
for the honor of the Church and the Ornament of the City, if he had lived a
little longer. Great expectations Men had entertained concerning him and hopes
that his goodness together with the learning of Richard de S. Victore his
Cotemporary, would vindicate those times from obscurity and ignominy: for
Richard was then a famous Doctor and wrote many things gravely and copiously,
particularly a Book concerning the Trinity; beside that he was an eloquent as
well as profound Preacher. At this time almost all Europe was afflicted with
Famine, which put our Pope upon acts of Charity which he performed liberally
both openly and in secret, but he died when he had been Pope one year four
months and twenty four days, and was buried in the Lateran in a Tomb of
Porphyry.

HADRIAN IV.
HADRIAN the Fourth, an English man [born near S. Albans in Hertfordshire]
having been sent into Norway to preach the Gospel, he converted that Nation to
the Christian faith, and was therefore by Pope Eugenius made Bishop of Alba and
Cardinal. Upon the death of Anastasius being elected Pope, he was applied to by
the Romans both with Prayers and threats for an investiture of their Consuls in
the absolute administration of the Government of the City, but he positively
refused; and the Clergy of Rome desiring him to go to the Lateran to be
consecrated, he also denied so to do, unless Arnold of Brescia who had been
condemned for a Heretic by Eugenius, were first expelled the City. This so
enraged the People, that they set upon the Cardinal of S. Pudentiana in the Via
Sacra as he was going to the Pope, and gave him a wound or two. This the Pope
took so ill, that he set them under Excommunication, till at last they changed
their minds, and both banished Arnold and forced their Consuls to lay down
their Offices, leaving to the Pope the absolute Power of governing the City.
Mean time William King of Sicily, who succeeded Roger, takes the Subburbs of
Benevent, and both Ceperano and Bauco from the Church, which so enraged the
Pope, that he Anathematized him, and absolved all his Subjects of their
Allegiance, that so they might be at liberty to rebel. But at this time the
Emperor Frederick I. of Schwaben was entered into Lombardy with an Army and
besieging Tortona, which had revolted from the Empire, he took it by force, and
thence with great speed he continued his march toward Rome. The Pope was then
at Viterbo, from whence he went to visit Orvieto and Civita Castellana, places
belonging to the Church, to confirm them in their Allegiance; but finding
himself unable to cope with the Imperial Army, by his Nuntio's he struck up a
Peace, and met the Emperor near Sutri, who alighting from his Horse, addressed
to him with all that Ceremony which was due to the true Vicar of Christ. From
hence they went to Rome, where Frederick was to be Crowned by the Pope in S.
Peter's Church, but the Gates being shut lest any tumult should happen between
the Citizens and the Soldiers, the Romans yet broke forth by Ponte S. Angelo
and set upon the Germans (whom they looked upon as of the Pope's side) and
killed many. This unsufferable riot angered the Emperor so, that having brought
his Army, which was encamped in the prati di Nerone, into the City, he drove
the Romans from the Vatican, and slew and took Prisoners multitudes of them,
till being appeased by the intercession of the Pope, he let those he had taken
go free. But when afterward according to custom, the Pope and Emperor were to
go together to the Lateran and found it would be unsafe because of the
seditious humor of the Citizens, they went first to Magliana, and there
crossing the River they passed by the way of Sabina and Ponte Lucano to the
Lateran, and performed the Coronation with the usual Solemnity. While matters
went thus at Rome those of Tivoli surrendered themselves to Frederick,
professing a perfect submission; but when he understood that it was a part of
S. Peter's Patrimony he restored it to Hadrian, and without any long stay
returned into Germany. The Pope also at the request of the great men of Puglia
removed to Benevent, where by his presence alone he regained from William to
the Church a great part of his Kingdom. In the mean time Paloeologus an
illustrious personage came Ambassador from Emanuel II. Emperor of
Constantinople, first by Sea to Ancona, and then by Land to Benevent, with an
offer to the Pope of fifty thousand pounds in Gold, and a Promise to chase
William out of Sicily, if upon the good success of the Expedition, three
maritime Cities of Puglia might be put into his possession; which no sooner
came to William's Ear but he sued for the Pope's mercy, promising not only to
restore what he had taken from the Church, but to add somewhat more, and that
he would employ his Force to constrain the rebellious Romans to their duty, if
he might be honored with the Title of King of both Sicilies. The Pope could
not grant this, because several Cardinals opposed it. Wherefore William getting
a good Army together enters Puglia after an hostile manner, destroying all with
fire and sword, and setting upon the Greeks and Apulians who were encamped near
Brundusium, he easily overcame them, upon which those of Otranto and Puglia
immediately made their submissions to him. The Pope then was very angry with
those Cardinals who had opposed the Peace before, and took William into favor
and gave him the Title of both Kingdoms, he having first taken an Oath,
thereafter not to attempt to do any thing which might be a detriment to the
Church of Rome. Matters being thus composed to his mind, the Pope taking his
journey through the Countries of Cassino, Marsi, Reati, Narin and Todi, came at
last to Orvieto, which place he was the first Pope that made his habitation and
beautified. He was afterward by the earnest entreaties of the Romans persuaded
to go to Rome, but being here teiz'd by the Consuls who would be setting up for
liberty, he went to Arignano, where not long after he died, having been Pope
four years and ten months, leaving the Estates of the Church in a very good
condition; for he had built several Castles on the lake of S, Christina, and so
fortified Radifano with a Wall and Citadel, that it was almost inexpugnable.
The History of these times was written in an elegant style by Richard a Monk of
Glugni, much quoted by other Writers. The body of Pope Hadrian being brought to
Rome was buried in S. Peter's Church near the Sepulcre of Pope Eugenius.

ALEXANDER III.
ALEXANDER the Third, born at Siena, his Father's name Ranuccio, upon the death
of Hadrian, was by the suffrages of twenty two Cardinals chosen Pope, though
other three Cardinals set up Octavian, a Roman, Cardinal of S. Clement, by the
name of Victor, which gave beginning to a Schism. But Alexander, lest the
Church of Rome should suffer by the continuance thereof, dispatched Legates to
Frederick the Emperor then laying Siege to Cremona, to desire him to interpose
his Imperial Authority in extinguishing the Sedition. He returned for Answer,
that both Popes should betake themselves to Pavia whither he would come and
hear their Case debated. Upon the receipt of this Answer Alexander went to
Anagnia, and Octavian to Segna. This the Emperor took so heinously, that he
sent two Bishops to Alexander, to cite him before a Council, by the name of
Cardinal and not of Pope. Alexander stood upon his right and rejected them,
whereupon they went to Octavian, and brought him to Pavia, with intent to set
him up against Alexander, which they did; for holding a Council, Frederick
confirms him in the Papacy, leads him sitting upon a white Horse through the
streets of Pavia, and performs the usual adoration to him. Alexander was much
moved at this, and having first admonished them to no purpose, he sets them
both under an Anathema, and writes Letters to all the Princes and Nations of
Christendom in justification of himself for so doing: Then returning to Rome in
the second year of his Pontificate, he finds he had many Adversaries there, who
took the boldness to oppose him, because Frederick's Army had now possessed
themselves of all St. Peter's Patrimony but Orvieto and Anagnia. Wherefore
Alexander by the persuasion of King Philip of France, went to Terracina, and
there embarked in a Ship provided for him by Order of William King of Sicily,
and arrived in France, where in a Council holden at Clermont he pronounced the
Anathema before laid upon the Emperor and Octavian. While these things were
doing in Europe, Baldwin III. died at Jerusalem, and his Brother Almeric stepped
into the Throne, lest if an Interregnum should have been among so barbarous and
treacherous a People, it might have given occasion to some mischievous
revolution; and having settled his affairs for the time, he led his Army
against the Egyptians, and defeated their General Drogon with a great
slaughter, he laid Siege to Alexandria, of which Tiracino Lieutenant to the
Sultan of the Saracens, had traitorously made himself Lord; which Siege he
urged on with so great diligence that the Alexandrians could hold out no longer
and yet were not willing to be made subject to the Christians, but offered to
yield upon condition they might be freed of this new Lord, and be restored to
the Dominion of the Sultan; Almeric was content, and receiving a vast sum of
Money redeliver'd the City to the Sultan, who ungratefully put off the
performance of the full bargain, which caused Almeric to march against him and
to lay Siege to Cairo. Mean time in Europe Frederick acts very tyrannically,
for he sacked Tortono and laid Milan even with the ground (from whence he
translated the bodies of the Magi to Cologn, of which, I think, Rodolphus was
then Arch Bishop) and did great mischief to the Cremoneses. Upon this those of
Verona, Vicenza, Padoua, and Venice resolved unanimously to stop all manner of
assistance that Frederick should stand in need of, while he thus harassed
Lombardy. This angered Frederick so that he was about to invest Verona with his
Army, but hearing that the other Cities had sent thither their Auxiliary
Troops, he retreated to Pavia; from whence by Letters and Ambassadors he
exhorted the King of France, that to put an end to the Schism, he would bring
Alexander before a general Council, where also he would appear with Victor. The
City of Dyon, situate where the River Savo divides France from Germany was the
place appointed for the Council, whither Frederick (having composed his Affairs
in Italy for a time) arrived, together with Octavian and the Kings of Scotland
and Bohemia, and attended by great numbers of armed Men. But when Alexander
refused to go to that Council which himself did not call, but had begun another
at Tours, Frederick full of rage and threats returns into Germany, having sent
Octavian into Italy, intending speedily to follow him; but he dying at Luca,
Guy of Crema was set up for Antipope in his stead. The Romans had now chosen
Consuls who were Friends to Alexander, they immediatey recall him out of
France, and he taking Ship arrives first in Sicily, and thence comes to Rome,
where he was very kindly received with universal acclamations; and the People
of Lombardy were by the arrival of Alexander put in hopes of retrieving their
liberty, so that they took up Arms against Frederic who had used them so
tyrannically, and drove several of his Garrisons out of their Towns, An. Dom.
1165. Frederic hereupon marches with a numerous Army into Italy, and without
doing damage to any one, contrary to all expectation, enters the Territory of
Bononia, where he divides his Army, and sends some Battalions to Luca, to be a
Guard to the Antipope who then resided there, whilst he invests Ancona with
his Army, and after a Siege of some time takes it. In the mean time the
associated Cities of Lombardy re-edifie Milan and fortify it, and receive
those of Lodi, who had been Enemies to the Milaneses, into their Confederacy,
the more to enable them to resist Frederick, if he should invade them: But
Frederick had somewhat of greater moment to think of; for upon the death of
William the Norman King of Sicily, Emanuel Emperor of Greece had sent
Ambassadors to the Pope to offer him a great Army to be employed against
Frederick and to promise a perfect agreement of all the Grecians with the
Church of Rome, that so the Eastern and Western Churches might be all one, if
he would suffer the Roman Empire then divided, to be again reduced into one
body. What Answer these Ambassadors received is not certain, for by reason of
a War then begun between the Romans and those of Tusculum and Alba, the Pope
could not give them a positive resolution. The cause of this was that the
Romans being too rigorous in the exaction of their Gabels, the Tusculans and
Albans denied to pay them, which enraged the People of Rome so, that they
marched out contrary to the Pope's will, against them tumultuously; but at that
time Raino, (who had been sttip'd of the Dukedom of Puglia by Roger) bore the
chief sway among the Tusculans, a Man well skilled in the Arts of War, who
sending for the German Soldiers from Nepi and Sutri, made so great a slaughter
among the Romans, that they afterward had much ado to defend their Walls, much
less could they meet an Enemy in the Field. Frederick took this occasion to
avenge the wrongs (as he called 'em) which Alexander had done him, and leaving
Ancona leads his Army to Rome, and encamps in the Prati di Nerone, from whence
he made an Attack upon the Vatican Suburb, but was stoutly repelled by the
Friends of Alexander. The next day he attempted to set fire to S. Peter's
Church, and had effected it, if those who had the care of it would have
suffered it, and the Pope not thinking himself safe in the Lateran, into which
he saw the Germans would soon enter, removed to the House of the Frangipani
near the Palladio. William King of Sicily, Son of the Great William, hearing of
the Pope's danger, sent him a good sum of Money and two Galleys well manned;
which came in good time, for Frederick having promised Peace to the Romans, was
very urgent with them, of the two Popes to choose the more worthy, and to depose
and reject the other, which when Alexander knew must be done as the Emperor
should please, he embarked in the Galleys and escaped first to Gaieta, and from
thence to Benevent. Frederick afterward was driven from the City by a Plague of
which both Citizens and Soldiers died like Sheep, and as he marched back
through Lombardy, the Army of the Confederate Cities met him, and urged him to
a Battle, which he carefully declined and arrived in Germany. When he was
departed, the Associates built a City at their common charge near Roueretto
upon the River Taro, which from the name of the Pope they called Alexandria, to
inhabit which from all the Cities they sent fifteen thousand Men, dividing the
ground equally among 'em, and setting out the dimensions of their Streets and
Houses. The Romans yet regretted the slaughter made among 'em by the Tusculans
and their Friends, and therefore upon the departure of Frederick they took Alba
and demolished it, and had done the like by Tusculum, if the Pope had not
terrified them with Threats and Anathema's from doing so great a mischief. At
this time Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople sent other Ambassadors with
greater Promises than before, if the Pope could be brought to comply with his
desire; to whom Alexander gave this Answer, that he was not willing to unite
what his Predecessors had thought good industriously to disjoin. In the mean
time Guy the Antipope died in S. Peter's Church, which was still strongly
garrisoned by Frederick, in whose room the seditious substituted John a
Hungarian, Abbat of Sirmio, who had before the repute of a Thief; to him Raino,
(who was afraid of the Romans upon account of the mischief he had formerly done
them) delivered up Tusculum, upon condition that he should have Monte-fiascone
in lieu of it; but when Raino went to take possession of it, the Inhabitants
would not receive him, neither would the Tusculans submit to the Antipope,
upon which he returned to Tusculum, but was forbidden entrance. From thence
therefore he went to Alexius who was then at Veruli, and surrendered to him all
his Title to the place, which when the Tusculans heard upon mature deliberation
by a public Decree they acknowledged their subjection to the Pope, and
received him. Here it was that the Ambassadors of Henry King of England were
heard, when they came to clear their King of the false Accusation of having
conspired the death of S. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. But the Pope not
easily giving credit to the King's Ambassadors, sent two Cardinals into
England with plenary Power to examine the matter; to whom Henry paid so great
respect, that though he was engaged in a War with Ireland, yet he came as far
as Normandy to meet 'em. Upon debating the case, it came to this end, that
Henry should by an Oath, (because the matter of fact was not clear) purge
himself, and promise to do Penance for the murder of that holy Man; of which
though he were not guilty nor conscious, yet it seemed that the great spite and
grudg he bore him in his lifetime, had given some occasion to the
assassination; and moreover, that he should raise and maintain two hundred
Soldiers for a year to assist the Christians in the Holy Land; that he should
within three years himself, with what force he could raise, undertake an
Expedition to the same purpose: that he should conserve the Ecclesiastical
immunities in his Realm, and not oppose any Appeals that might be made by his
Subjects to the Court of Rome. All these Conditions he having sworn to perform,
he had (and, he deserved it) the right and Title to the Crown of England
conferred upon him and his Heirs, with the Pope's consent. Hence it may be
observed, that all the English Kings acknowledge themselves to have received the
Title to their Realms of the Pope of Rome. But Alexander having long strugled
with the Romans, offered them, if they would admit him into the City, to leave
the whole Civil Government to their own managery, and to intermeddle only in
religious matters; but this would not be granted by them, so he retired to
Segna, and there being informed by the English Ambassadors of the Miracles
wrought by S. Thomas [Becket] he canonized him. Frederick now returning into
Italy by Moncenisi, took Seculia by treachery and demolished it; he took also
Asti which surrendered for fear, and laid close Siege four months to
Alexandria, but received so much loss from the Sallies of the besieged, that he
grew weary of it and on Easter day rose up from before it and went to Pavia;
where a Treaty for the peace of Italy was carried on, by the mediation of the
Pope, which the Venetians were willing to embrace; who though they had been
favorers of Emanuel before, yet had received from him a horrid affront
contrary to the Law of Nations; for he had with red hot plates of Brass blinded
their Ambassador Henry Dandalo by holding them before his Eyes. Mean time
Almeric King of Jerusalem raised his Siege from before Cairo, though he was not
without hopes of carrying the place, but was bought off with a great sum of
Money, and afterward marched against Ascalon; but was forced to quit that
Expedition, being in great want of provisions, and finding his Soldiers to be
very much tired and broken with the great and tedious toils of War they had
undergone. He did not long outlive his return, but died and left his Kingdom to
his Son Baldwin, who though he labored with a dangerous Leprosy, yet he
managed his Government with great constancy and Wisdom. Alexander thinking now
to enjoy a perfect Peace, made the new City of Alexandria a Bishops Sea, An.
Dom. 1177. but soon after Frederick reenters Italy with great Forces and put
all into confusion, till the Milaneses with the joint forces of the
Confederates so broke his Troops with frequent Onsets that in one of them
Frederick's Horse was killed under him and he narrowly escaped with life
himself; many of those of Pavia and Como being on his side were lost. The
Bishop of Pavia also because he took the Emperor's part, was by the Pope
deprived of his Pall and the honor of bearing the Cross. Frederic's great Men
thought these mischiefs happened to 'em, because they persecuted the Church of
God, and openly threatened to return into their own Country and leave that
wicked Warfare, except he would be reconciled to the Pope speedily. A Treaty
then was begun for the Peace of Italy; when Saladine a Person of great courage
succeeded Noradine then deceased, in the Empire of the Saracens, who having
taken and slain the King of Egypt, added that Country and Syria to his
Dominion; not that his success was alike when he fought with the Christians,
being defeated by Baldwin in two Battles, one at Ascalon and another at
Tiberias; but soon after gathering his forces together, he marched into
Cilicia, to meet with Emanuel, whose Army by a feigned flight he drew into
narrow and difficult ways, where he set upon 'em and vanquished 'em, taking the
Emperor Prisoner, whom he set at large again, upon condition that he should
quit whatsoever he had taken in Asia. At this time Alexander was met at Venice
by Frederic, there to treat of a Peace, where in S. Mark's Porch the Emperor
kissed the Pope's feet; and from thence they went together to the high Altar,
and having performed the mutual Ceremonies of Civility, they discoursed a great
while upon the Articles of the Peace, which the next day was concluded. Hence
the Emperor with the good leave of the Pope, departed first to Ravenna, and
then to Bertinoro, which Town he designed to keep in his hands, because of the
commodiousness of its situation, but the Pope at last persuaded him to restore
it to the Church. Alexander also left Venice, (having first made several
Presents and conferred many honors upon that State for the services they had
done him) and with thirteen Galleys of William King of Sicily and four of the
Venetians, he sailed first to Siponto and from thence to Troia, and Benevent,
and then passing S. Germano he went to Anagni; where he staid not long but came
to Tusculum, to treat with the Romans about deposing the Consuls they had set
up before a Peace should be concluded; but because the Consuls had been so
chosen for fifty years, it was found to be a difficult thing to alter the
custom; wherefore they agreed that thereafter no one that was chosen Consul
should enter upon his Office, till he had taken an Oath to be dictated by the
Pope, that he would be true to the Church of Rome and never attempt any thing
that should be a violation of the Pontifical Dignity. Thus all matters being
settled, the Pope went the third time to Rome, all the great Men of the City
coming forth to attend and congratulate him; soon after he held a Council in
the Lateran, partly to find a way to reform the great licentiousness of that
Court, but chiefly that it might be decreed, that no Man under pain of an
Anathema should furnish the Infidels with Iron, Wood or any sort of Arms. At
this time died Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople, leaving his Son Alexius heir
of his Empire, under the Guardianship of Andronicus, one of the blood Royal,
who for some years showed great prudence and fidelity in his public
Administrations; and by his consent the young Emperor was married to Agnes
Daughter to Philip King of France. Baldwin IV. also King of Jerusalem, to
strengthen himself by the Alliance, married his Sister Sibyl to William
surnamed Long-sword, Marquess of Montferrat, an excellent Soldier, not doubting
but that upon occasion William and other Princes of Christendom would come to
his assistance if his affairs were in any danger. Mean time Alexander after
having undergone so many and continual labors, when now he seemed to be at
rest from all his troubles, died at Rome when he had been Pope twenty one years
nineteen days, having yet lived to see four Anti-Popes go before him, who with
their factions had almost destroyed the Church of Rome.

LUCIUS III.
LUCIUS the Third, a Tuscan, of a noble Family of the City of Lucca, was made
Pope by general consent, at the time when Andronicus (who we told you was
Guardian to Alexius, having driven out the Latins who favored the young
Emperor and drowned him in the Sea, where he was wont for his recreation
carelessly sometimes to venture in a little Bark) usurped the Empire of
Constantinople; and to secure his Empire thus unjustly gotten, he added another
great wickedness, for in a short time he cut off all the Nobility whose Virtue
rendered them suspected to him. Now also William surnamed Long-sword dying at
Jerusalem, King Baldwin taking care of his Nephew, married his Sister Sibyl
again to Guy of Lusignan, a Picard, upon condition, that after his own decease
Guy should enjoy the Kingdom during the nonage of his Nephew Baldwin, after
which he should resign it to him. All which was confirmed by the Pope's
Authority, who thought it very necessary for the Christian Cause, that the
Princes of Asia should be knit together with the strictest bonds of Amity and
Friendship, to enable them the better to resist the insults of the Turks and
Saracens: but he was quickly after expelled the City of Rome, while by the
favor of some Citizens he attempted to abolish the Office of the Consuls, and
his Friends in that affair being taken had their Eyes put out. Upon this horrid
affront the Pope betook himself to Verona and called a Council, where the
exorbitant pride and licentiousness of the Romans was condemned, and all
Christian Princes were exhorted to afford assistance to the holy War;
especially because Saladine had entered and wasted the Territories of Jerusalem,
encouraged by the dissension among the Christian Commanders; who had turned out
Guy of Lusignan for his Arrogance, from the Government, and had substituted
Bertrand Count of Tripoli, Protector in his room, so that all things seemed to
threaten a Civil War. But the Pope incessantly persuaded them by Letters and
Ambassadors to lay by their Animosities, and with one heart and the same mind
to oppose the common Enemy, at least so long as till fresh Auxiliary forces
could be sent to 'em. For by the instance of Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem,
who came for that purpose first to Verona, and thence went to Philip King of
France upon the same Errand, a good number of Soldiers under the Cross were
listed and sent away: But William King of Sicily in an ill time, designing to
revenge the wrongs offered to the Latins by Andronicus Emperor of
Constantinople, passing into Greece with his Army, confounded all things; for
he took Thessalonica the chief City of Macedonia, by storm, and harassing many
other of his Territories he took and plundered several Cities, Adronicus not
appearing against him, being hated of God and Man, for the many murders and
banishments he had been the Author of. The Constantinopolitans were hereby
reduced to necessity and forced to fetch from Pelopennesus, and to set up for
Emperor one Isaac who was of the blood Royal; and he overthrew Andronicus in
Battle, took him, and with various Tortures put him to death. Upon which it
became easy for Pope Lucius to persuade King William to make Peace with Isaac
and with Promises and Rewards to prevail with him to turn his Arms against the
Asians; but while this matter was transacting by Internuntio's this excellent
Pope died in the fourth year second month and eighteenth day of his Papacy, at
Verona and was buried with great Pomp before the Altar of the Cathedral Church.
This Pope had a great regard for his own Country and conser'd upon it many
advantages both Civil and Spiritual before he died; particularly he obtained of
Frederick the Emperor with whom he all his time kept a peaceable
correspondence, that the Money of Lucca only should be current in Tuscany, as
that of Pavia with the Imperial stamp went only among the Lombards, which
People by the means of this Pope were reconciled to the Emperor. Ptolomy of
Lucca writes that there flourished at this time, Peter Comestor, who wrote the
History of both Testaments, and Joachim an Abbat of a Monastery which himself
built at Calabria, famous for his Learning and for his skill in Divination,
which he used to practice in doubtful and enigmatical terms.

URBAN III.
URBAN the Third, a Milanese, his Father's name was John, of the Family of
Crivellis was made Pope, applied himself to compose the differences between the
Christian Princes, lest they should be destroyed by the Infidels who would make
use of that opportunity. For Baldwin IV. dying of a Leprosy, the Count of
Tripoli who was made Guardian to Baldwin V. could not enter upon his charge,
because Sibyl the Child's Mother and Guy of Lusignan her second Husband,
opposed him. The Child however did not long outlive his Uncle, but died within
eight months after him, whose death his Mother kept secret so long as till what
with gifts and what with good words she had brought over the Patriarch and the
chief Men to her side, to make Guy their King. This Raimund Count of Tripoli
highly resented, and that he might the more easily work his revenge, he made a
Truce with Saladine; by which means the Provinces of Tripoli, Tiberias and
Galilee were torn from the Christians; for they were then subject to Raimund in
right of his Wife whom he had newly married; and lest a pretense for making War
(which Saladine earnestly sought) should be wanting to him, the Prince of
Monreal, a Christian, in whose Dominion was a great part of the Country beyond
Jordan, and who was wont to supply in great abundance Jerusalem with Corn,
inconsiderately broke the Truce with him. Saladine looking upon the time to be
come at last which he had so long desired, raised a great Army of Horse and
Foot, and stoutly assaulted Ptolemais then garrisoned by the Templers. In this
Action the Templers got the better, but with the loss of their choicest Men;
for their grand Master and many other of their most skilful and courageous
Soldiers were slain. Saladine hereupon reinforces his Army, and taking courage
from their distress, presses more hardly upon them. Raymund observing this and
not thinking good to give too much credit to Saladine, leaves his Wife at
Tiberias and returning to Tripoli renews his friendship with King Guy,
slighting his Treaty before had with the Barbarians: so that Saladine having a
fair occasion to make War upon him, draws off from Ptolemais and marches
toward Tiberias. All the Christians then, but especially the Templers, urging
that their Army might march against Saladine, King Guy accordingly sets upon
him in his Camp, which was pitched in a pleasant place and well-watered, but
was repulsed, after which he encamping in an incommodious and extreme dry
ground where the Christians suffered much by thirst, himself was forced to
fight and was defeated with great slaughter. In this unfortunate Battle most of
the Christian Commanders were taken Prisoners, as was also King Guy and the
Master of the Templers; many of whom were afterward beheaded. Saladine having
gained this Victory, marches to Acon, which was immediately surrendered by the
Christians, who were permitted to depart only with their Clothes, and thence
following his good fortune, he takes Berylus, Byblos and all the Towns upon the
Seacoast; those of Ascalon only trusting to the strength of their
fortifications, told him they would not yield to him except he were first
possessed of Jerusalem. But the excellent temper and faithfulness of Saladine
did the Christians much harm; for he was so affable to every one, that
Subjection to him was a desirable condition. He, notwithstanding the big words
of the Ascalonites, invests the place and after a Siege of ten days had it
delivered up to him, upon condition that he would set at liberty King Guy and
the Master of the Templers who were then his Prisoners. That which made
Saladine thus hasten the Surrender of this place, was, he heard that Conrade
Marquess of Montferrat was arrived at Tire with the Fleet of Isaac Emperor of
Constantinople, (whose Sister he had lately married) under his Command; and
that William King of Sicily was expected in a short time with forty Galleys.
The tidings of these glorious successes of Saladine against the Christians
coming to the Turks in the lesser Asia, so filled 'em with emulation, that they
marched against Laodicea and took it, and from thence they invaded the
Territories of Antioch; but they were there vanquished by the Christians with
as great loss on their side as the Christians suffered from Saladine. At this
time Saladine had invested Jerusalem and carried on the Siege with so great
diligence, that those who were in Garrison being out of hopes of succor, (after
the taking of it by the Christians under Godfrey eighty eight years) delivered
it up, on condition that whosoever should be minded to leave the City should go
freely, with so much and no more than they could carry on their shoulders. The
Christians who came forth of it went some to Tire, some to Antioch, and some to
Alexandria; from whence many sailed with the Sicilian Fleet into Italy.
Saladine having entered Jerusalem, first threw down the Bells out of the
Steeples, and then profaned all the Churches, but Solomon's Temple, which it is
said, he caused to be washed with Rose Water before he would enter it. The
Asiatic, Syrian, Armenian, Jacobite, Georgian and Greek Christians staid in
Jerusalem by the permission of Saladine, who leaving there a strong Garrison,
took his way with great speed toward Tire, the defense whereof by common
consent and with the joint Forces was entrusted with William, who with the help
of the Sicilian Fleet gave Saladine a repulse; but when the news came that that
valiant Prince was going to lay Siege to Antioch, the Pope (who had labored
with his utmost might to hinder the loss of Jerusalem) going to Venice to take
care to get a Fleet together for the relief of it, died in his Journey at
Ferrara of grief for the calamity of the Christians, having sat in S. Peter's
Chair one year ten months and twenty five days.

GREGORY VIII.
GREGORY the Eight, a Beneventan, was created Pope by universal consent, and
immediately dispatched away Nuntio's and sent Letters to all Christian Princes,
exhorting them to join with him with their utmost Power to raise forces both by
Sea and Land, to attempt the recovery of Jerusalem out of the hands of the
Enemy; which great end the better to carry on, he went to Pisa, there to
compose some differences between the Pisans and Genoeses, with design to excite
them (both being powerful by Sea) to that holy Expedition. But whilst this good
Man perplexed himself with overmuch care in this matter, he died at Pisa, the
fifty seventh day of his Pontificate.

CLEMENT III.
CLEMENT the Third, a Roman, Son of John, surnamed the Scholar, as soon as he
was made Pope, sent forth a Bull to encourage Men to go to the Holy War; for
Saladine following the course of his Victories had taken twenty five Towns in
the Principality of Antioch, and at last had by bribing the Patriarch rendered
himself Master of Antioch it self. This gave the alarm to the Christian
Princes, so that now complying with the Pope's exhortations they raised Men;
the chief of those who engaged in the Expedition were the Emperor Frederic,
Philip King of France, Richard King of England, and Otho Duke of Burgundy,
beside many Archbishops and Bishops who accompanied them. The Venetians and
Pisans set forth their several Fleets well equipped; that of Venice was under
the command of the Archbishop of Ravenna, and that of Pisa under their own
Archbishop: And William King of Sicily, having cleared the Sea of Pirates,
took care to supply them by the way out of Puglia and Sicily with all sorts of
Provisions. Beside these, the Friselanders, Danes and Flemings with a Fleet of
fifty Galleys landing on the African shore, did the Saracens much mischief,
taking and plundering Siluma one of their Cities. Bela also King of Poland out
of good will to the Christian Cause, made Peace with the Hungarians, that so
the passage through that Country might be more easy and safe for those who
were to take their way through it to this great Expedition. At last they all
arrived at Tire, and from thence they marched unanimously to Ptolemais and
besieged it; where Saladine with a great Army came and beat up their quarters,
so that having the Enemy before them and behind, they were forced to fight. The
Battle was long and bloody, and the Victory inclined to the Christians side,
when the mischance of a Horse slipping out of the hand of a common Soldier,
gave them an occasion of flight, our Men thinking that the Saracens had got the
better: but Geoffrey of Lusignan who was left to guard the Camp, in the nick of
time giving a brisk Onset shocked their pursuit and gave the Christians an
opportunity to rally. However it is certain the Christians lost two thousand men
that day; beside that the Master of the Templers and Andrew Earl of Bremen died
afterward of their wounds. In the mean time the Siege lasting long the
Christians were reduced to so great a want of all things, that they were forced
to procure Victuals of the Enemy: which Saladine having notice of, laid hold on
the opportunity, and deserted his Camp which he left without any Guard, but
furnished with all manner of necessaries; which when the Christians altogether
in disorder entered and fell to plundering, Saladine returned and killed many
of them ere they were aware or prepared to receive him. Yet did not the
Christians quit this tedious and toilsom Siege; though to their other
distresses this was added, that a Dysentery raged in their Camp, of which
Disease Sibyl the Wife of Guy with four Sons which she had by him, all died.
While matters went thus in Asia, William King of Sicily died at Palermo, not
leaving behind him any lawful Heir, so that that Kingdom fell to the Church;
but the Noblemen of the Island set up Tancred in his room, natural Son of Roger
the Norman by a Concubine, a Man of so great cowardice and sloth, that William
would not believe him to be Roger's Bastard. Pope Clement not willing to lose
his right, sends away an Army thither with all speed, between whom and Tancred
who opposed them, the Country was filled with slaughters and outrages. Frederic
the Emperor was now by the way of Hungary and Thrace, marched with his Army as
far as Constantinople, in order to advance against the Enemies of Christ, where
Isaac the Emperor of the Greeks fearing his Power, persuaded him to cross the
Bosporus, which he did; and Clement still hastening him on by Letters and
Nuntio's, he sat down before Philomena a City of the Turks and took it; then
he wasted the Country about Iconium, and possessed himself of all Armenia
minor; but going one time into a rapid stream to wash himself without regarding
the depth, he was drowned; and his Soldiers retreating toward Antioch either
were lost or died, so that his Army came to nothing. The two Kings, Philip and
Richard having passed the Gallic and Tyrrhene Seas arrived together at Messina,
after which they met with different fortune: for Philip had a good Voyage and
coming safe to Ptolemais, brought great strength and courage to the Christian
forces; but Richard being born by contrary Winds to the coast of Cyprus, and
being by the Greeks denied the liberty of landing, he entered the Island by
force, and conquering it, he placed therein Garrisons of his own, and then went
to Ptolemais. That City was then stoutly attacked, but Saladine had put in it
so strong a Garrison, that with their frequent Sallies they did the Christians
much damage. Pope Clement now thought good to defer his Controversy with
Tancred, till the Christians should have more success against the Saracens, and
betook himself to regulate some Ecclesiastical Affairs, and with great severity
animadverted upon the scandalous lives of Clergymen. Moreover, he built the
Monastery of S. Laurence without the Walls, and with great expense repaired the
Lateran Palace and adorned the Church there with excellent Mosaic work: not
long after dying, when he had been Pope three years and five months, and was
buried in the Lateran Church, with great Funeral Pomp.

CELESTINE III.
CELESTINE the Third, a Roman, Son of Peter, surnamed Bubo, succeeded to the
Chair, who grudging that Tancred should enjoy the Kingdom of Sicily, secretly
gets away Constantia, (Daughter to the late King Roger) out of a Nunnery at
Palermo, and though she was under the Vow of Chastity, yet granting her the
Apostostical Dispensation, gives her to Wife to Henry VI. Son of Frederic
Barbarossa, upon these terms: that he should be empowered to attempt the
recovery of both the Sicilies, which he should enjoy in the name of a Dowry
with his said Wife, paying a yearly tribute to the Pope, as Feudatary of the
Church. Henry was so sensible of this extraordinary kindness of the Pope, that
he restored to him Tusculum, which he had before strengthened with a good
Garrison, which Celestine immediately bestowing upon the Romans, they so spoiled
and ruined it, that the very stones of the demolished City were brought to
Rome, and many of them were for a long time to be seen in the Campidoglio, as
Monuments of this great devastation. Henry and his Wife Constantia laying Siege
to Naples, were forced to raise it by reason of a Plague which raged in their
Army; but the Christians who had now for two years besieged Ptolemais, had it
surrendered to them upon condition, that they (restoring that piece of our
Lord's Cross, which we before told you was lost) should march out freely, every
Man with his own Clothes; but when they could not make good the agreement,
because the piece of the Cross was not to be found, Richard put many of the
Barbarians to death. Saladine was so dismayed at these losses, that despairing
of being able to defend them all, he dismantled several Cities in that Region
and was upon the point of delivering up Jerusalem itself, if it had not been
for a difference which arose between Philip and Richard concerning Precedence;
upon which Philip pretending himself sick, departed home from Asia. Richard
then applied himself more vigorously to the War, though at this time Conrade of
Montferrat was assassinated in the Marketplace of Tire, by two Saracen
Ruffians, who had bound themselves under an Oath and Vow to destroy all the
Enemies of their Religion after the same manner; but as they ran away they were
caught and put to death with the most exquisite Torments; and Henry Earl of
Champagne taking Queen Isabel to Wife, entered upon the Dominion of Tire.
Richard giving some fair words to Guy of Lusignan, persuaded him to pass over
to him his Kingdom of Jerusalem, (which the Kings of England still put among
their Titles,) and herewith taking courage, he marched his Army to beleaguer
the City of Jerusalem; but Saladine in his Journey falling in with his Rear,
forced him to a Battle in a very disadvantageous place, in which though he at
last came off Conqueror, yet it was with great loss of men. Saladine after this
encamped not far from Bethlehem, in a commodious place to intercept any manner
of Provisions that might be sent from Egypt to the Christian Army as they
should lie before Jerusalem; wherefore and because the Winter was coming on,
Richard puts off his designs for this so necessary Siege, (the Pope yet urging
him and continually supplying him with Money) and retreats to Ascalon, which as
well as Gaza he fortifies again; they having before been slighted by Saladine.
In the mean time the Sea-forces by degrees leave him, and the Pisans sailing
into the Adriatic, seized Pola, with intent to Winter there; but the Venetians
reinforcing their own Fleet, set upon 'em, took the Place and sacked it, and
drove out the Pisans, and had pursued them to extremity, if Celestine out of
care for the good of Christendom, had not mediated between them. Spring now
came on and Richard was preparing for the Siege of Jerusalem, when on a sudden
news was brought him, that King Philip had invaded Normandy, and intended to
pass into England, to procure that Kingdom for his Brother John. Richard then
laid by those thoughts and struck up a Peace with Saladine upon these Articles;
That Saladine should enjoy all but Tire and Ptolemais; to which with their
Territories remaining in the hands of the Christians he should give no
molestation. Richard having thus settled Affairs there, returning into Europe,
was taken by his Enemies, from whom he was ransomed with a vast sum of Money,
and at last arriving in England, he had many a Battle with the King of France,
much against the Pope's mind, who was grieved that so fierce a War should be
raised among Christians at so unseasonable a time, when Saladine being now
dead, it was thought to have been a very fit time to have recovered Jerusalem.
It is reported of that illustrious Prince, that one Ceremony at his Funeral was
this: His Shirt was hung upon the end of a Pike and carried before the Corpse,
and one with a loud Voice cried; Behold, Saladine the mighty Lord of Asia, of
all his Realms and of all his Wealth, takes no more than this along with him. A
spectacle well befitting so great a Man, to whom nothing was wanting, but the
Character of a Christian, to have rendered him a most consummate Prince. Upon
the death of Saladine, as was said before, Celestine had fresh hopes, that
Jerusalem might be regained, and so urged the Emperor Henry, who ( Tancred
being dead) succeeded to the Kingdom of Sicily, to undertake the Enterprise,
that though he could not go in person, yet he sent thither with great speed a
good Army under the Archbishop of Mentz and the Duke of Saxony. The King of
France would have gone too, but that the Saracens who inhabited Mauritania [now
the Moors] had crossed the Streights and having taken the King of Castile
Prisoner, had possessed themselves of that part of Spain now called Granado;
where the French feared they would hardly continue long quiet but go near to
infest the neighboring Nations, and therefore would not draw their forces out
of Europe. The Germans however arriving in Asia, fortified Berylus, which had
been deserted by the Saracens, and raised their Siege from before Joppa, from
whence when they were about to go to Jerusalem, Celestine this most holy Pope,
who never let slip any opportunity for the recovery of the Holy Land, died,
upon which they desisted. Notwithstanding all these troubles and these great
charges of War, our Pope built two Palaces, one near S. Peter's, the other near
S. John in the Lateran, fit for the reception of Popes. The brazen Gates yet
remaining in the Lateran over against the Sancta Sanctorum, which were made by
his Order and at his charge. Moreover, he made Viterbo a City, raising the
Church there to a Bishops Sea, to which Diocese he added Toscanella and
Centum-cellae. Celestine died when he had been Pope six years seven months and
eleven days, to the great grief of all good Men, and was buried in St. Peter's
Church.

INNOCENT III.
INNOCENT the Third, born in Anagni, Son of Trasimund of the Family of the
Conti, was for his great Learning and many Virtues made a Cardinal by
Celestine, and upon his death was by general consent chosen Pope. Which he had
no sooner arrived to, but he applied his thoughts to the Holy War, and by
Letters, Messengers, large Promises and Largesses endeavored to contain the
Germans within the bounds of their duty, who after the decease of their
Emperor Henry were all in a mutiny: but 'twas to no purpose, for they
disdaining any Commander, left Asia and to the extreme damage of the Christian
Cause, returned to Europe; whereby those of Joppa especially suffered most, for
being destitute of help, the Turks and Saracens came upon 'em, and while they
were about to yield, they took the City by force and cut them all off, rasing
it to the ground. In Germany also all things seemed to threaten confusion, some
of the Electors stickling hard for Otho Duke of Saxony, others standing
resolutely for Philip a German, Duke of Tuscany, who was left, by Henry upon
his death bed, Guardian to his young Son: And to improve this mischief to the
height, the King of France took part with Philip and the King of England was
for Otho. Innocent then to obviate the impending miseries that must follow upon
such a state of Affairs, confirms Otho in the Empire, as duly elected by those
who had just suffrage. Philip notwithstanding would not lay down his
pretensions, but strengthened himself with good Garrisons both in Tuscany in
Italy, and Schwaben in Germany. The like with a more than Womanly fortitude
also did Constantia, the relict of Henry, in Sicily, on the behalf of her Son
Frederic II. yet a Child, rendering the Frontier-places defensible against any
Enemy. Though these Animosities every day grew higher, yet Innocent still
thought of renewing the War in the Holy Land, and to that Expedition he stirred
up Boniface Marquess of Montferrat, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Henry Count S.
Paul and Lewis of Savoy; who all arriving at Venice, could not persuade that
State to rig out their Fleet for the Service, till they had all promised to
recover Zara for them, which again was revolted to the Hungarians; the Fleet
then being fitted out, they first routed those of Trieste who piratically
infested the Sea, and then after a long Siege re-took Zara. While these things
were acted in the Adriatic, Alexius dethrones his Brother Isaac Emperor of
Constantinople, (who had been a good Friend to the Latins) and putting out his
Eyes throws him in Prison. But his young Son Alexius escaped by flight to the
Christian Camp, and begs the assistance of those Commanders for his Father
against the Usurper, which they consented to give him, on condition, that his
end being achieved, the Greek Church should be subjected to the Latin, and
that thirty thousand Marks of Gold should be paid for the damage which Emanuel
the late Emperor had done to the French and Venetians; and thus when they had
agreed, they set sail from Zara and passing by Candy, that Island submitted
itself, which young Alexius bestowed upon his Kinsman Boniface of Montferrat.
Hence they proceeded to Constantinople, which while they besieged by Sea and
Land, Theodore Lascari Son-in-law to Alexius endeavoring to sally forth, was
driven back, and the City after two days close Siege was taken by storm,
Alexius got away in the night, leaving behind him a great quantity of Gold in
the custody of Irene, a Nun. Isaac the Father with his Son Alexius then entered
the City, but lived not long after; the Father dying of sickness and the Son
being poisoned. Upon this Boniface of Montferrat gets the Kingdom of Thessaly,
but wanting Money he was persuaded by Baldwin to sell Candy to the Venetians,
which he did, and having received a vast sum for it, he beleaguered Adrianople
then oppressed by the Usurper; but this gave so much distaste to the Walachians
who live on the further side of the Danube and to the Bulgarians, that fearing
the number of his Enemies, he took his way to Constantinople, intending to go
meet the Turkish Sultan of Iconium, who having taken the City Satellia from the
Greeks; did much and continually incommode the Christians. Innocent encompassed
thus with Enemies raised what Forces soever he could to reinforce from time to
time our Armies: but when he heard that Hilminoline a Saracen, with a great
Fleet had crossed the Streights into Spain and had sat down with his Army
before Toledo, he published a Bull inciting all those that could bear Arms to
oppose this torrent; whereupon numbers of French men got together in order to
assist the Spaniards. but perceiving they were not welcome to them, they
returned home; so that Hilminoline in a short time overrun all Spain after a
hostile manner, and came as far as Arles and Avignon, filling all places where
he came with spoil and slaughter. This Calamity roused the four Kings of Spain,
that is, of Castile, Aragon, Portugal and Navarre, so that, joining their
forces together, they set upon the Saracens and gave them a total rout, leaving
nothing to 'em of what they had but only Granado. At this time sprung up a
Heresy at Toulouse, which by Innocent's means, the blessed Dominic, (who was
afterward made a Saint) repressed, with the aid of Simon Montfort; for it had
gone so far, that he had need of the help of the Arm of Flesh as well as of
Arguments and spiritual Weapons. Mean time Otho Emperor of the Romans was
every where worsted by Philip, and at last besieged by him in the City of
Cologn, where he making in Person a successless Sally, the Citizens shut him
out and surrendered to Philip, who yet did not long outlive the Action, being
soon after treacherously made away by the Count Palatine. Upon his death, the
Electors chose the Duke of Saxony Emperor, named Otho V. who the next year was
crowned by Innocent at Rome. The Venetians now being very powerful at Sea, and
the State having greater matters in hand, private Men had leave to make
themselves Masters of what Islands they pleased, provided they continued their
Allegiance to the Government, upon which many Citizens entered upon several
Isles in the Ionian and Aegaean Seas, and at the public charge were seized
Corfu, Modone and Corone. Otho having, as is aforesaid, received the Imperial
Crown of the Pope, against all justice and right, possesses himself of
Montefiascone, Radicofano, and several other Towns belonging to the Church, and
then marches into the Kingdom of Naples, designing to take that Kingdom from
Frederic II. who was young and as yet under Guardians; which so angered the
Pope, that having first admonished him without any effect he excommunicated him
at last and deprived him of his Imperial Title; and the King of Bohemia with
the Arch bishops of Mentz and Triers, by the persuasion of the Duke of Austria
and Landgrave of Turingia, choose Frederick King of Sicily, then in the
twentieth year of his age, Emperor in his stead. Otho hereupon returns into
Germany, to take care of his Paternal Estate, by which means Innocent had an
opportunity to his mind to recover whatsoever he had taken from the Church.
Those of Candy now rebelling against the Venetians, they were by force of Arms
reduced An. Dom. 1214. and brought into the constitution of a Colony, many
Citizens being sent to live among 'em and to observe 'em. At this time Frederic
II. came to Rome to receive the Imperial Diadem, but could not prevail with him
to bestow it upon him, so he returned into Germany and there was by the
Archbishop of Mentz Crowned King of Germany, and then made an Alliance and
League with the King of France; which added so much to the strength of that
King, that he invaded the Realm of John King of England, with such success,
that John was fain to make use of Divine aids as well as humane force, to
resist him, by making his Kingdoms of England and Ireland tributary to the
Church of Rome, in the payment of one hundred Marks yearly, which for some
years after was performed. Frederic now in pursuit of Otho, who had been
totally defeated by the King of France, takes in Aquisgrane, and there by
Authority received from Pope Innocent he sets up the Standard of the Holy
Cross, promising speedily to march to the assistance of the Christians against
the Saracens in Asia: beside that he might show with what a grateful mind he
had received so many benefits of the Holy Sea, he gave the Country of Fondi to
the Church of Rome, and what had before been given and afterward usurped from
it, he restored. But the Pope taking notice of the increase of the Saracens
Power in Asia, called a full Council in the Lateran, where were present the
Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople, seventy Archbishops, four hundred
Bishops, twelve Abbats, eight hundred Priors of Convents, and the Ambassadors
of the Greek and Roman Emperors, with those of the Kings of Jerusalem, France,
Spain, England and Cyprus. Many things here came under debate, but nothing
could be determined, because the Pisans and Genoeses were then at War by Sea,
as those of Lombardy were among themselves at Land. The Pope therefore took a
journey thitherward to compose their differences, but died in the way at
Perugia, when he had been Pope eighteen years seven months and sixteen days. He
was a Man most exact in his life, a proof of which is, that none of his Acts
which approved or disanull'd any thing, were by any of his Successors reversed.
He decreed many things for the reformation of manners both in Clergy and Laity;
and wrote Books concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the unhappiness of Man's condition, beside that he was wont to make
Sermons upon remarkable occasions and solemn days. He disallowed a Book written
by Abbat Joachim, which contained some Heterodox Opinions; and condemned the
Errors of Almericus a Heretic, that with some of his followers was burnt at
Paris, who among other false Notions maintained, that those Idea's which are in
the divine Mind were created and did create others, whereas according to S.
Augustine, there is nothing in the Mind of God but what is Eternal and
unchangeable; beside he said, that to one who was in a state of Grace no Sin is
charged. Great satisfaction this Pope took in observing the Virtue and Learning
of S. Dominic, who was Founder of the Order of Preaching Friars, and of S.
Francis of Assisi, who was Author of the Order of Friars Minors. It Is said,
that in his time lived Gratian who compiled the Decrees, and Papias the
Lombard, who collected a Latin Alphabetical Dictionary; and indeed of Papias we
have no reason to doubt, but for Gratian, some Authors place him in the times
of Pope Alexander III. Now lest you should think that Innocent in so long a
Popedom neglected works of Piety, I must tell you that at his charge the
Hospital of the Holy Ghost was built and endowed with so fair an Income as it
is, for the relief of Pilgrims and sick People, and for the Education of
Fatherless Children and Foundlings. He adorned S. Peter's Altar with Mosaic
Work, as the representation of him and his Cipher in the Arch do testify.
Moreover, he gave to each Church in Rome a Pound weight in Silver to make
Chalices for Divine Service, and he repaired the Church of S. Sixtus then
almost falling with age. The Enemies of his good Name indeed say that he did
this, only for fear Men should say that he laid out all his Money in building of
the Torre de Conti, which he erected for the honor of his Family. However that
be, it is certain he showed himself in all the parts of his life an excellent
Man and one worthy to be reckoned among the best Popes.

HONORIVS III.
HONORIVS the Third, a Roman, Son of one Almeric, was by a general suffrage
chosen Pope; to whom Peter Emperor of Constantinople coming with his Wife
Jole, he was Crowned in the Church of S. Laurence without the Walls, and
immediately John Colonna a Cardinal, was pitched upon to go into Asia with
those forces which Pope Innocent in his lifetime had got together for that
end. The Christian Princes by the persuasion of Honorius now went to Acon,
particularly Andrew King of Hungary, who to that purpose borrowed the Venetian
Shipping and by way of requital passed over to 'em the right to all that part
of Dalmatia, which had been in the possession of the Duke of Austria. With
Andrew went Henry Count of Nevers and Walter Chamberlain to the King of France.
All these holding a Council of War together with John King of Jerusalem, they
resolved to lay Siege to Damiata in Egypt, and thither they went, in the month
of May 1218. This City was once called Aeliopolis from Aelius Pertinax, who
environed it with a trebble Wall, and deriving a little stream of the Nile
about it made it stand in an Island. The Suburbs hereof were large and full of
Merchandise, which the Christian Soldiers plundered; but soon after upon a
West-wind the Nile rose so high, that their Provisions were spoiled, and they
began to be in great want of necessaries; especially because the Sultan who was
encamped not far off, had beset all the passages to hinder any supplies coming
to 'em. The Christians under this difficulty march their Army against the
Sultan, who in great fear straight leaves his Camp stored with plenty of all
things and retreats, leaving them free to besiege the Town which he at first
came to relieve. Cordirius also Son to the great Sultan, despairing of being
able to defend Jerusalem, if the Christians took Damiata, broke down the Walls
of the City and left nothing standing but the Tower of David and the Temple of
God; only he did not violate the Holy Sepulcre, moved (as we may suppose) by
the entreaties of the Christians that inhabited those places. While our men
attacked Damiata, the Sultan returns with a much greater Army and pitches his
Camp between Cairo and Damiata; from which he could not be provoked to Battle
by either the challenges or reproaches of our Men; which so enraged the French,
that without any Order they set upon him and received great loss.
Notwithstanding all this, the Siege was still pushed on, till after fifteen
months lying before it it was taken by the Christians and sacked: so that the
Soldiery was wonderfully enriched with the spoil. In the mean time Honorius had
at Rome confirmed the Order of S. Dominic upon his request, and had
Anathematized Frederic II. because (after his Mother Constantia was dead, who
was wont to restrain him within his duty) he came to Rome, and without right or
reason laid wast the Pope's Territories. These differences between the Pope and
the Emperor being discovered to the Sultan, moved him to take the opportunity,
and accordingly he raises a greater Army than ever he had before, thinking the
Christians would not now show their heads; but Cardinal John Colonna roused
them with his persuasions, so that they took up Arms and went to meet the Enemy
at the Nile: where when they were come, the Sultan feigned himself afraid to
cope with 'em, putting it off till the time of the Increase of Nile, which
followed a little while after; and the Cataracts of that River opened and so
overflowed the whole Country, that it was in no place less than a Cubit in
depth. This so terrified the Christians, that they were glad to accept of Peace
upon condition, that Damiata should be re delivered to the Egyptians, the
Prisoners on both sides be discharged, and the piece of the Holy Cross then in
the hands of those Barbarians should be restored to the Christians, and they
suffered to retire quietly to Acon and Tire. Thus was Damiata which was begun
to be inhabited by the Christians upon the Feast of the Purification of the
Blessed Virgin, delivered up according to the Articles, on the Birthday of the
same, An. Dom. 1221. In which year the Tartars a Nation of Scythia (or as
others will have it, of the mountainous parts of India) leaving their own
Country, ravaged through Parthia, Media, Persia, Assyria, and came as far as
Sarmatia; where not far from Palus Meotis driving out the old Inhabitants they
seated themselves. The Christian Commanders finding at this time that nothing
was to be attempted in Asia, the Enemy being too powerful, they together with
John Colonna returned into Italy, and were soon followed by John King of
Jerusalem, who came to Rome and was by the Pope kindly entertained and had
large Presents made to him. Afterward he gave his Daughter which he had by his
Wife Jole in marriage to the Emperor Frederic, though he was under the Pope's
Anathema, and passed over all the Title he had by hereditary right to the
Kingdom of Jerusalem to him by way of Dowry. Hence it is, that all the
succeeding Kings of Sicily and Naples, use the Title of that Kingdom also,
though they make their claim to it with words only, and not with Arms. John
then took a Journey into France, where he had better luck than he was wont to
have, for Philip King of France bequeathed in his last Will forty thousand
pounds in Silver to him, and as much to the grand Master of the Templers; and
with the help of this Money he went into Spain to perform a Vow he had made to
S. James of Compostella, where he took to Wife Berengaria Sister to the King of
Spain. This year died S. Dominic, that holy Man, at Bononia; and Frederic
declared his Son Henry, a Boy but of ten years old, King of Germany. Our
Honorius being a little quiet from foreign troubles repaired the Church of S.
Laurence without the Walls, that is called Sancta Sanctorum and the Church of
S. Vivian; beside he built a Palace at Casa Marii, and adorned the Cibory
[Altar-Canopy or Covering] of S. Peter with excellent workmanship. He also
compiled the Decretal Epistles, and confirmed the Order of S. Francis, who
within two years after was canonized by Pope Gregory. After this blessed manner
did Honorius lead his life, and as became a careful and a good Shepherd, and
dying when he had been Pope ten years seven months and thirteen days, he was
buried in the Church of S. Mary Maggiore. After his death there happened so
great Earthquakes that in the Monti Salvii five thousand persons were slain by
the falls of Houses and by the Stones that were thrown into the Vales from the
tops of the Mountains.

GREGORY IX.
GREGORY the Ninth, born at Anagni, a City of Campania, of the Family of the
Conti, and Nephew to Innocent III. was created Pope at the Settizonio [a place
in Rome so called from seven rows of Pillars there placed by the Emperor
Severus.] Which was no sooner done, but he dispatched away monitory Letters to
require Frederic the Emperor under pain of an Anathema, that he should with
the first opportunity march with his Army into Asia, there to endeavor the
recovery of the holy City. Frederic received the Admonition and indeed promised
so to do; accordingly giving out Orders that all who had entered themselves of
the Crusado should by a day appointed repair to Brundusium, with their Arms.
Great numbers met there from all Countries, particularly from Germany came the
Lantgrave of Hesse, who (waiting there for the arrival of Frederic out of
Sicily, where he staid and prolonged the time feigning himself sick) died
himself and a great number of his Soldiers; and as soon as the news of his
death was brought to Frederic, he then immediately set sail for Brundusium and
seized into his hands whatsoever the Lantgrave had left of value, which act
plainly detected the fraudulence of his pretense. However he continued to make
the World believe that he was really intent upon the holy Expedition, and after
the rapacious action aforesaid upon the goods of the Lantgrave, he hoisted Sail
and commanded the rest that were there to follow him; but in a little while
after returned to Brundusium, forced (as he pretended) by the tempestuous
weather. 1. The noise of this Expedition moved John King of Jerusalem and
Berengaria his Wife (knowing well that they did what would be very acceptable
to the Pope) to take a journey to Bononia, meaning to make use of some Shipping
of the Venetians to carry him to Asia; but the Pope understood well enough the
tricks of Ferdinand and what little credit was to be given him, and lest John
should quite lose his labor and come for nothing, he conferred upon him the
Government of the Exarchate of Ravenna, and ratified the Sentence of
Excommunication which was pronounced by his Predecessor Honorius III. against
the Emperor Frederic, and had done worse things against him, if himself had
not been under some fearful apprehensions of an Invasion from the Moors, who
were then out at Sea with a powerful Fleet, but were afterward vanquished by
Ferdinand of Aragon with so great loss on their side, that in a short time he
possessed himself of Majorca one of the Islands called the Baleares, and took
the City Valentia, driving out the Saracens and compelling the Inhabitants to
receive the Christian Religion. At last yet Frederic was, what by the
entreaties of his Friends and the threats of the Pope, wrought upon to begin
his Voyage, sailing first to Cyprus, which afforded some hopes to the Christian
Soldiers that were in Asia, whom he had so often deceived. But while he staid
there sending out Spies to bring him an account of the strength of the Soldan's
Forces, his General Rainaldo, whom he had left in Sicily invades the Pope's
Territories and takes several Towns in the Marca di Ancona. The Pope was then
at Perugia, designing to go to Assisi, there in person to examine the truth of
those reports which had been of Miracles wrought by that holy Man, S. Francis;
and when he found what he had heard concerning him to be really true, he
canonized him with great solemnity, in the presence of great numbers of
Christian People who came together for that end. While these things were acting
by the Pope, another Commander of the Emperors by siding with a Faction seizes
Fuligno, but was quickly expelled by the Power of some good Men who stood up
for the holy Church. By this time Frederic was got to Acon, and from thence
solicited the Pope earnestly by Letters and Messengers, to be absolved by him,
and promised if he could obtain his request, to be ever after his most humble
Servant: but the Pope being well aware of the crafty temper of the Man, not
only warns the Christian Soldiers to have a care of him as of one that was
always plotting mischief; but having raised an Army he sends it under John King
of Jerusalem against Rainaldo, who then was harassing the Marca di Ancona and
filled all places with rapine and devastation; and with other Forces under
Cardinal Colonna he drove the Emperors Lieutenant, with his mercenary
Saracens, out of S. Germans, and had all the places from thence to Capua
delivered to him by surrender in a short time. These successes of the Pope so
affrighted those of Vmbria and Marca di Ancona who had served under Frederic,
that they deserted whatsoever they held and retreated into Naples. In the mean
time Frederic was returned from Asia to Brundusium, and being now very desirous
of Peace, offered his requests to the Pope, that he would please to take him
into favor, to acknowledge him Emperor, and a true Feudatary of the Church for
the Kingdom of Sicily. Which he at last obtained, but not till he had paid down
one hundred and twenty thousand ounces of Gold for the use of the Church of
Rome, to make good the damages he had done it; and these Conditions he was
forced to come to Anagni and there to implore of his Holiness. While Gregory
(as became a faithful Shepherd) was thus careful on all hands and was gone to
Perugia, to settle matters in that City then much disordered by some banished
persons who were newly returned, there arose a greater Sedition and Heresy at
Rome than had been known before: for Hannibal of the Family of the Hannibali
joining with some Priests, was made use of to head the People of Rome in a
Conspiracy they carried on against the Church of God; but the divine Vengeance
speedily put a stop to their wicked designs; for the River Tiber rising over
his Banks, did them much mischief, and this was accompanied with so devouring a
Plague, that hardly one man in ten was left alive. The Pope coming to Rome,
behaved himself with wonderful Clemency, and forgave the People of Rome their
fault, only putting Hannibal out of the Senate and convicting the Priests of
their Heresy, he brought them to recant their Error and to profess as true
Christians ought to do: then turning his thoughts to adorning the City, he
caused the old Common-shores to be cleansed and repaired, and new ones to be
made, at the same time yet consulting not only the Ornament but the
healthiness of the place. Then leaving Rome, for his healths sake, at Riete (as
some will have it) he canonized S. Dominic who founded the Order of Friars
Predicants, and at Spoleto, he did the same by S. Antony, who was born at
Lisbon, but died at Padua, and was the second after S. Francis, head of the
Order of Minors; hence he returned to Anagni, and fortified the circumjacent
Town, not a little apprehending the factious humor of the Romans, whose chief
Senator, after the ancient manner, had proposed a Law to be made and the People
had passed it, that should oblige all the Towns lying about Rome to pay a
certain Tax to themselves; the Pope hereupon fearlesly takes his journey to
Rome (though the Cardinals dissuaded him) meaning to endeavor by admonition or
correction to bring the Romans off from these insolences: but when he found it
signified nothing what he did, he departed to Riete, whither also came the
Emperor Frederic; and they having discourse about the present state of
Affairs, they both came to this resolution, that they would join their forces
together and unanimously march against the Romans. But at this time (as he had
always used to do) Frederic put a trick upon the Pope; for returning himself
into Germany, he left Order with his Men, that they should in all junctures act
as the Romans would have 'em. The Pope was much moved at this treachery of his,
and proposed a good Reward to any German Soldiers who would leave their Leaders
and serve under him, whereupon so great multitudes came over to his side, that
the Romans dared not any where show themselves in open field against the Army
of the Church. Gregory having by this means recovered the Patrimony of St.
Peter and the Contrada de' Sabini, he slighted the Ambassadors of the Sultan,
who came humbly to sue for Peace, and sent Friars of the Orders of S. Francis
and S. Dominic throughout Europe, by their preaching to stir up the Christians
to the War against the Saracens, by whose means greater numbers were got
together, than ever were before; and in the mean time that it was under debate
who should command this great Army, the Pope canonized Elizabeth Daughter to
the King of Hungary, a most holy Woman and famous for the Miracles wrought by
her. At length Theobald King of Navarre, Almeric Montfort, Henry Count of Bari
and Campania with the Christian forces passing through Germany and Hungary,
arrived first at Constantinople, where crossing the Bosporus, they came at last
to Ptolemais, laying the Country waste far and near. But they were not long
after set upon by a vast Army of the Enemy, and compelled to retreat defending
themselves from their pursuers for two days, and there lost all their best Men.
Thus in a short time came this Expedition to nothing, which had cost so much
industry to be brought about, merely through the unskilfulness of the
Commanders. The Pope was extremely troubled at this Calamity, and resolved to
return to Rome (at the earnest instance of the Citizens) there to put up
Prayers and supplications to appease the Divine Wrath, which the sins of
Mankind had provoked; but his intention was frustrated by Peter Frangipani, who
being of the Imperial Faction, opposed him; so he left Perugia and went to
Viterbo, to meet the Emperor with an Army, who (as intelligence was brought
him) had already entered Lombardy, and without any just cause wasted the
Territories of the Confederate Cities, and was about to lay Siege to some of
'em whose Forces were almost broken already, having received one mischief upon
the neck of another from Ezelino who then Lorded it over Padua. This Ezelino
surnamed the Roman, was Grandson to a German Commander (who under Otho III.
led an Army of his Countrymen into Italy,) and now having a body of Men which
he received of Frederic, under his command, procured to himself a great
Dominion in the Country of Lombardy, bringing under his jurisdiction Treviso,
Padoua, Vincenza, Verona and Brescia; and Frederic not showing any regard to
the stipulations and agreements which had theretofore been ratified between his
Ancestors and them, makes War upon the Milaneses and the associated Cities, and
in a great Battle fought between 'em at a place called Nova Corte he overcame
'em with great loss on their side; which put the Pope so much out of hopes of
success, that upon hearing this ill news of the misfortune of his Friends and
Allies, he began to think of retiring to Rome, though his coming thither was
opposed by one John Cincio, a potent Citizen and Senator, whose intolerable
arrogance yet was so curbed by James Capocio another Roman Citizen, that the
Pope was received into Rome with great splendour and magnificence. This was that
James, whose name is yet to be seen and read in the little Chapel of Mosaic
Work which was built at his charge in the Church of S. Mary Maggiore, in which
also was buried Peter Capocio who was a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, and
while he lived a bitter Enemy of this Schismatical Emperor Frederic: at whose
expense the Hospital of S. Anthony not far from the aforesaid Church and the
College for Scholars at Perugia (now called la Sapientia) was also erected.
Gregory having quieted the minds of Men in the City, again pronounces an
Anathema against Frederic and declares him to have forfeited his right to the
Empire and deprives him of it; then he sends for the Ambassadors of the States
of Venice and Genoa, (between whom there was so great a quarrel as it was
feared a War would ensue) to mediate their differences, which he did so
effectually as that he procured an Agreement between 'em to a Peace, upon
condition, that without mutual consent neither of the two States should make
Peace with the Emperor of Constantinople; that they should be Enemies to the
Enemies of each other and join their Forces upon every occasion for the common
defense; and this Treaty to be in force and complied withal for nine years by
them both, under pain of Excommunication to be denounced by the Pope upon the
Infractor. About this time died Baldwin who upon the Death of John had
succeeded to the Empire of Greece, and made shift to hold it for two years; but
with so great difficulty by reason of his poor Treasury, that he could hardly
defend himself from his Enemies, being forced to deliver his Son for a Pledge to
the Venetian Merchants for Money that he had borrowed of 'em, and to make Money
of the Lead that belonged to the Churches; beside he sold to the Venetians, who
were wealthy and able to purchase 'em, the Spear with which our Savior
Christ's Body was pierced and the Sponge which was reached to him to drink out
of Frederic had a great spite at these Venetians, because they were on the
Pope's side, and drove them into their Marshes (where their City stands) for
security and did them great damage; but in the mean while happened a general
revolt of the Cities of Lombardy, by the Procurement and instigation of Gregory
Monte-longo, who was Legate at Bononia, and Ferrara, which had revolted before
from the Pope to the Emperor was retaken by them, though Salinguerra a valiant
Commander was in it and made a brave defense. As soon as it was taken, it was
put into the hands of Azo of the House of Este, who was a considerable Person
in this Enterprise, to be governed by him in the name of the Church, An. Dom.
1240. This so alarmed the Emperor who was then at Pisa, that being under great
uncertainty whom to look upon as Friends to himself or Wellwishers to the Pope,
he divided first the Cities of Italy into two Factions, giving the name of
Guelphs to those who were for the Pope's Interest, and that of Gibellines to
them that were for the Imperial. These most pernicious names of distinction,
invented surely for the mischief of mankind, were first made use of at Pistoia,
where when the Magistrates expelled the Panzatichi, who were Gibellines, out of
the City, there chanced to be two Brothers Germans, the one of which whose name
was Guelph, was for the Pope; the other for the Emperor and his name was
Gibel; from which these two Parties were discriminated by those different
appellations. On the other side those of Arezzo and Sienna drive out the
Guelphs, whose example being followed by many other Cities of Italy, gave
occasion and rise to a worse than Civil War. Several Cities after this revolted
from the Pope as well in Vmbria as in Tuscany, and particularly the Citizens of
Viterbo threw off their obedience. The Romans also would fain have been doing
the same thing, but that the Pope carrying the heads of the Apostles SS. Peter
and Paul, through the City in Procession, moved the People to commiserate the
State of the Church, and then making a most excellent Oration in S. Peter's
Church, he had the power and good fortune by it to persuade even the Seditious
(who were ready to mutiny) to take his part and to list themselves under the
holy Cross for the defense of the Church of God. These, when some time after
Frederic came in hostile manner before the Walls of Rome, gave him a repulse,
which so enraged him that whatsoever Prisoners he had taken he put to death
with diverse tortures, and retired toward Beneventum, which City he took by
force, sacked, and dismantled it. Then returning by the Via Latina with his
heart full of fury toward the City, by the way he plundered the Monastery of
Monte-Cassino and turned out the Monks; he destroyed also with fire and sword
the City of Sora, formerly belonging to the Samnites, situate at the head of
the River Garigliano, and pillaged any thing that belonged to the Templers
wherever he could meet with it. He was so great a Lover of the Saracens, that
he made use of them rather than any other People in his Wars, made Magistrates
of them, and gave them a City for themselves, which is called to this day
Nocera di Pagani. He threatened the Brother of the King of Tunis, because he
was come as far as Palermo to receive the Sacrament of Baptism. By a sudden
Onset he also made himself Master of Ravenna, which appertained to the Church.
All which Gregory well considering, he appointed a Council to be holden in the
Lateran, there to find out means to depose Frederic; but the Emperor had so
beset all the ways, that, with the help of the Pisans, he took several
Cardinals and Prelates as they were traveling both by Sea and Land and cast
them into Prison. Which so grieved the good Pope, that he lived not long after,
dying when he had been Pope fourteen years and three months. There happened an
Eclipse of the Sun a little before his death greater than ever was seen.
Raymund of Barcelona flourished in his time and assisted him in compiling his
Book of Decretals, whom many Authors so commend that nothing can be added to
his Praise.

CELESTINE IV.
CELESTINE the Fourth, a Milanese, of the Family of the Castiglioni, Bishop of
Sabina, famous in his time for his exemplary life and great Learning, being
very old and sickly, was yet chosen Pope in the room of Gregory; but died on
the eighteenth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, to
the great disappointment of all Men, who hoped to see much better times under
his Government. After his decease the Sea was vacant twenty one months; for
those who were then in the highest Authority in the Church of God did not think
good to elect any Man to the Popedom, so long as the Cardinals which were taken
by Frederic, were detained in Prison. During this vacancy of the Holy Sea,
Frederic overran the Marca di Ancona and Romagna, as far as Faenza and
Bologna, which after some resistance he took by force, and transferred the
University which was at Bologna, to Padoua: and beside gave many troubles and
did great mischiefs to all those that were looked upon as Favorers of the
Churches Cause. Then Baldwin Emperor of Constantinople, despairing of managing
the Asian Affairs to any purpose, together with Raymund Earl of Toulouse, came
into Italy, and what with his entreaties and by reason of the respect which
Frederic (who was then at Parma) had for him, he procured that the Cardinals
and other Ecclesiastical persons who were kept under custody by him, should be
set free; who in a little time after had a meeting at Anagni to consider of the
Choice of a new Pope.

INNOCENT IV.
INNOCENT the Fourth, before called Sinibaldo, of the Family of the Fieschi,
Counts of Lavagna, was created Pope at Anagni; at the news of which Frederic
was not very well pleased; for he knew him to be a Man of resolution and of a
great Spirit, they having lived together familiarly for some time before, and
he was very much afraid he would call him to account for his past actions: So
that when some of his Friends were complementing him upon this occasion, he is
said to have told 'em, that Cardinal Sinibaldo was indeed his special Friend,
but now being made Pope, he was his bitter Enemy. Innocent having put on the
Pontifical Robes, comes to Rome, where by the way he is met by all the Nobility
and Men of note and received with universal Acclamations, and having performed
all the Ceremonies of the Consecration and Coronation which are usual in such
cases, he begins to discourse of making Peace with Frederic, Baldwin also
interposing his Authority to bring it about: But the business met with many
delays, till after four months had been spent in negotiating, the result was
this, that the Pope should remove to the City of Castellana, and tarry there a
while till the Emperor came thither also, personally to treat about the Peace.
But Innocent receiving certain information, that Frederic had laid snares and
Ambushes for him both at Rome and in his way to that place, he made use of some
shipping of the Genoeses, which then lay in the Port of Civita-vecchia, and
with a prosperous gale arrived in France, where at Lions he was received very
generously by all People and with great kindness, and at that City he appoints
a Council to be holden, An. Dom. 1246. to which he cites the Emperor by
Nuntios and Letters first, and at last by an Officer for the purpose, setting
him under a penalty if he were disobedient. In answer to this the Emperor
only sends thither a Civilian of Sinuessa, to desire of the Pope some longer
time, promising shortly to begin his Journey thitherward; and so much time as
was fit was allowed him. But his craft appearing and that he only sought an
occasion to scandalize and ruin the Pope, by universal consent he was declared
to be deprived of his Title to the Empire and his other Dominions. This
Frederic took with so great indignation, that he commanded the Houses and
Palaces of some of Pope Innocent's kinsfolks (who by his advice were removed
from Parma, where their Estates lay, to Piacenza) to be pulled down, and then
making a League with the Duke of Burgundy, he resolved to go to Lions, and for
that purpose he prepared a vast Retinue; with which he came as far as Turin,
where news was brought him, that those persons who had been banished from
Parma, were returned and having defeated their fellow-Citizens near the River
Taro, had entered the City by force and made great slaughter of the contrary
party. This caused Frederic to break off his intended Journey and to return
into Italy, where gathering into one Army all his Forces which had been
dispersed through the whole Country, he made up a body of sixty thousand Men,
and with these he marches to invest the City of Parma, which the associated
Cities being solicitous to defend, they put into it very great reliefs under
the command of the Pope's Legate; who having with great obstinacy sustained the
Siege for two years, at last making a bold sally, when Frederic expected no
such thing, he utterly routed and destroyed his Army and made himself master of
his Camp, which was plentifully stored with all manner of necessaries, because
Frederic had fortified it after the manner of a City with Outworks, designing
when he should have plundered and rased the City of Parma; against which he had
conceived the utmost hatred, to build a City in the place where his Camp stood,
(and where he had already coined pieces of Money called Victorines) and to name
it, the City Victoria. According to some Authors, himself had much ado to
escape to Cremona from this great defeat, in which he lost a Crown of
inestimable value and several Vessels of Gold of huge weight; but he durst not
enter the Walls of Cremona, for fear of the Cremoneses, many of whose
fellow-Citizens had lost their lives in that Engagement. Innocent being
advertised of this great blow given to the fortune of Frederic, and that his
heart was so broken with it, that he let himself loose to all manner of
voluptuousness, and made himself Gardens of Pleasure, where he kept a number of
beautiful Women and Eunuchs, he took pity upon the Man, and dismissing the
Councils without farther prosecution of him, he dispatched Nuncios through
France and other Countries to persuade the people to engage in the Holy War and
to follow Lewis King of France who was preparing for an Expedition into Asia,
which he had promised and vowed to perform when he lay under a great fit of
sickness. But the Tartarians put a stop for a while to this Journey, who with
two numerous Bodies of men had entered Europe and Asia; where those who invaded
the latter, having passed through the Countries of Georgia and Armenia, pierced
as far as Iconium, then the Royal Seat of the Turkish Princes: the other party
which entered Europe, under the conduct of one Batto, ravaged all through Poland
and Hungary, and then turning toward the Euxine Sea, they depopulated the vast
Realms of Russia and Gazaria. At the same time the Grossoni, a people of
Arabia, by the instigation of the Sultan of Babylon, set upon the Templars and
put 'em to flight, and without any trouble took Jerusalem, which was before
stripped of its Walls, putting the Christians that were in it to the Sword and
dishonouring our Savior's Sepulcher with all manner of filthiness. The tidings
of which moved Innocent to urge King Lewis to hasten his march toward Asia,
with those Forces he had already got together for that intent. He complied, and
arrived at Cyprus, but it was at so unseasonable a time of the year, that he
was forced to take up his Winter quarters there; but as soon as Spring came on,
he sailed to Damiata, where he got the better of the Soldan's Navy, and
defeated his Landforces who would have hindered his coming on Shore, where he
pitched his Camp for so long as till the rest of his Troops could arrive from
Italy. But these were very much retarded by the fury of Frederic, who weaning
himself after a while from the pleasures in which he had been immersed, takes
up his Arms again and fills the whole Country with confusion, and compells
several Cities in which were many factious Persons, to throw off their
subjection to the Pope; the chief of which were the Inhabitants of Forli,
Arimino, Vrbin, and all the Marca di Ancona: In Vmbria none stood to their
Allegiance but those of Todi, Perugia and Assisi: and in Tuscany only the
Florentines were on the Pope's side; who therefore were so harassed by the Army
of Frederic, that they were forced at last to banish so many of their
fellow-Citizens as were of the Guelphs Faction; The Bologneses had better luck,
for giving Battle to Henry one of Frederic's Generals, they overthrew him and
cut him to pieces. Some write that 'twas at this time that Frederic passing
into Sicily, died at Palermo; while others affirm that he was taken desperately
sick in Puglia, and when he began to recover, he was smothered to death with a
Pillow by one Manfred, who was his natural Son, begotten upon a Noble-Woman his
Concubine. Howsoever this was, it is certain that some time before his death he
had made Manfred Prince of Tarento, and had bestowed upon him, beside that
Principality, many other Towns and Territories.

He left Conrade (whom he had by his Wife Jole Daughter to John King of
Jerusalem) Heir of all his Estates, but he was afterward taken off by Poison,
as was manifest, by the means of Manfred; having before seized upon Naples and
Aquino, and sacked them, much against the mind of the Pope, who vigorously
opposed these proceedings, though in vain, in order to procure the peace of
Italy, that he might have liberty to transport the Italian Soldiers to recruit
the Army of King Lewis then lying before Damiata. But Damiata was now taken,
and Robert Earl of Poitiers coming with fresh supplies from France, he marches
from thence with his Army toward the City of Pharamia, whither the Sultan,
apprehending his design, was already come with great Forces. There happened to
be a River betwixt the two Armies, by reason whereof they could not join
Battle, but they had frequent light Skirmishes, (both Generals keeping
themselves within their Camps) in one of which Robert rashly venturing too far,
was taken Prisoner by the Enemy. By this time Innocent had almost extinguished
those flames of War with which Italy had so long been consumed, and intended to
have returned to Rome, having first canonized Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury;
but when he came to Perugia, he thought good to decline his journey to Rome,
understanding the Senate there arrogated to themselves more Power than stood
with the dignity of the Pope and Court of Rome; and there he canonized and
enrolled among the holy Martyrs Peter of Verona a preaching Friar, who had been
murdered by some Heretics between Milan and Como; and the same honor he gave
to S. Stanislaus Bishop of Cracow, who in his lifetime was very famous for
working Miracles. Hence he was invited by the Noblemen of the Kingdom of
Sicily, and immediately departed for Naples, then newly repaired, where he died
and was buried in S. Laurence's Church, when he had been Pope fourteen years
six months twelve days, just in the nick of time when he had hopes to have
brought into his possession all that Kingdom. It was by the Decree of this
excellent Pope Innocent, that the Octave of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin
was commanded to be observed yearly in the Church of God as a Festival. He with
good advice, filled up the places in the College of Cardinals, which had long
been vacant, with very worthy personages, and ordained that when they rode
abroad they should always wear a red Hat, for an honorable distinction of the
degree they held. Moreover this learned Pope, though raised to the highest
dignity in the Church, compiled and published several things; for he composed
the Apparatus [or Glosses] to the Decretals, which are of great use to the
Canonists, because they contain many nice disquisitions, which render the Text
wonderfully plain: and he put forth another upon the Councils, which Hostiensis
in his Summa calls the Authenticks. He wrote also a Book concerning the
Jurisdiction of the Emperor and the Authority of the Pope, in answer to one
Peter surnamed Vinea, who asserted, that the Empire and every person and thing
thereunto belonging were absolutely subject to the Emperor; to which Book
Innocent afterward gave the Title of his Apologetick. He was extremely
delighted with the conversation of learned Men, whom also he remembered to
prefer to dignities in the Church; particularly one Hugo, who wrote Comments
and Concordances upon the holy Bible, a Person famous for his learning and good
life, he advanced to be Cardinal of S. Sabina, which great promotion yet did
not make him leave his former course of life, being a Friar of the Order of S.
Dominic. In this Pope's Reign and by his Order, Alexander of the Order of
Friars Minors, who was well in years when he took upon him a religious Habit,
wrote a very copious sum of Theology: by the procurement also of this Pope and
enabled by his bounty Bernardus Parmensis and Compostellanus two very learned
Men, at this time made public their Works upon the Decretals, which they
called Apparatus. Innocent had not long been dead, when he was followed by his
Nephew William, whose Tomb is yet to be seen in the Church of S. Laurence
without the Walls.

ALEXANDER IV.
ALEXANDER the Fourth, a Campanian, born at Anagni, was chosen Pope in the room
of Innocent, and straight sends monitory Letters to Manfred, that he should not
at his peril attempt any thing that might be a diminution of the honor of holy
Church; for he calling to his aid the Saracens from Nocera, had surprised the
Church-Forces utterly unprepared, that were in Foggia, and either put 'em to
the Sword or took 'em Prisoners; and pretending that Conradine was dead and
that himself was his rightful Heir, he had taken upon him to rule as King. In
the mean while the Christians, who we told you had encamped near the City of
Pharamia, were very much visited with sickness, and pressed with want of
Provisions, that part of Nile being prepossessed by the Enemy, by which they
were wont to be supplied with necessaries; beside that the Patriarch of
Jerusalem coming that way with some number of Ships, was made a Prisoner; so
that Lewis being afraid his Army should be lost by famine, resolved to return
to Damiata, and in his way fell into a great Ambuscade of the Enemy, by whom he
was routed, and himself with Alphonsus Earl of Poitiers and Charles Earl of
Anjou, his Brothers-German, was taken Prisoner; but the Sultan not long after
this great Victory was slain by his own Men, and he that succeeded in his stead
having Damiata surrendered to him and a good sum of Money, discharged all the
Christians and sent them under safe conduct to Ptolemais; where Lewis sent away
his two Brothers into his own Country and by the persuasion of Pope Alexander
staid in Asia, till Cesarea, Joppa and Sidon, (Cities the Christians had newly
gained from the Saracens) were well garrisoned with Men; which done, after
having been six years on this Expedition, he returned home. While this was
doing, Pope Alexander having excommunicated Manfred, went to Anagni, and
dispatched away Octavian, a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, of the Family of
the Vbaldini, to confirm the Neapolitans in their resolutions against Manfred,
assuring him that he would in a short time come in person with good succors to
the aid of them and those of Campania; but Manfred not contenting himself to
teize the Neapolitans, raised up also several Factions in Tuscany, especially
at Florence, which City upon the death of Frederic had asserted its Liberty,
where matters were carried so high, that they were fain by a public Edict to
call home those persons who in the days of Frederic had been banished for being
Guelphs, that they might be rendered able to withstand the contrivances of the
Gibellines; by which means the Guelphish Faction got so great strength in
Tuscany, that they harassed and did much mischief by their Troops to those of
Pistoia, Arezzo, Pisa and Siena, who had expelled their fellow-Citizens for
being Guelphs, the Luccheses more than any helping them against the Pisans, who
had been certainly ruined by the Florentines, after they had been overcome by
'em at the River Ansari, but that they were afraid of those of Boggibonzi. This
Town stood in the Valley of Helsa, about twelve miles from Siena, very strong
by its natural situation and by artificial strengths, of which the Gibellines
made use against the Guelphs, as a Garrison; but it was at length taken and
rased; and then the Florentines being Enemies to Manfred, made offer to the
Pope of their assistance against him; which so moved Manfred, that having been
first declared King at Palermo, and with the help of some Saracen Auxiliaries
having in diverse conflicts broken the Forces of the Pope under the command of
the Legate, he sent his Lieutenant General Jordan with one thousand five hundred
Horse to the aid of the Sieneses against the Florentines, who not long after
were met by the Sieneses near the River Arbia and received so great an
overthrow, that they were forced to leave their City to the will of the Enemy.
The Pope yet ceased not to persecute the tyrannical Lords, wheresoever they
were, for when Ecelino, as was said, had seized into his hands almost all the
Venetian Territories and had laid Siege to Mantua, he immediately sent away
Philip Fontanese, Archbishop of Ravenna to Venice, where having published the
Crusado, he got together a good Army, and with it drove Anselm, Ecelino's
Nephew, out of Padua; upon news whereof Ecelino raises his Siege from before
Mantua and marches in great haste to Verona, but understanding he could have no
hopes of recovering Padua, he put to death with diverse torments, all the
Paduans he had in his Camp, to the number of twelve thousand. At this time the
Friars Minors who were sent to Brescia, had by their preaching persuaded those
Citizens to recall the banished Guelphs and to declare for the Church; and the
same success they had had at Piacenza and Cremona, but that Obert Pallavicino,
with the help of the Gibellines, had taken the Government into his sole Power.
Against him then and Ecelino, his Confederate, the Pope's Legate assisted by the
Guelphs, marches with his Army, but near Gambara he is defeated with great
loss, and himself with the Bishop of Brescia and the chief of the Guelphish
Faction, taken Prisoner, all whom upon the surrender of Brescia, Ecelino let go
free, An. Dom. 1249. This success of Ecelino, made the Legate Apostolic very
fearful of the increase of his Power, and put him upon the design of bringing
off Obert Pallavicino from his side; which he effected by the means of Boso
Donario, a noble Citizen of Cremona, who laying before him the barbarous and
detestable cruelty of Ecelino, wrought upon him to throw off his Alliance with
him, and to enter into the League with the Milaneses and Mantuans, and those of
the other confederate Cities. This much enraged Ecelino, seeing so many Enemies
conspiring against him, so that rendezvousing his Army at Cassano, he from
thence ravaged all the Country about Milan, provoking the Associated Cities to
give him Battle; which they did, and not only vanquished him, but took him
Prisoner, and he died soon after at Soncino of a wound he had received. Upon
his death all the Cities of Lombardy recovered their liberty, and became
obedient Sons of the Church; and the Pope's Legate who had procured to the
Paduans their freedom (as aforesaid) to make an end of all the relics of the
War, drives out of Treviso, and puts to death Alberic Brother to Ecelino, with
his Wife and Children. Pope Alexander having taken off these tyrannizing Lords
and put an end to so many great confusions, set his mind upon renewing the War
in Asia; but by reason of a quarrel which happened between the Genoeses and
Venetians, this pious and necessary Expedition was laid aside. The Christians
then inhabited Ptolemais and Tire, two opulent and wealthy Cities; which were
especially peopled with Genoese, Pisan and Venetian Merchants, who now for
sixty four years had engrossed almost all the Trade both from East and West.
These Merchants had their several Exchanges, their several Streets and
Landing-places, and nothing was common to both the Venetians and Genoeses, but
the Churches; when a contention arose between 'em about the Monastery of S.
Saba, which each City claimed to itself alone. The Pope would fain have
composed the difference, and sent his Letters to both, willing that the
Monastery should be equal free to both Nations; but the Genoeses having notice
aforehand how the Pope intended to determine in the Case, by the favor of
Philip Montfort, Prefect of the City, they excluded the Venetians, possessed
themselves of the Monastery and fortified it. The Venetians hereupon
unanimously leave the City, and making League with Manfred King of Sicily,
raise Forces against the Genoeses, and setting upon their Fleet, consisting of
two Galleys and twenty three great Ships then in the Port of Ptolemais, they
burn 'em and following their blow at the same time make themselves Masters of
the Monastery of S. Saba, which they demolished. The Genoeses, rather enraged
than terrified at this disaster, fit out another Fleet, to encounter the
Venetians at Tire, but they industriously avoiding a Battle, sail toward the
Euxine, and take Selymbria from the Saracens and plunder it; after which both
Nations recruiting their Forces, they steer for Tire, the common Seat of War.
The Pope fearful of the fatal consequences of this Contention, sends for the
Ambassadors of both Countries, and makes himself a Mediator of Peace; which
was welnigh agreed to, when news comes that the Venetians with their Allies,
the Pisans, had between Tire and Ptolemais routed the Genoeses, taking and
sinking twenty five of their Ships; that thereupon the Victors were retreated
to Ptolemais, and the vanquished were sled to Tire; that all the Edifices of
the Genoeses at Ptolemais were pulled down, all their Merchandises seized as
spoil, and the Citizens of that Nation expelled the place. This havoc made by
the Venetians so highly displeased the Pope, that he would not admit their
Ambassador to Audience till they had set free all the Genoese Prisoners they
had taken. Neither did this Calamity come alone to be the subject of the Pope's
care, for Baldwin Emperor of Constantinople, (during whose prosperity, there
seemed yet to be some hopes left of recovering the holy Land) was about to quit
that City: for Michael Palaeologus, who by the last Will of Theodore Lascari,
was left Guardian to his two Sons did the Latins all the mischief that lay in
his power, driving out of Achaia William a Frenchman, and teizing Baldwin with
Seditions at home and open War abroad; who afterward going toward the Euxine
Shore, in order to secure it from the Enemy, the Citizens of Constantinople in
the mean time at midnight let Michael Palaeologus into the City; upon news
whereof Baldwin and the Patriarch Pantaleo retire from Pontus into Europe and
lay by all thoughts of War. Palaeologus having thus rid himself of his
Competitor and Enemy, murders his two Pupils, and assumes the Empire, which
after having been possessed by the Latins forty eight years now was transferred
to the Greeks. In the mean time Octavian Cardinal Vbaldino returned to the
Pope, without having had any great luck in his negotiation at Naples, and the
Pope having first at Anagni canonized S. Clara a Franciscan Nun, went to
Viterbo, to endeavor a Peace between the Venetians and Genoeses; in which
Affair he met so much trouble and so many delays, that he died for grief in the
seventh year of his Pontificate, and was honorably interred in St. Laurence's
Church. The Sea was then vacant three months and four days. The life of this
Pope is certainly much commended by all Writers, he being said to have been
bountiful and kind to all, but especially to the poor Religious; to whom the
great love he bore caused him to comdemn by a perpetual Edict some Books
written by William de sancto Amore, against that sort of Poverty, wherein the
wicked Fellow asserted that those who took upon them religious Habits to live
by the Alms of other Men were not capable of Salvation. He also publicly burnt
another abominable Book, in which the Author affirmed that a State of Grace was
not to be obtained by the Law of the Gospel, but by the Law of the Spirit;
which Opinion, he said, was taken out of the Writings of Abbat Joachim. This
Book was called by those of that Sect, the Eternal Gospel. It was Alexander's
custom, when he got leisure from public Affairs to busy himself about
somewhat that savored of Learning, for he compiled Decretal Epistles, and gave
such countenance to learned Men, that he promoted several of them to
Cardinalates, particularly, Henry Cardinal of Ostia, a good Divine and an
excellent Lawyer. He was also very liberal and munificent to Bartholomew, a
Canonist of Brescia, who wrote much upon the Decretals; by which and by his
extraordinary abilities and sanctity he got great renown. By this means
moreover the vaulted Church near that of S. Agnes, which had in old time been
dedicated to Bacchus, was made capable of Divine Worship; and the Inscription
in the Porch of the Church of S. Constance shows that the Altar there was
consecrated by him.

URBAN IV.
URBAN the fourth, born at Troyes in France, Patriarch of Jerusalem, was made
Pope, and immediately listed French Soldiers to assist him against Manfredus
who infested the Patrimony of S. Peter; for fear of whom Jordanes General of
Manfredus his forces in Tuscany against the Guelphs was recalled to Naples,
which gave some breathing time to the Guelphs, especially those of Florence and
Lucca, who had been by the Gibellines marked out for destruction. Lombardy was
also plagued with the like Seditions, Hubert Pallavicino carrying on now the
Interests of the Gibelline faction and persecuting the adverse party; though
before by his Policy and moderate behavior to both sides he had got the
Command of Brescia by an universal consent. But the Citizens of Modena and
Reggio, instigated by those of Ferrara and Bononia, fearing lest Pallavicino
should over-pour them all at last, revolted to the Popes side, and turned the
Gibellines out of their Cities, giving their goods and effects to the
Florentines who had been banished for Guelphism, by this means adding great
strength to their faction. And thus went matters in Lombardy, the Pope still
earnestly endeavoring a Peace. At Constantinople the Venetians attempted to
dethrone Palaeologus and had done it, but for his Friends and Associates the
Genoese; this gave him the greater Power so that having taken Malvasia, he
easily made resistance against the Venetians and William Prince of Achaia. The
Pope was now intent upon sending a Legate to procure a Peace betwixt the
Venetians and Genoese, when Manfredus with a new body of Saracens seizes la
Marca, the Inhabitants being before inclined to a Rebellion. The Pope therefore
sends the same Legate to France, with order to make use of all manner of
Promises and Entreaties to persuade those French who had taken upon them the
Croisado, (who had been informed of the thing beforehand) to hasten their
march thither; they presently under the conduct of Guy Bishop of Auxerre
descend into Italy, and vanquishing Pallavicino at Brescia, without meeting any
resistance, they come to Viterbo: from whence a little while after, having
first received the Popes blessing, continuing their march through Vmbria and
the Country of Tagliacozzo, they beat the Saracens who had fled thither and
pursued them as far as the Garigliano. At the same time the Romans, though they
meddled not with the Patrimony of the Church, yet they threw off obedience to
the Pope, making what Magistrates they pleased; particularly, contrary to
custom, by which they were to choose for Senator a Roman only, they elected one
Brancaleon of Bononia, a man of a great spirit and very politic, to this high
dignity and promised him great advantages; but this humor held not long, for
they soon altered their minds and clapped him in Prison. This affront gave great
offense to the Bononians, who seizing several Romans, protested they would
never release them, but upon the delivery of their Brancaleon; which so wrought
upon the cautious Romans, that they not only released him, but restored him to
his former dignity; setting up also another Court of men chosen out of every
Ward in the City (whom they called Banderese) to whom they committed the Power
of life and death. The Pope plainly found the reason of this insolence of the
Romans to be that they observed how Manfredus had plagued him and that he was
not able to help himself. That he might therefore at last free the Church from
the tyranny of these men, he sent Legates to Lewis King of France, to exhort
him, that he would as soon as possible send his Cousin and Son-in-law Charles
Earl of Provence and Anjou with an Army into Italy; he intending upon the
expulsion of Manfredus, to create him King of both Sicilies. And this no doubt
he had done (so high were his resentments of the Ingratitude of Manfredus) if
sickness had not taken him off from business. Which yet was brought to pass, as
is supposed, by the following Pope. To the times of this Pope is ascribed
Albertus a High German, of the Order of Friars Predicant, who for the vastness
of his learning got the Surname of Magnus. He Commented upon all the Works of
Aristotle and explained the Christian Religion with great acuteness; beside he
wrought very accurately concerning the secrets of Nature; He also put forth a
Book de Coaequaevis, wherein he endeavors to show the little difference that
is between Theology and Natural Philosophy. He expounded a great part of the
Holy Bible, and illustrated the Gospels and S. Paul's Epistles with excellent
Notes. He began also a Body of Divinity, but lived not to perfect it. He was a
man so modest and so much given to Study, that he refused the Bishopric of
Ratisbon, because it could not be managed without trouble and force of Arms
sometimes, as the Bishops of Germany are wont to do. He lived therefore in
private at Cologn reading only some public Lectures. At length he died there
in the eightieth year of his age, leaving behind him many Scholars for the good
of Posterity, especially Thomas Aquinas, who leaving his Country and his noble
kindred (for he derived his pedigree from the Counts of Apulia) and going to
Cologn, he made such progress in learning, that after a few years he was made
Professor at Paris; where he published four Books upon the Sentences, and wrote
a Book against William de St. Amor a pernicious Fellow; Beside he put forth
two Books, one de qualitate and essentiis, the other de principiis naturae. At
last he was sent for to Rome by Urban, but refusing those promotions that were
offered him, he gave himself wholly to Reading and Writing. He set up a School
at Rome, and at the desire of Urban he wrote several Pieces, and ran through
almost all Natural and Moral Philosophy with Commentaries, and set forth a Book
contra Gentiles. He expounded the Book of Job, and compiled the Catena aurea.
He composed also an Office for the Sacrament, in which most of the Types of the
old Testament are explained. But to return to Urban, he died at Perugia in the
third year, first month and fourth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in
the Cathedral Church. The Sea then was vacant five months.

CLEMENT IV.
CLEMENT the fourth, formerly called Guidodi Fulcodio, a Narbonnese of S.
Giles's deserved to be made Pope upon the account of his Holiness and Learning.
For he being without question the best Lawyer in France, and pleading with
great integrity in the Kings Court, was created (after the death of his Wife by
whom he had several Children) first of all Bishop of Pois, and then of
Harbonne, and last of all a Cardinal by universal consent, and afterward was
chosen out as the only Person whose sincerity, and Authority had qualified
him, to compose the Differences between Henry King of England, and Simon Earl
of Montford. As soon as he was chosen Pope, some say he put on the Habit of a
Religious Mendicant, and went incognito to Perugia. Thither immediately went
the Cardinals, who having chosen him Pope though in his absence, attended upon
him pompously to Viterbo. In the mean time Charles, whom, we said, Pope Urban
sent for, to bestow a Kingdom upon him, set out from Marseilles with thirty
Ships, and coming up the Tiber arrived at Rome: Where he lived as a Senator so
long by the Popes order, till certain Cardinals, sent from his Holiness, came
and declared him King of Jerusalem and Sicily in the Palace of St. Giovanni
Laterano: upon this condition, that Charles should take an Oath to pay the Sea
of Rome a yearly acknowledgment of forty thousand Crowns: and should not accept
of the Roman Empire though it were freely offered to him. For there was at that
time a great contest for the Empire between Alphonsus King of Castile (who
sought to procure it by Power and bribery too) and the Earl of Cor^wall the
King of Englands Brother, whom the Electors had no great thoughts of. Therefore
lest Manfred should hope to make use of any quarrels between Alphonsus and
Charles (to whom many people said the Empire was justly due, though he could
not challenge it) the Pope animated Charles against Manfred as one that stood
in Contempt of the Roman Church. For Charles's Army was already gotten over the
Alps into Italy, and marching through Romagnia, had brought all the Soldiers
of the Guelphs Party as far as Rome. From whence Charles removed, and took not
only Ceperane, having beaten out Manfred's men, but posted himself in a Forest
near Cassino, which Manfred himself had undertaken to defend: although his mind
was soon altered, and he resolved to march for Benevento, to expect the Enemy
in plain and spacious places, because his forces consisted most of Cavalry.
Thither also did Charles move; and as soon as he had an opportunity to fight,
did not decline it, though his Soldiers were very weary with traveling. Each
of them encouraged their men to engage: But Charles coming to relieve a Troop
of his Soldiers, that were like to be worsted, more eagerly than usually (as in
such cases Military Men will do) he was knocked down from his Horse, at which
the Enemy was so transported, that Manfred fought carelessly out of rank and
file* and was killed; which, when Charles appeared again straight turned the
fortune of the Day. For many of his men that ran away were killed, and a great
many others taken Prisoners. Charles having obtained so great a Victory removes
to Benevento and marches into it upon a voluntary surrender of the Citizens.
From thence he went to storm Nocera de Pagani, where both the modern and the
ancient Saracens lived, but sent his Marshall into Tuscany with five hundred
Horse, to restore the Guelphs that had been banished, into their own Cities. He
was no sooner come thither but the Gibbelins departed on their own accord, and
he without any disturbance appointed a certain number of Officers at Florence,
which the neighboring Natives call the Heads of the Guelphian Faction. Thence
he moved against the Sienneses, and made all the Gibellins of Tuscany, but
especially those of Pisa his Enemies, because he besieged Poggibonci, which the
Gibellines stoutly defended. Now when Charles had reduced both Kingdoms, all
but Nocera de Pagani, he at last grants the Saracens a Peace, and let 'em live
in Italy upon their own terms, as they thought good. But he himself with his
Army upon the Popes invitation, went to Viterbo, where Henry, banished by his
Brother, the King of Castile, was not long before arrived. Of whom when the
Pope had heard Charles's good Character, he was so pleased with it, that he
presented him with great things and made him a Senator of the City. After that
Charles marched into Tuscany, to suppress the Gibellins, who desired Corradin a
young Man, Nephew to Conrad of Schwaben, to come into Italy and assist them
against the Guelphs. And seeing that he could not take Poggibonci by storm,
because it was so well fortified both by Art and Nature, he resolved to starve
it into a Surrender. And by that means after a long Siege he took it; and then
going against them of Pisa, he took a Town of theirs, called Mutrone, and gave
it to the State of Lucca. Charles at that time was very likely to have done
greater things, but that his friends called him hastily home to his Kingdom by
reason of some factious People that favored Corradin's Party, but most of all
upon account of the Saracens, whom he presently shut up in the strong Castles
of Nocera de Pagani, that he might go the safer against Corradin, whom the men
of Pisa endeavored to make their King, after they had not only laid waste all
the Country of Lucca, but conquered and killed Charles's Marshall at Arezzo,
by the assistance, chiefly, of Guido of Montferrat, and all the Gibellin
faction on that side the Alps. They say, that as the Youth passed through the
Country near Viterbo toward the Kingdom, the Pope, who pitied his condition,
said in a Prophetic manner, that Corradin himself was led as a Sacrifice to
the slaughter. So then he went toward Rome, and was met at Ponte Molle by Henry
the Senator together with all the people of Rome, who saluted him with loud
acclamations by the name of Emperor; but whether out of fear or love, is not
well known. At Rome he dismissed Guido of Montferrat, and went himself in all
haste with his Army toward the Kingdom; where when he understood how Charles
had taken possession of Compagna di Roma, and the great Road that goes through
it, he turned away to the Mountains called Tagliacocii, toward Marsi. And there
he encamped first of all near the Lake, being fortified with an old Conduit,
and ruinated Houses. Charles moved that way too, and pitched his Tents within
ten furlongs of him at the entrance of an hollow Vale; where by advice of
Alardus a Neapolitane, who had been an old Soldier in Germany, he immediately
sent away part of his Army under the command of his Marshal who was disguised
like a King, with a design to provoke the Enemy. But he himself staid the mean
while on the other side the Hill with his best Soldiers in Ambuscade to wait
for a good occasion of doing his business effectually. They fought full three
whole hours without being able to say who should have the better of it, till
the Marshal who behaved himself very bravely, fell. At whose death the French
began to give back, but the Germans were more brisk than ever, and pursued them
to all places without any manner of Order. By this means Charles came upon 'em
in a Confusion, routed 'em and made 'em run for it, but killed a great many of
'em as they fled. Henry the Senator was taken Prisoner at Rieti whilst he
endeavored to escape; and Corradin being discovered at the same time with the
Duke of Austria, as he attempted to pass the Tiber and go by Boat into Tuscany,
was brought to Charles and put to death: as the Pope, we told you, had
prophesied it would shortly happen. Charles therefore in the year 1268, after
so great a Victory, and having made himself absolute in the Kingdom, went to
Rome, where for some time he acted as a Senator by the Popes permission, and
sent his Marshal into Tuscany: by whose pains and care a Peace was made between
the Sieneses and the Florentines. But when Clement was dead, in the third year
of his Popedom, and twenty first day, and buried at Viterbo, there was such a
Difference presently not only between the People of Italy, whom the godly Pope
whilst alive had by his Authority, and awe upon them, kept within some kind of
measures, but also between the Cardinals about the choice of a new Pope, that
the Sea was void two years. At that time Charles, who took a great care, that
the Church should not suffer any damage, went with part of his Army into
Tuscany, where he took Poggibonci (the place from whence all the Troubles
sprang) and sold it to the Florentines. Which when they had demolished, they
built a new Town, not far from thence upon a plain ground, which they call
Poggibonci, whereas the old one was called anciently Bonitium. After that
Charles made Peace with those of Pisa, whose Ships he designed to make use of
to carry him over into Africa, and then intended to return to his Kingdom,
leaving Ruffus Earl of Anguillara, with part of his Army in Tuscany, to keep
the Tuscans in Order. In the mean time King Lewis set sail from Marseilles, and
was followed by three of his Sons, Theobald King of Navarre, and the Earl of
Champaigne, together with an Apostolical Legate. All these arrived at Tunis the
very same time, and besieging the City they destroyed all that ever came to
their hands. But a Plague happening in the Camp, which for a good while had
infected none but inconsiderable Persons, at last took off Lewis with his
youngest Son and the Legate. To him succeeded Philip his Son, who began now to
think of going homeward. But Charles King of Sicily coming up to him, a Peace
was concluded upon this Condition, that the Captives on both sides should be
dismissed, and the King of the Country should pay Charles a certain Tribute,
besides that he should suffer the Gospel to be freely preached in his
Dominions. Then they brought back their forces into Sicily, where the King of
Navarre, and the Earl of Campaigne died at Trapani; which made Philip and
Charles, partly for Devotion, and partly to avoid the Contagion, sail to
Civitavecch^a, with an intent to go from thence by Land to Viterbo, where the
Cardinals were still contending about the choice of a Pope. For they imagined,
that the presence of two such great Kings would certainly move them (as it did)
to make Theobald of Piacenza, Archdeacon of Liege, Pope, though he were
absent. But to return to Clement: Whose life is to be commended in every part
of it for his Learning, Piety, Religion, Humanity, Charity to his Neighbors,
and to all poor Christians. As for the goods or the Church, he distributed them
at such a rate, and with such discretion, that he in all probability gave more
to God, than to his own Relations. He had two Daughters by his Wife who died
before his Popedom: to one of which, that lived in a Nunnery, he gave thirty
pounds of small Deniers Tournois, and to the other, who was married to a man of
an equal fortune, he ordered a portion of three hundred pounds Tournois, upon
condition she should never ask for one penny more. He had besides a Nephew that
was a Clergyman, whom when he found to have three Prebends (for so they call
Canonries) he forced him to take his choice, which of 'em he would keep and
leave the other two. But when his friends were urgent with him not only to let
his Nephew enjoy what he already had, but give him more, and greater
preferments, the Holy Man made answer, (I would the Popes in our time would
follow his Example) that he would obey God, and not flesh and blood: That it
was Gods pleasure, what belonged to the Church should be bestowed to charitable
uses, nor was he worthy to be S. Peter's Successor, who would give more to his
Kindred than to Religion and to Christ. But whilst he was at Viterbo, and news
was daily brought to him that Ednigeth, a Duchess of Poland, who had been long
dead was in very great esteem for her Miracles, he canonized her. He was also
wonderfully satisfied with the Doctrine of Bonaventure, General of the Order of
Friars Minors, who at that time wrote gravely, and copiously upon the first,
second, third, and fourth Books of the Sentences. Now the Holy Man dying with
such a Character was much lamented and missed by all men. And hence arose the
Controversy among the Cardinals, to find out a fit Person to succeed Clement.

GREGORY X.
GREGORY the tenth, formerly called Theo^ald, an Italian, born at Piac^nza, and
Arch deacon of Liege, was created Pope by the College of Cardinals at Viterbo,
whilst he was in Asia. For at that time, when Lewis went into Africa, Edward,
Son to the King of England, sailed from England into Asia with a great Navy, in
order to regain the holy Land. But staying so long at Ptolemais, till Lewis,
King of France came out of Africa with Victory, according to his promise, he
was stabbed in three places by one Arsacida, a Companion of his, as he was alone
in his Bed chamber, and by the assistance of another friend of his, very hardly
escaped his Death. For that other person held the Russians hand so long, till
the People of the House came in, who tare treacherous Arsacida to pieces, and
dragged him out of the Room. But Edward, when he was cured of his Wounds, had a
great esteem for his friend Theobald, because he continually animated all
Christian Kings and Princes against the Saracens; and when he went to Rome in
order to receive the Popedom, being sent for by the Cardinals, who had elected
him, he assisted him extraordinarily with a Ship, with Money, and a splendid
equipage, especially at that time, when Henry a Youth, and Son of Richard Earl
of Cornwall, who was lately dead, came to Viterbo to see Clement. After whose
death, staying there for some time, he was unluckily killed. For Guido Monford,
who went to the Cathedral Church along with Philip the French King, to hear
Divine Service, stabbed him before the Altar; because his Father Simon had been
basely murdered in England by Richard. He having revenged his Fathers death in
this manner, he escaped with safety to Ruffus, Governor of Tuscany. Not long
after Philip and Charles, vexed at such an Indignity went from Viterbo, the
former into France, the latter into Puglia. For having made a Peace with the
Saracens, Charles went along with Theobald (who was arrived at Siponto, now
called Manfredonia) as far as Ceperano. From thence his Holiness traveled
through Marsi, and Sabini to Viterbo: where he was received by the Cardinals
with all Respect and Honor imaginable, and being crowned with the Pontifical
Diadem, he was invested with all the Power that Christ left Peter. When that
was done, and that he had settled the Popedom for a time, he was desirous to
make Peace between the Genoeses and the Venetians. For these two States had
been engaged one with another in great and bloody Conflicts for a long time.
Upon this account Philip King of France, who tarried at Cremona, was prevailed
upon by the Pope to send for the Genoese, and Venetian Ambassadors, and made a
Peace between 'em for five years, that they might all go in one body against
the Saracens. Italy was now quiet, when the beginning of an universal disorder
rose from the Venetians now Exactions. For they made a Law, that no one should
sail in the Adriatic, especially from Pola to Venice, unless they paid a Gabel
according to the value of their goods. But the Bologneses could not endure
this, as being at that time masters of a great part of Romagna, and therefore
for three years together they fought the Venetians with great variety of
Fortune. At last being tired out they accepted of a Peace upon this Condition,
that they should demolish a Castle, which they had built upon the very mouth of
Po, that they should have free leave to carry out some goods that were there,
and then the Venetians should have the sole custody of the Mouth of the River
Po. They also of Ancona were offended, that the Venetians challenged the
absolute dominion of the Adriatic Sea, and exacted Custom from those that
sailed there. And hereof they complained to the Pope, whose Duty it is to see,
that no new Taxes be imposed. He therefore immediately commanded the Venetians,
to take off that Imposition, who answered him in these very words. That the
Pope did not perfectly understand the matter, and that when he did, he would be
able to judge better of it. Gregory could not make an end of this matter to his
mind: because he was forced to go to the Council, which he had called at Lions.
Thither also went Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople with a great Retinue;
and made the Greeks comply and subscribe to the Opinion of the Church of Rome
now the thirteenth time, they having so often revolted. Nay farther, some
Noblemen of Tartary were induced by his Authority to receive Baptism. Mean
time, the Western Empire being vacant, Rodolphus, Earl of Assia is made Emperor
by the Electors, upon condition that he would go to Rome the next year, to
receive the Crown there. But the Florentines who were Guelphs immediately
turned out their Countrymen the Gibellins, though they had been restored to
their Country by Gregory, as he went into France. At which the Pope was so
angry, that he interdicted them from all benefit of the Law, and was very near
doing the same thing by the Bologneses, who had ejected the Lambertescii and
the Asinelli, Gibellins of noble Families: but they suffered for it not long
after. For when they went to fight against the Forleses, that had kindly
entertained some persons whom they had banished; it is said, eight thousand of
the Bologneses were slain at one Sally from the Town. Upon which misfortune
some Cities of Romagna grew confident, and immediately revolted from the
Bologneses themselves. Especially Cervia, from whence they received a great
Revenue out of Salt. But Gregory when he had dismissed the Council at Lions, in
which many Decrees were made, relating to the choice of Popes, the expedition
against the Saracens, the union of the Greek and Latin Churches, and the peace
of Christendom, as he was going into Italy, he met Alphonso King of Castile at
Bellocadoro, complaining grievously that he had given the Empire to Rodulphus.
But when the Pope had satisfied him, he resigned all his right to Rodulphus.
The Pope was very kindly received by all the Italians as he traveled through
Tuscany, but shunned the Florentines on purpose, and went to Arezzo, lest they
should have prevailed with him to take off his Interdiction, At Arezzo he died
in the fourth year, second month, and tenth day of his Pontificate and there he
was buried. He was a Man of an extraordinary Reputation through his whole Life,
for Prudence in the conduct of his Affairs, for Courage, and greatness of Mind,
that made him contemn Money and all mean things: for humanity, clemency, bounty
to poor Christians, and those especially that fled for refuge into the bosom of
the Apostolic Sea.

INNOCENT V.
INNOCENT the fifth, formerly called Peter of Tarantaise, a Burgundian, a
Dominican, a man very learned in holy Writ was created Pope at Arezzo in the
year of our Lord 1275. From thence not long after he went to Rome, where he was
crowned in S. Peter's Church, and from that time immediately applied himself to
compose the Affairs of Italy. To this end he sent Legates (men of great
Authority) to command not only the people of Tuscany (who conspired the ruin
of those of Pisa) but also the Genoeses and Venetians (who were mortal Enemies)
to quit their Arms. Assistant to them were the Ambassadors of Charles, the
King, by whose Awe over them he hoped to have his business done more to his
mind. The People of Tuscany did as he commanded them, but especially the
Florentines, whom the Pope absolved from Gregory's Interdiction upon that very
score: But the Genoeses and Venetians, whose hatred was more inveterate, were
still in Arms, perpetually butchering each other: and yet Innocent, if he had
lived a little longer, had brought them over to his Opinion; so zealous he was
in that matter. But he died in the sixth month and second day of his
Pontificate, and was buried in the Lateran Church. Now the secular Priests had
no great reason to lament his death by reason of a Sentence which he gave just
before he died. For when there arose a Dispute between the Priests of the
Cathedral Church, and the Friars Preachers concerning the body of Clement the
fourth (for each Order desired to have the disposing of it) he gave judgment
that it ought to be committed to the Friars; for he said his Holiness had
ordered it so whilst he was alive. Upon this account Innocent was a little
maligned: but was otherwise a very good Man, and such a Person from whom those
of his time might have expected all the good imaginable.

ADRIAN V.
ADRIAN the fifth, a Genoese, of the Family of the Flisci, before called
Othobon, was made Pope at Rome in the Court of the Lateran. He was Innocent the
fourth's Nephew; by whom he was created Cardinal Deacon of S. Adrian, and sent
Legate into England with plenary Power to compose the differences between that
King and his Barons. As Soon as he was made Pope he presently went to Viterbo,
and invites Rodulphus the Emperor into Italy, to lessen the Power of Charles,
who at that time did what he pleased at Rome. But Rodulphus being engaged in
the Bohemian War, could not comply with Adrian. In the mean time Charles was
very cautious, to avoid the envy of the World, and turned all the stress of the
War upon Achaia, so to make his way toward the Empire of Constantinople. But
Adrian dying in the fortieth day of his Pontificate, he came back into Italy.
This Pope died at Viterbo before his consecration, and was buried in a Convent
of Freres Minors. He had an intention not only more and more to secure the
Churches Patrimony from Tyrants, but also to reduce Gregory's Decree for the
Choice of a Pope into a better method, not totally to abolish it. But Death
obstructed his endeavors, and withstood the greatness of his Mind. The Sea at
that time was vacant twenty eight days.

JOHN XXII.
JOHN the Twenty-Second, a Spaniard, born at Lisbon, and formerly called Peter,
was made Pope, being then Bishop of Frascati. Who, though he were reckoned a
very learned man, yet by his ignorance in business, and the unevenness of his
Conversation he did the Popedom more injury than Honor or kindness. For he did
many things that argued him to be guilty of Folly and Levity: and does not
deserve commendations unless it be for one thing; and that was; that he
assisted young Scholars especially the poorer sort with money and preferments.
At that time the Venetians infested those of Ancona for Merchandising in
Dalmatia without paying any custom to the Venetians: and yet the Pope himself
to whom they were tributary, did not protect them as he should have done; but
only seemed ready with his Tongue to say what he was too much a Coward ever to
do. Nevertheless, the Anconeses, though the Pope would not aid them, took
courage and made a Sally so briskly, that they raised the Siege, and drove the
Venetians from the Town a good way, not without considerable damage to them. By
the advice of John Cajetan (who governed all things at that time, for that he
was made Pope by his assistance and the Votes he procured) he sent Legates to
Paleologus, and all the Western Kings, to exhort 'em in his name, that they
would make Peace with one another, and bend their Forces against the Saracens
and other Enemies of Christianity. The Man was a Fool to promise himself a long
Life, and to tell every body he should live a great while: because every body
knew his life and Conversation; he was so immodest, and so sottish. But behold,
as he was betraying his Folly to all that were about him, a certain new
Apartment that he had built in the Palace at Viterbo fell down all of the
sudden, and he was found among the Wood and the stones seven days after the
fall of it: but he received the Sacraments of the Church and then died in the
eighth month of his Pontificate, and was buried at Viterbo. He was a Man (as I
said before) of great Learning but little Prudence. For he wrote many Tracts in
his life, especially certain Rules relating to Physic: for he was counted a
very good Physician. He wrote also another Book and called it Thesaurus
Pauperum, or the Poors Treasure, and set out Problems in imitation of
Aristotle. But it is certain, however it comes to be so, that many very learned
Men are not at all fit for business. Yet I need not doubt how it comes to pass,
but take it rather for a greater Wonder, if he that takes pleasure in
Contemplation, should apply his mind to Wordly Affairs too.

NICOLAS III.
NICOLAS the Third, a Roman, of the Family of the Vrsini, formerly called John
Cajetan, was made Pope at last, after the Election had been six months in
suspense, by reason of a great Contest that was among the Cardinals. Now the
King of Sicily as Senator, had the guard of the Conclave at that time, and was
very urgent with 'em, to choose a Frenchman. But Nicolas, as soon as he began
his Reign, in the year 1278, resolved to restrain Charles's Power, and took
from him the Lieutenancy of Tuscany; because, he said, that Rodulphus took it
ill, and would not perform his promise of going upon the Expedition into the
holy Land upon any other terms, since Tuscany was reckoned to belong to the
jurisdiction of the Empire. Though the Pope gained this point, yet he reduced
Romagna and Bologna it self together with the Exarchate of Ravenna, which at
that time were under the Emperor, and made 'em subject to himself. And thither
he sent Bertholdus his Nephew, who was declared Earl of Romagna. He sent also
another Nephew of his that was a Cardinal, called Latinus, Legate into Tuscany;
who restored the Gibellins in all places, and imposed what Officers he pleased
upon the Citizens at Florence and in other parts of Tuscany. But the Office of
Senator, which used to be granted, or committed to Kings and Princes, he
discharged himself alone. He would not see the Ambassadors from the Venetians
(who at that time harassed the Anconeses with War) and so they departed. But he
called 'em back, and chid 'em severely; nay he threatened to ruin their City,
if they did not desist from besieging, or storming Ancona. At length when both
parties had suffered great inconveniences, they made a Peace upon equal terms.
But this Pope had a mind to create two Kings, both of the Vrsini; one of
Tuscany, and the other of Lombardy; to keep those Germans on the one side (that
inhabit part of the Alps) and the French on the other side, that lived in
Sicily and Naples, within their bounds. And to bring it about, he persuaded
Peter King of Aragon, to endeavor the recovery of the Kingdom of Sicily upon
the title of his Wife Constantia who was heir to it: And he took the Honor of
Senator from Charles and conferred it upon himself; and made an everlasting
Edict, that no King or Prince should dare to sue for, or bear that Office. This
Nicolas (as Authors say) was a man of great courage and conduct, and so perfect
in his life and conversation, that in Italian he was commonly called il
Composto or Composto. He was a lover and admirer of learned men, especially of
those who had Learning mingled with prudence and Religion. But he was reckoned
impartial to all in the distribution of honors and dignities. For at his first
Ordination, he chose a Bishop for Alba out of the Order of Minors, for Ostia
and Porto out of the Preachers. The Bishops of Palestrina and Trescat, were
Seculars. He created besides these, two Cardinal-Priests, that is to say,
Gerard, with the Title of the Twelve Apostles, and Jerome of the Order of
Minors, with the Title of S. Pudentiana. To them he added two Deacons, that is
to say, Jordan his Brother, Cardinal of S. Eustachius, a man of much Learning
and innocence; and James Colonna of S. Mary's in Via lata, a person of great
Religion and gravity. He adorned, and enlarged the Papal Palace with other
Buildings which he added. For he built a convenient house nigh S, Peter's (part
of which is yet to be seen) which Nicolas the fifth afterward repaired to his
great cost and charge. He also walled S. Peter's Garden, which now they call
Belvedere. Then he repaired S. Peter's Church when it was ready to fall with
age, and adorned it with the Pictures of the Popes. The same he did in S.
Paul's. More than all this, he advanced divine Worship most wonderfully, by
increasing the number of Canons, and the provision that had been made for those
who served in Churches. Again, he divided the Ecclesiastic Orders and
appointed to each their Offices. He likewise assigned every one his Lodging,
that even Strangers might know where every Officer, especially the chief
Officer was to be found. He finished the Lateran Palace which was begun before
by Adrian the fifth. He built the Sancta Sanctorum from the ground, after the
first Chapel was ruined with age: and beautified the Church it self with
Mosaic work (as it is now to be seen) and with plaster of Marble. And thither
he removed the Apostles heads, till he had reqair'd St. John's Church at his
own Charge. But when it was finished, he presently brought 'em back again, in
Silver Cases made by his Order, and, attended by all the People, he laid 'em up
in the Chapel which was built for the purpose. The same day he consecrated the
Church, that is, upon the eighth of July. Some Historians say, that no one ever
said Mass with more Devotion than he; for during the performance of that Divine
Office, he constantly wept. He was very godly, and such a Lover of the Friars
Minors for that they contemned the World, that he has explained many doubts
relating to that Order in a decretal Epistle. When Churches were void, there
never was a Pope, that took care sooner or more deliberately; giving them to
the best and the fittest Men he could find. For he first looked into a man's
life and his Learning, and then gave immediately the vacant Seas to those that
he thought worthy. For he used to say Delays were dangerous; because there were
such men in the World, as would commit Sacriledg with all their hearts. He
could not endure Proctors, and Attorneys, because they lived upon the blood of
the Poor; and those that went to Law, but hated them as a Plague: in which he
imitated Gregory X. and John XXI. But because there were great corruptions
among Magistrates in all places; he ordained, that all Offices should be annual
only; and if any one durst to hold 'em longer, he was liable to an Anathema,
from which he could not be absolved but by the Pope himself. Besides these
things he did a great many more for the good of the Clergy and all Christian
People, as it appears in his Titles. And yet he had his faults too, amidst all
these commendations. For he is said to have loved his Relations to such a
degree, as that he would rob others to give to them. For he took Castles from
some Noble Romans, and gave 'em to his own kindred, particularly that at
Soriano; Where, though he was a most temperate man, yet he died suddenly in the
third year, eighth month, and fifteenth day of his Pontificate. Whose death
they say some body foretold by a presage drawn from the swelling of the River
Tiber. For it rose so high, that it was four feet and more above the Altar in
round S. Mary's. But his body was carried to Rome and buried in the Chapel of
S. Nicolas which he built in S. Peter's, in a Marble Tomb beautified with
Fret-work, still to be seen, An. Dom. 1280. eight days after the Assumption.
This year Charles the King, adorned, and honored the Body of S. Magdalen,
which S. Maximin had buried in a Town of his own name, with a more magnificent
Tomb and a bigger Chapel: and laid her head up in a Silver Case separate from
her body. Now they say, that upon the death of Nicolas, the Sea was vacant five
months. For whilst the Cardinals were about electing a new Pope at Viterbo, and
one Richard, of the Family of the Hannibals (which is the best in all Rome) was
Keeper of the Conclave, two Cardinals of the Vrsini did what they could to
hinder the Election, unless Richard, who was a bitter Enemy to the Vrsini,
would restore Vrsus, Nephew to Nicolas lately deceased, to his Government of
Viterbo, from which he had not long before deposed him. For this reason the
people of Viterbo sided with Richard, went into the Conclave, took the
Cardinals and imprisoned them. Which when it was known at Rome, the same
faction of the Hannibals drove the Vrsini out of the City: who seeing they were
forced to depart, went all together, and retired as far as Proeneste. So that
the French Cardinals (when the Vrsini were gone) out-voted the Italians, and
chose a French Pope about the end of the fifth month.

MARTIN IV.
MARTIN the fourth, formerly called Simon, a Cardinal Priest of S. Caecilie,
and a French man of Tours, being chosen Pope, would not be crowned at Viterbo,
because he thought that City ought not to be made use of in such a solemn
occasion, where the Cardinals had been so assaulted. And therefore he went to
Orvieto, an ancient City, and there performed all the Ceremonies upon the 23d
day of March. And upon Easter day he created six Cardinals; of which the Earl
of Millain had the Title of S. Marcellin and Peter; and Benedict Cajetanus had
that of S. Nicolas in the Prison. As for Charles, the King, he not only
received him kindly when he came to him, but he gave him his former Senatorian
Dignity, whereof Nicolas had deprived him. But this was not so very well
approved on by all, because it was like to cause great Tumults in the City, the
Vrsini being now restored and the Hannibali banished. For Charles was a mighty
Enemy to the Vrsini, for Nicolas's sake, whom he hated. For this reason John,
to revenge the injuries done to his Brother Latinus, and in defense of the
Dignity conferred upon himself by the Romans, got a good Army together, and
marching toward Viterbo, spoiled all their Country far and near. But Martin,
who was then in Montefiascone, being concerned at the misery of the Viterbeses,
sent Matthew, a Cardinal of the Vrsine Family to Rome in all haste to compose
the business; who took John, the Captain of the Roman People, whom he met upon
the Road, along with him. Thither came all the Heads of the Factions by command
from the Legate, especially Richard Hannibal, to be absolved by the Legate from
that Interdiction, that he incurred at Viterbo, for breaking into the Conclave,
and imprisoning the Cardinals Vrsini. He therefore laid himself at the
Cardinals feet, with a Rope about his neck, (as the greatest sign of penitence)
and after he had begged pardon was absolved. Peace being thus made between both
the factions, and the Roman Army called back from plundering the Viterboses,
the Pope immediately grants the Romans a Power to choose two Senators out of
themselves, that should govern the City. Accordingly two were chosen, Hannibal,
Son of Peter Hannibali, and Pandulphus Savelli, who ruled the City very well
all the time they were in Office: Especially at that time when Pope Martin, at
the request of Charles King of Sicily, excommunicated Palaeologus for not
keeping the Articles of Alliance made between them. But then Palaeologus
fearing Charles's Power, made a private League with Peter King of Aragon, who
laid claim to the Kingdom of Sicily in right of his Wife Constantia, Manfred's
Daughter and Corradin's Niece. Hereupon they prepared a great Navy at the
common charge of 'em both: which made the Pope send to Peter, to know of him,
what he meant by all those preparations. Peter told him, that if he thought his
Shirt could know what his intentions were, he would tear it from his Body. So
the Legate went away without any satisfaction: And Peter when he had gotten his
Navy ready sails into Africa, where he pillaged the Coast at Tunis extremely,
and then returning into Sardinia expected to hear of some new commotions in
Sicily by the contrivance of John Prochita, according to an agreement they had
made. In the mean time new broils arose in Lombardy. For the Viconti a noble
Family there, under the command of Luchino, drove the Turriani another potent
Family out of Millain. Which Luchino was afterward sent as Lieutenant to the
Emperor into Tuscany, where he resided at St. Miniato, and plagued the
Fl^rentines and Luccases with grievous incursions, not regarding the Popes
interdictions, with which he thought to have affrighted him from troubling
these his Friends and Allies. Those also of Perugia were now in Arms, and did
so press the Fuligneses, that they took their City, and demolished part of the
Walls. Thereupon the Pope excommunicated 'em; but paying a good sum of money to
him for penance they soon obtained his pardon. In the mean time the Sicilians,
whose motions Peter attended in Sardinia, could no longer endure the pride and
licentiousness of the French, and therefore were persuaded by John Prochita to
enter into a Conspiracy against Charl^s, that upon such a day in the Evening
when they should hear such a Bell ring, they should fall on and kill the French
without respect to Sex or Age. In which action it is said, they were so true to
their barbarous Promise, that even those Sicilian Women were killed who were
with Child by French men; Hence comes it that the Sicilian Vespers is grown a
Byword for any great Massacre. At this time Guido Appius met with ill fortune,
when he was sent in the Popes name with eight hundred French Horse to recover
Ro^agna. For as they sat before Forli, and the Citizens would fain have
s^l^ied out, one Guido Bonatus an excellent Astrologer* exhored his fellow
Citizens to wait till such time as the Stars should promise good luck, and make
their Sally when he gave 'em the Signal. They did as he would have them, and
breaking forth in the very nick of time they killed Guido and almost all his
French men. Thus was that City freed from a great Siege. But Charles when he
heard how the Sicilians had revolted, and of their cruelty too, went over into
Sicily with a very considerable Army. And first he besieged Messina, which he
had certainly taken by Surrender, but that the French, desirous of Revenge had
threatened to raze the City. Besides Peter of Aragon, who expected (as I told
you) such commotions, no sooner heard of it, but he comes over with all speed
from Sardinia into Sicily, and arriving at Palermo, he was very kindly received
by the Citizens and all the other Sicilians, who also saluted him by the name
of King, whilst all the Rabble flocked about him. Charles was frighted at this,
and therefore leaving Messina he went immediately into Calabria, to stay for
his Son the Prince of Salerno, who, he knew would come very shortly out of the
Province of Narbonne with some Recruits. Charles expostulated with Peter of
Aragon, that he who was his Relation, nay of the same blood too should dare to
invade his Kingdom. To which he replied, that he was so compassionate, as that
he could not deny his assistance to a miserable people that were so hardly
used: though he said too, that the Kingdom belonged to him by right of
inheritance, as he was Husband to Constantia, Monford's Daughter, and Corradins
Niece. At last when words grew high on both sides, it came to a Duel; upon this
condition though, that each King should have an hundred men along with him, as
being to engage in such a weighty Combat, and the place where they were to
fight was to be Bourdeaux. For both these Kings were akin to the King of
England, who with the assistance of Pope Martin at length made up the
difference. But when Peter, for all that, made War upon Charles, Martin sent
Gerard, Cardinal of Parma, his Legate to Naples, not only to keep the People in
Allegiance to him, but to assist him who was but a youth with good counsel and
the awe of his presence. But when Peter had sent Rogeris Lorias, his Admiral to
Naples, Charles moved toward the Enemy and not far from Naples was conquered
with the loss of a great many men: nor only so, but he was taken, and carried
first into Sicily and then into Aragon. But this, without question, had never
happened if he would but have hearkened to the Legate, (as he should have done)
who was of a contrary opinion; who dissuaded him and told him that such a
mighty Kingdom as that was, ought not to be hazarded at that rate. For not long
after his Father Charles came with a great Navy, which would have made him able
to have coped with the Enemy before he was a Conqueror. But Martin being
concerned very much for Charles's misfortune, excommunicates Peter of Aragon,
and gives his Kingdom for a prey to any one that can or will take possession of
it; absolving his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance to him, and exciting
all Christians against him, as an Usurper of the Churches Patrimony, according
to his opinion. Nay, he would have sent the Church-Militia to help Charles, but
that he was fain to wage War in Romagna himself against the Forleses, who by
the aid of Guido Earl of Monford, were so bold as to revolt from the Church,
and attaque some Forts thereabouts. But when Guido himself repented of what he
had done, and had made Peace with the Pope, he not only demolished the Walls
of Forli in revenge to Guido Appius, but he recovered a great part of Romagna
in a short time. He had also taken Vrbino as sure as he attempted it, but that
Rubeus Anguillarius, Earl of Tuscany died in the action. There were at that
time two Generals that commanded the Camp: one of which was sent into Tuscany
to defend that part of the Country that lies toward the Soane, and the other
(whom they call Earl of Giovenazzo) continued the Siege by the Popes Order,
whilst Guido Montefeltranus supplied the very Townsmen with necessaries
underhand. But in the mean time when Martin was at a loss from which of the
two States, Pisa or Genoa, he should desire Auxiliaries against Peter of
Aragon, there arose immediately such a quarrel between them about the
possession of Corsica, that they themselves were fain to beg assistance one
against another. Then the Pope sent word to the Apostolical Legate, that he
should keep the people in order, till Charles came with a supply. After which
Charles went into Naples, and having settled the peoples minds sailed into
Africa where he died of a Fever: upon which occasion all the weight of the
Government devolved upon the Legate. At that time there was a rumor, and almost
a current Report, that Philip Son of the French King, and Earl of Artois was
coming to receive that Kingdom. But that did not frighten Peter from spoiling
the Country, because he was sure he came with a small number: For his Father
Philip was going into Aragon with a great Army, to take possession of Peter's
Kingdom, which Martin the Pope, by heavy Censures first laid upon him, had
exposed as a booty to any one that could get it. But the Pope being surrounded
with so many cares, and those increased too by new tumults at Orvieto (for the
Gibellins had banished the Guelphs) he went to Perugia: where not long after he
died of an hectic Fever in the fourth year, and first month of his
Pontificate, and was buried in the Cathedral. At whose Tomb many sick, blind,
deaf, and lame people that are brought thither, recover from God their former
health by the merits of this most holy Pope.

HONORIVS IV.
HONORIVS the fourth, a Roman, of the Race of the Sabini (a very noble Family)
formerly called James, a Cardinal Deacon, was made Pope at Perugia, and came to
Rome in the year 1285. when his Brother Pandulphus was Senator. For Pandulphus
was esteemed a Person of so much severity, and Justice, that whenever the
Citizens of Rome had a mind to purge the City of Robbers, Ruffians, Thieves and
Parricides (of which at that time there were great numbers in Rome, among the
Seditious) they desired no other Senator than Pandulphus. And he, though
mightily tormented with the Gout both in his feet and his hands; yet in courage
and constancy of mind he was inferior to none of those that had their health.
Honorius also was sometimes troubled with the same Distemper, insomuch that he
was forced to make use of certain Instruments made for the purpose to support
him, when he performed the Priestly Office. But he was a Man of that Conduct
and Prudence, that he did not seem much deficient in corporal strength: for he
himself could discern rather more of the Affairs of the City, than those that
were in it besides, put 'em all together. He lived in the Mount di S. Sabina,
and built him a curious Palace there (whose ruins are yet to be seen) which
drew many of the Romans to live by him; so that the Mount began from his time
to be very full of Inhabitants. He was resolved to injure no Man whilst he was
Pope, but on the contrary to do what good he could to all; and therefore being
provoked by the indignities which Peter King of Aragon offered to him, by
endeavoring to get the Kingdom of Sicily, he confirmed Martin's Interdictions
against Peter. But Rodulphus the Emperor, having a great mind to raise money,
sent his Chancellor (one of the Family of the Flisci) into Tuscany; to make
all the Country free, especially those who would buy their Liberty. Those of
Lucca paid upon that account 12000 l. The Florentines six thousand: and as soon
as they were made perfectly free, they created a certain kind of Officers
(which they call Arts-masters) with a Sword Bearer. This Sale did not displease
Honorius, though it looked too mean for such a great Prince; because by that
means the Patrimony of the Church would be more secure, he thought, when the
Emperor had no more power to oppress those free Cities. But whilst the King of
France besieged Girona, and Peter of Aragon was sollicitous, how to hinder the
carriage of Provisions from Narbonne into the Enemies Camp, he was engaged in a
sharp Conflict, where he received a deadly Wound, of which not long after he
died for want of looking to. So that Girona was surrendered upon Terms, and
submitted to the King of France; though he did not long survive the Conquest.
For he died of a Fever which he caught in the Camp, as he was besieging
Perpignano. His Navy too, not long after that, was taken and burnt in the Port
of Narbonne by Roger Loria. Peter of Aragon had two Sons, Ferdinand and James;
whereof he left Ferdinand, his eldest Son, King of Aragon by his Will, and
James, King of Sicily. But when the old Kings were dead, in that manner, as I
have told you, the Wars devolved upon the young ones; who attempted on both
sides to make those of Pisa, and the Genoeses, who were excellent Seamen, of
their Party. But these two States heing incensed and armed against each other,
engaged so furiously at Malora, an Island near the Port of Pisa, that those of
Pisa lost forty Ships, or Galleys, and twelve thousand men; which were partly
slain, and partly taken. Honorius took this misfortune of theirs so much to
heart, that he had like to have interdicted the Genoeses, who pursued the men
of Pisa with too much animosity. And that unhappy day gave such a shock to
those of Pisa, that they never retrieved themselves since. But Edward King of
England went at that time into Gascoigne, to make peace between Charles, a
Youth, Son to the King of France (who I told you was taken in War) and
Ferdinand, King of Aragon. The business went as he would have it, and they
treated about Charles's freedom, when at the same time the Apostolical Legate,
and the Earl of Arras, with the assistance of the Earl of Avellino, possess
themselves of the City Catina, and send over thither an Army raised out of
Tuscany. For this reason Edward returned home without success. But Roger Loria
advanced King Ferdinand's fortune by taking the French Fleet as it came back
out of Sicily. Honorius could not engage in this War, because he was invaded in
Romagna by Guido Feltrini. But at length, when he had conquered Guido he
recovered all Romagna in a short time: and not long after died, two years and a
day after he was made Pope. His body was carried in great State from S. Sabina
to S. Peter's, and buried in a Marble Tomb, which is yet extant among those
that Pope Pius collected, as the Arms of his Family and the Inscription
declare; And indeed he deserved all the honor paid to his dead Corpse; because
he was a very upright Man, and a great lover of Christian Piety. For he
confirmed not only the Order of the Carmelites, which was not very well
approved of in some Councils, and changed their black Cloaks for white ones;
but he did the same also by the order of Eremites, which was disapproved on at
Paris. But the only Cardinal, he made, during his Pontificate, was John
Boccamatius, Bishop of Frascati: for he would say, that none but good and
learned men ought to be taken into so great a Society; not those that were
illiterate, and ignorant in the manage of humane Affairs. He loved Courtiers
so, as that he would go every year, especially in the Summer, to Tivoli, on
purpose to avoid the Heat of the Town, which causes many Diseases. When
Honorius was dead, the Sea was vacant ten months. For the Conclave being
summoned to meet at St. Sabina, a great many of the Cardinals were taken sick
of a sudden. Out of whom there died Jordan Vrsin, Earl of Millain, Hugh an
English man, Gervase of Anjou, Dean of Paris, and Antherius, an excellent
Person. For this reason they dismissed the Conclave, and deferred the matter
till a more seasonable time; especially because of the Earthquakes, which were
then so great, that they thought Heaven it self would be angry with 'em, if
they did it at that time.

NICOLAS IV.
NICOLAS the fourth, of Principato-citra, an Ascolese, formerly called Jerome,
a Brother, and General of the Order of Friars Minors, and after that a Cardinal
Priest, was made Pope at St. Sabina, the tenth month after Honorius's death,
and placed not only in Peter's Sea, but in the Saint's own Chair. After that
he went to Rieti to avoid some Tumults at Rome; and there he created Cardinals
of almost all Religions. For he loved all men alike, nor did he think that he
owed more to his Relations, than to any good man. The difference between Virtue
and Vice caused him to incline more to one man than another. Some of those that
he made Cardinals were called Neapolio, Petrus Columna, Hugo Colionius, a
famous Doctor of the Order of Preachers, Matthaeus Aquasparta, General of the
Minors, and Bishop of Porto. About a year after he came back to Rome, when City
broils were somewhat appeased, and lived at S. Mary's the Great, which Church
he and James Columna repaired, as appears upon the great Portico, where the
Image of our Savior, the Pope, and James the Cardinal are yet to be seen. The
same Pope repaired the front, and the back-part of the Lateran, and adorned it
with Fret-work, as the Inscription tells us. In the mean time the Kings of
Aragon and Sicily conclude a Peace upon these terms; That King Charles should
be set at Liberty, and settle James of Aragon in the Kingdom of Sicily at his
own charge. And if he did not do so in three years time, he promised to return
to Prison; giving his two Sons for Hostages; one of which was named Charles
(who was afterward created King of Hungary and called Marcellus) and the other
Lewis, who, when he had lived a good life in the Order of S. Francis, was
canonized for a Saint. Whilst these things were transacted in Europe, the Great
Turk made use of that occasion, and whilst the Christians quarreled among
themselves thought himself secure. Wherefore he goes with fire and sword, and
razes Tripoli a famous City in Asia, killing all the Christians that were there
in Garrison. Said, and Baru^i suffered the like Calamity, having no body to
assist 'em. Aca, of old called Ptolema^s, stood, because they made a truce with
the Sultan for two years. And to defend it for time to come, Nicolas the Pope
did all he could to get Soldiers under Christ's Banner, and paid them with his
own money. They were about one thousand five hundred: but there were a great
many more that followed 'em, without being enrolled, without Colors, or any
body to conduct 'em. Who when they were come to Aca, they did the Christians as
much hurt as they did the Saracens, But the Sultan demanded what was his due,
as he pretended, which when the Christians refused to restore, he threatened
utter ruin to 'em all. Then there arose a great question among the Christians,
who should have possession of Aca; for the Patriarch of Constantinople, the
Templars of Germany, the King of Cyprus, and Charles King of Sicily did all lay
claim to it. Those also of Pisa had a mind to demand Aca and lawfully (as they
said themselves) but that a War which brake out in Tuscany diverted them from
such an ill design. For they starved Earl Vgulinus in Prison, where they kept
him, his two Sons and two Nieces; and after that, did so far animate the
Gibellins against the Guelphs, that they threatened equal destruction to 'em
all. They fell first upon those of Arezzo, because the banished Gibellins
desired it; when William Petramala was Bishop of that place, who was aided by
Earl Feltri the Florentine. But the Florentines did not think themselves strong
enough, and therefore they sent Charles the Second also thither with some
forces, as he was going through their Country to wait upon the Pope. Their
Camps were pitched near one another in the Country of Tipherno, by which name
they now call the City, having altered the name of the Castle. Immediately as
the Battle was just begun there were a great many Florentines killed; but not
long after the case was altered, and, though William the Bishop, and Earl
Feltri were slain, yet there fell of the Gibellini three thousand, and two
thousand were taken. The Neighbors call the place where they fought,
Campaldino. Charles having obtained so great a Victory goes straight to
Nicolas, and gets the favor to hold of him in Fee the Crown of both the
Sicilies. Which when James of Aragon understood, he presently goes and attaques
Cajetta. But lest any thing should be wanting that might disturb the quiet of
Christendom, a fatal War broke out between Philip of France and Edward King of
England, which did not only trouble the Christians in Asia very much, but also
gave our Enemies great confidence and hopes that they should totally obliterate
the Christian Name throughout all Asia. For the Sultan, who at that time was
sick, had sent an hundred and fifty thousand men to Acra under the Command of
his Son. But the Siege continuing for two months, the Father died in that time,
and the Son succeeded him; who attaqued the Town with much greater resolution.
For he filled the Trenches, and promised all the plunder to the Soldiers. But
when he had fought his way to the very Walls, he was beaten back by the
Christians, (who made a Sally upon him) even to his Camp, and had a great many
of his men hurt in the Action. Whilst they were thus employed in Asia, Nicolas,
the Pope, sends two Legates a Latere (as they call'em) i. e. Benedictus
Cajetanus, and Gerard of Parma with all speed into France, to make a Peace
between the two Kings and animate 'em against the Saracens who then besieged
Acra. For he had made a Peace between James of Aragon, and Charles who was a
Captive, upon those Conditions, that I told you before, that they might all be
the more free to go against the common Enemy. Nay he had begun to provide a
Navy, as thinking himself almost sure of a Peace; but to no purpose. For the
Kings did not obey him, when he gave 'em good advice, nor did they that were in
Garrison at Ptolemais agree so well among themselves, as to keep out the Enemy
according to their power. For having daily lost a great many of their men,
there were at that time but twelve thousand left; who afterward made their
escape in a Corsaire (or a swift sailing Frigot kept for that purpose) along
with the Patriarch of Jerusalem. And though at first they had good shipping,
yet at last they were Shipwrecked near Cyprus. But the Sultan entered the City
when the Inhabitants had left it, and destroyed it immediately with fire and
sword in the 196th year after Godfry had taken it. But amidst so many
Calamities, the Island of Cyprus, and Armenia the less, formerly called
Cilicia, continued Christian. At that time Nicolas was very urgent with
Rodulphus the Emperor to send his Army into Asia, for fear the Enemy should get
the remaining part of it. But Rodulphus soon after died, and Adolphus Hasso was
chosen to be his Successor; who, demanding the Rights of the Empire, was killed
in a fight at Spire by Albertus Son to Rodulphus. He was indeed a brave Man,
but had neither men nor money enough: and that was the reason that they said,
he was rather overpowered by multitude, than fairly Conquered. But Nicolas, the
Pope, through discontent (as some suppose) to see all things go cross to his
expectation, and being conscious that he had favored Parties more than became
a Pope, died at Rome in the fourth year, first month, and eighth day of his
Pontificate near S. Mary's the Great; and is there buried, at the upper end of
the Church, by Cardinal Columna, as you may see upon the Pavement, where his
Picture is in Porphyry. But after his death the Cardinals went to Perugia, that
they might choose a Pope with greater freedom, but protracted the business by
quarrels among themselves two years and three months. In the mean while Michael
Palaeologus, Emperor of Constantinople dies: but the Priests and the Monks
would not suffer his body to be buried in an holy place, because he joined with
the Western Church in the Council of Lions. And indeed Andronicus, Michael's
Son, would have declared himself of the same opinion as the Latins, if he had
been assisted by our Party. But when the Sea was vacant, Andronicus was
destitute of Friends, and so at last apostarized from the faith. But Charles
the Second, King of Naples, seeing what would come of it, made a journey from
Narbonne to Perugia, and exhorted the Cardinals several times to agree, and
perfect their Election. And would have continued his importunity, had he not
been severely rebuked by Benedict Cajetan, of Anagni; who told him that he was
too urgent, and thereby seemed to lay a kind of restraint upon the Cardinals,
whose Votes ought to be free*

CAELESTIN V.
CAELESTIN the fifth, formerly called Petrus Moroneus, by profession an
Anchorite, of Sergna, who dwelt in an Abbey two miles from Sulmona, was made
Pope at the request of King Charles, and Cardinal Latinus. A thing, which all
people wondered at so much the more, because his holy retirement had voluntarily
removed him out of the prospect of any such Grandeur. After his Creation he
went to Aquila, and thither he summoned all the Cardinals to him from Perugia.
But they were very importunate with him both by Letters and Messengers, that he
would come to Perugia, which was a City more agreeable to the Dignity of a
Pope. Notwithstanding Caelestin's Will was at last obeyed, who would needs have
it so, because he understood that King Charles was of the same mind. Thereupon
they went all thither, and paid such homage to Caelestin as became a Pope. Now
Ptolomy says, there were two hundred thousand men at his Coronation; and that
he himself was there too. I suppose the people were taken with the newness of
the thing, and the holiness of the Person: that a man, that was an Eremite
should come to such Honor (as if he had been preferred by Heaven it self)
after so long a Contest between the Electors. As soon as he entered upon the
Popedom, he made twelve Cardinals; men of the greatest integrity, of whom two
were Eremites. But because he did not alter his former way of living and take
upon him the Grandeur of a Pope, he was so kind, and accessible to all that
made suit to him, as that he granted the same things to several persons; which
brought not only a Contempt upon his Dignity, but was a lessening to the
Majesty of a Pope: For indeed he was unfit for public business by reason of
the obscure life, which he had led in the Wilderness. Hereupon they talked of
deposing him; especially after the death of Latinus the Cardinal, a good man,
by whose assistance Caelestin had hitherto made shift to support himself under
so vast a burden. But some of the Cardinals being very instant, especially
Benedict Cajetan (a cunning man, and well skilled in the Civil and Canon Law)
who was a great favorite of the Popes, that he would remove himself from the
Pontificate, lest the Church of God should be endangered by the unskilfulness
of its Governor, he began to think of laying down his Papal Office. But King
Charles was so much concerned at his levity and superstition, that he takes the
good man to Naples, and endeavors to convert him from such base thoughts;
whilst the people cried out in all places, that they would have no other Pope,
but Caelestin, and heartily beseech'd his Holiness that so it might be. To whom
the Pope made answer, That he would do nothing but what God would have him do,
and what he thought might be for the good of Christendom. At that the Cardinals
that desired he would leave the Papacy were very urgent with him to do it as
soon as he could; telling him the danger all Christendom was in by his
ignorance, and that all the mischiefs that then befell the Church would be put
to his Account at Doomsday. The holy, simple Man was moved with what they
said, and told 'em he would do as they would have him, if it might lawfully be
done. Whereupon there was an Order made by unanimous consent, that the Pope
should have liberty to depose himself. Which Constitution Boniface the eighth
his Successor afterward confirmed, as appears in the sixth Book of the
Decretals. Then Caelestin returned to his private life again, and gave the
Cardinals power to put another Pope in his place, in the sixth month of his
Pontificate. And Benedict Cajetan by that means, having most Votes, was chosen
Pope; who seized upon Caelestin by the way as he was going into his Hermitage,
committing him to the custody of the Governor of a certain Castle, called Fumo,
in Campagna di Roma. For which he said his reason was, lest the Authors of
Sedition should one time or other bring some calamity upon the Church of God
under his conduct; although he really admired the Sanctity of the Man. However,
this is certain that Boniface was very ungrateful, as well as subtle, first, to
chouse a good man out of his Dignity, to satisfy his own ambition, and then to
take him (when he would have retired again to his solitude) and keep him in
Prison, till he died for very grief, before his time, in seventeen months after
he first came to the Pontificate. There are some that say, this Caelestin was
so famous for Miracles after his death, that there were frequent Discourses in
Councils about his Canonization; and that many people worshipped him as a Saint,
and put him in the Catalogue of Confessors. His Anniversary is kept every year
on the 17th of July (which was the Day of his death) by an Order of Clement the
fifth made at Avignon.

BONIFACE VIII.
BONIFACE the eighth, born at Anagni in Campagna di Roma, formerly called
Benedict Cajetan, was made Pope at Naples, upon Christmas Eve in the year 1294.
He was a man of great Learning and Experience: as having lived long in Public,
and risen to the Popedom by all the degrees of Honor, though not without some
imputation of Pride and Ambition. For whilst he was Cardinal-Priest of S.
Martins in the Mount, he was so desirous of the Papal Dignity, that he omitted
no fraudulent or other indirect means, that might in his opinion conduce to his
obtaining of it. Besides, he was a man of that arrogance that he contemned
every body, and recalled some Indulgences granted by Nicolas the fourth and
Caelestin the fifth. He also persecuted the Gibellines extremely: from whence
arose that quarrel between the Pope and the Gibellines of Columna, who also
maintained their party against the Pope at Anagni. Thereupon he began to
calumniate, and traduce them in general; but especially two Cardinals, Peter
and James, two famous Men of the same Family; that upon the death of several
Popes, they had wasted the Churches Treasure, and spread abroad scandalous
Pamphlets against his own Person. For after he had done 'em Injury, they did
indeed write to several Kings, Princes and States concerning Boniface's
Arrogance and Ambition: how he had possessed himself of the Papal Sea against
all right and reason, after he cheated Caelestin out of it, and then put him in
Prison. For there are some that write, how Boniface sent some cunning Rogues
privately in the Nightime, to speak in a strange Tone through Caelestins
Chamber-Wall, and tell the poor, simple man (as it were by a Voice from Heaven)
that he must lay down the Popedom if he would be saved. The Cardinals were
cited but did not appear, because they feared Boniface's severity and
resolution. Wherefore they retired to Nepi, with all the Family of the
Columneses; and being declared Schismatics by a public Decree, they had their
Benefices, Dignities, Estates, Castles, and Towns taken from them. Which
Deprivation Boniface afterward reduced into the form of a Decree, as appears in
the Book called Sextus. After that Boniface raised a great many Men and Arms,
to quell them, and besieged Palestrina, where they were ingarison'd with one
Sarra a famous Man, who was their Uncle. And when they got away from thence,
after he took and plundered the Town, he pursued 'em to Zagalora, and Columna:
from whence also they were forced to fly not long after by reason of the
multitude of their Enemies, by whom these Castles likewise were destroyed, but
especially that of Columna, which was their native Country. But the Cardinals
got away from thence too, and went to Rieti; though Sarra staid a long time in
the Woods at Antium, for fear of Boniface's cruelty. But falling into the hands
of certain Pirates, he was put to the Oar, and by that means suffered a great
deal of misery: though he was more willing to endure banishment and hardship in
that manner, than to feel Boniface's Tyranny, who hated the whole Race of the
Gibellines. It Is well known what he said to Prochetus, Archbishop of Genoa,
when he came and laid himself at his feet upon an Ash Wednesday; For whereas
the Priest uses to say, Remember, man, that thou art Ashes and into Ashes shall
thou return; he altered some of the words and said, Remember, man, that thou
art a Gibellin, and with the rest of the Gibellines into Ashes shall thou
return: and, with that, he threw some Ashes into his Eyes, not upon his head,
as the custom is. Nay, he deprived him of his Archbishopric, for the very
name of the Gibellines; though he restored him afterward, when he understood
that the Cardinals of Columna, did not go to Genoa, as he supposed they had
done. The Columneses being banished in this sort, Boniface appointed a double
Anniversary, one in honor of the Apostles and Evangelists, and another in
honor of those four Doctors of the Church, Gregory, Austin, Jerome, and
Ambrose. He likewise canonized Lewis (one of the King of France's Family, Son
to Charles the Second, who, some say, was professed of the Order of S.
Francis,) whilst he was at Civita Vecchia. After that he turned out the Secular
Canons from the Cathedral of Alby, and put Regulars in their room, at the
request of Bernard Castanetus, Bishop of the Place. He also put forth a sixth
Volume, or Code of the Pontificial or Canon Law, which was compiled by three
very learned Men (according to his Order) with the addition of some new Decrees
of his own. The City of Gubio, which by the instigation of the Gibellines had
revolted from the Church, he in a short time recovered. He denied Albertus Duke
of Austria to confirm him in the Empire, though he petitioned for it several
times. But when James of Aragon was dead, and Robert, Son of Charles, and Duke
of Calabria or Terra d' Otranto was gone over into Sicily, and had taken
Catina, there brake out such a War of a sudden, that almost all Italy was in an
Uproar. For the Sicilians who favored the Aragoneses, got a Navy together, and
not only conquered Philip, Robert's Brother, but took him and put him in
Prison. Whereupon Robert left Catina, and returned into Italy without
accomplishing his Designs. But Frederick of Aragon coming out of Spain with an
Army into Sicily, did not only recover all Sicily, but Terra d' Otranto too.
In Tuscany, those of Genoa did burn with so much hatred against the Inhabitants
of Pisa, that they not only took Leghorn and burnt it, but they sunk Merchants
Ships in the mouth of the River, to hinder the men of Pisa from sailing out.
These things were carried on in Italy, to the no small detriment of the
Country; whilst the Pope sat still, nor would interpose his Authority to make
Peace in any place. And lest you should think Heaven was at peace with Mankind,
there was of a sudden such an Earthquake, as never was known before, which
lasted at several places a great many Days, and threw down many Houses. The
Pope was then, with all the whole Court, at Rieti: and fearing lest he should
be knocked on the head with the fall of Houses, he caused a little Hutt to be
built of small planks, in a wide Field which was in the Cloister of the Friars
Preachers; and there he kept for some time, though it were bitter cold Weather.
For this Commotion began upon St. Andrews day. There appeared also at that time
a Comet, which was a sign of some great Calamity to come. But Boniface after so
many and such continued Earthquakes came to himself, and made several
Cardinals, of which number were the Archbishop of Toledo, Richard of Siena*
Nicolas of Treviso, Master of the Order of Preachers, John Murro, General of
the Minors, and one Peter, a Spaniard. He also kept a Jubilee in the year 1300.
and gave a full pardon of all their sins to those that had visited the Apostles
Tombs, after the manner that is prescribed in the Old Testament; though the
Jews at first had quite another sentiment of this Affair. For they kept a
Jubilee every fiftieth Year, wherein Debtors were released from their
Creditors, as Josephus says, and Servants, or Slaves challenged their freedom.
From whence the Jubilee imports liberty both in mind and body. For they are
truly said to be free, whose sins are forgiven. He commanded it to be kept
every hundredth year. For this reason, that year, there came such a multitude
of people to Rome from all parts, that you could hardly stir in the streets,
though they are very large and spacious, it was so thronged. There came to Rome
at that time Charles Earl of Valois, Brother to Philip of France, who married
the Daughter of Balwin late Emperor of Constantinople, and got leave of
Boniface, that his Father-in-law might endeavor to recover the Empire, of
which by force he had been deprived. Boniface was willing to gratify him,
because he intended to make use of their assistance toward sending an Army into
Asia, to recover Jerusalem. But whilst things were coming to a settlement, he
made Charles sole Governor of Peter's Patrimony, and sent a Legate into
Tuscany, to appease the new broils there. For instead of Gibellins and Guelphs
they were called Whites, and Blacks. But the Legate could do no good though he
threatened to interdict them; nor could Charles of Valois who came thither by
the Pope's Order, restrain the Florentines so much, but that they did drive the
Albi, or Whites, out of their City and kill a great many of 'em besides. For,
at that time, the Gibellines were called, the Whites. But the Pope having long
premeditated of his Expedition to Jerusalem, he sends the Bishop of Apamea to
Philip King of France, to exhort him into the same Design. He went; but when he
came thither and could do no good by fair words, he was fain to make use of
Menaces. At which Philip was very angry and threw him into Prison. Which when
the Pope understood, he sent the Archdeacon of Narbonne, an excellent person,
thither immediately, to command Philip in his name, to set the Bishop of Apamea
at Liberty. If he would not do it, he bid him declare publicly, that the
Kingdom of France was fallen to the Church by Philips contumacy, and forasmuch
as he had broken the Law of Nations: and ordered him farther, to lay a Curse
upon him, and absolve all the French from their Allegiance. The Archdeacon did
all this very cheerfully, and compelled the King to dismiss the Bishop. But the
King, having a mind to take some part of a Revenge for the injuries offered to
him by the Pope, set forth an Edict, that no man should go out of his Kingdom
to Rome, or send money thither. The second year after the Jubilee Charles of
Valois went to Charles the Second his Cousin. At whose coming Frederick of
Aragon was concerned, and desired a Peace, which he obtained upon condition,
that he, restoring what he had taken in Italy, should keep Sicily as long as he
lived. But when Charles of Valois went out of Tuscany, the Whites, who were
driven out of Florence went in great numbers to Forli: among whom there was one
Dantes Aldegerius, a very learned Man, and an excellent Poet in his
Mother Tongue: this Person endeavored to return into his own Country several
times, but in vain; although he were assisted by the Bolognians, and
Canegrandis Governor of Verona, with whom he lived afterward for some time in
all the freedom of conversation. There are some Authors that tell us, how
Boniface about this time caused the body of one Hermanius, that had been
worshipped in Ferrara as a Saint for twenty years, to be taken out of the
ground, and burnt, because he had made a strict inquiry into his Heretical
Opinions. I suppose he was one of the Fratricelli, or Holy-Brotherhood, whose
Sect at that time was very numerous. In the mean time Philip King of France,
taking Boniface's Arrogance very ill, called an Assembly at Paris of the Clergy
and Nobility: and recounting the injuries that Boniface had done to him, his
Ambition, and Cheats which he had used to get the Popedom, which he was
unjustly possessed of, he appealed to the Sea Apostolic, which, he said, was
then vacant, and to the next Council. At which Boniface, being startled, called
a General Council, wherein he declared Philip and his Kingdom subject to Albert
the Emperor, whom in the beginning of his Pontificate he had repulsed. Then
Philip, thinking to tame his pride, sent Sarra of Columna (who was known and
redeemed from the Pirates, at Marseilles) with Nogaretius a French Cavalier,
and a trusty Soul, to Rome, for no other end (as he declared himself) but to
publish his Appeal. But he had a quite different Design. For Sarra, putting on
the disguise of a Slave, went into Campagna di Roma; where gathering to him as
many friends as he could, he sent Nogaretius with two hundred French Horse,
which he had listed out of Charles of Valois's Army, before to Ferentino; to
assist him, if need were. But himself went into Anagni privately, in the Night,
and by the assistance of the Gibellines, whom Boniface had teazed extremely for
a long time, he broke the Door open, and took the Pope by surprise in the House
where he was born, and so brought him to Rome, where thirty five days after he
died for grief, in the eighth year, ninth month and seventeenth day of his
Pontificate. He was buried in S. Peter's, in a Tomb that he built himself
before he died; which is yet to be seen in a Chapel which he made of
Fret-work. He likewise built the Pulpit and the Portico in the Lateran, where
Curses are pronounced upon the Sacrament; and where he laid that Curse upon
Philip King of France, and the Columneses. Thus died Boniface, who made it his
business rather to infuse terror than Religion into Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Nations, and States; and would pretend to give and take away Kingdoms, to
banish and to recall men, as he thought fitting, to satisfy his pride and
covetousness, which was unspeakable. Therefore let other Princes as well
Religious, as Secular, learn by his Example to govern the Clergy and the Laity,
not proudly and disdainfully, as this party of whom we speak, but holyly and
modestly, as Christ our King, and his Disciples, and true Followers. And let
'em desire rather to be beloved than feared; which is usually the just bane of
Tyrants. Some say he cherished the Feuds among the Italians, especially between
the Genoeses and the Venetians, who were two States, very powerful at Sea.

BENEDICT XI.
BENEDICT the eleventh, an Italian, of Treviso, formerly called Nicolas,
Cardinal of Ostia, was made Pope the first of November at Rome. For he entered
himself into the Order of Preachers, when he was but young; and so far
prevailed upon the Fraternity both by his Virtue and Learning, that they
preferred him gradually through all Offices till he was made General. From
which Station he was chosen Pope, and in that place also gave great
demonstration of his Virtue. For he lived after such a manner, that he may well
be reckoned among the number of those that are in Bliss. But as soon as he got
into the Apostolical Chair, he cites Nogaretius, and Sarra and all those of
Anagni that conspired to take Boniface, to come before him; but they not
appearing, he laid an heavy Curse upon them. He likewise heard King Philip's
cause, and absolved him from Boniface's Censures. And after that, he received
John and James, the two Cardinals of Columna, into favor; whom Boniface
persecuted, for being of the Guelphian Faction, more than became a Pope to do.
Nay he gave 'em their goods again, only he enjoined 'em to let the Red Hat,
that Boniface had taken from 'em, lie by for some short time. Having settled the
Affairs of the City in this manner, and made some Cardinals (of whom Nicolas a
Pratese of the Order of Preachers was one) he immediately applies himself to
procure a general Peace in Italy. And because there were greater tumults in
Tuscany than any where else, he sent Nicolas Bishop of Ostia thither with full
Commission; who made new Officers in Florence, and put 'em into the House,
which they had built for the reception of Magistrates, now called the Palais of
their Lords. But at that time Nicolas thought he might do more than so, and
therefore spoke about recalling the persons that were banished: Which Proposal
not taking effect as he would have had it, he declared a Curse upon them, and
went to Prato. But not long after, Benedict dying, Tuscany was again in an
uproar, for the banished of all places met near Bologna, resolving immediately
to enter Florence, and thereupon in the Night getting over the Walls which were
not then finished, near the Gate, that leads to Bologna, they advanced as far
as the Church of S. Separata, that was begun to be built a little before. But
whilst they looked too eagerly after the plunder, and consulted their friends
what they had best to do, they gave their Enemies time to take courage, and
raise Arms; insomuch that they quickly drove 'em out, and killed a great many
of their men. Then they got Robert Duke of Calabria to be their General, and
were grown confident they had strength enough not only to defend their own but
to attaque their Neighbors too. Hereupon they besiege Pistoia, which those
within it did so bravely defend, that with one Sally they beat Robert and all
his Army back to Prato. Benedict, who was a very good and holy Man, resolved,
when he had quieted Italy, to assist against the Tartars, who were fallen into
Syria and Palestine, having been solicited to it by frequent Messages. But
dying at Perugia (where he and all the Court were) in the eighth month and
seventeenth day of his Pontificate, he missed his Design. He was buried with
due pomp, in the Church of the Freres Preachers the fifth of June in the year
1303. Now the Miracles which he did after his death show him to have been an
excellent, holy Man; for he cured the sick, and cast out Devils. The Sea was
then vacant from the fifth of June to the seventh of July, in the year ensuing;
although the Cardinals that were kept in the Conclave for that purpose, were
importuned and sometimes threatened to make choice of a Pope.

CLEMENT V.
CLEMENT the fifth, a Gascon, Bishop of Bourdeaux, formerly called Bertrandus
Gottho, was made Pope in his absence at Perugia, though the College of
Cardinals had a long debate about the Election. But he approving of their
choice, went from Bourdeaux to Lions, and called all the Cardinals thither to
him: who obeyed him without any scruple; so that the Court of Rome was
translated into France in the year 1305. And there it remained for seventy four
years to the great damage of all Christendom, but especially of Rome; where the
Churches, great part of 'em, fell to ruin for want of use; whilst they were
absent, that ought to have taken care to repair 'em. There were present at the
Coronation of this Pope, Philip King of France, and his Brother Charles lately
returned from Italy, John Duke of Britaigne, who, together with some others,
was killed by a Wall, that fell upon him, whilst the Coronation pomp was going,
as is usual, through the City. Philip also was a little hurt by the same
accident. But the Pope though he was in such a consternation that he fell from
his Horse, yet he lost nothing but one Carbuncle out of his Crown, that some
say was valued at 6000 l. When the Solemnity was over, and all things in order,
Clement made a great many French Cardinals, but none out of Italy, though
indeed he did restore John and James of Columna to their entire Dignity of
Cardinalate, which they formerly enjoyed. Besides that he sent three Cardinals
to Rome, with the character of Senators; to govern not only the City, but all
Italy by their Conduct. But when he saw the Genoeses and those of Pisa involved
in a bloody War one against the other, and that Sardinia in the mean time was
taken by the Saracens, he gave that Island to Frederick King of Sicily upon
condition that he should beat out the Enemy and recover it as soon as possible:
the Venetians making a League with Charles the Second against the Emperor of
Constantinople, induced King Rassianus, to come and desire of the Pope to be
instructed in the Orthodox Faith, in the year 1307. But the Venetians and
Charles falling out again, they altered Rassianus's mind by their ill example.
In the mean time a new Heresy was broached at Novara by Dulcinus and Margaret,
which allowed Men and Women who lived together, freely to exercise all acts of
uncleanness: and the professors of it were called, the Brotherhood. Clement
endeavored to suppress them, and immediately sent thither a party of Soldiers,
with a Legate Apostolical; who partly with cold and hunger, partly with force of
Arms routed 'em from the Alps, where they harbored. But Dulcinus and Margaret
were taken alive, torn in pieces, and their bones burnt and scattered into the
Air. About that time Intelligence was brought, that the Templers, who were
formerly Christ's Soldiers, had revolted to the Saracens. For this reason all
of 'em that could be apprehended were killed, and their goods given partly to
the Rhodian Knights who had possessed themselves of that Island a little
before, and partly to Religious uses. Philip also, King of France turned all
the Jews out of his Territories, confiscating their goods for their Rogueries
and their covetousness. Not long after, Albert the Emperor being killed by his
Nephew John, almost all the Cities of Lombardy, chose their Captains or
Governors to be their Sovereign Lords; as at Verona, the Scaligeri, at Mantua,
the Bonacossi, at Padua, the Carraresi. The House of Este had been Masters of
Ferrara a long time before, but now they reduced Modena also. Nor did Charles
the Second King of Naples, think it below him to marry his Daughter Beatrice to
Azo, Marquis d' Este. But Friscus his Son, seeing he had gotten a Stepmother,
put his Father in Prison and there murdered him: and then possessed himself of
Ferrara, by the assistance of the Venetians who lent him aid to storm a Castle,
called Thedaldo. Then the Cardinal Pelagura was sent to Bologna from Clement,
to forbid the Venetians from meddling with Ferrara under the pain of a Curse;
those of Ferrara desiring to be under the Church. Wherefore the Venetians,
thinking it their best way to make haste, attaqued the Castle Night and Day
till at last they took it. Which when they had done, Friscus himself, greedy of
Revenge, set fire on half Ferrara, especially their Houses, who seemed to
desire a Change. The Citizens now not able to endure so great an injury any
longer, taking up Arms, turned Friscus out of his usurped Sovereignty and
surrendered themselves to the Venetians, who in all probability might be able
to defend them. At which Pelagura was very much incensed, and mustered up all
the Church forces immediately against the Venetians and those of Ferrara. But
Clement, understanding how obstinate, and how desirous of Dominion the
Venetians were, laid a Curse upon them with an Interdiction: commanding all
persons, wherever, to look upon them as no better than Slaves, and to take away
whatever they had from them, by which that trading Nation, suffered great
damage both in England and France. After this the Pope sent other Cardinals
into Tuscany, which was all one Scene of War, to command Robert Duke of
Calabria, the Florentines, and the other people of that Province, to break up
their Siege of Pistoia. They all obeyed him, save only the Florentines and
those of Lucca; so that he interdicted those two States. But Robert went away
for Avignion to complement the Pope, and then the Pistoieses, tired out by this
long Siege; at length concluded upon a Surrender. The Florentines and those of
Lucca pulled down the Walls of the City as soon as they had taken it, and
filling up the Trenches, divided the Country among them, leaving to the
Citizens their lives only, the City it self remaining equally subject to both.
But it was not long before the Florentines made themselves sole Masters of it,
by Walling it round within the Trenches, contrary to the Articles agreed upon
by them and those of Lucca. And that they might make all things the more
secure, they bought Aciano a Castle belonging to the Vbaldini, which they
pulled down: and in the Plain not far distant, they built Scarparia, as some
few years before they had done Castel-Franco and S. John's in the Valley of
Arno. Cardinal Vrsin was now sent into Tuscany, to compose the differences;
whom the Florentines and those of Lucca contemned, and thereby put him into
such a passion, that he publicly reiterated his Curses and his Interdiction.
For that reason the Florentines revenged themselves upon the Clergy by
exactions very long and very much. Nay farther, they used such severity upon
this occasion, that they put Cursio Donato (an eminent Citizen and one that had
deserved well of the Public) to death, for marrying Vgutio Fagiolanis
Daughter; such Enemies they were to all Nobility. But afterward they were
received into the Popes favor for assisting Pelagura, the Legate, in the
recovery of Ferrara, and the Castle of Thedaldo which was in possession of the
Venetians, in the year 1309. Charles the Second of Naples dying the same year,
his Son Robert was sent by the Pope to be his Successor; but he went to Bologna
to Pelagura, who presently in the name of the Church made him Governor of
Ferrara while it was yet in Arms. But he was to go on toward Naples, and so
left Dego Catelano, an eminent Person, with a Troop of Horse in the Garrison.
This Dego seeing he could not contein the People of Ferrara within their Duty
by fair or foul words, sent his Horse down upon them from the Castle, and
killed a great many of them, hanging up eight and twenty of the House of Este,
who aspired to the Dominion. At that time Henry of Lucenburgh was chosen
Emperor by the Germans, and confirmed by the Pope upon condition, that he
should come into Italy within two years and receive his Crown at Rome. This the
Pope did to the end that the commotions in Italy would be suppressed by the
arrival of the Emperor. Who promised to perform what the Pope had enjoined him,
and immediately sent Agents into Italy to all the States and Princes there; but
chiefly to the Florentines, who at that time harassed them of Arezzo. The
Florentines made answer, That so great a Prince as he was did not do prudently,
in endeavoring to bring Foreiners into Italy, which was a Country that, as
Emperor, he ought to defend from such with his utmost power. And that he did
not do well to protect them of Arezzo, who, he knew had banished the Guelphs,
their fellow Citizens: whereas it was the Emperors prerogative alone to banish
or to recall from Exile. They say that Dantes then told the Florentines, They
were blind, for making such a foolish answer to the Emperor, than which nothing
could be more to the disadvantage of their State, especially when so great and
Warlike a Prince with so great an Army approached them. But indeed they were
encouraged by the promises of King Robert, who as he went into his Kingdom,
gave them assurance that he would always be a Patron to the Guelphin Faction.
The Emperor was now advanced as far as Piedmont, where in the Plains all the
Princes, or Governors of Cities came to meet him. There were at that time two
principal Factions in Millain, the Turriani, and the Viconti. Guido Turriano
was Head of the Guelphs, as being Captain of the people (to use their own word)
and Maffeo Viconti of the Gibellins. And Guido fearing lest the Viconti should
get into Henry's favor before him upon the account of their Faction, he raised
an Army and encamped in the Country of Millain, to see, as he himself said, who
durst come into that City without his leave. When at the same time Maffeo sent
Agents to the Emperor to invite him to Millain, which was a City, he told him,
that was the very Mansion House of the Roman Empire. Thereupon Henry drew his
Forces near to the City, and made a great bustle, though Guido was got in
before him. But he allayed all Tumults by a composition which he made upon
these Terms; That Guido should have Marcelli, and Maffeo be Captain General of
his Horse. And thus the Emperor having gotten possession of Millain, almost all
the adjacent Cities surrendered presently, except Alessandria. Then he received
the Iron Crown at Millain, according to custom, but put the Citizens to so much
expense, that the Commonalty finding themselves rather oppressed than vested
with the Liberty they expected, betook themselves to their Arms: The Germans
seeing their men killed by both Factions, went out of the Suburbs into the
City, and called the Heads of the Parties to 'em. But Galeatius, Son to Maffeo
Viconti, left his Father at home and went with a considerable number of
Suppliants to wait upon the Emperor and told him, That the Turriani, affecting
Sovereignty, had made that uproar in the City. Whereupon the Germans joining
the Gibellin Faction, drove the Turriani, (after some small resistance at S.
Martes New-street) out of the City: from whence they fled in great numbers to
Vercelli by the persuasion of Guido. Thirty of this Faction being killed, of
which four were Turriano's. After this Henry moved toward Cremona and Crema,
and called the Guelphs before him there, who had turned out the Gibellins, but
he dealt mildly with the Cremoneses, because they rendered themselves so
freely, though he was a little severer upon the Cremeses, and demolished their
Walls. Which struck such terror into those of Parma (who by the persuasion of
one Gilbert Correggio had received the Rossi into their Town) that immediately
they drove out the Guelphs and took in the Emperors Lieutenant. Those of
Brescia defended themselves for some time: but being smartly attaqued by Henry,
they fled in the Night to the Mountains, and left the City quite empty. The
Germans entered it presently, and pulled down the Walls. At which Calamities of
their Neighbors, the people of Mantua, Verona, Vicenza, Padua, Treviso, and
Venice were so affrighted, that they immediately submitted to the Emperors
Orders. Those also of Piacenza turned out Albertus Scotus, Captain of the
Guelphs, and took in the Emperors Governor. Having settled Affairs after this
manner in Lombardy, the Emperor went through Piacenza to Genoa, along with
Amadeus of Savoy, attended by the Agents from Pisa and Genoa. Thither came
Ambassadors from Robert of Naples and Frederick King of Sicily, not long after;
the former to make a show of friendship, and the latter to assure him of the
real love which they had for him. For Robert had sent his Marshall into
Tuscany with two thousand Horse, to assist the Floretines and those of Lucca,
if need were, against the Emperor. But Henry went by Sea to Pisa, and having
sent his Landforces before him, did the men of Lucca a great deal of damage.
Hitherto I thought fit to relate all the inconveniences which were brought upon
the Italians, which some impute wholly to Clement, who solicited Henry to come
with an Army into Italy: Whilst others tell us, that Clement did it for the
advantage of the Country, because of the civil Discords among 'em, which were
the cause of much bloodshed in every City, nay in every little Castle. The
Citizens were slain, old men murdered, young Children dashed against the
ground, with a boundless cruelty. Whereupon Clement used that saying of Homer,
Let there be but one chief Lord, one Judge of all matters. Henry went on toward
Rome, and sent Lewis of Savoy, Son to Amadeus, with five hundred Horse before,
who taking up his quarters at one Stephen Columna's House, near the Lateran,
put the Vrsin Faction in a terrible fear. But Henry came first to Viterbo and
thence to Rome, where he was very kindly received not only by all the
Nobility, but by the Citizens in general. After that being Crowned by three
Cardinals, he made the Romans swear Allegiance to him, as the custom is, and
made a great Feast, to which he invited all the Noblemen of the City, except
the Vrsins. But lest in such a concourse of people, there should arise any
tumult through the animosities of some men, he planted his Soldiers in the
Theaters, Baths and other fortified places; in the strength of which Guards he
was so confident, that he had the courage to demand of the people a Tribute
which they never used to pay. Hereupon all the Citizens of both Factions fled
to the Vrsins, who had set good Guards about their House, which stood near the
Tiber and hard by Hadrians Bridge. At that the Emperor was so enraged, that he
summoned the Sea-Archers, whom the men of Pisa had sent him, to march into the
City against the Romans; but they were surprised and soon routed by John, the
Brother of King Robert, who had placed his Sea-forces under the Mount di S.
Sabina. He also let in the Horse who quartered not far off, and by the aid of
the Roman people forced the Emperor himself to retreat as far as Tivoli. After
him John, Robert's Brother went away by Command from the Cardinals, and left
the City quiet. But Henry going from Perugia arrived at Arezzo, where he
accused Robert the King of Treason; and because he did not appear upon Summons,
deprived him of his Kingdom, against the mind of Clement, who thought he had
done a thing of such consequence in a very improper place, besides that it was
none of his Prerogative. For he said, It was Popes peculiar Province to dispose
of the Kingdom of Sicily on both sides the Pharo. The Emperor marching from
Arezzo led his Army toward Florence and Lucca, who were Allies to Robert. But
seeing he was not able to storm a Town, he possessed himself of Poggibonci;
which when he had fortified, he declared War against the Seneses, because they
were so niggardly, and sparing in supplying him with Provisions. But falling
sick he went to the Bath at Macerata, from whence he came back to Bonconvento
much weaker than he was before. There, after some days, he died; but it was
suspected, he was poisoned by a Monk at Florence, who was induced by large
Rewards and Promises to give him the Eucharist dipped in Poison. The State of
Pisa (now that the Emperor was dead) feared the power of the Florentines, and
therefore chose Vgutio Fagiolano their Captain and sole Governor; who not long
after reduced those of Lucca, and took away their Lands from 'em, by the
assistance of the Cavalry, that had served under Henry. In the mean time
Clement was very much troubled not only at all the other evils that Italy
underwent, but that S. Constantines Church should be burnt down. Wherefore he
sent Money to the Clergy and people of Rome toward the repair of that Church,
though there was such scarcity and Dearth in his Country at that time, that he
could hardly buy himself Victuals and Drink. Which miseries were foretold by
frequent Eclipses of the Sun, several Comets, and the Plague which was almost
Epidemical. But Clement applied himself to settle the State of the Church, and
therefore he exercised his Episcopal Function three times, not only in making
several Cardinals, who were excellent Men, but in three Councils which he
called in several places and at several times he did many things with prudence
and deliberation. For he suppressed Dulcinus's Sect (as I told you) that
opposed the Churchmen, and took off the Templers, who were fallen into very
great Errors (as, denying Christ, etc.) and gave their goods to the Knights of
Jerusalem. He likewise withstood the King of France at Poictou when he made
unreasonable and unhandsom Demands; for the King would have had Boniface
censured and Nogaretius and Sarra absolved. The first request he never
obtein'd, but the second he at last had granted to him, upon Nogaretius's
Promise, that he would go against the Saracens for Penance. Which expedition
Clement himself had a great mind to, as appears by his Councils. Afterward he
canonized Caelestin the fifth by the name of Peter the Confessor, because
approved by Miracles; and set forth the Clementines, which he composed during
the Council at Vienna. But in succeeding time he was afflicted with diverse
Diseases: for he was troubled sometimes with a Dysentery, sometimes with a pain
in his Stomach, or his Sides, of which he died in the eighth year, tenth month,
and fifteenth day of his Pontificate. The Sea was then vacant two years, three
months, and seventeen days, whilst the Cardinals were at a stand, whom they
should choose. Nor was there less Discord among the Electors of the Empire,
upon the Death of Henry, some proposing Lewis of Bavaria, others Frederick,
Duke of Austria. And these two engaging in War one against the other, Frederick
was Conquered: at which Lewis grew so proud, that he not only called himself
Emperor, without Authority from Rome; but favored the Viconti in Lombardy, so
far, that they got into Millain. And this he did to make his own passage more
easy toward Rome, where he was to receive a golden Crown according to the
usual Custom. Then began the people of Tuscany, and all the Guelphs to tremble,
when they saw Lewis Emperor, and that he was likely to recover all the rights
of the Empire in a short time, by the help of the Viconti and Vgutio Fagiolani
who was sole Governor of Pisa and Lucca. Wherefore they endeavored to bring
over to their Party by Promises and Presents, Petramala, Bishop and Lord of
Arezzo, and Philip of Tarento, a Prince and Brother to King Robert. For Philip
at that time was very strong in Cavalry, and a very good Soldier.

JOHN XXIII.
JOHN the twenty third, formerly called James of Caturco, Bishop of Porto,
after a long debate between twenty three Cardinals, was chosen Pope at Lions,
and the fifth of September received the Pontifical Crown in the Cathedral
Church there. From thence he removed with the whole Court to Avignion, where he
made eight Cardinals in the Ember-week before Advent: some of which were James
of Caturco, his Sisters Son, and John Cajetan, Cardinal Deacon of S. Theodores,
of the Family of the Vrsins. Besides that, he canonized, for a Confessor, Lewis
Bishop of Toulouse, Son to Charles late King of Sicily, though there are some
that ascribe this Act to Boniface, as I told you before. He forced Hugo Bishop
of Caturco, to relinquish his Bishopric and Priesthood, and stripped him of
all his Pontifical Ornaments, as, the Ring, the Mitre, the Coife, the Cap, and
the Rocket. And after he had deprived, degraded, and (to use their own phrase)
delivered him over to the secular jurisdiction, he was tortured to Death for
conspiring against the Pope. The Church of Toulouse, which he loved entirely,
he made an Archbishopric; and improved six Castles that belonged to it into
so many Cities, that the Archbishop might have something under him which was
honorable, and worth his governing. He also joined Limosa, i. e. Wiselburg,
and the Abbey of S. Pontius to the Archbishopric of Narbonne; nay so much
addicted was he to Novelties, that he divided some single Bishoprics into two,
and united others that were distinct; turning Abbaties into Bishoprics and
Bishoprics into Abbaties. He likewise created new Dignities and new Societies
in the Church; and altered those, which had been formerly constituted. Yet he
was so grateful, that he confirmed the Design of setting forth that Book called
Clementinae, or Rules of Clement; and commanded all Doctors in public Schools,
to read it for Lectures. He reduced the Order of Gramont, which had been
corrupted by some factious fellows, into a better form, by taking away such
things as might be inconvenient, and adding other things that might keep up the
Grandeur of Religion. He loved the Church of Saragoza so well that he made the
City a Metropolis, and assigned it the Covernment of five Cathedrals out of
eleven, which were under the Archbishop of Tarragona. He also created a new
Order of Knights, to fight under Christ's Banner in Portugal, and oppose the
Saracens in Granada and Africa. Boetica was the old name for Granada, which
lies to the Mediteranean, and is so called, I suppose, from the abundance it
yields of a sort of Grain that Dyers use. Now the Headquarters of this Order,
which the Pope constituted, was in a Seaport Town in the Diocese of Sylva; and
the Knights had all the Templers goods by consent of the King of Portugal, that
they might be more at leisure to fight for Christ. Their Censor and Moderator
is the Abbot of a Monastery of Cistercians at Alcoasia in the Diocese of
Lisbon, who has the Power to list and disband a Knight as he pleases, Afterward
he made two S. Thomases; that is to say Thomas Bishop of Hereford, a man of a
great Family, a good Life, extraordinary Learning, and famous for his Miracles;
and Thomas Aquinas, a celebrated Doctor of the Order of S. Dominick, of whose
Life and Writings I have formerly made several Remarks. Not long after, he
created seven Cardinals at a second Ordination, in the year 1322: and presently
thereupon he set forth an Edict, to declare all those for obstinate Heretics,
who affirmed that Christ and his Disciples had nothing which they could call
their own. Which certainly does not much agree with the Scripture, that tells
us in many places, how Christ, his Disciples and true followers had a real
propriety in nothing: as in that passage of the Gospel, where it says; He that
does not sell all that he has and give to the Poor, cannot be my Disciple. Nay
more than that, He accounted every one an Heretic, that said the Disciples as
such had not Power to sell, to give, to bequeath, and to get, because when they
entered into Religion, they were to be under the Will of another. Which is the
reason that Slaves do not gain any thing for themselves but their Master, or
give the Poor what they formerly got, if he command them. And of these
Positions he sent Apostolical Transcripts to all public Schools, that the
Scholars might not dare to Dispute of that matter any more. Moreover he
condemned the Opinion of one Friar Peter of the Order of Minors, who had
animated a whole Convent of the third Order to imitate Christ's poverty: of
which number many were condemned and burnt. After that he made ten Cardinals
more; among whom he considered John Columna and his Brother Matthew, who were
of the Vrsin Family, and of the Order of Preachers. Whilst the Pope was
employed in these Affairs, the Florentine Army was overcome in a bloody fight
by Vgutio Fagiolani, not far from the Mount Catino. But those of Lucca, not
able to endure the Tyranny of Vgutio any longer, took an occasion and turned
Nerius his Son out of the City, whilst he was going to punish Castruccio, a
person of a Noble Family, and good courage; whom he had put in Prison, that he
might get the spoils which Castruccio had taken from the Enemies. Nerius being
banished out of Lucca incensed his Father against that State, upon whom those
of Pisa shut their Gates, as he was going out of the City to meet the Enemy.
Upon that he and his Son escaped to Malaspina, after he had often attempted,
and been as often frustrated in the recovery of his Sovereignty; but by Command
from the Pope he came back at last into Romagna which was his native Country.
By this means Castruccio was promoted from extreme misery to the greatest
happiness: for he was taken out of Prison and made sole Governor of Lucca. But
the Pope hearing that the Esteses had routed the Church Forces out of Ferrara,
and gotten it totally into their own hands; and that the Viscounts, by
assistance of Lewis of Bavaria, had made themselves Masters of Millain, he
said, he would let the Esteses alone for a while; but interdicted the
Viscounts, though he was not so angry with them as with Lewis, who usurped the
Title of Emperor. At the same time the Gibellins of Genoa were banished by
their Fellow-Citizens the Guelphs assisted by King Robert, to whom they had
committed the Government of their City, and fled in great numbers to Savona.
But there too some time after, Robert persecuted 'em every one in their Exile,
and reduced the Savoneses, as he went into France.

The Pope understanding that the Guelphs were generally oppressed after
Robert's departure, sent Charles, Earl of Valois, the Son of Philip King of
France into Italy, to protect the Guelphs, and those especially that were at
Vercelli with the Turrianoes, who were Lords of that City. But Viscount
Galeatius, by command from Lewis the Emperor, prevented Charles, and expelled
the Turrianoes out of Vercelli before he came; upon which that City became
subject to the Viscounts. Not long after Castruccio gets into Pistoia, as Guido
Petramala a little before had into Tipherno, though the Florentines withstood
him. But Castruccio relying upon the aid of Viscount Galeatius (for he had sent
his Son Accio with one thousand five hundred Soldiers to assist him) pursued
and beat the Florentines back to the very Walls, killing a great many men. The
Pope seeing the Bavarian resolved to embroil all things interdicted him with
the usual Ceremonies; and degraded Guido Petramala from the Priesthood, after
he had got possession of Tipherno. He also separated Cortona from the
Bishopric of Arezzo and made it a City of it self, making John of Viterbo
Bishop of it. In the mean time Nicolas d' Este, Lord of Ferrara, stormed and
took Argenta, a Town belonging to the Church of Ravenna, by the assistance of
Passerino Bonacossio Lord of Mantua, who a little before had married Nicolas's
Sister. These two also joined their Forces and attempted Bologna, but went off
with great loss, being defeated by Beltrando who commanded the Church-forces,
and not long after cursed by the Pope. Ferraria too was interdicted, till they
restored Argenta --. But Castruccio at that time did torment the Florentines
after he had taken Segna, from whence he made frequent Sallies upon them,
insomuch that, despairing of their Affairs, they called in Charles, the Son of
Robert to be their Covernour. At that time Pope John sent John Vrsin into Italy
with all speed, to animate the Florentines and the Guelphs against the
Bavarian, who was then coming over the Alps with a mighty Army. But he, in his
way to Rome, went first to Millain, at the earnest request of the Gibellins.
Where having received his Iron Crown, he wanted Money, and was forced to raise
some upon the people; which Galeatius their Governor making some scruple of,
he put all the Viconti in Prison, and chose four and twenty Citizens to manage
the public Affairs, with a chief Officer of his own Family. Afterward the
Bavarian, at the request of Castruccio, set all the Viconti at liberty, whilst
they were at Lucca, where the Emperor was entertained with great respect and
kindness. And when he went from thence, he was attended to Rome by Castruccio
with one thousand five hundred Horse: where in the Palace of S. Giovanni
Laterano he was Crowned by Stephano Columna at the command of the Clergy and
People. At that time there were two chief Officers in the City, chosen out of
the Nobility, which they called the Emperors Lieutenants: and one of 'em,
called Nicolas di Conti being then absent, it fell to Stephano's lot to do that
Office. Being Crowned Emperor, he presently made Peter of Corbiere, of the
Order of Minors, born near Rieti, Pope (to Rival John the twenty third) who was
a man of mean Birth, but a learned Man and very fit for business. This Person
had a Wife formerly, against whose desire, and inclination he entered into the
Order of S. Francis. So being made a mock-Pope and called by the name of
Nicolas the fifth, he was saluted by the Emperor and all that were there along
with him, as the true Vicar of Christ; who likewise made Cardinals and Bishops
of men like himself --. In the mean time the French Horse that were left in
Garrison at Florence, having surprised Pistoia in the Night, they forced
Castruccio to depart immediately from Rome. Who having first joined the
Viconti's forces, came to Lucca and Pisa, and thence moving toward Pistoia he
besieged it a long time, and at last compelled it to surrender for want of
Provisions. But the Bavarian followed Castruccio with an Army, and left the
Antipope at Viterbo, having a Design to storm Florence. And perhaps he had
taken it, if Castruccio had not happened to die of a Disease which he
contracted by the excessive pains that he took. Yet the Bavarian forgot his
great kindness to him, and banished his Sons from Pisa and Lucca, as they were
disposing of Soldiers to guard the several Cities; and took possession of the
Towns. At the same time Galeatius also dying, his Sons sled to the Bavarian,
desiring him, that he would restore 'em to their Country for such a sum as
they promised him. He thereupon, being very greedy of Money, sent Accio home,
but kept his Brother, Marco for an hostage till the whole Money was paid. And
then, leaving the Antipope at Pisa, with Viscount Marco, he went to Millain,
in order to go for Germany, but could not be received into the City by Accio,
who too well remembered the injuries done to his Father. But the German
Soldiers who kept Marco in Tuscany for an Hostage, when they knew his good
temper, swore Allegiance to him, and made him of their Prisoner, their Captain,
so that he was straightway Master of Lucca, by the surrender of Castruccio's
Soldiers, who gave up the Castle into his hands. And yet not long after the
Germans, in Marco's absence, changed their mind and sold the City of Lucca to a
certain Genoese of the Family of Spinola, a great Seaman. So that after all,
the Bavarian returned to Germany, without having performed any thing to the
advantage of the Empire; and Boniface Earl of Pisa, to gratify Pope John,
brought the Antipope to Avignion, where he died in Prison. And now the Pope
being freed of his two greatest cares; to wit, the Antipope being dead, and
the Bavarian gone out of Italy into to Germany, he declared an Expedition
against the Saracens, and imposed new Tenths, to be paid to Philip upon the
account of that Voyage. The Florentines were then in Lucca, but were driven out
immediately by the Bohemians, whom the people of Brescia had invited into Italy
against the Bergameses; and by whose assistance also the Popes Legate had taken
Parma Rheggio, and Modena. But he, making an Alliance with John King of
Bohemia, quickly changed all the Measures of the Italian Factions. For
whosoever the Pope and King of Bohemia were Confederates with, Robert and the
Florentines were certainly against, without any distinction of Guelphs or
Gibellins. For Mastino Scala Lord of Verona, Philippino Gonzaga of Mantua, the
Carrarieses, Lords of Padua, the Esteses of Ferrara entered into Alliance and
League with Robert, by whom the Florentines also were assisted, and took
Pistoia, by surrender from some of the Citizens without opposition. In the mean
while the Marquesses of Este were not absolved from the Ecclesiastical
Interdiction, before they were tired by the Petitions of those of Ferrara, and
restored Argenta, which they were possessed of, to the Church of Ravenna. Yet
still, relying upon the assistance of the Scaligeri, they attaqu'd the Castle
of S. Felix in Modena; till Charles, the King of Bohemia's Son, came upon them,
with Manfred, surnamed Pius, who was Lord of Carpo, and by these two
Confederates, they were routed and beaten out of the Field. It Is certain that
eight hundred of their Soldiers fell in that Battle, and many of their Nobles
were taken, and among others of the greatest note, one Nicolas d' Este, Brother
to Rainaldo the Marquess. The Legate of Bologna took this occasion, and getting
a considerable Army together, commanded by Galeot Malatesta of Rimini,
Francisco Ordelapo of Forli, Richard Manfred of Faenza and Hostasio Polentano
of Ravenna (at that time Lords of their respective Cities,) he besieged
Ferrara; which was then sharply attaqued, and the Suburbs of S. Antony taken,
when Auxiliary Forces sent by Philippino Gonzaga, Mastino Scala, and Vbertino
of Carrara encouraged the Ferrarians to sally forth; which they did with such
success, that they routed the Enemy, and took most of their Captains. But the
Earl of Romagna, who was taken, was changed for Nicolas d' Este: and the rest
were sent safe home, upon condition, that they should take up Arms no more
against the House of Este. Rainaldo d' Este proud of such a Victory, marched
into Bologna, where he spoiled all the Country round about, and had very near
taken the Town. They of Bologna well hoped that the King of Bohemia would have
assisted the Legate: and it was reported that he was on his way thither, when on
the sudden news was brought to him that Mastino Scala, had taken Brescia, and
Bergamo by surrender: and that Accio Viconti was got into Pavia and storming
the Castle. For this reason he desisted from any farther attempts, and leaving
his Son at Parma, went himself with some Troops to Pavia: where seeing he could
not take in the Forts that the Viconti had raised, he only plundered the
Country about Millain, and went back again to Parma without effecting his
Design. There he understood that Americk Son to Castruccio had gotten Lucca by
means of some friends within: but that the Castle held out still, though the
King, for a sum of Money surrendered that too, because he was to go shortly into
Germany, being weary of the Italian Factions. For the Viconti, having taken the
Castle of Pavia, made excursions far and near. Wherefore placing a German
Garrison in Modena, and Rheggio, and committed the care of Parma to Marsilio and
Piedro Rubeo, he went into Germany, but promised to come suddenly back again
with a greater Army. When the King was gone, the Bologneses, with the aid of
the Florentines and the Marquess d' Este, beat out the Legate, and recovered
their Liberty, killing all the Ecclesiastical forces both within and without
the City. So that the Legate growing helpless, writ to Avignion in the year
1334. just when John the Pope died in the ninetieth year of his Age, and in the
nineteenth year and the fourth month of his Pontificate, and left behind him in
the Treasury such a mass of Gold, as never any Pope did before him. He was
buried in the Cathedral, in great State. Some say that Petro Mutroneo, once
Pope, was canonized by John; and that Gentilis of Fuligno, and Dyno of
Florence, two famous Physicians were at the same time rewarded by him with
money and honor: for he was reckoned a great Lover of learned Men.

BENEDICT XII.
BENEDICT the Twelfth, of Toulouse, a Cistercian, formerly called James,
Cardinal Priest of S. Prisca, was made Pope at Avignion the sixteenth day after
John's death, and presently confirmed the Censures which John had laid upon the
Bavarian, as one that usurped the Empire. By this means the Empire was vacant,
and every thing tended toward a War, when every one, though never such a petit
Lord, endeavored to encroach upon his Neighbor. For the Scaligeri were not
content to be sole Governors of Verona, Brescia, and Bergamo, but strove to
get Parma too from the Rubei. Gonzaga had a mind to get Rheggio, d' Este
Modena, and the Florentines Lucca. But the Scaligeri, seeing they could not
take Parma, because the Soldiers within, especially the Germans, who hated the
Scaligeri, defended it so briskly, they marched toward Vincenza. But they could
do no good upon it; and therefore hearing that the Germans were gone from
Parma, they returned thither and straight took it by surrender of the very
Rubeans themselves. Nicolas d' Este also took Modena by the assistance of his
Father-in-law, one Guido Gonziaco, whose Daughter he had married. And
Philippino Gonzaza had Rheggio voluntarily yielded to him by the Citizens. But
at the same time the growing Power of Mastino Scala, who had gotten into Parma,
Lucca and Padua by surrender from Vbertino Carrara, made all the Princes and
States almost in Italy conspire to ruin his Grandeur; but the most zealous of
'em were the Venetians; Gonzaga, and d' Este besieged Verona, whilst Lucino
with another Army took Brescia and Bergamo. But the Venetians fearing, lest by
their endeavors to lessen the power of one, they might augment that of
another, they make a Peace with Mastino Scaliger upon Condition, that if he
would let the Carrareses have Padua, and the Viscount Brescia and Bergamo, as
he formerly had, he should keep Verona, Vincenza, Parma and Lucca. This Peace
was very offensive to the Florentines, who were their friends and Allies, and
had a great mind to have Lucca: yet they deferred their complaint till another
time and at that present held their Tongues. But the Pope sent a Legate into
Italy, who persuaded the Senate and People of Rome, that they would exercise
the Senatorian Office in the name of him and the Church, though they had done
it for a long time in the name of the King. For this reason Stephano Columna
was continued Senator for five years, and Colleagues or Partners in the Office
were assigned him annually. But when the Pope had sent for Stephano to
Avignion, Vrsus Earl of Anguillaria, who was Stephano's Colleague, made Francis
Petrarcha, a man very eloquent, especially in his Mother Tongue, and famous for
the Poems he had published, Poet Laureat, in the Capitol, before all the
Nobility and people of Rome, in the year 1338. But the Pope fearing lest when
the Empire was vacant, Italy might be invaded by any foreign Enemy, he made
Viscount Luchino and John his Brother, Arch*bishop of Millain, Lieutenants of
Millain and other Cities that were in their possession. The same Power he
delegated to Mastino Scala over Verona, and Vincenza; to Philippino Gonzaga, in
Mantua and Reggio: to Albertino in Carrara and Padua: and to Obicio d' Este in
Ferrara, Modena and Argentae, and that very justly, as he pretended; for the
Empire being vacant, all the Power belonging to it devolves upon the Pope, who
is the sole Vicar of Jesus Christ upon the Earth. But he set a Tribute upon
Obicio d' Este, that he should pay ten thousand pounds every year to the Church
of Rome. This Pope in all his Reign made but six Cardinal-Presbyters, and that
at one time; who were excellent Persons, not of his own kindred, as it is usual
now a days, but men called forth to receive such a Dignity, out of several
Nations. Yet I do not disapprove of them, that are preferred to honor, because
they are related to the person who confers it, if they are deserving. Besides,
he was a Man of such constancy, that he could not be induced to do an injury
either by force, by importunity, or promises of gain. For he loved good Men,
and on the contrary was an open Enemy to all evil, and ^lagitious persons. He
likewise often attempted by his Legates to make Peace between Philip of France
and Edward of England, but to no purpose, since they were such foes, as to have
fought many bloody Battles one with another. For Edwards Navy engaged with the
French above Selusas near Flanders so fiercely, that he overcame them, and
killed (they say) full thirty three thousand French in that one fight. But the
Pope, having tried to effect that business so often, at last desisted, and
betook himself to building a Palace for succeeding Popes with several Towers,
and making of Orchards, which he finished. He also repaired the Roof of S.
Peter's Church at his own charge, as the Inscription under his Statute there
shows. He died in the seventh year, third month, and seventeenth day of his
Pontificate, and left a great quantity of Gold behind him, not to his
Relations, but to the Church. He had a Design to have Zoto a famous Painter of
that Age, to draw the Histories of the Martyrs in the House that he built, but
was prevented by Death. At which every body was grieved, he was so good and so
learned a Man; and showed their sorrow by their Tears and Sighs, whilst they
attended at his Funeral.

CLEMENT VI.
CLEMENT the sixth, a Limousin, formerly called Peter, at first a Monk, and
then Archbishop of Rouen, was at last made Pope at Avignion. He was a Man of
great Learning, and exact Eloquence, liberal to all men, affable and very
humane; elected Pope the seventh of May, and Crowned the sixteenth of June, in
the year 1342. In the first year of his Pontificate, and the Ember-week after
his Coronation he created eight Cardinal-Priests, and two Deacons, that is to
say, his Brother who was a Monk of Tulle, and William his Sisters Son. Of those
Priests also which he made one was his Relation by Marriage; and the following
year he made two more, of which one was his Nephew by another Sister. This Pope
when the Romans petitioned and told him, that whereas Boniface the eighth had
formerly granted a full Remission of sins to all that visited the Shrines of
the Apostles Peter and Paul every hundredth year (which space of time the
Romans anciently called Saeculum, an Age, and thence their Games once in an
hundred years, Ludi Saeculares.) they thought it more convenient the time
should be contracted because men seldom lived so long, he freely consented that
the Jubilee should be kept every fiftieth year. But when he sound that all
Italy was in an uproar, he confirmed only Luchinus and John two Viscounts, his
Lieutenants in the Duchy of Millain, without mentioning the other Princes of
Italy. For he thought that they alone were able to resist the Bavarian, who (as
he gave out himself) was coming down into Italy, and, to requite the Pope,
confirmed many Lieutenants in the Towns and places belonging to the Church by
his Imperial Authority. For he continued John of Vicourles, at Viterbo; Galeot
Malatesia, and his Brethren, at Rimini, Pesaro, and Fano; Antonio Feletrario,
at Vrbino; N^lphus and Gallasius, two Brothers, at Callio; Allegretus
Clavellus, at Farriano; Bulgarutius at Matel^ca; Ismedutius at Sancto Severino;
Gentilis Varraneus, at Camerino; Michael, at Mount Milon; Pongonius, at
Cingoli; Nicolas Boscaretus, at Esio; Guido Polentensis, at Ravenna; Francis
and Synebald, at Forli, and Caesena; John Manfred, at Faenza; though before
some of these men had gotten the same places under them partly by force and
partly by the good will of the Inhabitants, as I said in the life of Benedict.
But in the mean time the Frescobaldi, who were eminent Citizens of Florence,
were banished by their fellow-Citizens, and would have instigated the Pisanes
to War, but it was at an ill time. For the Florentines at that time were just
upon buying Parma of the Scaligeri, and to that end had sent some of their Sons
to Ferrara as Hostages, promising to give 'em for it 500000 l. For there were
two Arbitrators, one chosen by each party out of Ferrara. But the Florentines
having engaged in several bloody fights one upon the neck of another, were
extremely weakened both by the Pisanes and their Allies, and at last even
forced to slip the opportunity of such a bargain. Yet they did not neglect to
send aids to the people of Lucca when they were besieged by the Pisanes;
besides that their Allies helped 'em too, under the conduct of Malatesta of
Rimini, surnamed Vngarus, who forced the Pisanes from Lucca. At that time
Robert, who was an Ally of the Florentines, being moved with the calamities of
his Confederates, sent one Gualter a French man, that they called Governor of
Athens with a small party of Horse into Tuscany, who having by mere stratagem
defeated Malatesta, who was but an unskilful Captain, he gained so cunningly
upon the favor of the Florentines, that in a short time he was both General of
their Forces and Governor of their City; and turned out all the other Officers
in it. Those of Arezzo also, if Pis^oia, and Volaterra promoted his success, by
surrendering themselves immediately to him. But when Accio Corrigienses had
delivered up Parma, which he could not keep, to Obicio d' Este, Philippino
Gonzaga, provoked to War by Obicio, got an Army together, and near to Reggio
engaged with him so furiously, that he routed and pursued him as far as
Ferrara* Then Obicio finding his condition desperate, put Parma which he could
not defend, under the protection of Luchino in the year 1366. But when the
Florentines could no longer endure the Tyranny of Gualter, and many were put to
death every day for conspiring against him how to get their Liberty, Angelo
Acciaiolo, Bishop of the City, sends away for the Citizens ready armed into his
Bishopric, with a resolution to recover the liberty of his Country. At which
the Tyrant seeing himself too weak for the Citizens, made the Bishop himself
Umpire concerning the Terms of Peace, and so marched off in safety with what he
had in the tenth month of his Reign. But the Rabble of the City showed
themselves ungrateful (as indeed they always do) and banished the Nobility, by
whose conduct and courage they had gained their Liberty, spoiling their Goods
and demolishing their Houses. And lest any thing should be lacking that might
disturb all Italy, there were great animosities arisen in the Kingdom of
Naples. For King Robert, dying without Issue male, bequeathed Johanna Daughter
of Andrew, his Nephew, for a Wife to King Charles of Hungary's Son, who came at
that time a Youth to Naples. But Johanna hating him, for a dull fellow, killed
him by surprise in the City, which was generally against the Match; and was
married to his Cousin German, one Lewis, Son to a former Prince of Tarento, who
was known to be Robert's Brother. But Lewis King of Hungary and Brother of her
first Husband, resolving to revenge so great a piece of Villainy, came into
Italy with a very well ordered Army, and first attaqued the Sulmoneses, who had
the boldness to oppose him. But in the mean while the manner of choosing
Senators at Rome was altered by Apostolical Authority, and Nicolas de Renty,
Citizen of Rome and public Notary, a man very earnest and high for Liberty,
when he had taken the Capitol, gained so much good will and Authority among all
the people, that he could incline them to what he pleased. And that he might
work upon them the more effectually, he used this Motto; Nicolas, the severe
and merciful Patron of Liberty, Peace and Justice, and the illustrious Redeemer
of the Sacred State of Rome. With these great Words he created such an
admiration of himself, that all the people of Italy desired by their
Ambassadors to enter into League and friendship with him: Beside that some
foreign Nations looked upon the glory of the Roman Empire to be now reviving.
But his vain Boasting continued not long; for whilst he was kind to some
Citizens, and an Enemy to others, he all on the sudden was accounted, instead
of a Patron a Tyrant. So that in the seventh month of his Government, of his
own accord, without any bodies knowledge, on a dark Night he went disguised from
Rome into Bohemia to Charles, the Son of John; whom Clement a little before had
made the Electors put in nomination for Emperor, because he was so fine a
Scholar; besides, that he had a mind to affront the Bavarian by setting up a
Competitor. So the Tribune, i.e. Nicolas, was taken by Charles and carried to
Avignion for a Present to the Pope. But Lewis having gotten into Sulmona after
a long Siege, makes himself easily master of the whole Kingdom, since Johanna
and the Adulterer Lewis were fled for fear into Narbonne, and had left only
the Duke of Durazzo Nephew to King Robert, to protect the Kingdom; who was
conquered and taken by Charles, and put to Death. But the Plague being very hot
all over Italy, Charles left sufficient Garrisons there, and returned into
Hungary, in the third month after his arrival; which was just about the time,
when John the Archbishop, a man of great courage and conduct received from the
Pope the Lieutenancy of Millain, upon the death of his Brother Luchino. But
Clement kept Nicolas in Prison, and sent some Cardinals to Rome, to settle the
State of the City: to whom Francis Petrarcha wrote, persuading them to choose
Senators impartially out of the Commonalty, if they would appease the Tumults;
since it did not sufficiently appear in Rome who were of the Senatorian and who
of the Plebeian rank, because they were almost all Foreigners and born of
strange Parents. Upon this Petro Sarra of Columna, and John Vrsini were
declared Senators: At this time the Plague raged so all over Italy for three
years, that there was scarce one man in ten that escaped. Nor is that any
wonder; for there was such a concourse of men from all places to Rome at the
Jubilee, which was then celebrated, that they not only brought the Contagion
along with 'em, but by the throng and bustle and sweating that was among 'em,
infected all places and persons. At that time the Town of Colle and Geminiano
were made subject to the Florentines, and Bologna to the Archbishop of
Millain, by the voluntary surrender of the Citizens. At which the Pope, being
disturbed, sent a Legate into Italy to instigate the Florentines and Mastino
Scala against the Viconti. But when Mastino was dead, the Archbishop
endeavored to draw Canegrande Son to Mastino, and all the Gibellins in Romagna
and Tuscany, to make an Alliance with him, and sent his Nephew Bernabos to
Bologna, to keep the Citizens in Obedience. In the mean time the Florentines,
without any resistance, set upon the Pistoians and the Prateses, and at length
reduced 'em by main force. But after that, being harrass'd by the Archbishop's
force under the command of John Aulegius, they could hardly defend themselves
within their Walls. At that time Anguillara and Borgo di Sancto Sepolchro,
belonging to the Church, revolted to the Viscounts: and then also we read, that
the Genoeses and Venetians fought a Sea-Battel, in which the Genoeses at first
were conquered; but afterward they were more victorious under the Command of
Admiral Philip Auria, and not only took the Island Scio from the Venetians,
but killed a great many men in Vbaea (now called Necroponte.) But Clement
resolving at last to consult the quiet of Italy, Decreed that Lewis, Prince of
Taranto, should be King of Naples; renewed the Peace with the Hungarian; bought
the City of Avignion of Queen Joan, whose Inheritance it was, and paid for it
by remitting of a certain Fee, that amounted to rather more than the price of
it, and was due from her to the Church of Rome upon the account of the Kingdom
of Naples. But whilst Olegio Viconti besieged Scarperia in Muciallia, those of
Siena, Arezzo and Perugia being affrighted, entered into a new Confederacy with
the Florentines against the Viconti. The Pisans could not show their friendship
to the Viconti for the Gambacorti, a Noble Family, that were Allies of
Florence; who being now unable to withstand the Viconti alone called Charles
the Emperor into Italy. At this the Pope was concerned, and fearing Italy might
be destroyed with fire and sword (as the Emperor threatened) he delivered
Bologni to the Viconti upon Condition, that they should pay the Church twelve
thousand pound a year, and made Peace between the Viconti and the Florentines
upon these terms; That neither of 'em should molest those of Pisa, Lucca,
Siena, or Perugia; and that Borgo di Sancto Sepolchro should be subject to the
Church, and the Viconti should preserve the Liberty of the Cortoneses. He also
endeavored to compose the differences between Philip of France and Edward of
England, but in vain; for they were so incensed to fight, that in one Battle
Edward killed twenty thousand French, and after eleventh months Siege
victoriously took Calais by storm. The same success he had against the Scots.
But the Pope having done the Duty of a good Shepherd, seeing he could not
advantage Christendom, abroad, he consulted how to do the Church some good at
home. For he chose excellent Persons for Cardinals; especially, Giles a
Spaniard, who was Archbishop of Toledo, Nicolas Cappocius a Roman Citizen,
Rainaldo Vrsina Protonotary of the Church of Rome, and his own Nephew, who
after got the Papacy, and was called Gregory the Eleventh. Some say this Pope
canonized Ivo a Britain, Priest and Confessor. He died in the ^enth year, sixth
month and twenty eight day of his Pontificate in the year 1352. and was
decently buried at Avignion by the Cardinals that were then upon the place.

INNOCENT VI.
INNOCENT the sixth, a Limousin, formerly called Stephen, a man very well
skilled in the Canon and Civil Law, first Procurator, then Bishop of Cleremont,
and afterward Cardinal, was at first made Pope in the year 1352. upon the
fifteenth of December. He was a Man of an exact Life, of great constancy and
severity; and bestowed Ecclesiastical preferments upon none but men of good
lives and Learning. Immediately after his Coronation he suspended many
Indulgences which Clement had granted; commanding all Prelates, and others that
had Ecclesiastical Benefices to repair to their Churches under the pain of
Anathema; saying, Flocks ought to be kept by their own Shepherds, and not by
Hirelings. He also retrenched his Household expenses, and reduced his Family to
a convenient number, and would have none but honest men about him. He strictly
commanded the Cardinals to do so too; for he would often tell 'em, that both
his own life and that of all Churchmen ought to be an Example to the Laity; in
imitation of our Savior whose whole life was a pattern to all mankind. He
likewise appointed certain Salaries for the Au^^tors of the Holy Palais, lest
through want they should be tempted to give judgment for bribery. For he would
say, that those who are ready to starve can hardly keep their hands from other
peoples meat, if they have any opportunity to get it. He was sparing in his
D^et, but in his Warlike preparations very expensive, whilst he endeavored to
recover that by Arms, which formerly Usurpers had taken away from the Church.
For he sent Giles Carillo, a Spaniard, Cardinal of S. Sabina, an excellent
Person, his Legate a latere into Italy, to make War upon the Usurpers, and
secure the Church Patrimony. At this time, the Emperor of Constantinople, the
King of Aragon, and the Venetians entered into a League against the Genoeses;
and having gotten a great Navy together, superior to the Genoeses both in the
number of Ships, and Men; set upon them between Constantinople and Chalcedon in
a place very disadvantageous for the Genoeses, and when the Wind was against
'em. They fought from Morning till Night, till at length the Grecians ran away,
but the Venetians and Catalonians were most of 'em slain, together with their
Admiral; under the command of Pagano Auria. But the Venetians were so enraged
at this Defeat and disgrace, that they and the Catalonians recruited their
Navy, and under the conduct of Nicolas a Pisan, routed the Genoeses the year
following not far from the Island of Corsica, and sunk forty of their Galleys
with their Men. The Genoeses terrified at this overthrow, delivered up their
City and all they had to the Archbishop of Millain: who, by attaquing the
Venetians, alarmed the Lords of Padua, Verona, Ferrara, Mantua, and the
Florentines too to oppose him; they fearing lest, when he had conquered the
Venetians, he would set upon them also. The War was carried on by Land and Sea;
but the Genoeses, Pagano Auria being their Admiral, had wonderful fortune at
Sea, and, at Sapientia, a Promontory of Morea, defeated the Venetians; taking
their Admiral Nicolas the Pisane, with five thousand men, whom they brought to
Genoa in the year 1354. But the following year the Archbishop of Millain died,
which freed the Venetians and their Allies from a great deal of care. Bernabos
and Galeatius, his Brother Luchinus's Sons were his Heirs. No place but Genoa
relinquished them, these two making a peace with the Venetians: which had been
first proposed by Bernabos and Galeatius, at the instance of the Pope and
Giles, his Legate. In the mean while Calo-Johannes Emperor of Constantinople
was restored, having vanquished Cahtacusenus who had usurped the Empire against
all right and reason. But that action was performed by means of Francis
Catalusius, a Genoese, a great Seaman, on whom he bestowed Mitylen and all
Lesbos for a Reward, which the Turk afterward took from the Gatalusii when he
had gotten Constantinople and all Thrace in his power. Nor was there less
uproar at Rome, than was then at Constantinople. For Francisco Baroncello, a
Roman Citizen, and a great man, having degraded John Vrsin and Peter of Columna
from the dignity of Senators, usurped to himself the dignity of a Tribune, with
these Titles; that is to say, Francisco Baroncello, Secretary to the Senate, by
the grace of God second Tribune of our Mother this City, and Consul of Rome.
When the Pope heard of it, he had a mind to rebate the audacious spirit of the
Man, and sent Nicolas de Gencio, a person full as ambitious, as he, out of the
Goal at Avignion, to Rome, to recover the Tribuneship. He, when he came into
the City, being assisted by the Nobility and great part of the Commons, threw
Boroncello out of the Capitol and killed him; so that he enjoyed the
Tribuneship alone. But not long after forgetting his former condition he
persecuted the Nobility, and especially the Columneses, who were going out at
the Exquiline Gate into Campagna di Roma with a Petition, but was repelled so
much to his disadvantage, that he betook himself into the Capitol; and from
thence endeavored to escape; but the Enemy followed him at the heels, and
though he were disguised, yet the Citizens of Rome discovered him and cut off
his Head. Then was Guido Jordan made sole Senator for a year by Apostolical
Authority. About that time the Emperor who was Son to the King of Bohemia was
very kindly entertained by the Carrariens, the Gonziacks, and Viconti, and
received his Iron Crown, as the custom is, at Millain. And going from thence to
Pisa, was met by Ambassadors from the Sieneses, from those of Volaterra, and
almost all Tuscany, who told him they were ready to obey his Commands. The
Florentines would have done the same, but that they had first bought themselves
out of his Dominion, with a great sum of money. After that he went to Rome, and
was crowned by two Cardinals, who were sent on purpose, upon condition, that he
should not stay any longer either at Rome or in Italy. This made him depart the
sooner, and when he was gone, Giles, the Legate, quickly recovered almost all
the Towns, which the Usurpers had gotten by the instigation of the Bavarian,
either in Romagna, Marca d' Ancona, or S. Peter's Patrimony. But he confirmed
all those Lieutenans of Towns, whom he saw obedient to the Church of Rome; as
Galiot, Malatesta, and Guido Poletanus in Romagna, and the Vatraneses in the
Duchy of Millain. But the O^delaphi who were disobedient to the Church, he
persecuted with two years Wars, and at length quite routed them out of Forli,
For impopili and Cesena. These indeed might have retained some part of their
Dominion by the assistance of James the Cardinal of Columna, a man who was a
great friend to their Family, but they chose rather to lose the whole like men,
than save any part of it sneakingly. But Giles, having quieted Romagna, was so
pleased at Forli that he laid up not only the Treasure of the Church, but also
all the money which was sent from Avignion into Italy to build Castles in that
Town, and made some Ordinances which the Province uses to this Day. But when
Giles had settled Italy, and built a great many very necessary Forts in the
Church Dominions, and reduced all the Italian Princes and States to Obedience,
he had a Successor in the fifth year of his Embassy, called Arduinus a
Burgundian, Abbot of Cisteaux, a man not at all fit for business. Wherefore
when Giles was gone, all the Princes and States of Italy took up Arms. For the
Pisans did so molest the Florentines, that, seeing no body durst oppose 'em,
they plundered all the Country of Florence, and took Figino a Castle lying up
the River Arno, burning all the Villages which were built thereabout. At that
time Pandulphus Malatesta was Captain General of the Florentine Army, whom the
people forced to relinquish his civil Government, because he had never shown
that he had courage enough to engage with an Enemy. But the Pisans were then
much higher than before; not so much out of any hope they had of taking the
City, as that they should bring a scandal upon it, and therefore after some
light Skirmishes before the Gates, they returned home with great spoils, about
the beginning of Autumn. And Bernabos also demolished many Castles in Bologna
(which was now harassed with War) though the Abbot of Clugny defended it
stoutly. Bologna, as I told you before, was subject to the Viconti; but
Aulegianus betrayed it to the Abbot of Clugny, and was to have Fermo as the
reward of his Treachery. But whilst that Bernabos made War upon Bologna and
Reggio, the Apostolical Legate makes an Alliance with Philippino Gonzaga, Canes
of Verona, and Nicolas d' Este to go against the Brescians. Then Bernabos,
being concerned for the danger which those of Brescia were in, left Bologna and
Reggio, and marched toward the Enemy, but was so defeated at Montclere, that
afterward he could hardly defend the very Walls of the City. About the same
time the Florentines overcame the Pisans, under the command of Galeot
Malatesta, by corrupting their Soldiers to come over to their Party. For this
reason the Pisans laid all the fault upon the Cambacurti, who were eminent
Citizens there, because they paid the Soldiers covetously and stingily; and
therefore recalled John Agnellus who was banished, as being a friend to
Bernabos, and against the Cambacurti: and he in a little time reduced the City,
and made it acknowledge him for their Governor, having removed all the friends
of the adverse faction. But when the Pope had made a Peace between the Pisans
and the Florentines, one John Haucut who had been used to fight under the
Pisans, got together all the Soldiers in Italy, and gave all people occasion to
fear; especially since Rome was in such an uproar at the choosing of Senators.
But Innocent easily appeased their Discords by sending a foreign Senator to 'em,
called Raimund Ptolomy, a Citizen of Siena, who bore that Office a whole year,
and that was in the year 1359. But though things were settled in this manner,
yet the Romans could not be quiet. For they turned out their Senator, and
created seven Citizens with Sovereign Power whom they called the Reformers of
the whole Republic. Upon this account Innocent made Hugo Lusignaneus, King of
Cyprus (who was going then to War against the Turks) Senator, and commanded
totally to abolish that Society of Reformers. But he, at that time, was very
intent upon making an end of the War betwixt England and France, that all might
go against the Turk. But when the English had overcome the French in Poictou,
and had taken their King with Philip his Son, they were thought to have done a
great exploit: yet at the same time Edward, out of his Princely generosity,
gives all the Captives their Liberty, upon condition, that they would never
fight against him more. But they soon after broke those terms of Peace, and
forced Edward to resume his Arms and besiege Paris. Innocent designed also to
prepare a Navy against the Infidels, when at the same time the Pisans, who were
excellent Seamen, and the Venetiano that had a great Navy, were at War, the
former with the Florentines, and the latter with Lewis King of Hungary. For
that King did then besiege Treviso with a great Army; besides that the
Venetians were at variance among themselves. For Marino their General being
accused, as if he aspired to Sovereignty, was beheaded. Innocent being thus
discomposed in his mind, he died in the ninth year, eighth month, and sixth day
of his Pontificate, just about the same time with Bartholus Saxoferratus, the
wisest man in all that Age. But before the Popes death there was such an
Eclipse of the Sun, as never was before: wherefore all people thought that such
a great Man could not die, but even the Planets would give some presages of his
departure.

URBAN V.
URBAN the fifth, of Lymosin, formery called Will. Grisant, Abbot of S. Victor
at Marseilles, was made Pope in his absence by universal consent. For at that
time he was gone into Italy as Legate to the Viconti; but being called to
Avignion he entered upon the Popedom. And no sooner was he got into the Chair,
but, being a person of singular Virtue, great Courage, and very innocent in his
Conversation, he immediately applied himself to vindicate the Churches Liberty,
and made use of such Instruments, as were zealous for the business. For he sent
Giles a Spaniard (of whom we said something before) into Italy with full Power
and Authority; who so far animated and engaged Lewis Gonzaga, Nicolas d' Este,
and Francisco Carrario, against Bernabos, that he was overcome by them, and
lost his Son in the Battle, and being wounded hardly escaped with his life. Nor
was that all, but the Enemy took Andrew Pepulo a Bolognian Banditto, Synebald
Ordelaphus, Paulus Mirandula, Guido Foliano, Azo of Corrigia, William
Cavalcabos, the most Signal Commanders of the Army. But the Kings of England,
France, and Cyprus were concerned at the misfortune of the Viconti and sent
Ambassadors to Giles, to desire him, that he would make Peace with them. Which
Ambassadors were not sent in vain; for a Peace was concluded, though it were
of no long continuance. For John Hawkwood, on the behalf of the Viconti, having
engaged the Florentines, routed their Army at S. Miniato, which caused Giles,
the Legate, to send Thomas Obicio an excellent Commander, with three thousand
Horse, and a competent number of Foot to help the Florentines. They fought
betwixt Arezzo and Cortona four hours together stoutly: but at length Thomas,
chiefly with the assistance of his Infantry, gave the Enemy such a blow, that
of six thousand Horse, which fought under Hawkwood, few escaped, and the
Captain himself yielded. Those that had revolted from the Church when they
heard of this great Victory, immediately surrendered. Urban then came into
Italy, in the fourth year of his Pontificate to settle things, and Giles the
Legate met him at Corneto; and rendering an account of what he had done was
discharged from his Legateship; and the Pope going on his way from Corneto to
Rome, he retired quietly in his old Age at Viterbo, where he died in three
months after. He was a Man of singular Virtue and Courage, and preserved the
Honor of the Church, whilst he lived, most wonderfully. His Body was carried
to Assisi, and buried in the Church of S. Francis, in a Tomb that he built
himself, whilst he was living. When Charles the Emperor understood that Urban
was gone to Rome, he went thither too as fast as he could with his Wife and
Children; but, by the way, took Lucca from the Pisanes, and Sancto Miniato from
the Florentines. Whether he went to Rome or no is not certain; because it is
said, he received his Imperial Crown from Pope Innocent the Sixth, who sent the
Cardinal of Ostia to Rome for that purpose. But having received a great sum of
money of the Florentines, to buy their own peace, he marched out of Italy the
third month after he came thither, in the year 1368. Urban had sought a long
time for the Heads of SS. Peter and Paul (which through the ignorance of the
times had long been neglected) and having light upon them at Sancta Sanctorum
he put 'em up in Silver Cases next the great Altar of the Lateran, where they
were highly honour^d by a great concourse of all the Clergy and People of Rome.
The same Pope built one Palace in the old City, and another in Montefiascone,
that he and other Popes might retire thither to avoid the Heat and bustle of
the Town. But resolving to go back shortly into France, he made John Hawkwood
an excellent Commander whom he released out of Prison, General of all those
Forces that had served under Giles, to guard the Church Patrimony till he
returned again. For he designed to return for Italy. But going into France, he
died at Marseilies in the eighth year, and the fourth month of his Pontificate:
or (as others will have it) he died at Avignion just about the time, when
Briget a devout Woman, who was a Princess of Switzerland, came to Rome upon a
Vow she had made. There were at the same time some Commotions in Puglia after
the death of Nicolas Acciolo, who was Governor of that Province, and a Stout,
Wise Man.

GREGORY XI.
GREGORY the Eleventh, of Lymosin, formerly called Peter Belford, and
Cardinal-Deacon of New S. Mary's, was made Pope at Avignion by a general
consent. Clement VI. his Uncle, made him Cardinal when he was scarce seventeen
years of age. But that he might not seem to consult the good of his Kindred
more than that of the Church, he sent him to the best Masters he could find for
breeding, and especially to Baldus, who at that time was a Professor at
Perugia. Under whom he made such progress in all sorts of Learning that Baldus
often used his Authority to clear a Doubt. And then he was a Man of such
innocence, good nature, affability and piety, that he was generally beloved. At
his entrance upon the Pontificate this was the state of things in Italy; at
Rome the Courts of Justice were held by Senators whom the Pope appointed for
every six months, but the Guard of the City and all the management of public
Affairs were in the hands of the Banderesii, so named from their Banners (a
Teutonic word) which they used in War, by which every Decuria (now called Capo
di Regione or Head of a Ward) was distinguished. In Lombardy, those Nobles who
(as I said before) conspired against the Viconti, surprised the City of Reggio
by treachery which was before in their possession, but the Castle holding out,
Bernabos entering the City that way at the first Onset overthrew the Enemy and
driving away Lucius the German Commander, repossess'd himself of the place.
Thus went matters in Italy, when Perinus King of Cyprus, who succeeded his
Father Peter, was the cause of great animosities between the Genoeses and the
Venetians. For when he was Crowned at Famagosta, and two Bailiffs (as the
Merchants call their Residents) one from Genoa, and the other from Venice were
there attending; they strove who should walk on the right hand the King, which
raised such a Tumult that the Genoeses were beaten and wounded basely, the King
favoring the Venetians. The Genoeses hereupon got a Navy of 40 Ships together,
under the command of Peter Fregoso, Brother to Dominick Fregoso, and invaded
Cyprus; and landed fourteen thousand men, to destroy all the Island with fire
and sword for violating the Law of Nations. The King being deserted on all
sides submitted to their mercy, and surrendering Famagosta, promised the
Genoeses to give them 40000. per annum to purchase his Peace. The Popes Legate
was now come into Italy and had settled the state of the Church, he made a Peace
with the Viconti, when a new Tumult arose at Prato, which was the original of
great confusion. For the Inhabitants of Prato endeavoring to vindicate
themselves from the Dominion of the Florentines, called the Church Forces into
Tuscany by permission from the Legate. But the Florentines so far corrupted
them with money, that they entered Prato by their assistance, put the
Conspirators to death, and sent a great many Banners, with Liberty written upon
them, by several Troops, to several Towns; exhorting the People, as their
Lords, that they would remember the Liberty of the Church, and cast off the
yoke of Servitude. The first that revolted from the Church were the Castellani,
then the Perugians, those of Todi, Spoleto, Gubio, Viterbo, Forli, and Ascoli
followed their Example. At that time too Astorgius Manfred, under the Bavarian,
having tasted the sweetness of absolute Dominion, had possessed himself of
Granariolo a Castle near Faenza: against whom the Legate sent John Hawkwood
with some Troops out of Bologna. The Florentines and those of Bologna defended
Astorgius, and keeping out Hawkwood with all his men, asserted their Liberty.
But Hawkwood seeing the Faenzeses ready to rebel, he not only plundered the
City severely, and killed all that his Soldiers met, but he sold the very
ground on which it stood to Nicolas and Albert d' Este, two Brothers, for 20000
l. reserving only Bagnacavallo to himself, where the Carriages of his Army
lay. The Pope hearing of such great Revolutions sent Cardinal Cevennes as his
Legate with six thousand British Horse ito Italy; who coming down through
Piedmont, marched as far as the very Gates of Bologna without doing any hurt
designing to besiege the City. But when the Legate heard the Florentines were
come to the assistance of the Bolognians under the conduct of Rodolphus
Varraneo, he went with his Army, to Winter in Cesena. In which City there was
such an upooar by reason of the pride of the French, that six hundred Britains
were slain, and the rest turned out of Town. But they got in again afterward by
way of the Tower, and being increased in their number they filled all places
with blood and rapine, not sparing even those, whose very age made their
excuse: only young Women and Maids were kept alive to be abused. But those of
Forli, fearing lest for want of advice, and one to Govern them they might be
oppressed by the Legate, they took Synebald, Pyne, John, and Theobald,
Ordelaphi as their Lords into the City, and were bravely defended by them from
the fury of the Britains. But Pope Gregory conceiving that all the mischiefs of
Italy proceeded from his being absent, and that the long shipwreck of Affairs
there happened because the Pilot was out of the way, the good Man was very
intent a good while upon a Journey into Italy. But he was mightily concerned at
a certain Bishops words, who being asked by the Pope (as they were walking
together) why he did not return to his Church, which he ought not to have left
so long without a Pastor? He replied, Why do not you that are the greatest
Bishop, give a good Example and go to your own Bishopric at Rome? The Pope was
disturbed at these words, and therefore he got ready one and twenty Ships in
the Rhoan, under pretense of going elsewhere, that he might not be stopped by
the French, as he would have been, if they had understood he had been going to
Rome: because it was their Interest to keep the Court in France. Thereupon he
went first to Genoa, and then to Corneto; from whence he went by Land (for he
was weary of sailing, in the Winter especially) to Rome, and arrived there in
the year 1376. about the 11. of January in the seventh year of his Pontificate,
and the 70th year after the Court went out of Rome into France. But what
preparations the people of Rome made, and with what incredible joy they
received him it is needless to relate; for all the Nobility went to meet him,
with their countenances, gestures and acclamations expressing all kind of
pleasure, as Children do that see their dear Father returned from a strange
Country. And indeed all things lacked his presence there. For both the Walls,
the Churches and all buildings in general, public or private, threatened
nothing but ruin, till he repaired most part of them, as the Tower, which he
built at S. Mary's the Great does testify. The morality also of the City was
so decayed, that they seemed to have nothing about 'em which looked like a
Citizen; but appeared as if they ought to go and learn manners, who formerly
had reduced the whole to urbanity and good behavior. So then the Pope, having
seated himself in Rome (as a good Pastor should do) began to look about him,
and think of a cure for the Wounds of Italy. And whilst he was a ruminating of
it, he considered that nothing but a Peace could do the feat. Thereupon he sent
his Legate first to the Florentines, who inclined to War, and persuades 'em not
to slight or refuse any fair Conditions of Peace. They suspecting the Popes
power, and fearing lest they should be compelled to make a Peace, enter into
Alliance and Confederacy with Bernabos their old Enemy. After that they
corrupted Haucut with money and fair promises to come over from the Church to
their Party: at which they were so triumphant, and so proud, that they omitted
no sort of injury or Affront, that they could do the Pope. For which they were
anathematized, and yet were so insolent, that they forced their Priests,
notwithstanding the Interdiction, to perform the Divine Offices against Law and
Reason. The Pope therefore weary at last of entreating took up Arms, and having
reconciled Bologna, which was to be governed in his Name, he, like the
Florentines before made Varraneo his stipendiary, and gave him the command of
the Church Army, to go against Florence. But a quarrel arose between the
Genoeses and the Venetians which put a stop to his Designs, he fearing, lest
any foreign force should invade Italy, if he engaged with the Florentines
himself. For whilst Andronicus, by the Genoeses assistance, to whom he had
given Tenedo, as the reward of the Exploit, had dethroned Charles's Father, who
was John, Emperor of Constantinople, the Venetians restored him again to his
Country, and had the Island Tenedo given to them by him. At which the Genoeses
were angry though they deferred their revenge till another occasion, for fear
of the Pope's Curse, who threatened it to both parties, if they did not quit
their Arms, not holding it fit for either of them to meddle in that War. But
whilst this holy Man did all things with that diligence that became a Pope, he
died of that intolerable pain, the stone in the Bladder, in the seventh year,
and fifth month of his Pontificate, the sixteenth of April, in the year 1378.
and was buried in S. Mary's in the New Street, in a Marble Tomb, which is yet
to be seen; and so much lamented as never man was before him. For all people
thought themselves deprived of a Father, in him; and did bewail not only the
present but their future Calamity, into which they were fallen by the loss of so
good a Pope, and the Discords that arose among the chief Citizens.

URBAN VI.
GREGORY being dead, and the making a new Pope being under debate, the Clergy
and People of Rome addressed themselves to the Cardinals, and desired 'em, that
they would choose some worthy Person, an Italian, to govern the Church and
State of Rome with integrity and piety: for that, unless an extraordinary
Pastor were then elected, Christianity, as it stood at that time, must needs
fall to decay. And they desired an Italian Pope, lest, if he were a French man,
the Court of Rome must remove again beyond the Mountains, to the great
disadvantage, and damage of the City of Rome, and all Italy besides. Alleging,
that when the Pope was absent, all the Country and City were continually
embroiled with Usurpations, and Seditions; and that the Churches in Rome were
so neglected, and thereby grown so much out of order, that they were most of
'em ready to fall. And that, upon this account, the people who came continually
to Rome were not so zealous as they used to be, when they saw the Papal Sea,
the Cardinals Churches, and Monasteries, nay the holy places where the Martyrs
lie, without a Roof, and the Walls falling down, to let in sheep and other
Cattle. That it was fit the Pope should live where Peter had placed the
Pontifical Chair by the Will of God, out of his own Country and Nation, and
advanced the honor of it by the ashes and the blood of Martyrs, Confessors,
and holy Popes. Hence might the Pastors of the Church, if they were circumspect
and mindful of Christ's Command, or incited by Example of those whose Martyrdoms
and Actions they had before their Eyes, consult the Salvation of Mankind; and
at the same time recover S. Peter's Patrimony, which had been seized by several
Usurpers in Tuscany, Sabina, Campagna di Roma, Ombria, Millain, and Romagna,
whilst the Popes were absent. That they would not say for the present, how the
piety of people was diminished, and that their Pilgrimages to Rome, or to see
the Bodies or Relics of the Saints were much rarer than formerly, by reason
of the Popes absence; but that all these things might still be restored, if an
Italian were chosen Pope. The Cardinals made Answer, that they would take care
to choose an excellent Man, to govern the Church of God, without any respect to
Persons or Nations, in imitation of our Savior, who chose Apostles out of all
Nations. That they might go and be satisfied that they would do nothing but
what should promote the glory of God, the good of the Church and of all
Christendom. So they appointed a Conclave at S. Peter's, and ordered a certain
number of Guards to be in the Vatican, lest any Tumult might hinder so
important an Election; But when they came to Vote, there was a great debate all
of a sudden. For there were thirteen French Cardinals, who would have had a
Pope chosen out of them; and four Italians, among whom one, that was of the
Vrsin Family, did most aspire to the Popedom. The French seemed to have the
better of it because they had the Majority: but there happening a quarrel betwixt
those of Limosin and the other French Men, each side contending for the choice
of a Pope out of their party, they chose Bartholomew Archbishop of Bari, a
Neapolitan, or, as others say, a Pisan, not of the College of Cardinals, and in
his absence, by the name of Urban the Sixth. But before they appeared abroad,
or that it was known, that Urban was made Pope; the French scandalized the
Election, as extorted by fraud and fear, whilst the Romans urged them with
force and Arms to choose an Italian. So that the Cardinals when they came out of
the Conclave, fled partly into Castle S. Angelo, and partly into other secure
places, to avoid the fury of the enraged people. Cardinal Vrsin also went to
Vicovaro, having great hopes of getting the Pontificate in a time of such
Discord. But not long after the Cardinals repented, and came to the City, where
they confirmed Urban, whom they had formerly chosen, saluting him, according to
the dignity of a true Pope. Three months after the French Party pretended the
City was too hot for 'em, and desired of the Pope, that he would give 'em leave
to go to Anagni, for change of Air, which in the City was pestilent, especially
in the Summer, and to French Constitutions; though they indeed were afraid of
his severity, and so were desirous to get out of the way. For he had often
called 'em to him and admonished them, to keep their hands clean, and receive
no bribes nor rewards for pleading in behalf of others, or doing any man a
kindness that should ask it: And told 'em, that he would punish them severely
that he found guilty of Simony, or promoting unjust Suits. Besides he told 'em
that he should be pleased, and was very desirous, that they would omit some of
their State, and such a train of Servants and Horses, for what they spent in
such vanity was really due to the Poor, or ought to have been employed toward
the repairs of tottering Churches. He told 'em, that he would choose good men to
be about his own person, and that he would make the wicked suffer for their
offenses, unless they mended their manners. And because he heard that the
French Cardinals did talk once, as if the Court of Rome would go back into
their Country, he told 'em publicly that he would stay at Rome, and would not
hearken to any one that should persuade him to remove from it, because, as he
said, the foundation of the universal Church, and of Christian Faith, was laid
at Rome, and all the superstructure raised in the same place. The French
Cardinals were moved with these Reasons, and especially those, who had robbed
the Church Treasury upon the Death of several Popes, and done what they
pleased; they fled first to Anagni, next to Fondi, where they inveighed against
Urban as a false Pope, and said he was made by force, and received his Crown by
force, because that Election and Coronation was not in a place at all safe,
where peoples Wills and Votes might be free, but that on the contrary, they
were forced to choose an Italian rather than a French man. For these Reasons,
the Sea (as they said) being vacant, they (who were eight in all) by the
permission and favor of Queen Joan, chose Cardinal Cevennes, who had been
Legate in Italy; and called him Clement the Seventh. Hence arose a great and a
long quarrel in the Church of God, which they call a Schism; when part of the
Christian Princes favored Urban, and part favored Cevennes. Nor were these
seditious Cardinals content with that, but sent the Britains, who had plundered
and taken many Castles, Villages and Forts, against the Pope and people of
Rome, who meeting the Enemy at Ponte Salaro in a confused manner were conquered
and killed. But after that they fought another Battle at Sancto Marino with
such courage and intention that they beat the Britains and killed so many of
'em, that there was hardly a Messenger left to carry the news. Those that were
in the Castles defended themselves for some time, but especially the Governor
of the Castle of Surio, who after many years surrendered it to Pope Martin. In
the mean time the Genoeses begin to show the malice which they had conceived in
their hearts against the Venetians, and took Lewis King of Hungary into their
Alliance, with Francis of Carrara, Lord of Padua, the Duke of Austria, and the
Patriarch of Aquilegia. On the part of the Venetians were Perinus of Lusignan
King of Cyprus, and so was Bernabos Viconti. In the first Engagement at Sea the
Venetians had the better of it, upon the Coast of Antio, under the Command of
Victor a Pisan: of ten Genoese Ships five being lost. At that time also the
Marchesi of Carreto, by the assistance of Bernabos took Albenga, Noli, and
Castle Franco from the Genoeses, but not long after they made a Peace with 'em
and restored all. After this the Genoeses put Dominick Fregoso their Duke into
Prison, with his Brother Peter, and made Nicolas Gualch their Governor by
Land, and Lucian Auria their Admiral by Sea. But Bernabos, that had married his
Daughter to the King of Cyprus, sent her very honorably into Cyprus to her
Husband, with twelve Galleys, six Catalonian and six Venetian. Perinus thus
strengthened attaqued Famagosta both by Sea and Land; but in vain; for the
Soldiers within defended it stoutly, and his Navy was battered, and disabled by
bad Weather. In the mean while the Venetians on the one side and the Genoeses
on the other did not cease to molest both the Seas: For whilst Charles Zono,
Admiral of the Venetian Fleet, infested the Genoeses in the Tyrrelene Sea,
Lucian Auria over ran the Adriatique to the great damage of the Venetians,
setting upon them from Zara (where his Ships lay at Anchor) the King of
Hungary's Port. The Venetians were very much concerned for the injury done to
'em, and seeing they could not draw Lucian to fight, they burnt two Towns of
the Kings called Cataro, and Sibinico. In the mean time Galeatius Viconti died,
in the year 1379. and almost all the Duchy of Millain seemed to be for
Bernabos: at which the Venetians were much pleased, but to no purpose; for
first the half, and then the whole Country fell off to John Galeatius his
Nephew. Lucian, Admiral of the Genoeses, moving toward Pola, conquered and took
the Venetian Navy in the very Harbor: but, whilst he pursued the Enemy too
rashly, he was run through with a Lance and died. Both the Navies, as well the
Conqueror, as the conquered, were brought into Zara, whither the Genoeses sent
Peter Auria in the room of his deceased Brother, with nine Galleys, and many
other Vessels: who taking an account of his Brothers Victory, found two
thousand Captives, beside the multitudes that were killed and drowned. The
Venetians were attaqued at Land too by Carrara and his Allies, whom I have
mentioned, to whom the Venetians opposed Albrico Barbiano Earl of Cuni, an
excellent Commander. But Peter Auria having gotten a Navy of sixty Galleys, and
as many other Vessels, went to Venice, stormed and burned Grado, Comachio, and
Cahorle. From thence he went to Chioza, which though it were defended for some
time by the Venetians, yet he took it at last, by assistance of Supplies, which
he had from the Governor of Padua. It Is certain that full six thousand men
were slain in that Siege, and nine hundred and fifty of the Venetians taken,
and sent to Zara; they spared the Women, not violating their Chastity in all
their fury and violence. The Venetians being quite disheartened at this
Calamity, and despairing of any help by Sea or Land, set the Genoese Captives
at liberty, and sent 'em to Chioza to their Admiral, to beg their pardon, and
to make their submission to the Will of the Conqueror; But the Genoeses, proud
of their Victory, as Conquerors use to be, refused to answer the Venetians,
unless they would come and surrender themselves and all they had. Thereupon the
Venetians betook themselves to the defense of their Country, and setting up
Chains of Iron before the Ports mouth, and a Guard of three hundred Horse with
as many Foot upon the Key; they sought out for some one person, whom they might
make their General. And being in great doubt by reason of their Distractions
whom to choose, it was proposed by some body, that Victor of Pisa was the only
man fitting to be in a place of that Trust, as well understanding the Power and
Arts of the Genoeses. That Voice (whoever spoke) was heard with great
reverence, as if it came from an Oracle: for immediately they ran all to the
Prison, where he lay for his ill management at Pola, and taking him out made
him their sole Commander. The Genoeses by that time were come very near, and
having taken all the Castles thereabout, were just entering the City; but were
easily repulsed after a long fight by John Barbadicus with certain small Ships
well armed, the Genoese Galleys not being able to come on, in those narrow
Seas. Besides, Barbadicus used this other Stratagem. There was at that time an
Instrument, called Bombarda, i.e. a Gun, newly invented by a certain German,
and called Bombarda from its thundering sound; and each of the Venetian Skiffs
had two of those Guns or more, whereby the Genoeses who were ignorant and
unskilled in this new kind of fighting, were many of 'em destroyed; each Gun
often killing two or three men at one shot, because they were not able to avoid
them so well on board as if they had been on shore. Hereupon the Venetians bad
Bernabos Viconti their friend and Ally, to press upon the Genoeses so as to
raise their Siege; they already wanting provisions. And indeed the Venetians
must have perished, if (as Carrara advised, the Genoeses had taken care to
hinder supplies from being imported into Venice. Bernabos, to give some
satisfaction to the Venetians, sent his Army against the Genoeses; who when
they had plundered the Valley of Pulcephera and taken nineteen thousand, they
left the Genoeses (who fought against Bernabos not with Swords but with Gold,)
and having loaded themselves with Spoil returned into Millain. Astorgius of
Faenza had not so good luck, when he was sent thither, by Bernabos, with the
Horse. For coming toward the City he was routed by the people of Genoa who
sallied out upon him, but escaped with much ado himself in the habit of a
Country Fellow. But Calo John Emperor of Greece, being an Ally of the
Venetians, besieged Pera, a Place belonging to the Genoeses, over against
Constantinople. For he saw the Genoeses were engaged in many and dangerous
Wars. But Andronicus his Son, who was an equal Enemy to his Father and the
Venetian both, with the assistance of the Turks and Bulgarians, defended it
stoutly, and frighted his Father to that degree, that he soon after came over
to the side of the Genoeses. In the mean time Urban was not so intent upon
making Peace between Christians (which he should have done) as he was desirous
to revenge the injuries which he received from Queen Joan, and therefore
incited Lewis, King of Hungary, to revenge his Brother Andrea's death and he
would help him. He consented, and by instigating Charles his Son (who was then
carrying on the War against the Venetians in Marca Trevisana) against Joan, he
gave the Venetians some little respit, who before that were almost ruined. And
it added somewhat to their Affairs that Charles Zenus a Venetian, an excellent
Seaman sunk two Ships of Burden in the Port of Chioza, and reduced the
Genoeses to that extremity, that they themselves (since all other Passes were
stopped up, and they could not bring their Ships out) seemed rather to be
besieged than to besiege, they were in such necessity of all provisions. But
nothing did the Genoeses so much injury, as the death of Peter Auria who was
killed by a shot from a Gun, as he was stoutly defending the Fortifications of
Chioza. In whose place Matthew Ruffus was presently chosen, who, as he was
coming to Chioza with new Galleys, took Thaddeus Justinianus at Manfredonia,
with six Galleys laden with Provisions. Agapetus, Cardinal Columna, being
concerned for these misfortunes, exhorted the Genoeses and the Venetians to
Peace very often, but all in vain: for they, who fought out of hatred, not for
Dominion, would never hearken to the wholesome advice of those who gave 'em good
Counsel. At length the Genoeses, when they saw themselves so begirt at Chioza,
that they could not sally forth for the Venetian, nor get provisions from
Matthew Ruffus, or the Lord of Padua, who had promised them shortly to supply
them, they surrendered the Town on the first of July 1380. At which time there
were taken of the Enemy 4340. though more died in the Siege by Famine and the
Sword. Yet the Genoeses, though they had received such a fatal blow, could not
lie still, but with thirty eight Galleys compelled the Triesteses to revolt
from the Venetians to the Patriarch of Aquilegia. They likewise took
Justinople, but not the Castle. And when they had recruited their Navy they
went for Venice again; but no body encountering them, they returned into Istria,
took the City Pola and burned it: Many slaughters followed on both sides. But
the Venetians were overcome in a Land fight by Carrara, whilst James Caballus
an excellent Commander, defended Treviso stoutly, which was almost forced by
Famine to a surrender. And now both sides being well tired with such a long and
bloody War, the Duke of Savoy, upon the 23d of September, 1381. makes Peace
between them upon these terms; that the Venetians, every tenth year, should pay
the King of Hungary seven thousand pounds, provided he kept all his part of
Dalmatia free from Pirates, and suffer no Salt to be made in his Dominions
there; and that the Patriarch of Aquilegia should have the same Power in Friuli
as before the War. But the Venetians and the Genoeses were ordered, to send
home each others Captives, without any mention of the Spoils which were taken
on either side. The Padueses were commanded to draw off from the Siege of
Treviso; and to demolish the Towers, and Forts which they had raised in Fens,
and at the mouths of several Rivers; upon which account bounds were set out
between the Venetians and those of Padua. In the mean while Charles whom we
told you the Pope sent for out of Hungary to go against Joan, came into Italy
with eight thousand Horse, and first reduced Arezzo, which had been long
embroiled by the seditions of the Guelphs and Gibellins. From thence moving
toward Florence, he was repelled by John Hawkwood who at that time quartered at
S^agia. But the Florentines fearing they should not be able to endure the shock
of such a mighty King, they purchased a Peace of him at the rate of 40000 l.
and discharged Hawkwood without his pay; who sold Bagnavallo to Nicolas and
Albert d' Este, that they might the better keep Faenza in obedience, which
notwithstanding they soon after lost by treachery, to Astorgius Manfredus. But
Charles, after he had visited Urban at Rome went into his Kingdom, and having
conquered all Joans Forces, took Naples by surrender. The Queen was besieged in
Castelnovo, when the Guelphs of Arezzo made a Tumult and forced James
Caracciolo a Citizen of Naples who was sent thither by the King, to fly into
the Castle. The Gibellins also fled thither too, whose good that just Man
consulted as much as the Guelphs. For he desired to carry every thing alike
with equity in all cases. Wherefore having sent for Albrick Barbianus from Todi
upon the account of an injury which he revived, he went into the City, and
whilst he strove to reduce the Guelphs, he plundered the Gibellins also. And
Ferraback another General who followed Albrick took all the remaining spoil
that he could find in Arezzo. Whilst these things were transacted in Naples and
Arezzo, a new cloud of War overcast Italy. For Lewis of Anjou, of the Blood
Royal of France, entered Italy with thirty thousand Horse, and posted himself
not far from Bologna, being set on by Clement the Antipope not so much to free
Queen Joan who was besieged, as by force to depose Urban. For this reason
Charles left Arezzo and sent for Albrick and Ferraback; to whom also the
Frorentines sent John Hawkwood at the request of Urban. Lewis going through
Marci was come as far as the Forest of Cassino, expecting twelve thousand
Horse, which were already come into Italy under the command of Andegranius, and
marching through Viacenza, Lucca, Florence, and Siena were arrived at Arezzo,
where they were let in by the Guelphs, and sacked the City, after Albrick had
given 'em a fatal blow. The Gibellins defended the Castle, which was besieged
forty days, and had been taken by the French, had not Lewis of Anjou died in
the mean time. Then Andegranius, seeing how things went, by advice of the
people of Arezzo, that were besieged in the Castle, sold the City to the
Florentines; and so returned into France. And the Anjouen Soldiers now
destitute of their General, wandered home by two or three in a Company begging
by the way. Urban being now delivered from the fear of the French, went to
Naples, and as'd leave of the King, to make his Nephew Prince of Campania,
which when he could not obtain, being of a clownish and uncivil temper, (which
he would have had to be interpreted a blunt downright honesty) he began to
threaten him, and provoked the King so far, that he set a Guard upon him for
some days, and would not suffer him to walk the Streets. This affront he seemed
to wink at for a time, and with the Kings good leave went to Nocera, to avoid
(as he himself said) the heat of that City. Where when he had fortified the
Town he made some new Cardinals, and imprisoned seven of the old ones, charging
upon them a Conspiracy with the King and the Antipope against him. Besides
that He commanded a Process (to speak in their phrase) against the King, and
sent him a Citation to appear: and had this answer from him, That he would come
very shortly to Nocera, and acquit himself of all Crimes objected not with
Words but with Weapons. And in order thereunto he came to Nocera with a
competent Army, and besieged the Town. But Raymund Balcianus, of the Family of
the Vrsins, and Son to the Earl of Nola (who was afterward Prince of Taranto)
was concerned at the indignity, with his own Forces, which he commanded under
the King, he carried Urban and the whole Court to the next Shore, and put 'em
on board certain Genoese Galleys prepared for the purpose. By the way as the
Pope sailed to Genoa, he took seven Cardinals at Nocera, of which he put five
into Baggs and drowned them in the Sea. But upon the death of Lewis King of
Hungary the Nobility of that Country sent presently for Charles: who going
thither called a Convention of the Estates for the settling of Affairs, but
whilst he was busy upon it, the Queen who owed him a grudg procured him to be
murdered, in the year 1385. This was just about the time, when John Galeatius
put Viscount Bernabos (his Uncle by the side of his Father Galeatius) into
Prison at Monza, where he kept him as long as he lived, and enjoyed his Estate.
For formerly when they divided their Patrimony, Pavia, Vercelli, Novara,
Tortona, Alessandria, and other places toward the Apennine Mountains and the
Alps, fell to Galeatius; and Piacenza, Cremona, Parma, Lauden, Brescia, and
Pergamo, to Bernabos; Millain being common to both. Urban had now passed a
whole year at Genoa, when news was brought him that the Florentines incited the
Cities belonging to the Church to assert their Liberty, as they had done
formerly; upon which he went first to Lucca, and then to Siena and Perugia: And
those Cities being confirmed in their Allegiance by his coming, he went as far
as Ferentino under pretense of seeing Naples; but his true Design was, to turn
Ladislaus, a very Child, and John, both Sons to Charles, out of their paternal
Inheritance. For many Noblemen, that favored Lewis of Anjou, gave him hope of
enjoying that Kingdom; but those of Gajetta were very faithful, and preserving
the Children alive, saved the Kingdom too to their great Honor. The Pope
therefore returned to Rome not being able to effect his Design, but was
received into the City with great pomp; though not long after the Banderesii
laid wait for him, which yet he escaped, and frustrated. He created in one day
twenty nine Cardinals, of which three were Romans, the rest almost all
Neapolitans. In the mean while Antonius Scala of Verona and Francis the elder,
Lord of Padua, were engaged in a bloody War, in which John Vbaldin lead the
Army of the Carrareses, and John Ordelafo that of the Scaligeri. But Galeatius
Viconti, with the assistance of the Carrareses, conquered the Scaligeri, and
took Verona and Vincenza. Nor was he so contented, but in a few months he
besieged and took Padua, and imprisoned Francis Carrara at Monza; Francis his
Son escaping by flight. The Florentines also willing now to increase their
Dominions, took Monte-Pulciano and Lusignano, two Towns in the Territories of
Siena, by Stratagem rather than by strength; And afterward sent Charles, Son to
Bernabos, and Antony Scala with five thousand Horse into the Country of Siena
to forage. This moved Galeatius to such a degree, that he dispatched
Ambassadors to Florence to complain, that contrary to the League heretofore
made between them, the Florentines had entertained in pay his Enemies, Charles
Viconti and Antony Scala; and that against all right and justice they had
harassed his Friends and Allies, the Sienneses: In fine, his Ambassadors were
commanded, to declare War against them, except they drew off their Forces from
the Siennois, and disbanded those Officers. But lest Galeatius should have been
as good as his word, Peter Gambacorta Lord of Pisa, a Friend both to him and to
the Florentines, interposed, and undertook to make up the business. In the mean
time Urban died at Rome in the eleventh year and eighth month of his unhappy
Pontificate; and was buried in S. Peter's Church, where there was but little
mourning for him, as being a rustical, and an inexorable Man. His Sepulcher or
Tomb is yet to be seen with a very rude, and silly Inscription upon it.

BONIFACE IX.
BONIFACE the Ninth, a Neapolitan, formerly called Peter Tomacello, was made
Pope at Rome by general consent of the Cardinals, in the year 1389. Who though
he were not above thirty years old, when he entered upon the Popedom, yet he
lived so strictly at that florid Age, and in those wicked times, that no act of
Lust, or inordinate pleasure could be charged upon him; for he seemed to have
changed his Youth into Age. And then he was a Person of such courage and
conduct, that he was the first who invested all the Power of Rome in the Pope
alone, so that he created Magistrates, as he pleased, and fortified the Castle
of S. Angelo, which is situate near the Tiber as you go to the Vatican, and set
guards upon all the Bridges cross the Tiber. Whilst this Boniface IX. was in
the Chair, Galeatius made War upon the Florentines and Bolognians, by his
Generals, John Vbaldin and Lantedescus Petramala, who in the Valley of Arno
plundered and spoiled all far and near. James Vermes likewise entered the
Territories of Bolognia upon his own account, and did the City great damage.
The Florentines in the mean time, to prevent with their utmost, these evils,
sent Jown Hawkwood, Charles, Son to Bernabos, and Antony Scala with four
thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot, to aid the Bolognian* their friends and
Allies: And solicited Stephen Duke of Bavaria (to whom Francis the younger was
fled fot refuge) both by Letters and Messengers to come and assist 'em. Beside
they hired James Earl of Armeniac for a great deal of Money, to come down into
Italy against Viconti, and divert him from their borders, to defend his own.
Francis the younger also, at their Entreaty, disguising himself, and favored
by the Venetians, got into Padua, and took the City before any body was aware.
The Duke of Bavaria followed him at the heels, and entering the Town, stormed
the Castle without any intermission. And the Veroneses, startled at this turn
of Affairs, beat out the Guards of the Viconti, and invited Antony Scala to
their side, who just about that time died in Tuscany, leaving one only Child,
a little Boy. Which when they heard, they repented of what they had done, and
immediately sent for Vgulot Blancardus, who was with Galeatius's Army in
Cremona, having begged pardon for their Crime, and paid some thousands of
pounds to atone for their Error. Blaneard being let in, could not keep the
Soldiers from sacking the wealthy City, but the Wife of Galeatius out of pity
for the Noble Town after three days stayed any further plundering. The Duke of
Bavaria now complaining that the Subsidies promised him by the Florentines were
not fairly paid him, raised the Siege of the Castle at Padua and went into
Germany. Thereupon the Florentines, having procured passage for their Troops of
Albert d' Este, who was fallen out with Galeatius a good while before, sent
John Hawkwood to assist young Carrara; by whose Valor and skill the Castle of
Padua was quickly brought to surrender. So that the Forces of Galeatius who
were sent for their relief retired into the Country of Vicenza. By this time
the Earl of Armagnac, a Pensioner of the Florentines, was arrived in Italy by
the way of Turin, with twenty thousand Horse, and having taken Castellaccio by
storm, he gave the plunder to his Soldiers. To oppose this Enemy Galeatius was
necessitated to recall his men out of the Country of Vicenza: while the
Milaneses who were posted in the Suburbs, of Alexandria were furiously set upon
by those of Armagnac without any order; but the Italians drew out the Battle so
long, fighting for some time before the Gates, till their men (whom they had
sent about, to fall upon their Enemy in the Rear) could have time to surprise
'em. While the fight continued, they came about. So that the Enemy was attaqu'd
in the Rear, Front and Flank, in such a dreadful manner (for the Towns-People
also aided them) that they were almost all of 'em killed, before they were
sensible what danger they were in. The Earl of Armagnac himself, General of
this great Army, was taken, but died immediately of a wound that he received.
Besides him there were taken Rainardus Lanfigliatius, and John Riccio, two
Florentine Knights, who had guided the Earl into Italy. Galeatius grown
confident by this Victory, sent part of his Foces against Hawkwood, who had
passed the Rivers Adige, and Mencio, to join Armagnac; upon notice whereof
Hawkwood hasted toward Padua; but lost a great many men by the way, who were
drowned in the Seluces that the Country people had made to hinder their
retreat. But the Florentines being hard put to it by James Vermes, who was sent
thither by Galeatius with twelve thousand Horse and four thousand Foot, called
back Hawkwood, who overcame their Enemies by stratagem, whom he was not able to
conquer in the open field. In the mean time a Peace was made at Genoa upon good
conditions, between Galeatius and the Florentines by the mediation of Pope
Boniface and Antony Adurno General of the Genoeses. But one flame was no sooner
quenched, but another broke out. For Francis di Vico Prefect of the City got
Viterbo out of the Popes hands by treachery; And Peter Gambacurta, Lord of
Pisa, and his Sons, was killed by James his Secretary, and Counselor, who
strait usurped his Seigniory. At this time also upon the death of Albert d'
Este, one Azzo of the same Family, who had been banished a long time, attempted
to be restored to his Country by the Power of the Counts of Cunie. But the
Guardians of young Nicolas, Son of Albert, took up Arms, and driving Accius
from Ferrara, promised the Towns of Lugo and Monselice to John Cunio, if he
would kill Azzo. But he showed 'em a trick for it, and only killed a man very
like him; upon which the Towns being surrendered to him, he produced the real
Azzo. Alberic his Progenitor would never have done such an Act; to whom the
Italians owe more than to all the Generals of his Age. For he first taught the
Italians the Art of War (when they had been long unaccustomed to Arms) how to
defend themselves from domestic as well as foreign Enemies. For before his
time, if the Italians had any War either among themselves or against the
Barbarians, they were forced to desire the aid of foreign Soldiers. But he
raised such a mighty Army in a short space under the Banner of St. George, that
he drove the Britains (who had ruined our Country, and the Castles belonging to
the Church) together with the Germans, English and all other Invaders, out of
Italy. From him arose the Bracceschi and Sforceschi, by whom Italy gained so
much Glory, that other Nations either were content to be quiet for fear, or if
they attempted to invade us, 'twas at the cost of their lives. In the mean time
Clement VII. the Antipope died, and in his place the Cardinals, who joined in
the present Schism, put up Peter Luna, then called Benedict XIII. at Avignion.
At that time also Winceslaus, Son to Charles the Emperor, succeeded him; from
whom John Galeatius Viconti received the Title of Duke of Milan by his
Ambassador Peter Philargi Archbishop of Milan, who afterward got the Papacy,
and was called Alexander the Fifth. But Galeatius when John Hawkwood was dead
and buried at Florence, (whom the Florentines made use of as their chief
Commander in their Wars) He resov'd to send Albrick with an Army into Tuscany,
to keep the Florentines in awe, who then made War upon Appiax Lord of Pisa.
There were in that Army Paul Vrsin, Ceculino, Brolia, Brandelino, Paul Sabello,
Luke Canali, great Captains; who going with joint-forces and Counsels to
besiege Florence, pitched their Camp near the Carthusian Monastery; from whence
they continually infested the City of Florence and all the Country about it,
with frequent inrodes, and filled all places with slaughter, rapine, and fire,
Anno Dom. 1397. At which time Boniface went to Perugia, to procure a
reconciliation between the Nobility and Commonalty, there. But the Commonalty,
even in the Popes presence, took up Arms against their Promise, and killed
eighty of the Nobles, and then made Biordo, and Nichilotto, who were admitted
into the City as heads of their Faction, chief Lords of all. The Pope was angry
at that, and went to Assisi, from whence he sent Agents to Galeatius, to desire
him, that he cease to attempt Mantua, which he then besieged by Land and Water,
having sent for Albrick Barbianus into that Country to assist in the War. But
the Florentines and the Venetians being bound as Allies to aid Mantua, they
sent a good Army under the conduct of Charles Malatesta, (Cousin to the Duke of
Mantuan) who defeated Galeatius's forces at Governo. At that time the
Florentines had a design to fall upon the Pisans, but the Earls of Puppio and
Balono, and the Vbertine Rebels, who threatened destruction to the City of
Florence, if they stirred a foot against the Pisans, diverted them from it. But
not long after James Appian died, and his Son Gerard succeeded him, who when he
could not keep Pisa in subjection, by reason of the Tumults which the
Florentines raised in it, he sold the City to Galeatius Viconti, in the year
1399. keeping only one Town for him and his, called Piumbino. At Perugia
Biordus, being slain by the contrivance of Lantedescus, the Perugians
endeavored to assert their Liberty: And when Vgolin Trinci of Fuligno, the
Popes Vicar there, endeavored in his name to bring Perugia into the Churches
Patrimony, the Citizens were angry, and surrendered themselves to Galeatius;
who two months after got possession also of Bologna and Lucca by a wile. Hence
was the fear of the Florentines so increased, that they gave out, that they and
their Liberty were all lost, unless Galeatius were taken off. The Year of
Jubilee approaching, the Pope was moved by Ambassadors from Rome to leave
Assisi and reside with them; which though he was very willing to do, yet he
concealed his desire, and told 'em, he would not; because, he said, they denied
to have Senators chosen out of foreign Nobility according to the Custom and
Orders of former Popes; and because they had chosen Conservators of the Chamber
on their own head: Men not fit for the Employment, who gave too much License to
the Banderesii. Then the Romans, to gratify the Pope, removed the Banderesii,
and admitted of Malatesta Son to Pandulphus, of Pesaro, a learned Man, as
Senator, in the Popes Name, and furnished Boniface with Money to go to Rome.
When he was come into the City, he fortified S. Angelo (as I told you) with
Walls and Turrets, and made himself by degrees Master of the whole place. After
that, in the year 1400. the Jubilee was kept, and a great multitude of People
stocked to Rome for Devotion, and then the Florentines, being willing to be rid
of Galeatius, invited Robert Duke of Bavaria (whom the Electors of the Empire
having deposed Wenceslaus, of Bohemia for his sloth, had chosen Emperor) to
come into Italy upon condition, that he should not have the promised reward,
till he was advanced as far as the Duchy of Millain. But when he was come to
Brescia, near the Lago di Grada, and had received part of the Money, he engaged
with Galeatius, and losing the day, fled to Trent. The Venetians and
Florentines promised him great things to keep him from going back into Germany,
but all would not do. At that time Boniface, whether out of fear of the Power
of the Viconti, or out of covetousness to enlarge the Churches Patrimony, was
the first that imposed Annates, or yearly payments upon Ecclesiastical
Benefices, upon this condition, that whoever got a Benefice, should pay half an
years Revenue into the Apostolical Treasury. Yet there are those who attribute
this Invention to John XXII. Now all Countries admitted of this usage, except
the English, who granted it only in case of Bishoprics, but not in other
Benefices. Being thus strengthened with Money, and choosing Magistrates as he
pleased, both in the City and all over the Church Dominions, the Pope restored
Ladislaus a Youth, Son to Charles King of Naples into his Fathers Kingdom,
which was usurped by such as sided at that time with Lewis of Anjou. And to do
it the more easily and honorably he abolished that deprivation of Charles,
which Urban had promulged at Nocera, and sent Cardinal Florentino to Cajeta
(which was the only place, that had continued Loyal) to crown the Youth there
where he had been so loyally preserved. Galeatius thus rid of the Emperor, sent
his Army under the command of Albrick against John Bentivoglio, who had turned
out the Garrison, and made himself Master of Bologna. At this time Francis
Gonzaga fought in Galeatius's Army (for they two were friends again) as also
Pandulphus Malatesta, Charle's Brother, and Ottobon Rossi of Parma. The names
of these Men terrified the Florentines so, that they sent Bernardo their
General to assist the Bolognians their Allies; which so encouraged the
Bolognians, that they engaged the Enemy before their Walls; but had the worst,
and lost all their Horse, as also Bernardo, who was killed in the fight. James
Carrara was taken, but preserved at the request of Francis Gonzaga. Bentivoglio
fled with a small number into the City; which whilst he stoutly defended, he
fell into an Ambuscade where he was killed, the Enemy not being able to take
him alive; so that now Galeatius easily became Master of Bologna, and struck
great terror into the Florentines, threatening suddenly to turn all the force
of his Arms upon them: But not long after he died at Marignan of a Fever, Anno
Dom. 1402. whose death, long wished for by the Florentines, freed them from
many fears, and was presignified by a Comet which appeared some time before.
Upon this many Usurpers arose, either those who were chief in their Cities or
who had command among the Soldiery, by corrupting the Garrisons, seized their
several Towns; there being now no one Man of Authority and Power to correct
their ambitions and excesses, infinite mischiefs happened. That fatal Sedition
too of the Guelphs and Gibellins was renewed, which ran through Italy two
hundred years and above, and raised such civil Wars among the several Cities,
that they fought till they had almost destroyed each other. Vgolinus
Cavalcabos, having vanquished the Gibellins, was Lord of Cremona: whilst Otho
the third got Parma, expelling the Rossi. The Soardi seized Bergamo, the
Rusconii took Como, the Vignati possessed themselves of Lodi, and Fazino Cane
an excellent General made himself Master of Vercelli, Alessandria, and many
other Towns thereabout. I omit others, who having been expelled by Galeatius,
then were in some hopes of recovering their usurped Dominions: especially
William Scala, and Charles Viconti, Son to Bernabos, who solicited all the
Princes and People to revolt. Upon this account Piras Ordelaphus was banished
his Country and got possession of Forli; and Albrick Earl of Cuni, would have
reduced Faenza, then brought to extremity, if he had not been sent for in haste
by Ladislaus, by the Popes advice, and made Great Constable of Naples. The Pope
had sent his Brother also thither with a competenr Army, to assist the King;
but he being expelled by the Neapolitans moved toward Perugia, and soon made
that City subject to the Pope. Baltesar Cassa also a Neapolitan Cardinal of S.
Eustachius, compelled the Bolognians to return to the Church-party, after he
had besieged them for some time; in which expedition Brachius Montonius led the
Church-forces, as being a Person well skilled in Military Affairs, and left for
that reason in Romagna by Albrick. For he had fought under him from his youth,
and been a Commander, as had Sfortia, who was born in Cotignola a Town of
Romagna. By whose valor and prowess the Militia of Italy so improved, that
whoever wanted a Commander, would make use of one of them. Hence those Military
Factions so increased that all the troubles of Italy for sixty years might be
imputed to one of them. For he, that was oppressed by the Brachians,
immediately hired the Sfortians to revenge his quarrel. But Albrick (from whom
as from the Trojan Horse so many Generals did come) made Naples yield to
Ladislaus, after a long Siege. At which Victory all the Princes of the Kingdom
and all the Cities surrendered themselves to the King. But Ladislaus, over
desirous of enlarging his Kingly power, before he had laid a good foundation in
Naples, was sent for into Hungary, to accept of that Kingdom by hereditary
right; and in order thereunto sent over his Forces. But whilst he was besieging
Zara, his Friends sent him word, that the Neapolitans were like to revolt;
wherefore having taken Zara, and sold it to the Venetians, he returned to
Naples; and calling back Albrick out of Romagna, he deposed all the Nobles, and
banished those that refused to obey him. But he was very severe upon the Family
of Sanseverino, and put the chiefest of them to death. Boniface being troubled
at such a tedious confusion of Affairs, at length died of a Pleurisy, in the
fourteenth year and the ninth month of his Pontificate, Anno Dom. 1404. He was
buried at S. Peter's in a Marble Tomb, of Mosaic work, still to be seen with his
Coat of Arms: which shows also that he built much in S. Angelo, the Capitol,
and the Vatican. Nor had any thing been wanting to the glory of this Pope, if
he had not been too partial to his Relations: Simony being often committed, by
reason that his Brethren and Friends, who came to Rome in great multitudes to
get Money, asked for every thing that fell in his gift, without any reason. As
for Indulgencies, and those plenary too, they were sold about at such a rate,
that the Authority of the Keys and the Popes Bulls was brought into contempt.
Boniface indeed endeavored to amend these things, but was forced by the
importunity of his Friends to let it alone. And for this reason I think it
would go better with the Church of God, if Popes would not mind their kindred,
or at least not too much, but consult the good and honor of the Papacy rather
than promote the interest of flesh and blood. Especially at that time, when
Tamberlain, who conquered the Turks, and led their Emperor in Chains along with
him, was dead, and had left all the Armenians, Persians, Egyptians, and
Assyrians without Governors: so that the Christians might easily have recovered
Jerusalem and the Holy Sepulcher. But his care was placed nearer home, for he
persecuted the Albi, [ Bianchi or Whites] that would have introduced a new sort
of Superstition under his Pontificate, of whom I heard my Father (who saw the
Man) say, that there was a certain Priest who came down from the Alps into
Italy the year before the Jubilee, with a great many after him: and being
clothed in white Cloth, pretended so much modesty, that every body looked upon
him as a Saint. So that this Fellow coming into Italy drew a great number of
Men and Women over to his Opinion in a short time. And these People at Night,
lay, Men or Women, Pesants or Citizens, Servants or Freemen, promiscuously
together covered with their white Robes, like so many Sheep. They feasted in
the public Streets, and strove who should bring the best provisions. The
Priest himself carried a Crucifix, which, he said wept for the sins of Mankind;
and as often as it did so, the people set up a clamor and begged pardon of
God. They sang the Lauds, or Praises of the Blessed Virgin, going along and
standing still, in Hymns made for that purpose. But as he came from Piedmont
and that way, into Romagna, Tuscany, and Millain, the Opinion of his sanctity
was advanced, whereby he brought over not only the rude and unlearned
Commonalty, but even great Men and Bishops of several Cities. At Viterbo, being
tired with traveling, he tarried with the multitude, and from thence, said, he
would come to Rome, to visit the holy Places, and Bodies of the Saints. But
Boniface fearing him to be a Cheat, and thinking, as he said, that the
superstitious Knave had a mind to get the Popedom by the assistance of that
Gang about him, he sent Soldiers to meet him, and bring him to Rome. Which
done, some write, that his knavery was detected by Fortune, and that he was
deservedly burnt alive; but others say the Man was guiltless, and that it was
only a trick of the Pope to raise that report of him, whereas he put him to
death out of envy. Which is true, God knows: But this is certain, that after so
great a conflux of people caused partly by this and partly by the Jubilee, a
number of Men died of the Plague. But amidst all the evils wherewith Italy was
afflicted, we received one Benefit. For Chrysoloras Byzantius brought the Greek
Learning into our Country, which had been neglected in Italy for four hundred
years. Hence came the Greek and Latin Schools, where Guarinus, Victorinus,
Philielphus, Ambrose the Monk, Leonard and Charles of Arezzo, and many more
were educated, by the emulation of who many Wits were excited to laudable
Studies.

INNOCENT VII.
INNOCENT the Seventh, of Sulmona, before named Cosmo, Cardinal-Priest of Santa
Croce, was made Pope at Rome, when all Italy was in an uproar. For John
Galeatius being dead, and leaving two Sons but young, all Italy betook
themselves to Arms. John Maria, the elder Son got the Duchy of Millain; and
Philip Maria, the younger, made himself Lord of Pavia with ease, as lawful Earl
of it. The other Cities, to the number of twenty five revolted from the
Viconti. Paul Guiniffius, a Citizen of Lucca, usurped the Dominion of his
Country; Francis Carrara now that General was gone off, whose Arms he
exceedingly feared) that he might enlarge his Territories, sent Ambassadors to
Verona, Brescia, Bergamo, and Cremona, to solicit the Guelphs to be on his
side. But when he saw William Scala and Charles Viconti (who desired to govern
their own Cities) could hinder his attempts, he promised William the Signiory
of Verona, and that of Millain to Charles, of whom he borrowed thirty thousand
pounds. So he restored William to his Country; but he soon after was poisoned,
and then Verona fell again to Francis. He would have served Charles the same
trick, when he was urgent with him, either to perform his promise or to pay the
money he had lent him. He also advised Francis Gonzaga by Letter to come over
to his side, and embrace his Alliance; and if he would not, that he would look
upon him as an Enemy, and give him reason ere long to repent of his obstinacy.
And that, he said, was easy; because he having gotten Verona, which bordered
upon Mantoua, he should shortly compass Brescia too, and so teaze the
Mantoueses as he pleased. Francis resolved to say nothing in answer to him,
till he heard what the Venetian Ambassadors said, whom he understood to be upon
the way coming to him. For the Venetians suspecting the power of the Carraresi,
took Vincenza into their protection by a free surrender of the Citizens, who
feared Francis's strength; and would rather be under any Lord than one of
Padua* for there was a mortal hatred between the Paduans and those of Vincenza.
So then, the Venetians admonished Francis Carrara, that he should not meddle
with those of Vincenza who were their Tributaries: and that he would raise the
Siege from Cologna, which they accounted within their Dominions; if not, that
the Venetians would revenge their quarrels. Francis replied, that he admired at
the impudence of the Venetians, who though they have no right or claim to any
thing upon the Continent, yet would prescribe Laws to them who had just Titles.
He therefore bad 'em go and confine themselves within their Bays, and Fens, and
let them alone to govern the several Cities, who had derived a right to it from
their Forefathers. This enraged the Venetians, who thereupon sent instructions
to their Ambassadors, then upon the Road, to make a League with Francis
Gonzaga; and choose him General of their Forces, with an honorable yearly
stipend. And Francis (when the League was made) thought it best to make haste,
because he heard the Enemy had gotten Cologna, and raising a great Army,
attaqued the Veroneses on that side, that lies toward Mantoua. The Venetians
from Vincenza did the same. Which so terrified the Veroneses, that having no
hopes of help they surrendered. For the Citizens hated Francis Carrara, for
having poisoned William Scala, and imprisoned his Sons, after he had gotten
Verona by a Wile. But as the Army entered the City, keeping their exact Order,
for fear of some stratagem of the Enemy, James Carrara, who had commanded the
Garrison, ran away with some few Soldiers to Hostia. But as he crossed the Poe,
he was taken Prisoner and sent to Venice. Now the Venetians having fortified
Verona as well as they could, marched thence with all their Forces to Padua,
which they besieged, though it were fenced with very high Walls, and a deep
Ditch, and garrisoned with stout Men: and after some months having blocked up
the Avenues for provision, they had it yielded to them. Francis was fled into
the Castle, with his Sons and Nephews: but the Venetians took that too not long
after by surrender of the Soldiers within, who were ready to starve. But
Francis being taken and sent to Venice was put to death along with his Brother.
And this was the end of him, who indulged his own lust of ruling so much, that
he contemned Peace, and would get all things by force of Arms. But this was not
the end of our misfortunes. For, either by the neglect of Popes (who used to
procure Peace either by Interdictions, Menaces, or force) or rather by means of
the Schism (under which the Church of God did at that time labor) it was come
to that pass, that every base Usurper, after the death of John Galeatius, would
venture upon any mischievous Design. And though Innocent, whilst he was
Cardinal, used to blame the negligence and timorousness of former Popes,
saying, their sloth was the cause, that the Schism, which was the bane of the
Church of Rome and of all Christendom, was not rooted out. Yet when himself had
gotten the Popedom, he followed Vrbans and Bonifaces steps in several things,
which he had carp'd at in them when he was a private person: and not only did
not what he had before commended, but took it very ill if any one mentioned it
to him. Beside he was so furious in his Administration of the Government, that
once, when the Romans desired to have their Liberty restored, and that the
Capitol, Ponte Molle, and S. Angelo might be put into their hands, and also
were urgent with him to extirpate the Schisms (which had been so destructive,
and of such ill example) out of the Church, and that he would seek the Peace of
Christendom (since the King of France promised to assist him in it, and Peter
Luna the Antipope was not against so good a work) the Pope even sent the
Romans themselves to Lewis, his Nephew, who lay at the Hospital of the Holy
Ghost in the Stone-Way, as to an Executioner. For eleven of these
publick-spirited Citizens were presently put to death, and thrown out at the
Windows; for that he said, was the only way to remove Schism and Sedition. The
People of Rome were so incensed at this cruel usage, that they sent for
Ladislaus King of Naples, and took up Arms to revenge themselves of Lewis. But
the Pope, to avoid the fury of the People took Lewis along with him and ran
away to Viterbo. Whereupon the People, seeing they could not satisfy their
wrath upon the Author of the Villainy, they turned their indignation upon the
Courtiers, and plundered them of all they had. Yet some, they say, were
preserved in the Houses of several Roman Cardinals, who with much ado, did make
a shift to protect those that fled to 'em, by the assistance of their Clients.
Then the Romans having taken the Capitol, and Ponte Molle, they attempted S.
Angelo; but in vain, though they were assisted by John Columna Earl of Troja,
Gentilis Monteranus, Earl of Carrara, great Commanders under King Ladislaus.
But when Paul Vrsin came upon them by order of the Pope, with Mostarda and
Cecchalino, they routed John Columna and Ladislaus's Men that were left, in a
place called Neros Meads. This was a great damage to the Romans; for their Men
and Cattle were driven away; and therefore when their anger was over, they
became friends with the Pope, and desired him to return home to the City. For
he was naturally courteous, and affable, learned in the civil and Canon Law,
and well skilled in the Art of Persuasion. When therefore things were thus
composed, he came to Rome, and made more Cardinals, among which were Angelus
Carrara, a Venetian, Cardinal of S. Mark, after called Gregory XII. Peter
Philardi, a Candiot, Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles, afterward Alexander and
Otho Columna, Cardinal of S. George, after called Martin V. Thus having settled
the Popedom he created Lewis, his Nephew Marquis of Marca d' Ancona and Prince
of Fermo: but he himself died a little after at Rome in the second year of his
Pontificate; and was buried in S. Peter's in a Chapel that was formerly
dedicated to the Popes (which Nicolas V. afterward repaired) and his Tomb bears
this Inscription; Innocentio VII. Pontifici Maximo cum neglecti ejus Sepulchri
memoria interiisset, Nicolas V. Pontifex Maximus restitui curavit. In the mean
time the Italians wanted a true Pope and a good Emperor, and therefore every
one did what they pleased. For Cabrinus Fundulus, of whom Charles Cavalcabos
made great use both in War and Peace, being puffed up with hopes of being sole
Governor (because all Magistrates and Lieutenants of Castles obeyed him as
much as Charles) he murdered Charles, with his Brethren and Kindred at
Machasturma, ten miles from Cremona as he was coming back from Lodi. From
thence he fled with a few Men to Cremona, before the thing was known in the
City; and having gotten possession of the Fort and all the Gates, he went into
the Market all in Arms, and whomsoever he saw that was likely to withstand his
Designs, he banished or put to Death. But to make himself absolute he omitted
no kind of cruelty. Nor could the great Men of Milan hinder this, being
themselves embroiled by the different Designs of Gucegaldo Governor of Genoa,
who attempted to bring Milan to subjection to the French King, and of Facino
Cane an excellent Commander, who strove to conserve it in the hands of the Heir
John Maria Visconte. Now also Otho III. Lord of Parma was enticed upon pretense
of treating with him, by Nicolas d' Este, to Rubera a Castle of his, where at
the command of Nicolas he was killed by Sforza Cotignola: upon whose death,
Nicolas immediately got Reggio and Parma by surrender of the Citizens, who
hated the name of Otho. But Ladislaus, having been possessed of Rome, as I said
before, and Perugia being put into his hands, which had been brought low by the
Forces of Braccio, he led his Army into Tuscany: which by the industry and
conduct of Malatesta of Pesaro was so bravely defended, that Ladislaus was
beaten thence and retreated into his own Kingdom, having received more damage
than he had done his Enemies. But the Florentines being delivered from such an
Enemy turned their Arms toward the Pisanes and after a long Siege took Pisa,
under the conduct of Tartaglia and Sforza in the year 1406.

GREGORY XII.
THE Schism continuing still in the Church, to the decay of Christianity, one
Pope being chosen at Rome, and another at Avignion, the Princes of France, to
wit, the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, and Orleans (who at that time governed all
France, during the Kings indisposition) took pity on the Church at last, and
came to Avignion to Peter Luna, who was called Benedict XIII. and desired him
to commiserate the Church now falling to ruin, though it were to relinquish the
Pontificate: he having promised so to do upon Oath in the Conclave, when he was
made Pope. And they engaged the other Pope, that was then made at Rome after
Innocents death, should do the same. For these Princes and those of Italy, who
both were hearty Lovers of Christianity, had agreed, that those two which
strove for the Pontificate, of whom one was of the French and the other of the
Italian faction, should be put by, and some one afterward elected, that might
be the common Father and Pope of all Nations. Benedict replied, That he should
grievously offend God, if he forsook the Church of God, whose Patron and
public Father he was made by universal consent of all good Men, and that he
would not hold that Seat precariously to which he had been so fairly chosen. As
to what they said concerning extirpating the Schism and treating of Unity, he
professed, it pleased him very much, so it were debated in a free place, and
that no man might lie under any force from either Party. Yet one thing he
promised 'em, and confirmed it with an Oath, that if the Schism could not be
composed by any other means, that then he would wholly lay down the Pontifical
Dignity, if the other Antipope would do so at the same time. Thereupon the
Princes began to consult among themselves, how they should bring over Benedict
to their Opinion. But he fearing their Consults and conferences, furnished the
Papal Palais with Arms and all necessary provisions; and there he stayed and
was besieged for some months, till at last he got Galleys ready for his escape,
and sailed down the Rosne into Catalonia, where he was born. There are indeed,
who write that the Princes of France did make that attempt upon Benedict by the
persuasion of French Cardinals, who hated him, because he was not of their
Nation. For when they could not agree concerning the choice of a French Pope
after Clement's death, they elected him (after a long Debate) as a Person of
great Virtue and Devotion; but he often admonishing them to live soberly and
holily, and forbidding Simony upon severe penalties, they grew weary of his
strictness, and notwithstanding his love to Christianity, instigated the French
Princes against him. Christianity was in all Countries, but most of all in
France, they met at S. Peter's in the Vatican, where each of 'em took an Oath,
and bound it with the greatest imprecations, that they would relinquish the
Pontificate, whosoever of 'em happened to be elected to that great Dignity,
upon condition that the Antipope would do the same. They came to this
resolution, to satisfy the French Nation, who having been so foolish to make
an Antipope, had brought in a custom, from which they could not recede without
dishonor, unless the Italians did so too: and not only so, but to comply with
Benedict's judgment, who said the Church could never be healed but by that
means only: But if both were deposed, one true Pope might be elected by
consent of all the Cardinals there, to whom all Kings and Princes should pay
obedience. Upon this condition Angelus Corarius a Venetian, Cardinal of S.
Marks (who, as I told you, was called Gregory XII.) was chosen at Rome Novem.
2. 1406. and immediately in writing, by the hands of Notaries and before
witness confirmed what he had promised before his Pontificate, and set his hand
to it. But when they came to discourse about a place, where they might both
meet without danger, and could not agree, they were esteemed by both Assemblies
of Cardinals no better than Shufflers, and Promise-breakers. Nevertheless the
Cardinals, some from Rome and some from Avignion, met at Pisa, and there with
one accord they deprived Benedict and Gregory of their Pontifical Honor, and
that by the consent of all Nations, except the hither part of Spain, the King
of Scotland, and the Earl of Armagnac who favored Benedict. Then they
proceeded to elect a new Pope, who might govern the Church of God without
Sedition, and the result was, the creating of Gregory being absent, and this
Election depending, Rome was all up in Arms. For Ladislaus the King had taken
Ostia, and put his Land and Sea-forces into it, and thereby so harassed the
Romans with inroads, that he forced them to sue for Peace, and to receive him
honorably into the City as their Governor, where he changed their civil
Officers, fortified according to his own mind their Gates and Walls. But Paul
Vrsin, General of the Church-forces came upon him, they fought stoutly in the
Septimiano near S. James's, and lost a great many Men on each side. For the
King kept his Men on the farther side of Tiber, supposing that he should be the
safer in that place, by reason of his Naval Forces whom he had brought from
Ostia to Rome. But at last yielding to rather than flying from the Vrsin
Faction, which increased every day, he went to Naples; his Party being very
much weakened by a Victory obtained before he came thither over the Columneses,
that fought under John Columna, Baptista Sabellus, James Vrsin, and Nicolas
Columna, who had taken S. Laurences Gate and got into the City. But when Paul
Vrsin came up (as I told you) they were most of 'em taken and all vanquished.
Two of them were put to death; one of which was Galeot a famous Norman
Cavalier, and the other was called Richard Sanguineus, of a Noble and an
ancient Family. The rest were discharged upon condition, they would never fight
for Ladislaus again. From these troubles at Rome there arose such a Dearth of
all Provisions, that a Rubio of Wheat was sold for eighteen Florins, because
the Cattle were all driven away, and the Husbandmen destroyed, as is usual in
the Wars.

ALEXANDER V.
ALEXANDER the Fifth of Candia, formerly called Peter, Friar of the Order of
Minors, and Archbishop of Millain; a Man famous for Holiness and Learning, was
made Pope by consent of all the Cardinals that were at that time in the Pisan
Assembly. So that Gregory fled as it were into Austria, and talked there of a
General Council. But not thinking himself safe enough there, he went for Rimini
and was splendidly received by Charles Malatesta: And Benedict having a Council
at Perpignan, fled to the Castle of Panischola, a very strong place, where he
staid a good while for his better security. But though they were both deposed
in the Council at Pisa, yet they created Cardinals like true Popes; especially
Gregory; who whilst he tarried at Lucca made Gabriel Condelmero Cardinal by the
consent of all the Cardinals that continued of his Party; which Gabriel was
after elected Pope and called Eugenius IV. But I return to Alexander, who was
an excellent Man in the whole course of his life. He was of the Order of Minors
from his youth, and took so much pains in his Studies at Paris both in Humanity
and Divinity, that he soon became a public Reader, and wrote very acutely and
learnedly upon the Books of the Sentences. He was also reckoned a great Orator
and a great Preacher. And therefore he was sent for by John Galeatius, Duke of
Millain, and made his chief Counselor. After that, at Galeatius's request, he
was made Bishop of Vincenza, then translated to Novara, and last of all being
made Archbishop of Millain, he was created Cardinal of the Twelve Apostles by
Innocent VII. From which step he rose to the Pontifical Dignity, and was
deservedly styled Alexander, because he might compare with any Prince for
liberality and greatness of mind. For he was so munificent to the poor, and all
that deserved his bounty, that in a short time he left himself nothing. That
made him use to say in a joke, that he was a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and
a beggarly Pope. For he was free from that desire of getting which increases
usually with a Man's Estate and his Age. But it is a Vice, that cannot be found
among good Men that contemn the World: who the older they grow the less
Viaticum or provision, they know, they shall want for their Journey, and
therefore they restrain their Desires, bridle their Covetousness, and
extinquish all evil lusts. Nay Alexander was a Person of that Courage as to
depose that powerful King Ladislaus, (who in the absence of several Popes had
for a long time much spoiled and harassed the Church Dominions and taken some
Towns by force) at Pisa in the Council there, by approbation of all that were
present; and declared his Kingdom to belong to Lewis Duke of Anjou. But when
the Council of Pisa brake up, the Pope went to Bologna, of which Baldesar
Cossa, Cardinal of S. Eustachius, was Governor. Him Alexander confirmed in his
Office, because by his industry and conduct the Council was held at Pisa; and
because he was a Man fit to oppose Usurpers or such as encroached upon the
Church Revenues. Yet there was more of rusticity, boldness, and worldliness in
him, than his profession required. He led a military Life, and his manners were
Soldier-like, and he took the liberty of doing many things not fit to be named.
But when Alexander was very sick and knew his death was very near, he exhorted
the Cardinals that visited him to Concord and Peace, and to defend the Honor
of the Church: And swore by that Death, he was just now about to undergo, and
by the Conscience of his well-acted Life, that he did not think or believe that
any thing was Decreed in the Pisan Council but with all justice and integrity,
without any deceit, or fraud. This said, and the People weeping that stood by,
he repeated that saying of our Savior with much ado, My peace I give unto you,
my peace I leave with you; and immediately died, in the eighth month of his
Pontificate; and was buried at Bologna in the Church of the Friars Minors: in
which year there was a Famine and a Plague.

JOHN XXIV.
JOHN the Twenty Fourth, a Noble Neapolitan, formerly called Cossa Baldesar,
was chosen Pope at Bologna by general consent, though some say the Election was
carried by force; because he was not only Legate of Bologna, but had Soldiers
in the City and Country planted for the purpose, so that if he could not get it
by fair means, he would by foul. However it was, it is most certain, that he
was made Pope, and always aspired to that Dignity. For when he was a Youth, and
studied Civil Law at Bologna for some years, he took his Degree there
(according to Custom) and then went to Rome. And being asked by some Friends
whether he was going, he answered, To the Pontificate. When he came to Rome, he
was entertained by Boniface IX. and made one of his Privy Chamber: Then he was
made Cardinal of S. Eustachius's, and sent as Legate a Latere to Bologna, which
he in a short space subjected to the Church; together with a great part of
Romagna, beating aut some Usurpers and putting others to death. But after nine
years, when he had enlarged the City of Bologna in a wonderful manner by a long
Peace, and gotten a great deal of Money; Alexander died, and then he used
Bribery, especially to the Cardinals, that Gregory had made, (who were yet
poor) and so was made Pope. Thereupon he sent Agents to the Electors of the
Empire, to desire of 'em, that they would choose Sigismund of Lucenburg, King
of Hungary and Bohemia, Emperor; as being a person very stout, and fit, as he
said, for all brave Actions. For this was his way to get into Sigismunds's
favor. And that succeeding according to his mind, he told 'em beforehand,
that, whereas it had been ordered in an Assembly at Pisa, that a Council should
be called at such a certain time, he would hold it at Rome, and no where else.
And that all might have the freer access thither, he endeavored to settle
Italy, especially that part near the Alps, in which the War did daily increase
by the instigation of Fazinus Canis, who could not keep his mercenary Soldiers
under his Command without employment. For he used to maintain them by rapine
and plunder. At that juncture it happened, that the Pavians, whom Philip could
not contain in awe by reason of his Minority, were grown factious, and took up
Arms. Then the Gibellins, under the conduct of the Beccarian Family, brought
Fazinus and his Army into the City, and were to have the Guelphs Estates for
doing it. But Fazinus entering the Town with his Soldiers, spared neither one
nor the other, but plundered both. And when the Gibellins complained, that
their goods too were plundered against his Promise, he replied; The Gibellins,
in their Persons, should be safe; but their Goods were Guelphs, which he would
give as Spoil to the Soldiers, deriding the folly and covetousness of both
Factions. When he went from thence, he left a good Garrison both at the Gates
and in the Fort, pretending to be Philips Protector till he grew of Age; and so
went against Pandulphus Malatesta, where he teazed the Brescians and the
Bergameses with frequent inroads and ravagings; nor did he spare those of
Cremona, at that time governed by Cabrinus Fundulus. During these transactions
the King of Hungary who was going (as he pretended) to Rome freely to receive
the Imperial Crown, sent twelve thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot against
the Venetians, and seizing Friuli, he set upon Treviso. Against this great Army
the Venetians sent Charles Malatesta to keep them off, not so much by fighting
as by protracting of the time. The Venetians had like also to have lost Verona
the same year by treachery of some of the Citizens, who had more mind to *try
what they could get by violence, than to preserve their Liberty. But those that
were guilty were punished. and there was an end of that. Fazinus Canis died the
same year, after which several persons conspiring together killed John Maria
Duke of Millain, and took Bernabos's Son and Nephews into the City. Then
Philip, by the persuasions of his Friends, married Beatrice, Fazinus's Widow,
who was very Rich, and had Authority with the Soldiers that had fought under
her Husband, Fazinus. By this means he had all the Cities, that paid homage to
Fazinus, presently surrendered to him, and drew Carmignola, and Siccus
Montagnanus (who had seditiously divided the Legion between them after
Fazinus's death) to come to fight under his Colors, by the persuasions of
Beatrice. Which two Commanders Philip made use of afterward, and by their
assistance drove Bernabos's Son, Astorgius, out of Millain, but killed him at
the taking of Monza. Things went thus in Millain and thereabouts, when John
Francis Gonzaga, Son to Francis that was deceased, went with a competent Army
of Horse and Foot to guard Bologna, at the command of Pope John, under whose
Banner he then fought. For Malatesta of Rimini, stipendiary to King Ladislaus,
laid close Siege to the City at that time. He therefore, by the aid of the
Bolognians, fought several sharp Battles with the Enemies; in which he had the
better and defended the City most gloriously. The Winter following Pope John
was invaded by Ladislaus, which made him remove from Rome to Florence, and
thence to Bologna. Nor did he stay there long, but he went to Mantoua, where he
was splendidly entertained by John Francis Gonzaga, whom he took along with
him, at his departure thence, together with great part of his Forces to Lodi,
whither he knew the King of Hungary would come. For he trusted much to that
Prince, whose faithfulness and integrity he had such experience of in the
Bolognian Wars, though he had been tempted by Malatesta with gifts and promises
to revolt to the Kings party. But after when the Pope and the King did not
think themselves sufficiently safe at Lauden, they sent John Francis to Mantoua
(whether they said they would go) with all speed, to prepare for their coming and
for the reception of such a multitude. He went and quickly made all things
ready, and then returned to Cremona, where he heard the Pope and the King by
that time were arrived. After that he conducted them to Mantoua, where all the
people came thronging out to meet them, and they were much more kindly received
than was expected. Now in these several meetings at Lodi, Cremona, and Mantoua,
it was considered, how they should remove Ladislaus out of Campagna di Roma,
Ombria, and Tuscany; for he had taken Rome and many other Towns belonging to
the Church. They saw that Italy could not be freed from the distractions of War
by any other means, and therefore they thought it convenient to advise
concerning a supply to carry on the Affair not at Mantoua, but Bologna, when
they were come thither. But they had greater concerns still upon them. For John
being urged to call a Council by consent of all Nations, for the removal of the
Schism, immediately sent two Cardinals into Germany, to advise with the Princes
of France and Germany and choose a convenient place for a Council to be held
at. Upon enquiry, Constance, a City within the Province of Mentze, seemed to be
most commodious for the purpose. Thereupon they all went thither by a certain
Day, according to Order; so likewise did Pope John himself, though some advised
him to the contrary, because they told him they feared, if he went thither as
Pope, he would return thence as a private person: and so it fell out. For going
thither with certain Men, that were excellent in all sorts of Learning, he
puzzled the Germans so long with tedious Disputations, that they could not tell
what to Decree. But Sigismund came up, who gave every body leave to say what
they pleased, and then great and grievous Crimes were laid to the Popes charge:
upon which he went privately in disguise from Constance to Scaphusa, for fear
some dangerous Plot might be contrived against him. Scaphusa was a City
belonging to the Duke of Austria, whither several Cardinals also, that he had
created, betook themselves. But they being called again by Authority of the
Council, John fled from Scaphusa to Friburgh, designing to go, if possibly he
could with safety, to the Duke of Burgundy. But by the care of the Council,
John was taken, and imprisoned near Constance in the Isle of S. Mark in the
fourth year of his Pontificate, and the tenth month. Then the Council began to
enquire the reason of his flight, and choose several persons of great gravity
and Learning as Delegates, to examine and weigh the Objections made against
John, and make an orderly report of it to the Council. There were above forty
Articles proved against him: of which some contained faults, which he was so
habituated to, that he could not avoid them, and therefore they were judged
contrary to the Faith; and some of them were likely to bring a scandal upon
Christianity in general, if they were not condemned in him. Wherefore since
they all agreed in the same Opinion, John who was deservedly and justly
deposed, approved of their Sentence though pronounced against him. And
thereupon he was presenty sent to Lewis the Bavarian, who was Gregory the
12th's Friend, to be kept in custody, till further Order from the Council.
Accordingly he was blocked up in the Castle of Haldeberg which was a very well
fortified place, for three years, without any Chamberlain, or Servant to attend
him, that was an Italian. All his keepers were Germans, with whom he was fain
to talk by Nods and Signs, because he neither understood the Teutonick
Language, nor they the Italian. They say John was deposed by those very Men,
and them alone, that were formerly his Friends. For those that were of Gregory
and Benedict's Party were not yet come to the Council. These Men therefore,
that they might make their Deprivation of him just and perfect, with one accord
published a Synodical Decree, wherein they affirmed, that a general Council
lawfully called was the Supreme Authority next to Christ. (Grant but this
fundamental Point and the Pope himself is inferior to a Council.) Whereupon
Gregory was forced, by the persuasions of the Emperor Sigismund, to send some
Person to the Council (because he would not go himself) to approve of their
proceedings in his Name. So he sent Charles Malatesta, an excellent Man, who
seeing them all agree, to make Gregory also lay down all claim to the Papacy,
he stood forth before 'em all, and sitting down in a Chair that was made as
stately as if Gregory himself had been there, he read the Instrument of
Renunciation over and presently deposed Gregory: for which free act of his he
was made Legate of Millain by all the Council. But this Person not long after
died at Recanati of grief (as some say) for his so sudden Deprivation before
the time appointed. For he was clearly for deferring the business as long as he
could, as placing some hope in delay. But he died before Martin came to be
Pope, and was buried in the Church of Recanati. Now though two Popes were
removed, there remained a third who gave 'em more trouble than the other two,
and that was Peter Luna, called Benedict XIII. as I told you before. But to
force him to resign, Sigismund went personally with some Agents of the Council
to the Kings of England and France, and persuaded them for the sake of
Christianity so much endangered by the Schism, to assist him, now that the
other two had laid down, in the removal of Benedict; who answering him to his
mind, he went straight to Ferdinand King of Aragon, whose Subjects generally
stood for Benedict, who agreed among other Articles, either to persuade
Benedict to resign, or to cause his People to withdraw their subjection to him,
(as Gregory and John had done in the Council) and to submit to the Council; But
Benedict kept in his strong Castle, and would not comply, persisting that he
was Christ's true Vicar, and that the City of Constance, (where Pope John had
been forced even by his own Friends to exauctorate himself) was not a place of
Freedom requisite for a General Council. The Spanish Nobility seeing Benedicts
obstinacy, followed the Order of the Council, and came over to the rest. Now
things were carried in the Council by the Suffrages of five Nations, Italy,
France, Germany, Spain and England. And whatsoever was Decreed by their Votes,
was confirmed, and published by a Beadle, public Notary before the Court, as a
general Act. By this Authority Benedict, when the matter had been bandied for
some time, was deprived of the Popedom, the Nations that were of his side,
being either absent or rejected; especially the Scots, and the Earl of
Armagnac. In the same Council the Heresy of John Wickliffe was condemned; and
two of his followers, to wit, John Hus, and Jerome, his disciple, as heads of
the Heresy, were burnt: because they affirmed, among other Errors, That
Ecclesiastical Men ought to be poor, for that all People were offended at their
great wealth and Luxury. Matters being thus composed, and mention made
concerning Reforming the Church, and manners of the Clergy, they thought that
could not be done whilst the Sea was vacant. Then they Discoursed about
electing a new Pope, that the Decrees of that Council might have the more
Authority. And in order to it, they resolved to choose six good Men out of
every Nation, who together with the Cardinals, should go into the Conclave and
choose a new Pope. November. 8. 1417. they went into the Conclave, and by consent
of 32 Cardinals, and all the several Nations (contrary to the expectation of
all Men in the presence of many of the Schismatics) Otho Columna, a Nobleman
of Rome, and Cardinal Deacon of S. George was made Pope upon S. Martins day,
Novem. 11. when the Sea had been without a true Pope for four years. And this
was done so much to the satisfaction of all Men, that the joy was
inexpressible. The Emperor was so mightily pleased at it, that he went into the
Conclave and gave 'em thanks (without any respect to his own Dignity) for
choosing so good a Man, and one so fit to support Christianity which was almost
decayed. And then falling down prostrate before the Pope, he kissed his feet
with great Veneration; whilst the Pope on the contrary embraced him, and valued
him as a Brother, and gave him thanks, that by his means and industry Peace was
restored once more to the Church of God. But the reason why he would be called
Pope Martin was, because the Election was upon S. Martins day. Whilst these
things were transacted at Constance, Ladislaus dying as he was going against
the Florentines, the cry at Rome was, To Arms, and for Liberty. Whereupon Peter
Mattheucii was forced against his Will to assume the Government of the City,
though afterward he relinquished the Office, when he understood that a Legate
whom Pope John had designed to send thither, would shortly come with a Senator
of Bologna. As soon as they were come, they put Paul Palonius, and John
Cincius, two seditious Citizens, to death. The year following Brachius
Montonius came with an Army to Rome, and getting into the City, began to storm
the Castle S. Angelo, which was defended by a strong Garrison of Queen Joans;
who succeeded her Brother Ladislaus in the Kingdom. But when Sfortia, the
Queens General, came up, he not only raised the Siege, but beat Brachius out
of the City, the Romans siding with neither Party. John Columna was killed in
that fight by a private Soldier, that formerly had fought under Paul Vrsin,
whom Lewis Columna, in Brachius's Army, had formerly killed at Fuligno. Now the
Soldier had a mind to kill Lewis, to revenge Paul's death, but John who was
innocent died for it as he was going to save Lewis. Whilst Rome was in this
tempestuous condition, rowing to and fro, it conceived at length some hope of
quiet, upon Martin's being chosen.

MARTIN V.
MARTIN the Fifth, a Roman, formerly called Otho Columna, was made Pope in the
Council, by the general consent of all the Nations and Cardinals, at a time
when he as well as the Church was in a declining condition. For he had been
well educated by his Parents care from his Childhood, and when he grew up, he
studied the Canon Law at Perugia, from whence he returned to the City and for
his integrity and learning was made Referendary by Pope Urban VI. Which place
he acquitted with so much humanity, justice, and mildness, that he was created
Cardinal Deacon by Innocent VII. Nor did that make him forego his natural
Disposition. For he was more courteous than before, and lent his assistance to
all that wanted it, yet so, as not to meddle much in public matters. So that
when there were many Debates in the Council of Constance by reason of the
Factions, he took the middle way, and seemed to incline to neither Party, but
always studied the general good: Being therefore beloved by the Emperor, the
Cardinals, and indeed by all Men, he was chosen Pope, In which Office he was
not idle, but active and careful, hearing, refuting, and approving; persuading,
disuading, exhorting, or deterring those that came before him according to
reason and the merits of the Cause. For he was very accessible; and never
denied a reasonable request; besides that he was a Man of great prudence in
Debates. For he would tell what ought to be done, as soon as a thing was
proposed to him. He was short in his Speeches, and wary in his Actions,
insomuch that people saw a thing effected before they could imagine he had
thought of it. His Discourse was full of Sentences; nor did any word come from
him so often, as [Justice:] frequently turning to his Attendants and Familiars,
especially them that governed Cities and Provinces, and saying; Love Justice,
ye that judge the Earth. Indeed the Church of God wanted such a Pope at that
time, to sit at the Helm, and steer S. Peter's Boat (then battered with Waves
of Schism and Sedition) into a safe Port. He therefore having obtained this
great Dignity, and seeing the Hydras head which might grow out again and
multiply, was still left; (that is, Benedict, formerly called Peter Luna, who
kept with some few Cardinals and Prelates in a place that might be called the
very Fort of Schism.) Whilst some People of Aragon were at a stand which way to
incline, He, by approbation of the Council sent Alemannus Ademarius a very
learned Man (whose Tomb is still to be seen in new S. Mary's) a Florentine, and
Cardinal of S. Eusebius, as Legate a Latere into Aragon; to admonish Peter upon
Ecclesiastical Penalties and Censures to resign the Pontificate. Nay, even the
Cardinals that were on Peter's side, when they heard this ultimate resolution
of the Pope and Council, went to Peter and desired him, at last to remove all
Schism out of the Church of God, with which Christendom had been for so many
years afflicted; and told him, that John and Gregory had done the same, in
order to save the Church from ruin. Peter gave 'em some slight answer, and told
'em he could not do it; but he would agree with Martin, if all were true which
people said of his integrity and humanity: and bid 'em, let him alone to manage
the business, and trouble themselves no more about it. But of the four
Cardinals who went to him, two observing his obstinacy immediately revolted
from him to Martin. And those two that continued on his side were presently
counted Anti-Cardinals: one of which was a Carthusian, and the other called
Julian Dobla. Upon this all Spain acknowledged Martins Authority; and so did
the Scots and those of Armagnac not long after. And so all Christendom, except
one Peninsula, owned the Authority of Martin. This great Affair thus settled by
the pains and industry of the Ecclesiastic and secular Princes, especially of
Sigismund the Emperor, they began to talk of reforming the manners of both the
Laiety and Clergy, which were debauched with too much License. But because the
Council of Constance had lasted already four years, to the great inconvenience
of Prelates and their Churches, it was Martin's pleasure, and the Opinion of
the Council, that weighty Affair should be deferred till some more seasonable
opportunity, it being (he said) a work that would require much time and
deliberation; because, as Jerome says, every Country has its peculiar Manners,
and Customs, which cannot be easily removed without great disturbance. Now
because the Schism from a small beginning had lasted a long time to the great
disadvantage of Christendom, upon notice that John XXIII. was escaped out of
custody, fearing lest he should call another Council, he published a Decree
concerning the calling of Councils, That from the end of the Council at
Constance no other Council should be held within five years; and after that,
within seven, and from thence it was drawn out to ten years, and was made a
Law, That every ten years a General Council should be held in some convenient
place, to treat of matters of Faith, and the common good of Christendom; In
confirmation whereof, by the approbation of the Council Martin published his
Bulls. But he abrogated all Decrees that were made during the Schism, before
his Pontificate, except such as were made to promote faith or good manners.
That all Men might know he intended to call a Council, he publicly advised
concerning a commodious place for it, and at last chose Pavia by general
approbation, and gave out his Breves to this purpose: Martin, Bishop, and
Servant of Gods Servants (for the future remembrance of the thing) being
desirous to have Obedience paid to the Decree of this General Council, upon a
Debate had concerning a Place where the next Council shall be holden, we do
with the approbation and consent of the said Council and by the Authority of
these presents appoint the City of Pavia for that purpose. And let no man
contravene this our Decree, upon pein of the displeasure of God Almighty and of
his Apostles SS. Peter and Paul. Given and enacted at Constance in the public
Council-House, April 18. in the first year of our Pontificate. And now he was
willing the Council should be dissolved, wherefore calling a full Assembly,
with the good liking of the Emperor and of all the rest, he commanded Ibaldo
Cardinal of S. Vitus to dismiss them, which he did by saying, Sirs, Depart in
peace. Every one now having leave to be gone, the Pope was desired, on the one
side, by the Emperor and the Germans, that he would tarry some time in their
Country, and by the French Princes, on the other side, to go into France; but
he told 'em he could not do it by any means, because he said, the Churches
Patrimony was torn and spoiled by Usurpers in Italy whilst the Pope was absent;
and that the City of Rome, which was the Metropolis of Christendom, was almost
ruined for want of the presence of its Governor, so much it had suffered by
Plague, Famine, Sword, Fire, and Sedition; beside that the Churches and
Chapels of the holy Martyrs, by the Pope's absence were either in ruins, or
ready to fall, and therefore he must be gone thither. He desired 'em to take
that kindly which reason and necessity forced him to, and that they would let
him sit in Peter's Chair, since they had unanimously chosen him Pope. That the
Church of Rome was the Mother and the Head of all other Churches, and therefore
the Pope ought to reside there, lest the true Pilot should be displaced from
the Stern, to the Stem, to the great hazard and detriment of both Passengers
and Sailers, (i.e. all Christian Men.) So he went from Constance through Savoy
into Italy, and arrived at Millain: where he was very kindly received by Duke
Philip and all his People, who gave him all the respect imaginable. Philip was
at that time in Arms, endeavoring to recover his paternal inheritance, which
the Usurpers kept from him with great bravery and courage; for having once
tasted how pleasant it was to govern, they were not easily turned out of
possession. However Carmignola Philip's chief Commander pressed Pandulphus
Malatesta very hard, who having taken Pergamo, by bribing the Governor to
betray the Castle, moved toward Brescia, and would have quickly stripped him of
all his Dominions, had he not been aided by the Venetians with great sums of
Money and stout Cavalry; or had not Pope Martin persuaded Philip to make a
Peace with Pandulphus: which was accordingly afterward composed and agreed upon
at Mantoua, in the presence of Martin, and by the Umpirage of John Francisco,
upon these terms; to wit, That Pandulphus paying a yearly Tribute should keep
Brescia so long as he lived, but should not have Power to give it away by Will,
because at his Death it naturally devolved upon Philip. But the next year
Pandulphus broke his Peace, by endeavoring by Men and Money to keep Cabrinus
Fundulus in the possession of Cremona. For Philip made War against him and
endeavored to regain the City which was his paternal Inheritance, but had been
so many years possessed by that Usurper. Yet there was a report that Pandulphus
had bought the City of Cabrinus, and promised to give him Riviera di Salo for
it. But John Francisco strove all he could to keep him from this War, and sent
Ambassadors to tell him that he did contrary to all Law and Reason, in
violating of Leagues, defending a Tyrant, and taking up Arms against him who
gave him the Government of Brescia. And that Martin's Authority ought not to be
slighted, to say nothing of his own, by whose Arbitrament the Peace was made.
But if he slighted the Authority of Men, at least he should reverence that of
God, whom they had invoked as a witness to the League, which he had broken.
Soon after the Pope went away from Mantoua, in the fourth month after he came
thither, and passing through Ferrara and Romagna he came to Florence, without
calling at Bologna which he shunned on purpose. For when they of Bologna heard
that Baldesar Cossa was forced to lay down the Pontificate, they expelled the
Church Officers and asserted their Liberty. At that time Carmignola pressed
hard upon Pandulphus (by his breach of the Peace made justly obnoxious to a
War) and in a short space took a great part of the Country of Brescia, and
pitched his Camp at Montclere, there to encounter Lewis Meliorat Nephew to
Innocent VII. who was said to be coming with a great Body of Horse to help
Pandulphus. For they two were kindred by Marriage, and Lewis did it in respect
to his Relation. So they joined Battle, wherein Lewis was basely routed; and
not long after Carmignola reduced Brescia and made it subject to Philip: who
also within a little while was Master of Cremona, and put Cabrinus the Usurper
to Death. Nicolas d' Este being moved at Philip's great success, went of his
own accord, and did what he might have been forced to; that is, he went to
Millain and restored Parma (which he possessed himself of when Otho the Third
died) to Philip, but kept Rheggio, at the request of Pope Martin, as a Fee.
Thither also went John Francis Prince of Mantoua, to congratulate Philip's
Successes. But when he saw Philip look gruffly upon him, and understood that he
designed to renew his Claim to all that he held of the Cremoneses and the
Brescians, he went from Millain in haste, and entered into Alliance with the
Florentines, and Venetians. For those two States were very timorous, and took
pains to draw over whom they could to their Party; because Philip, who loved
Dominion, had broken the League with them, and not only given Sarzana upon the
River Magra, to Thomas Fregoso (whom he had expelled from his Principality lest
he should join with the Bandittoes of Genoa against him) but also had incited
the Bolognians, who were Allies of the Florentines* to revolt, and in order to
it hired their Soldiers to fight under him; nay he had got possession of Forli
under color of the nonage of Theobald, or to gratify the Prince of Ferrara,
whereas there was a proviso in the League, that Philip should not meddle with
Bologna and Romagna. They feared likewise, lest all would be carried by the
power of the three mighty Princes, to wit, Philip, Pope Martin, and King Lewis,
whom they knew to be Confederates. Whereas on the other side Philip laid all
the fault upon the Venetians, because they had endeavored to keep Pandulphus
in the Government of Brescia, and because the Florentines and Genoeses had
assisted some of his Enemies with Money and Ammunition, and had bought Legorne,
(which he had lately Conquered) of the Genoeses for an hundred thousand pounds.
These seeds of Discord might seem enough to raise a War at that time, but
nothing did more set on the Venetians, than the Authority of Carmignola, a
person mightily famed for warlike Discipline, as any of that Age. This person
could not endure (as he used to say himself) the insolence of Philip and
therefore came over to the Venetians, and animating them to War promised to
assist 'em with his utmost. Whereupon these two States, assisted by the Princes
of Mantoua and Ferrara, and going Partners in the charge of the War, set out an
Army of twelve thousand Horse and eight thousand Foot, over whom Carmignola was
General. And then setting upon Philip from every quarter at once, with Boats
upon the River as well as Ships upon the Sea, they were invited into the Town
by the Guelphs of Brescia, who were against Philip. And having seized some part
of it, they reduced it all into their own power within seven months. Then
Carmignola led them to take the Castles which belonged to Brescia, when Pope
Martin, very much concerned for Philips misfortune, sent the Cardinal of S.
Crosses to the Venetians, to mediate between them and Philip. But that did not
succeed, because the Venetians and Florentines made unreasonable Demands, and
so they began again mighty preparations for a War. They fought thrice in that
year, first at Cotolengo, a Castle of Brescia; the second time at the upper
part of Cremona (in which two places they parted pretty equal, and neither had
the better on it) and the third time at Maclodio; where Philip was defeated, and
Charles Malatesta the General taken. This was so great an overthrow, that if
Carmignola would have kept the Soldiers that he took, and have pursued 'em
whilst they were in such a consternation, it had been no great pains to have
turned Philip out of his Principality. Charles (I told you) was taken in that
Battle, but was sent away safe by the Prince of Mantoua, his Kinsman; But
Carmignola employing the Army against the Towns belonging to the Brescians,
which had continued in their Allegiance to Philip, he gave him time to breath
upon it. For he not only made Peace with Amadens Duke of Savoy (who lay hard
upon him) yielding him Vercelli; but he instigated the Emperor Sigismund and
Branorus Scala against the Venetians. But Pope Martin, seeing Philip in such
dangerous Circumstances, sent the Cardinal of S. Crosses again to make peace
between him and the Venetians: who staying at Ferrara, till the several
Ambassadors of the Princes and Cities came with instructions, he made a Peace
upon these Conditions, That the Venetians should keep Brescia and all the Towns
belonging to the Brescians or Cremoneses, which they had taken; that Philip
should surrender Bergamo and all that appertained to it to the Venetians; and
that he should not molest their Allies, or those of the Florentines, or
persuade any of 'em to revolt. Martin approved of this Peace, for fear Philip
should be quite turned out of his Duchy. For as he could not be his Friend
(though he loved him well) upon the account of Religion: so neither could he
then especially, because at that time the Church-Treasury had been exhausted
for several years by the War against Brachius. For when he went to Florence, he
found Brachius Montonius, an excellent Soldier, had so far got possession of
Perugia, the Duchy of Spoleto, and great part of the Churches Patrimony (by
help of the Usurpers round about) that he could not get safe to Rome. But when
Brachius upon Admonition would not comply, the Pope used first of all spiritual
Weapons, that is, Censures, against him; and interdicted all his Adherents, nor
were the Priests allowed to do their Office in the usual places. At which
misfortune of their Friend Brachius the Florentines were concerned, and treated
with Martin for Peace, upon Condition, that Brachius should throw himself at
the Popes feet and ask pardon, which he did. And that he should restore some
Towns to the Church, and fight under the Pope till he had reduced Bologna which
was then in Rebellion, and made it subject to Martin. In which War Gabriel
Condelmer, Cardinal-Priest of S. Clements, and Legate, was General; who by his
industry and Brachius's Valor subdued Bologna in a short time, and made it
tributary to the Church. Whilst these things were transacted in Bologna, the
four Cardinals, formerly of Peter Luna's party, the Antipope, came to Martin
at Florence, where they were received most honorably by the whole Consistory,
and retained their former Dignities. Three were Cardinal-Deacons, but the
fourth, who was formerly a Canon Regular, was a Cardinal-Priest. Baldesar Cossa
being still a Prisoner at Heidelberg in Germany under the Count Palatine, some
Citizens of Florence (of which Cosmus was one) were urgent with Pope Martin, to
set him at liberty: The Pope promised, he would: but whilst his Legate went
thither to perform it, Baldesar, being impatient of staying any longer, gave
the Count Palatine thirty thousand pounds to free him: And coming into Italy,
he went directly toward Florence, but called upon Peter Rubeus a Baron of
Parma, and an old Friend of his, where he understood that there was wait laid
for him. Thereupon he fled by Night, along with the Legate whom he met by the
way, to Thomas Fregosos, another old Friend of his, and gave people a suspicion
that the Schism would be renewed. For he was a Man of great Courage, and very
cunning, nor could he endure a private life. Besides, there were not wanting
such as would incite the bold Man to innovations, they were generally at that
time so much affected with Novelties. But God Almighty took pity on his Church
and put Baldesar upon a resolution of going to Martin at Florence, without any
Articles of Agreement, or any Caution, between them. When he came thither and
had kissed the Popes foot (to the admiration of all that saw it) he saluted him
in the presence and hearing of all the Company, by the name of Christ's true
Vicar, and a true Pope canonically elected. This was strange to all that saw
it, and brought to pass, it should seem, rather by Gods providence than any
humane skill: That a Man, covetous of Dominion, and in such an high Station
before, should be so supple in a place where he might be free, because he was
loved by all. But it made every body cry for joy, especially those Cardinals,
that had acknowledged him as the true Pope. But Martin considering the
vicissitude, or changeableness of humane Affairs, made him a Cardinal in few
days, and then Bishop of Frascati; after which he showed him as much respect as
any other Cardinal, both in public and private. But Baldesar (some think) died
of grief in a few months after, at Florence, (as being unable to endure a
private life) and was buried most honorably in S. John's Church, nor far from
the Cathedral, at the great cost and charges of Cosmo di Medices, who grew so
rich with Baldesars Money, that he was looked upon as the chief Man in Florence
of a Citizen, nay perhaps the richest in Italy, or the World. Upon his Tomb
were written these words: BALDESARIS COSSAE, JOHANNIS XXIII. QVONDAM PAPAE
CORPUS HOC TVMVLO CONDITVM. During these Actions at Florence, the Emperor of
Constantinople's Agents came to the Pope, and promised that the Greeks would
come over to the Latins in all points of Faith upon reasonable terms. The Pope
received them very kindly and splendidly, and made Peter Fontesiccus (a
Spaniard, Cardinal of S. Angelo, and a very learned Man) Legate a Latere, to go
to Constantinople and settle matters there. But before he sent the good Man
away, he dispatched Friar Anthony Massanus thither, (who was General of the
Minors) to find how the Emperor and the Greeks were affected, and tell him what
he might trust to. Now the Romans were urgent to have him come to Rome, and
therefore taking his leave very kindly of the Florentines, he made their City a
Metropolis. For though before, even from its foundation almost, it had only had
the honor of a Bishopric, he made it an Archbishopric, and the
Mother Church to Volaterra, Pistoia, and Fiesola. He also gave a bigger Altar
to S. Mary the New, belonging to the Order of Preachers, where he lived all the
while he was at Florence; that Convent being very commodious for his reception.
At last, parting from Florence he came to Rome, where all the people met him;
and the Nobility looked upon him as the good Genius, or Father of their
Country. Sept. 21. 1421*
And that day the Romans put in their Calendar as a lucky one. When he came he
found the City of Rome so ruinated, that it looked nothing like a City. You
might have seen the Houses ready to totter, the Churches fallen down, the
Streets empty, the City full of Dirt and Mire, and in exteam want of all sorts
of provisions. What should I say more? There was neither the face of a City,
nor any sign of civility there, the Citizens seeming rather Sojourners and
Vagabonds. The good Pope was troubled to see it, and applied himself to
adorning of the City, and reforming the Citizens manners, so that in a short
time it looked much better than before. For this reason he was called by the
People not only the True Pope, but Father of his Country. But lest that
public joy should last too long without interruption, the year following in
November, on St. Andrews Eve, the Tiber swelled so high, that it came in at the
Porta del popolo, overflowed the whole City, (which lies upon a level) and
filled the Church of S. Mary the round as far as the great Altar. Two days
after it fell, but took much Cattle along with it, and did great damage to the
Citizens; who sailed about the Streets, as upon the Tiber. Now King Lewis, Son
to Lewis came to Rome, and obtained of Martin to be invested King of Naples, by
general consent of the Cardinals. For he having been invited thither and
adopted by Queen Joan, Sister to Ladislaus, expected by this means to get the
Kingdom without fighting, but was driven out of Naples by a contrary Faction
and retired to Calabria. And now the time for the Council drawing near
(according to the Decree at Constance) Martin was pleased, by consent of the
Cardinals, to send some Bishops before to Pavia, to begin it: that seeming to
be the most commodious place for it. Thither therefore he immediately sent
Peter Donatus, Archbishop of Candia, James Camplo Bishop of Spoleto, Peter
Rosatius Abbot of Aquilegia, Friar Leonard a Florentine, and General of the
Preachers, to open the Council; But they found no body yet come from France or
Germany, only two Abbots of Burgundy; therefore they thought fit to defer it,
till one at least should be come from each Nation, little of moment being to be
transacted without universal consent. But while they waited their coming, on a
sudden Pavia was visited so severely with a Plague, that with the Popes leave,
the Presidents of the Council removed to Sienna; whither people came from all
Nations more readily and in greater numbers than to Pavia. Alphonsus King of
Aragon, (who was an Enemy to Martin for giving the Title of King of Naples and
Sicily to Lewis, which himself desired) sent his Ambassador to the Council with
Order to delay it as much as he could, and to bring about the Cause of the
Antipope Peter Luna (yet alive in Panischola) either by Promises or Bribes to
those who had greatest Authority in the Council. Wherefore Martin (who knew
very well, how great a calamity such a thing would bring upon the Church, and
what danger there was in delays) commanded the Council to be immediately
dissolved, approving first of the Decrees made in it, that concerned matters of
Faith. And lest he might seem to fear a General Council, he ordered that
another should be held at Basil seven years after. Thus did that prudent,
subtle Man root out the seeds of Schism and Discord that were sown in the
Council of Siena. Alphonso then complained of Martin publicly, that by his
means he was put by the Kingdom which Joan designed for him, and Lewis was made
Heir in his room. Martin easily confuted this charge, and told him that Lewis
was confirmed Heir to Joan by Alexander V. and John XXIII. long before: and
that all the blame ought to be laid on the Queen, and not upon him, whose
business it was to strengthen rather than weaken the Churches Feudataries,
unless they had committed some heinous Offense against the Sea of Rome: and
that he did not see, why Lewis might not be lawful Heir to Joan who was Crowned
by his Order. But when Brachius saw the Pope involved in so many Affairs, and
so distracted by reason of the quarrel between him and Alphonso, he got many of
the Church-Towns by force, and laid close Siege to Aquila a City in the Kingdom
of Naples. The Pope was angry at that, and raising a good sufficient Army, he
attempted to relieve Aquila, assisted by the Army of the Queen and Lewis, and
not far from Aquila he conquered and killed Brachius in the open Field. The
Sfortians were in that Battle, under the conduct of Francis Son to Sforza, who
some years before going over the River Piscara (which the Ancients called
Aternus) was drowned. Brachius's body was brought to Rome, and buried in an
unhallowed place without the Porta di Sancto Lorenzo. Upon this Victory there
was so great tranquillity (besides that Perugia, Todi, and Assisi with some
other Towns which Brachius had possession of were reduced to the Church) that
they thought Augustus's happy days were come again into the World. Then people
lived at ease, and could walk even in the Night through the Woods without any
danger; no Robbers being abroad, no Russians and Thieves; for he cut off
Tartalia, Lauellus, and other Usurpers, that got their living rather by Rapine,
than War. But the Heretics of Bohemia who plagued the Catholics of Germany
continually with Heresy and Arms, seemed to interrupt this Peace and
happiness. To make them therefore submit to Reason and to the Church, he
admonished them first of all very gravely, and when that would not do, he sent
Legates into Germany, to stir up the Catholics to Arms. And first he sent
Henry, Cardinal of S. Eusebius thither, alone, then Bartholomew of Piacenza;
and last of all he recalled them, and sent Julian Caesarinus Cardinal of S.
Angelo, who received great damage from the Enemy, not by his own fault, but by
the cowardice of his Soldiers. However Martin was not discouraged at it, but
made greater preparations against the Heretics; only before he set about such
a grand Affair, he resolved to compose and quiet Italy. For when the Peace was
made by Martin between Philip and the Venetians, the Florentines bore a grudg
at Ladislaus Son to Paul Guinisius, Lord of Lucca, for the assistance he gave
Philip in the preceding War, and now he not being mentioned in the Articles of
that Peace, they laid hold on it as a fair opportunity to subdue the City, and
having raised an Army under Nicolas Fortebrachius and taken some Castles
thereabout, they laid Siege to it. Whereupon Philip by the entreaty of Paul,
and for fear lest if Lucca fell into the hands of the Florentines, he should
find them the sharper, as being the nearer Enemies, he first sent Francis
Sforza into Parma with a great body of Horse, to raise Foot-soldiers there. Who
passing the Apennine in the beginning of Spring put the Florentines into such a
fright, that before he came into the Cloudy Vale (as the Inhabitants call it)
the Enemies had removed their Camp, and raised their Siege from before Lucca,
out of fear. And his coming was so much the more welcome to the Lucceses,
because when their Enemies were subdued and the Usurper taken, they thought to
become absolute freemen by Francis's assistance. But the Florentines bribing
Francis with fifty thousand pounds, he left the people of Lucca in a worse
condition than ever; having promised for that Sum not to serve Philip for six
months. Then the Lucceses were besieged more close than before: Whereupon
Philip at the request of Martin (who also pitied the case of the Lucceses)
sent. Nicolas Piceninus thither with a great Body of Horse presently; who
vanquished and routed the Enemy, and not only raised the Siege, but marched
thence, and took many Castles belonging to Pisa and Volaterra by storm, and did
the Sieneses a kindness, who then made War upon the Florentines. Martin being
now undisturbed by any foreign Foe, applied his mind to adorn the City, and
Churches of Rome, and to that purpose, repaired the Portico of S. Peter's which
was falling down, and paved the Lateran Church with Mosaic work, cieled it
anew; and began those Paintings there which were done by the hand of the famous
Gentilis. He likewise repaired the old Palace that was ready to fall, near the
Twelve Apostles, where he lived some years. The Cardinals followed his Example,
and re-edified their Churches as fast as they could; so that now Rome looked
something like a City. He also created certain Cardinals, of which his Nephew
Prosper Columna, Cardinal of S. George, was one. In the mean time Peter Luna
died at Panischola, but lest the Church should be at quiet, those two
Anti-Cardinals, that I told you of, were persuaded by Alphonso who was Martin's
Enemy, to choose Giles Munio (a Canon of Barselona, and a Nobleman) Pope, and
called him Clement VIII. He was no sooner chosen, but he made Cardinals and
acted as Pope. But when Martin and Alphonso were friends again, he sent Peter
de Fuso a Cardinal, as Legate from the Sea Apostolic thither: to whom Giles
resigned his Title to the Popedom, at the command of Alphonso. For which Martin
was so kind to him afterward, that he made him Bishop of Majorca. And the
Cardinals also that were made by Giles did voluntarily lay down their Dignity.
But those two that Peter Luna made remained still obstinate, and therefore
because they would not obey the Pope, the Legate put them in Prison. Thus
Martin's industry and prudence removed the Schism from all parts; and when the
Church was settled he used as much skill and discretion in conferring of
Benefices. For he did not bestow 'em upon every one that asked him, but
considered who was fittest to receive them, and to take such a charge upon him.
And if he did not know any body in the Country where Benefices fell, he used to
send and enquire of those that knew the place who was qualified with Learning,
Birth, or breeding fit for any Office. And thus did he advance the Church and
deserving Men at the same time, to his great Honor. In fine, so courageous and
resolute he was, that though he had two Brothers, the elder of which (
Jordanus, Prince of Salerno) died of the Plague, and the other ( Lorenzo) was
burned to death in a Turret which was casually set on fire, he was not known to
say, or do any thing, that argued Impatience, or lowness of mind. But this same
Person so exactly good in the whole course of his life, died at Rome of an
Apoplexy in the fourteenth year and the third month of his Pontificate, and the
sixty third year of his Age: and was by his own Order buried in S. John's Church
near the Heads of the Apostles, in a brazen Tomb, and attended by all the
people of Rome, and the Clergy, weeping as if the Church of God, and the City
of Rome had been bereft of their only and their best Parent. The Sea at that
time was vacant twelve days.

EVGENIVS IV.
EVGENIVS the Fourth, a Venetian, of the Family of Condelmero, (a common but
ancient name) whose Fathers name was Angelo, arrived at the Pontificate after
this manner. When Gregory XII. was made Pope (who was of the Family of Coraro,
and a Venetian) Anthony Corar Gregory's Nephew, a Canon of S. Georges in Alga
going to Rome, took Gabriel Condelmero, who was of the same profession and had
lived with him from his Childhood, along with him somewhat against his will.
Gregory was so taken with his Wit and Parts, that he first made him his
Treasurer, and then Bishop of Siena, having made his Nephew Anthony Bishop of
Bologna. The Sieneses refused Gabriel at first, and would not have him for
their Bishop; alleging that a Foreiner ought not to be set over them in that
high Function, but one that knew the customs and usages of their City. But when
Gregory afterward upon a distrust of his condition, left Rome for Lucca, and
increased the number of Cardinals, he made Anthony his Nephew and Gabriel
Condelmero two, who was made use of by Gregory after that, and (when he was
turned out) by Martin in many great Affairs; especially in the Embassy to the
Marcha d' Ancona, in which he not only confirmed the Inhabitants in their
Allegiance to the Church, by punishing some seditious Conspirators, but also
repaired the Church of S. Agnes at Ancona, which was decayed, and the Port of
the same City which was Weather-beaten, very old, and ruinous; so as to make it
like Trajans. And afterward when Martin understood that the Bolognians were set
upon innovations, he sent Gabriel from Ancona thither, who suppressed the
Sedition as soon as he came. Where coming to Rome, and Martin soon after dying,
he alone was thought fit to be made Pope, out of eighteen Cardinals, who at
that time were in the Conclave, and changing his name to Eugenius, was brought
immediatey to S. Peter's, attended by all the People and Clergy, in the year
1431. March 3d. And having received the Papal Crown he went to the Lateran, and
from thence to the Vatican, where he set a day for a general Consistory to be
held. At which there was such a Concourse of People, that the Timber of the
building where they met, (and where the public Consistory now stands) gave
way, and put the people into such a consternation, that the Bishop of
Sinigaglia, a Citizen of Rome, of the Family of Mella, was trodden to death in
the throng: For the Popes House was not built at that time as it is now. When
the Consistory was dismissed, Eugenius took all care to avoid Tumults. But some
Sycophants persuading him that Martin who was very covetous had left somewhere
a great Treasure behind him, of which he might be informed by Martin's Friends
and Relations; they made the Man so mad, that he commanded Oddo Poccio Martin's
Vice-Chamberlain to be laid hold on, and gave the charge of the business to
Stephen Colonna his General (the only person of his Party among the Colonna's)
Cardinal Vrsin and Cardinal Comitum egging him on, by whose contrivance it is
thought all these things were done against the Colonneses, out of an old grudg
between the two Factions. Eugenius however commanded that Oddo should be
brought to him quietly and civily which was quite contrarily executed by
Stephen. For not only his goods were plundered by the Soldiers, but he was
carried by force, or rather dragged like a Robber publicly into the Pope's
presence. Eugenius was very angry at this rude usage of him, and checked
Stephen for it; nay threatened to punish him severely for bringing not only
Oddo but the Bishop of Tivoli, who was formerly Martin's Chamberlain, before
him after such an unworthy manner. Hereupon Stephen fearing the Popes
displeasure fled to Palestrina, to Prince Colonna, and desired him to join with
him, to drive Eugenius from the City, because, he said, Eugenius had a Design
to extinguish the whole Family of Colonna. And that he knew that to be so; for
he was privy to it himself, and that he ran away from the City, because he knew
that he also must bear a part in that common Calamity, unless they all avoided
it together. The Prince moved with what he said, and with the misfortunes of
such as had been Martin's Friends, took up Arms and immediately resolved to set
upon the Pope, staying only a little, till his Brother Prosper, a Cardinal
Deacon, whom he had forewarned of the business, could get out of the City. And
as soon as he saw him, he marched from Palestrina to Marino, and thence to Rome
against Eugenius; and having the Gate di Sancto Sebastiano delivered up to him
by John Baptista, he entered the Town at first without doing any violence. But
when they were come as far as S. Marks, in the Street called Colonna, the
Pope's Soldiers met them, assisted by a great number of people. They fought
some time in the City very stoutly; and many were slain and taken on both
sides. But the Colonneses seeing the People of Rome otherwise affected than
they expected, they resolved to retreat out of the City, but as they went they
plundered all things, drove away the Cattle, and forced a great many Men along
with 'em. But the Pope's Soldiers, mixed with the Romans requited 'em for it.
For they plundered and laid waste the Houses of Prosper the Cardinal, and all
the Colonneses, together with all those that had been Martin's Friends. Being
thus incensed on either side, they began to make use of treachery as well as
open force, to bring about their Designs. For the Archbishop of Benevento, Son
to Anthony Colonna, was taken, and one Masius a Friar, who being tortured
confessed, that he intended to kill the Governor of Castle S. Angelo, and so
taking it by surprise, to betray it to the Colonneses, who, being once Masters
of that, might drive the Pope and the Vrsins out of Rome, when they pleased.
Masius was degraded from the Priesthood and quartered in Campo di Fiore, and
his Limbs hung up at the four chief Gates of the City, nothing being said of
the Archbishop of Benevento. But Eugenius falling sick either of grief for
these troubles or of Poison, as some said, he clapped up a Peace with the
Colonneses by the mediation of Angelot Foscus a Roman Citizen, whom he not long
after made Cardinal at the same time with Francis Condelmero his Nephew. This
Peace he made public with as much speed as possible, because he understood
that Sigismund was come into Italy, and designed for Rome; upon which he made
his Nephew Francis Chamberlain: and gave him some excellent Persons for his
Assistants in the management of the Church Patrimony. Whilst these things
passed thus at Rome, the Florentines and Venetians having routed a Fleet of
Philip Duke of Genoa upon the Coast of Genoa in a Sea Fight, and having a Pope
who was their Countryman, took the confidence to invade Philip by Land: But he
sent for Nicolas Picenninus immediately out of Tuscany, and both beat the
Venetian Fleet at Cremona, and easily defeated Carmignola, whom the Venetians
beheaded a little after having first (as they say themselves) convicted him by
Torture, Letters produced and Oral testimony that it was through his treachery,
that they did not take Cremona, when Cavalcabos had seized one Gate of the
City: and that the Navy was vanquished before his face, when he might easily
have hindered it with such a number of men as he had so near. But then the
Florentines fearing lest the Emperor now coming into Italy, should favor
Philip, they dispatched Nerius Capponius a Citizen of theirs, if possible, to
persuade Eugenius, that the Emperors coming to the City, did threaten no less
ruin to the Sea Apostolic than to Florence: And that it was an easy matter to
keep him from passing over Arno into Siena (which had molested the Florentines
a long time) if he would command Nicolas Tollentinas, then in Arms under the
Pope, to join Michelett Cotignola, General of the Florentines, and oppose
Sigismund at Arno, that he might not pass the River with his German Horse.
Eugenius was easily persuaded to it; and upon some Debate about the charge of
the War, Nerius took up the business and agreed that the Florentines should pay
two thousand Horse of Eugenius's raising as long as the War lasted. Then
Nicolas Tollentinas at the Pope's command marched out of his Winter Quarters,
and whilst he pillaged the Sieneses, gave Sigismund opportunity to pass the
River Arno (by the assistance of Anthony Pontadera, who was an excellent
Commander, and a bitter Enemy of the Florentines) and thence passing through
Volaterra in so peaceable a manner, that his Army seemed rather friends than
foes, he was received and made welcome wherever he came. The Emperor having
tarried six months at Siena, to the great cost of that City, and having in vain
attempted to make Peace with the Florentines, applying himself to Eugenius he
made a League with him, and then went to Rome; where he was kindly entertained
by the people and the Pope, and received the Imperial Crown: And going from the
Vatican, where he was crowned, into the Lateran where he lodged, he Knighted
several Italians and Germans at Ponte di S. Angelo, according to custom. And
some say that Eugenius waited on him so far, and then went back to S. Peter's.
After that the Emperor took leave of the Pope, and traveling through the
Marcha d' Ancona, and Romagna he arrived at Ferrara and Mantoua. Where when he
had stayed some days, he made John Francis, Lord of Mantoua a Marquis, and
married Barbara, the Daughter of John, Marquis of Brandenburgh to Lewis, Son of
John Francis. This match was thought an honor to the Gonzagan Family, not
only because the Lady was akin to the Emperor, but because her Father John
was an Imperial Elector. At last the Emperor departed out of Italy, leaving all
things in confusion; but Nicolas d' Este, Marquis of Ferrara was persuaded by
Philip to go to Venice and exhort them to Peace, and so he did, insomuch that
they were induced by the awe he had over 'em, and considering their great
expenses, to send Plenipotentiaries to Ferrara along with him, where by consent
of Eugenius, April 1. 1433. a Peace was concluded upon these Conditions: to
wit, That Philip should depart out of Geradada and deliver it up to the Marquis
of Monteferrat and Orlando Pallaricini, both whom he had turned out of their
paternal Inheritance, that all which had been taken from the Florentines, the
Sieneses, or those of Lucca should be returned to the Owners; and that he
should be looked upon as a common Enemy, that did not restore what he had taken
in thirty days. Thus having made a Peace in all parts, they hoped for some
rest, when on the sudden the whole shock of the War fell upon Eugenius. For
Philip who loved Novelties sent Francis Sforza with a great Army into Romagna,
pretending to march into Puglia (which Alphonso had invaded) to defend those
Towns which his Father Sforza had possessed there. Who marching through Ancona
and Ombria with his Army in good order, surprised and took them in a moment.
And Philip not content to do so, sent Nicolas Fortebrachius, a valiant and
prudent Commander with chosen Horse so suddenly against Eugenius that he was
possessed of the Ponte Molle and the Porta del popolo, before it was known that
any Enemy approached. This Nicolas had formerly fought under Eugenius, and by
his Commission had subdued the Governor of Vetralla and Civita Vechia, by the
help of the Venetian Galleys that attaqued the Castle off the Sea. But when
Nicolas afterward demanded his pay, Eugenius answered him, that he had taken as
much spoil out of the Castle, especially out of the Town as would satisfy him.
At which Nicolas was so angry, that he went into the parts about Rome, and
raised such tumults, taking and driving away such numbers of Men and Cattle,
that Eugenius was some time at a stand what to do. The Romans flocked to him
with their complaints; but the Pope, who at that time wanted both advice and
health, sent 'em to Francis the Chamberlain, who being devoted to idleness and
pleasure, gave 'em no other answer, but that they over-valued their Cattle (for
they often complained of the loss of them) and told 'em that the Venetians
lived more like Citizens than they without Beasts and flocks of Cattle. The
Romans were displeased at this answer, and therefore when Nicolas had taken
Tivoli (beating Count Tagliacotius out of it) and Subiaco, and drawn all the
Colonneses to his party ( Stephen Colonna, who was always of the other side
being killed by the Prince) they threw off the yoke of Subjection and crying
out, Arms, Arms, Liberty, Liberty, they beat out all Eugenius's Officers and
taking Francis the Chamberlain Prisoner they created a new Magistracy of their
own choosing, consisting of seven Romans whom they called Governors, who had
power of life and death. But Eugenius in such an Hurry not knowing what to do
resolved to flee for it. And immediately changing his Habit for that of a Monk,
went on shipboard in a small Vessel along with Arsenius the Monk down the Tiber
to Ostia. Whereupon certain Romans, that knew of his going, threw Stones and
shot Arrows at him; for they would fain have kept him there till they had got
possession of S. Angelo. Nevertheless Eugenius went away upon the 7th of July
and sailed to Pisa first, and then to Florence in Galleys laid on purpose for
his passage; and then the Romans betook themselves to storm the Castle, raising
Mounds and Bulwarks in all places, that might make it more accessible to the
Enemy. On the other side, those of the Castle made some sallies upon them; and
the Governor thinking it fit to use some stratagem with the people of Rome, He
(by the assistance and advice of Baldesar Aufido a cunning Captain, that
defended the lower part of the Castle) bad one of his Soldiers that sallied
out, that he should suffer himself to be taken by the Enemy, and then blame the
cruelty and covetousness of him the Governor, and promise them that if they
would give him such a reward, he would kill the Governor and betray the Castle.
The Soldier did exactly as he was bid; and when he was taken, said all the ill
things he could devise against Antony Ridio (the Governor) and swore, he would
bring the matter about to their mind. Thereupon being dismissed he went into
the Castle and hung up Anthonies Clothes, with somewhat like his Head on top of
them, which was visible a great way off. Baldesar presently cried out, the
wicked Fellow was justly punished, and that some of the chief Roman Commanders
might now come in, and, if they paid the reward, take the Castle. They not
being aware of the trick, went in, and were strait taken. Immediately there was
a joyful noise in the Castle, and Darts and Bullets were thrown and shot upon
the Romans without. The Romans being thus deluded advised concerning the
enter-change of their Captives, and in order to it, set the Chamberlain,
Eugenius's Nephew, at Liberty: and unanimously submitted to Eugenius within
five months after they thought to have gained their freedom. Then there were
Magistrates made in the name of the Church, who fortified the Capitol with
strong Guards and other provisions. And after upon the arrival of John
Viteleschus (whom they called, the Patriarch) Francis his Nephew being gone to
Eugenius, a sudden dread seized the Romans to such a degree that they durst not
so much as open their mouths for fear. For Viteleschus was an imperious and
cruel Man, and lived like a Tyrant rather than a Christian. These things were
transacted at Rome whilst Alphonso besieged Naples and Cajetta, which was
stoutly defended by the Genoese Merchants: and the Genoeses thinking it their
duty to assist their Countrymen, fitted out a Navy with all speed by the leave
and good liking of Duke Philip Viconti, who lent 'em some Foot-Soldiers; and
meeting their Enemy Alphonso not far from Cajetta they engaged with him. After
a long and a sharp conflict they defeated Alphonso, and took him Prisoner, and
all his retinue, of which some were Princes. Alphonso was brought to Millain to
Philip, but was entertained not as a Captive, or an Enemy of the Genoeses, but
as a King and a Friend. And when he had been treated honorably for some days,
and presented by Philip with many great gifts, he went into his Kingdom and
took Cajetta presently. Upon that the Genoeses were so enraged that he should
free Alphonso so easily, whom they had taken with such hazard, that by the
advice of Thomas Fregoso they revolted from Philip, and made the said Thomas
their Duke. Then Picenninus, who was sent against the Genoeses, receiving news
that they persisted in their obstinacy, took Sarzana, and marching toward Pisa,
under pretense to go and help Alphonso, spoiled many Castles belonging to the
Pisans. But the Florentines stopped his career, by sending for Francis Sfortia
with the Pope's good liking, who was then in possession of Ancona, and
endeavored, by the assistance of the Florentines and Venetians, to be made
Lord of it. But Eugenius was against that; and said, that it became a Pope to
preserve the Church-patrimony even by War, rather than alienate it. So they
deferred that business till another opportunity: yet Francis in hopes of it,
did not only beat Picenninus from the Siege of Barga, taking Lewis Gonzaga who
fought under Picenninus; but he laid close Siege to Lucca in the name of the
Florentines. Picenninus was hindered from passing the Apennine to their relief,
and therefore promised to free them another way. Wherefore he marched through
Bologna without any molestation (only taking a Town belonging to the
Florentines, called Oriolo) and being mindful of the Lucceses, he went thither,
and in the absence of Francis Sfortia vanquished the Florentines and raised the
Siege of Lucca. The Pope being almost distracted with care, as well because he
was surrounded with War, as that the Council of Basil, begun by the Decree of
Pope Martin, increased daily by the conflux of all the Princes of Spain,
France, Germany and Hungary, who referred the case of all Christendom to that
Council, he contrived how to dissolve it, and to that purpose, would have
removed it from Basil to Bologna by general consent of the Cardinals that were
there on his side. But the Emperor, other Princes and Prelates, then at Basil,
did not only disobey the Pope, but admonished him several times to come
himself with his Cardinals to Basil, which was a convenient place that Martin
had chosen to hold the Council in, or else they threatened to oppose him as a
prevaricating and an obstinate person. Eugenius was moved at their words and
confirmed the Council at Basil by a new Breve, giving every one leave to go
thither: for he was so tormented with Wars on all sides of him, that he had
hardly time to breath. But having recovered Rome, he sent John Viteleschus
thither immediately, who was a Man indeed very fit for business, but savage and
severe: who marching against the Colonneses, the Sabelli, and all the Gibellin
faction he sacked and razed the Castle of Gandulpho standing on the Lago
Albano, as also Savello, and Borgeto. He likewise took Alba, Civita Lapuvina,
Palestrina and Zagatolo, and sent all the Inhabitants, that were alive, to
Rome. Then turning his course into Campagna di Roma he brought 'em all over to
the Church; and having taken Anthony Pontadera he hanged him upon an Olive Tree
at Fraselone. Then coming back to Rome he put 'em all in a fear, and pulled
down several Houses of Conspirators, that had taken possession of the Porta
Maggiore in a tumult, and declared them Enemies to the Church. Among the rest
he took one Pulcellus, and tortured him with red hot Pincers and then hanged
him in Campo Fiore. When the Roman people complained, that the covetousness of
some rich Men had brought a Famine upon the Country, there was so much Wheat
immediately brought into the Market by his Order, that there ensued great
plenty of all things in a short time; so readily were his Commands obeyed. When
he had thus settled Affairs, he went into the Kingdom of Naples, which Alphonso
had lately got possession of, and which he said belonged to the Pope and the
Church, and there he took the Prince of Tarento with two thousand Horse and
invaded the Dominion of the Earl of Nola. He also had like to have taken
Alphonso by fraud rather than force, when they had made a Truce, and a Peace
was as good as concluded. When he had taken the Towns belonging to the Church
he freed the Prince. And going back to Rome he demolished Palestrina, which was
ready to rebel, by the persuasion of Lorenzo Colonna, and turned out the
Inhabitants in great numbers to roam about the Country in the year 1435. In
which year Eugenius went from Florence, (having first consecrated the Cathedral
Church there) and going to Bologna he built a Fort near that Gate which leads
toward Ferrara, and fortified the House where the Legate now resides, with a
good high and broad Wall (behind especially) and with Turrets. The year after
he in a public Consistory translated the Council of Basil (though he had
approved of that place) from thence to Ferrara; and said that the Greeks who
had a mind to join with the Church of Rome had chosen that City to meet in.
Then the Presidents of the Council at Basil were very urgent with the Greeks
and did exhort them with Prayers and Promises, that they would leave Eugenius
and come to them. Nor were they content to do so only, but they bragged that
they would depose Eugenius too, if he would not come thither also. Eugenius
could not tell for some time what to do, but yet he sent thither, as Legate,
one John Francis Capitelista a Lawyer and a Knight of Padua, to plead his
cause. But when Sigismund the Emperor was dead, by whose favor the Council of
Basil flourished, and Albert Duke of Austria was chosen in his room, the
Cardinal of S. Crosses began the Council of Ferrara in the name of Eugenius.
Eugenius also went thither when he heard the Emperor of Constantinople, whose
name was John Paleologus, was coming, with a great many Galleys of his own, as
well as what the Venetians for Eugenius's sake sent to meet the Emperor lest
any violence should have been offered him: because he had an account, that
certain French Galleys were sent by the Council into the Archipelago, with
Orders either to bring the Emperor to them, or if they could not do so; that,
at least, they should keep him from going to Ferrara. But Eugenius so far
corrupted the Admiral of those Galleys with Money, that he left the Council at
Basil and came over to his Party. When the Emperor came to Ferrara, he was
entertained by Eugenius, as the Roman Emperors used to be treated. But
Viteleschus when he had quieted the Church Dominions, and punished several
Priests that had pilfer'd certain Jewels out of the Heads of Peter and Paul the
Apostles in the Lateran Church, to which they belonged, and, after that, had
put James Galesius and his Accomplices to death for attempting to make
Innovations upon the Government, he went to Ferrara where in a public
Consistory he was received into the number of Cardinals with great Honor. For
he had been made Cardinal six months before at Bologna; and then returning with
greater Authority, he put the Governor of Vetralla, and the Lord of Fuligno
(after he had expelled him from his usurped Dominion) to death in the Castle of
Surio. But Eugenius desiring to unite the two Churches that were so long of
different Opinions, in the year 1438, having made solemn Prayers and celebrated
the Mass of the Holy Ghost, he went to the Council along with the Emperor and
Patriarch of Constantinople, where the Emperor being seated on a Throne
suitable to his Dignity, and the other Greeks in a place opposite to the Pope,
the question was first asked, Whether the Latins and the Greeks who had been so
long of different Opinions were willing to be united into one Church? At which
they all cried out, They would very willingly, provided that their differences,
were first reconciled by Reason. In order to which there were Disputations
every day between those that the Latins and Greeks had chosen to debate those
weighty Points. But there happening a Plague at Ferrara, which continued a good
while, it was not safe staying there, and therefore the Council was removed to
Florence. And as soon as they came thither, Picenninus presently took
possession of Forli, Imola, Ravenna and Bologna, by command from Philip, with a
design to thwart Eugenius's intentions, who was a Friend to the Florentines and
Venetians, his Enemies. After that he came back into Parma, and raising a great
body of Horse he passed the Po, and took (in a short time) the greater Casal,
and Platina, my native Country, and all that the Venetians had about Cremona.
Then he routed Gattamelata General of the Venetian Army at Calvatoni, and with
the Prince of Mantoua his Ally, he besieged Brescia for some months, which was
stoutly defended by the Citizens and one Francis Barbar, a very learned Man and
their chief Magistrate. Whereupon he passed from thence to seize several
Castles thereabout, and hinder provisions from being brought into the City,
plundering and destroying all the Country as far as Verona and Vincenza, so
that he left the Venetians nothing to live upon; but yet all this was not
accomplished without great damage to his Men, especially in the dead of Winter
which was the time they took to do it. He likewise secured great part of the
Rivers Menzo, Adige, Lago di Garda, and Lago d' Iseo, that nothing might be
carried that way by Water to the needy Inhabitants. But the fitting up of some
Ships, that were removed out of the Adige into the Lago di S. Andreas, and
careened below in the Lago di Garda near Forboli, gave the Venetians some
respite. Then seeing nevertheless that Picenninus pressed those of Verona and
Vincenza very hard, the Venetians thought themselves quite lost, if they did
not get a good Commander, and therefore they sent James Donatus to Florence,
then in League with 'em, to desire, that if the Florentines had any regard to
the Republic of Venice, or the safety and Liberty of Italy in general, that
they would send Francis Sfortia immediately with all his Forces to Venice, now
almost ruined by the Arms of Philip and the Mantuan. The Florentines being
concerned for their own danger as well as that of their Allies, persuade
Francis to take up Arms for the Venetians, and promised him in the name of the
City, to defend all the Towns that he had, which belonged to the Church of
Rome; which was his greatest desire. They also got Letters Apostolical from
Eugenius with much ado, to declare Francis Marquis and Lord of Ancona: but with
these words, Let him take it, and the Devil give him luck with it. Francis
going with his Cavalry along the Coast of the Adriatic Sea fell into Ferrara,
and passing the Po in Boats, and having augmented his Army in Padua (for he is
said to have had twelve thousand Horse, and five thousand Foot) he met the
Enemy first at Suave near Verona, where they fought very smartly for some time
and neither had the better on it. Afterward Picenninus by reason of his
indisposition, and want of Men, gave way to his Power, and then Francis having
recovered all the Castles from them of Vincenza and Verona, he was about to
raise the Siege from before Brescia, but seeing all other Avenues stopped, he
passed the Adige, and marching into the parts about Trent, he went to Archo, a
Town he had a mind to take, because the Earl of Archo was an Ally of Philip.
Picenninus also came thither, to assist the Earl; but fighting more eagerly
than cautiously (as he used to do) he was deserted by the rest of the Army, and
receiving great damage was fain to fly into the neighboring Valleys, where he
had been taken by the Enemy, if Charles Gonzaga, son to John Francis had not
come between him and them, and so saved him from that imminent danger; and yet
for all that he was taken afterward, the Foe gathering strength, and carried
Prisoner to Verona. There are that write, how Picenninus was so weakened in one
side with Wounds which he received in the several Battles, that he was not able
to ride back to his Army, but was wrapped in a Sack, as if he had been dead,
and so carried upon a lusty Fellows shoulders even through the Enemies Camp.
Whilst these things were transacted in Venice, Philip taking it ill that the
Florentines by the help and persuasion of Eugenius, had sent Francis Sfortia to
aid the Venetians, he treated with those that were at the Council of Basil, to
cite Eugenius before 'em; which they did twice or thrice. But when it did not
answer his expectation, he so far infatuated them, as that they deposed
Eugenius and chose Amadeus Duke of Savoy (his Father-in-law, who lived like an
Hermit at Ripalia with some other Noblemen) Pope, and called him Felix. Hence
arose great Seditions in the Church of God; for Christendom was divided into
three parts, and some followed Eugenius, some Felix, and the rest were Neuters.
For all that Eugenius was not dejected; but held frequent Assemblies, and
Disputations between the Greeks and Latins, till at last it came to this
result, that the Greeks were convinced that the Holy Ghost did proceed from the
Father and the Son, and that he was homusius, that is of the same substance,
and did not come forth from the Father only, as they formerly believed: and
that they ought to consecrate the Body of Christ with unleavened bread made of
Wheat, and to believe a Purgatory. Lastly, That the Pope of Rome was Christ's
true Vicar, and the lawful Successor of Saint Peter, to whom all the Eastern as
well as Western Churches ought to submit, as being the universal Patriarch. The
business thus settled, the Greeks went away; and then the Armenians also agreed
with us in Faith, their Errors being confuted, and Eugenius's Letters to that
purpose promulgated, to show the reason why they accorded, with this
Inscription, Given at the Holy General Council held at Florence in the
Cathedral there, November. 22. 1439. When that was done he contrived how to
strengthen himself and at the same time weaken the Council of Basil, and that
was by making eighteen Cardinals at once in the public Consistory: of which
number two were Greeks, to wit Rutenus and Nicenus; that the Greeks might be
kept in the Faith by their example and Authority: and yet that Nation fell back
in a little time to its old State. Others were Peter Barbo his Sisters Son, and
Alouisius Patavinus whom he afterward made Patriarch of Aquilegia and
Chamberlain, having advanced Francis Condelmerius to the Vicechancelourship.
Whilst these things were acted near Trent, and People thought that Picenninus
and the Prince of Mantoua would yield at last, having received such damage,
they removed thence with all speed to Verona and took it, by the help of
Ladders wherewith they scaled the Walls and entered in at the Cittadelle,
unknown to any of the Sentinels, who, to avoid the extreme cold of the North
Wind (which that Night was very boisterous,) had quitted their Posts, and were
got into the Tents. But Francis Sfortia, when he heard that Verona was taken by
the Enemy, marched thither presently with all his Army, to recover it, knowing
that the Venetians had still possession of the old Castle, and the Fort of S.
Felix in the Mount. And therefore he entered the City that way with his Army,
and ran upon the Enemy with a mighty shout. Philip's Men met him with a few
Horse (for all his Forces were not yet come up) and they fought very sharply in
that part of the City, which they call the Island. At last the few were fain to
yield to the many, and Picenninus and the Mantuans betook themselves to the new
Bridge (as they call it) where for some time they bore the shock of their
Enemies. There, as the Horse were engaging, and a great many crowded in a
little room, the Draw-bridg broke with the weight of Men and Horses, and almost
all that fell into the River were drowned, because they were tired with fasting
so long, and sunk by the very weight of their Arms. Thereupon Francis flying to
a Bridge of Boats, put over his Men and drove Picenninus and the Mantuan (who
distrusted the Citizens fidelity) quite out of the City, within four days after
he had taken it. Then Philip, that he might draw Francis from the Venetians by
infesting the Florentines, who had given him the same pay as the Venetians did,
sent Picenninus into Tuscany with six thousand Horse, in the midst of Winter.
The Florentines seeing that, sent presently for Piergianpaulo, an excellent
Commander, and desired Eugenius that he would assist 'em according to the
League by which he was bound to defend Tuscany; and so were resolved to meet
Picenninus. But when they found that John Viteleschus had conspired with
Philip, though he were at that time Legate and General of the Church-Forces;
and that he would not prove a friend (as he pretended) when he came into
Tuscany, but an Enemy in the Head of six thousand Horse, and would fight
against the Florentines on Picenninus's side, the Magistrates of Florence
contrived by real or feigned Letters (no matter which) from Eugenius, to have
him killed by Anthony Ridius the Governor of Castle S. Angelo, just as his Men
were passing the Bridge. And so he was; for he could not be aided by those that
were gone over the Bridge, and therefore was as it were alone, because he
brought up the Rear. The Count Aversus, who fought under the Patriarch, having
lost his General, conveyed his Carriages along with his own to Roncillione. But
the Florentines being freed from so great a Terror, deal cunningly with
Eugenius, to let Lewis of Padua who succeeded Viteleschus, muster up all the
Church-Forces and come to their assistance. This Lewis was a politic Man, and
it was supposed that by his means Viteleschus was taken off. But Picenninus
marching down into the Vale of Mugello, killed and plundered all before him as
far as Fiesole. Then turning toward Castentino, he by the assistance of Count
Popio made many Towns revolt. Thence going to Perugia, he went quietly into the
City, and sent the Legate who was then Governor there to the Pope Eugenius upon
a certain Message. And in the mean time he took the Treasurer, and altered the
whole State of the City. For he chose ten Citizens who had Power of life and
death over all the rest. But the Perugians fearing lest he should set up a
Tyranny upon them, they bargained with him to depart the City for fifty
thousand pound. He did so and went to Cortona, hoping to take that place by
treachery; but the Plot was discovered and the Conspirators either killed or
banished, upon which he marched to Citta di Castello. The Florentines also
moved to Aughiera, a Town in their Dominions, to help their Countrymen, if
Picenninus should offer 'em any violence. These things passed in Tuscany,
whilst Francis Sfortia conquered Philip's Navy at the Lago di Garda (of which
Italiano Furlano was Admiral) and not only raised the Siege from before
Brescia and Bergamo, but the same Summer vanquished Philip's Army at Soncino
having taken one thousand five hundred Horse, and in a short time took and
subdued all the Castles of Brescia, part of Cremona, and Mantoua, with all
Gerradadua, and made them tributary to the Venetians. At that time the Prince
of Mantoua lost Asola, Lonato, and Pescheria, three Towns of a good bigness
without opposition: for when Picenninus was absent, he never durst engage with
an Enemy in the open Field. But Picenninus hearing how the state of Affairs was
altered in Venice, and being sent for by many Messengers and Letters as well
from Philip, as the Prince of Mantoua; as also being tired out with the
importunities of the Soldiers who were most of 'em Natives of that part of
Italy which is near the Alps, he removed his Camp from Cita di Castello to
Borgo di Sancto Sepolcro, a Town in his Territories, which lies over against
Angliera: with design either by compulsion or stratagem, to fight the
Florentines and the Pope's Army, that lay (as I told you) near Angliera. On the
29 of June (S. Peter and S. Paul's day) Picenninus set his Army in Array, which
took up a Plain of four thousand paces, but was unfortunately forced to choose
a disadvantageous place to fight in, (because he understood, that the common
Soldiers of the Enemy were gone a foraging, and was not willing to lose the
opportunity) For he was to go up the side of an Hill, and so his Enemies upon
the higher ground easily kept him off. Yet they fought five hours very smartly,
till at last Picenninus, what with the multitude of his Enemies and the folly
of his Son Francis, who had forsaken his Post, was overcome, and retreated to
Borgo with great damage and the loss of his Ensigns. And the next day leaving
Borgo in the hands of the Townsmen and some few of his Soldiers that survived
the Battle, he went back through Romagna to Philip. The Townsmen of Borgo
fearing they might be hardly dealt withal, because they had revolted from the
Pope, employed Agents to get their Pardon, and surrendered themselves to the
Legate without loss of limbs or goods. That Victory was very welcome both to
Eugenius and the Florentines; and they say Alonisius Patavinus was made a
Cardinal for that reason. The same Summer the Florentines beat Count Poppio who
was Picenninus's Ally, out of Tuscany. But Philip who was environed with so
many Enemies, fought out for foreign Aid, and entreated Alphonso, who had got
possession of the Kingdom of Naples, to storm all the Towns which the Sfortians
had in that Kingdom; to draw Francis Sfortia from the Venetians. Alphonso
complied with his request, but never could recall Francis from the War that he
was engaged in. For he, when a sufficient quantity of forage came in, marched
from Pescheria to Brescia with fifteen thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot,
and met Picenninus at Cignano, with a design to fight him. Picenninus was as
willing to fight as he, and though he had a less number of Men, yet they were
stout Fellows and he relied upon their Valor. They fought briskly for some
time, and parted upon equal terms. Francis thinking he had gotten honor enough
in the Wars, for that he had challenged his Enemy into the Field, lead his Army
round the Country and retook several Towns which Picenninus had taken that
Winter, and made them subject to the Venetians. From thence he went to
Martinengo, which Picenninus had fortified with a strong Garrison, and besieged
it. But when Picenninus had augmented his Army by the arrival of Francis his
Son, and the Prince of Mantoua, he went thither and pitched his Camp a mile off
the Enemy, provoking him by Skirmishes to come and decide the matter in a set
Battle: but he not now desiring to fight the Enemy in the Field, grew wholly
intent upon taking the Town. Picenninus therefore removed his Camp every day so
much nearer the Enemy, and put Francis in such dangerous circumstances, that
neither his Soldiers could forage, nor any Provisions be sent in, nor the Army
march out from the place, without apparent danger: and just then beyond all
hopes there was a Peace declared, which had been in agitation between Philip
and Francis by the mediation of one Eusebiolus surnamed Chain, without
Picenninus's knowledge. When Picenninus heard of it, he exclaimed at Heaven and
Earth, and Philip's inconstancy, who with a certain Victory before him desired
Peace like a conquered Person. The Armies departing, the Peace was declared at
Capriana, in the year 1442, upon these terms; That Francis should marry Blanch
the Daughter of Philip, and have with her, as a Dowry, Pontremoli and Cremona
with all the Country belonging to it, except Picigitono and the Castles which
the Mantouan, and Pallavicini possessed: and that all those places that Philip,
and his Allies had taken, as also the Venetians and their Confederates (except
Asola, Lonato, and Pescheria which were the Prince of Mantoua's before that
War) should be restored: and he that would not accept of these Articles, should
be looked upon as a common Enemy. Eugeneus liked not this Peace; because
Francis had neglected him whilst he talked of restoring what was lost, without
mentioning Bologna, which Picenninus had possession of; wherefore he resolved
to go from Florence to Rome, and there advise concerning the recovery of the
Church Patrimony, because that was a place where he might take more freedom.
But that he might find all things quiet, he sent Alouisius Patavinus, Cardinal
of S. Laurence before, to put out the Seculars and restore the Canons regular
to the Lateran, who had been expelled by the Secular Priests, upon a
Controversy that was between 'em, who should carry the Body of Christ upon
Corpus Christi day in Procession. Gino Albanese an excellent Soldier was put to
death because he would have broken the Peace between Eugenius and Alphonso.
Palus Lamolara also a stout Man, of whose parts he was jealous, was also put to
death. And when things were settled in this manner, Eugenius came to Rome
September 28. 1443. (though the Florentines did all they could to keep him
there) being met by all the City with all the veneration imaginable, and lay
that night at the Porta del popolo. And the next Day as he was going to S.
Peter's to Prayers, as the custom is, he walked in his Pontifical Robes through
the City, and heard the People were in a mutiny for that the Taxes were
doubled, and a new Impost laid upon Wine. Thereupon he commanded silence, and
in the presence of 'em all, abolished that Exaction as tyrannical: at which
they immediately cried out, Long live Eugenius; whereas before they had cried,
Down with these new Gabells, the inventors of them. After nineteen Days he went
to the Lateran, and declared he would hold a General Council there, and sent
Letters and Messengers to acquaint the several Princes with his Design. For he
had a mind to weaken and destroy the Council of Basil by this means. When
things were thus composed at Rome, he remembered the injuries he had received,
and sent Picenninus the General against the Anconeses (whom Francis had
subdued) who going from Bologna toward Perugia made those of Tiferno who were
Allies of the Floretines, revolt, to gratify Eugenius who was angry with the
Florentines, for supplying Francis with Money to oppose him and keep Ancona.
Alphonso too, who the year before had long besieged Naples and at last through
a Common-shore got into the Town and taken it, beating out Rene of Anjou, was
so far taken with the same and courage of Picenninus that he not only chose
him General of his Army, but, to honor him the more, adopted him into the
Family of Aragon: who as soon as he had received Money of Eugenius and Alphonso
to defray the War, went into Ancona, and reduced many Towns to the Church,
which Francis Sfortia, who was come thither with a good Army from Cremona,
vainly strove to defend. About that time John Francis Gonzaga died, and the
Venetians and Florentines who were concerned for the time to come, made Lewis
Gonzaga, Son and Heir to John Francis, their Stipendiary, that he, if occasion
were, might oppose Philip. In the mean time things were pretty quiet in those
parts of Italy that lie next the Alps, when Hannibal Bentivoglio, who was kept
Prisoner sometime in the Castle of Pelegrini, by command from Picenninus, for
suspicion of a Conspiracy, escaped and went back to Bologna where he excited
the People to liberty and seized Francis Picenninus, Governor of the City, and
all his Men. Which done, he recalled all the Exiles whether of his own or the
contrary Faction, especially one Baptista Canedolus by name. After which the
Bolognians sent Ambassadors to the Venetians and Florentines to desire their
Alliance. Which the Ambassadors having obtein'd they returned home, and
presently took the Castle (which was yet in the Enemies hands) by the help of
those recruits that were sent 'em from their Friends, and as soon as they had
taken destroyed it, chasing Alouisius Vermes out of Bologna. Then Philip taking
it ill that the Bolognians should be in League with the Venetians and
Florentines, hired some Friends of Baptista, promising them assistance, to take
Hannibal off, that themselves and their Faction might be sole Governors in the
City. And Canedolus who was ready at Roguery, prevailed with a certain Man of
Bologna (who had a Son accidentally then newly born) to choose Hannibal
Godfather: and the next Day the Child was carried to be Christened; which being
over, the Father of the Child invited Hannibal to S. John's Church, because it
was S. John's Day. Hannibal complied with the Traitor in that too, not thinking
of any Design; but in the way thither he was set upon by a company of the
Conspirators that got about him, and was slain, though two Servants that he
had, who loved him, did what they could to defend him. But the people of
Bologna, when they knew it were so concerned for the indignity, that they
presently took up Arms and killed all the chief of the Canedolian Faction,
particularly Baptista, whose body they dragged through the City and buried it
very ignominiously. At the same time also there happened a great piece of
villainy to be acted at Rome: for Angellottus Cardinal of S. Marks was deprived
of his life and all the Money that he had so covetously gathered and scraped
together, by his own Valet de Chamber. The Villain was taken and tortured to
Death, and then being cut into four parts was hanged upon the four Gates of the
City. But the Venetians and Florentines fearing, lest Bologna, which was very
commodiously seated for both of 'em in time of War, should fall into Philip's
hands, sent immediately some Troops thither to assist them. The Venetians were
not out in their guess; for Philip designed to send Picenninus thither with an
Army, at the request of the Exiles, if he had not died before he could set out.
They say he died for grief, that his Son Francis, whom he had left behind him
in Ancona, when Cardinal Firmanus was Legate, was vanquished by Francis Sfortia.
But the year after Philip took courage and advised Eugenius to endeavor the
recovery of Bologna, promising to supply him with Men, and bear his share in
the charge of the War. By which the Pope was so wrought upon, that he made a
League with Alphonso, and sent Sigismund Malatesta with a great body of Horse
into Ancona against Francis; that when the Florentines were otherwise employed,
Bologna might be forced to surrender. Now Philip had sent William Montferrat
and Charles Gonzaga before with a great Army; who entering the Territory of
Bologna in an Hostile manner plundered all before 'em. But the Florentines who
were concerned for the danger of their Allies, dispatched Astorgius Faventinus
with one thousand five hundred Horse and two hundred Foot, to aid the
Bolognians till farther order from them and the Venetians. Things stood thus in
Romagna; when Philip, on the sudden, sent for Francis Picenninus from Ancona,
and gave him order to go with a great Army upon May Day, against the Cremoneses
who apprehended no such thing. He went as he was commanded, and took a great
many of the Country Fellows, and struck such terror into the Citizens by
battering their Walls both Night and Day, that he had very near taken the City.
But the Venetians and Florentines were troubled at the danger, which Francis
and their Friends were in, and resolved to defend Cremona and Bologna at the
same time, and sent Tibertus Brandolinus a very active Commander, who taking
along with him the Bologneses, and the Auxiliaries from Florence marched toward
the Enemy (who did not well agree among themselves, and were encamped at a Town
called St. John's) and when he had brought William Monferrat over to the
Bolognians by Promises and Presents, and easily routed Charles, he quickly
retrieved all the Towns which the Enemy had in their hands. Bologna being thus
quieted, and the Auxiliaries of Florence and Venice divided, by order, into two
parts, the one half were sent to avoid Francis Sfortia whom Eugenius and
Alphonso had beaten as far as the Walls of Vrbino* and the other half to the
Cremoneses who were hard put to it by Francis Picenninus. The Venetians
resolving upon an open rupture with Philip, sent Ambassadors to him, to
denounce War unless he would desist from the Siege of Cremona. But they were
answered by a Messenger (for they could not speak with Philip himself) that
they might be safer any where, than at Millain. At which the Venetians were
very angry and commanded Michelot Cotignola their General, who was then at
Brescia, to march forthwith into Cremona, (which Philip had got most part of,)
and engage the Enemy wherever he met them. He readily obeyed their Commands,
and passing the River Oglio at Casale with all expedition, found the Enemy
encamped upon the Po in an Island, which having forded, he attacked them in
their Camp, and soon routed them, taking a great part of their Cavalry. After
that he recovered all the Towns, and freed Cremona from the Siege, and having
augmented his Army by Lewis Gonzaga's additional Forces (who had reduced
Platina, and some Castles in Cremona to the Venetians) they marched toward
Geradada, and left nothing for Philip but Crema. Then crossing the River they
entered Millain, filling all places with fire and rapine. And when they had
taken Monte di Briausa and Brevio, where there is a Bridge over the Adda, they
attaqued Leco which those within stoutly defended, and battered their Ships so
severely that whole Men might have got in at the sides of 'em; so that having
lost many Men, and being in great want of Forage, they were fain to depart
without accomplishing their Design, for fear of Francis Sfortia, who they heard
was privately gone over to Philip's Party. Mean time Aloisius Patavinus the
Pope's Legate, General of the Forces which went against Francis Sfortia, into
Ancona, hearing that Italiano and James Gatuano (who had fought partly under
Philip and partly under Eugenius) were revolting to Francis, he commanded them
to be taken before they could arrive there, and put to Death: for both of 'em
had one thousand five hundred Horse under them. Francis Sfortia was much
concerned at that, and finding himself not able to sustein the shock of his
Enemies any longer, being set upon by so many at a time, and assisted by no
body, by the persuasions of Eugenius and Alphonso* who envied the Venetians
success, he left Ancona, and went into Philip's Army, over which he was made
General. Eugenius, now, lest he should seem to mind nothing but War, made
Nicolas Tolentinas of the Order of S. Austin, who was famous for Miracles, a
Saint, and went personally in Procession from S. Peter to S. Austin's attended
by all the Clergy* the Roman People and the Cardinals. After that he expelled
the Canons Secular from the Lateran and admitted only the Regulars. He also
built the Portico, that goes from that Church to the Sancta Sanctorum, and
repaired the Cloister for the Priests to live in. He also augmented the
painting of the Church which Martin had formerly begun; and carried the Mitre
of S. Sylvester, which was brought to Rome from Avignion, in his own hands from
the Vatican to the Lateran with great veneration of all the Priests and People
of Rome. Afterward King Alphonso came to Tivoli and would have treated with
Eugenius about the management of the War, but he heard he was sick and
so-stay'd for some time there. Eugenius had a great mind to have plagued the
Florentines for helping his Enemies: and doubted not but, if he attaqued them
with his own, the King's, and Philip's Forces all together, he might bring that
City to what he pleased. But all his Designs were frustrated by his Death; for
he died in the sixteenth year of his Pontificate, February 23. 1446. He was a
Man of great inconstancy; at the beginning of his Reign, he was led away by ill
Counsels and disturbed all things, to that degree, that he incited the Roman
People to War, and gave Authority to the Council of Basil (which was the
original of much mischief) by approving of their Decrees in Letters
Apostolical. But in process of time when he came to himself, he acted very
prudently and with good resolution. He had a very venerable aspect; but was
rather grave than eloquent in his Speech; an indifferent Scholar, though a
knowing Man, especially in History. He was bountiful to all, more especially
Learned Men, whose company he loved; For he admitted Leonard Aretinus, Charles
Poggius, Aurispa Trapezuntius, and Blondus, very learned Men, to be his
Secretaries. He was not easily provoked to anger for injuries done him, or by
the Calumnies, jibes or scoffs of any. He was a great Patron of all Schools
especially that at Rome, where he had all kind of Learning taught. He loved the
Religious wonderfully and gave 'em many Privileges, besides Revenues which he
added to their foundations. But he loved War so much (which a Man would admire
in a Pope) that besides what I have told you of his Actions in Italy, he
instigated the Dolphin, Son to Charles the French King (having first made Peace
between that King and the Duke of Burgundy) to go with a great body of Horse
against those of Basil. He did so, and routed the Assembly. And afterward he
sent Vladislaus King of Poland along with Julian Caesarinus against the Turks:
of whom thirty thousand were slain in one Battle between Adrianople, and the
Danube, though the King indeed himself and the Cardinal too, was killed at the
same time. He was accounted very strict to his word, unless when he had
promised a thing which it was better revoke than perform. He kept a very good
House, and yet lived on a spare Diet himself, and was so great a stranger to
Wine, that he was properly called, the Abstemious. He had but very few familiar
Friends, but they were all learned Men, whose Counsel he made use of in great
matters; and used to admit into his Chamber at Supper-time, to be as witnesses
of his sober Conversation. And then he would ask 'em, what news in the City,
what People thought of his Government since he had been Pope, that he might
correct any Error, if ought were amiss either in his own Person or any body
else. He endeavored to adorn the Church with Buildings and Chapels as appears
by the Pope's Chapel and the brazen Door of S. Peter's Church. But he died,
(as I told you) after he had done many great Actions, in the sixty fourth year
of his age, and was buried in S. Peter's Church, under a Marble Tomb, upon
which there are these Verses; Eugenius jacet hic Quartas, Cor nobile cujas
Testantur vitae splendida facta suae.
Istius ante sacros se praebuit alter ab ortu,
Alter ab occasa Caesar uterque pedes.
Alter ut accipiat Fidei documenta Latinae,
Alter ut aurato cingat honor caput.
Quo duce and Armenii, Graiorum exempla fecuti,
Romanam agnorunt Aethiopesque fidem.
Inde Siri ac Arabes, mundique e finibus Indi.
Magna, sed haec animo c^ncta minora su^.
Nam valida rursum Teucros jam class petebat,
Dum petit ast ill^m sustulit atra Dies.
Qui semper vanos tumuli contemp^it honores:
Atque hac impressa condita dixit humo.
Sed non quem rubro decoraverat ille galero,
Non hoc Franciscus stirps sua clara tulit.
Susceptique memor meriti, tam nobile, quod nunc
Cernis, tam praestans surgere jussit opus.


After his Death the Seat was vacant twelve days.

NICOLAS V.
NICOLAS the Fifth, formerly called Thomas Sarzana, a Town in the Territory of
Lucca, was chosen Pope by general consent, March 6. 1447. Who though he were a
Man but of mean extract (his Mothers name was Andreola, and his Father's
Bartholomew a Physician) yet he was worthy of the Pontificate for his Virtue,
Learning, Courtesy, good Nature, Liberality and Magnificence; notwithstanding
all which he was so modest, that he thought himself undeserving of so great an
Honor, and desired the Cardinals to take better care for the Church of God.
But when the Cardinal of Tarento exhorted him not to resist the Holy Ghost, he
submitted his shoulders to the burden, and took it upon him. The Cardinal of
Portugal being asked (as it is usual) coming out of the Conclave, Who they had
made Pope? He answered, We did not choose Nicolas, but God has. There are who
say, that this Thomas was born at Pisa, brought up at Lucca, and made a Scholar
at Bologna, especially in Philosophy and Divinity which he learned under
Nicolas Albergate, Cardinal of S. Cross, who was extremely pleased with the
Youths ingenuity, and parts. For which reason he, in his Popedom, assumed the
name of Nicolas, because it was the name of one who had deserved very well of
him. Having gained his Degree in the University, by a probation in the most
acute Controversies, the Cardinal of S. Cross made him Steward of his Household,
and of the Clerks of the Penitentiary, till he got a Pontifical Sub-Deaconship
by his good Life and Conversation, which all People admired, and then he began
to think of greater matters. For Eugenius, who knew his Learning and integrity
(especially by the Disputations that he had with the Greeks at Florence and
Ferrara) had at that time designed him for a Cardinal. But that he might do it
with better pretensions, he sent him into Germany along with John Carvagialla
(who was afterward Cardinal of S. Angelo) to dissolve the Council of Basil, and
the neutrality. For the Germans were called Neuters, because they would obey
neither Felix nor Eugenius; by which means the Church of God suffered greatly,
and the Papacy lost something of its grandieur. There were frequent meetings to
dispute that Point before Frederick King of the Romans, by the persuasions of
Aeneas Picolhomineus, who was afterward Pope; but at that time only Secretary
to the King. And indeed they found it hard to remove the Germans from their
Opinion, though it was altogether false: as on the other side it was difficult
to induce Eugenius's Agents to comply with the German Proposals. At last the
Agents being mollified, and the requests of the Germans moderated, they had
certainly put an end to the Schism and Neutrality (which was so pernicious to
the Sea of Rome) if the Germans would have stood to their Promise. So that the
Legates went back to Eugenius with that Opinion and were made Cardinals by
general agreement; to whom Eugenius sent their Hats whilst they were yet at the
Porta del popolo, that they might come with greater honor into the City. Thus
in one and the same year Thomas got to be Bishop of Bologna, Cardinal and Pope,
to the great satisfaction of the Clergy and People of Rome. And yet when the
Cardinals were in the Conclave, there was a small bustle in the City by the
instigation of Stephen Porcaro a Roman Knight, and an eloquent, ingenious Man,
who calling his Companions about him into the Church, called Ara Coeli,
encouraged 'em to assert their Liberty: for he said that every petit Town (when
the Lord of it was dead) was used to talk of Liberty, or at least, of limiting
the Power of their Governors. But nothing was done to that purpose, because
the Archbishop of Benevento then Vice-Chamberlain, was against it. The Romans
also feared King Alphonso, who stayed at Tivoli after Eugenius was dead, and
was in doubt with himself, whether he should go back, or make War against the
Florentines, as he, Eugenius, and Philip had formerly a design to do. And
whilst he deliberated, two Sieneses, that got their livings by setting People
together by the ears, persuaded him to attempt the Government of Tuscany: which
he might easily obtain, if he were once Master of Siena, which would surrender
it self upon his arrival there. The King commended the Sieneses, and sending
them away to solicit their Fellow-Citizens, he promised them to be there in
such a time. But Nicolas the Pope, who was a lover of peace and quietness,
after he had kept his Coronation (as the fashion is) and made many Processions
on foot in his own Person, he sent Cardinal Morinensis to Ferrara, (a place
which being neutral was fit for the Treaty) that by the persuasion and
Authority of his Legate, the Factions might be the more induced to a composure.
Thither also did Alphonsa, Philip, the Venetians and Florentines send their
Ambassadors, who after a long Debate gave Philip leave to choose, whether he
would make a Truce with the Venetians and Florentines for five years (both
sides keeping what they had*) or conclude a Peace, and change Crema for those
Towns which the Venetians had taken upon the River Adda; leaving only Cassan
at the Pope's disposal, as being his due by compact, to make amends for the
injuries which he first received. But that also was afterward thrown in, to
make the Peace more lasting. And one of Philip's Ambassadors was sent to make
the Proposal to him; who found him dead of an Apoplexy the day before he came
to Millain, August 8. 1447. Morinensis, hearing of Philip's death, sent for all
the Ambassadors in haste to his House, and urged for Peace as earnestly as
ever. The Venetians, when they were asked if they would continue of their
former Opinion, made answer, That they could not tell what they might do now
Philip was dead, but that they would write to the Senate concerning that
Affair, and do as they should order them. In the mean time the other
Ambassadors that were there, knowing the Venetians ambition to govern all
Italy, dissolved the Assembly and went every one to their own Home, the Pope's
Legate exhorting them to Concord, but all in vain. But the Venetians, whose Camp
was at Sorefina near Cremona, in hopes to take that tumultuous City by
surrender with the help of the Guelphs, when they heard of Philip's death
marched presently to Lody; which having taken, they received those of Piacenza
into their Alliance upon the same terms as them of Lodi; and sent one thousand
five hundred Horse thither immediately to assist the people of Piacenza if any
body should molest 'em. Francis Sfortia, who at that time was beaten out of
Ancona and quartered in Bologna, to refresh his Army, whose Arms, Horses, and
Men were almost spent with this long War, when he heard that the Venetians had
seized all upon his Father-in-law's death, went great days Journeys till he
came to Cremona, and was chosen General by the universal consent of the
Millaineses over all their Forces against the Venetians. And having made a
Bridge over the River Po, which he fortified with Castles and Artillery, to
hinder the Venetians from coming with a Navy to Piacenza, he passed the Adda at
Picigitono, and encamped not far from the Enemy who lay at Camurago. And there
they had some light Skirmishes to try, I suppose, the Enemies courage. The
People of Pavia were so much encouraged at Francis's coming, and so glad to see
him, because they hated to be subject to the Millaineses upon an old grudg that
was between them, and on the other hand, would rather suffer any thing than
submit to the Venetians, who had formerly despised their Alliance, insomuch
that they delivered their City up to Francis without any more ado by consent of
the Governor of the Castle: which was such an Addition to his grandieur that
Sfortia presently affected to be Lord of the whole Duchy of Millain. These
things passed in Lombardy and thereabouts, whilst Alphonso at the same time
fell down with his Army into the Seacoast of Siena, and had subdued them
(though the Pope was against it) had not the Florentines, who knew the King's
intention, sent a Messenger to Siena, to advise them, that Alphonso who was
covetous of Dominion, was no less their Enemy than the Florentines. The
Sieneses hearing what danger they were in, they did not deny the King any kind
of provisions, but yet they would not suffer any of his Soldiers to come within
their Walls. So that the King when he observed their caution, marched down into
Volaterra, and Pisa, and took many Castles there partly by surrender and partly
by storm: which yet the Florentines recovered not long after, all but
Castiglione, under the command of Sigismund Malatesta, whom they had corrupted
to come over from Alphonso to their side. In the mean time Nicolas the Pope
continually persuaded the King and the Venetians to Peace rather than War; but
they, who were grown proud and unruly would not hearken to his good Advice.
Thereupon Francis raised a great Army, out of the main strength of Italy,
(uniting the Brachian and Sfortian Soldiers) and pitched his Camp in the middle
of Autumn at Piacenza, in which was a good Garrison of Venetians, and beating
down part of the Walls with Cannon he stayed before it so long till the Po rose
to that prodigious height that his Galeoones came up to the very Walls, and so
attacking it both by Land and Water, at last he took and plundered it. This was
a great Honor to Francis, to take so great a City and that in the Wintertime,
when it rained so hard, that the Soldiers were ready to leave their Tents. Yet
Nicolas was even then still talking of Peace, and the Florentines were urgent
with their Allies the Venetians, because they feared the King's Power, who was
then with his Army in Tuscany. But nothing was done in it, because the
Venetians were unwilling to restore Lodi to the Millaineses which they
earnestly sought. So that Nicolas after so many attempts to no purpose, laid
aside all thoughts of making Peace by such means, and applying himself to
religious exercises, he ordered Days of Humiliation to be kept for appeasing
God's anger, and Prayers for the Peace of Christendom. And at the Solemnities
the Pope himself assisted with all the Clergy in Procession from S. Peter's to
S. Mark's, with great Piety and Religion. But the wrath of God was not abated
for all that, so much had Men probably deserved it. For two years after there
was such a Plague in almost all places, that few survived out of great numbers.
And this Calamity was foretold by frequent Earthquakes, and an Eclipse of the
Sun: nay it had been often foretold by the Friars Predicants; especially, one
Robert a Franciscan, and famous Preacher, who so moved the people of Rome with
his Sermons that the Women and Children ran about the City desiring God to be
merciful unto them. And least any misfortune should be lacking in Italy, the
Wars which we told you were begun before did so increase, that one would have
thought it impossible to have put an end to them. For Francis Sfortia (the next
Summer) having taken some Castles from the Venetians, went with his Land and
Sea-forces against their Navy which blocked up the Cremoneses, and forced it to
retire to Casal: thither also he followed it, and with his Cannon disabled all
their Ships as they lay in the Harbor, driving the Admiral of Venice to such
despair that he burned his Navy, which he could not keep, and ran into the Town
as fast as he could. Francis then went from thence, and took no farther care
about Cremona, having destroyed the Enemies Navy; but marched toward Geradada,
and encamped before Caravagio which was well fortified by the Enemies. The
Venetians moved thither too, fearing they should lose their reputation, if the
Millaineses took the Town, and therefore they lay about a mile off the Enemy,
and showed the Townsmen that if occasion were they would come in and assist
them. They had Skirmishes every day, they were so near one another: but when
they came to join Battle, it happened to be in a narrow way surrounded with
Fens, where the Vanguard of the Venetians was so straighten'd, that they could
not give back (as sometimes in War, it may be convenient to do) nor yet fight,
the Enemy came so thick upon them, insomuch that they must of necessity have
perished, if the Rear had not begun to run away. Francis pursued 'em as they
gave ground, and not only made himself Master of their wealthy Camp but took
about five thousand Horse and Foot. After that the Brachians were, without
Francis his consent, ordered by the Millaineses to attaque Lodi, and he moved
toward Brescia with his Army and besieged it. Which so alarmed the Venetians,
that they concluded themselves lost, if they did not make Peace with Francis,
now he had a quarrel with the Millaineses; and a Peace they did make upon
condition, That joining their Forces against the Millaineses, all that they
should take beyond the River Adda and Po should be Francis's, and that on this
side the Adda, should be the Venetians: that they should allow him (the
Florentines and the Venetians betwixt 'em) sixteen thousand pounds a month, and
send him in aid still, till he got possession of Millain. Having made this
League and drawn what Commanders he could to his side by Promises and Presents,
he turned toward the Millaineses, and took most of their Cities by surrender.
At this success of his the Venetians were so concerned, when they saw his
fortune much better than they expected, that they took Crema according to
agreement and recalling all their Soldiers they made Peace with the
Millaineses, as fearing the power of Francis, if he once got into Millain. But
Francis pretended a kindness to the Venetians, and being assisted and supplied
more out of Cosmo di Medices's private Pocket than out of the Treasury of
Florence, after a long and tedious Siege, and many bloody Skirmishes, in the
middle of Winter, though some of his Men forsook him and joined with the Enemy,
and Alphonso was against him, who claimed Millain as his Birthright (and
therefore kept Lewis Gonzaga in pay, whom he sent against the Bolognians, that
his Men might pass with more safety into Lombardy) he at last took Millain in
the year 1449. It Is true, the Venetians did assist the Millaineses, under the
conduct of Sigismund Malatesta (who was to join with Picenninus, that fought
under the Millaineses) but after such a lame rate, that they were famished and
yielded up the City rather to the Venetians than to Francis. Wherefore the
Venetians seeing the thing went quite contrary to their expectation, they
treated with Alphonso, who was an utter Enemy to Francis, and made a League
with him, to rout the ambitious Man out of Millain before he grew too strong.
They also solicited the Florentines to do the same; who said they would never
be against Francis, and therefore the Venetians banished their Merchants out of
their Dominions, and prevailed with Alphonso to do the like. Nicolas the Pope,
seeing all Italy in Arms, did often interpose his Authority to make a Peace,
that all people might come the next year freely out of all Europe to the
Jubilee; for the fiftieth year was acoming wherein the Jubilee was to be
celebrated after the usual manner. Besides he made six Cardinals, of which
number were Latinus, Vrsinus, and his own Brother by the Mothers side, called
Philip, Cardinal of S. Laurence in Lucina, a very good Man and of a generous
disposition. Mean time Frederick the Emperor, at the Pope's request, forced
Felix to renounce the Popedom, because he saw how pernicious and destructive so
much Sedition had been to the Church of Rome. Yet Nicolas was so civil and kind
to Amadeus, that he sent him a Cardinals Hat, with Legantine Power in Germany,
that he might not live without some Honor at least. And those Cardinals also
which Amadeus had made, submitted. This agreement of theirs did so rejoice not
only all the Clergy, but the people of Rome, that the Night after they heard
of it, April 23. 1449. they rode about the City with Flambeaus in their Hands,
and cried out, Long live Nicolas. The Pope, that he might not seem unthankful
to God for so extraordinary a benefit, went publicly to Prayers in the Vatican
along with the Clergy and the people. The like was done all Italy over, when
they saw the Church of God freed from such a pernicious Sedition. Nay the
Pope's Authority and esteem was so great, that he restrained even Princes for
some time, when they had a mind to make War. For James Picenninus, Sigismund
Malatesta, and Charles Gonzaga, who were Francis Sfortia's bitter, mortal
Enemies, incited the Venetians to that War. The Venetians also had drawn the
Duke of Savoy into their Alliance, together with the Marquis of Montferrat and
the Lords of Corregio: and tried to bring over the Bolognians and those of
Perugia, but in vain, for the Pope was against it and threatened 'em with his
displeasure if they offered to do it. They likewise indented with Alphonso,
that whilst they attaqued Francis, he should engage the Florentines. But
Francis relying upon the friendship and power of the Florentines, and having
taken Lewis Gonzaga Prince of Mantoua into his Alliance, he prepared himself
with courage for the War. Hence arose great Animosities between Charles and
Lewis, that Lewis should court his Alliance, who was Charles's Enemy, and
because he had kept some Towns from him which his Father left him by his Will.
For Lewis was his Brother's security when he was once arrested for eighty
thousand pounds; and Charles having no mind to part with his Land, he chose
rather to pay the Money to Francis (who was for Money or Towns either) and keep
the Towns in his own hands, as being near and conveniently situated. For this
reason Charles blamed his Brother and accused him as a Robber, not only to the
Venetians, on whose side he was, but to the Emperor, by whose assistance he
expected to have right done him. And now the Year of Jubilee was come, when
such a multitude of people flocked to Rome, as never were seen there before; So
that, when they came from seeing our Saviors Picture, in the Vatican, back
into the City, a Mule which was in the way, belonging to Peter Barbus, Cardinal
of S. Mark's, was thronged to death, and two hundred Men and three Horses
trodden to Dirt and suffocated in the crow'd upon the Bridge near S. Angelo.
Besides many that fell from the sides of the Bridge into the River and perished
in the Water. It is certain there were one hundred thirty six buried upon that
occasion in S. Celsus's; and the rest carried to Campo Sancto. Hereupon Pope
Nicolas, who was heartily sorry for them, pulled down certain little Cottages
that straighten'd the way to the Bridge and spent most of that Year in
Processions, daily visiting one noted Church or other, whither he was attended
by all the Cardinals. He likewise took care, that though there were such a vast
number of people, yet they should want nothing that was necessary for them: nor
was he wanting with Curses and Guards to deter Highway Men from molesting
those Strangers that came to the City at that time. The next year he heard that
Frederick the Emperor was coming to the City, to receive his Imperial Crown,
and to marry Leonora, Daughter to the King of Portugal, and Alphonso's Niece;
wherefore he fortified the Gates and Towers of the City, as also the Castle of
S. Angelo as well as he could, out of fear, I suppose, lest the Emperor's
coming should make some new commotion there: he being naturally very timorous.
For that reason he called all his Forces to Rome, and, to oblige the People,
chose thirteen Senators, to govern the thirteen Wards of the City, and gave 'em
thirteen Scarlet Gowns. The Emperor upon his arrival was met by thirteen
Cardinals, with all the Nobility and Magistracy of the City, and having passed
the Castle gate was saluted at S. Peter's, by the Pope himself: by whom he was
conducted into the Church, with his Empress Leonora, whom he had met at Siena
lately arrived out of Spain, upon March 9. 1452. And from thence (after Mass
said) they departed, and lodged in that House which stands by S. Peter's Stairs
to this day, though it looks better than it did, because it was beautified at
the cost and charge of the Cardinal of Constance. For some days after the Pope
said Mass in his own Person, and blessed the Emperor and Empress after the
usual manner at Weddings, before the Bridegroom lies with his Bride: and
presented them with the Crown Imperial upon the eighteenth of that month, in
the same place. As the Emperor was going, after his Coronation, to S. John's,
he made several Knights upon the Bridge at S. Angelo. Then he and his Empress
went into Naples, to see King Alphonso, by whom he was received with all
splendor and magnificence; and afterward returning to Rome by Sea, he took his
Journey immediately for his own Country, because he heard that some Princes in
Germany and Hungary, were upon new Designs on the behalf of King Ladislaus (a
fine young Gentleman) whom he had brought along with him. When he departed, two
Cardinals attended upon him several miles, that is to say, the Cardinal of
Bologna, who was the Pope's Brother and Carvagialla Cardinal of S. Angelo. Now
when the Emperor was gone, the Venetians raised a great Army and marched into
Cremona, where they spoiled all they came near, besieging Soncio and the
adjacent Towns, which they not long after took, together with some Troops of
Horse, that fell into their hands, because Francis had not his Men ready so
soon as he should have had. But after that when Lewis Gonzaga his Friend and
Ally came up, he went into Brescia and brought the Venetians to such an
extremity that they durst not venture out of their Fens, to fight in the open
Campaigne. For that reason the Venetians were willing to protract the time, as
placing all their hopes of Victory in delays, because they thought Francis
could not hold out long, at such a charge for want of Money. They likewise
hoped, that the Millaineses would think of their Liberty which he had lately
extorted from them, and, whilst Francis was engaged in such an important War,
endeavor to shake off the yoke of servitude by some new commotions. Ferdinand,
at this time by the command of his Father Alphonso marched into Tuscany with
about eight thousand Horse, and four thousand Foot, against the Florentines:
and when he had tempted Cortona to rebel, he took Foiano a Town near Arezzo
after forty days Siege, with the loss of a great many Men on both sides. He
marched from thence into Siena, and after he had vainly attempted the taking of
Castellina, he fell down into the Seacoast of Siena to Winter, but took some
Castles from those of Volaterra by the way. Sigismund Malatesta who was General
of the Florentine Army observed his motions all along, with Design to take an
opportunity of doing his business the more successfully. But the Florentines
fearing the Power of Alphonso and the Venetians both by Sea and Land, resolved
with the consent of Francis, to call in foreign Aid; and upon that account they
sent Angelus Accioiolus, a Knight, their Envoy into France, who, recounting the
continual kindnesses between the Florentines and that Crown, induced him to
command the Duke of Savoy and the Grisons, that had taken up Arms against
Francis, not to injure the Friend and Ally of the Florentines either by word or
deed, if they would have him their Friend. He also persuaded Renatus to accept
of his assistance by Men and Money, in order to retrieve the Kingdom of Naples,
from whence he had been expelled by Alphonso: seeing the King was at that time
engaged in the Florentine Wars. After this Embassy the Florentines and Francis
grew so prosperous, that the Venetians were glad to make Peace, their Army
which they had sent against the Prince of Mantua under the command of Charles
Gonzaga, being routed not far from Godio: This Army had been raised and
dispatched away under Gonzaga, to hinder the Mantuan and Brandoline, who were
bringing together Forces for the service of Sforza, from joining with him, by
which means he would have easily been able to overcome their less powerful Army
under Gentilis. Carviagalla came the year before to the Armies, to make Peace
between them, in the name of Nicolas; but went away without any satisfaction,
calling both God and Man to witness, it was not long of Nicolas that a Peace
was not settled in Italy, but that he was desirous it should be so, that War
might be made against the Turks by the unanimous consent of Christendom. For he
had heard that the Turks were making preparations against Constantinople, and
therefore sent Cardinal Ruten thither, who was a Constantinopolitan born, to
promise the Emperor and the Citizens his Assistance, if they would return to
the Catholic Church, as they had promised in the Council of Florence. In the
mean time Renatus, who was desirous to recover the Kingdom of Naples (in order
whereunto Francis and the Florentines had promised him their assistance, if he
would pass the Alps against the Venetians) attempted, but in vain, to make his
way through Savoy with two thousand Horse, and having spent most of the Summer
in that Affair, went another way to Savona, and so to Francis. Francis was so
proud of the company of so great a King, and was so well recruited both as to
Men and Courage, that he chased his Enemy into the Mountains of Brescia. And
after that marched round Brescia and Bergamo, where he took forty Towns partly
by storm, and partly by surrender. But the Winter coming on, they all went into
their Winter Quarters, and Renatus, leaving his Son at Florence, returned (much
dissatisfied both with the Florentines and Francis) into France. All Peoples
courage began now to cool with the Season* and the States and Princes finding
their Treasuries almost exhausted with the continual charges of a War, they
began to think of Peace, which Nicolas had formerly attempted: and the
Venetians and Florentines who hated the licentiousness of the common Soldiers,
were now mightily for it. Nicolas having just discovered the conspiracy of
Stephen Porcarius a Knight of Rome, neglected that Affair, though it were in a
fair way, and applied himself to remove those civil Animosities. For Stephen
had more Courage than Power, and was a very great Master of his Mother Tongue,
and having made broad Signs that he would free his Country (as I told you) was
banished by the Pope into Bologna, upon condition, that every day he should
present himself to Nicen who was Governor of the City. But he pretending
himself sick cheated the Governor, and by advise of the Conspirators went back
to Rome in all haste, with a Design, as soon as he came thither to cry out
Liberty to the People and seize upon the Pope and Cardinals. But whilst he lay
down a little while, tired with the length of his Journey and much watching
(for he had been some whole Nights without sleep) he gave them opportunity and
time to discover the Plot. When the Pope knew of his audacious Design, he
presently sent James Lavagnolus, a Senator, a Veronese and Sub-Chamberlain with
a Guard to take and put him into Prison. He hearing of their coming, fled to
his Sisters House, and left Baptista Sarra, with a few Servants at his own; who
being an active, bold Fellow, got both himself and his Companions out of the
House and escaped without any hurt. But being informed whither Stephen was
gone, they took him at his Sisters, where he lay hid in a Chest, and having
confessed the whole story of the Plot, they hanged him under Castle S. Angelo.
Angelus Massa and his Son had the same punishment in the Capitol, together with
their Accomplice, Savus, having first read the Narrative of the Plot publicly,
January 9. 1453. After that he persecuted and destroyed all the rest of the
Conspirators, especially Francis Gabadeus, and Peter de Monterotundo, with
Baptista Sarra who was delivered up to Justice by the Venetians. For to them
had he fled after the Conspiracy was discovered. But Nicolas who hitherto had
treated the Romans with all Liberality and kindness, and went about the City
with more freedom, than ever any Pope before him, was more cautious for the
future, and more morose too not only to all in general, but especially to the
Romans: whom he would not admit to speak with him. Besides he had the Gout very
severely; but nothing tormented him so much as when he heard that the Turk had
taken Constantinople and Pera at one time, and that the Emperor of
Constantinople with many thousands more, was killed. He was afraid lest
Cardinal Ruten might have been taken and killed too (whom he (I told you) sent
thither) but he escaped in a disguise. The Pope had a mind to assist the
Constantinopolitans with Soldiers and a Navy, as his Letters which he wrote to
the Emperor do testify: wherein among other misfortunes he blames them for
their revolting from the Church, and their pretended affection to the Latins:
but that City was taken so suddenly, that he had hardly any time to think of
sending Aid. Besides all these things, lest any thing should be lacking to
torment him, the Count Aversus attaqued Norscia without his Order, being hired
to do so by those of Spoleto: for those two People had a Controversy
concerning their Bounds. Hereupon he sent Angelus Ronco with the Church-Forces
to stop the Count's passage, that he might not return to his own Towns. But he
hearing that Angelus was in the fault that the Soldiers did not take the Count
as he came back, he sent for him into Castle S. Angelo and put him to death at
three of the Clock at Night. Some write, that Nicolas was very sorry for that
Action, that the Governor of the Castle should execute what he in passion
commanded him, so punctually. The Venetians now seeing it was to no purpose to
talk of Peace, (for they had often attempted it) and fearing lest Francis
should slight it by the persuasion of Lewis Gonzaga, they sent James Picennine
their General, with a great body of Horse in all speed to Volta: which when he
had taken and repelled Angelus into Godio (not without damage to Lewis, who was
then sick there) they recalled him into his Winter Quarters, thinking that
Lewis was now sufficiently moved to seek Peace. In the mean time Simonetus, an
Ermit, went up and down from one to the other, and persuaded sometimes the
Venetians and sometimes Francis to Concord so long till he made 'em agree upon
a Peace, which was publicly proclaimed, April 9. 1454. upon these terms, That
every one should have all that was theirs before the War restored to 'em,
except Geradada and Gastiglione di Pescara, of which the former Francis had
taken from the Venetians, and Alphonsus the later from the Florentines. And to
make it the stronger, as also that Alphonso might see, they had respect to him
as a King, the Princes and States thought fit to send Ambassadors to him:
where when they arrived from all places, Dominicus Capranius, Cardinal of S.
Crosses and great Penitentiary, (a Man of great Prudence and Authority) who was
sent Legate from the Pope, by his exhortations and admonitions offering himself
the Umpire for the Peace, he brought him at last to agree that the Peace which
the Venetians and Francis had made, should be confirmed, and assented to by all
Parties; and if any quarrel happened between them for the future, that the Pope
should have Power to decide it: as also that whoever should offer violence to
the other, should be censured by the Pope, and reckoned a common Enemy. When
therefore they had all taken an Oath to perform it, the Peace was confirmed at
Naples, about a year after the former Peace, which was accounted the most firm
that ever our Ancestors knew. For all except the Genoeses joined in it; but
Alphonso could not agree with them by any means, because they promised him
Tribute and did not pay it, as he said. There was also left a good pretense for
a War either by the neglect or design of the Ambassadors, which Alphonso made
use of afterward against Sigismund Malatesta; that he should receive Money of
Alphonso as a Soldiers pay, and yet fight under the Florentines against him.
But Nicolas, the Pope, whether for grief at Constantinoples being taken, or
whether of a Fever and the Gout wherewithal he was very much tormented, died in
the eighth year of his Pontificate, 1455. and was buried in S. Peter's very
honorably; upon whose Tombstone this Epitaph is deservedly inscribed; Hic sita
sunt quinti Nicolai antistitis ossa,
Aurea qui dederat secula, Roma, tibi.
Consilio illustris, virtute illustrior omni,
Excoluit Doctos doctior ipse Viros.
Abstulit errorem quo Schisma infecerat urbem
Restituit mores, moenia, templa, domos.
Tum Bernardino statuit sua sacra Senensi,
Sancta Jubilei tempora dum celebrat.
Cinxit honor caput Frederici conjugis aureo
Res Italas icto foedere composuit.
Attica Romanae complura volumina linguae
Prodidit, en! tumulo fundite thura sacro.
He was commendable for his Liberality toward all, especially Learned Men, whom
he advanced with Money, Court-preferments, and Benefices; whom he would
sometimes put upon reading public Lectures, sometimes upon writing some new
thing, and sometimes upon translating Greek Authors into Latin, insomuch that
the Greek and Latin Tongues which had lain hid for six hundred years, at last
regained their splendor to some considerable degree. He also sent those
Learned Men all over Europe to find out such Books, as had been lost either by
the negligence of Antiquity, or the brutal fury of the barbarous Nations. So
that Poggius found out Quintilian; and Enoch Asculanus, Marcus Caelius
Appicius, as also Pomponius Porphyrio, a famous Writer upon Horace. Besides, he
erected most stately Buildings in the City, and the Vatican: in the City, a
noble House for Popes, near S. Marie the Greater, and repaired S. Stephen's
Church that stands in the Mount di S. Giovanni, but built S. Theodores, that
stands upon the Plain between the Palazzo Maggiore and the Campidoglio, from
the ground. He likewise covered the roof of S. Mary the Round which stands in
the middle of the City, an ancient Temple built by Agrippa, with Lead. And in
the Vatican he not only beautified the Pope's House after that manner which we
see, but he began the Walls of the Vatican, very large and high, laying
foundations for Towers, and a vast Superstructure, whereby to keep the Enemy
from plundering the Pope's House, or St. Peter's Church, as formerly was often
used. Furthermore, at the upper end of S. Peter's he began a great Gallery to
make the Church more glorious, and hold more People. He also repaired Ponte
Melle: and built a fine House at Viterbo near the Baths. Nor only so, but he
lent many others Money who were a building in the City; and by his order the
Streets were paved. He was very Charitable, especially to Persons of Quality if
they happened to be reduced to poverty; and gave poor Maids a competent Portion
when they were married. He always received foreign Ambassadors very honorably
and freely. He was easily angered, to say the truth, being a choleric Man, but
he was easily pleased again: and that gave some ill-natured People the occasion
to carp at him, though he deserved extremely well of God and Man. Then he was
so far from Covetousness, that he never sold any Place, nor ever was guilty of
Simony. He was kind to them, who had deserved well of himself and the Church of
God, a lover of Justice, the Author and preserver of Peace, merciful to
Offenders, a diligent observer of Ceremonies, and would omit nothing belonging
to Divine Worship. The Vessels of Gold and Silver, Crosses set with Jewels,
Priestly Robes adorned with Gold and Pearls, the Arras Hangings interwoven with
Gold and Silver and a Papal Crown are yet to be seen as Monuments of his
Munificence. I do not mention the many holy Books that were transcribed by his
Order and embossed with Gold and Silver: but you may see the Pope's Library,
which was wonderfully augmented by his care, and at his charge. He was so kind
to the Religious that he gave 'em a great deal of Money and Ecclesiastical
Benefices besides; and Canonized S. Bernardine of Siena, a Friar Minor, because
by his Preaching, Admonitions, and Reproofs, he had almost extinguished the
Factions of Italy, that is to say, the Guelphs and the Gibelline Faction, and
showed Christians the way to live well and happily: whose Body is now to be
seen, and daily visited with great veneration, at Aquila.

CALIXTVS III.
CALIXTVS the Third, first called Alphonso Borgia, a Spaniard, born at Sativa
in the Diocese of Valenza, (whose Father and Mother were called John and
Francis, of a Gentile Family, and gave him good Education) was made Pope by
consent of the Cardinals, April 8. 1455. First for his Education; he was but
fourteen years old when, having laid the foundations of Learning elsewhere, he
went to the University of Lerida, where he attained to such perfection, that in
a short time he commenced Doctor in Civil and Canon Law, and made very learned
Readings to those that came to hear him. So that Peter Luna (called Benedict
the XIII.) on his own accord and without asking, gave him a Canonship of the
Church of Lerida. And now becoming famous for his Learning he went to Alphonso
King of Aragon; and was made his Secretary and one of his Privy Council.
Afterward he was made Governor of the Church of Majorca, and his Friends
persuaded him to be Parson of that Church; he refused it, and said, he expected
to be Bishop of Valenza, as not long after he deservedly came to be. For when
Benedict the XIII. was dead, and those two Anti-Cardinals, which I told you of
in the life of Martin, had made one Giles, a Canon of Barcelona, Pope (in the
room of the other that died at Panischola) whom they called Clement the eighth,
Alphonso Boria was presently sent thither by King Alphonso, (who was now agreed
with Martin) not without apparent danger of his own life as well as those that
attended on him: So tyrannically was Panischola kept, and governed by those
chiefly whose interest it was to breed discord. This Alphonso then made Giles
so sensible of his Error by his Reason and Authority, that upon the arrival of
Peter the Pope's Legate, he quitted the Popedom and submitted to the Papal
jurisdiction. Upon this account Martin made Giles Bishop of Majorca, and
Alphonso Bishop of Valenza. After that, when Wars arose between Alphonso of
Aragon and James King of Castile, Alphonso Borgia was thought the only fit
Man, to go and exhort the two Kings to peace and amity; which after seven years
Wars he procured, and made such a lasting Peace, by conjugal Alliances as well
as other means, that some Conditions of that League are observed even to this
day. But when the Council of Basil was at the height, King Alphonso, who was
then at War in Naples, being desired to send some body thither, he ordered
Alphonso Borgia to go: who taking it ill that a thing of such pernicious
consequence should be committed to his management, he got leave of the Queen,
to go into Italy to the King with Ferdinand the King's Son, and exhort him,
that after so many dangerous expeditions, and difficulties with which he was
even at that time surrounded, he would return into his own Country. But the
King told him he would not, but sent him to Eugenius, who was then at Florence,
to treat concerning a Peace. For Viteleschus having entered the Kingdom of
Naples in Eugenius's name with an Army, plundered and spoiled all that came
before him, to hinder the King from taking Naples, which at that time he laid
Siege to. But the business taking up time, and the Pope intending in the mean
time to make twenty Cardinals, among the rest designed the Bishop of Valenza
should be one: though he refused the honor with all the earnestness
imaginable; because, he said, it was not fit for him to receive especially till
he had done the business that he came for. Afterward Eugenius returned to Rome,
the Patriarch of Aquilegia, whom he sent to Tarracina to the King, having made
a Peace between the Pope and the King, upon Conditions, at the making of which
the Bishop of Valenza was present, and interposed his Authority and care, for
which the Pope began to love him so well, that he soon after made him Cardinal
Sanctorum quatuor, and sent for him to Rome, where he used no less modesty in
his Cardinalate, than he had before in his Bishopric, being always free and
far from pomp and vainglory. When he spoke in the Senate, he was reckoned so
grave and sincere a person that he never spoke any thing out of flattery, or to
win favor. But Eugenius dying and Nicolas after him, this Alphonso Borgia, as
I told you, was made Pope in S. Peter's Palace, taking upon him the name of
Calistus, and immediately proclaimed War against the Turks: showing his own
handwriting whereby he had vowed to do so even before his Pontificate in a Book
of his to this purpose; I Calixtus do vow to God and the Holy Trinity that I
will persecute the Turks those Enemies of Christianity, with War, Curses,
Interdictions, Execrations and by all the ways I am able. All that were by
admired at it, that he should arrogate to himself the name of Pope before he
had the honor conferred, and that a Man who was so old and decrepit, should
have so much courage. But that he might really perform his promise, he sent
Preachers through all Europe, to animate all Christians against the Turks, and
to persuade such as were able to lend their helping hand in that momentous
Expedition. And of these he sent sixteen Galleys full, built at Rome; over whom
the Patriarch of Aquilegia was Admiral, and harassed the Seacoasts of Asia for
three years together; where he took several Islands, and did the Enemy a great
deal of damage. King Alphonso, and the Duke of Burgundy also took upon them the
Cross, and professed that they would either go against the Enemy in their own
persons, or at least would raise Men to send. Yet this Affair as it was moved
at an heat, so it as easily cooled again, whilst the Princes indulged their
pleasures and neglected that which would have gained them immortal Fame. Whilst
the Pope was Crowned in the Lateran, two Soldiers, one under the Earl Aversus,
and the other under Neapolio Vrsin (Men of diverse factions and parties) who
quarrelling about a young Lad, did so wound each other, that they both died
upon the spot. For that reason Neapolio, raising the Vrsine Faction, invaded
the House where the Count Aversus lived: but the Count being from home, he
would have gone to the Lateran, to seize him, but was with much ado kept back
by his Brother Latinus, the Pope's Chamberlain. And indeed Neapolio could not
have gone thither without great damage to the City, because all the Faction of
the Colonneses, who favored the Count, were then in Arms. The Pope also had
sent John Baruncellus, and Laelius de Valle (two Advocates of the Consistory)
to both of 'em, to make 'em Friends: so that by this means the present
disturbance was appeased, but the old grudg betwixt them still remained. For
they had many trials of Skill to the great disadvantage of their Adherents. The
Pope however applied his mind to his Pontifical Affairs, and Canonized S.
Vincent a Spaniard of the Order of Preachers, and S. Edmund of England: and
upon that occasion said Prayers and Thanksgivings from Ecclesia Minervae to S.
Peter's with a long train of Clergy and Laity following him. But lest any thing
should be wanting to disturb the Church, some Country Fellows of Palombara a
Town in Sabina, who were formerly banished thence by James Sebellus, Lord of
the place, returned home, and killing two Sons of James's, promised to
surrender the Town to the Church: which Calixtus not only refused to accept,
but sent Cardinal Columna thither, to appease them. Neapolio fearing the
Cardinal should seize Palombara in his own name, he went thither with his Army
and besieged the Town for some days: Though when Matthew Poianus and Francis
Sabellus with other Commanders came up by order from the Pope and the Cardinal,
they raised the Siege, entered Palombara, and hanged twenty of the Country
Fellows, of those especially that had made the disturbance, and quartered 'em,
to give example to others, and warn 'em never to attempt so great a piece of
Villainy against their rightful Lords. Soon after appeared a Comet for some days
hairy and red; of which when the Astrologers said that it portended a great
Plague, Dearth, or some mighty Slaughter, Calixtus appointed a Fast, for
several days, to pray to God, that if any judgment hung over them, he would be
pleased to avert and turn it upon the Turks the Enemies to Christianity. He
gave order likewise that God should be supplicated every day, and that a Bell
should be rung about Noon, to give people notice when they should join in
Prayer for the Christians against the Turks. So that the Christians assisted by
the Prayers of the whole Church, fought against the Turks at Belgrade under the
conduct of John the Vaivod an excellent Person, and John Capistranus of the
Order of Minors, bearing the holy Cross, and conquered 'em when they besieged
Belgrade, six thousand of the Enemies being slain by a few of our Men, as
Carviagalla, Cardinal of S. Angelo wrote to the Pope and to Dominick Capranicus
Cardinal of S. Crosses: besides that all their Carriages and an hundred and
sixty Guns were taken; a blow, that so much scared the Turk that he retired in
haste to Constantinople. And no doubt but that cruel, barbarous Nation had been
destroyed, if the Christian Princes would but have laid aside their civil
Animosities, and have pursued that great Conquest by Land and Sea, as Calixtus
advised. But the Turk recovering strength took Trabisond, killing the Emperor,
and then Bossina, where he took and slew the King. All wise Men perceiving as
from a Watchtower, and advertising the Christians of the Calamities that were
like to befall. Calixtus especially never desisted from exhorting the Christian
Princes by Letters and Messengers, to open their eyes at last amidst such great
dangers, for that they would seek a remedy in vain, when the Enemy was
recruited. But whilst the good Man was thinking and talking of these things,
James Picenninus revolted from the Venetians and marched into the Territories
of Siena with a numerous body of Horse and Foot, to demand of the Sieneses some
thousands of pounds, which, he said they owed him upon his Father Nicolas's
account, who had formerly fought under their Commission. The Sieneses fearing
the worst, sent to the Princes of Italy to assist 'em, as they were bound by
Contract; especially the Pope, who first advised 'em, not to give James one
farthing and then sent his Forces against him and admonished the Princes of
Italy to do the same, lest a flame should break out in Italy, which might be
too fierce for them to quench. The Italians fearing the Pope's words would
prove too true, sent speedy succors to the Sieneses: only Alphonso favored
James and sent for him to his House, as being mindful of the Friendship he had
formerly contracted with Nicolas Picenninus his Father, nor would he assist the
Sieneses as he ought to have done; nay he so far animated Count Petilian
against them, that he seemed to be the chief cause of all the mischief. But
when the Auxiliaries came in, not only from Francis Sfortia, but the Venetians
also, Picenninus was reduced to that pass in some few Battles, that if he were
not routed, he was mightily weakened, especially at Orbitello; insomuch that he
was fain to take shipping in Alphonso's Galleys, that were sent to him in his
distress, and sail into his own Country without any success in that great
Attempt. Thus by the assistance of Calixtus and his Allies were the Sieneses
freed from great danger; though they were still troubled with intestine and
domestic as well as foreign broils, by reason of some Citizens that contemned
their present Liberty and followed Alphonso's Faction, by whom also it is
thought that great War was first raised. But the honest Citizens turned out, or
killed the rest and do to this day retain that Liberty which they purchased at
so dear a rate. Nor did they omit to punish the licentiousness of the Soldiers
or those that fled from their Colors, as Gilbert Corrigia, whom they put to
death, and gave his Men for a common prey to the rest. Sigismund Malatesta had
like to have been served in the same sauce, who at that time fought under them,
for protracting the War, and driving away their Cattle out of their grounds, as
if he had been an Enemy. That year there happened such an Earthquake in the
Kingdom of Naples upon the seventh of December, that many Churches and Houses
fell down, to the great destruction of Man and Beast; especially at Naples,
Capua, Cajetta, Aversa, and other Cities in old Campania, whose ruins I since
have seen with great astonishment, when I went thither to look after
Antiquities. Then also did Alphonso often repeat his Vow which he had made
against the Turks, and said he would shortly perform it; but he could never be
brought to the Holy War for all that, so mightily was he taken with the
delights of Naples. But Calixtus, when he had settled the Affairs of Italy,
created nine Cardinals, of whom two were his Nephews by two Sisters of his, to
wit Roderick Borgia and John Miliano his Sisters Son. He also made Aeneas
Bishop of Siena a Cardinal, and made use of him to procure the peace of Italy
whilst the Sieneses were teazed with War. The Earl Tagliacocius being dead whom
the Pope had made Governor of the City the year before, there rose a
Controversy between Neapolio Vrsin and the Count Aversus, for that the later
had possession of Monticello, not far from Tivoli, he pretending it belonged to
his Daughter-in-law who was the Count's Daughter; and Neapolio urged on the
other side that it ought to be his, himself being reckoned to be of the Vrsine
Family. Whilst these two contended thus for their Patrimony and that with Arms
too, the Roman people suffered very greatly. But when this Controversy also
was over, and both sides commanded to lay down their Arms, Calixtus made his
Nephew Borgia not only Governor of the City in the room of the Count
deceased, but made him General of the Church-Forces, that he might keep the
great Men of the City the better in order. Alphonso not long after dying
without a lawful Heir, Calixtus had the courage to demand that Kingdom, and
said it belonged to the Sea Apostolic as an Escheat. Whereupon Armies were
raised on both sides, and Ferdinand, Alphonso's Heir feared Calixtus's
resolution: for he knew his nature, and the greatness of his Soul. But his
death also put all things into confusion, and freed Ferdinand from great
consternation of mind. Calixtus died in the third year, the third month, and
sixteenth day of his Pontificate, and was buried in the Vatican on the left
hand of St. Peter's, in the Round Church, dedicated to St. Marie del Febri,
which was formerly repaired by Nicolas. Borgia also, his Nephew died, not long
after, at Civita Vechia, whither he had fled to save himself from the Vrsins
whom he had disobliged by favoring the opposite Faction. But to give you a
short Character of Calixtus; He was a very upright Man, and is to be commended
for one thing above all; That when he was Bishop or Cardinal, he would never
keep any Benefice in Commendam, but said, he was content with one Wife, and
that a Virgin, i.e. the Church of Valenza, as the Canon Law ordains. Besides,
he was very charitable to poor Christians both in public and private: and gave
portions to several poor Virgins when they married; kept indigent Noblemen at
his own charge: and when occasion was he was munificent to Princes, especially
those that could assist the Church of Christ. He likewise sent Lewis of
Bologna, of the Order of St. Francis, Vsun-Cassanus Prince of Persia and
Armenia, and to the King of the Tartars with many great Presents, to animate
them against the Turk; and by his persuasion they did the Enemy great damage,
and sent their Ambassadors, that were designed to come to Calixtus, after he
died, to Pope Pius: which was an admirable Rarity to us, not only upon account
of the distant Countries from whence they came, but their habit which was
unusual, and very strange to our eyes. They say that Vsun-Cassanus after many
Victories over the Enemy, wrote to the Pope, that he had conquered the Foe by
the Pope's prayers, and that he would one day thank him for his kindness which
was Divine rather than humane. That Alliance was begun by Calixtus, and is
preserved to this day between all Christians and that Prince, who vexes the
Turk with continual War. He laid out but little in building, because he died
too soon, and gathered up all the Money that he could, to maintain that great
and perilous War against the Turks. Only he repaired St. Prisca upon the
Mount Aventine, as also the City Walls that were broken down almost to the
ground. Yet some Hangings of Gold there are, which he bought. He was sparing in
his Diet, very modest in his Discourse; and very accessible, as much as his Age
would suffer him to be: for he was eighty years old, and yet as studious as
ever. For he either read himself, or heard those that did, whenever his
important Affairs would give him leave. He composed the Office for the
Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ, and ordered it to be said in the same
manner, and with the same Indulgences for which Corpus Christi Day is so much
valued. He received all Ambassadors that came to him with great kindness, but
would not yield to any of their Proposals or Demands, which were not consistent
with Virtue and Justice. And that was the cause why he fell out and had a long
quarrel with Alphonso, who sometimes would ask him to give Bishoprics to such
as either upon the score of their Age, or ignorance in Books as well as Men,
ought not to have them. When Calixtus died he left 115000 l. behind him, which
he had heaped together to make warlike preparations against the Turk. As
Calixtus was going to be buried, Dominick Cardinal of St. Crosses and chief
Poenitentiary, died also (a Man of gravity and great Wisdom) and was buried in
Minerva's Temple; to the grief of all good Men.

PIUS II.
PIUS the Second, before called Aeneas Picolhomineus, an Italian, of Siena, and
born at Corsignano (whose Father's name was Sylvius and his Mother's Victoria)
was chosen Pope by general consent of the Cardinals, August 20. 1458. Formerly
his Father and the rest of the Nobility being banished, or expelled the
Republic of Siena by the Commonalty of that place, he went to Corsignano, the
Seat of his Family, and there had a Child by his Wife. Which Child as soon as
it was born the Father christened Aeneas Sylvius. Now his Mother, when she was
big with Child, dreamed that she had brought forth a Boy with a Mitre on his
head; as which she was afraid (as people are apt to think the worst of things)
that her dream betokened some dishonor to their Child and Family: nor could
she be eased of her fear till she heard her Son was made Bishop of Trieste. And
upon that news she was freed from all fear, and gave God thanks, that she saw
her Son more happy than she expected. As soon as he was capable of learning any
thing, he, having a good memory, and being very docile, went through his
Grammar at Corsignano where he lived but poorly, being forced to undergo all
the troubles of a rural employment. But when he was eighteen years of age he
went to Siena, where, by the help of his Friends, he first learned the Poets
and then the Orators, in which he was so skilful, that in a short time he put
forth Poems in Latin and Italian, of which if the Subject was Love, it is to be
ascribed to his Youth. Thence he applied himself to the Civil Law, the study of
which not long after he was forced to leave. For there arose a War between the
Sieneses and the Florentines, which made him fear a Dearth; and seeing the
Commonalty of Siena suspected the Nobility, he chose as it were a voluntary
Exile, and followed that excellent person, Dominick Capranicus, who then passed
through Siena, in his way to the Council at Basil, to complain of the injury
Eugenius had done him in denying him a Cardinals Hat, which Martin even in his
absence had bestowed upon him, for his Virtue and Integrity. In his Retinue he
went, and after long tedious Journeys over the Alps (that reach to heaven
almost, and are covered with Snow) he travailed over Ponte del Inferno, the
Lake of Lucern, and through Switzerland, till he at last came to Basil. In
which Assembly though he had much to do, being Dominick's Secretary, yet he
stole always some hours for his Book. After that, he was forced not without
tears to leave Dominick, because he was extreme poor, Eugenius denying him the
Revenue of his Benefices and of his Paternal Estate too; he went to wait upon
Bartholomew Bishop of Novara, with whom he came to Florence, where Pope
Eugenius at that time was. But he was forced to leave Bartholomew also, (he
being accused by the Pope of high Treason) and betook himself to Nicolas,
Cardinal of St. Crosses, and a very excellent and religious person in all Men's
judgments; who going to Artois by order from Eugenius (where there was a
Convention of all the French Princes) he made a Peace between the Duke of
Burgundy (an Ally of England) and the King of France. After that, Nicolas
returning into Italy, made a Peace between the Venetians and Philip Duke of
Millain to their great satisfaction; and Aeneas, who was not very acceptable to
Eugenius, went to Basil, and was in great esteem among all Men. He was made a
Secretary in that famous Council, and Abbreviatour of the Pope's Breves, as
also a Duodecimvir, or one of the Twelve who in that great Assembly were as
Censors. For nothing could be done relating to the public, but what passed
their graver approbation; and if any were admitted to the Council that were not
fit, they were removed by their Order. There were in that Council four Sub
Conventions or Committees, one debated concerning Faith, another of Peace, a
third of Reformation, and the other of promiscuous matters. Over each of these
there was a several President placed every month: and Aeneas was often Chairman
of the Committee for Faith of which he was a Member, and was also chosen twice
one of the Collators, or disposers of Benefices. He made several Speeches in
that Assembly, but one more remarkably elegant, to prove that Pavia was
preferable to Avignion, Vdine or Florence for a place convenient to hold a
Council in, by reason of its plenty, situation, magnificence of the Houses,
good Air, and the liberality of Philip their Duke. When any thing was to be
done by the several Nations together, he was the only person chosen for Italy,
to manage their business, he was a Man so courteous and ingenuous. He went also
on several Embassies from the Council; to Strasburgh, three times; to Trent,
once; to Constance, twice; to Frankfort, once; and into Savoy twice. But when
upon a long Debate the Council chose Felix Pope, and deposed Eugenius, and
eight were chosen out of every Nation, to be managers of the Council Affairs,
Aeneas, who was the Pope's Secretary refused to be one, though it was offered
him. And afterward when he was sent Ambassador from Felix to Frederick the
Emperor, he so far prevailed upon him by his ingenuity, that he made him a
Poet Laureat, his Companion, and a Prothonotary, which, in Germany, is a
Secretary of State. Not long after he was made a Counselor of State, and
showed such Learning and Authority, that he was reckoned the most ingenuous Man
there by far, although he wanted not Rivals and Detractors. When Eugenius and
the Emperor first treated about putting an end to the Schism, and Aeneas went
to the Pope upon that account, he stayed some time at Siena, where his Friends
desired him not to go to Eugenius; for they feared the Pope would use him
severely, because his Authority was often opposed (as people said) by Aeneas in
Epistles and Orations at the Council of Basil. But he was resolute and trusting
to his own innocence slighted the entreaties of his Relations and went to Rome;
where in the first place he acquitted himself before Eugenius, in an elegant
Oration, for submitting to their Opinion, who approved of the Council of Basil.
And when he had so done, he began to treat with him about that which the
Emperor sent him to negotiate. Thereupon two Agents were sent from Eugenius
into Germany, of whom one was Sarzanus and the other John Carvagialla, by whose
good management, and Aeneas's industry together, the Neutrality (as I told you
in the Life of Nicolas) was taken off. But that it might appear really to be
so, and not in words only, the Emperor sent Aeneas himself to Rome, to make a
public Declaration of Submission in all matters to Eugenius, in the name of
himself and all Germany. Eugenius dying about this time, Aeneas was President
of the Conclave, till another Pope was chosen in the room of the deceased;
there being no Orator in the City, more fit for so great an Employment. Nicolas
being chosen Pope, he had leave to depart, and as he went into Germany, he
(having been made Sub Deacon by Eugenius) was made Bishop of Trieste (that
Bishop being just then dead) by the Pope and the Emperor, without his own
knowledge. After which Philip Viconti dying without an Heir, the Emperor sent
him Envoy to Millain: where he made an Oration concerning the descent of the
Inheritance of that City, and exhorting to Allegiance, which if they preserved
inviolate, they might enjoy their liberty still. He was sent thither another
time, when they were besieged by Francis Sfortia, and suffered great
extremities in defense of their Liberty; at which time he entered the City with
great hazard alone; for his Colleagues left him at Como, and durst not go on for
fear. But he departed thence without any success, and whilst the Emperor sent
him to Alphonso King of Aragon, the Pope Nicolas, made him Bishop of Siena, the
place of his Nativity. And when the Emperor and Alphonso had contracted an
Alliance by Marriage he returned into Germany, where he persuaded the Emperor
to go as soon as possible into Italy and receive his Imperial Crown. Upon that
advice Frederick went thither, but sent Aeneas before, to meet and complement
his Wife Leonora, who was to come from Portugal into Tuscany. Who when he came
to Siena, stayed not long there, but he began to be suspected by the people, as
if he designed (because the Emperor was coming) to turn out the populace and
make the Government an Aristocracy. Aeneas therefore, to free the people from
that jealousy, went to Talamone, where he thought Leonora would arrive; and
yet the people were not satisfied. For they banished the Nobility into the
Country for a time; and a little while after (according to the mutable humor
of the Mobile) gave 'em leave to come back again, when they understood the
integrity of the Emperor and the modesty of Aeneas. Hence he went to Pisa,
where he heard the Portugueses were landed, and brought the Infanta (who was
committed to his sole care) to the Emperor, then at Siena. Then going to Rome
he managed all things (whilst the Emperor was crowned) both private and
public. Afterward the Emperor went to visit Alphonso, and left Ladislaus (a
Princely Youth whom the Hungarians and Bohemians had often endeavored to steal
away from him) under the tutelage of Aeneas, who kept him very faithfully. When
the Emperor came back to Rome, and had given the Pope thanks, he went for
Ferrara, and having made Borsius d' Este Duke of Modena, he departed* And no
sooner was he come into Germany, but he presently dispatched away Aeneas by the
Pope's Order as Envoy extraordinary into Bohemia and all the Cities of Austria.
For there was a Controversy between them and the Emperor about King Ladislaus
whom they would needs have him send into their Country. But the Dispute was
ended, and a Peace made between 'em, so that Aeneas was not long after sent to
the Assembly at Ratisbone: where he, in the name of the Emperor, and in the
presence of Philip Duke of Burgundy, and Lewis of Bavaria, spoke of the Turks
cruelty and calamities of Christendom with such vehemence and passion, that he
forced sighs and tears from every one there; but especially he seemed so far to
animate the Duke of Burgundy, that a War was decreed immediately by general
consent: though it was after laid aside through the ambition and folly of
those, who thought too well of themselves. And now Aeneas was grown old, and
tired with the tedious Journeys he had taken into foreign parts; wherefore he
resolved to return to Siena, his native Country: but the Emperor easily
changed his mind, by telling him, that he yet designed to make War upon the
Turks. Thereupon he was sent to the Convention at Frankfort where all the
German Princes were met together, and in a grave, long Oration persuaded them
with many reasons to undertake that dangerous, but necessary War. And indeed he
seemed to move 'em all exceedingly: though it is natural for those to cool soon
whose affections are quickly heated. There was also a third Convention in
Cittanova about the same thing, wherein Aeneas employed all his endeavors to
bring about what he desired; exhorting every one of them both in public and
private to assist in that War, upon which the safety of all Europe, the Liberty
of both Princes and people, and the honor of Christianity did depend. And just
as he expected to do the business, there was news brought, that Pope Nicolas
was dead; which put all things into a new Confusion. For the Convention broke
up, and the Germans, desirous of Novelty, endeavored to persuade the Emperor
no longer to obey the Pope unless he would grant them some certain Demands, for
they said, the Germans were in a worse condition than either the French or
Italians, whose Servants they might be termed (unless things were altered)
especially to the Italians. And truly the Emperor had hearkened to those
Mutineers, if Aeneas, with his gravity, had not interposed, and told the
Emperor, That though one Prince may possibly keep peace with another, yet
there always is an immortal jealousy between Prince and People. So that, he
thought it better for him to agree with the Pope, than give way to their
desires, whose minds are led by Appetite and Fancy, not by Reason. The Emperor
was persuaded: and slighting the peoples petition, sent Aeneas to Calixtus. He,
when he came to Rome, and had given Frederick's Oath to the Pope, as the custom
is, commended them both in an Oration, whereof the greatest part enforced a War
against the Turks; so mighty zealous he was for it. For he was a wise Man and
foresaw what afterward came to pass; That the Barbarians would not be quiet
when they had gotten all Greece; they were so puffed up with their Victory. For
that reason he applied himself to make peace in Italy (before he made War with
the Turk) and so exhorted the Pope to do the same with all earnestness. At that
time the Sieneses were hard put to it by Count Petilian and James Picenninus,
who carried on that War more upon Alphonso's account than their own. Wherefore
Aeneas, to make a final conclusion of it, went by command from the Pope and at
the request of his Fellow-Citizens and Countrymen to Alphonso, at Naples, where
almost all the Ambassadors of Italy were met to treat of Peace, but had done
nothing in it to that time. But when Aeneas came, he said he would agree to a
Peace then without any more ado, since that person was arrived, whom he loved
above all mankind. Having obtein'd a Peace, and freed his Country from the
Enemy he stayed with Alphonso some months, because he loved his Conversation;
and in that time took his opportunity to make an elegant and a large Discourse
to him, by which he induced him to engage by Sea against the Turk. And having
so done he went for Rome, with a design to go into his own Country, but was
stopped by the Pope, and not long after made a Cardinal. Now he was in such
favor with Calixtus and bore such a sway, that he persuaded him to send
Ambassadors to Siena, which was all in an uproar among themselves, to exhort
the People to peace and unity. But whilst he was at the Bath at Viterbo upon
account of his health, and had begun the History of Bohemia, Calixtus died, and
then he returned to Rome: where he was so much desired, that great part of the
people ran out to meet him, and saluted him, prophetically, by the name of
Pope. For indeed he was chosen Pope by universal consent not only of the
people but the Cardinals: and having received the Papal Crown upon the fifth of
September he went into St. Peter's Church in his pontifical Robes, where he
gave thanks to Almighty God, and immediately betook himself first to settle the
Churches Patrimony, and then to endeavor the advantage of all Christendom in
general. For he ended the War in Ombria (which broke out before his
Pontificate, under the command of that seditious Innovator James Picenninus) as
soon as he was Pope, and took back Assisi and Nocera from the Enemy. He
likewise made a Truce (which seemed a difficult thing to do) between Sigismund
Malatesta, and King Ferdinand, that all might safely pass to Mantua, where he
had ordered a general Council. And having made the Prince of Columna Governor
of the City in the room of Borgia, who was dead, and left Nicolas Cusa,
Cardinal of St. Peter's in vinculis, his Legate at Rome, he departed the City
in the midst of Winter, and passed through those Cities which seemed more
inclining to War than Peace, exhorting the People to unity and concord. In
fine, they met at Mantua from all quarters, where there was a great number of
Princes and Ambassadors. For of all Europe there was no Nation, but sent
either Princes, or Ambassadors thither; and in that famous Assembly it was
enacted by Pius, (who made an Oration himself) that a War should be proclaimed
against the Turks, which they all agreed to. He proposed Methods for carrying
it on, and showed the danger of Christendom: nor could they forbear to weep
when they heard the calamities laid open, to which poor Christians were
exposed, who lay under the bondage of Barbarians. Beside he moved them to
consider that the Turks having already possessed themselves of Greece and
Schlavonia, would shortly get into the innermost parts of Europe. And indeed he
omitted nothing that might excite their resolutions: for he was an excellent
Orator, and seemed to draw his Arguments from new Topics still, though he
spoke of the same thing, such an elegant and copious faculty he had. He
confuted the complaints of the French and the calumnies of King Renatus (for
his having confirmed Ferdinand, Alphonso's Son, in the Kingdom of Naples) in
three several Speeches. These things were transacted in the Council at Mantua,
whilst almost all Europe employed their thoughts and Weapons in civil Discords,
and neglected the foreign War. The Germans arose partly against one another, and
partly against the Hungarians: by whose assistance that great and necessary War
might have been in a great measure managed and ended. England also was divided
into two Factions: whereof the one would keep their old King, whilst the other
strove to banish him and set up a new one. In like manner did the Spaniards
rise to help those of Barcellona, whom the King of Aragon, assisted by the
French, oppressed. And lest any thing should be lacking to disturb the World,
Italy, the chief of Europe, laid by all thoughts of foreign War, and bent all
its strength upon intestine quarrels. For at that time there was a War in
Puglia, John Renatus's Son, endeavoring to drive Ferdinand out of his Kingdom,
which occasioned a double Faction through all the Province, whilst some
favored Ferdinand, and others, Renatus. Pius therefore, to allay these heats,
dismissed the Council at Mantua, and came back into Tuscany, where he easily
regained Viterbo, which was in the possession of the adverse Party. Those of
Ancona, who had harassed one another miserably about their bounds and limits,
he quieted partly by fear and partly by reason: as likewise the Ombrians, who
had embru'd their hands in each others blood upon the like account. He also
settled the State of Siena, which had been engaged in great tumults for three
years before; and restored several worthy Persons, who had been banished
thence, giving the Government of that Republic (as formerly) to the Nobility.
But he was very severe upon the Sabini for their falsehood, in supplying a
common Enemy with provisions, and letting him pass through their Country. At
Rome, he suppressed the shameful Riots of Ruffian-like Men, and imprisoned
Tiburtius Son to Angelus Massianus (who we told you, was put to death by
Nicolas for a Conspiracy and hanged up by the Capitol) and his Accomplices, who
possessing themselves of the Church of St. Maria Rotunda, would sally from
thence, as from a Castle, and commit outrages upon the Citizens. Furthermore,
he exterminated some Tyrants who studied innovations, out of the Church
Dominions: but never meddled with any one, till he had first sent an Ambassador
or Legate to 'em, to reduce 'em, if it were possible, by fair means. After
that, he sent Frederick of Vrbino his General with Alexander Sfortia to
Tagliacozzo to stop James Picennenus, who fought under Renatus, from going into
Puglia to assist the French against Ferdinand. And besides, he succored
Ferdinand at Sarno, when he had like to have lost his Kingdom, for fear, the
French, when they had once gotten that Kingdom, would make use of their Victory
to subvert the Liberty of Italy. He slighted the Threat and Promises of the
French Ambassadors that endeavored to bring him over from Ferdinand to
Renatus; and by his Censures as well as Arms he tamed the fury of Sigismund
Malatesta who was a Feudatary of the Church, and yet contemning the League,
which the Pope had made between him and Ferdinand, stormed and took all the
Castles, which he had given for caution, against Law and Reason; and having
driven the Churches Legate as far as Nulasture, he made War upon the Anconeses.
But his extravagance was corrected the year after at Sinigaglia, under the
conduct of Frederick of Vrbino and Neapolio Vrsin, in a sharp engagement,
wherein they retook Sinigaglia, the Town called Fortunae Fanum was taken by
Nicolas of Pistoia Cardinal Legate of St. Cecilys, and great part of Rimini
taken from him, lest he should rebel any more. Ferdinand also had the same
happy success not long after at Troja, a Town in Puglia, by which the Prince of
Tarento and many others, who, being desirous of change, were on the French
side, were so consternated, that they came all upon their knees to the King and
begged pardon of him; but some few continued obstinate, whom the King afterward
prosecuted so severely, that he either drove 'em out of the Kingdom, or brought
'em to know themselves. When this was over, Pius, now freed from two great and
troublesome Wars, renewed the thoughts of his Expedition into Asia, which had
been so long omitted from the time of the Mantuan Council through the ambition
and avarice of the several Kings and Princes: and makes the King of Hungary,
the Duke of Burgundy, and the Venetians his Confederates, because they seemed
more inclined to it, than any body else. He likewise sent Nuncioes with Letters
Apostolic to the several Nations of Christendom, to exhort the Princes and
people to so great and necessary a War: Himself in the mean time went to Siena,
with a design to go as soon as the Season permitted, to the Baths at
Petriolana, that seemed best for his Distemper. And there he heard the Duke of
Burgundy, who had vowed to come with a Navy well Manned, had desisted from his
resolution: as also, that many other Princes and people not only Foreiners,
but of Italy, led by ambition and envy, endeavored to frustrate that great
Design, because they saw, that they were likely to have the richest spoils and
rewards, that underwent the greatest brunt of that War. Thereupon (as it became
a Pope to do) he tried to persuade 'em by kind words at a distance: and soon
after leaving the Bath he went to Rome, where he lay sick for some days of the
Gout and a Fever, and therefore could not be at Ancona upon the seventh of June
as he had publicly declared he would. But when his distemper was somewhat
assuaged, he gave Audience to certain Ambassadors that came from the King of
France, and Duke of Burgundy to excuse their delay. And then calling all the
Cardinals before him he appointed a day to hear the charge against the King of
Bohemia, who was said to be heretically inclined: and when he had done, he was
carried in a Litter through Sabina, Ombria, and the Marcha till he came to the
City of Ancona. By the way be found great numbers of Men, that came out of
Germany, Spain, and France, intending for the War against the Turks: of whom he
sent a great part, especially of the Germans (having absolved 'em) back into
their own Country, because he thought 'em unfit for the toil of War; and
because they had not brought their pay along with 'em, as he had ordered in the
Letters Apostolical. But in the mean time, whilst he waited at Ancona for the
Navy that was a building in the several Ports of the Tyrrhene and Adriatic
Seas, and also for the Duke of Venice his Ally, he was afflicted with a tedious
Fever, and died in the year 1464. upon the 13th of August about three of the
Clock in the Night, six years wanting six days after he was made Pope. He was a
Man of such constancy and courage of mind, that in all his sickness, which was
long and painful, he never omitted any business that concerned his
understanding only, whether it were to hear the causes of several Nations, to
inhibit, to decree, to judge, to sign, to admonish, to chastise, or correct. And
that day whereon he died, about two hours before he expired, he called the
Cardinals about him, and with a resolute Heart and a good audible Voice
exhorted 'em to Unity in the choice of a new Pope: commending to their care (in
a grave Speech) the honor of God, the dignity of the Church, the War which he
had undertaken against the Turks, the salvation of his Soul, all his Family,
and especially his Nephews, if they proved worthy of commendations. He desired
all the Sacraments of his own accord, and showed great tokens of a true
Christian. But besides that he dispued very acutely with Laurentius Roverella,
Bishop of Ferrara, a learned Divine, whether it were lawful for him to receive
the Extreme Unction again, having been anointed once before at Basil, when he
was sick of the Plague. Nor could he be entreated by all his domestic Servants
to forbear saying the Canonical Prayers, though he were in such an Agony. He
repeated the Athanasian Creed with great strength and Emphasis; and when he had
done, he said, it was most true, and most holy. He was not afraid to die, nor
did he show any sign of trouble or inconstancy to his last breath. But indeed
he may be said rather to have been killed than to have died, he was so tortured
with tedious Diseases. He commanded his Friends to carry his Body to Rome:
where those that embalmed him affirmed that his heart was very sound and vivid.
His funeral pomp from Ancona to Rome was made up of his Family, who were all in
mourning and in tears. And when that was over, he was buried in St. Peter's at
the Altar of St. Andrew, in a Tomb, which was built at the charge of Francis,
Cardinal of Siena, with this Epitaph, Pius II. Pont. Max. natione Tuscus,
patria Senensis, gente Pocolhominea. He enjoyed the Sea only six years: But
though his Pontificate were short, yet it was full of great Actions. He held a
Council at Mantua to maintain the Faith; resisted all the opposers of the
Church of Rome both within and without Italy; he canonized Catharine of Siena,
and abrogated the French Pragmatic Sanction. He restored Ferdinand of Aragon to
the Kingdom of Naples; increased the Churches Patrimony, and made the first
Alum Mines at Tolfa; He was an Admirer of Justice and Religion, and an
excellent Orator: But he died at Ancona as he was going to the War against the
Turks, where he had his Navy ready, and the Duke and Senate of Venice for his
fellow Soldiers in Christ. He was brought thence into the City by order of the
Cardinals, and buried in the place where he commanded St. Andrew the Apostle's
head (which was brought hither to him from Morea) to be laid. He lived fifty
eight years, nine months and twenty seven days; and when he died, left the
College of Cardinals forty five thousand pound gathered out of the Church
Revenues, to maintain the War against the Turks. But the Cardinals committed
all this Money and the Galleys, that were then in the Port of Ancona, to
Christopher Maurus Duke of Venice, who arrived there two days before Pius died,
upon condition, that he should use the Ships according to their directions, and
should send the Money to Matthias King of Hungary, who was continually at War
with the Turk. Thus died Pius, who was a personage of such true courage and
singular prudence; as he seemed to be born not to ease or pleasure but to
manage the most important Affairs. He always endeavored to augment the Majesty
and grandieur of the Pontifical Chair; nor did he ever leave chastizing of
Kings, Dukes, States, Usurpers, that wronged either himself or any other
Churchman, till he made 'em acknowledge their Error. And therefore he was an
Enemy to Lewis King of France, because he endeavored to diminish the Liberties
of the Church, and extorted from him the Pragmatic Sanction which was most
pernicious to the Sea of Rome. He threatened Borsius Duke of Modena, who being
a Feudatary of the Church of Rome, yet favored Sigismund Malatesta and the
French, who were no Friends to the Church. But he censured Sigismund Duke of
Austria most grievously, for taking Nicolas Cusanus, Cardinal of St. Peter ad
vincula, and keeping him some days in Prison. He deprived Dieterus
Isimbergensis Bishop of Mayence, who hated the Church of Rome, and put another
in his place: and so likewise he displaced the Archbishop of Benevento, who
was upon new projects, and endeavored to betray Benevento to the French. He
likewise deprived Francis Copinus, who in his Embassady to England, assumed
more Power, than the Sea Apostolic had given him (to the destruction of many
Men) him he deprived of his Bishopric of Teramo. He also made Terracino,
Benevento, Sora, Arpino and a great part of Campagnia subject to the Church. He
never granted any thing to any King, Duke, or State for fear or covetousness;
and would reprove Men severely, that asked what he could not grant without
detriment to the Church and dishonor to himself; and struck such terror into
some Lords of Italy especially, that they continued very true to their Faith
and Allegiance. But as he always plagued his public Enemies, so likewise he
Cherished his Friends as much. He dearly loved Frederick the Emperor, Matthias
King of Hungary, Ferdinand Son to Alphonso, Philip of Burgundy, Francis
Sfortia, and Lewis Gonzaga. He added twelve Cardinals to the former number, the
Cardinal of Rieti, Spoleto, Trani, Alexander Saxoferratensis, Bartholomew
Roverella, James of Lucca, Francis Son to his Sister Laodamia, Francis Gonzaga
Son to the Marquess Lewis, all Italians. But then there were others from beyond
the Alps; as, Salseburgensis, Lewis Libretus of Artois, and Vergelensis.
Moreover, he so ordered his method of living, that he could never be accused of
idleness or sloth. He rose as soon as 'twas day for his health sake, and,
having said his Prayers very devoutly, went about his worldly affairs. When he
had done his mornings work, and walked about the Gardens for his recreation, he
went to Dinner; in which he used an indifferent sort of Diet; not curious and
dainty. For he seldom bid 'em get him this or that particular Dish, but
whatever they set before him, he ate of. He was very abstemious, and when he
did drink Wine, it was always diluted with Water, and pleasant rather than
rough upon the Palate. After Meals he either discoursed or disputed half an
hour with his Chaplains, and then going into his Bedchamber he took a nap,
after which he went to Prayers again, and then wrote or read, as long as his
business would permit. The same also he did after Supper; for he both read and
dictated till midnight as he lay in his Bed, nor did he sleep above five or six
hours. He was a short Man, gray-hair'd before his time, and had a wrinkled Face
before he was old. In his aspect he bore severity tempered with goodnature;
and in his garb was neither finical, nor negligent, but so contrived it, as to
be consistent with the pains which he usually took. He could patiently endure
both hunger and thirst, because he was naturally very strong; and yet his long
journeys, frequent labor, and Watchings had impaired him. His usual Diseases
were the Cough, the Stone, and Gout, wherewith he was often so tormented, that
no body could say he was alive but by his Voice. And even in his sickness he
was very accessible, but sparing of Words; and unwilling to deny any Man's
Petition. He laid out all the Money he got together; and did neither love Gold
nor contemn it: but would never be by, whilst it was told out, or laid up. He
seemed not to cherish the Wits of his Age, because three grievous Wars which he
had undertook had so continually exhausted the Pontifical Treasury that he was
oftentimes much in Debt: and yet he preferred many learned Men to places both
in the Court, and Church. He would willingly hear an Oration, or a Poem, and
always submitted his own Writings to the judgment of the Learned. He hated
Liars and Sycophants, was soon angry and soon pleased again. He pardoned those
that reviled, or scoffed at him, unless they injured the Sea Apostolic; the
Dignity whereof he always had such a respect for, as upon that account often to
fall out with great Kings and Princes. He was very kind to his Household
Servants; for those that he sound in an error, through folly or ignorance, he
admonished like a Father. He never reproved any one for speaking or thinking
ill of him; because in a free City he desired every body should utter their
minds. And when one told him, that he had an ill Report, he replied; go into
the Campo di fiore, and you will hear a great many talk against me. If at any time
he had a mind to change the Air of Rome for a better, he went, especially in
the Summer, to Tivoli, or his own Country, Siena. But he was mightily pleased
with the retirement of an Abbey in Siena, which is very delightful, and cool too
by reason of its situation and the shady Groves that are about it. He
frequented the Baths at Macerata and Petriolana for his healths sake. He used
thin Cloths, and his Expenses in Silver looked more frugal than Princelike. For
his whole delight (when he had leisure) was in writing and reading: because he
valued good Books more than precious Stones; for in them he said there was
great plenty of Gems. He so far contemned a splendid Table, that he went
oftentimes to Fountains, Groves, and Country recesses for his own humor, where
he entertained himself not like a Pope, but an honest humble Rustic. Nor were
there wanting some who found fault with this his frequent change of places,
especially his Courtiers; because no Pope had ever done so before him, unless
in time of War, or of a Plague. But he always slighted their Cavils, and said,
that for all his pleasure he never omitted any thing that befitted the dignity
of a Pope or tended to the good of the Court. In all places he Sealed, heard
Causes, Censured, Answered, Asserted and Confuted; to give full satisfaction to
all sorts of Men. He could not eat willingly alone, and therefore invited
either the Cardinal of Spoleto, of Trani, or of Pavia commonly to Dine or Sup
with him. At Supper he used to discourse of Learning, and rubbed up his old
Notions of the Ancients; showing how commendable each of 'em was in this or
that particular. He frequently exhorted his Relations to Virtue, and deterred
'em from Vice, by recounting the good or ill actions of others. Augustine
Patritio was his chief Reader, and Amaniensis. He was also sometimes pleased to
hear Wit, especially when he had nothing to do: and therefore he had one
Grecus, a Florentine, who would mimick and ridicule any ones behavior, garb,
or way of speech with great diversion to the Audience. He was an honest,
upright, plain Man, without fallacy, or guile. And so zealous a Christian he
was, that there appeared no color of Hypocrisy in him. He frequently
confessed, and received the Communion; and at divine Service either performed
the Priestly Office himself, or assisted at the Ceremonies. He always contemned
Dreams, Portents, Prodigies, Lightning, and the like. There was no sign in him
of fear or inconstancy: but he seemed as little elevated at his good, as
dejected at his ill Fortune. He often reproved his Friends, for Cowards, and
sneaking Fellows, that they should be afraid of telling him what mischances
they had (as it sometimes happens) in the War: because, he said, those things
might have been remedied, if he had known of 'em in time. He never forsook his
Allies, either upon account of Charges, or fear of his Enemies. He went to War
with an ill will, but fought for the Church and Religion when he was forced
to it. He was mightily pleased with Building: and at his charge were the Steps
in the Vatican Church repaired; the Portico of it made glorious and strong: And
he had a design to carry away the rubbish from before the Church-door, and pave
the Piazza. He was about to make a Portico, from whence the Pope might bless
the People. He built a Castle at Tivoli before people thought he had begun it:
and at Siena he built his Countrymen a Portico of square stone very high and
very fine. As likewise he made Corsiniano (which he called Pienza, from his own
name, Pius) a City: and built there a noble Church with a Cupalo, together with
a fine House. He erected also a Tomb for his Father and Mother at Siena in St.
Francis's Church, with this Distich for an Epitaph. Sylvius hic jaceo, conjux
Victoria mecum est,
Filius hoc clausit marmore Papa Pius.
He had four Nephews by his Sister; of which the two youngest through his
Authority, and the respect that was shown him, were made Knights by the King of
Spain. The eldest, who had married King Ferdinand's Daughter, was made Duke of
Malphi; and the second, whom Pius (as I told you before) had made a Cardinal,
lives yet in such repute of integrity and Virtue, that there is nothing wanting
in him that is required in an excellent Person: being adorned with Wit,
Manners, Policy, Religion, Modesty and Gravity. But to return to Pius; who
never omitted his Studies though he were advanced to such an eminent Station.
When he was a Youth indeed and not yet initiated into Divinity, he set out
Poems, that were rather light, and jocular, than serious and grave: and yet
sometimes even in them he was elevated, nor did he want satirical sharpness
amidst his merry Conceits. There are Epigrams of his extant, that are full of
Wit, and he is said to have written about three thousand Verses, which were
lost most part of 'em at Basil. The remainder of his life he wrote in Prose
only, his grand Affairs rather inclining him to it; but he also loved a mixed
Style, more fit for Philosophy. He set forth several Books of Dialogues about
the Power of the Council at Basil, about the Rise of Nile, of Hunting, of
Destiny, of God's Prescience, and of the Heresy in Bohemia. He left an
imperfect Dialogue which he began against the Turks in defense of Christianity.
He digested his Epistles into their several occasions and seasons when they
were written: and those that he wrote when he was a Layman, a Clergy, a Bishop,
or Pope he put into distinct Tomes: Wherein he excites Kings, Princes, and
others to engage in the War for Religion. There is an Epistle of his extant
which he wrote to the Turk, to persuade him from Mahometanism to the Christian
Faith. He also wrote a Book about the Life of Courtiers; as likewise a Grammar
for Ladislaus the young King of Hungary. He farthermore composed thirty two
Orations, exhorting Kings, Princes, and Commonwealths to Peace, and in defense
of Religion, to promote the quiet and Concord of the whole World. He perfected
the History of Bohemia, but left that of Austria imperfect. And though he was
upon a History of all the remarkable Actions in his Time, yet he was never
able, for his business, to finish it. He wrote twelve Books and began the
thirteenth of things done by himself. His Style was soft and easy, in which he
made several excellent, and pertinent Sermons. For he could readily move the
Affections with handsome and graceful Expressions. He very aptly describes
situations of Places and Rivers, assuming various ways of Eloquence, as the
occasion required. He was well acquainted with Antiquity; nor could any Town be
mentioned, but he could tell its rise and situation: besides that he would give
an account in what Age famous Men flourished. He would sometimes take notice of
Mimicks for his pleasure: and left many Sayings behind him, of which I thought
fit to add some to this account of his Life: to wit; That the Divine Nature was
better understood by Believing than by Disputing. That all Sects though
confirmed by humane Authority yet wanted Reason. That the Christian ought to be
received upon its own credit, though it had never been backed with Miracles.
That there were three Persons in the Godhead, not proved to be so by Reason,
but by considering who said so. That those Men who pretended to measure the
Heavens and the Earth were rather bold than certain what they did was right.
That to find out the motion of the Stars had more pleasure in it, than pro^it.
That God's Friends enjoyed both this Life and that to come. That without Virtue
there was no true Joy. That as a covetous Man is never satisfied with Money, so
a Learned Man should not be with Knowledge; But that he who knew never so much,
might yet find somewhat to be studied. That common Men should value Learning as
Silver, Noblemen, as Gold, and Princes as Jewels. That good Physicians did not
seek the Money but the health of the party diseased. That a florid Speech did
not move wise Men but Fools. That those Laws are Sacred which restrain
Licentiousness. That the Laws had Power over the Commonalty, but were feeble to
the greater sort. That great Controversies were decided by the Sword and not by
the Laws. A Citizen should look upon his Family as subject to the City, the
City to his Country, his Country to the World, and the World to God. That the
chief place with Kings was slippery. That as all Rivers run into the Sea, so do
all Vices into Courts. That Flatterers draw Kings whether they please. That
Kings hearken to none more easily than to Sycophants. That the tongue of a
Flatterer was a King's greatest Plague. That a King, who would trust no body
was good for nothing, and he that believed every body was no better. That it is
necessary he that governs many should himself be ruled by many. That he
deserved not the name of a King who measured the Public by his private
abvantage. That he who neglected holy Duties did not deserve the Church
Revenue, nor a King his Taxes, that did not constant Justice. He said those
that went to Law were the Birds, the Court, the Field, the Judge, the Net, and
the Lawyers, the Fowlers. That Men ought to be presented to Dignities and not
Dignities to the Men. That some Men had Offices and did not deserve 'em, whilst
others deserved 'em and had 'em not. That the burden of a Pope was heavy, but
he was happy who bore it stoutly. That an illiterate Bishop was like an Ass.
That ill Physicians killed the body, and ignorant Priests the Soul. That a
wandering Monk was the Devil's Bondslave. That Virtue had enriched the Clergy,
but Vice made 'em poor. That there was great reason for the prohibiting of
Priests to marry, but greater for allowing it again. That no Treasure was
preferrable to a faithful Friend. That Life was like a Friend and Envy like
Death. That he cherishes an Enemy who pardons his Son too often. That a
covetous Man never pleases any body but by his Death. That Men's faults are
concealed by Liberality, and discovered by Avarice. That it was a slavish Vice
to tell Lies. That the Use of Wine had augmented the Cares and the Distempers
of mankind. That a Man ought to take as much Wine as would raise and not
overwhelm his Soul. That Lust did fully and stain every age of Man, but quite
extinguish old Age. That Gold it self, and Jewels could not purchase Content.
That it was pleasant to the good, but terrible to the bad, to die. That a noble
Death was to be preferred before a dishonorable Life in the Opinion of all
Philosophers.

And this is all or most that can be written of Pius: except I add, that he
canonized St. Catharine of Siena; and laid up St. Andrew's head, that was sent
from Morea to Rome* in St. Peter's Church with great Veneration, and
Processions performed by the Clergy and People, in a Chapel built on purpose:
after he had cleared the Church in that place especially, and removed the
Sepulchers of some Popes and Cardinals, that took up too much room.

PAVL II.
PAVL the Second, formerly called Peter Barbo, a Venetian, (whose Father's Name
was Nicolas and his Mothers Polyxena) Cardinal Priest of St. Marks, was made
Pope August 30. 1664. being Pope Eugenius's Nephew by his Sister, he was just
going as a Merchant to Sea (an Employment not ungentile among the Venetians,
and not disapproved of by Solon) and having carried his Scritore, and other
Implements on Board, he heard that his Uncle Gabriel Condelmerius was chosen
Pope. Whereupon he stayed ashore, and at the request of his Friends and his
elder Brother Paul Barbo, applied himself to his Book though he was pretty well
in years, under the Discipline and tutelage of James Ricionius, who used to
commend his Diligence. He had also other Masters, but made no great proficency,
considering his Age; however he preferred 'em all when he came to be Pope
(excepting only Ricion) to show that it was none of their faults he was not
made a Scholar. But Paul Barbo who was a stout and a wise Man, and knew his
Brother's nature inclined him rather to ease than business, entreated Eugenius
(whom he went to visit at Florence) to send for Peter, and give him some
Ecclesiastical preferment. He did so, and Peter was made first Archdeacon of
Bologna, with which not long after he held the Bishopric of Cervia in
Commendam, and was made a Protonotary; one of that Rank who receive the
greatest Fees. In this condition he lived for some years, till at last he was
made a Cardinal at the same time with Alouisius, a Physician of Padua, whom
they afterward called Patriarch and Chamberlain: which was done at the request
of some Friends of Eugenius's, who desired to have a Man that might thwart
Alouisius upon occasion. And indeed it happened afterward that they grew such
Enemies as never were known, by the insinuations of others especially whose
interest it was to foment the Quarrel. For Peter was vexed that he should be
inferior to any Man about Eugenius, since he was his Nephew, and of a
Patrician Family in Venice. Upon this account he fell out most grievously with
Francis Condelmerius the Vice Chancellor, who was Eugenius's Cousin-german:
and when he died, he turned all his fury upon the Patriarch, though they two
had been often seemingly reconciled by the intercession of Friends. Hereupon
they were such Enemies to one another in several Popes Reigns, that they did
not spare each others either Estate, or honor: but mutually reviled each other
in words, which I will not relate, lest I should seem to believe 'em. But when
Eugenius was dead and Nicolas the Fifth in his place, he prevailed so far upon
him by his kindness and flattery, that he not only got the uppermost place of
all his Nation in Nicolas's Court, but by assistance of Nicolas's Brother, did
so animate him against Alouisius, that he retrenched the Chamberlain's Office.
For Peter Barbo was naturally fair spoken, and could feign good nature, when
occasion served. But he was sometimes so mean spirited, that when he could not
obtain what he aimed at by praying, entreating, and requesting, he would join
tears to his Petitions to make them the sooner believed. And therefore Pope
Pius used sometimes to call him the godly Mary, by way of joke. He also used
this wheedle with Calistus, and persuaded him to send Alouisius with certain
Galleys against the Turk; showing him by Argument that such a Person was
fittest for such an Expedition, because he had not only been a Commander
formerly, but had stoutly defended the Church-patrimony against all its
Enemies. Peter being at last delivered from that eyesore, made Calistus always
so far of his Opinion, that he used no bodies advice more than his, as long as
he lived. So that he easily obtained of the Pope whatever he asked either for
himself or his Friends. For he was ready to do friendships and kindnesses for
any Man whom he undertook to protect or assist not only before the great Men
in general, but with the Pope also. Yea such was his humanity, that he would
visit his Domestics that were sick (if they were Men of any account) and apply
Remedies to 'em. For he had always at home Medicaments brought from Venice,
with Oil, Treacle, or other things fit for Medicines; and some of these he
often sent to the sick. He took care that the Wills of sick People should be
entrusted with himself rather than any body, to dispose of as he thought fit;
for if any thing in them concerned him, he presently sold part of the goods by
Auction, and turned it into Money for his own use. He was pleased with the
Conversation of some particular Romans, whom he often invited to Dine with him,
for his diversion: and was often very well pleased at the Wit, Mimickry, Gibes,
Taunts and civil Affronts that came from Priabisius and Francis Malacaro. By
this means he engaged the respect of the Citizens of Rome and even the
Courtiers also. But that he might not seem powerful at home only, he
endeavored to make an Interest abroad too. For he went into Campagna di Roma
to appease certain People that were at variance about their Confines: and
whilst he endeavored to reconcile the Count d' Aversa to Neapolio Vrsin, he
had like to have been taken and put into Prison for words which the Count
resented very highly. Wherefore he went away without his Errand, and from that
time always showed himself Aversa's Enemy. After that Calixtus died, into whose
room Pius succeeded, when he, endeavoring to change his Bishopric of Vincenza
for that of Padua, by troublesome importunities, and requests, so far provoked
Pope Pius and the Venetians, that they turned out his Brother Paul from being a
Senator, and interdicted him from enjoying any Church Benefice, if he would not
alter his mind. At which the Man was so angry that he waited only for a time
to revenge himself, and was very invective in the mean while against those,
that obstructed his Design, But when Pius was dead and he put in his place, he
no sooner came to the honor but immediately he turned our all the Clerks of
the Breves, which Pius had put in, pretending they were either useless or
unlearned: whether he had so promised, or that he hated Pius's Acts and
Decrees, no body can tell. For he stripped them of their goods and preferments
without hearing what they could say for themselves, whom he ought to have
invited from all parts of the World with Encouragements and Rewards; that
College being then full of good and learned Men. For there were Men very
skilful in the Laws both Divine and Humane: as likewise Poets and Orators, who
were as great Ornaments to the Court, as that was honor to them; yet Paul
turned 'em all out, though it had been ordered by Letters Apostolic and the
Judges of the Pontifical Treasury, that no Man who bought his place honestly
should be put out of it. And yet those that were concerned did what they could
to change his mind: and among the rest I entreated him, that it might be
referred to the public Judges, whom they call Auditors of the Rota. At which
he looked upon me with a stern aspect, and told me, Do you (said he) refer me
to Judges, as if you were ignorant, that all the Laws were laid up in my
Breast? I am resolved (said he); let 'em all be gone whither they will I value
'em not; I am Pope, and I may do as I please, either in rescinding or approving
the acts of others. When we heard this severe Sentence, we traveled about and
strove to roll an unmovable stone, attending Persons of the Court Day and
Night, and vainly beseeching every mean Servant to procure us admission to the
Pope. For we were rejected with reproachful Language, as if we had been
excommunicated persons, or Pagans. But notwithstanding we attended twenty
Nights together; because he did nothing in a manner, but what he did by Night.
At last I was so concerned for the disgrace which he put upon us, that (seeing
I and my Associates could not come to speak with him) I was resolved to send
him a Letter, which I wrote to this purpose: If you had power to strip us of
all we had just and lawful right to, then it ought to be in our power to
complain of the injury and disgrace that you have done us. And therefore seeing
we are rejected by you with so much ignominy, we will appeal to all the Kings
and Princes far and near, and desire 'em to convene a Council, where you may be
forced to show thy reason, why thou robbest us of our Livelihoods: When he had
read the Letter, he sent for Platina, as a Traitor; put him into Prison and
fettered him; and then sent Theodore, Bishop of Treviso, to examine him. He
soon concluded me guilty, for dispersing Libels against Paul, and mentioning a
Council. The first Objection I thus refuted; to wit, That those were called
Libels, in which the Name of the Writer was concealed; but my name was at the
bottom of the Letter, and therefore it was no Libel. And as to my making
mention of a Council; That I did not think so great a fault, seeing the
fundamentals of true Faith were established by the holy Fathers in Synods,
which had been sown by our Savior and his Disciples, to the end, that all both
great and small might live peaceably together and have right done them. And
that by the Laws of Rome, not only private but public persons were to give an
account of their lives and how they discharged their Trusts. But when I could
do no good this way, I was forced to be content and lie in massy Chains in the
middle of Winter without any fire, and in an high Tower, which was exposed to
all the Winds that blew for four months together. At last Paul was tired with
the importunity of Francis Gonzaga Cardinal of Mantua, and freed me from the
noisome Prison, though I could hardly stand upon my Legs; and withal he bids me
not stir from the City: For (says he) if you go into India, Paul will fetch you
back. I obeyed his Commands; and stayed three years in the City, hoping to find
some remedy for my misfortunes. But Paul, when he was Crowned, according to
custom, remembering that the Canons Regular were formerly turned out of St.
Giovanni Laterano by Calixtus, though Eugenius had placed 'em there; he
recalled 'em, to perform Divine Service apart from the Canons Secular. And
because he had a mind to extirpate the name of Seculars from that place, if any
one of 'em died, he put no body into his place; or if any Benefice were vacant,
he made them renounce their Canonships and so translated 'em to other Churches,
till at length the profits of that Church being reduced into one body might
satisfy the Canons Regular without any charge to him, he being before forced
to keep 'em, they were so poor. But by this means Paul did much estrange the
Citizens minds and affections from him: because (as they said) he gave those
Revenues which their Forefathers had settled (instead of Citizens) to foreiners.
Nor was Paul content to do so, but he spoke to some Canons by themselves, and
threatened 'em till they quitted their Canonries. Some indeed contemned his
Menaces and expected an opportunity of vindicating their Liberty, which
happened not till he was dead. It was now reported that the Turks had taken
most part of Epirus and were coming into Sclavonia, he therefore sent Nuncio's
immediately to all Kings and Princes, to advise 'em, to compose their civil
Discords and make War against the Turk the common Enemy; but there was nothing
done in it, because they were up to the ears in blood one among another: the
Germans in one part and the English in an other, some of whom desired a new
King, others would retain their old one. And then the Spanish and French
Princes, feared their King's Power, who attempted to bring them to a total
subjection. But more than this, the King of Bohemia's Apostasy vexed Paul very
much, in that he withdrew himself from the Church of Christ by little and
little; and therefore he designed to send the King of Hungary with an Army
against him, if the War which he had undertaken against the Turks, would give
him leisure; and that he could compose the difference between the King and the
Emperor. For when Ladislaus King of Hungary and his Nephew was dead, without
issue, the Emperor himself pretended a right to that Kingdom, which Matthias
Son to the Vaivod was in possession of. Thereupon Paul thought it best to defer
that matter till another time, and applied himself to make up some breaches
between certain Citizens of Rome. For there was a quarrel between James Son to
John Alberinus, and Felix Nephew to Anthony Capharellus: and therefore he sent
for the two old Gentlemen, the Father and Uncle of 'em, and caused 'em to put
in Sureties, that they would be friends, though they stood out a good while.
But James Son to Alberinus, who could not endure that any Affront should be put
upon his Father, attempted soon after to murder Anthony Capharellus, and gave
him several such grievous wounds that he left him for dead. At which Paul was
very angry, that Alberinus's Son had broken his Father's Oath, and therefore he
demolished their Houses, confiscated all their goods and banished them from the
City, but he afterward recalled 'em and took 'em into favor, restoring all
their goods; and made Peace between the parties after they had been both
sometime in Prison. In the year 1465. Alouisius Patavinus the Pope's
Chamberlain died. He was Cardinal-Priest of St. Laurence, a very rich Man and
prudent in the management of business, but not so wise toward his later end:
in that he left most of his Estate to his two Brothers who were called
Scarampi. Men that were good Gentlemen, but yet not worthy of such a vast
fortune as he had got out of the Church Revenues (I know what People thought)
whereupon Paul, who had given him free leave to make a Will and bequeath it to
whom he pleased, seized upon the Estate, took the Scarampi who had fled and
kept 'em (though in no scandalous place) till he had those things brought him
which were carried away to Florence; which done, he freed the Scarampi, to whom
he gave a good share, and was more liberal to the other Legatees than the
Testator himself had been. And thus Alouisius's Estate, which he got with great
industry and preserved with greater, (as if in the strength of so much Wealth
he could have lived Mathusalem's Age) was seized and distributed by one with
whom he had had so many quarrels, ill words and Animosities, and before whom he
would have chosen the Turk for his Executor. Nor was Divine Providence thus
satisfied, but was pleased that his body also which was already buried should
be made a prey; for the Grave was opened in the Nightime by those to whom he
had given the Revenues of St. Laurence in Damaso, and he stripped of a Ring and
all his Cloths. But indeed Paul, when he knew of it, was very angry at them.
About that time Frederick a fine Youth, Son to Ferdinand, who passing to
Millain, to fetch Francis Sforza's Daughter, his Brother's Wife, to Naples,
arrived at Rome, where he was met by the Nobility and Rhoderick the
Vicechancelour, and kindly entertained by the Pope himself, who presented him
with a Rose, which the Popes use to give to some Christian Prince every year.
Ferdinand now minding to punish those of his own Kingdom, who had revolted from
him when he was engaged with the French, sent some Forces to set upon the Duke
of Sora; but the Pope was desirous to divert that War, and therefore sent the
Archbishop of Millain thither with all speed, to pray him, that he would send
those Men to him (as he was obliged by his Tenure to do) because he had a
Design to destroy and take off the Count Aversa's Sons that had denied
Obedience to the Church. For about that time the Count Aversa died, when Paul
was made Pope; and his body was brought to Rome, where it was buried in St.
Mary's the Great. The King, who was Deiphobus's bitter Enemy, as having been
attempted by him with Plots, Poison and open force in the late War, gave Order
to the Captains of his Army, cited to go where the Pope bad them, upon the
first Summons. He had Deiphobus and Francis to him before and given 'em charge
to clear the Road of Thieves, (who used to rob Travelers at the very Gates of
Rome, as it were) and that they should restore Caprarola (a Town so called) to
the Son of Securanza, the greatest part of whose Estate they had possessed
themselves of: they not only refused to do either, but threatened him, and
bragged that they were Count Aversa's Sons, nor would they spare any one that
gave 'em a provocation. Paul therefore having privately prepared all things
that were necessary for a War, with assistance of the King's Forces, he
surprised and subdued 'em within fourteen days after he attaqued 'em, reducing
nine Castles under the jurisdiction of the Church: of which some were so well
fortified both by Art and Nature, that they seemed impregnable. Deiphobus
fearing lest if he were taken he should be sent to the King, made his escape.
But Francis his Brother and his Son were taken and kept five years in Castle
St. Angelo, till upon the Creation of Sixtus, they were freed. And hence
afterward arose great enmity between the Pope and the King; when Ferdinand
demanded that Paul would remit the Tribute which he was to pay the Church, as a
reward for his great merits: and would retrench or take off part of it for the
future, seeing his Uncle enjoyed the Kingdom of Sicily, though he paid Tribute
for that and Naples too: and told him, That he ought to consider his Deserts
and what might happen; for that he had always some Batalions in Arms, not more
upon his own than upon the Pope's account as he found in the late War against
the Aversans. Paul on the other hand recounted the Churches merits toward
Ferdinand; and so they spun out the Debate a long time by these kind of
wranglings, each of 'em seeking an opportunity to recover their Right. In the
mean time the King was very cautious how he caused any new Commotions, because
he feared James Picenninus's Power, who had Sulmona in Abruzzo, and some other
Towns in his possession: whom afterward his Father-in-law Francis Sfortia sent
to the King, who gave him his word that he should come and go in safety when he
pleased. But all things did not go according to James's expectation: for he was
taken at Naples by Ferdinand, as so was his Son, and there thrown into Prison,
and not long after put to Death; though there was a false report given out,
that he fell down in the Prison and broke his Leg, as he was inconsiderately
staring through the Window to see the King's Galleys that came from Ischia,
with Victory over the French. There were who thought him still alive: which I
can never believe, because there was no Man in all Italy more fit (if you look
upon him as a Soldier) to subvert the Government of King Ferdinand. The Duke of
Millain's Daughter, when she heard of it, tarried by the way at Siena, as she
was going to her Husband at Naples, to persuade the World, that her Father was
not any way concerned with Ferdinand in contriving the Death of Picenninus. But
what People thought of it, we very well know. There were likewise some, that
said, the Pope knew of it before hand, because at that time the Archbishop of
Millain went often from the Pope to the King, and from the King back again: and
because Paul said, when he heard of his Imprisonment, that the Judge of Appeals
was taken off. But that of Virgil is too true, Nescia men's hominum fati,
sortisque futurae.
Little do Men their future Fortune know.
For Paul could not have made use of any one to fit to curb Ferdinand as James
Picenninus was, if he had been alive, when their Debate arose about the
Tribute, for which a War was like to have been proclaimed. For when he had kept
his Daughter-in-laws, and his Son's Wedding, and that thereby and by the death
of James his Kingdom was settled, Ferdinand was instant with the Pope, that he
would retrench the Tribute, and give him back certain Towns which belonged to
the Kingdom but were in possession of the Church. Thereupon Paul sent to him
Bartholomew Roverella, Cardinal Priest of St. Clements, as Legate; who did in
some measure satisfy the King. And at that time I believe, they both feared,
lest the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, which all Men were then astonished at,
might portend some changes in Government. Nor can you think the heavenly Bodies
have no efficacy; for the year after Francis Sfortia Duke of Millain and Genoua
died. For he had gotten Genoua two years before, being after a long War
surrendered by the Citizens. For they having rejected the French Government
which they had formerly courted, killed six thousand of the French under the
Nose of King Renatus, who came with some Galleys well armed, to retrieve the
City that had now revolted from the French. When Francis Sfortia Duke of
Millain was dead, Paul summoned the Cardinals to consult what was to be done.
They all concluded that he must send Letters and Nuncioes to all the Princes of
Italy, and to all States, to persuade 'em against Innovations, and to maintain
the established Peace; especially at that unhappy time when we were so
threatened by the Turk the common Enemy. And afterward he sent the Bishop of
Conca to Millain, to persuade that State, to have regard to the Allegiance they
had sworn to Galeatius, Francis's Son. At that time Galeatius was absent in
France, whither his Father had sent him with an Army, to assist King Lewis
against the Princes of his Kingdom, that acknowledged not his Authority. For
Francis was bound by the League he made with him, when he possessed himself of
Genoa, to supply him with some Auxiliaries: Besides the Allegiance which they
had contracted obliged him to it; for he had married the Sister of the Queen
and the Duke of Savoy. When he heard of his Father's Death, he relinquished the
War which he engaged in upon the King's account against the Duke of Burgundy,
and going from Lions returned with a small Retinue and in a disguise to his own
Country, where he peaceably possessed himself of his paternal inheritance by
the help of his Mother who kept the people in Obedience till he came. But Paul,
when the Affairs of Italy were thus composed, hearing that the Rhodian Soldiers
were ready to starve, he summoned the Grand Master (and the great Clergymen) to
Rome, to consider of a Relief, who after frequent meetings in St. Peter's, died
for grief and Age, and was buried in that Church, not far from St. Andrew's
Chapel: in whose room Charles Vrsin was chosen and sent immediately to defend
the Island. In the mean time when Paul heard that there were a great many
Heretics in Tagliacozzo, he having heard their cause severely branded the Lord
of the place, eight Men and six Women (which were caught and brought before
him) being those that were most obstinate; but dealt more favorably with those
that confessed their Error and begged pardon. They were of those perverse sort
of Heretics who say, there never was any true Vicar of Christ since St. Peter,
but who had imitated Christ's Poverty. Then he increased the number of
Cardinals; and made ten at one time, of which number were Francis of Savona
General of the Order of Minors, M. Barbo, Bishop of Vincenza, whose Advice he
always took in great Affairs, Oliver Archbishop of Naples, Amicus Bishop of
Aquila, and Theodore Montferrat; and the rest were partly French, Hungarians
and English. Having thus augmented the College, he applied himself wholly to
settle the peace of Italy. For certain Florentines, who were banished by Peter
Medices's Faction in a civil Tumult (as Detesalvus Neronius, Angelus
Accioiolus, and Nicolas Soderinus) had persuaded Bartholomew of Bergamo, who
had a good Army of Horse and Foot, to march into Tuscany, and restore them and
all the other banished Persons to their Country, the Venetians underhand
lending their assistance; these seemed to be able and to design to overthrow
the State of Italy at first dash. But Galeatius D. of Milan with the Forces of
the King and of the Florentine people posting himself in his way, he slackened
his march and endeavored to get the better rather by protracting the War than
by fighting. One fierce Battle however under the conduct of the Count of Vrbin
they fought in the Territories of Bologna near a Town called Ricardina, where
no doubt the Bergamese had been utterly ruined, if Galeatius had been there;
but he was gone to Florence a little before, to settle matters relating to the
War. Those that were present at this Battle say, that it was fought with the
greatest obstinacy and the most numerous slaughters of any in our Age. But now
the Venetians bethink themselves for their own safety, rather than that of the
Bergamese, and though they sent some Forces to his assistance, yet they sought
earnestly a Peace, and referred the whole matter to the Pope; who also lying
under great apprehensions, if the King of Naples and Duke of Millain should
obtain a complete Victory, urged on the Peace too. It was indeed the Opinion of
many Men of Understanding, that the Pope was not altogether against
Bartholomew's Design, knowing that if an alteration were made in the Government
of Florence, he might with greater facility make War upon Ferdinand, whom he so
hated, that he endeavored to raise him up more Enemies in Italy. Having
hereupon called together the Ambassadors of the several Princes, he mediated a
Peace upon these terms, That each Party should restore what they had taken in
the War, That Bartholomew should retire with his Forces into Lombardy, and That
for the rest the Conditions of that Peace should be observed, which had been
made at Lodi between Francis Sforza and the Venetians. One Point was yet to be
Disputed, Whether the Duke of Savoy and his Brother Philip should be included
in this Peace, who that year taking pay of the Venetians, had ravaged
Galeatius's Country with their Forces. Galeatius denied to yield to it,
professing no Man should ever be his Ally and Friend, who was an Enemy to the
King of France. But Paul with Promises and fair words made shift to get
Galeatius's Ambassador to sign it contrary to his Master's order, which so
enraged Galeatius that he banished the said Ambassador, Lorenzo da Pesaro, and
so infested the Savoyards, that they were forced to sue for Peace, which by the
intercession of the Queen of France and Duchess of Milan, both Sisters to the
Duke of Savoy, they at last procured, upon conditions proposed by the King of
France. Affairs thus settled, Paul had a little leisure; and instituted
sumptuous Plays, and made noble Feasts after the ancient manner for the people
of Rome, Vianesius of Bologna, Vice-Chamberlain to his Holiness taking care of
them. He proposed eight Cloaks to be run for each day in the Carneval; old Men,
middle-ag'd, young Men, nay Jews, took their fortune in the Races, as also did
even Horses, Mares, Asses, Buffals, to the incredible pleasure of the
Spectators. The Race was from Domitian's Arch to St. Mark's Church, where the
Pope himself stood to behold it with great satisfaction; who after the sport
was over gave to every Boy that ran (daubed all over with Dirt) a Carlin [a
piece of Money]. But Paul amidst all this public Jollity was on a sudden
seized with a terror unexpected; for news was brought him, that several young
Men, whose Ringleader was one Callimaco, had formed a Plot against him; and
the Narrative of it was no sooner made out to him, when (he being already
almost dead with fear) comes a Fellow that called himself the Philosopher, a
sad Wretch and a banished Man, who (first begging pardon for his life and
liberty to live in his Country) shams a Story upon him, that he saw in the Wood
of Velitre, one Luca Tozzo, a Citizen of Rome but banished, with a great number
of other Banditi, and that they were just coming upon him. This made Paul
tremble for fear, apprehending that now, being attacked both without and
within, he should surely be undone: and therefore he clapped up a great many both
Citizens and Courtiers. Vianesius gave him occasions of fear, and so did any
one about him who from a turn of Affairs could probably expect an augmentation
either of Dignity or Estate. They broke up Men's Houses without distinction, and
dragged to Prison any body they suspected, and lest I should have missed my
share in so great a calamity, they came by Night and set a Guard about my
House, broke open the Windows and Doors, and seized my Servant Demetrius a
Lucchese, who told them I supped that Night with the Cardinal of Mantua; hither
then they fly and taking me in his Chamber, they bring me before Paul, who as
soon as he saw me, Are you too (says he) in the Plot with Callimaco against me?
But I, conscious of my Innocence, answered him so fearlesly, that no sign of
guilt appeared in me. He being negligently dressed and looking pale urged me
still, and sometimes threatened me with Torments and sometimes with Death,
unless I would confess. I seeing all places full of outrage and tumults, and
fearing lest we should suffer mischief, by reason of the terror and rage that
I saw had possessed them, showed many reasons, why I could not believe
Callimaco would attempt nor so much as to think of any such Design, being
without cunning, an ill speaker, unactive, regardless, without Wealth, wanting
Forces, Dependents, Ammunition, and beside being almost blind; more drowsy
than P. Lentulus and more unfit for action, by means of his corpulence, than L.
Crassus. Moreover, he was no Citizen of Rome, that he should concern himself
for the liberty of his Country; nor was he a Prelate that upon the taking off
of Paul, he should expect the Papacy. What could Callimaco do? What dare he do?
Was he good either at Discourse or Action? Had he listed any Men to assist him
in bringing about so important a Design; unless you will make Glaucus and
Petreius, the Companions of his flight, to be other Gabinii and Statilii. At
this Paul turns him to Vianesius, and looking sternly upon me, (says he) this
Man is to be forced with the Rack to confess the truth; for he understands the
true Art of Plotting. Would to God Paul had dealt more considerately with me,
he had not then applied tortures to me. For when the Truth is to be gathered
from circumstances, the matter of fact not being sufficiently made out, then
those Actions are to be taken notice of that either preceded or ensued upon the
Enterprise; the life of the Complotter is to be considered and his way of
living, his Ambition and greediness, either of wealth or honor, and what he
had before talked or written or done, that looked that way, But Paul without
regard had to any of these, clapped us all up in Jail: and yet taking advice of
some who knew the thing well enough and knew that Luca Tozzo had never departed
a foot from the City of Naples, to create so great a commotion with such danger
to himself, he recalled a Proclamation he had published three days before,
wherein he had proposed rewards to them that should bring his Traitor Luca to
him either alive or dead, not discharging however the Quadratii, whom he had
seized and tortured upon suspicion of the same. He designed it should be
thought that there was something in it yet undiscovered, lest he should be
charged with levity. But Paul being rid of that fear, begins to think of us;
and sends into the Castle Vianesius, John Francisco, Sanga of Chiozza and one
of his Guard, to force us with any kind of torture to confess what we knew
nothing of. The first and second day many were put to the Rack, of whom a great
part died of their pains under the hands of the Executioner. You would have
taken Castle St. Angelo for Phalaris his Bull, the hollow Vault did so resound
with the cries of those miserable young Men. Lucidus as innocent a Man as any
in the World suffered the Rack, as did Marsus Demetrius and Augustinus Campanus
a hopeful young Man and an honor to his Age for Wit and Learning, who I think
died soon after of pain and anguish. The Tormenters were yet not satisfied,
though weary, having tortured twenty Men in those two days, but sent for me to
take my turn too. The Executioners set themselves to their business, the
Instruments of Torture were ready, I was stripped, torn and used like a Murderer
or a Thief; whilst Vianesius sat like another Minos upon a Tapestry-Seat, as if
he had been at a Wedding or rather at Atreus and Tantalus's Feast; a Man (I
say) in Holy Orders whom the Ecclesiastical Canons forbid to be Inquisitors by
Torture upon Lay men, lest if Death follow, as it often does, they should
become Irregular (as they term it) and profane. And to add to my misery, while
wretched I hung on the Rack in torment, he played with a Jewel that Sanga had,
asking him of what Girl he had got that Love-token; and then the Love-talk
being over, he turns to me and bids me give him a full Narrative of the
Conspiracy or rather Sham-Plot contrived by Callimaco, and to tell him why
Pomponio writing to me from Venice should call me Holy Father? What, says he,
the Conspirators had agreed to make you Pope! Beside he examined me whether I
had not sent Letters by Pomponio to the Emperor or any other Christian Prince
in order to raise a Schism or procure a Council? I answered that I never was a
party in the Counsels of Callimaco, for there was an old grudg between us; that
I knew not why Pomponio should call me Holy Father, himself could best tell,
who, he said, was to be brought Prisoner quickly; as for the Popedom, they need
not trouble their heads about me, I having been always content with a private
life; that I never sent any Letter to the Emperor, or made use of Pomponio to
that purpose, which also might be known from him. At last having a little
pleased but not satisfied himself with my Tortures, he ordered me to be let
down, that I might undergo torments much greater in the Evening. I was carried
half dead into my Chamber, but not long after, the Inquisitors having dined,
and drunk lustily, I was fetched again, and Lorenzo Archbishop of Spalato was
there. They asked me then what discourse it was that I had with Sigismund
Malatesta who was then in the City? I said, the discourse we had was only
concerning the ancient and modern Learning, way of fighting, and famous Men, or
such like things as are the common subjects of talk. Vianesius then threatened
me bitterly with yet greater tortures, unless I would confess the truth, and
told me he was to come again the next day, advising me in the mean time to
consider where I was and whom I had to do withal. So I was carried back to my
Bedchamber, where I was seized with such extreme pain, that I had rather have
died than endured, all the aches of my shaken and battered limbs coming afresh
upon me. But I was not a little refreshed by the kindness of Angelo Bufalo a
Knight of Rome, who had been committed to Prison a year before by Paul, because
his Son Marcellus had killed Francis Cappocio, which was charged to be done by
his instigation. This Angelo and his Nephew Francis being my Chamber-fellows
did with their own hands assist me both with Food and Physic, otherwise I had
died of pain and want: Two days after Paul's Physician, Christopher of Verona,
came to me from the Pope and bad me have a good heart and hope well of him, and
I should soon have my liberty. I asked him in how long time it might be
expected? Nay (says he frankly in the hearing of every one) not so very soon
neither; lest the Pope should be charged with levity and cruelty for having
with so much noise taken and tortured so many Men and then letting them go
immediately as innocent. But Paul left not the matter so, but altering his mind
upon a running report, accuses those now of Heresy whom he had before charged
with Plotting of Treason. Pomponio was at this time brought from Venice like
another Jugurtha, in bonds to be tried, a downright honest Man and guilty
neither of the Plot nor any other ill thing. Being examined why he changed the
names of the Men he wrote to, he answered boldly as his humor was, that it did
not concern either his Judges or the Pope, under what name he pleased to go, so
that he had no naughty end in it; for that out of respect to Antiquity he was
wont to make use of many ancient names, as spurs to egg on the modern Youth to
a virtuous Emulation. Lucillus also who led a very reserved life in the Country
near Rome, was fetched up before them for Treason, because in a Letter of his
to Campanus which they had intercepted, he had fallen foul upon some body, under
the name of Heliogabalus, for his Love-tricks, but with such concealed
expressions, that no one who was not conscious would take it to himself. Our
diligent Pastor, Vianesius, frequently visiting us with tortures, and having
tormented Petreius the Companion of Callimaco (whom they had taken endeavoring
to make his escape, and he confessing nothing, but saying that the drunken talk
of Callimaco was not to be regarded) casting his eyes about as if he feared we
should have got Wings like Daedalus and fled out of our Prison, he projected
the making a dungeon for us and set Workmen about it. When it was finished he
put into it Francisco Anguillara, Gattalusco, Francisco Alviano, and Giaiomo
Ptolemeo who had already pined away four years in Prison. But not a word yet
could we hear of our freedom. At this time the Emperor came to Rome, (according
to a Vow he had made) with a splendid Attendance, whom Paul entertained with
great magnificence, at the expense of eighteen thousand Ducats. I saw them from
the Castle returning under the same Canopy from the Lateran with a noble
retinue; and Paul stood still upon the Bridge, while the Emperor made several
Knights. The Emperor departing, and Paul by having quartered the greatest part
of his Forces both Horse and Foot in the City, being rid of the fear he had
lest the People should have raised tumults upon him when the Emperor was there,
after we had lain ten months in Jail, he comes to the Castle himself, and that
it might seem, that he made so great ado not without cause, he charged us with
many things, but especially that we had disputed concerning the Immortality of
the Soul, and that we held the Opinion of Plato, which S. Augustine says is very
like to the Christian Faith. It Is with good reason (says the Saint) that Cicero
makes Plato a God among the Philosophers, who certainly out-went them all for
Wit and Understanding: and with him therefore I chose to dispute, because he
reasons concerning the last end of Man and the Divine Nature better than any of
the rest. But, says Paul, By disputing you called the Being of a God into
question. Now this was no more than may be objected to all both Divines and
Philosophers of our times, who for Discourse-sake and that the truth may
appear, do frequently make a question of the beings of Souls and of God and of
all separate Intelligences. Besides, as S. Austin says, those are Heretics, who
defend with earnestness any false Opinion they have taken up. We never declined
sound Discipline, which (as Leo says) is wont to be done by the Ringleaders of
Error, who are deservedly called Heretics, according to S. Jerome, for
maintaining Opinions in opposition to the Church. I could give you an Account
of my Life from my youth till this time, ever since I came to years of
understanding. No ill action can be charged upon me, no theft, no pilfering, no
sacriledg, no cheat upon the public, no murder, no rapine, nor Simony. I have
lived like a Christian, confessed and received the Communion at least once a
year. Nothing ever fell from my mouth against the Faith or relishing of
Heresy. I followed neither Simoniacs, the Carpocratiani, Ophilae, Severiani,
Alogii, Paulini, Manichees, Macedoniani, nor any other heretical faction. But
beside, Paul accused us as too great admirers of Pagan Antiquities, of which no
Man could be more fond than himself, for he procured all the Statues of the
Ancients that he could throughout the City, and placed them in his House which
he had built near the Campidoglio; among the rest he took away a Porphyry Tomb
of S. Constantia out of the Church of S. Agnes, maugre the denial of the Monks
of the place, who yet after Paul's death, got it again of Pope Sixtus. Beside,
after the old Heathen way, he coined an infinite number of Medals with his own
Image, of Gold, Silver and Brass, and laid them in the foundations of his
House; herein imitating rather the ancient Paynims, than S. Peter, Anacletus or
Linus. Upon a debate of our matter before the Court-Bishops and two Friars, one
a Franciscan, the other a Dominican, they agreed all, that nothing could be
charged upon us that savored of Heresy. But Paul coming to the Castle, and
having on purpose excluded Francisco who favored us, that so Leonardo our
Accuser, might speak the more freely, he repeated what he had said the day but
one before; and then asked the Opinion of those that were present, who though
they spoke somewhat to please the Pope, yet they made a light business of it,
and endeavored to persuade him into a milder temper. Amongst them all Lelio
del Val, a Citizen of Rome and an Advocate in the Consistory, defended our
Cause very generously. He confuted all that Leonard had said and what the other
Advocate had asserted; but as they were arguing, mention chanced to be made of
the Academy, which was no sooner said, but M. Barbo Cardinal of S. Mark, cries
out that we were not Academicks but a scandal to the name. Now I cannot think
how we should bring any reproach to it at all: we were neither thieves, nor
pilferers, nor incendiaries, nor prodigal fools; we were sectators of the old
Academy, despising the new as establishing nothing certain upon which Science
might be built; but Paul would not have the Academy so much as mentioned under
pain of being pronounced Heretical, which was a reflection upon good old Plato
and let him look to it. Paul loved in every kind of learning to be thought an
acute and skilful Man; he desired too to go for a facetious Person, so that he
derided and contemned almost all Men. He after a scornful manner asked
Pomponio, what was the name his Parents gave him? who answered he was Binomius
[i.e. had two names] which Paul not understanding, persisted to ask his name
still. At last turning to me, he fell into a rage to such a degree that, beside
charging me with the Plot, Heresy and Treason, of which I had cleared my self;
he upbraided me too with Ingratitude against so kind a Friend as he had been to
me: If it be a kindness for a Man to be turned out of that which he has bought
with his Money without telling any reason; if to be imprisoned, tormented,
disgraced and slandered be a kindness, then Paul was my special bountiful
Friend, and I was very ungrateful, who unmindful of such Courtesies, did not
depart the City in obedience to his command, when I had been so often deceived
by his Promises. He went away threatening us and kept us in Prison a whole year
as I believe he had sworn he would, when he took us first and clapped us up; and
he was not willing to seem forsworn. At length however we were enlarged so far
as to have the liberty of his own House, but not to stir a foot out of it; and
soon after we had the freedom of the Vatican, and in the end, being wearied
with the Intercessions of the Cardinals, he set us free. Not long after I was
sent for by Lewis Gonzaga Duke of Mantua to the Baths, in order to cure my
right Arm which had contracted a great indisposition during my imprisonment;
which Paul forbad me at first to do; promising to do great things for me in a
little time; but I went and returned, Cardinal Bessarion a Person of great wit,
and learning, being Security for my coming back. Paul commended me that I was
as good as my word, and would often boast what a kindness he had for me, and
what great things he would do for me as soon as Borsius d' Este was gone, who
coming to the City with a great Equipage was very magnificently and splendidly
received by him. The same he had often promised to the Ambassadors of Venice
and Milan, who had spoken on my behalf. For two years I was led on or rather
beguiled with these hopes, till at length I resolved to go with the Cardinal of
Mantua to Bononia, of which he was Legate. But Paul forbad me, and (after his
jesting manner) said I had wit enough already, and wanted Wealth rather than
Learning. And now while I was in expectation that I should be relieved after so
many troubles and afflictions, behold the Pope dies of an Apoplexy about two
hours within night, being alone in his Chamber, having been well that day and
held a Consistory. His death happened July 28. 1471. in the sixth year and
tenth month of his Pontificate. As to his Personage, it was Majestic and
becoming a Pope; for he was so portly and tall, that he was easily
distinguishable from the rest, when at Mass; In his dress though he was not
curious yet he was not reputed negligent. Nay, it is said that when he was to
appear in public, he would use to paint his face. In his Pontifical Vestments
he outwent all his Predecessors, especially in his Regno or Mitre, upon which
he laid out a great deal of Money in purchasing at vast rates, Diamonds,
Sapphyrs, Emeralds, Chrysoliths, Jaspers, Unions, and all manner of precious
stones, wherewith adorned like another Aaron he would appear abroad somewhat
more august than a Man, delighting to be seen and admired by every one. To this
purpose sometimes by deferring some usual Solemnities he would keep Strangers
in Town, that so he might be viewed by greater numbers. But lest he alone
should seem to differ from the rest, he made a Decree that none but Cardinals,
should under a Penalty wear red Caps; to whom he had in the first year of his
Popedom given Cloth of that color, to make Horse-Cloths or Mule-Cloths of when
they rode. He was also about to order that Cardinals Caps should be of Silk
Scarlet; but some Persons hindered it by telling him well, that the
Ecclesiastical Pomp was rather to be diminished than increased to the detriment
of the Christian Religion. Before he was made Pope, he used to give out, that
if ever he came to that good fortune, he would give each Cardinal a Castle in
the Country where they might retire conveniently to avoid the Summer-heats of
the City: but when he was once got into the Chair, he thought of nothing less.
However, he endeavored by his Authority and by force too to augment the Power
of the Papacy: For he sent the Bishop of Tricarico into France to hear the
Cause of quarrel between the Duke of Burgundy and the People of Liege, and upon
their reconciliation, to take off the Interdict laid upon the Liegeois for
wrongfully expelling their Bishop; but while the Legate took great pains to
subject all matters to the Pope's Judgment, he and their Bishop too were clapped
up by the Liegeois. Hereupon the Duke of Burgundy makes Peace with the French
King (with whom he was before at War) and with his aid, gives those of Liege
several great defeats and at length sacks their City and sets free the
imprisoned Bishops: Moreover, Paul hearing of the Apostasy of the King of
Bohemia, he by his Legate, Lorenzo Roverella Bishop of Ferrara, raised the
Hungarians and Germans upon him, so that he had certainly cut off both the King
George and his Progeny, and utterly rooted out the Heretics, had not the
Polanders, who laid claim to that Kingdom, held Matthias King of Hungary
employed in War, lest he should have made himself Master of it. He undertook
two Wars of no great moment in Italy, which being not openly declared, but
begun by picqueering Parties, he afterward abandoned. For first he attempted
the seizing the Signeury of Tolfa by cunning wiles, which failing, with open
force, under the conduct of Vianesius he set upon it and besieged it; but the
King's Army (in which the Vrsini served) returning from the War they had now
ended with Bartholomew of Bergamo, on a sudden he raised the Siege in great
disorder, though the Enemy was not within sixty miles of the place; so that
after a long contention in which he had extremely disobliged and almost enraged
the Vrsini against him, he was fain to purchase Tolfa for seventeen thousand
Ducats of Gold, for fear of that potent Family who were related to the Lords of
the place. After the same manner he set upon Robert Malatesta Son of Sigismund,
when having taken the Suburbs of Rimini by a Stratagem, and for sometime having
besieged the City, Lorenzo Archbishop of Spalato being the chief in the
Enterprise, Frederick D. of Vrbin came upon him with the King's Forces and
those of the Florentines, who forced him to raise his Siege, and foiled his
Army shamefully, so that he accepted of a Peace upon very dishonorable terms.
Lorenzo charged the reason of the loss of Rimini upon the niggardliness of his
pay to the Soldiers; and to the great slowness of his Resolution, while through
ignorance in affairs of that nature, he deliberated long about actions which
should be done in a moment. Paul was indeed so awkward at business, that,
except he were driven to it, he would not enter upon any Affair however plain
and unencumbred, nor when begun would he bring it to peofection. This humor of
his, he was wont to boast, had done him great service in many concerns, whereas
(to speak truth) it had been very mischievous both to himself and the Church of
Rome. He yet was very diligent in getting Money, so that he generally entrusted
the disposal of Bishoprics and Benefices to such Courtiers, whose Places being
saleable, nothing could be bestowed without a Present. All Offices indeed in
his time were set to sale, whereby it came to pass, that he who had a mind to a
Bishopric or Benefice, would purchase of him at a good rate some other Office,
and so get what he would have, in spite of any other Candidates, who could
pretend upon the score of either Learning or good Life to be capable of
whatsoever honor or preferment. Beside when Bishoprics were vacant, he would
remove the more worthy (as he called them) to the more wealthy Seat, by these
Translations raising vast Sums of Money, because more Annates became due at the
same time. He also allowed the purchasing of Salaries. With these Moneys he
would sometimes be very liberal, giving exhibitions to the poorer Cardinals and
Bishops, and to Princes or Noblemen that were driven out of their Country, and
relieving poor Maidens, Widows and sick People. He took great care too, that
Corn and all manner of Victuals should be afforded cheaper at Rome than
formerly. He was at the charge of several magnificent Buildings near Saint
Mark's and in the Vatican. An instance of his Munificence was, the Hunting
which with great charge he caused to be represented in the Campo di Merula, for
the entertainment of the Duke of Ferrara: The management of which was committed
to his Nephew by his Sister, whom he had made Cardinal of S. Lucia, and at the
same time conferred the like honor of a Cardinal on Baptista Zeno his other
Nephew. It was a hard thing to gain access to him, considering he would sleep
in the daytime and be awake in the night looking over his Jewels and precious
Stones; and if after long waiting you came into his presence, you might hear
him indeed, but your self could not be heard; he was so very talkative. He was
morose and peevish as well to his Courtiers as Strangers, and would often alter
his mind from what he had promised. He had a great mind to be thought a
politic Man, and would therefore give very ambiguous answers; so that he
continued not long his Friendships with any Princes or Commonwealths, himself
having several different Interests. He loved to have great variety of Dishes at
his Table, and generally eat of the worst; but would be clamorous if what he
used to like were not provided. He drank often, but his Wine was small and
diluted with Water. He loved Melons, Crabs, Sweetmeats, Fish and Bacon; which
odd kind of Diet, I believe, caused the Apoplexy of which he died; for the day
before his death he had eat two very large Melons. He was reputed a just and
yet a merciful Man; endeavoring to amend even Thieves, Murderers, Traitors and
perjured Villains, by tedious Imprisonment. But he was a great Enemy and
Despiser of Human Learning, branding those for Heretics that gave their minds
to it: and dissuading the People of Rome from putting their Children to be
brought up to it, telling them that it was enough if they had learned to write
and read. He was known to be ill-condition'd and inexorable to Petitioners, not
only denying, but reproaching and abusing them; but yet he would make a show
of doing less than he would do. Lastly, one thing he was highly to be commended
for, that he kept no ill Men about him; but contained his Family and all his
Domestics in their due bounds; that their pride and insolence might not procure
him the hate of the great Men and People of Rome.

The End of the Lives of the POPES,
Written by B. Platina.
A CONTINUATION OF THE Lives of the Popes.
SIXTVS IV.
FRANCIS della Rovere, born the 21. of July, Anno 1414. at Celle, a Village
near Savona, a City under the Dominion of the Republic of Genoua, was created
Pope on the 9th. of August, 1471. he was (as some write) the Son of a
Fisherman: tho Onofrio Panvinio in the History of his Life deduces his Original
from a noble, and ancient Extraction of the Longobards; and reports, that Simon
della Rovere, in the year of our Lord 700. transplanting himself from Premont
to Savona, was the first of that Family, from whom this Sixtus IV. descended.
His Fathers name was Leonard, a person of Authority and Reputation, having
managed many public Offices for the Service of his Country. This Francis della
Rovere was in the time of his infancy dedicated by the Vow of his Mother to the
Order of S. Francis, and at the age of nine years was put into a Convent, and
committed to the charge of John Pinarolo a Friar of that Society; by whom he
was instructed in the Rules of the Franciscan Order, and in the first Rudiments
of Grammar: and being of good Wit and Capacity, he became Master of the
Ciceronian Style and Language. He afterward went to Cheri, where he studied
Logic, and thence traveled to Pavia and Bologna, where he became a great
proficient in Philosophy and Divinity. Being of twenty years of age, he
disputed with great acuteness and subtilty in the Schools at Geneva; and
afterward taking the degree of Doctor in Padua he was made Reader of the
Divinity and Philosophy Lectures at Padoua, Pavia, Siena, and other parts in
Italy. In process of time his abilities being made known, he was esteemed and
courted by all; and having many Scholars and admirers, amongst which Cardinal
Bessarion was one, he gained a great esteem and interest in all Courts of
Europe; so that in time he was constituted General of his Order, Procurator of
the Court at Rome, and Vicar General of all Italy. He was highly esteemed by
Pius the second, and Paul the second being a great admirer of his abilities and
Learning, did at the instance and persuasion of the Cardinals Bessarion and
Francis de Gonzaga, admit him, with seven others to the order of Cardinals,
without any motion In process of time his abilities being made known, he was
esteemed and courted by all; and having many Scholars and admirers, amongst
which Cardinal Bessarion was one, he gained a great esteem and interest in all
Courts of Europe; so that in time he was constituted General of his Order,
Procurator of the Court at Rome, and Vicar General of all Italy. He was highly
esteemed by Pius the second, and Paul the second being a great admirer of his
abilities and Learning, did at the instance and persuasion of the Cardinals
Bessarion and Francis de Gonzaga, admit him, with seven others to the order of
Cardinals, without any motion or address from himself, or so much as his own
knowledge, being then at Pavia, with design to go for Venice. On this occasion
coming to Rome he was created Cardinal the 17th. of September, 1467. and being
by the beneficence, and favor of the Church assisted with many large
Contributions, he was enabled to repair the Palace of S. Peter ad Vincola,
where he formed, and kept his Court after the Rules and Customs of a Convent.
The exercise of this eminent Office, and his attendance on the Government of
the Church, could not so distract, or divert his mind from his Studies; but
that he found time to write many Tractates, and Treatises in Divinity, namely,
a Tract of the Blood of Jesus Christ; of the Conception of the Virgin Mary, de
futuris contingentibus; and of the Power of God, against the Opinion of a
certain Carmelite Friar, who held, that God could not by his Omnipotent Power,
save any person whom he had predestined to damnation. He also wrote a
Tractate reconciling the opinions of Aquinas, and Scotus, showing that they did
not differ in substance, or reallity, but in words, or ways of expression. All
which procured him such fame and credit, that Paul the second dying suddenly on
the 28th. of July, he was in a Conclave of seven and twenty Cardinals elected
Pope on the 9th. of August, 1471.

After his Election he was Crowned the 24th. of September following, after
which he esteemed it his first business to reconcile the Discords amongst
Christian Princes, and to turn the hatred they conceived one against the other,
upon their common enemy the Turk. To which end Bessarion was Commissionated to
be his Legate to Lewis XI. of France, Roderigo Borgia Vice Chancellor to go his
Legate into Spain, Marco Barbo into Germany. and Hungary, and Oliviere Carafa to
Venice, and the Knights of Rhodes; to every of which Legates he assigned a
Pension of 500 Crowns in Gold per Month, but the success answered not the
charge, all the Legates returning without any effect, or fruit of their
Negotiations. For Lewis the 11th. had already levied War against Charles of
Burgundy, and the Duke of Brittany. Ferdinand King of Aragon made War on the
King of Portugal to decide the dispute between them for the Kingdom of Castile.
The Kings of Hungary and Poland were in actual Wars, fighting for the Kingdom
of Bohemia; so that the Oratorical persuasions of these Ministers of Peace,
were not able to prevail on the incensed, and resolved minds of these warlike
Princes. And being now fixed and established in his Apostolical Seat, he
received with a serenity of countenance, and cheerful affability, the Addresses
and Congratulations which Foreign Princes by their respective Ministers made to
him at his first promotion to the Papal Dignity: which Ceremony being
performed, he published and declared two persons to be by him created
Cardinals, namely, Peter Riario, and Julian della Rovere; the first was of a
mean Family at Savona, and educated by this Sixtus in the Franciscan Order, and
made Bishop of Trevisi: The other was Son of his Brother Raphael della Rovere,
whom he had constituted Bishop of Carpentras. The first took the Title of S.
Sixtus, and the other of S. Peter ad Vincola, who was afterward Pope Julian
the second.

And such was the affection which this Pope indulged to his own natural
Relations, that he never refused to grant their demands, or yield to the most
exorbitant of their desires; for which he was much blamed, and hardly censured,
with many reflections on his conduct and wisdom: for he had enriched this Peter
Riario with several fat Benefices, on the Revenue of which he might have lived
with splendour, and greatness. But so exorbitant were his expenses, that in the
space of two years only he spent two hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, leaving a
debt of seventy thousand Crowns, with three hundred pounds weight of wrought
Plate; and then being discontented with disappointments of his ambitious
desires, he died at 28 years of age, and was buried in the Church of the holy
Apostles. His Brother Jeronimo, tho (as we have said) of mean extraction, was
yet by the favor of this Pope made Prince of Imola, and Forli, and married to
Catherine natural Daughter of Galeazzo Duke of Milan: and on this account and
reason Ascanius the Son of Galeazzo was created Cardinal. And farther did the
affection of this Pope extend toward his Nephews, and Relations, that he
married Leonard his Brothers Son to the natural Daughter of Ferdinand, King of
Naples, and ordained him Governor of Rome: and he dying soon after, his place
was bestowed on John the Brother of Cardinal Julian, with augmentation of the
Signiories of Sora and Senegaglia; on the reputation of which he married Jane
the Daughter of Frederick Duke of Vrbin by whom he had one Son called Francisco
Maria, who succeeded in the Dukedom of Vrbin after his Uncle Guy Vbald, who
died without issue. This Pope moreover created his Brother Christopher, and
Domenico della Rovere Cardinals, as also Jeronimo Basso his Sisters Son,
Raphael Sanson, a youth of 17 years of age, Son of his Sister the Wife of Peter
Riario, also Schiafinato of Milan, who was his Chancellor, and Bishop of Parma;
likewise John Baptista Cibo of Genoua, who afterward succceeded in the
Popedom, under the name of Innocent VIII: and besides these he raised many
others to the number of 34, whom he successively created Cardinals during his
Reign.

And so free and liberal was Sixtus in his Promotions and Gifts, that nothing
was asked of him which he denied; which liberality gave occasion oftentimes to
many Disputes, when the free nature of the Pope had given Donations to three or
four persons of the same thing: to prevent which for the future, the Privy
Signet was given to John de Montemirabile, a severe and reserved person, and
one well practiced in the Affairs of the Court, who keeping an account of all
matters which had passed the Seal, vacated such Donations as were not regularly
granted.

It is doubtful amongst the Writers of Ecclesiastical History, whether it was
this Pope Sixtus, or Paul the Second, that reduced the year of Jubilee to 25;
howsoever it is certain, that this Pope in the year 1475. did Celebrate the
Jubilee, which brought a great concourse of people to Rome, amongst which were
several Kings and Princes present, such as the Kings of Denmark, Sweden and
Norway, of Bosna and Walachia, the Dukes of Calabria and Saxony, with many
others of great Quality, who in person made their Pilgrimages to Rome to gain
the Indulgences, Pardons, and Privileges which were granted at that Solemnity.

About this time Mathias King of Hungary being desirous to create an Alliance
between himself and Casimir King of Poland, did in the year 1476. make demand
of his Daughter in Marriage; but before Casimir would assent thereunto, he sent
his Son Vladislaus to Frederick the Emperor then at Vienna, to desire that he
might be established and confirmed in the right of the Kingdom of Bohemia,
notwithstanding that it had formerly been given away by Paul the Second to
Mathias King of Hungary. On which Quarrel the Knights of the Teutonick Order
did not only at the instigation of Balthazar the Popes Legate make War against
the King of Poland, with assistance of the King of Hungary; but likewise the
Legate Excommunicated Vladislaus the new King of Bohemia and his Father Casimir,
upon pretense that they favored the Doctrine of the John Huz.
Hussites.

That long continued Difference and Dispute between the Secular Priests and the
Mendicant Friars, which had lasted for above two hundred years, was afterward
by the Sentence of this Pope determined in this manner, That the Seculars
should never hereafter tax, or impeach the Mendicants as Authors of Heresy,
but honor and respect them, as those, by whose Preaching the truth of the
Gospel had been greatly enlightened. That all Communicants should be obliged to
hear Mass said by their Parochial Priests, every Sunday, and solemn Festival,
without which the Mendicants were not admitted to Preach. That the Mendicants
should not declare the people disobliged from making their Confessions to their
Parochial Priest, at least every Easter, according as they are directed by the
Ecclesiastical Canons; provided still that the Mendicants retain their
Privilege of hearing Confessions, and enjoining Penance. These, and some other
particulars being declared, and determined by this Pope, the animosity and
hatred between the Seculars, and the Religious, was much abated, and the long
continued Controversy brought to an issue. But to pass now from the matters of
Spiritual Government, to temporal and secular Affairs, it is to be noted, that
about this time most mortal feuds and quarrels arose between this Pope Sixtus,
and the two Brothers of the House of Medicis, Julian and Laurence, the original
of which proceeded from the great displeasure which Laurence took at the Pope
for not conferring a Cardinals Cap on his Brother Julian, in revenge of which
he being very potent in Florence, gave assistance both of men and money to
Nicolas Vitelli, Count of Tiferno, and Lord of the City of Castello; whereby
after he had been subdued, and banished by the Pope, and had resigned his Right
and Possession to him, he returned again, with the favor of the people, and
re-assuming his Inheritance, he demolished the Citadel which Sixtus for his
better security had made and fortified with a good Garrison: Upon revolt of the
City, the Pope sent his Nephew Cardinal Julian with a strong Army against it,
and by a long Siege of three months became master of it. Nor did Laurence de
Medicis only show his indignation against the Pope by furnishing men and money
to Vitelli, but likewise by disappointing him of the purchase of Imola, the
Prince whereof being reduced to great necessities for want of money, offered to
sale; to prevent which, and that it should not fall into the hands of the Pope,
who now grew above measure great and powerful in Italy, Laurence supplied the
money, and so eased the Prince of those necessities which compelled him to a
sale of his Patrimony. The Pope growing very angry hereat, and resolving to
revenge these affronts, entered into a secret conspiracy with Francis de Pazzi,
who was head of that Faction, which was contrary to the House of Medicis,
whereby it was resolved, that both the Brothers Laurence and Julian should be
murdered, and that the Commonwealth of Florence should be disposed of,
according to the pleasure of the Pope. But that a design so impious as this,
should not seem to have entered into the heart of a Pope, the whole management
was committed to the conduct of Jeronimo Riario, who in the first place
prevailed with Ferdinand King of Naples to send an Army into Tuscany under the
command of Alonso his Son, and compel the Florentines either to extirpate the
Family of the Medicis, or force them to abandon their Country; and that then
under color of the Papal Dignity, the King of Naples might introduce his own
Authority, and set up for himself: but to make all things sure in case this
should fail, Jeronimo communicated his design to John Baptista Montesecco, a
man very expert and ready in such attempts, who quickly engaged several with
him in the Conspiracy; namely Bartholomew Salvian Archbishop of Pisa, who had
conceived a private pique against Laurence; also Francis de Pazzi, and James
Poggio, whose Father was a famous Orator in his time. And to put a better face
on the matter, and countenance the Plot, Raphael Riario Cardinal of S. George,
a youth, and Nephew of Jeronimo, was sent to Pisa on pretense of his Studies;
under whose protection the Assassinates having performed their work might be
the better secured. Sunday being the 26th of April, was the day appointed for
this murder, and accordingly the Conspirators, who were many, assaulted the two
Brothers in the Church, whilst they were hearing Mass: Julian was there killed,
but Laurence having received a slight wound, sled into the Vestery, where he
was saved from the violence of the Assassinates; and in the mean time the
Archbishop of Pisa, and James Poggio endeavored to possess themselves of the
Palace belonging to that Signiory: But the rumor hereof spreading quickly over
all the City, and that Julian was killed, and Laurence still living, the Party
of the Medicis took courage, and with Arms in their hands seized the
Archbishop of Pisa, and James Poggio, together with their Companions; and
putting a Halter about their necks, they executed speedy Justice, hanging them
out at a window. Antonio da Volterro, and Stefano a Priest who attempted
Laurence, incurred the like fate. Montesecco was tortured to make Confession,
which having done, he was likewise put to death. The Cardinal at the time of
this Combustion flying to the High-Altar, was scarce protected by the
sacredness of the place, and the earnest intercession of Laurence;
notwithstanding which having for some days been committed to safe custody,
until he had cleared his Innocence, he was out of respect and favor to the
Pope set at liberty. Howsoever Sixtus was not so well pleased with the grace
showed to the Cardinal, but that he resented the severity they had used against
a Priest, and an Archbishop, to that degree, that at the persuasion of
Jeronimo Riario, he interdicted the people of Florence, and made War upon them.
Frederick Duke of Vrbin was made General of the Papal Army, and Alfonso Duke of
Calabria, Son of Ferdinand King of Naples was also ready with another Army in
favor and assistance of the Pope. On the other side Lewis the 11th. King of
France sent a Succor of 300 Horse to Florence, under the Command of Philip de
Comines, Lord of Argenton; and farther to affright the Pope, he ordered a Synod
of Prelates assembled at Orleans, to Decree that no more money should be carried
out of France to Rome for vacant Benefices. The Venetians, and Dukes of Milan,
Mantoua, and Ferrara concerned themselves in the League, that they might
repress the ambition of the Pope, whom they esteemed to be full of designs to
advance his own power, and glory in Italy. Laurence de Medicis by his
vigilance, good address, and conduct, so well accommodated matters with
Ferdinand King of Naples, that he engaged that King to his Party, and into an
agreement of an Offensive, and Defensive War; with which Union and Alliances
the Pope being discouraged, Anno 1479.
the War concluded without any remarkable successes; the Pope suppressing his
resentments until a more seasonable time, when he could with better effect reak
his anger, and revenge on his enemies: which he had certainly performed with
the first opportunity, had he not been surprised with a sudden alarm from the
Turk; who having unexpectedly seized the City of Otranto, put all Italy into
fear, and confusion. This accident confirmed the Peace more firmly between
Sixtus and the Florentines; on whom by way of Penance for their late crime, he
imposed a charge of maintaining 15 Galleys against the Turk; whose great force
having entered into Italy would certainly in despite of all the power of that
Country, have made great devastations, had not the death of Mahomet the Great,
who had taken Constantinople, put a stop to the progress of his Arms, and moved
Bajazet his Son, and Successor to recall A^^met Pasha his General with his Army
out of Puglia: and this happened in the year 1481. when the King of Cyprus, and
his Son being dead, and the whole power remaining in the hands of the Queen
(who was of the noble Family of Cornaro) the Venetian Senate laid claim to the
Kingdom, as devolving to them by right of inheritance, which for many years
they maintained against the power of the Turk, who made many attempts to make
seizure of it. About the same time also Dabuson the Great, Master of Rhodes,
valiantly defended his City against Mahomet, causing him to raise his Siege,
and retire with disgrace.

The fear of the Turk by their Retreat out of Italy being extinguished, Sixtus
reassumed his former designs, and in order thereunto favored the party of the
Venetians who made War upon Hercules da Este Duke of Ferrara: by these means
all Italy was put into a new flame of War, being divided into diverse Parties
and Factions. On one side were the Pope, the Venetians, Genoueses, and those of
Siena, with other Cities allied in a Confederacy. On the other were Ferdinand
King of Naples, the Florentines, Lodowick Sforza Protector of the State of
Milan during the minority of the young Duke. The Pope in favor of his own
Party managed his War with the Spiritual as well as with the Temporal Arms; for
in the year 1482. he Excommunicated all his Enemies, and as many as took their
part, or favored their Cause; and encouraged Rene Duke of Lorain and Anjou to
return into Italy, and recover his Kingdom of Naples. But Rene being otherwise
employed, could not make use of this opportunity, which was offered; and
therewith Ferdinand being enraged, entered the Dominions of the Pope with a
great Army, and approached to the Gates of Rome; with which Sixtus being
greatly incensed, issued out an Army against him under the command of Robert
Malatesta; and both Armies joining Battle in a place called Campo Morto, near
Velitri; Sixtus had the fortune of the day, and to overthrow his Enemy; many
were slain on the place, many principal Officers taken and carried in triumph
into Rome, and Ferdinand himself narrowly escaped by flight. Three days after
which Victory Malatesta died, not without some suspicion of being poisoned. Not
long after a Peace being concluded between Pope Sixtus, and the King of Naples,
all the Prisoners were set at liberty; amongst which were the Cardinals Colonna
and Savelli, who at the beginning of the War, were as disaffected persons
committed to custody. This War being in this manner ended, the Pope turned his
Arms upon the Venetians in favor of Hercules Duke of Ferrara, lest that State
being too powerful for him, should augment their Force by the addition of that
Dukedom: and in regard that State would not give ear to his admonitions, and
desist from prosecution of their War at his command, the Pope made use of his
spiritual Arms, Excommunicating all the Subjects under the Dominions of Venice,
and entering into League with all the Confederate Princes of Italy, waged the
most dangerous War, that ever the Venetians had sustained; and certainly had
proved fatal to them, had not Lodowick S^forza Duke of Milan made a separate
Peace with them, against the sense, and opinion of all the other Confederates.
Sixtus having by these many Wars, and several ways exhausted his Treasury,
contrived by sale of new Offices, never before known, to replenish his Coffers;
he also imposed new Taxes, and raised the old ones: but that which most
reflected on his Reputation, and blemished him with the character of a covetous
person, was that he decimated the Prelates, and laid new impositions on the
Clergy: but to do this Pope justice, and give him his due, never was any more
generous, or munificent in his gifts, or more delighted to do good offices than
this; for he freely, and at his own charge maintained Andrew Paleologo Prince
of the Morea, with Leonard di Focco Despor of Albania, who had been deposed,
and exterminated their Dominions by the Turk: he likewise with great
magnificence and courtesy treated the Queens of Cyprus and Bosna, whom the
Turk had forced to abandon their Dominions, and fly for refuge under his
protection, Also when the Kings of Denmark, Swedeland, Norway, and Gothland,
with the Dukes of Saxony, and Calabria being moved, and guided by their
Devotion, came to visit the Roman Sea, he received them with great State, and
treated them with a magnificence becoming Kings: And when in the year of Jubilee
Ferdinand of Aragon King of Naples came to gain Indulgences at Rome, he
remitted to him the yearly Tribute which he was obliged to pay for that
Kingdom, and in lieu thereof contented himself with the yearly acknowledgment
of a White Horse with its Furniture, which is continued to this day. And
farther to demonstrate his generous and great Soul, he rebuilt the Hospital of
S. Spirito for maintenance and education of young Children: he built the
Church of S. Mary of Peace: he adorned the Basilicon of S. Peter with new
Windows, making the Church more lightsome and pleasant than before: he repaired
the Palace of Lateran, as also the Churches of the Holy Apostles, with several
other Churches. The Pons Janicularis, or the Bridge of Janicula being ruined, he
took up all the Stones, and built an other Bridge over Tybur in the place
thereof, which since that time is called by the name of Ponte Sesto, or the
Bridge of Sixtus. He cleared all the Common sewers of Rome, making conveyances
for the sullage of the City to run into the Tybur: he repaired many Aquaeducts
and Fountains, and brought the brazen Statue of M. Aurelius from an obscure
place, and erected it in the more open Area of the Capitol. It was he that
reduced the Vatican Library into such a condition as has made it famous
through all the world; for he not only brought Books thither from all parts of
Europe, but left also certain Rents and Revenues for the increase of them, with
Pensions also to the Library-keepers, and Underofficers. On the Pedestal of
his Statue in the Library, these Verses are written.

Templa, Domum expositis vicos, fora, maenia, pontes
Virgineam Trivii quod reparatis aquam.
Prisc a licet Nautis Statuas dare commoda Portus.
Et Vaticanum cingere Christ jugum
Plus tamen urbs debet, nam quae squalore latebat
Cernitur in celebri Bibliotheca loco.
In short, there was nothing which tended to the glory and ornament of the City
which was neglected by him; and such was his zeal and power in defense of the
Privileges of the Church, that he would never suffer them to be infringed, nor
did any Prince offer him an injury, or indignity which he did not return with
due revenge. As for instance, appears by the War he made in confederacy with
Venice and Genoua against the Duke of Ferrara and his Allies; the which he
managed with so much heat, that when the Venetians made a separate Peace
without his consent, or approbation, he so highly resented it, that it brought
him to a fit of the Gout, which increased on him with that violence, that he
died thereof on the 13th. of August, 1484. having held the Pontifical Sea for
the space of 13 years and four days, having arrived the age of 70 years and 22
days. At his Death this Distick was made.

Sistere qui nullo potuit cum foedere Sixtus,
Audito tantum nomine pacis obit.
His Body was interred in S. Peter's Church under a Monument of Brass, which
Julian Cardinal of Liens caused to be erected for him before the High-Altar.
After which the Chair was vacant 16 days.

INNOCENT VIII.
SIXTVS being dead the Cardinals entered the Vatican, where in the space of 16
days after the decease of the former Pope, they elected John Baptista Cibo
Cardinal of S. Balbina, to succeed in the Papal Chair: He was a Native of
Genoua, and born of an illustrious Family in the year 1432. his Father being a
Knight, and Count of the Empire, and Senator of Rome: He lived a long time in
the Family and Service of Ferdinand King of Naples, and afterward coming to
Rome, was received into the Family of the Cardinal of Bologna, Brother of Pope
Nicolas V. He was created Bishop of Savona by Paul II. and of Melfy and Priest
Cardinal, with the Title of S. Balfina by Sixtus IV. after whose Decease he was
by the common suffrages of 24 Cardinals elected Pope, and on the 29th. of
August 1484. was Crowned by Francis Piccolomini, calling himself by the name of
Innocent the Eighth, and at his Inauguration he used these words, Ego autem in
Innocentia mea ingressus sum. Tho Guiccardin will not allow this Motto to
correspond with his manners, and Onufrius says, that he often covered his
avarice and covetous desires, with Drollery, and some pleasant expressions.
Howsoever he is styled by most Writers with the honorable character of pious
and affable, and commended for his sanctity of life, and profound learning. The
first business he took in hand after he came to the Papal Chair, was to take
off the Excommunication which Pope Sixtus had laid on the Venetians, and being
himself in perfect amity, and maintaining a fair correspondence with the
Christian Princes, he endeavored so to reconcile them one with another, that
being united in a strict confederacy, they might convert their Arms against the
Turk, who was now become the formidable, and common enemy of Christendom: for
tho he was naturally averse to War, yet his zeal for the Christian Religion
moved him to equippe a Fleet at the cost and expense of 150 thousand Crowns;
which being successful in their enterprise, gained him great renown, and esteem
with all the Christian Princes; the which he also improved by various good
offices, and acts of justice performed toward them; for he re-blessed the
Venetians after they had been desecrated and attainted by the Excommunication
of Sixtus, he eased the Church from the burden of extraordinary Taxes, he
retrenched many superfluous charges of his own Family: he conferred many
benefits, favors, and privileges on the Orders of S. Francis, S. Augustine, and
S. Dominick, and thundered out his Excommunications against Women that used
Poisons, and Incantations, and such as cheated and purloined from the Dataria,
or Exchequer.

But all these good actions, and just intentions were interrupted by civil
Discords at Rome arisen between the Families of Colonna and Orsini, on the
ground of ancient hatred, and resentments between them; and had proceeded to
worse effects and more evil consequences, had they not been assuaged for a
while by the breaking forth of a foreign War with Ferdinand King of Naples; who
having oppressed, and ill treated many Lords and great personages, and
particularly the Count De Montorio, who was of great repute and popular in the
City of Aquila; they all, together with the City of Abruzzo had recourse to the
Pope for sanctuary, protesting, that in case he would not receive them into his
protection, that they should be forced to yield, and resign themselves into the
hands and power of some Foreign Prince. The Pope being moved by their
supplications, and incensed against Ferdinand for his ill deportment toward
the Papal See, for he had denied to pay the yearly tribute of twenty thousand
Ducats, and had disposed of the Ecclesiastical Benefices according to his own
will, and pleasure* he therefore resolved to receive Aquila and Abruzzo and the
other complainants into his care and protection, and to declare War against the
King of Naples: for carrying on of which with better success, he entered into a
League with the Venetians, and drew to his Party the Princes of Colonna, of
Bisignano, Salerno, Altamura. and Duke of Oliveto, with many other Lords, and
great men of Naples, making Robert Sanseverino the General of his Army. On the
other side the King combined with the Florentines, and joined the Orsi^i to his
party; and such were the animosities on both sides, that a furious and bloody
War began, which was maintained for some time with changes and variety of
fortune: the evil consequences of which being by good and wise men esteemed
fatal to Italy, induced the Count De Pitigliano, and the Cardinals of Angioio
and Sforza to intercede and mediate between the two parties for a Peace: but
the Pope who conceived that he had reason and justice on his side, refused to
condescend unto equal terms, and being farther encouraged by the aids given him
from Charles the Eighth King of France, of 300 thousand Crowns in money, with
the recruits of 4000 Savoyards, and 3000 Switzers, he became inflexible, and
for some time continued resolute to maintain the War: but at length considering
the fatal conquences of it, and how ill the effusion of blood becomes the
gentle spirit of a Prelate, he hearkened, and condescended to Articles of peace
on these following conditions. That the King should pardon and forgive all the
Lords, and Barons who were his Subjects, whether they belonged to the City of
Aquila, or to any other Town, or part of his Dominions who had fled to the Pope
for his succor and protection. That he should not farther pretend to any
Collation of Benefices. That he should pay all the arrears of his Tribute at a
convenient time appointed. That Verginio Orsino should humble himself at the
footstool of the Pope, and demand his pardon. All which Articles being agreed,
the King of Spain, Lodowick Sforza, and Lorenzo de Medicis, with two Cardinals,
and James Trivoltii a great Favorite of the Popes, became Guarrenties for the
peace. But no sooner had the Pope disbanded his Forces. and Ferdinand freed
from the apprehensions of War, but with violation of his own Faith, and in
despite of the obligation of those, who were engaged for him, he refused
compliance with the conditions he had agreed and concluded; for he not only
imprisoned the Barons, and others, who had sided with the Pope, and four months
after cut off their Heads, and confiscated their Estates, but likewise denied
to pay his annual Tribute to the Papal Sea; covering the breach of his Faith,
Phil. Comin. Onuf.
and the persidiousness of these acts with vain and frivolous pretenses. The
Pope greatly incensed with extreme indignation against this dishonest
treachery, in which the Guarantees for the late Peace acknowledged him to have
reason, disposed his affairs for a second War; in order whereunto he in the
first place Excommunicated Ferdinand, absolved his Subjects from their
Obedience, and deprived him of his Kingdom; but because this would prove
insignificant, unless it were made good by some more effectual means, he sent
to the King of France for the aid he had formerly promised, and having raised a
considerable Army of Switzers and Italians under the command of Francis Cibo;
and having also the countenance of all Italy in detestation of this false
treatment: Ferdinand being terrified therewith, inclined to a Peace, and really
to accept with unfeigned devotion, and obedience, such conditions as the Pope
should be pleased to impose upon him; and in farther pursuance of this Peace,
the Vrsini were induced to prostrate themselves at the feet of the Pope; in
which humble posture he generously granted to them all those Petitions and
requests which they submissively offered to him; and at the same time bestowed
the like favors in the pardon of Cardinal Baldri a Frenchman, who had
treacherously conspired against him. And farther to evidence his natural
inclinations to Peace, he reconciled the enmities of Colonna and Vrsini, two
potent Families in Rome, who by their Dissentions and Wars had miserably
spoiled and vexed each other. This Peace produced a League between the King,
the Venetians, the Florentines, and the Duke of Milan, and in short begat a
general peace in all Christendom, which continued for the space of five years;
during which time, great preparations were made against the Turk, which had in
all probability happily succeeded, had not that honorable and glorious design
been unhappily interrupted by the Death of this Pope.

Yet some time before his decease, being in the year 1488. he had the honor to
have Zizime the Brother of Bajazet Emperor of the Turks to be his Prisoner,
being taken, and sent to Rome by the Knights of Rhodes. And tho this Sultan was
splendidly received, and treated, yet he could not be induced either by fair
persuasions, or ruder menaces to prostrate, or humble himself at the feet of
the Pope; wherefore being remanded back to safe custody in the Vatican, he
lived there for all the time of this Pope, during which his Brother Bajazet
Emperor of the Turks sent yearly to Rome forty thousand Crowns for his
maintenance: and to render his Brother more acceptable there, he sent with an
honorable Embassy the Key of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem to the Pope,
together with the Lance with which Longinus pierced the side of our Savior;
both which he received with great humility and devotion, lodging the Key in a
Chapel in S. Peter's Church, where it is to be seen unto this day: and laid
the Spear in a Marble Chest, which he purposely erected in a Chapel within the
Church of the Vatican. In the time of this Pope Innocent, there was but one
Creation of Cardinals, at which eight only were made; amongst which Laurence
Cibo the natural Son of his Brother was one. In the year 1489. he permitted,
that the Mass might be celebrated in Norway without Wine, because that the
Country being cold, and the distance far, the Wine was either frozen, or turned
Vinegar before it could be brought thither. This Pope as we have said, Du
Cheshe.
was generous and magnificent in all his actions, performing many things at his
own cost and charge for the honor and adornment of the City. For he built a
house of pleasure and delight for recreation of the Popes, called the
Belvedere; he rebuilt the Deanery of S. Narcis from the foundation; he made
many Galleries in the Palace of the Vatican; he erected a Fountain in the front
before S. Peter's, and adorned many other places in the City; and having
disposed all things in order to the quiet and happiness of Italy, he ended his
days, and died the 25th. day of July, 1491. being about the age of sixty years.
He was buried in a Sepulcher of Brass, near the Altar which he had lately made
for the Spear. Lionel Bishop of Concordia Preached his Funeral Sermon, wherein
he recounted the most memorable passages of his life. Over his Tomb this
Epitaph was Engraven, Ego autem in Innocentia mea Ingressus sum
Redime me Domine, and miserere mei.


ALEXANDER VI.
INNOCENT being deceased, Roderigo who was made a Bishop, and afterward
Cardinal Albano; and Porto by Sixtus, was elected Pope, calling himself by the
name of Alexander the Sixth, and fate in the Papal Chair for the space of
eleven years and upwards: he was born at Valentia in Spain, his Father was
Geoffery Lenzola, a rich and noble Gentleman, and his Mother was the Sister of
Pope Calixtus the Fourth; by the favor of which Uncle he was designed from his
Youth to be created Archbishop of Valentia, and in the year 1456. was actually
made Cardinal-Deacon of S. Nicolas, and Chancellor of the Roman Church; and was
afterward by Sixtus the Fourth employed upon many important Affairs, and
Embassies for the Church; and particularly to intercede and mediate in the
differences between the Kings of Spain, Portugal, and Aragon, who had all
pretensions to the Kingdom of Castile; by which Offices and places, having
gained great honor and interest, he was by the suffrages of two and twenty
Cardinals elected Pope.

But several Writers, such as Guicciardin Onufrius and others, brand the
Election of this Pope with the infamy of Simonaical corruption; for reporting
that most of the Cardinals were bribed by sums of Money, and promises of
Offices, and high Preferments to give their Votes in his favor, those who were
most active, and had taken the greatest Bribes for this promotion, were the
Cardinal Ascagnus, who in reward had the Office of Chancellor conferred upon
him, likewise Julian Bishop of Ostia, and Raphael Riario, who were busy, and
talking Cardinals. But Alexander who was an excellent dissembler until his turn
was served, and who loved the Treason, but not the Traitor, or the Office, but
not the corrupt ways to it, hated this abominable practice in his heart; so
that by violent deaths, by Banishment, and other various calamities, he found
means to bring all those unto ruin, who had thus basely conspired to his
promotion; and particularly Baptista Orsino (to whom was given the magnificent
Palace of Borgia, and John Michael, on whom was conferred the Bishopric of
Porto, with all the Wardrobe of the Pope, which was of inestimable value) were
both put to death; one being publicly executed in the Castle, and the other
secretly made away by Poison. This sort of treatment toward his Friends
induced Guichardin in his History of this Pope to represent him under the
notion of a person without Truth, without Faith, or Religion, of an unsatiable
avarice, and insuperable pride, and passionate in the raising and advancement
of his Bastard Sons (which were many in number) to places of dignity and
profit; the which character is farther confirmed by all the Italian Poets and
Historians of those times, who ascribe strange and monstrous cruelties to him,
making him the Author of all those Calamities and Miseries which in his Reign
overwhelmed Italy, rendering its condition slavish, and contemptible to Foreign
Nations. Howsoever his temper was not so altogether flagitious, but that it
admitted of some alloy, and mixture of Virtue: for he with great care attended
to the government of the City, and regulation of the Courts of Justice; to
which end he ordained Visitors of the Prisons to examine, and know the causes
for which persons were imprisoned, and created four Judges for the trial of all
criminal matters, so that Justice was the more punctually executed, than in
former times. But not to remain too long on his personal qualities, let us
proceed to the important affairs of his Government.

And in the first place, being created Pope, he was according to custom
saluted, and congratulated in his Papal Dignity by the Ambassadors of Kings,
Princes, and States, whom he respectively treated with affability and respect;
persuading them to peace and concord amongst themselves; and by the virtue of
such union and confederacy to join, and employ their Arms against the Turk, who
was the common Enemy of Christendom. And at that time being about the year
1493. in honor to Ferdinand King of Spain, he gave him the Title of Catholic,
in acknowledgment and memory of the many Victories he had obtained over the
Moors; and gave him a Title to all those Lands and Countries in America, which
were or should be discovered there. And thus as he was civil to Kings, so he
was kind and more affectionate to his Family. For in the first Consistory that
he held, he created John Borgia his Sisters Son Archbishop of Montreat,
Valentine Borgia his Natural Son Archbishop of Valentia. At this time the
Emperor Frederick died, having reigned for the space of 54 years. Likewise
Ferdinand King of Naples being dead, he sent his Legate with power to confirm
his Son Alonso in the succession to the Kingdom; and having contracted an
Alliance with him, he ordered him to be Crowned, and invested with the
Regalities.

At this time being the year 1494. Charles the Eighth, King of France, who was
of a martial and ambitious spirit laid claim to the Kingdom of Naples, by
virtue of the last Will and Testament of Rene Duke of Anjou and Lorain; and
being encouraged in that enterprise by Lodowick Sforza, the Guardian of John
Galeas Duke of Milan, he entered Italy with a puissant Army, consisting of
25000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, with a great train of Artillery. The Pope
apprehending the great ruin and damage which this incursion of the French
would bring upon Italy, entered into League with the City of Florence, and both
agreed and resolved to leavy Soldiers, and join in a defensive League with the
King of Naples, but the Venetians and Ferdinand King of Spain who were likewise
moved to enter into the League, did positively refuse to accept the proposals,
being more inclinable to be unconcerned and Spectators than Actors in that
hazardous War. Charles being entered into Italy, marched victorious through
Lombardy, and having overthrown the Army of Florence, soon after became Master
Of the City it self: thence he proceeded toward Rome, where he entered on the
first of January 1494. without any opposition; it being agreed that in case the
Romans would peaceably open their Gates, and give free admission to the French,
that no hurt, or violence should be offered by them to the Inhabitants, but
that on the contrary, if they made opposition, they would put all into flame
and confusion. The Romans therefore finding themselves in no condition to
resist, readily gave a reception to the French, affording them plenty of
Victuals, and Provisions; and they on the other side performed their
conditions, severely punishing such as were guilty of Riots, or Tumults. The
Pope at first being affrighted with the approach of the French, fled for
security into the Castle, but at length finding all things quiet and secure
from the outrages of their Ghests, adventured abroad, and much against his will
and inclinations entered into a League with them. But Charles not much
confiding in the Faith which the Pope had given, required for better security
thereof, and by way of Hostage, that Caesar Borgia who was called Cardinal
Valentino, should under color of being the Popes Legate, accompany him in the
War, together with Zizime the Brother of the Grand Seignior, on pretense, that
having overcome the Kingdom of Naples, he would make use of him in the War,
which he intended to make upon Constantinople; but he died soon after of a
Bloody Flux at Capua. Upon approach of the French near to Naples, King Alonso
being conscious of his ill government, whereby he had contracted the hatred of
his people, and despairing of the success of his Affairs, surrendered up the
Kingdom into the hands of his Son Ferdinand, and with great fear and ignominy
embarked himself with the best part of his wealth, and fled into the Island of
Sicily; and soon after Ferdinand considering the weakness of his Force, and the
inequality of the Match between him and the French, betook himself also to the
Island of Ischia. Charles following the favorable course of his good, and
victorious fortune, with great expedition made himself Master of all the
Kingdom of Naples: the which success giving an alarm to all the Christian
Princes, a general confederacy was agreed amongst them, for intercepting the
French on their return out of Italy; so that the Pope, the Emperor Maximilian,
the King of Spain, Lodowick Sforza Duke of Milan, and the Venetians, uniting
their Forces for the common safety of Italy, composed an Army of forty thousand
men. Notwithstanding which Charles boldly returned out of Italy, and with great
difficulty having passed the Apenine Mountains with sixteen pieces of weighty
Cannons which were drawn over by 300 Swissers, and having by the greater error
and neglect of the Enemy passed all the narrow and inaccessible ways about
Zerzana and Petra Santa at length descended into the Plains of Lombardy. The
Confederate Army to hinder the Kings farther passage had encamped themselves at
Fornovo, near Tarro, and at no far distance from Parma; and there both Armies
were engaged. The French did not consist of more than 9000 men, and the
Confederates of 40000; and yet the French had the advantage, and won the Field:
and as Philip de Comines says, the King entered triumphant into Asti; tho
Panvinio and other Italian Writers relate the Battle to have been bloody, but
the success and advantage doubtful. Howsoever the news hereof being reported at
Naples to the great advantage of the Confederates, King Ferdinand reassumed
his courage, and adventured out of his retirement at Ischia; and then the
French Forces being grown weak, and all Recruits failing them, he recovered his
Kingdom with the assistance of the Catholic King: Not long after Charles the
Eighth died, and Lewis the Twelfth Duke of Orleans succeeded in his Throne:
Likewise Ferdinand dying without Issue, Frederick his Uncle became his
Successor.

Lewis XII. continuing his claim by right of Inheritance to the Kingdom of
Naples, and also to the Dukedom of Milan in right of his Grandmother the
Daughter of John Galeazzo, entered into a League with the Pope, which was fatal
to Italy; and with them the King of Spain, the Florentines, and the Venetians,
were all combined against Duke Lodowick Sforza, and King Frederick, on
conditions that Lewis having conquered Milan, should cause Cremona to be
restored to the Venetians; and that Caesar Borgia who was the Popes bastard
Son, having renounced his Cardinals Cap, and taking Carlotta de Alebretto,
Daughter to the King of Navar, and Kinswoman to the King of France for his
Wife, should be invested in Romagna, Marca, and Vmbria, and that the Kings of
Spain, and France should equally divide the Kingdom of Naples between them.
Lewis entering Italy with a powerful Army, drove out the Duke of Milan from his
State, and shortly after took Cardinal Ascanius Prisoner, whom he sent into
France, where he died in a short time afterward. The Venetians by virtue of
the League had Cremona consigned to them; and all matters succeeded so
prosperously for Lewis in Italy, that Frederick King of Naples being thereby
wholly dis-animated, cast himself with all humble confidence into the arms of
King Lewis, who treated him basely, and with the highest indignities
imaginable. In the mean time the French and the Spaniards being to divide the
spoils of the Kingdom, such differences arose betwixt them, as being only to be
decided by the Sword, the French were all cut in pieces by the valor of
Gonsalvo a brave Captain, by which means that Kingdom fell into the hands of
Spain.

In the mean time Pope Alexander being attentive to nothing more than to raise
and enrich his Bastard Children, encouraged and countenanced his Son Caesar
Borgia in the grievous oppressions he laid, on all the Barons of the
Ecclesiastical State; for he designing and aspiring to make himself sole, and
absolute master of it, made the Family of the Orsini the most remarkable
examples of his insolent indignities, spoiling and harassing their Country for
the space of a whole Summer. As yet Caesar Borgia had not renounced his
Cardinals Cap, and therefore continuing still under the notion of a Prelate,
Guido Vbaldo di Vrbino, and John Borgia, an other of the Popes Bastards, were
made Generals of the Ecclesiastical Army, who overrunning several Countries,
reduced Braciano by Siege, and proceeded every where victoriously, until
Charles the natural Son of Virginio Orsino, joining Battle with them, routed
their Army, and took the Duke of Vrbin prisoner. After this a Peace being
concluded with the Orsini, and the Pope perceiving that his business did not
thrive well by War, he endeavored to advance his designs by fortifying the
interest of his Family with great, and potent alliances; and in the first place
he gave his Daughter Lucretia in Marriage to John Sforza, Lord of Pesaro,
breaking his promise to a certain Nobleman of Spain to whom he had formerly
contracted her; then he took her from Sforza, and gave her to Lewis of Aragon,
Bastard Son of Alfonso King of Naples; who being killed, she was given to
Alfonso da Este Duke of Ferrara, with whom afterward she ended her days.

This Pope had also three Sons, Geoffery the youngest was made Prince of
Squillaci, Caesar who was the second was Cardinal, and John the eldest was sent
into Spain, and there made Duke of Candia; but he rambling one night in his
pleasures about the Streets of Rome, was by the treachery of his Brother the
Cardinal assassinated, and his body thrown into the ^ybar; which kindness he
did him after they had supped the same night together at the Table of their
Mother Vanoccia; with which horrid act the Pope was not so much displeased, as
he was terrified, fearing that upon the least displeasure the spirit of this
miscreant would be provoked to add parricide to the murder of his Brother.
After this he made little account of his Scarlet, or degree of Cardinal; but
turning his thoughts wholly to War, he was made General of the Popes Army, and
uniting his Forces with the French, and joining with their interest, he became
master of a considerable Principality in Italy: for having expelled Sforza from
Milan, and imprisoned the Chiefs of that Family, with assistance of Lewis the
12th, he with great cruelty and blood possessed himself of all the Cities of
Romagna, ( Bologna only excepted) banishing, or putting to death all the
ancient Lords and persons of quality belonging to it. He also took Imola and
Forli, banishing all the Children of Riario, to whom the Inheritance belonged,
only their Mother Catherina he took prisoner, and carried her in triumph with
him to Rome. Next he took Sinigaglia by force of Arms, and by treachery
surprised the State of Vrbin; for being with all his Army at Cagli where he was
kindly received, upon the signal given, he seized that City, and marched
immediately with the same design to Vrbin. Guido Vbaldo da Feltro, Prince of
that State, surprised with this sudden attempt, and fearing to fall into the
cruel hands of this Tyrant, left the City, and with some few of his domestics
saved himself by flight. Then this Borgia turned his Arms upon Camerino, which
he took, and put many of the ancient Lords, and Barons of it to death: with the
like cruelty and wickedness he treated all the Lords, and Barons about the
parts of Rome, particularly that noble Family of the Gaetani, which were Lords
of ancient possessions in the Volsci; of which he put James the Son of Honorato
Gaetano to death, then Protonotary of Rome: He also ordered that Cola Gaetano a
youth, who was the only Son, and hopes of the Family, should be removed out of
the world. He in the next place by assistance of the French, attacked the
Family of Colonna, and seized on all their State, forcing them to fly into
Puglia, and Sicily for refuge. His next and last work was to subdue the Orsini,
but they having always been constant and firm friends to the Pope in all times,
and against all Factions, he wanted some colorable pretense to fix a quarrel
on them: but at length the occasion which he sought, the Orsini themselves
administered; for they growing jealous of the successes, and fortune of Borgia,
and fearing lest his insatiable avarice should transport him also to an
appetite of devouring them, they considered it prudence to provide in time
against a danger so apparent, and imminent as this: wherefore consulting with
others, who were possessed with the like apprehensions and fears; such as
Bentivolio Lord of Bologna, Paolo Baglione the Usurper of Perugia, Vitellozzo
Vitelli, Lord of the City of Castello, Liverotto Lord Fermo, Pandolfo Petrucci
of Siena; they appointed a Council to be held at Perugia, where they agreed
upon an alliance, and confederacy together against Borgia; and accordingly
setting out an Army into the Field, they took Vrbino, and Camerino, and
overthrew the Forces of Borgia which came to relieve them, and thence made an
incursion into all the Country of Romagna. The Pope being greatly troubled, and
concerned for these losses, and turn of fortune, used all his subtilty and
artifices to reconcile these differences; and his Authority being very
prevalent, he persuaded the Orsini into a Peace, and into an assurance of all
security; in short therefore with promises, and protestations, and conditions
of great advantage, he deluded them into a Peace, and into Articles which he
never designed to perform. With these feigned appearances of reconciliation,
the Towns taken from Borgia were surrendered to him; and Paul, and Francis
Orsino Duke of Gravina, Vitellozzo, and Liverotto then together at Senegaglia
went to attend Borgia at Imola, and to receive his Pardon. Borgia went forth to
meet them; and gave them a most courteous reception; and conducting them into
an inward Room in his Palace; as if he had had something of importance to
communicate to them, he on a sudden encompassed them with his Gascon Soldiers,
and strangled Vitellozzo, and Liverotto, and in a short time after bestowed the
like fare on the two Orsini; all which proceeded from the credulity and
easiness of Paul Orsino, who against the Opinion, and Protests, and Dissuasions
of Vitellozzo, being corrupted, as was supposed, by Money, condescended to the
terms of Borgia, and to trust, and believe his Faith, who was a known Tyrant,
bloody, and false, and his life blackned already with a thousand instances of
Murder and Perjury: hereupon Perugia, and the City of Castello surrendered
themselves into the hands of the Pope, the Families of Baglio and Vitello being
banished thence. This success was followed by the imprisonment of Baptista
Orsini the Cardinal, who was by order of the Pope committed to the Castle of S.
Angelo: in like manner Renold the Bishop of Florence, and James de Sancta Croce
being of the same Family, were likewise imprisoned; James howsoever had liberty
to go out upon Bail, but the Cardinal was in a few days poisoned in the Prison.

In vigor of this success Borgia, now called Duke Valentino, prosecuted the
other Confederates with an Army of 15000 men, for fear of which Pandolfo
Petrucci leaving his Town of Siena, fled to Lucca for succor and refuge, whilst
Borgia became Master of all the Castles, and Fortresses belonging to the Family
of the Orsini. Thus did he continue his Wars with such great expense, and with
a magnificent Equipage agreeable thereunto, that the Coffers of the Pope became
exhausted, the Revenue of the Church, not being able to provide for such vast
designs. To supply which, this Pope Alexander renewed the ancient form of
eighty Writers of Breviates, according to the custom of former Popes, every of
which Offices were sold for 750 Crowns of Gold: he sold also all other Offices
at excessive rates, and created Cardinals for Money: he also entertained the
Marrani at Rome, whom the King of Spain had Banished from his Countries,
preferring the profit which he squeezed from them, more than all the favor and
interest of that King. In fine, he omitted no ways and arts, honest, or
dishonest, to raise Money, setting every thing to sale. that was vendible, or
could yield a benefit: But all the Revenue of the Church, and these
contrivances, and artifices for raising Money, not being able to answer the
expenses of the War, and the immense luxury and prodigality of Duke Valentino,
it was resolved by the Pope to poison all the rich Cardinals, and Prelates at
Rome, and then seizing their Revenue and Estates, to sacrifice their Riches to
the lust and insatiable avarice of his wicked Son. The Plot being thus laid,
the rich Cardinals and Prelates were invited to a Banquet in the Garden of
Belvedere, where a Table was spread near a Fountain, and Bottles of excellent
Wine provided; those for the Pope and his Son were set apart, from those into
which the poison was infused, being designed for the Guests only: But here let
us observe the just Judgment of God, for the Butler and Cup Bearer mistaking
the Bottle, gave the poisonous Dose to the Pope, and his Son, and to Cardinal
Adrian their sole Confident, instead of that which was to have been given to
the Cardinals, and his other Guests. The Pope being aged at the years of 72,
and not able to struggle with the violence of the Poison, died at the Vatican
in the month of August, 1503. and was buried obscurely in a Chapel of St.
Peter's Church, under a poor and ignoble Monument: but Borgia applying present
Antidotes, and being a man of a young and robust nature, was able for some time
to struggle with the prevailing force of the Poison; howsoever the malignity of
it so crept into his Vitals, and affected his Blood, that his Body growing
macerate and weak, and being ill disposed, and faint, he was not able to attend
to his Affairs, and the discipline of his Army; for want of which, and the
encouragement of his presence, the Soldiers forsook their Colors, as being
ashamed of the detestable Villainy of their Commander, and therewith his whole
Army disbanded, leaving him naked, and exposed to the displeasure of two Popes,
which in a short time afterward appeared, that were his mortal enemies. After
which, all the Cities and Fortresses which he had by force, and rapine
possessed, returned again to their ancient Masters; the Families of Colonna,
Vrsini, Savelli, Vitelli, and Barons of Rome, reassumed their former right; and
likewise the Lords of the Signories of Vrbin, Pesaro, Camerin, and Senogalla
were again re-instated into the Dominions of their Paternal Inheritance; so
that every Bird taking his own Feather, left him a poor Caesar, being divested
of all his Power, and ill acquired Riches.

Notwithstanding the wickedness of this Pope Alexander the Sixth, there are
those who will allow him some grains of Virtue. They say that he was of a ready
Wit, of a great Memory, and profound Judgment; and of that persuasive
Eloquence, that it was impossible almost to refute his Arguments, or deny his
Demands. He treated the Cardinals with great affability, and respect, and gave
high demonstrations of his care, and concernment for the Christian Cause. He
knew so well how to accommodate himself to the humor of the French, that he
reconciled their Party to him in a firm and strict Alliance; and so well how to
govern, that amidst all the violences, and slaughters which he caused to be
committed in Rome, no tumult, or insurrection of the People ensued thereupon.
He always went late to bed, contenting himself with little sleep, and a
moderate diet: he was a great lover of Learning, and men of Literature; so that
tho he was covetous, yet he was said, never to have detained the allowance to
Doctors, nor pay of the Soldiery, nor wages of Workmen.

Howsoever his Vices were so enormous, that these mean Commendations could bear
no balance with them. For he was a man of no Faith, nor Honor; he was Cruel,
Covetous, and insatiable of Riches. At any time of vacation from business, he
gave himself up wholly to delights, and pleasures, especially to Women, whom he
loved in excess; but the Mistress of his Affection was the fair Vanoccia, a
Roman Lady, whom in the time of his private fortune and condition he kept and
owned as a lawful Wife. He was a great lover of Plays and Comedies, and would
be always a spectator of Shows, and pleasant divertisements. In his time he
created 43 Cardinals, of which 18 were Spaniards. In the year 1500. he
celebrated the Jubilee according to ancient customs, giving Bulls, and
Indulgences, for Sins, to all those who personally visited the Church of Rome,
and to such also who being hindered by their occasions were made partakers of
his bountiful remissions. Thus he who could so easily pardon the sins of
others, must expect the final Sentence of him, who is the just Judge, and
renders to every one according to his demerit.

PIUS III.
ALEXANDER the Sixth being now deceased, the Duke Valentino seized on all his
Plate, and Jewels, and whatsoever was of value, and fortified himself in the
Vatican, and Castle of S. Angelo with 12000 men, supposing that he might be
able by such a force to overawe the Cardinals in their Suffrages, and force
them to elect such a person, as was most acceptable to himself. The Cardinals,
to avoid the awe of such a force, assembled themselves in the Minerva, which is
a Convent in Rome; but that place also was presently surrounded by a Band of
Soldiers commanded by one Captain Coreglia, by order of Borgia, who himself at
that time lay sick in bed. The news of this restraint on the Cardinals, put all
Rome into an alarm, and great confusion, so that the Citizens shut their Shops,
chained up their Streets, and took Arms in their hands; all things seeming in
that fear, and dread, as if Hannibal had been at the Gates of the City; so that
Coreglia finding himself in some danger, gave way to the present necessity, and
setting fire to the Palace of the Orsini, retired without doing other damage.
In the mean time the Cardinals having gathered a force of 4000 Foot, resolved
contrary to custom, to suspend the Election, until such time as the Cardinals
resident in foreign parts beyond the Alps could convene in some other place,
where they might be more secure, and free in their Voices. Prospero Colonna
coming then to Rome with Fabius Orsino (the Son of him whom Borgia had put to
death) were by order of the Cardinals sent to Borgia, to entreat him, that he
would be pleased to remain quiet, and suffer the Election to proceed free, and
without disturbance. The like request also the Ambassadors of France, and Spain
made to him; with which suffering himself to be persuaded, he withdrew his
force from Rome, and departed thence in a Horse-litter, being in a weak state,
and condition of health: Howsoever his own Soldiers kept the Castle, tho the
Governor of it at the instance of Cardinal Bernardino Carvagiale, promised to
act every thing by the order, and direction of the College. In this manner the
Vatican being cleared, the Cardinals employed themselves nine days in
performing the solemn Obsequies of the Pope, during which time the French Army
was persuaded also to quit the Town at the instance of the Cardinal of Rouen,
who had great interest with that Party. So that all things being left free,
without appearance of any Commotion or Disorders during the Election; the
Cardinals entered into the Conclave to the number of 38, Guicciardin, l. 6.
where the disagreement which at other times kept things in delay, was now the
cause, that matters were put to a speedy issue, and a new Pope created in a few
days. Cardinal Amboise the Archbishop of Rouen being supported by the interest
of France, and the power of Borgia seemed to stand the fairest of any for the
Election: but the French Forces being withdrawn to engage the Spaniards in the
Campagna of Rome; the greatest, tho not the best number of the Cardinals agreed
in the Election, and on the 21. day of September, 1503. chose Francis
Piccolomini Cardinal of Siena for their Pope, who to renew the memory of Pius
the Second his Uncle, took upon him the name of Pius the Third, and was
solemnly Crowned on the 8th. of October following; the Sea having been vacant
six months, and three days.

Caesar Borgia who had during this Election remained with his Army at Nepe, so
soon as he received intelligence, that the Pope was Created, returned to Rome,
attended with 150 men at Arms, with the like number of Horsemen, and 800 Foot;
and having paid his Reverence, and Obeisance to the Pope, he returned his
thanks to the College of Cardinals, for having Elected a person so wise, so
religious, and good, and so worthy of the Papal Chair. Borgia having performed
this Ceremony, took up his Lodgings in the Vatican, where the Vrsini, thirsty
of Revenge, assaulted him with armed force, and he as valiantly defending
himself, many were killed on both sides: and at length Borgia by order of the
Pope was for his better security sent to the Castle of S. Angelo, whence
without license from the Pope, he had not liberty to go abroad, all his people
forsaking him, and lying where their fear or fortune led them. These troubles
to a person aged and sick as this Pope was, hastened the accomplishment of his
days, so that he expired his last breath on the 18th. of October, 1503. being
the 26th. day after his Election; not without some suspicion of Poison: for
having a sore Leg, it was imagined that by the suggestion and contrivance of
Pandolfo Petrucci the Tyrant of Siena, some Poison being injected to the Wound,
he was thereby greatly afflicted, and more speedily brought to his end, being
aged 74 years, 5 months, and 10 days. He was afterward buried in the Chapel
of S. Andrew, belonging to S. Peter's Church, under a fair Monument of Marble,
near to the Sepulcher of his Uncle. After which the Sea was vacant 14 days only.

JVLIVS II.
THE Funeral Obsequies of Pope Pius being performed, the very first night that
the Cardinals entered into the Conclave, being the 9th. day of October, Julian
de la Rovere, Bishop Cardinal of Ostia was Elected Pope, with the common
consent of 37 Suffrages, all of them so unanimously concurring together, that
before his choice, all reports fixed and concentred upon him; and afterward he
gave himself the name of Julius the Second. He was born in Savona, within the
Dominions of Genoua, his Fathers name was Raphael, the Brother of Sixtus the
Fourth, whose Pedigree we have already mentioned; he had two Brothers,
Bartholomew who was a Friar of the Order of S. Francis, Bishop of Ferrara, and
Patriarch of Antioch; and John who was Prefect of Rome, and Duke of Sora, and
Senegaglia, and he himself from Bishop of Carpentras, was at the same time with
Peter Riario created Cardinal of S. Peter ad Vincula, by the said Sixtus the
Fourth. Having obtained this Dignity, Julius appeared extremely grave and
modest in all his actions, so that he acquired the good esteem and opinion of
all persons, obliging all those with whom he treated by his courteous and
affable behavior: he afterward obtained the Title of Bishop of Albano, then
of Sabino, and great Penitentiary, and lastly of Bishop of Ostia, Velletri, and
Legate at Avignon. In the time of Innocent the Eighth he had gained great
power, and interest in the Court of Rome: but in the time of Alexander the
Sixth, he was forced to give way to other Favorites, and the difficulties of
those times, and retire into France, where he remained for the space of ten
years: At length (as we have said) having amassed great wealth, he was almost
by the common agreement of the whole Conclave promoted to the Papal Chair, not
without the astonishment, and displeasure of many, who being acquainted with
his fierce and impetuous Spirit, did admire (as Guicciardin says) how a man
known to be impatient of rest, and tranquillity, Lib. 6.
who had consumed his Youth in continual Travels, offended many by necessity,
and exercised hatred, and hostility, could so speedily operate on so many
dissenting Spirits, and cause them to conspire in an unanimous agreement for
his promotion. But on the contrary, it will not seem so strange, if it be
considered, that he had been a long time Cardinal, and by degrees gained such
interest, and authority in the Court of Rome, that he was styled the principal
Defender of the Ecclesiastical Dignity, and Authority, that he was magnificent
in his Buildings, generous in his benefits, and so punctual to his word, that
Pope Alexander, who was otherwise his mortal enemy, would yet do him that
right, as to confess him faithful, and just to the performance of his promises:
but yet this good quality which he was so careful to preserve in his private
condition; he made no scruple, or conscience to violate that he might become
Pope: for the obtaining of which, he made such immoderate promises to
Cardinals, Princes, and Barons, that he well knew the whole Revenue, and Price
of the Papal Sea, if set to sale, had not been able to have satisfied; and
therefore it is not difficult to imagine, how the promises of a person, not used
to beguile, should procure a confidence in the minds of the most scrupulous,
and wary persons. Nor were the Cardinals only possessed with these
expectations; but Caesar Borgia himself conceived hopes upon his promises of
being confirmed General of the Armies of the Church, and of a Marriage between
his Daughter, and the Popes Nephew called Francis Maria de la Rovere, the
Prefect of Rome. But he soon discovered the vanity of these hopes; for Julius
being Crowned the 26th. of November, 1503.
and settled in the Papal Chair, would afford him no other grace, or favor, than
his liberty, and freedom from imprisonment, upon condition that he should
deliver up into the Power of the Church, the Fortresses of Cesena and Forli,
which were the retirements of his impious Guards. Borgia who had deserved a
thousand deaths, being in this manner set at liberty from the Castle of S.
Angelo, embarked at Ostia in a Boat for Naples, where so soon as he arrived, he
was seized by the great Captain Gonsalvo, by order from the Catholic King, and
being thence transported into Spain, he made his escape, and fled to John King
of Navarre, where in a certain fray, he was cut in pieces by the Cantabrians,
who are a people that border upon Asturias.

Julius being thus rid of this Pest of mankind, by whom all Italy was
embroiled, and several dominions dismembered from the Church; he endeavored to
recover all back again; for being a true Defender of the Ecclesiastical
Possessions, and Rights, he would compound for nothing, but rather amplify,
than retrench the Dominions of the Church.

The first enterprise therefore that he undertook, was to drive out and expel
John Bentivoglio, his old inveterate enemy, who had unjustly usurped a power
over the City of Bologna; forcing him with his Wife, and Children to remain
banished in Bassetto, a Country belonging to the Dominions of Parma, and
contentedly to consent to the destruction of his Palace, which was a fair and
noble structure.

His next design was against the Venetians, for recovery of Arimino and Ravenna
with the Territories thereunto belonging, by force of Arms from the Venetians;
and to that end entered into a League with Maximilian the Emperor, the Kings of
France, of Spain, with the Dukes of Ferrara, and Mantoua, all conspiring to the
total ruin and subversion of the Venetian State; the which League was agreed,
and signed at Cambray, a City of Flanders. Moreover the quarrel between the
Pope and the Venetians was augmented by the dispute they had for the City of
Faenza, which the Pope laid claim unto, as having always been a part of the
Ecclesiastical State; the which he resolved to wrest from their hands by the
Spiritual, as well as by Temporal Arms, having thundered out his
Excommunications both against the Senate, and People. On the contrary the
Venetians pleaded, that the City of Faenza was no part of the Possessions of
the Church, in regard that the Pope, and Cardinals had in a full Consistory
amply transferrred the Rights and Jurisdiction thereof to Caesar Borgia formerly
Duke Valentino. That before that Grant, the Popes had never possessed Faenza,
but from time to time had given it to new Vicars, Guicciardin, lib. 6.
without acknowledging other superiority, than the Tribute, which they offered
to pay readily, when it should be required. These Arguments were seconded by
the Venetians, with an Army, which appearing before Faenza, and the Batteries
began, the City yielded it self into the hands of the Enemy; they might with
like facility have taken Imola and Furli; but not to excite the indignation of
the Pope too far, they abstained from farther proceedings, being masters
already of Faenza and Rimini in Romagna, with their Countries Montefiora, S.
Archangeo, Verruca, Gattere, Savignano, and Meldole, with the Haven and Country
of Cesena, and in the Territory of Immola, of Tossignana, Solarvola, and
Montfattagla.

Notwithstanding this success, and force of the Venetians, the storm and power
of so many potent Confederates raised against them, was too furious, and a
match unequal for them to contend with. The first beginning to so great a War
was made the 15th. of April, 1509.
when Monsieur de Chaumont with 3000 Horse, passed the Ford of Adda, and
joining afterward with the other Confederates, gave Battle to Alviano, the
General of the Venetian Forces: the Fight was continued, and maintained with
great bravery, and resolution on both sides; but at length the Venetians being
overwhelmed with the number of their Enemies, and deprived of strength rather
than courage, without turning their backs to the Enemy, they remained almost
all dead upon the place. After this Defeat, which happened on the 14th. of May,
1509. at Guiaradadda, Guicciardin, lib. 8.
the Emperor Maximilian took possession of Verona, Vicenza, Padoua, and
Trivigiano. The King of France, of Bergamo, Brescia, Cremona, and Crema. The
King of Spain of Trani, Monopoli, and Barletta in Puglia. The Pope had Ravenna,
Arimino, and all Romagna delivered to him. The Duke of Ferrara was made master
of Rovigo, and the Duke of Mantoua was re-possessed of Asola. So that this
Republic, which had not long since been so renowned, and famed for greatness
through the whole world, was now confined within those Fortifications which the
Sea had made them, and wherein their Commonwealth took its first beginning.
When the news of so great a Calamity arrived at Venice, great was the
consternation of the Counselors, and the cries and lamentations of the
Citizens, placing before their eyes nothing but the utter ruin and destruction
of their Government, and Country, whose glory, and puissance a few months
before had been such, that they promised to themselves no less than the Empire
of all Italy. But now being reduced to a low, and despa^^^ng condition, they
resolved to cast themselves at the feet of the Pope, h^mbly supplicating his
Pardon, and Mercy; and that he would be pleased as a tender Father to receive
them with pious compassion into his Arms, and Protection. And now Julius having
gained all the Cities and Countries from them, to which he could lay any Claim
or Title, began to melt with pity in consideration of their afflicted State:
And therefore to comfort them again, he openly Absolved their Ambassador in the
Portico of S. Peter's Church, and by them in a solemn manner took off the
Excommunication from the People: Then Articles of Peace were made, and a League
between them: The Pope was to have a full power and authority to bestow all the
Benefices, Livings, and Preferments belonging to the Church within their
Dominions: and on the other side the Venetians were to have Padoua restored to
them; and their Title and Dominion over the Seas confirmed, and continued. The
Concession of Padoua was greatly displeasing to the Emperor Maximilian; nor was
the French King contented with the Reconciliation which passed between the Pope
and the Venetians: so that a misunderstanding being hence created between the
Pope, and these two great Princes, matters broke out into an open War. Julius
that he might weaken the French Interest and Party, endeavored to withdraw
Alfonso de Este, Duke of Ferrara from the friendship of King Lewis; but he
having anciently conceived an implacable hatred against the Venetians, and
being bribed also by the French Money, refused to give ear to the persuasions,
or injunctions of the Pope. Julius highly enraged hereat, thundered out his
Excommunications against him, warning the French King not to take part against
him in defense of the Contumacy, and Rebellion of the Duke of Ferrara, who was
a Feudatary, and held all his Lands and Dominions in right of the Church, and
for the better, and more convenient prosecution of this War, he removed his
Court to Bologna. But these menaces and motions not being able to divert the
French King, nor Emperor from their Alliance with the Duke of Ferrara, nor
their design of utterly subverting the Venetian State; the Pope resolved to
fortify himself by a League with Spain, and having hired a great number of
Switzers, he joined the Army of the Church with that of the Venetians; and
having thereby composed a Body or about 12000 Foot, under the command of
Francisco Moralva, he took the City of Modena, and the City and Territory of
Mirandola, and then returned triumphantly to Bologna. But this good success
continued not long; for the French growing strong, did first by an Army under
Monsieur Claumont, attempt the Siege of Bologna; but the Pope being recruited
with the Forces of Venice, and Spain, obliged Chaumont to withdraw his Army,
after the propositions of Peace negotiated by Laurence Pucci the Popes Datary
of Florence, were rendered ineffectual. Afterward the Pope recommending the
defense and safety of the City of Bologna to the care of the Magistrates, and
exhorting them to be loyal, and faithful to the Church, departed thence for
Ravenna, with intention speedily to return to Rome. After his departure
Trivulse who was constituted General of the French Army in the place of
Chaumont, approaching Bologna with all his Force, so terrified the Cardinal of
Pavia, who was left there for Legate, or Governor of the City, that he
immediately fled, and surrendered all without striking of one stroke: the like
panick fear possessing the Army of the Church, which lay quartered not far from
thence, they all fled, leaving their Cannon, Provisions, and Baggage to the
Enemy. Trivulse entering the City of Bologna, delivered it into the hands of
Bentivoglio, whose Family had been ancient Lords of it; and not farther to
irritate the anger, and displeasure of the Pope, he proceeded no farther, but
retired with his Army into the Duchy of Milan.

The Pope (as he had just cause) resenting this loss of Bologna, being the
chief City next to Rome of the Ecclesiastical State, did seem inclinable to
Articles of Peace, and Accommodation; but his actions were guided in such sort,
that they seemed rather to proceed from an intention to avoid the present
danger, than from any desire he had to Peace: fear, obstinacy, hatred, and
disdain striving together in him. In the mean time several accusations were
brought to him of Treason and Cowardice against the Cardinal of Pavia, whom the
Pope so entirely loved, that no prejudicate thoughts could take place in his
mind against him; and therefore when the Cardinal came to Revenna to clear
himself of the aspersions which were cast upon him; the Pope seemed so little
to be touched, or affected with them, that as soon as the Cardinal arrived and
demanded Audience, he rejoiced much, and invited him to Dinner. But as he was
going to the Popes Palace, attended with a Guard of Horsemen, the Duke of Vrbin
bearing an ancient grudg, and hatred to him, reproaching him of Cowardice,
which had caused the loss of Bologna, and the slight of the Army; he with a
small train rusht in amongst his Guard of Horsemen, who out of reverence and
respect made him way, and with a Poniard slew the Cardinal with his own hand:
who, tho for the degree he held, ought to have been treated at another rate;
yet for his infinite Vices deserved a more cruel punishment. The death of the
Cardinal of Pavia by the many ill circumstances of it, did more nearly affect
the Pope; for the murder having been perpetrated by his Nephew upon his dearest
Favorite, on a Cardinal of his high Degree, and in a place so near his person,
were all aggravations to increase his grief, and shame, who had made
professions to preserve and exalt the Ecclesiastical Dignity. The Pope not able
to beat this grief, nor attemper his fury, departed the same day from Ravenna
to Rome: and for the greater augmentation of his trouble, and grief, he was
overtaken in his journey as he traveled, with a report, that at Bologna,
Modena, and other Cities, Placarts were affixed in all public places,
denouncing and publishing a Council to be held, and celebrated on the first day
of September following at Pisa, where the Pope himself was also cited to
appear. This Council was convened by the Authority of the dissenting Cardinals,
such as Bernardino Carvagiale a Spaniard, who was the chief leader and director
of the Schism, William Brisoner a French Bishop, Francis Borgia a Spaniard,
Cardinal of S. Cecilia, Renat de Brie a Frenchman, Cardinal of S. Sabina, and
Frederick Sanseverino, an Italian, Cardinal of S. Angelo: all which agreed, and
pretended that a Council might, where was apparent necessity, be judicially
convoked by them: and that when a Pope was guilty of Simony, infamous and
damnable in his manners, Author of so many Wars, Guicciardin, lib. 10.
and notoriously incorrigible to the universal scandal of all Christendom; that
then the power of convocating a Council (which was the only remedy, and redress
for so many evils) did lawfully devolve unto them, especially having the
Authority of the Emperor, and the consent of the most Christian King, together
with the Clergy of Germany, and France concurring. The Pope enraged with this
bold attempt of his contumacious Cardinals, issued out his Excommunications
against them, depriving them of their Hats, Honors, and Dignities
Ecclesiastical: notwithstanding which, the design of the Council proceeded, and
on the first day of September, the Proctors of the Cardinals being come to
Pisa, did there celebrate the Acts for opening of the same: with which the Pope
conceiving yet higher indignation, against the Florentines, for that they had
suffered the Conventicle, (for so he called it) to take beginning in their
State, did declare, and publish, that whosoever did favor the Conventicle of
Pisa, did stand actually Excommunicated, Interdicted, and subject to all the
Penalties severely ordained by Laws against Schismatics and Heretics; and
that accordingly Lewis XII. King of France, together with the Cities of
Florence, and Pisa, did stand actually Excommunicated and Interdicted. And
farther to countermine this Council, he published a General Council to be held
at the Lateran; and to do the greatest despite imaginable to the Florentines,
he constituted Cardinal John de Medices, who with his whole Family was exiled
from Florence, Legate of Bologna, Romagna, and of the whole Army of the League:
and to give farther diversion and trouble in France, he incited Henry VIII,
King of England, and Ferdinand King of Spain to join in a League with him; the
first to enter his Forces into Aquitaine, and the latter to wage War on the
King of Navarre, who being joined in Confederacy with Lewis, did likewise lie
under the censure of Excommunication. Matters being thus disposed, he finished
the Articles of a League made with the Catholic King, and the Senate of
Venice, which was solemnly published on the 5th. of October in the Church of
Santa Maria del Popolo, the Pope and Cardinals being present. where it was
solemnly declared, that the intent thereof was to preserve the Unity of the
Church, to defend her from the present Schism, to recover the City of Bologna,
which was the right of the Church, to confound the Assembly at Pisa, and
finally to chase, and expel the French by force of Arms out of Italy. Lewis
finding himself on all sides hardly beset, hastened the Recruits of his Army,
and withdrawing the Forces he had in Brescia, which he had lately recovered
from the Venetians, and from Bologna, which composed in all a Body of about
15500 men, he marched by Ravenna, in order to join with the Troops of the Duke
of Ferrara, who was then Confederate with France. The Popes Army, with the
Allies consisting of about 13000 Foot, and 1800 men at Arms, marched toward
the relief of Ravenna, which was then hardly besieged by the French Army, under
the Command of Gaston de Foix a valiant, and experienced General. The Papal
Army being encamped at no far distance from the French, endeavored to avoid a
Battle, which the Enemy frequently offered them; but finding that unless they
did fight, Ravenna would be taken, for such wide breaches were made in the
Walls by the Cannon, that the Enemy was ready to enter, and in sight of their
Army to make themselves Masters of the City; to prevent which, and the disgrace
of such a mischief, time was not farther to be lost, nor an Engagement to be
longer declined; so that on Easter day both Armies joined Battle: The Fight
continued so very long, and bloody, that in the space of six hours, it was
scarcely discernable to which side the Victory inclined. At length, by
direction of the Duke of Ferrara, the Cannon being brought by a long compass
about to play on the Flank of the Army, the Spaniards and Italians began to
fly, leaving their Baggage and the glory of the day unto the French, which they
gained with so much blood, and loss of the principal Commanders, and flower of
their Army, that they seemed rather vanquished, than Conquerors, and to remain
in a condition which afforded them no cause of triumph in their Victory. It is
said that twenty thousand men were slain in this Battle, and the numbers almost
equal on each side: amongst which 150 Gentlemen belonging to the Court of the
French King were killed, five of the Family of Colonna, with Gaston de Foix
their General. Of the Popes Army the Legate John de Medices, with several other
Captains was taken Prisoner. The first news of this Defeat, and the ill
consequences thereof, (which was the taking and sacking of Ravenna) was
entertained at Rome with great fear and tumult; so that the Cardinals running
hastily to the Pope, urged and pressed him with earnest and vehement Petitions
to conclude the War, and accept such reasonable and moderate conditions, as
they were assured the King of France would be ready to offer. On the other side
the Ambassadors of the King of Aragon, and the Senate of Venice entertained
other sentiments, judging from the advices they had received, that matters were
not reduced to such extremities, as the fears and melancholy fancies of the
Cardinals suggested: for that the French Army had not gained this Victory with
so little loss, but that the great effusion of blood which it had cost, had
weakened their Force to a degree, as was not in a short time to be recovered;
nor was the death of that valiant and wise General Gaston de Foix, Guicciardin,
lib. 10.
and other Captains slain on the French side to be repaired in this age.
Likewise it was further urged, that the Viceroy was escaped with the greater
part of the Cavalry, and that the Spanish Infantry were retreated from the
Battle in good order, which being joined with the Swissers, which were daily
expected, there would be no necessity at present of yielding to the conditions
of the French, which in this conjuncture, would be very unequal, and
dishonorable, and that therewith they must expect to receive Laws from the
pride of Bernardin Carvagiale, and the insolence of Frederick de Sancta
Severin, and the other dissenting and Schismatical Cardinals. Things being in
this manner debated before the Pope, he remained doubtful what to conclude, or
resolve, fear and hope striving within him: But whilst he thus remained in
suspense, the course of fortune began to turn; for Monsieur de Palissa, who
succeeded Gaston de Foix in the command of the French Army on a sudden
departed from Romagna, and drew all his Forces into the Duchy of Milan, being
alarmed by descent of the Swissers into Lombardy, leaving only 300 Lances, 300
Light-Horsemen, and 6000 Foot, with eight pieces of Artillery behind, under
command of the Legate of the Council. This news delivered the Pope from the
fear of being forced to leave Rome, and confirmed the state of his affairs in
such manner, that he resolved to continue the War with better hopes, and
expectations of success.

For the Pope's affairs having regained their reputation, the new Council
lately convened, was on the first of May opened in the Church of S. John
Lateran at Rome; to this Assembly the dissenting Cardinals were cited to give
their attendance; but they not appearing, were on the 8th. day of the Sessions
declared contumacious, and Excommunicated, and deprived of all their Temporal
and Spiritual Degrees, Honors, and Offices, and the people absolved from their
Submission, and Obedience to them. It was farther also declared, That their
Council held at Pisa, and afterward removed to Milan, was but a Conventicle,
and an unlawful and Schismatical Meeting, and all their Acts rendered void,
null, and of none effect. In the mean time the Cities of Lombardy being
encouraged by the Swissers, who were now come into Italy in favor of the Pope,
revolted, and re-assuming their ancient Liberty, assailed the French with open
force, and overthrew them. The Venetians also joining with them, prosecuted
their Victory in such manner, that in the space of 70 days after the Battle of
Ravenna, the French Army was almost wholly defeated; and the remainder by order
of King Lewis, was recalled to his assistance against the Kings of England and
Spain, who at that time miserably infested his Country: so that in a short time
all Italy was freed from the slavery of the French. The dissenting Cardinals
having lost their protection at Milan, fled from thence to Lions, where they
were kindly received, and entertained at the charge of King Lewis.

The French being thus driven out of Italy, all the Cities and Towns belonging
to the Pope, did by consequence return to the Ecclesiastical State: Parma, and
Piacenza being dependencies on the Exarchat of Ravenna, voluntarily yielded to
the Pope, all the other Towns of Romagna followed their example, together with
Bologna; which casting off all respect to the Family of the Bentivogli,
expelled them from their Confines; with which the Pope not being satisfied,
pursued them with the thunder of his Excommunications. Genoua being also
abandoned by the French, was possessed by Fregoso. The Venetians seized on
Crema, and Brescia, such of the Family of the Medices, as had followed the
Popes Party, were re-instated in Florence; Peter Joderini, who had been created
perpetual Gonfaloniere, being expelled thence. The State of Milan was resigned
to Maximilian Sforza, as the true, and lawful Prince; all which benefits, and
happy successes being procured by the Arms of the Swissers, they were in the
Council of Lateran adjudged and declared to be the Restorers of the Liberties
of Italy.

And now all things being restored to this happy state, the Pope required the
Venetians in virtue of the late Articles to deliver Verona, and Vicenza to
Maximilian; which they obstinately refusing to perform, he entered into a
League with the Emperor against them. The Venetians on the other side being
well acquainted with the temper of the Pope, confederated themselves in an
Alliance with Lewis the French King, hoping by his assistance and protection to
defend themselves from that League: to this interest likewise the dissenting
Cardinals adhered; who instigating Lewis every day against the Pope, and
raising tumults in several places, gave out a report, that the Abbot of Clugni
was to be created Pope in the place of Julio; the which extremely incensed and
moved him with choler, and disdain, for he had a mind always unquiet; not
sooner ending one enterprise, before he began another; his Plots and designs
always increasing. Guicciardin, lib. 11.
He determined now at the beginning of the Spring to attempt Ferrara, a design
so much desired: He had bought the City of Siena for thirty thousand Ducats. He
agreed to lend the Emperor forty thousand Ducats, receiving Modena in pawn. He
threatened Luca for seizing Garsagnana. He testified some anger against the
Cardinal de Medicis, because he seemed more inclining to the Party of the
Catholic King than to his; and studied new Plots and Practices to alter the
Estate of Florence. And in this manner having a thousand irons in the fire, he
was continually plotting how he might drive the Spanish Army out of Italy by
the help of the Swissers, whom he always extolled, and embraced; it being his
great design, as he often uttered, to expel all Foreign Force out of Italy. He
had also moved Henry VIII. King of England to make War upon France, and in
detestation of Lewis, he had transferred by a public Decree of the Council of
Lateran, the Title of Most Christian to the King of England, for which there
was a Bull prepared, and written, containing also in the same, a deprivation,
and deposing of the King of France from all his Power and Dignities, giving
that Kingdom for a prey to any who could conquer it. With these great thoughts,
and perhaps many other more secret intrigues, he fell sick of a violent Fever,
caused perhaps by the violent agitations of his mind; and in a few days died in
the Vatican, Anno 1513.
on the 21. of February, 1513. the Council of Lateran still sitting: He was
aged above 70 years, and held the Papal Chair for the space of nine years,
three months, and five and twenty days; and was buried in S. Peter's Church, in
the Chapel of his Uncle Pope Sixtus. This Julius the Second had a spirit more
agreeable to a Soldier, or Martial Governor, than a Pastor of the Church. He
was a Prince of incredible constancy, and courage, but so violent, and of such
unmeasurable apprehensions, that the Discord of Princes, and the Reverence
which some of them bore to the Church, preserved him from ruin, more than his
own moderation, or discretion: And yet nevertheless he was lamented by such,
who knew not how to distinguish between the tempers which are decent, and
agreeable to difference a temporal, from a spiritual Prince: for certainly, had
he been a Secular, his inclinanations, his industry, and zeal, to enlarge, and
advance his Dominions, might have been more commendable, than in him, who
pretended to be Vicar to the Prince of Peace.

LEO X.
POPE Julio being dead, and his Funerals performed according to the accustomed
Rites: the Cardinals being four and twenty in number, entered the Conclave in a
peaceable manner, without any appearance of outward force over-awing their
Election, or practices of Simony, and corruption, or other bad Arts, by which
it was manifest that the two former Popes had acquired their Dignity, and so on
the 11th. of March, being the seventh day after, the Cardinals entered the
Conclave. John de Medicis of that great and illustrious Family in Florence,
(now Dukes of Tuscany) was by the common Suffrages of 23 Cardinals elected
Pope, taking upon himself the name of Leo X. At the age of 13 years he was made
a Cardinal by Innocent VIII. and now was about the age of 37 years, when he was
created Pope; a thing rare, and unusual to have a Pope so young, and which had
not otherwise been practicable but by the concurrence of the young Cardinals,
such as the Cardinal of Aragon, Gonzaga, Cornaro, Petrucci, etc. the Conclave
before they came to this Election, proposed, and with many warm Debates
considered of the ways, how the Secular Power which the late Popes had
exercised in a disorderly manner, sacrificing all to their lust and ambition,
might be restrained within some limits, and bounds of moderation: but those
rules, and terms agreed upon, were speedily relaxed, and dispensed with, so
soon, as a new Lord or Governor appeared, whom every one courted, being
desirous with humble obsequiousness to gratify; and freeing him from all the
clogs, and limits to his power, endeavored to testify the confidence they had
in him. Being thus chosen on the 11th. of March, he was crowned on the 19th.
and on the 11th. of April following, in a most pompous, and solemn manner he
went to visit the Church of S. John Lateran, and with such magnificence, and
State, as was never equalled by former Popes.

The world conceived great joy, and expectations of good at the first news of
his Election; for being a person of unspotted Chastity, of exemplary Piety, and
unblemished in his manners; and the Papal Dignity obtained fairly by him
without Simony, Corruption, or evil Arts, it was reasonable to expect, and
presage from such happy beginnings, times of more calmness, and blessings to
the Church, than under the turbulent Reigns of the two former Popes.

The exiled Cardinals, (of which those of greatest note were S. Croia and S.
Severin) hearing of the death of Julius II. began their Journey toward Rome;
and being landed at Livorn, they went to Pisa, and thence had safe conduct to
Florence. The Pope having received intelligence of their arrival in that City,
sent the Bishop of Orvietto to advise them not to proceed farther, until such
time, as it should be determined in what manner they should be received at
Rome. For considering they had been judicially deprived, and their deprivation
confirmed in the Council of Lateran, that they should forbear to go in the
habit of Cardinals, but present, and offer themselves in some other modest, and
penitential dress whereby they might testify their repentance and humility,
which would be the best motive, and arguments to restore them again to their
pristine condition; the which being accordingly agreed, the Cardinals
renouncing their late Schism with all submission, and humility returned to
Rome, and kissed the feet of the Pope. Notwithstanding which, it was judged
fit, that the Council of Lateran should still be continued, until many
disorders which had crept lately into the Church, were wholly redressed.

And now Leo being settled in the Papal Chair, showed himself desirous to
continue, and conserve the Peace of Christendom, which he thought would be most
easily effected by persuading the warlike and martial spirits of those times to
spend their fury upon the Turk, and in the mean time endeavored to
accommodate, and compose the differences between Maximilian the Emperor and the
Venetians touching Verona, and Piacenza by an amicable agreement. At the same
time also he hired the Switzers with a great sum of money to assist Sforza Duke
of Milan against the French; for notwithstanding his inclinations in the
general were toward a peace, yet his dislikes to that Nation, and the
displeasures he had taken on many accounts against Charles the 12th. moved him
with earnest desires to chase the French out of Italy. To perform which the
Switzers were esteemed the only instruments capable for this exploit, and to
engage them therein, a largess was sent them of 42 thousand Ducats with
pretense, (in case the matter should come to light) that twenty thousand of
them were upon account of their yearly Pensions, and that the other twenty two
thousand were due on Arrear by preceding Popes, to the three Cantons. The
Switzers being satisfied, and animated with this payment, resolved to accept of
no conditions with the French, who being now in Lombardy, had forced Milan to
surrender, with all other Cities belonging to that Duchy, except Novaro, and
Coma, which being defended by the Switzers, held out as yet in the name of
Maximilian Sforza. Wherefore the French having no other work remaining,
Guicciardin, l^b. 11.
besieged Novaro, and had so battered the Walls, and made such breaches, that
they were ready to enter their men. Howsoever fearing the Resolution of the
Besieged, who all the time of the Siege, had not so much as shut their Gates
against the Enemy; and understanding that Relief was coming to the Town, and an
Army under the command of that renowned Captain Altosasso, they retired at two
miles distance from the Walls of Novaro; with which the Switzers were so
encouraged, that not staying for the Relief expected, they made a Sally on the
Enemy, and gave them a total Defeat, taking all their Baggage, with two and
twenty pieces of Artillery, remaining a prey to the Conquerors. After which the
City of Milan with all the places belonging to it, returned again into the
possession and power of their Duke; the people of Milan giving two hundred
thousand Ducats as a Reward to the Switzers for the restoration of their
Liberty.

All things now putting on a face of Liberty, and Peace in Italy, the French
King seemed willing to demonstrate a filial obedience, and submission to the
Church, and declared himself well pleased with the Pope. for receiving the
Dissenting, and Schismatical Cardinals to pardon, and Grace. The Pope was also
in like manner successful in his Negotiations of Peace between the Emperor, and
the Venetians: for both Parties having referred the determination of their case
to his Arbitration, and compromise, a Peace ensued, tho the Sentence and
Determination was not Pronounced and Published until the year following. Lewis
likewise the French King, at the persuasions and instigation of the Clergy, was
very desirous to come in, and be reconciled to the Papal See; and to that end
sent the Bishop of Marseilles his Ambassador to Rome, to treat, and conclude
all matters in dispute, either relating to Spiritual, or Temporal Affairs. At
the arrival of this Ambassador, the Pope by a Decree of the Lateran Council,
which still continued, gave License to the Bishop of France, and other
Prelates, against whom his Predecessor Pope Julius had proceeded by censure of
Excommunication to come in, and in the space of one years time to purge
themselves of the contumacy with which they stood charged. In pursuance of
which Decree, the Ambassador, and other Agents from France, did in the name of
the King abjure all the Acts, and Decrees made, and ordained by the Conventicle
at Pisa: promising to acknowledge and hold for true and sacred, all those Acts,
and conclusions which should be declared by the Council of Lateran, and that
six of those Prelates which were present at the Convention of Pisa, should
repair to Rome, and in the name and behalf of all the Gallican Church renounce,
and disown that Convention; and promise to submit, and hold, and esteem for
Sacred, and Obligatory, whatsoever should be determined in their case, or in
any other matter by the Lateran Council; and that then upon such submission,
the Council should grant a full and plenary Pardon, and Absolution for all
those Crimes committed by them against the Church of Rome. But whilst these
things were in Treaty, Lewis XII. being surprised by a Fever, died the first
day of January 1515. at Paris, in whose place Francis de Valois the first of
that name, Duke of Angolesme succeeded. Francis having made a Peace with the
King of England, assumed the Title of Duke of Milan, as appertaining to him not
only by the ancient right of the Dukes of Orleans, but also as comprehended in
the Investiture made by the Emperor in the Treaty of Cambray* to recover which
he made a League with the Venetians, and passing into Italy with a powerful
Army, declared War against Maximilian Sforza Duke of Milan, who on the other
side had made an Alliance with the Emperor, the Switzers, and the King of
Spain. The Pope being jealous of the French, believing that so soon as they
were become Masters of Milan, they would also design upon Piacenza, and Parma,
favored the cause of Duke Sforza, and encouraged the Switzers by his Legate
the Cardinal of Sedan, to continue firm, and constant in defense of Italy
against the French Arms, that so their ancient glory which had been in former
years crowned with so much success, might be maintained by them, and the Title
of Restorers of the Italian Liberty be for ever continued to their Honor. The
Switzers having their valor provoked by such incitements as these encountered
the French Army, which under the auspicious Conduct of King Francis, was passed
into Italy, near Marignan, where after a sharp conflict, the Venetians coming
in to the assistance of the French, the Switzers were overthrown, and forced to
retreat into Milan, which afterward was surrendered* and Duke Sforza being
taken Prisoner was sent into France, with an allowance of five and thirty
thousand Crowns a year, which he agreed to receive in lieu of his Dukedom.
After this success, Parma and Piacenza which had been annexed to the Church by
the Arms of Julius II. fell into the possession of the French; for Leo not
having the courage to defend them, made them a Sacrifice to the Conqueror, and
the price of his Peace with France, the which was concluded at Bologna, where
an interview was appointed between the King and Pope Leo. The Pope entered the
City on the 8th. of December 1515. and the King two days after, having been
received on the Confines of the Country of Reggia by the Cardinals of Fieschi
and Medicis, whom the Pope had appointed to be his Legates Apostolical to him.
The King, so soon as he entered was immediately conducted into the Consistory,
where before the Pope by a Speech delivered by his Chancellor, he professed all
Obedience to the Papal Chair, and afterward was lodged three days in the same
Palace with the Pope, during which time all the signs of good will, and amity
interceded between them, and all matters agreed which had relation to Naples,
Modena, and other controversies: and thus all things being amicably concluded,
the King returned to Milan, and in a short time after into France; leaving the
Duke of Bourbon Lieutenant in his place: The Pope also went to Florence, where
having passed the Winter, he in the Spring returned to Rome.

And now Pope Leo being a little at repose, designed the assistance of
Maximilian the Emperor (with whom he was in League) to make his Brother Julian
Lord of Siena, and Lucca, and thereunto to adjoyn the Dukedoms of Vrbin and
Ferrara: but Julian unexpectedly dying, the same fortune was intended for
Laurence his Nephew, Son of his Brother Peter de Medicis; and in the mean time,
until this design could be ripened and put in practice, the Pope committed to
him the Government of Florence, with condition that he should act nothing
without the privity and consent of the Citizens. And now to prepare a way for
taking the Duchy of Vrbin from Francisco Maria de la Rovere, the Pope began
with his Church Censures, Guicciardin, lib. 12.
causing the Accusations against him to be published, wherein he expressed,
that being in Pay, and under a Sallary from the Church, he had denied him the
Service of those Regiments for which he had received Pay, and had secretly
compounded with the Enemy. That he had killed the Cardinal of Pavia, for which
he was alsolved by Grace, and not by Justice, as also for many other Murders
committed by him. These and other were the Crimes, which were alleged against
him; but yet nothing animated the Pope so much with anger, and disdain against
him, as that he had denied unto his Brother Julian his aid, and assistance to
return to Florence. The success of the War was this. So soon as Renzo di Cere
the Popes General with a considerable Army showed himself upon the Frontiers of
the Duchy, the City of Vrbin with other Towns belonging to it, surrendered to
the Pope, the Duke himself retiring to Pesaro; which also yielded together with
Sinigaglia, and in the space of four days all submitted to the obedience of the
Pope; and then the Duke with all his Family saved himself in Mantua.

These successes were followed by new designs upon Siena, from whence by force
of Arms he compelled the Prince Borghese, and Cardinal Alfonso his Brother,
both Sons of Pandolfo Petrucci to retire, and make place for Raphael Petrucci,
his old Friend, and Companion in his Exile: at which the Cardinal was so
enraged, and excited beyond all patience, that he conspired against the life of
the Pope, which not succeeding, proved afterward the cause of his own
destruction. For this Alfonso Cardinal of Siena revolving often in his mind the
ingratitude of this Pope, who by the labors and dangers of Pandolfo Petrucci
his Father, Guicciardin, lib. 13.
was with all his Family restored to the Government of Florence; and yet had in
recompense of these benefits, caused him and his Brother Borghese to be thrust
out of Siena; the which thoughts boiling in his mind, he resolved once with his
own hand to stab the Pope; but being diverted from that intention by the danger
of the Fact, and by the ill fame of a wickedness without example, to have a
Pope killed by the hand of a Cardinal, he changed the Plot of the Dagger to
Poison, which by the help of Baptista Vercelli a famous Surgeon, and his
familiar Confident, he hoped to effect in this manner. The Pope being greatly
afflicted with an old Fistula in his Fundament, this Baptista was to be
preferred as an able man for this work; and then in dressing of the Wound he
was to have injected Poison into it: but Baptista being long in getting
admission to the Popes privacy, Alfonso grew impatient of delays, and not being
able to contain himself, continually uttered something of passion, which gave
the Pope just cause of suspicion, that this Alfonso was practicing something
against his life: at length by some Letters which were intercepted, the
Conspiracy was detected, which the Pope dissembling, invited Alfonso to Rome,
with promises of Reconciliation and Preferment; and for his encouragement
thereunto, he gave him Letters of safe conduct, and his promise to the Spanish
Ambassador not to violate the same. But so soon as Alfonso arrived, the Pope so
little esteemed the Faith he had given, that he caused him to be Arrested, with
his Friend Cardinal De Sauli, a Genoese, one so familiar and intimate with him,
that it was believed, that one could not be guilty, or designing any action
without the privity, and consent of the other. These two Cardinals being
committed to Prison in the Castle of S. Angelo, Ibidem.
the Spanish Ambassador complained of the breach of Faith, which being given to
the Kings Ambassador, ought to have been observed with the same sacred
fidelity, as given to the King himself. Whereunto the Pope made answer, that in
matters of a Conspiracy, designing against the life of the Pope, no safe
conduct was sufficient, unless in some clause of it, the Crime it, self had
been specified with a peculiar Proviso; and that in cases of Poisoning, which
is detestable to God and man, no sufficient provision can be made for security
of the Offender, unless the Crime it self be first mentioned, and pardoned. The
matter being fully examined, and Alfonso* and Bandinello in a full Consistory
being found guilty, they were by public sentence of the Consistory deprived of
the Dignity of Cardinals, and delivered over to the Secular Power: which being
done, the night following Alfonso was Strangled: but the Sentence of Bandinello
was changed to a perpetual Imprisonment; from which afterward for a certain
sum of money he gained a release.

The success which the Pope had against the Duke of Vrbin, was different to
that which he had against Alfonso Duke of Ferrara, for he being a watchful man,
and a good Soldier, defended himself against all the contrivances, and attempts
of the Pope.

Toward the end of the year 1517. the King of Spain died, leaving his Nephew
Charles of Austria, sole Heir of all his Kingdoms, and Dominions in Naples,
Sicily, and Spain, between whom, and the French King, there passed as yet, a
fair, and amicable correspondence, Notwithstanding which things were troublesome
in Italy, and (...) ^espight of all the endeavors of the Pope, who desired
nothing so much (...) peace, all things were unquiet, and tended to War: for
the Switzers (...) those minds were rather inflamed with indignation, in
remembrance of their late Defeat at Marignan, than abated, or humbled, entered
into a League with Maximilian the Emperor, to drive the French out of all their
Possessions in Italy: in opposition whereunto, the French joining with the
Venetians, recovered Brescia out of the hands of the Spaniards, and Verona from
the Emperor: and the Venetians by the support of this Alliance, made no account
of any amity with others, nor offered their Obedience to the Pope,
notwithstanding the endeavors of Altobello Bishop of Pola, whom he had
commissionated to be his Legate at Venice, not without some just reflections,
as a matter unworthy the Pontificial Majesty.

Francisco Maria Duke of Vrbin continued still his War against the Pope for
recovery of his State; but his success was ill both against the City of Osimo,
and also before the Town of Corinaldo, from whence with great blemish of honor
he was forced to raise his Siege: Nor was he more fortunate in his attempt to
recover Pesaro; for having put to Sea several Ships to cut off all Provisions
from the Town, they were encountered by another Fleet set out by those of
Rimini, consisting of sixteen Sail, with Barks, and Brigantines, which going in
convoy with Vessels laden with Provisions to Pesaro, met the Navy of Francisco
Maria, and engaging with them, sunk the Admiral, and destroyed their whole
Fleet; with which ill success, Francisco Maria despairing of his enterprise,
departed thence. At Rimini he also was worsted, and forced to return with his
Army into Tuscany, where being in great want of Provisions, and the Soldiers
without Pay, lived by Prey and Pillage, whereby they began to be no less
terrible to their friends, than to their enemies; and to grow weary of the War,
having no hope to better their condition either by a Battle, or protraction of
time. The Pope also on the other side became poor, having exhausted his
Treasury, and doubtful of the Faith of his Allies, especially of the King of
France, who was slow and backward in the payment of those moneys agreed by
Articles; so that Peace being the best expedient for good to both parties,
propositions were made for a Peace between the Legate, and Francisco Maria,
which by the Mediation of Monsieur D'Escut, General of the French Forces in
Italy, and Don Hugo de Monaco Vice-King of Sicily, was accorded on these
conditions, That the Pope should pay to the Spanish Footmen five and forty
thousand Ducats, and to the Gascoins and Germans threescore thousand; and that
upon such payment they should all depart within eight days out of the State of
the Church, the Jurisdiction of Florence, and the Territories of Vrbin. That
Francisco Maria should leave, and abandon all his Possessions in that State
within the term aforesaid, with License to carry with him all his movables,
and Artillery, with his famous Library, which with great charge and diligence
had been collected by Frederick his Grandfather by the Mothers side. That the
Pope should absolve him of all Censures, and pardon all the Subjects of the
State of Vrbin, and those who had been enemies in this War the Spaniards,
Gascoins, and Germans having received their moneys, marched to the Kingdom of
Naples; and Francisco Maria abandoned of all his Allies, returned to Mantua,
accompanied only with one hundred Horse, and six hundred Footmen.

In this manner ended the War with Vrbin, which tho it continued but eight
months, yet had exhausted the Coffers of the Pope of eight hundred thousand
Ducats, the greatest part of which he had drawn from the Commonwealth of
Florence, on the score of his great interest in that City: and indeed his
Charges were the greater, because that with much ignominy, he was forced to
purchase his peace with paying the Armies of his Enemy: Nor was the advantage
which he gained at the conclusion, acquired by the valor of his Arms, or
Virtue and Conduct of his Captains; for they being men of lewd lives, cowardly,
and base, were prosperous in nothing, all their actions tending to increase
disorders, and multiply errors; whereby the Pope being at length forced to
crave the assistance of all men, paid dearly for the purchase of Vrbin.

In this manner the year 1518. began, and continued with peace, and with an
unusual calmness in all the Regions of Italy, only the success of Sultan Selim
Emperor of the Turks, who had been victorious in Persia, Syria, and Egypt,
alarmed the Pope and the Christian Princes; who apprehending with great dread
the progress of his Arms, the number of his Ships, and Galleys, which he was
building, and all other Provisions necessary for War, feared lest he should
invest Rhodes, the Bulwark of Christendom in the Eastern parts, or perhaps fall
into Hungaria; which tho formerly defended by the Valor of the Inhabitants, yet
now lay exposed by its own Civil and Intestine Dissentions; and by the minority
of a King, governed by Priests, and Jesuitical Councils. Nor was Italy free
from the like fears of Invasion by that Potent Prince, which had under meaner
circumstances of power entered the City of Otranto, and put all Italy into a
fear and consternation: And therefore now to obviate, and prevent the like
dangers at a distance, the Pope caused most devout Processions, with the solemn
Pomp of Images, and Relics of Saints to be made at Rome, and in person walked
barefoot with all his Court from S. Peter's to the Minerva, where Prayers were
made to God, that he would be pleased to divert the fury of this Common Enemy
to Christendom. And because Prayers without human endeavors are not available,
Letters were wrote to all Christian Princes to join in this War; for the more
orderly management of which, the task, and enterprise which every one was to
undertake, was allotted, and contrived in the Consistory, and an Universal
Truce for five years was published amongst all Christian Princes, and States,
with grievous censures on those, who should be repugnant thereunto. In
pursuance of this method and design the Emperor and King of Poland were to
invade the Turk on the parts of Servia and Bulgaria. The French King,
Venetians, and other Princes of Italy were to Embark at the Port of Brundusium,
and pass into Albania, and invade Greece on that side. The Kings of England,
Spain, and Portugal were to Rendezvous at Car^agena in Spain, and with a Fleet
of 200 Sail enter the Heliespont, and attack Constantinople it self; and for
carrying on of this Holy War, voluntary Contributions were to be made, and
Impositions to be laid as well on the Clergy, as the Laity. Now tho these
matters were begun with great expectation, and the Universal Truce accepted
with a specious show, and mighty promises made of advancing this Enterprise,
with ostentation and bravery of words; yet at length private Interests,
overruling the zeal for Religion, and the Universal Union, the minds of the
Princes became slackned in the design, and the thoughts of War vanished; every
one looking at the peril as uncertain, and far distant.

The Peace still continuing in Italy until the year 1520. Martin Luther a Friar
of the Order of S. Austin began to make some disturbances in Germany, which
greatly opposed the Authority of the Church of Rome; The beginnings thereof had
their original from certain Indulgences which Pope Leo exercised in a more
ample, and licentious manner than was customed and practiced by former Popes.
For in the year 1100. being in the Reign of Urban II. Plenary Indulgences for
Pardon and Remission of Sins were bestowed on those only who went to the Holy
War with intent to deliver the Sepulcher of Christ out of the hands of
Infidels. These Indulgences were afterward in like manner dispensed unto
those, who either were not able, or willing to undertake the design in person,
provided that they entertained or paid another at their own charge. Afterward
Indulgences and Pardons of this nature became more common, being enlarged to
those who took part in the Wars against those who resisted the Secular Arms of
the Pope; tho the same were Christians, and Princes, who in defense of their
own Kingdoms, and States, opposed the Encroachments and Extravagancies of the
Ecclesiastical Claims. But now Pope Leo by the Counsel of Cardinal Puccio
bestowed his Indulgences in more ample form, and dispersed them in all parts of
the Christian World, without distinction of times, persons, or places, not only
for the help of such, who were yet living, but with power to deliver the souls
of the Dead from the pains of Purgatory; it being manifestly known, that the
design of these Indulgences was only to obtain money from the people, which the
Collectors exacted with an unparalled impudence, the matter became
scandalous, especially in Germany, where the Officers set the Indulgences to
sale at a small price; and sometimes in a Tavern this power of redeeming Souls
out of Purgatory were set for a Stake at a Game at Tables. This shame, and
dishonor was increased in the Country of Saxony, and other parts of Germany,
when it was known, that the proceed, and benefit of those Indulgences, extorted
with great rigor and avarice by the Bishop of Arembauld, (a man fit to be
employed in such a Commission) was not to be paid in to the Apostolical Chamber
at Rome, but given to Magdalen, Sister to the Pope, and devoted to the avarice
of a Woman; for then the matter became detestable, and the cries and
exclamations lowed in all parts of Germany. Luther being supported by the
favor of the Duke of Saxony, took this occasion to contemn these Indulgences,
and preach every where against them, which being a matter very plausible, his
Sermons were heard with great attention by the people, and his Doctrine approved
by his Auditors, who came from all parts to hear him: Having this
encouragement, he began to question the Power of the Church, and the Authority
of the Pope; and as matters grew higher, he disputed against Pardons, and
Penance, and Purgatory, upon which the Doctrine of Indulgences had its
foundation: on the truth of which Doctrins, he laid so much stress, and was so
positive in the certainty of all his Conclusions, that he would often say, he
would not refer or submit them to the judgment of Angels. After these
beginnings, O^^cil. Trent.
which seemed plausible and honest, and which made great noise, and were highly
controverted in the world by the most acute and subtle Wits of that Age; Luther
proceeded to preach against Images in Churches, against Prayers to Saints, to
question Transubstantiation in the Holy Eucharist, and to allow Marriage to
Priests, Monks, and Friars, the which he not only maintained by force of
Argument, but confirmed by his own example, The Pope in opposition hereunto
sent many Religious, and learned men into Germany to hinder (if possible) by
their Preaching, and Disputations the farther spreading of these Doctrins: The
Emperor Charles the Fifth in a Diet at Ratisbon made a public, and solemn
Edict against Luther and his Conclusions; the University of Paris condemned
them; and the King of England, Henry VIII. wrote a Book against them, for which
he afterward received from this Pope Leo, the Title of Defender of the Faith.
But Luther being a man of great courage, and supported by the favor of the
Duke of Saxony, little regarded either the Arguments of the Schoolmen, or the
Authority of the Princes; saying, That the Prophet forbad to trust in men, or
Princes, before whose judgment, the Word of God, and the sentence of Scripture
was to be preferred. These disturbances in Germany were followed by the like in
Switzerland, where Zuinglius by force of Argument disputed in favor of the
Doctrine of Luther; which caused such confusions, and discord, that for the
settlement, and quiet thereof the Senate of Zurich, convened all the Preachers
and Doctors of their Country, and requested the Bishop of Constance to depute
such wise, and learned persons, (as he should think fit) to assist at this
Conference, for determination of the matters in question: Great numbers of
people being assembled at this Convocation, Zuinglius proposed his Thesis, and
all the points in dispute, and offered to answer the Arguments of any Opponent,
which should be set up against him. Peter Faber a man holy in his life, and of
profound judgment, having heard, and weighed all the strength of Argument which
the Jacobins, and others had alleged, refused as Moderator in those
Controversies to determine any thing in those matters, which more properly
belonged to the cognizance of that General Council, which was shortly by
Authority of the Pope, and the consent of all the Christian Princes, to meet,
and assemble, consisting of all the Prelates of Christendom. This Sentence gave
Zuinglius advantage to advance his Doctrine, and say, that these were but delays
to amuse the people, and lull them in their ignorance; that doubtful matters
were proper to be treated, and discussed, and determined by the Authority of
General Councils; but that matters certain, and clear by Scripture, which was
the Word of God, and the rule of our lives, and confirmed by the practice of
the Primitive Christians, stood in need of no other Authority, than their own
plain evidence to confirm them. In fine, the Assembly broke up, and the Senate
concluded with this result, that the Gospel should be Preached according to the
Canon of the Old and new Testament, and not according to the Decrees, and
Constitutions of men.

This matter began daily in the Court of Rome to seem of greater importance,
fearing lest it should greatly shake the Power of the Popes, and abate the
profits of the Church of Rome, and discompose the Union of the Christian
Religion; for which occasion, many Consistories were summoned at Rome, and many
Consultations held in the Chamber of the Pope amongst the Cardinals and
Divines, for remedy of this growing evil. The Duke of Saxony, and Luther were
at these Meetings condemned, and Excommunications thundered out against them
with most grievous Anathemaes, the which served only to exasperate the Duke of
Saxony, and caused him to become a more severe and vehement Protector of that
Cause; which began now to dilate and spread more diffusely amongst the people,
by how much the more it was persecuted by vigorous, and violent courses. At
length the Court of Rome, as well as other People, and Nations, did conclude,
that the only means to quiet men's minds, and settle them in a true Belief and
Faith, was to establish all doubts and Controversies by the Authority of a
General Council: the which was desired by Princes, and Lords of Countries, in
hopes that thereby the disorderly lives of Priests and Friars would be
regulated and reduced to their Primitive Constitutions; and that the Regalia
and Temporal Jurisdictions, which had long been usurped by the Ecclesiastical
Power, would at length be restored to the Secular Dignity of Princes. But to
reduce matters to this estate, they did not judge it necessary that
Ecclesiastics should be the sole Members to compose such an Assembly, whose
interest it was to maintain their own Corruptions, and determine all matters in
favor of themselves against the Rights and Prerogatives of Christian Princes;
in whose Affairs their consents and Suffrages ought to be consulted. The common
people also, who had some competent knowledge in the Affairs of the world, were
desirous of a Council, in hopes, and expectation, that the libidinous Power of
the Church, which had for a long time tyrannized over them, might at length be
limited, and moderated; and that the Exactions which were charged upon them,
under the specious pretenses of Alms, and Indulgences, might not be forced, and
distrained by the violence, and rudenesses of the Episcopal Officers. The Court
of Rome did likewise desire a Council, in hopes the Authority of the Church,
which began to be shaken by the opposition of Adversaries, and the
encroachments which Princes made on its Jurisdiction, might thereby be
confirmed: but they were for having it regulated according to the practices of
modern times, which should not touch on the present Abuses and evil customs
introduced in favor of the Papal Power; but such an one as was called by the
preceding Pope, and Assembled at the Lateran, which had produced many happy and
advantageous successes; for it had extinguished the Schisms of the Cardinals,
reduced the Kingdom of France, which before was separated, to an Union, and
abolished that Sanction which highly entrenched on the Temporal and Spiritual
Monarchy of Rome: and lastly had conferred the collation of Benefices on the
Pope, which was the great foundation of the Papal Grandeur. Howsoever Pope Leo
still doubted, that this remedy was not entirely adapted to the nature of this
evil: for tho the power of a Council might have an influence over Princes, and
great Prelates, against whom their Decrees, and Determinations might avail, yet
could not reach the minds of the common people, or produce that real
alteration, and change, which was necessary for the quiet, and settlement of
the Ecclesiastical State. In this condition of affairs Leo died, about the end
of the year 1521.

But these Divisions and Dissentions in Spiritual Controversies did not only
disquiet the Pope; but likewise the Plots of certain Cardinals which designed
against his Life and Government; of which a discovery being made, several of
them were deprived of their Hats, and Ecclesiastical Benefices: and Alfonso
Petrucci being chief in the number of the Conspirators, was taken, and
strangled by a Negro Slave in the Castle of St. Angelo at Rome. Adrian da
Cornetro being fled, and escaped from Justice, was for ever without hopes of
Restoration deprived of the Character and Honor of Cardinal. Raphael Riario,
and Bendinello Sauli were suspended, but afterward restored to the Dignity of
Cardinals. Saderini was condemned to live in perpetual banishment. Thus by the
punishment and degradation of several Cardinals, the College being wanting and
unprovided of its due numbers; the Pope with much liberality created one and
thirty at one time; all persons of quality belonging to several Countries of
Christendom; some of which were advanced for their Virtue and Merit, and others
by the Favor and Interest of great Personages. This Pope created two and forty
Cardinals in all during the time of his Reign, besides the restoration of the
four rebellious Cardinals deprived by Julio; amongst these Cardinals which he
had ordained, Julio de Medici his Kinsman was one, whom he made his
Vice Chancellor, and was afterward Pope under the name of Clement VII.

About this time Maximilian the Emperor dying, Charles King of Spain, Naples,
and Sicily was elected to the great regret, and indignation of Francis King of
France, who with much envy and emulation was displeased to see the Imperial
Dignity added to the many Kingdoms, and Estates holden by the King of Spain:
And because according to the ancient Rule and Canon the King of Naples was
excluded from all capacity of being Emperor; a Dispensation was purchased from
the Pope, with expense of 7000 Ducats, qualifying the King of Naples for the
Election. Afterward the Pope having favored the cause of Charles, and he by
his assistance being Elected Emperor, an Alliance, and League was agreed
between them to drive the French out of Italy, a design ever pleasing to the
Popes; and particularly to Leo, who was impatient of the infamous loss of
Parma, and Piacenza, which being gained with so much glory and trouble by
Julio, he hoped to regain and restore to the Possessions of the Church. In
pursuance of this enterprise, a considerable Army of Germans and Switzers were
sent by the Emperor into Italy, and joined with the Forces of the Pope.
Prospero Colonna was made Generalissimo, and Frederico Gonzaga of Mantoua
General of the Army of the Church, and Julio de Medici Legate of the whole
Army. The success proved agreeable to the preparations, for the French were
droven out of Italy, which had long groaned under their pride and tyranny*
after which Milan was according to Articles surrendered into the hands of
Francis Sforza the true and natural Lord, and Parma and Piacenza restored to
the Church; with the news of which, the Pope conceived such extremity of joy,
that he died suddenly on the first of December 1521. at the Village of
Magliana, where he used often for recreation to retire himself, from whence the
next day his body was removed to Rome; not without suspicion of having been
poisoned by his Chamberlain Mal^spina; who thereupon being imprisoned, was
afterward released by Cardinal De Medicis, so soon as he came to Rome, no
farther proceedings being made thereupon, lest the matter being examined should
reflect too far in disgrace of the French King. Thus died Leo X. at the age of
45 years, 11 months, and one day, having held the Papal Chair for the space of
eight years and twenty days; having at the hour of his death testified the
great satisfaction he received by the restitution of Parma, and Piacenza to the
Ecclesiastical State, without the effusion of the least drop of blood.

This Pope was esteemed a great lover of Justice, having been severe against
Thieves and Robbers. He was a great lover of his Recreation, and Pleasures,
spending much time in Hunting, and Banquets; and was more delighted with
Music, than became the gravity and severity of a Pope. He was highly
magnificent in his Buildings, and munificent in his gifts, with which and by
his Wars he had consumed so profusely beyond his Revenue, that for maintenance
of this charge he was forced to exact money for making Cardinals, and to set
several Offices of his Court to sale. He was a great lover of Learning, and
learned men, to whom he was very liberal in his gifts, imitating therein the
spirit of his Father Laurence de Medicis. He enlarged the Power of the Potesta,
or Civil Magistracy of Rome, and bestowed on them several Privileges and
Immunities; for which reason by a Solemn Decree they made Julian his Brother a
Citizen of Rome, and treated him at the Campidoglio with Feasting, and other
Entertainments; where they also erected a Statue of Marble, and dedicated it to
Leo, with this Inscription, Optimo Principi Leoni X. Med. Joan. Pont. Max. ob
restitutam instauratamque Vrbem, aucta Sacra, bonasque arts, adscitos Patres,
sublatum vectigal, datum congiarium S.P.Q.R. In fine, the face of the City of
Rome was never more pleasant, nor cheerful, than in the time of Leo X. His body
was buried for that present in a Sepulcher of Brick erected in S. Peter's
Church, and for afterward by direction of Paul III. translated to the Minerva,
together with the body of Clement VII.

ADRIAN VI.
POPE Leo being dead, and his Obsequies solemnly performed, the Cardinals on
the 16th. of December 1521. assembled in the Chapel of Sixtus Quartus in S.
Peter's Church; and thence adjourned to the Vatican, where 29 Cardinals entered
into the Conclave, and having sang Veni Spiritus, they for some days were
employed in giving Audiences to Foreign Ministers, in ordering matters for the
more orderly Government of the City, and regulating the Conclave in relation to
their choice: so on the 20th. they began seriously to proceed to an Election.
Cardinal De Medicis aspiring to that dignity, seemed to stand the most fair for
it, because that by the reputation of his greatness, and by the interest of his
Revenues, and his glory lately acquired in the Conquest of Milan, he had
obtained the Voices of 15 Cardinals: howsoever many considerations crossed his
desires; for it seemed irregular, and against the common Policy for one of the
same Family to succeed in the place of the Pope deceased; for that such
Presidents might soon bring the Popedom to a state of being disposed by
Succession: for which cause all the ancient Cardinals who pretended to be of
the French action; and all those who were enemies to Leo, and discontented by
him, stood in opposition against him: Moreover all the Cardinals who were
Competitors, and lived in hopes of succeeding, could not endure, and suffer the
Election of a person under the age of fifty years. These difficulties
occurring, retarded the Election for several days: at length as they made
scrutiny according to the custom of the Conclave, Cardinal Adrian a Hollander
by Nation was proposed, one who had been Schoolmaster to the Emperor, and by
his means made Cardinal under Pope Leo: so soon as he was nominated, the
Cardinal S. Sixtus began to recount, and amplify his Virtues in a long
Oration, which so took, that the Cardinals began to yield, and give up their
Voices for him, the residue followed from one to another, seeming guided rather
by chance, than Counsel; so that by the common Suffrages of all the Cardinals,
Adrian was Elected and Created Pope on the 9th. of January 1522. the parties
themselves not being able to render a reason, why amidst so many dangers, and
troubles of the Ecclesiastical State, they had chosen a stranger for Pope of a
remote Country, who had never seen Italy, and perhaps might never have seen it,
but upon this occasion; and who had neither been acquainted with the customs of
the Court of Rome, nor yet had entertained such conversation with the
Cardinals, as to have hoped by their interest, or his own merit to have
attained to the Election: of which the Cardinals not being able to render any
solid reason, gave out in excuse of themselves, that it was an impulse of the
Holy Ghost which did often inspire the hearts of Cardinals in Election of Popes.

The news of this Election was brought to Adrian, then residing at Victoria, a
Town on the Confines of Biscay; upon advice whereof taking no other name, than
his own, he caused himself to be called Adrian the sixth. He was born at
Vtrecht a City in Holland, his Father's name was Florent, one that by
Profession made Tapestry Hangings; and this his Son being a Youth of an
ingenious, lively spirit, was sent to Study in the University of Lovain; where
afterward being a great proficient in Learning, Margaret the Daughter of
Maximilian, then Governess of the Low Countries, receiving information of his
Virtues and Abilities, made him Curate of a Parish Church in Holland:
afterward he was preferred to be Dean of the Cathedral in Lovain, and then
made Vice Chancellor of that University. During this time Philip Archduke of
Austria, Son of Maximilian the Emperor died, leaving a Son of seven years of
age, named Charles; for whose Education, and Instruction, a Tutor and
Schoolmaster being sought in all parts, none was esteemed more proper either
for his Virtue, or Learning, than this Adrian. Having for some time honorably
acquitted himself in this Office, he was sent Ambassador to Ferdinand King of
Spain, with whom he acquired so much favor and interest, that in a short time
he was made Bishop of Tortosa; and afterward Chief Counselor of State to the
Emperor Charles V. Likewise by the recommendation of the Emperor Maximilian,
and on account of the great esteem, and reputation he had acquired, he was
created Cardinal by Pope Leo X, with the Title of S. John and S. Paul, in the
year 1519. And Charles his Scholar being chosen Emperor, he committed to his
care, and charge the whole, and entire Government of Spain; in which Country
Adrian resided when the news was brought him of his Election to the Popedom.

Charles the Emperor having about that time passed by Sea into Spain, sent an
Express to congratulate his Promotion, desiring him, that he would be pleased
to make some little stay at Barcelona, that so he might have opportunity to pay
his Respects in person to him, and perform that Reverence, and Obedience which
he owed to the Apostolical Sea; but Adrian was in so much have, fearing some
Revolutions in Rome, and Italy, that he would make no stay at Barcelona; but
Embarking at Taragona, on the 11th. of August, he soon after with a placid
Navigation arrived at Genoua, where he was visited by the Prelates of France,
thence proceeding to Ligorn, he was there received by Cardinal De Medicis, and
five other Cardinals, as also by the Ambassadors sent from several Princes of
Italy, and by Francis de Gonzaga, who was General of the Army belonging to the
Church. At Pyrgos he was met by Pompey Colonna, and Francis Vrsino, who were
Cardinals delegated by the Senate of Rome; and thence proceeding to Ostia, he
was carried up the River to the Monastery of S. Paul, where he lodged for one
night: And lastly on the 29. of August, the people of Rome, with the several
Orders of the Clergy, accompanied him with great pomp to the Palace of the
Vatican; and the next day he was solemnly Crowned in the Portico of S. Peter's
Church.

Pope Adrian being now seated in his Throne, employed his whole time at first
to hear, and understand the Affairs of Rome, for as yet he was altogether
ignorant of the State of Italy; the which in such an exigency, in which things
at that time were, was a great trouble to considering men, who thought it a
miserable disadvantage to have at that time a Pope a stranger, and altogether
unexperienced in the Affairs of Italy and of the Court; when the Pestilence
grievously afflicted the City, a matter which was interpreted for an ill
Prognostication, and omen of his future success: The Treasury also by the Wars,
Disorders, and Luxury of preceding Popes exhausted, and drained to a farthing;
and all the Jewels, and Ornaments of the Pontifical Dignity pawned, and placed
in the hands of Usurers, first by Leo, and afterward more moneys raised upon
them by the College, to supply the necessities, and exigencies of the Church.
Arimino also was seized and possessed by Sigismund Malatesta. And news was come
that Soliman the Great Turk had invested Rhodes, and put it into great danger,
and prepared with a great Army to invade Hungary: all which being matters of
great difficulty, did much puzzle and distract the mind of Adrian, who was as
yet raw and unexperienced in the Affairs of Rome: the which troubles were soon
followed by the unhappy news of the loss of Rhodes, having been surrendered up
on conditions after a six months Siege.

And now Adrian being warm in his Seat, began in the first place to design the
recovery of Rimini, which was seized and possessed by Sigismund, and Pandolfo
Malatesta, and next to compose those differences which the Duke of Ferrara had
continued with his two late Predecessors; for the more effectual performance
whereof, he sent 1500 Spanish Infantry which he had brought with him out of
Spain, for security of his passage on the Sea into Romagna, the which with
addition of other Forces so affrighted Sigismond and Malatesta, that by the
mediation of the Duke of Vrbin, they surrendered Rimini to the Pope, upon hopes
that the Pope would in lieu thereof, assign them some other honorable support
and maintenance. Afterward the Duke of Vrbin went himself to Rome, where the
memory of Pope Julian was still so precious, as to entitle him to some kindness
from this present Pope; on which motive the Ecclesiastical Censures, which were
issued out against him by Leo were reversed, Plenary Absolution given him, and
he again restored to the Duchy of Vrbin by Adrian: howsoever with this clause,
salvo jure, etc. that it might be without prejudice to that Grant made to the
Florentines of the Country of Montfeltra, in considerarion of the sum of 350000
Crowns, which they had lent to Pope Leo for defense of that Country.

With the like frank generosity Adrian received Alfonso Duke of Ferrara into
his favor; and not only invested him in the Dukedom of Ferrara, and in all
those Lands which depended on the Church before the War which Pope Leo ^ade
against the French; but also in the Towns of Felix, and Final, which he had
taken from the Church during the time of the last Sede Vacant, on conditions,
that he should hold those Lands of the Church with obligation of assisting the
Pope with a certain number of men, to be ready at his command, when his
occasions should require: and in case at any time he acted any thing to the
damage, and prejudice of the Church, that then he should incur severe
Forfeitures and Penalties, and lose his Investiture, and be actually deprived
of all those Liberties, Immunities, and Rights to which he pretended and laid a
claim.

After these Affairs the Pope reassumed the thoughts so often meditated by his
Predecessors, of driving the French out of Italy, the which was also greatly
desired by the Emperor Charles, on supposition that the matter was practicable
and easy in case they could induce the Venetians to separate from the French
King: to incline them hereunto, Ambassadors were dispatched from the Emperor,
and the King of England (who at the same time sent a Herald to denounce War
against the French King, in case he would not make a Truce with the Emperor in
all parts of the world for three years) in which also the Pope, the Duke of
Milan, and the Florentines were to be comprehended. The pretense of this Truce
was grounded on agreement of all Christian Princes to turn their Forces against
the Turk, who was now grown formidable in Hungary, to which place Cardinal
Cajetan war sent his Legate with a supply of fifty thousand Crowns to carry on
that War. But this design was disappointed by a discovery made by some Letters
intercepted by Cardinal Julio de Medicis, wrote from Francis Soderino one of
the old Cardinals, and much trusted by the Pope in all his secrets, to Francis
the first, King of France; wherein he persuaded him to invade the Kingdom of
Sicily, laying down the Plot, and Design as easy, and hopeful. The Pope being
greatly moved, and enraged against Soderino, who was Cardinal of Volterra, for
this perfidious disturbance of the quiet of Italy, and disappointment of the
Holy War, greatly inveighed against him in a full Assembly of the Cardinals,
and afterward committed him Prisoner to the Castle. Soderino's Letters were
then produced and read, being full of reflections on the Pope; saying, That he
was a person to whom no Faith, or Credence could be given; for tho he pretended
the quiet and peace of Italy, and the benefit of the Church, yet he designed it
no farther than was consistent with the advancement of his own Charles the
Emperor, to whose concernmentr all other considerations were to yield and give
place: The Pope took measures of the affections of all the other Cardinals by
this character which Soderino had given of him, and believing them to be all of
the same humor, entertained a like jealousy and suspicion of the Cardinals in
general; so that he made Confidents of none but of such men only, as were of
his own Country: his Secretaries that were most intimate with him, and privy to
all his designs and secrets, were William Eikenwort, whom he had made Chief
Datary, and Bishop of Tortosa, and the only Cardinal created by him, and
Theodorick Hetius, both Dutchmen, and John Rufus, who had been his old
Acquaintants and Creatures, by whose counsels, and advice he contrived and
acted all matters which had relation to the Government; and seldom communicated
his Counsels and designs to the College, but only to his Dutchmen, whom he
often praised, for their sincere and real intentions, without ^^aud, or
artifice, and for being truly faithful to the Church, and loyal to him. This
ill correspondence between the Pope, and his Cardinals was augmented by the
offense he gave to the College, by disanulling all the Acts and Ordinances they
had made, during the vacancy of the Sea, and before he came to Rome; which
being made in favor to themselves, and for their own benefit, he made void for
the greater good, and emolument of the Church, revoking and taking into his
hands those Benefices which the Cardinals had out of favor, and courtesy
voted and bestowed on each other: and such Offices as Pope Leo the tenth had
conferred on able and good men, in reward of their Learning, and Virtue, he
took away to raise money, wherewith to supply, and satisfy the urgent
necessities of the Church. This manner of proceeding added to the fuel of the
last discontents made Adrian appear not only distrustful, but covetous in a
high degree, and every day seem more odious, and wearisome to the Clergy and
Grandees of Rome: of which the Pope being sensible, would often say, that the
happy conjuncture of Affairs was greatly conducing to a Prince, who desired to
illustrate his Virtues, and Actions to the most advantage: witness the happy
state of affairs in the time of the late Pope Leo, which were so flourishing
and cheerful, that they seemed to be the golden days, which afterward by that
licentiousness which was crept into Rome, during the long vacancy of the Sea,
and absence of this Pope, were changed, and altered by a total corruption of
manners: to which a contagion of Pestilence supervening, joined with Famine,
and War, which greatly afflicted Italy; the miseries of men caused them to
retort their remembrances on the late more cheerful days of Leo, and by such
unreasonable comparisons to pass a judgment between the Wisdom and Worth of
Leo, and Adrian; making the unavoidable miseries of those times, a matter and
subject of odium and detestation of the present Pope; tho in reality he was a
person of a severe life, of great temperance, and desirous to reform abuses,
which were crept into the Church; and correct, and severely chastise the
dissolute manners in the City, such as Simony, Extortion, and Sodomy; to which
end he called to his assistance Caraffa, Archbishop of Chieti, and Marcello
Gazella of Gaeta, both persons of gravity and sobriety, and of singular Wisdom
and Learning; with whom he consulted touching a reformation of manners, and
amendment of abuses: and to set by his own example rules of moderation and
temperance, he appeared extremely severe toward his own Relations and Kindred:
an instance whereof he gave in his deportment toward a Cousin of his, whom he
having settled in his Studies at Siena, came one time from thence to Rom,
without the order or command of the Pope; at which he conceived so much anger,
that he presently returned him back again on a hired Horse, reproving and
telling him, that he should learn modesty, and temperance by his example:
several Relations also of his being in a mean condition, traveled afoot
through Germany, and came to Rome in expectation of arising to some
considerable Preferments: but he disappointed them of their hopes, and returned
them back again with no greater largess, than a plain Suit of Cloth to each,
and with so much money as might serve to bear their charges and expenses back
into their own Country. And in this manner whilst Adrian was intent to
introduce honesty of life, and manners into the world, and bring Virtue into
fashion; and employed in perfecting the League and Confederacy between the
Emperor and the Venetians, and other Allies, in order to the main design of
expelling the French out of Italy: It happened that he was seized by a Fever,
which affecting him at first in a gentle manner, was lightly esteemed by the
Physicians, but the disease afterward increasing, he summoned the College of
Cardinals to him, recommending to them the care of the Church, and the welfare
of Christendom. He bestowed his own Cardinals Hat, with his Title on his great
Friend, and Confident Eikenwort, in gratitude for his faithful services
performed toward him. After which he died in the Vatican on the 14th. of
September 1523, having held the Papal Dignity no longer than one year, eight
months, and six days; and having lived 64 years. three months, and 13 days, he
departed this life, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter, with this
Epitaph. Adrianus Papa VI. hic situs est
Qui nihil sibi infelicius in vita
Quam quod imperaret, duxit.
But afterward Cardinal Eikenwort in grateful remembrance of the benefits he
had received from him, erected a fair Monument of Alablaster over him, with
this Inscription, Adrianus VI. Pont. Max. ex Trajecto insigni Inferioris
Germaniae Vrbe
Qui dum rerum humanarum
Maxim aversatur splendorem, ultro a Proceribus ob Incomparabilem
Sacrarum disciplinarum scientiam
Ac prope divinam castissimi animi moderationem
Carolo V. Caesari Augusto Praeceptor,
Ecclesiae Derthusensi Antistes,
Sacri Senatus Patrium Collega,
Hispaniarum Regnis Praeses,
Reipub. denique Christianae divinitus Pontifex absens adscitus.
Vixit annos 64 menses 6 dies 13, decessit 18 Call. Octobris
Anno a partu Virginis 1523. Pontificatus sui Anno secuna^:
In this manner Pope Adrian died, to the great disappointment of the
Confederates, to whom not only the benefit of the Papal Authority failed by his
death, but also the Contribution of that money, to which he had obliged himself
by the capitulations of Confederacy. He left behind him a mean esteem, and
opinion in the world of his Wisdom, or abilities of mind, either because in
that short time of his Reign, he was not able to give better proof; or else
because he wanted experience in Affairs: howsoever he departed this life to the
incredible joy of all the Court, who desired to see an Italian in that Seat, or
one at least who had been trained up and practiced in the Affairs of Italy.

CLEMENT VII.
POPE Adrian the sixth being dead, and his Funeral Obsequies performed, the
Cardinals to the number of thirty, entered into the Conclave for Election of a
new Pope. The two which were chiefly in nomination, and which stood most fair
for the Election, were the Cardinals Medici and Colonna; the first supported by
the Faction of the Emperor, and the other of France: but that which made most
against Colonna, was the inveterate enmity which Cardinal Vrsino bore to him on
account of that ancient hatred and quarrel which was hereditary between the two
Families, who therefore opposed him with all his power and interest: And
farther upon promise given by Medici to Vrsino to confer on him the Office of
Vice Chancellor: the contest was no longer doubtful, every one pressing to give
his voice that he might not seem the last to appear in favor of Medici: by
which means two thirds giving their suffrages for him (which is necessary to
the Election of every Pope) an end was put to this Controversy which had
lasted two months and four days. Thus Julio Medici being declared Pope, was
conducted by all the Cardinals, together with great numbers of Prelates, and
Clergymen to the Church of S. Peter, where being seated upon the High-Altar ad
limina Apostolorum, he was there worshipped, and reverenced by all the Clergy,
who presented themselves before him to pay him rheir respects, and obedience,
and receive his blessing. He there took upon himself the name of Clement VII.
and was afterward conducted, and attended with a numerous train to his
Lodgings in the Vatican.

This Julio, now Clement VII. was the natural Son of Juliano de Medici, who was
murdered by the Pazzi, and other Conspirators, as before declared in the life
of Sixtus IV. He was born a month after the death of his Father, whom he
greatly resembling in all the lineaments of his face, and vivacity of his
spirit, was committed to the charge and care of his Uncle Lorenzo, who educated
him in all sorts of Liberal Sciences, and elegancy of manners, which might
serve to render a person of his quality and condition accomplished. His Family
being afterward expelled out of Florence by the power of Charles the Eighth,
King of France, he continued in exile from his own Country for the space of 18
years; during which time, he was created Knight of Rhodes, and Grand Prior of
Capua: and afterward advanced by his Kinsman Leo X. to the Archbishopric of
Florence, and the year following was created Cardinal of S. Clement, and then
instituted Chancellor of the Roman Church, which is the supreme Office in the
Popes Court: and lastly, being ascended to the high dignity of Pope, he was
crowned on the 25th. of November 1523. with the common joy, and satisfaction of
all in general, who were pleased with the promotion of a person of his great
Authority and Sobriety, wholly addicted to business, and counsel, without
mixtures of pleasures, or divertisements; for which reason the world expected
great and extraordinary matters from him.

Howsoever all these excellencies in a person of his high condition could not
hinder or prevent the evils of an ensuing War: nor could the Pope, when the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Francis the French King sent their Ambassadors
to Rome to complement him upon his late Election, please them both, by keeping
that even hand of moderation and temperance which became his Office, when
Christian Princes are at variance: for the Emperor expected the same strictness
of Alliance as was between him, and Pope Leo his Predecessor, and challenged
his favor and partiality on his side, for being assistant and instrumental in
his promotion: Howsoever the Election of a person of his Authority and Interest
had a considerable Ascendant over the Affairs of the Church: For the Duke of
Ferrara, who during the vacancy of the Sea, had seized upon Reggia, having
understood that a Pope of so much reputation in the world was Elected, desisted
from prosecution of his design of taking Modena, and so retired peaceably to
Ferrara: and John de Sassatello, who had for some time vexed, and harassed
Romagna, from whence he had been expulsed by the Gibelines, under the Reign of
Adrian, did now retire with his contrary Faction of Guelfs, being appeased by
the Authority and influence of this new Pope.

But the spirits of mightier and more puissant Princes were not so easily
allayed by the charms of mediation, or the force of reason; for tho Clement
being desirous of the repose, and quiet of Italy, proposed to Francis the
French King in behalf of the Vice-King of Naples, a Truce for five years, with
condition, that during that time he should quietly enjoy all the Country on the
other side of the River Adda, the Town of Loda only excepted: yet he could not
prevail, the French King refusing this fair offer, which afterward turned to
his great misfortune. Wherefore the Pope finding the difficulty, or
impossibility almost of making this Peace, he remained doubtful to which of
these two Princes it was most to the interest of the Church, and security of
Italy for him to incline, in which suspense the Count Carpy arriving at Rome
with character of Ambassador from the King of France, so well managed his
design, that he persuaded the Pope to lay aside, and forget those ancient
discontents and animosities, which arose between his Master the King, and Pope
Leo the 10th. his Kinsman, and to enter into a firm Alliance with him, as the
most secure, and wholesome means to preserve the quiet of Italy. Clement hereby
being well affected toward France, dispatched an Ambassador to the King for
confirmation of the Alliance, advising him to undertake the Conquest of Naples,
which he represented as an enterprise easily effected, in regard that there was
no Garrison there, all the Emperors Forces being at that time employed in the
Dukedom of Milan. The King well approving this design, ordered John Stuart,
Duke of Albania, who was of the Blood of the Kings of Scotland, and his
Lieutenant General in Italy, to march with a considerable force into the
Kingdom of Naples, asking license of the Pope to pass through his Dominions. But
the Pope seeming outwardly, and in appearance averse hereunto, Da Chesne.
persuaded the King to desist from this design, as a matter of jealousy to the
Venetians, and all Italy; with arguments also inciting to Peace, and
accommodation, as best became the Office and quality of a Pope. But the Duke of
Albania without attending an answer, Onuf. Panv.
had (as assured of the Popes consent) passed the River Po; but before he had
marched five days, he was called back again by the King; who understanding that
some Forces and new Supplies were already arrived in the Enemies Camp, and more
daily expected, he judged it more advisable to keep his Army entire, until the
new Recruits of Switzers and Grisons were come which he had sent to levy,
rather than to weaken his Army by that considerable detachment which the
enterprise of Naples would require; during which time the King continued the
Siege of Pavia. But the Switzers and Grisons being at length arrived in the
Kings Camp, the Duke of Albania repassed the Po to invade the Kingdom of
Naples; in which design, that the Pope might seem to have had no contrivance,
he dispatched away Paul Vettorio, Captain of his Galleys, to the Viceroy,
letting him know, that tho he had used all diligence to divert the King from
his purpose to invade Naples; yet he could not prevail; nor could oppose, or
obstruct his passage through his Country, unless he would draw upon himself the
difficulties of that War, which he was not able to master: and that tho he was
forced to secure himself by new Articles, and Contracts, yet he would never
assent, or agree co any thing, which might be prejudicial to the interest of
the Emperor. In fine, he exhorted both Parties to a Peace, and in order
thereunto proposed several expedients for accommodation; but nothing prevailed:
the Duke of Albania continuing his march, and the King the Siege of Pavia.

And now the Imperialists drawing near to the relief of Pavia, the treaties and
practices of Princes, and the endeavors and studies of Ambassadors availed
little; all the difficulties and dangers of many months being reduced to the
fortune and success of a few hours. In short, the Battle of Pavia was fought on
the 24. of February, 1525. in which the French Army was entirely defeated, and
the King himself taken Prisoner; and all the flower of the Nobility of France
either slain or taken: of which the Duke of Albania having received
intelligence, he raised his Camp from Monte Rotondo near Aquila, where he was
lodged, and returned into France; but the greatest part of this Soldiery being
composed of Italians, and Corsicans, returning to Rome, were for the most part
rifled and pillaged in their way by the people of Campagna, who were Subjects
to the Prince Colonna, and by some Imperialists who belayed the ways for them,
killing them within the very Walls of Rome; to which place they fled for
sanctuary. All the Princes of Italy, especially the Pope, being extremely
affected with this unexpected success, obtained by the Imperial Forces,
conducted chiefly by the valor, and wisdom of the Marquess of Pescara,
remained doubtful in what manner to govern, and manage their affairs: for the
balance being now no longer in an equality, but carried down with too much
weight on the side of the Emperor, his Captains were elevated with this
Victory, that they became insolent beyond all human sufferance, seeming to
aspire to an universal Monarchy: the which insolences were also rendered more
intolerable by the complaints brought daily to Rome from Parma, and Piacenza,
which Countries the Imperialists had exposed to plunder, and desolation: and
the suspicions and jealousies of the Pope were increased, by the refusal the
Emperor made of restoring Francis Sforza to his right of the possession of
Milan, whom the Imperialists besieged in the Castle, and afterward banished
from the precincts of that Country. And farther, these misunderstandings were
increased for want of a faithful compliance on the Emperors side with the Pope,
who having paid a considerable sum of money to Charles de Lanoia the Emperors
Agent, on condition to have Reggio restored to the Popedom, which after the
death of Adrian had been seized by Alfonso Duke of Ferrara: when these
conditions came to be performed, and the ancient League renewed with Charles
the Fifth, he disowned the agreement, lest thereby the Pope should grow more
potent, and enlarge his Dominions, endeavoring to lessen his power by the loss
of his money, and exclusion from the possession of Reggio. All these umbrages,
and matters of displeasure being revolved in the mind of Clement, with extreme
melancholy, and desire of redress, administered cause sufficient to him of ill
will toward the Emperor, moving in him at the same time compassion of the
unfortunate state of Francis the French King, then a Prisoner, in respect to
whom he sent the Bishop of Pistoia to condole with him for his unhappy success.
Whilst the Pope meditated on these matters with some sort of indignation and
fear, the Venetians, who were troubled at the same time with the like thoughts,
unexpectedly, sent with many pressing instances to persuade the Pope to join
with them in the good cause for preventing the total servitude of all Italy;
which they proposed to effect by a force of ten thousand Switzers, which they
might cause in a short time to descend into Italy; which being added to the
Italian Bands, would be able to make head against the Imperial Army; and for
their parts they promised according to their custom, far greater matters, than
they were able to perform: and for farther encouragement hereunto, they
represented the state of the Imperial Army in Italy, to be tumultuous and
inclinable to Sedition, having for want of pay seized the Artillery, and
fortified themselves in Pavia. Farther, it was not to be doubted, but that
Louisa the Queen Mother, and Regent of France would concur with these Counsels,
and be assistant to this design with all the power of that Kingdom. Moreover,
it was not to be doubted, but that the Duke of Ferrara, who favored, and
depended on the French felicity, would also enter into this League; the
conjunction of whom was of great importance, considering that he was a Prince
very rich, his Town of Ferrara strong, and furnished with all stores of
Ammunition.

But the Pope considering the difficulty of this enterprise, and the uncertain
concurrence of those many circumstances which were required to make it
successful, did for some time suspend his resolution, until the Archbishop of
Capua who had been his ancient Secretary and Counselor, brought him such
agreeable propositions from Don Carlos de Lanoy, Viceroy of Naples, as gave
him assurances of an advantageous accommodation with the Emperor; for then
disposing his mind wholly to the thoughts of peace, he labored to get the
Venetians comprehended in the same terms of accord: but in regard the chief
points insisted upon by the Imperialists were sums of money to be paid, their
Army already mutining for want of their Arrears, the Venetians, who judged it a
piece of folly and cowardice to compound with their enemies on the condition of
putting weapons into their hands, absolutely refused any agreement on such
terms; which made well for the Pope, and facilitated his negotiations with the
Viceroy, who interpreting this refusal of the Venetians to be an indication of
new stirs, and commotions, intended against the Imperial interest in Italy, was
the more ready to condescend to the more easy terms with the Pope. In short
therefore 25 thousand Ducats being by the Popes order paid by the Florentines
to the Marquess of Pescara, Chief of the Emperors Forces in Milan, a
Confederacy was concluded at Rome between the Pope and the Florentines on the
one side, and the Emperor on the other, viz. That the Pope, and the Emperor
should be in a perpetual League, and Alliance, and that the Duchy of Milan
should be always defended by the Arms of the Pope, and the Emperor with such
numbers of men, as should be agreed by a certain Article, and that the same
should be possessed, and governed under the Emperor by Francis Sforza,
particularly nominated in that Capitulation. That the Emperor should take into
his protection all the Estate which the Church held; and particularly should
have a care of the House of Medicis, to maintain and preserve them in all the
Dignities and Offices which they hold in that City: to which Treaty the
greatness of that illustrious Family is in some measure obliged. That the
Florentines should presently pay to the Emperor a hundred thousand Ducats more,
in recompense of that which they had engaged to contribute to the last War, in
virtue of that Agreement made with Pope Adrian, which was not to expire until
one year after the death of one of the Confederates. That the Duke of Ferrara
should immediately render to the Church Reggia, Rubiera, and other Towns which
he had unjustly seized, and usurped, during the last vacancy of the Papal Sea;
of which so soon as the Pope was possessed, he was in consideration thereof to
pay unto the Emperor one hundred thousand Ducats. Lastly, as to Modena, and
those Towns, consideration was to be had, and the matter examined, whether they
of right appertained to the Church, or the Emperor, and being found only
belonging to the Ecclesiastical State, they should be freed from all
acknowledgment, and dependence on the Empire. In this manner this Alliance was
concluded and determined, and the designs of uniting with France, and Venice,
which were at first laid open as the fairest game, were now diverted by far
different measures.

Matters being thus agreed, and concluded in the year 1525. between the Pope
and the Viceroy, the Cardinal Salviati was sent to the Emperors Court with
Character of Legate, for confirmation of the Articles; his reception was very
honorable, but in debating of particulars on the Commission, the Viceroy, who
for the common safety and quiet of Italy, allowed that the Investiture might be
given to the Duke of Milan, did dissuade the restitution of Reggia, and
Rubiera; which being a scruple started after the Accord, did ill affect the
mind of the Pope, and confirmed the opinion he had of the Emperors designs, not
to endure any increase of power and greatness in the Church. And farther whilst
these things were debating, there fell out in Lombardy several events which
hindered the Investiture of Sforza in the Duchy of Milan, and therewith broke
all the agreements, and measures which were formerly taken; for the Emperor not
willing to yield to this Investiture, made pretenses of forfeiture thereof by
Sforza, and earnestly pressed the taking of the Castle of Milan: so that now
the Pope having no expectations from the Emperor, began to incline again, and
be biassed on the side of France; and the other Confederates, knowing that
whilst his successes were prosperous, and towering in Italy, the Emperor might
easily dispose of the Pope, and oppress him at his pleasure; which he would
certainly do, either out of revenge, or ambition, which is known to be almost
natural in Emperors, against the Pope.

Wherefore a League and Union being proposed between the Pope, the French, the
Venetians, and Duke of Ferrara, with hopes also that the King of England would
join in it; all things were designed and laid down in a regular manner, and
form for carrying on the War, and suppressing the suspected greatness of the
Emperor: But this Pope Clement, who was of a temper naturally slow, and
irresolute, weighing the consequences of these matters with his Servants, and
Ministers of his Councils, found them so divided, each of them abounding in his
own sense, that belabouring the Pope on all sides, he became much more
perplexed and distracted in his thoughts, after, than before his consultations.
The truth was, there were two men of great Authority with him, one Nicolas
Scomberg a German, and John Matthew Giberto a Genoese; Scomberg was much
honored, and almost feared by the Pope, but Giberto was more favored and
beloved: these two having been ancient, and intimate friends to him, whilst he
was Cardinal, agreed well together; but afterward Ambition, and different
Interests put them at variance; for Scomberg being a German, naturally affected
the interest of the Emperor; but Giberto loved no man but the Pope: and tho he
had formerly been an enemy to the French interest, yet now upon the change of
Affairs, he sided with them against the Emperor. Thus the Pope being distracted
between the different Councils of these bosom Friends, he that was irresolute
in his own nature, suffering himself to be guided by the last advice of
different judgments, seemed always so tottering and wavering, that he rendered
himself contemptible and ridiculous to all that knew him. The Arguments used by
Scomberg to dissuade the League, were, that according to observation, Leagues
and Alliances of several Princes had seldom, or never any good effect; for that
the conjunction of the Armies, and the due provisions for them, do seldom
arrive in season, or at convenient times; that where so many minds and opinions
are to concur, and diverse interests are carried on, there distrusts, and
discontentments do easily happen: whereby the favor of fortune, and benign
occasions are disappointed: howsoever at length being overborn by Giberto, he
inclined to go through with the League, and in company with the other
Confederates to begin a War against the Emperor.

For Francis the French King being now at liberty, and holding himself not
obliged to the terms he had made, encouraged and gave life to the League* and
the people of the Duchy of Milan being greatly oppressed by the Imperialists,
were ready on all occasions to make insurrections, and mutinies in the City
against the Soldiery, and Collectors of the Contributions: so that the Pope
being well settled, and confirmed in his opinion of the necessity of a War,
readily entered into confederacy with the French King, and the Venetians,
making the subject and ground of the War to be the re-possession of Francis
Sforza into the Duchy of Milan, and the restoring to liberty the Kings
Children, which were given for Hostages: so that the Forces of these Princes
being united together, a most cruel War was again renewed in Italy; the success
of which in short was this: Lodi was at the beginning of all taken, and then
the Confederate Forces joining with the Switzers, took also Cremona, and
besieging the Castle of Milan, forced it to surrender upon Articles, and then
resigned it into the possession of Sforza; the Pope also sending some Forces
against Arimino, which was seized and possessed by Sigismondo Malatesta, he
recovered the City, and expelled the Usurper: but all these successes received
some alloys, by the ill news arrived from the King of Hungary, who being
overcome, and slain in battle, the City of Buda yielded to the Turk; the which
being grievously resented by the Pope, he called the Cardinals into the
Consistory, where having complained of the great ignominy and damage to the
Christian Cause by this late disgrace, he with great gravity proposed, that for
the common good of Christendom it was necessary to surcease the Wars in Italy;
and that in order thereunto, laying aside all the considerations of
incommodity, danger, and dignity of his person, he resolved to meet the
Christian Princes in some convenient place, where he would with Tears and
Prayers incline them to an universal Peace, and unite them in a Holy League,
and Confederacy against the common Enemy of Christendom. But whilst these
things were meditating, all the design was diverted by the treason and
conspiracy of the Family of Colonna, which succeeded in this manner.

The Family of Colonna which was always favorable to the Imperial interest,
observing the proceedings of the Pope, was desirous to act some thing in
prejudice to the Allies, and of advantage to the Emperor: and therefore
Cardinal Pompeo a near Kinsman of that Family, retiring from Rome to Frescate,
with pretense of remaining there to watch against any attempts, that might be
made upon the Kingdom of Naples, made great levies of men to be ready at any
time to execute his designs. The Pope growing jealous hereof, increased his own
Forces, and commanded the Colonnians to depart, and withdraw their Soldiers out
of the Dominion of the Church; the which being effected at the instance of the
Cardinal De la Valle, who persuaded them to quit the Ecclesiastical State,
which they could not disturb without great scandal; the Pope thereby judged
himself secure, and trusting to the power, and protection of the League, did
against the common advice, and persuasion of all his Friends, for the cause
only of saving charges, disband his Forces. The Colonnians observing now the
Pope deprived of all his Guards, and exposed, as it were naked to their
pleasure, assembled their Forces, being about 3000 Foot, and 800 Horse near
Anagnia, assuming to their society Caesar Filettin, their Confederate, and
taking a compass to Rome, to be the less suspected, they surprised three Gates
of the City, making their entry by that of S. John de Lateran; and having
passed the Bridge of Sistus with their Battalions orderly drawn up, they entered
some Forces by the Burg of S. Spirito. At this action there were present Don
Hugo de Moncada, Ascanio Colonna, and Vespasian Colonna, which last had been
instrumental in soliciting the late accord, and given his Faith to the Pope, as
well for himself, as for the residue of his Companions. Likewise Cardinal
Pompeo was there, being so far transported with ambition, that he not only
conspired, and resolved to put the Pope to death, but to constrain the
Cardinals by force of Arms to elect him to the Papal Chair. The Pope surprised
with the unexpected arrival of these Guests, 1525.
who by break of day on the 20th. of September entered Rome, resolved once
after the example of Pope Boniface VIII. to seat himself in his Pontifical
Chair, and there receive the utmost violence of these Traitors; but being
dissuaded from that resolution by his Friends, he retired to the Castle of S.
Angelo, where he in vain called for the assistance and succor of his friends.
For Clement, notwithstanding the great opinion which at his first Inauguration
the world conceived of his worth, and merit, was now fallen so low in the
esteem of the people by his avarice, and mean practices, that there was not one
man, who seeing him betrayed, and contrary to Religious Oaths, and the common
Faith of mankind falsely treated, conceived any kind remorse, or compassion of
his fate. But on the contrary they began to enumerate the many miscarriages of
his Government; That he had laden the Benefices of the Clergy with new and
unusual decimations; That he had taken away the Revenues belonging to certain
Colleges, made void the Stipends which were given to the Professors, and
Readers of Diverse Sciences: Nor was the Commonalty less disgusted against the
Pope than others of greater note; for by reason of the Monopolies he had
granted upon Corn, to increase the benefit and income of his Exchequer, Bread
was risen to that excessive price, that it seemed as if a Famine had been in the
City. He had also destroyed, and plucked down several houses, for making the
Streets more large and beautiful, without consideration given to the
Proprietors, tho to the enriching of his own Creatures, whom he had made
Superiors over those contrivances. Thus the people being full of hatred, and
disdain against the Pope, refused in the time of his greatest exigency to
afford him any relief, and defense against his enemies; who therefore without
opposition entered into the new Suburbs, which being sacked by them, they
passed no farther for fear of the Cannon from the Castle; then they proceeded
to the Popes Palace, and the great Church of S. Peter's, which they plundered,
and rifled, laying their Sacrilegious hands on every thing that was rich, or of
value: but at length the tumult being appeased (for this Riot did not continue
above three hours, by reason that they did no hurt, or damage to any particular
person) the Pope, who found himself within the Walls of the Castle, without any
provision, or sustenance for himself, or his defendants, sent to Don Hugo de
Moncada, desiring that he might have a parley, and treaty with him, for the
better understanding of matters between them. Tho Cardinal Pompeo was greatly
averse to all proposals, or addresses for accommodation, yet Don Hugo under the
Popes Faith, having received the Cardinals Cibo and Rodolfo, who were of the
Popes kindred, as Hostages for his security, went into the Castle to treat, and
discourse with the Pope; where after many words had passed, an agreement was
concluded in these terms. That a Truce should be made between the Pope and the
Confederates on one side, and of the Emperor on the other, for the space of
four months: That in the mean time the Pope should withdraw his Army out of the
Dukedom of Milan, causing them immediately to retire on the side of the River
Po toward Rome, and call home his Fleet at Sea under the command of Andrew
Doria: That he should pardon the Cardinal Pompeo, with all others of the Family
of Colonna; and for security hereof, should deliver Philip Strozzi, a wealthy
person, who had married the Daughter of Peter de Medicis, and one of the Sons
of James Salviati, for Hostages; and to send them to Naples within the space of
two months, on penalty of thirty thousand Ducats for default thereof. And
lastly, that Don Hugo should depart from Rome with his whole Army, causing
every thing to be restored, which had sacrilegiously been robbed, and plundered
from the holy places. The Truce being thus concluded, much to the
dissatisfaction of Cardinal Pompeo, and others of the Family of Colonna, Don
Hugo cheerfully departed from Rome, supposing that he had thereby performed
sufficient service for the Emperor; and the Pope as readily accepted the
Agreement, wanting provisions in the Castle, and all other means to make a
resistance: But the Pope so soon as he found himself at liberty, and freed of
those fears, and dangers which encompassed him, having no regard to that Faith,
he had given under such compulsive circumstances, as Imprisonment, and Arms,
nor care of the Hostages he had delivered, resolved not longer to maintain the
Truce; and thereupon recalled his Forces to Rome, being two thousand Switzers,
and seven Companies of Italian Infantry, under the command of John de Medicis;
to which adding new Levies as an Auxiliary force, he in the first place
deprived Pompeo of his Cardinals Hat, and published both him, and all the
Family of Colonna Excommunicated, and enemies to the Church; and so farther
prosecuting them by Arms, he demolished and laid wast Jubiaco, which was the
Country House, and only place of Pleasure, in which Pompeo delighted, and
divertised himself; and sent Vitelli with his Companies to burn and destroy all
the Towns, and Countries of the Colonnians; as namely, Marina, Montfortin,
Gallicano, and Tagarolo.

Whilst these things were in action, the Emperor judging it not time to sit
quiet, and secure, commanded Charles de Lonoia Vice-King of Naples to put in a
readiness six thousand Spaniards, and ordered thirty Sail of stout men of War
to be speedily equipped, and sent to the Coast of Italy; and wrote also to his
Brother Ferdinand to persuade George Franispergio a Captain of great authority,
and renown in Augusta, that he would speedily with three Regiments of Germans
pass into Italy; whose march, aed passage over the Po, whilst John de Medicis
endeavored to hinder, he was unhappily killed by a shot from one of the
Enemies Sakers, which breaking his thigh a little above his knee, he was
carried to Mantoua, where he died within a few days after, to the great
prejudice of the Enterprise, and loss to the Pope, for being a young man of
nine and twenty years of age, whose Arms alone the Enemy feared; whose time and
years his Experience, and Virtue surpassed; and being of a most excellent
temper, neither too forward, and precipitate, nor yet too wary, and diffident,
gave evident indications of becoming with time one of the most eminent Captains
in the world.

In this manner the Truce being absolutely broken, a most cruel War began again
in Italy; for the Imperialists entering the Ecclesiastical State, had some
skirmishes with the Popes Forces about Frosolone; and matters pressing hard to
their disadvantage, the French King was entreated to make a diversion by
attempting the subjection of the Kingdom of Naples. Hereupon it being
determined to invade Naples both by Sea and Land, Monsieur De Vaudemont who by
the ancient Right of King Rene laid claim to that Kingdom, was appointed for
that enterprise, and being arrived with his Fleet, he at the first onset took
Salerno; and thence with great courage, and hopes marching to Naples it self,
was repulsed by the Forces under the command of Don Hugo de Moncada. Howsoever
the Pope re-inforcing his Army with new Levies under the command of his Legate
Augustine Trivultio, one greatly affected to the French interest, the
Imperialists were worsted, and at length forced to raise their Siege from
before Frosolene, and retire farther within the Jurisdiction of that Kingdom.
But this good fortune passed no farther.

For after various successes, and many troubles, and desolations in Italy, the
Pope wanting money, grew weary of the War; and being disappointed by the French
King, who was great in his promises, but little in his performances, having
always failed in his times of payment, and neither complied in the supplies of
men, or money, he resolved to close with the propositions made him by Francis de
Quignones, in behalf of the Emperor; in reward of which mediation, he was
afterward promoted to the dignity of Cardinal. In short, the Articles agreed
were these: That there should be a cessation of Arms for eight months, the Pope
paying 60000 Ducats to the Imperial Army: That whatsoever had been taken from
the Church, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Family of Colonna, should be made
good and rendered: That Pompeo Colonna should be restored to the dignity of
Cardinal, and absolved from all Ecclesiastical censures; which condition was
more grievous to the Pope than all the rest: That the French King and the
Venetians should have liberty within a certain time to enter into the League,
if they pleased: That the Pope should pay forty thousand Ducats in the space of
two and twenty days, and the residue in a month after: That the Viceroy of
Naples should come to Rome, to confirm the Articles; it being judged a good
expedient to cause the Duke of Bourbon to observe the accord. The Capitulations
of Peace being in this manner signed, both parties speedily retired their
Forces; and the Pope resolving sincerely to keep and execute the Articles, was
also persuaded, that the other party would do the like; of which being assured
by the coming of the Viceroy to Rome, he unadvisedly disbanded all his
Soldiers, excepting only 200 Horse, and 2000 Foot, which he still continued in
his Pay, being of those valiant Black Bands which had been commanded by John de
Medici. Matters continued in this posture for the space of eight days: by which
time the news of this accord being made known to the Duke of Bourbon and his
Army, the Soldiery became enraged, and the Duke raised infinite difficulties
about standing to the Agreement; and especially the Spanish Soldiery were so
violent therein, that a Gentleman sent by the Viceroy to the Duke to persuade
him to accept the Agreement, had been killed by them, had he not conveyed
himself away from their fury: wherefore the Duke either not being willing, or
not able to restrain his Soldiery, marched with all speed imaginable to the
Walls of Rome; to which without farther demur, applying his Ladders at the side
of the Vatican, was the first, (that he might give courage, and example to his
Soldiery) to scale the Walls; in which attempt being shot by a Cannon-Bullet,
he fell dead from the Walls: and lest his body lying exposed to the view of the
Soldiery should give them cause of discouragement, the Prince of Orange who was
near to him covered his Corpse with his Cloak: Howsoever the storm succeeded
more prosperously toward the Mount of S. Spirito, where they entered on the
14th. of May, 1527. with the slaughter of some few, who had the courage to make
any resistance; and passing the Bridge of Sistus, the whole Army consisting of
Germans, Italians, and Spaniards, to the number of 40000, entered the City,
where they committed all the slaughter, rapin, and violence which enraged and
licentious Soldiers were capable to act, without respect to things sacred, or
profane, or to those Cardinals, who had the name, and report of being inclined
to the Emperors Faction. Rome never saw so sad and dismal a day, no not when
they had been sacked by the Goths, and other barbarous Nations; for whomsoever
they met, they killed, and cut to pieces, the Streets ran with blood, the
Altars were despoiled, the Churches and Monasteries plundered, the Nuns and
Women ravished, and the Palaces of the Pope, Cardinals, and Princes rifled and
sacked; so that it is impossible to express, what Wealth and Riches lay in
heaps, and what precious Commodities belonging to Merchants were made the prey
of common Soldiers. And what made the spoil yet more great, was the number of
Prisoners, every one of which was forced to cut his ransom, and redeem himself
at a certain price: and to augment the ignominy, as well as the desolation of
this miserable fortune, the Prelates were taken by the Soldiers, and in all
their Pontificalibus and Habits, were set upon Asses, and Mules, and led
through the streets with contempt and derision. The Pope amidst these
distractions fled to the Castle of S. Angelo, his usual Sanctuary, where being
straightly Besieged, with great numbers of those who retired thither for
refuge, he soon began to want Provisions; so that Famine constrained him to
yield himself into the hands of his Enemies upon discretion, and on conditions
of doing whatsoever the Emperor should as a Conqueror impose upon him: And in
the mean time, until Messengers could be sent into Spain, and return to Rome
with the Emperors pleasure, it was agreed that the Pope should pay to the Army
400000 Ducats, for raising of which, all the Vessels of Gold and Silver
belonging to the Churches, which were saved from the rapin of the Enemy were to
be melted down, and coined; and farther for raising money, diverse Cardinals Caps
were set to sale, as by public outcry to whomsoever would give most, who upon
payment of the sums agreed, were to enter into the College and dignity of
Cardinals. The persons who with their money had purchased this quality were
Marino Grimano, and Francis Cornaro, both Venetians; likewise Sanseverino,
Carrafa, and Parmerio, Neapolitans, and Cardona a Spaniard; and for an
Auxiliary help to these payments, an impost of money was to be charged upon the
whole state of the Church. It was farther agreed that the Pope should deliver
into the hands of the Emperor, to hold them so long as he pleased, the Castle
of S. Angelo, Ostia, Civita Vechia, Castellano, with the Cities of Parma,
Piacenza, and Modena: That the Pope and the thirteen Cardinals with him should
remain Prisoners in the Castle of S. Angelo, until the moneys were paid, and
afterward should go to Naples, or Gaietta, Gaietta, until the pleasure and
determination of the Emperor was arrived.

The Duke of Bourbon being dead, the Prince of Aurange was made General in his
place; to whom whilst things were acting in this manner, advices came, that
Monsieur De Lautrec, with a very great Army, by order of Francis the French
King, to which also Henry the Eighth of England had joined his Forces, was
marching toward Rome, with design to rescue the Pope from those insolent
hands, under which he was a Prisoner: The news of which caused great tumults
and mutinies amongst the Soldiery, who being desirous to depart quietly with
their prey, before they were forced to disgorge it again, used all imaginable
insolences toward the Pope, to compel him to a payment of their Arrears, with
the moneys promised: but he not being master of one penny, was constrained to
deliver into their hands the persons of several rich men, which they had named,
for security of the money promised. But the ill fortune of Clement stopped not
here, for so soon as the news of the Popes imprisonment was heard at Florence,
the Inhabitants judged it a seasonable opportunity to recover their liberty,
and thereupon betaking themselves to Arms, they forced the Cardinal of Cortona,
with Hippolito, and Alexander de Medicis to abandon the City, and so reassumed
unto themselves the free administration of a Commonwealth, under the Authority
of a Gonfalonnier, created according to their ancient ^o^^titution for the
space of a year: for indeed the hatred they had con^^ived against the House of
Medicis, was for many reasons, great and ^e^ous; especially because they had
been forced with their own money to bear out the pride, and greatness of that
Family, in all the Wars they made in defense of the Duchy of Vrbin, and in the
Wars which Pope Leo made against the French: for which reasons, they persecuted
those Citizens that had been friends to the Medices; they reversed, and defaced
through the City the Arms of that Family; they brake the Images of Leo, and
Clement, which were rare pieces of Sculpture, and famous through the world; and
in short they omitted nothing which might affect the Pope with indignity, and
dishonor, and nourish division, and discord in the City.

At Rome the Army was very disorderly and tumultuous, governing themselves,
rather than obeying the command of their General the Prince of Aurange; for
they were wholly disposed to prey and violence, to get Ransoms, and receive the
money promised them by the Pope, no care being had of the interest of the
Emperor; nor was there any resolution taken to remove the Army from Rome, where
the Pestilence raged, and was entered into the Castle of S. Angelo, to the
great hazard of the Pope's life, many being dead thereof who served about his
person: during which time, as the Imperial Army yielded little obedience to
their Captains, so they made no great disturbances, nor gave fears to their
enemies; for the Spaniards and Italians flying from the infection of the Plague
lay dispersed about the Confines of Rome; and the Prince of Aurange was gone to
Siena to avoid the Plague, and keep that City in Devotion, and Obedience to the
Emperor. Wherefore all matters of action at that time were quiet, and in
repose, until Monsieur De Lautrec who was Captain General of the League made
between Henry the Eighth of England, and Francis King of France, for setting
the Pope and all Italy at liberty, appeared in Piedmont, whose success was so
fortunate, that he took Genoua, compelled Alexandria de la Paglia to surrender,
and having for four days battered Pavia, he forced it to yield at discretion,
giving it up to the plunder and cruelty of his Soldiery; and lastly ended that
years Champaign with glory, wintering his Army in the City of Bologna.

The Imperialists being a little mortified, and abased with this success of
Lautrec, were desirous to make the best bargain they could with the Pope,
before he were forced from them, and agreed upon the payment of 60000 Ducats to
the Germans, and 30000 to the Spaniards, with engagement to pay the residue at
a certain time, to set the Pope and Cardinals at liberty, and afford them safe
conduct to Orvieto, which was nominated and chosen by the Pope for the place of
his security, and retreat. Upon this accord the Pope being guarded by the
Imperialists, with less caution than before, gave him opportunity in the
disguise and habit of a Merchant to make his escape; which he rather determined
to do, and recover his freedom in that manner, than to expect the formal
conduct of the Imperial Guards, suspecting that Don Hugo de Moncada who was
Vice Roy of Naples in the place of Lanoia dead of the Plague, and who had no
good will toward him, would play him some trick, and baffle with him at the
conclusion of all.

The Pope being now at liberty in Orvieto, after seven months imprisonment, was
instantly congratulated by the Duke of Vrbin, the Marquess of Salutta, and
other Captains of the League, to whom having returned thanks for their kind and
obliging Offices, he desired them to withdraw their Forces out of the Dominions
of the Church, assuring them that the Imperialists had promised to depart
thence, in case the Confederates would show them the first example: He wrote
also Letters to Monsieur Lautrec, giving him to understand, that he with great
sense acknowledged the influence which his appearance in Italy had contributed
toward his liberty, having much facilitated, and eased the conditions on which
he was to receive it: and that the reason why he did not expect the glorious
time, in which he was to have been delivered by his powerful hand, was, because
his necessities compelled him to procure his liberty with the greatest speed;
for he observed, that the conditions imposed on him, always changed from bad to
worse; that in the mean time the Church was oppressed, his Authority contemned,
and he rendered incapable of being that happy instrument of mediation, which was
now required to settle peace among Christian Princes. Thus far were excellent
words, and such as became a Bishop under his mortifying circumstances; but his
words, and answers in other things, according to his natural temper, were in
substance different at one time, to what they were at an other. For when
Gregory Castle, the King of Englands Ambassador came to him about the beginning
of the year 1528. 1528.
desiring him to continue firm to the Confederates, he would some time give him
hopes, and then again excuse himself, as being so unfortunate, as to have
neither Men, Money, nor Authority remaining to him.

The Pope having now abandoned Rome, and Monsieur Lautrec upon his march
toward Naples, Ibidem.
the Imperialists on the 17. of February left the City in a naked and poor
condition, despoiled of all its Ornaments, and Riches, and applied themselves
to Counsels in what manner they might give a stop to the proceedings of
Lautrec, who departed from Bologna the 9th. of January. No sooner were the
Imperialists departed, than the Vrsins with their Tenants and Paisants entered
to complete the spoil and desolation of that City, of which not only the Houses
were ruined, and the Riches carried away, but all the Statues, Columns, and
curious pieces remained a prey to these Locusts.

Lautrec in his march toward Naples, took not the nearest way, but rather for
the more commodious carriage of his Cannon, and for the benefit of Forage, and
other Provisions, fetched a compass by the way of Puglia: his Army consisted of
400 Lances, 6000 Footmen, old and Veterane Soldiers; besides the Forces of the
Marquess of Salutta, who marched in the Van, and the Regiments of the
Venetians, and the Black Bands of Florence which were in much esteem, and
reputation with Monsieur Lautrec.

In short, at the first appearance of Lautrec within this Kingdom, Capua, Nola,
Acerra, Aversa, and all places yielded to him; but Naples endured a long Siege:
at which Monsieur Lautrec dying of a Fever, and most of the Captains and
Soldiers dead of the Plague, caused by the Contagion of those that were
privately sent out of the City to infect the Camp, the enterprise upon that
Kingdom had an end.

In the mean time whilst these things were in action, Sassatello rendered to the
Pope the Rock of Imola, and Sigismond Malatesta upon some conditions resigned
Rimini into his hands; and the Pope having a great desire to re-instate his
Friends and Relations, and advance his own Interest and Power again in
Florence, he seemed inclining to the party of the Emperor, in whose power only
it was to settle the Affairs of his Family in their pristine state: and
therefore perceiving the Affairs of the French, and the other Confederates to
decline in Italy, he forgot all the former injuries done to him by the Emperor,
and entered into a perfect friendship, and fair correspondence with him. And
farther to advance himself in the good opinion of the Emperor, he called for a
review of the cause of Divorce between Henry VIII. of England, and Catharine
his Queen, 1529.
and Aunt to the Emperor; for which having at the time of those great
oppressions he lay under from the Emperor granted a Bull, did now on terms of
reconciliation, cause the same to be revoked. And now the Pope following his
resolution, and closely attending a fair conclusion with the Emperor, a Peace
was concluded between them at Barcelona, much to the advantage of the Pope;
proceeding perhaps (as may be believed) from a sense the Emperor might have
conceived of the unjust and hard usage he had exercised toward him: and
because the urgency of his Affairs did call him into Italy, he might imagine
that the countenance, and favor of the Pope might be useful: and for these
reasons it was accorded, and agreed, That a perpetual Peace, and Confederation
be made between the Emperor, and the Pope: That the Pope should grant free
passage to the Emperors Army through the Ecclesiastical State, in case it
should depart out of the Kingdom of Naples: That the Emperor should re-instate
the Son of Laurence de Medicis in the same condition of greatness and power at
Florence, as they had been in before their expulsion thence, or their
Predecessors had enjoyed at any time before: That the Emperor should by such
ways and terms as were most convenient, either by force of Arms, or otherwise,
cause the possession of Cervia, Modena, Reggio, and Rubiera to be restored to
the Pope. That these particulars being performed, the Pope should in
consideration thereof yield unto the Emperor the whole and absolute Investitute
of the Kingdom of Naples, with the Tribute only of a White Horse yearly to be
given in acknowledgment of Fealty; together with the nomination of four and
twenty Cathedral Churches, which had formerly been in dispute, but now were
determined to belong to the Emperor; the Churches only which were not under
Patronage to be reserved to the Pope: That when the Emperor should have passed
into Italy, that the Pope and he should have an interview, and meet at Bologna,
or some other convenient place, to consult about their Affairs, and matters
relating to the Peace and settlement of the Church. And that the Emperor, and
his Brother Ferdinand should exercise their Temporal Arms against the
Lutherans, and others who had revolted from the Roman Church, and second the
Spiritual Weapons of Excommunications, and Ecclesiastical censures, which were
issued against them: That the Pope should grant Plenary Absolution to all
those, who had lately been injurious to the Apostolical Sea, or had by any
violent, or hostile acts committed outrages against it: And lastly, to confirm,
and consummate all these Articles by the more endearing terms of Alliance, the
Emperor was to give Margaret of Austria his natural Daughter in Marriage to
Alexander de Medicis Son of Laurence, late Duke of Vrbin, with twenty thousand
Ducats of yearly Revenue; on whom the Pope intended to establish the temporal
greatness of his Family; having not long since created Hippolito Cardinal, who
was the Son of Julian.

This Peace was soon afterward followed by another between the Emperor and the
French King, 1529.
treated at Cambray, of which the Pope was the chief Mediator by the
Archbishop of Capua, who was sent thither as Legate. The conclusion of this
grand Affair did much facilitate the Emperors design upon Florence, which he
committed to the charge, and management of the Prince of Orange; who in
pursuance of those commands having mustered his Forces about Aquila, he was
desired by the Pope to come to Rome, that he might the better consult, and
resolve with him upon the provisions, and ways of carrying on the War. The
Prince of Orange accordingly coming, was received by the Pope with great
respect, to whom toward payment of the Army, thirty thousand Ducats were
issued out of the Popes Treasury, and soon after forty thousand more; with
which, and with three pieces of Cannon taken out of the Castle S. Angelo, the
Prince departing, he encamped before Perusa, which was in the first place to be
reduced to the obedience of the Church. This place being held by Malatesta,
Baillon was surrendered upon composition; and thence the Prince entering on the
Lands, and Country belonging to the Florentines, encamped before Spella, which
was in a short time delivered to him.

Whilst these things were acting, the Emperor departed from Barcelona with a
great Fleet, wherein were a thousand Horsemen, and nine thousand Foot, with
which he arrived at Genoua, to the great terror of all Italy, and especially of
the Florentines, who thereupon made choice of four Ambassadors to congratulate
his arrival, and endeavor to make some agreement with them for composition of
their Affairs. When these Ambassadors were admitted to the presence of the
Emperor, and that the Ceremonies of Congratulation were past; they declared,
That their City was not ambitious, or desirous of great enlargements, or
extents of jurisdictions, but only to conserve their own with their Rights and
liberties, being willing to be beholding to the power of any mighty Monarch,
who would be pleased to take them into his protection. That they had associated
and entered into Confederacy with France, it was no matter of their own choice,
but in obedience, and compliance with the Pope, who at that time commanded
them; but that now they had thrown off all considerations of his Temporal
Power, or his Families over them; and that their Commission extending no
farther than to a Treaty with the Emperor, they could not give ear to any thing
which had reference to the Pope. This answer being unpleasing to the Emperor,
the Ambassadors were refused farther Audience at Piacenza, tho they had
followed the Court of the Emperor with that expectation from Genoua to that
place; so that their Negotiation was at an end for that time.

By this time being about the beginning of the year 1530. 1530
the Pope arrived first at Bologna, and the Emperor soon after came to him;
where he was received by the Pope with great honor, and lodged in the same
Palace with him; and such signs of familiarity and friendship passed, as if
there had never happened any of those disgusts, and violent actions between
them, which we have formerly mentioned, or at least that they had with a real
and unfeigned pardon been entirely forgotten. Thus matters appearing fair, and
clear between them, the Emperor intended to pass some time in Italy, in regard
his Affairs in other parts seemed not much to require his presence: for that
Soliman the Magnificent, who was then Grand Signior, and had besieged Vienna,
was forced to raise his Camp, and return to Constantinople; and the Peace being
newly concluded with France, nothing seemed in outward appearance which might
give him cause of avocation, or diversion from the Affairs of Italy. Wherefore
it was resolved that the Emperor should proceed to Rome, and there be Crowned,
taking Siena in his way, for better dispatch, and expedition in the design upon
Florence: but whilst these things were meditating, Letters came from the
Electoral College to the Emperor, earnestly entreating him, that he would be
pleased speedily to return into Germany, to consider about the matter of
Summoning a General Council for Reformation of Religion, and Election of his
Brother Ferdinand to be King of the Romans; and also to prepare matters for
resistance of the Turk, who had sworn to return thither again in a short time.
These matters seeming of considerable importance, were the cause that the
Emperor changed his resolution of proceeding to Rome, and was Crowned at
Bologna by the hand of the Pope, at which there was a great confluence of
people, tho not that magnificence and pomp as had been usual at the
Inauguration of other Emperors. The day of his Coronation was the Feast of S.
Matthias, a day thrice auspicious to him, being the day of his Nativity, the
day on which he took the French King Prisoner, and the day on which he was
invested in the Imperial Dignity.

This Solemnity being past, the Emperor prepared for his Journey into Germany;
howsoever before his departure, the Pope having settled his own business with
him touching the subjection of Florence, other matters of difference relating
to the Venetians, to the Investiture of Francis Sforza into the Duchy of
Milan, and Alfonso d' Este, Duke of Ferrara, were referred by compromise to the
sentence and determination of the Emperor; the expectation of which judgment
gave for some time quiet and repose to the Affairs of Italy. After which, the
Emperor proceeded to Germany, and the Pope returned to Rome; where after some
short time, he received the joyful news of the surrender of Florence; which
having endured a long Siege by the Emperors Army under the command of the
Prince of Aurange, and after his death of Don Ferrand de Gonzaga, yielded it
self by common consent of the people to the government of twelve Citizens, who
being of the Faction of the Medices, did without attending the Declaration of
the Emperor, leave Florence entirely to the pleasure and disposal of the Pope;
at whose instance and persuasion the Emperor declared Alexander de Medicis
Prince, and Duke of Florence; and the same right of Honor and Dignity to
descend from him, to his Heirs for ever: the which power and title has since
that time continued in that Illustrious Family. Whilst these things were acted
in Italy, a Diet was assembled at Ausbourg, at which Ferdinand the Emperors
Brother was elected King of the Romans; where also notice being taken of the
great increase of the Lutheran Doctrine, which had spread it self in all parts
of Germany, and had taken root in the greatest and most Princely Families; it
was concluded by all sides, and parties, as well Lutherans, as others, that the
only means to reform Affairs, and confirm those Doctrins which were sound and
Orthodox, was only in the Power, and Authority of a General Council: for the
moderate Party which was inclined to the Papal Interest, considering the many
abuses crept into the Church, and the exorbitant power of the Clergy, hoped
that a Council would reduce matters to more equal terms. The Lutherans on the
other side, having formed a great and numerous Party, did apprehend that many
of the dignified Clergy, that were to be Members of that Council, would prove
well inclined, and affected to them; where matters being debated with freedom
and candor, the nakedness of the Church of Rome would be exposed, and its
Corruptions discovered. This being the general sense of all Germany, which the
Emperor was willing to satisfy, he sent to the Pope, urging him to summon a
Council; to persuade him whereunto, he desired him to recall unto his memory,
the personal Conferences they had entertained at Bologna, and the assurances he
had there given him of faithfulness, and adherence to the Church; promising
him, that neither his Authority nor Dignity should be brought into any danger;
for that he would be there present in person to overawe any contrivances which
might be designed against either. Nothing could come more ungrateful than this
Proposition to the Pope and Cardinals, who were not willing to expose the
excessive abuses and exactions of the Court of Rome to the test of a Council;
where perhaps, the authority of Indulgences, the largeness of Dispensations,
and other Errors being discussed, would give admission into those secrets,
which were not to be touched, or opened. The Pope also had some secret reserves
of his own, which he would not have committed to the scrutiny of a a Council:
he was not willing perhaps to have it debated, that he was born Illigitimate
which incapacitates him of being a Cardinal, and consequently of being Pope.
Nor would he have the suspicion of Simony, with which he practiced with
Cardinal Colonna, called into question; besides many other particulars, of
which he feared to be censured by the Council: upon consideration of all which,
after consultations had with the Cardinals deputed to the discussion of that
matter, many reasons were given to the Emperor, against the present Assembling
of such a Council; but when the time should appear more seasonable, that then
the Indictions might be regulated with many proper and cautious circumstances;
as that the Council should be celebrated in Italy, and that the Pope should be
personally present at it: and that the Lutherans should promise to submit the
determination and decision of their Controversies and Opinions, to the judgment
and sentence of a Council, and in the mean time desist from the declaration, or
propagation of their Doctrins: the which being a matter difficult, and
unpracticable, the proposition for a Council became ineffectual, and the
thoughts thereof laid aside until the Reign of another Pope.

Tho the Pope did not think fit to gratify the desires of the Emperor, and all
Germany with a General Council; yet the Emperor not unmindful of the
Arbitration he had accepted for settlement of the Affairs of Italy, did about
the beginning of the year 1531. 1531.
reassume the consideration of those matters. In the first place therefore he
decreed that the City of Florence should be governed by the same Magistrates,
and by the same model, and form of rule, as it had formerly been in the time of
the Medices; that Alexander the Popes Nephew should be chief in the Government,
and so successively his Heirs for ever: all the ancient Privileges and
Immunities formerly granted by him, or his Predecessors were again restored and
confirmed; with condition notwithstanding of forfeiture, in case the
Magistrates or People of that City should attempt any thing against the
authority and greatness of the Medices: the which Sentence he pronounced with a
Despotick power, not by virtue of a compromise, or reference to him by the
parties concerned, but by an Authority inherent in the Imperial Dignity. And
tho this determination was pleasing to the Pope, yet by the other relating to
the Duke of Ferrara he was much offended: for after that Controversy had been
opened, heard, and examined by many Doctors and Testimonies, and Writings
produced, the Emperor according to the counsel, and report made him,
pronounced, that Modena and Reggio appertained of right to the Duke of Ferrara;
who paying a hundred thousand Ducats to the Pope, the Tributes should be
reduced to their ancient custom, and he invested in the Jurisdiction of
Ferrara. But the Pope would neither allow that part of the Sentence, nor accept
the payment of the money, wherein the Duke was condemned, refusing the Tribute
which was offered to him according to the usual custom: so that there was
neither open War, nor a settled Peace between the Pope, and the Duke of Ferrara;
for having a regard, and some respect to the Emperors Award, and Sentence, he
feared to assail him with open force, contriving in the mean time secret plots,
and devices wherewith to ensnare him.

Matters thus continued with some tranquillity, until the year 1532. 1532:
which was more signal for Foreign Wars, than for the Commotions of Italy: For
Francis the French King, not forgetting the sufferings he had sustained by the
Emperor, contrived all ways imaginable for his revenge, not being scrupulous or
ashamed of secret practices and treaties with Soliman Emperor of the Turks, in
despite of his Title of Most Christian, to stir him up, and incite him to a
War against Charles the Emperor; inviting him to make a second attempt by
laying siege to Vienna. Soliman being full of anger, and disdain for the late
foil he had received before that City, was easily persuaded to try his fortune
in another Expedition; but the Princes and Free Towns of Germany concurring
with their Forces, and uniting them to the Imperial Troops, composed a most
formidable Army, which being conducted by Charles the Emperor, who was the
greatest Captain of his age, and his name terrible to the Turks: Soliman made
only some incursions into Hungary, and then returned again to Constantinople.

But before this news came, and whilst these things were in action, Henry VIII.
King of England, and Francis the French King being both highly displeased with
the Emperor, met together at Boloign in France, where they held several
Consultations how to improve the present state of Affairs to their own
advantage. And giving it for granted, that the Turk would Winter in Hungary,
and afford the Emperor sufficient employment for the year following; they
resolved to make use of this conjuncture of Affairs to their mutual benefit: in
pursuance of which, it was determined between them, that the French King was to
invade the State of Milan, and the Pope was to be induced to assist in the same
design, and to determine the cause of Divorce of Queen Catharine in favor of
King Henry, then depending in the Court of Rome: with which message and
instructions the Cardinals of Ternon, and Gramont were sent Ambassadors to the
Pope. But King Henry having not the patience to attend the result, contemned
the authority of a Divorce by the Papal Power, contenting and satifying his own
Conscience with what had before been disputed, and determined in the Courts of
England about that matter: and having understood, that the Legate Campeius had
been sent into England with a Bull of Divorce, which afterward upon change of
the Pope's mind he had burnt, the King was so enraged thereat, that he resolved
not to have farther dealings with the Pope; Baker's Chron.
and thereupon Proclamation was published, that no person of what estate or
condition soever, c.
should purchase, or attempt to purchase from the Court of Rome, any thing
prejudicial to the Jurisdiction, or Prerogative of this Realm, upon pain of
Imprisonment, or other punishment, according to the pleasure of the King.

But the retirement of the Turks out of Hungary put a period to the design of
Invading the Duchy of Milan, and to the expectation the King of England had of
receiving a favorable sentence at Rome in the point of Divorce; for the result
of the Interview of these two Kings being known at Rome, hastened the Pope to
make a League with the Emperor, which was concluded at a second meeting at
Bologna, where the same Ceremonies, and terms of amity, and friendship passed
between them, as had been formerly at the first. After which the Emperor by the
way of Genoua passed into Spain; and the Pope returned to Rome, accompanied
thither by the two Cardinals, Ternon, and Gramont; the which according to their
Commission insisted greatly to have the Divorce of Queen Catharine confirmed by
the Popes Authority; alleging the great damage, and ruin that an obstinate
persistance to the contrary might bring to the Church: but the Cardinals of the
Emperors Faction laboring to the contrary, and the Pope understanding what
Henry had already acted in that point in England, issued an Excommunication
against him, and his whole Realm, unless before the end of September following,
he did revoke all the Acts he had made, to the prejudice of the Apostolical
Sea, and the Papal Authority.

These French Cardinals finding their Negotiations in reference to England to
be unsuccessful, and desperate; treated notwithstanding an interview between
the Pope and the French King, to be held at Marseille; coloring their design
with the specious pretense of finding some expedient to accommodate matters
between King Henry and the Pope; a Charity so great, and Christian, and of that
high importance, as might challenge the labors and endeavors of the most
Christian King: and farther it was pretended that a League and Union between
the Christian Princes was there to be negotiated against the Turk. But the
desire of the Pope being in reallity to marry his Niece Catharine de Medicis to
the second Son of the King of France, was easily persuaded to condescend to a
proposition so agreeable to his own inclinations: in pursuance whereof the Pope
with a great retinue of Cardinals Embarked at Pisa on his own Galleys, and in a
few days of prosperous Navigation, he landed at Marseille, where being saluted
with three hundred pieces of Cannon at his arrival, he was lodged for the first
night in the Palace of the Duke of Montmorency, Grand Master, and Marshall of
France. The next day he made his entry through the City, habited in his
Pontifical Vestments, and carried in his Chair upon men's shoulders; before him
a White Horse was led by two men, with silken Reins, carrying the Sacrament of
the Altar; then followed the Cardinals in their Habits, mounted upon their
Mules; after which came Catharine de Medicis, Duchess of Vrbin, attended with
a great number of Ladies and Gentlemen, both of the French and Italian Nation;
in which equipage the Pope passed the Streets to the Lodgings which were
provided for him. The day following the French King came, and with great
solemnity went to perform the Offices of Duty, and Obedience to the Pope.

These Solemnities and Ceremonies being past, matters of public concernment
were in the first place taken into consideration by those who were by the King
and the Pope delegated to consult thereof: and tho the Marriage was the main
point, which moved the Pope to undertake this Journey, yet it was in the last
place, and as it were accidentally, and by the by treated of: The first thing
assumed, was the proposal about a General Council, but that was soon rejected,
and executed with the same reasons, and replies as were given to the Emperor.
In the next place the King of Englands case was warmly insisted upon by the
Commissioners of the French King as it had been formerly agreed between the two
Kings at Bulloin; but those instances produced little effect; for the Ministers
of the King of England being in a huff, were always to the diminution of the
Popes Authority appealing to a Council; with which the Pope referred their
Cause to be farther debated at his return to Rome: and the French King being
desirous in all things to satisfy, and comply with the Pope, he told him, that
it would not be displeasing to him, in case he proceeded against that King
according to the Rule of Justice, and the ancient Canons of Ecclesiastical
Censure; by which fair and friendly compliance, the Pope would not refuse at
the instance of the French King to create four Cardinals, tho much against his
own inclinations, fearing thereby to have rendered the French Faction too
strong, which already was more prevalent in the Court of Rome, than the Pope
desired. In the last place, tho the first in design, the Marriage between the
Duke of Orleans, and the Pope's Niece was treated and concluded; and the
parties married by the Pope himself: by which a strict and firm Alliance, and
friendship being created between the French King and the Pope, it seemed as if
all those professions of amity and good will, which had lately interceded at
Bologna between the Emperor and the Pope had vanished, or signified little; and
now amongst other Articles, it being capitulated, that the Duke of Orleans
should be invested in the Dukedom of Milan; it was with no less wonder
considered, that the interest of Francis Sforza the true and right Heir to that
Duchy, and for which both this, and other Popes had so earnestly contended,
could so easily be made void, and transferred over to a Foreign Prince, who
could pretend no other right thereunto, than the might, and power of his own
Arms.

With entertainment of these Affairs, a months time being spent at Marseille,
the Pope returned to Rome; where, so soon as he arrived, he foretold his own
death, acquainting his Friends, and Domestics about his person; that he had
not long to live; and therefore in order to his Burial, he commanded the Ring
to be provided, and the Vestments in which Popes were usually interred:
howsoever before his death, he thundered out his Bulls of Excommunication
against Henry VIII. King of England, and all the people of his Realm; with
which the King being highly incensed, immediately withdrew his Obedience from
the Papal Sea, and declared himself Head under Jesus Christ of the Church of
England; forbidding money to be transported out of England to Rome, and
commanded the Archbishop of Canterbury to renounce his Title of Legate from
the Pope: the which was the beginning of that blessed Reformation, 1534.
which has purged the Church of England from Errors, rendered it pure in its
Doctrine, introduced the true, and glorious light of the Gospel, which will with
Gods assistance for ever remain sure, and immovable in despite of all the
contrivances either of the Fanatical irreligious malice, or the power, or
policies of the Roman Church: And moreover it was the beginning of that liberty
which we now enjoy, and the enrichment of this flourishing Nation, which now
keeps its Treasures and Acquisitions to its self, which in former days were
emptied into the Coffers of the Pope to make Foreiners opulent, and its people
poor.

But to return to Pope Clement; being taken with a pain in his stomach, a Fever
ensued upon it; of which according to his own prediction, he departed this life
the 25th. day of September, 1534. leaving behind him in the Castle of S.
Angelo, many Jewels, in the Pontifical Chamber infinite Offices, but a very
small sum of money: he had at diverse Ordinations created three and thirty
Cardinals; all which (except Cardinal De Medicis) were made to please others,
rather than himself. He had been exalted to the Popedom with wonderful
felicity, and with the general applauses, and grand expectations of the world;
but in a short time he fell strangely in their opinion; for being of a temper
naturally irresolute, and diffident, suffered himself to be divided by his two
familiar friends, men differing in their humors, affections, and interests;
which laid him low in the esteem of mankind, and hated and detested by the
Romans; and yet he was sober, abstemious, and a greater conqueror of himself;
but accounted covetous, of no fidelity, or faithfulness to his word, nor
readily inclined to do any man a good office, unless forced thereunto by some
constraining necessity; and yet he was grave, and well advised in his actions,
if timorousness had not oftentimes corrupted his judgment. He proved such
diversity of fortunes, that it is hard to determine, whether his bad, or his
good fortune was greatest: for what evil can be compared to the sacking of
Rome, which he beheld with his own eyes; his own, and the long imprisonment of
the Cardinals; the desolation of his own Country, of which he was an
instrument, for the promotion only of the Family of the Medices. He died in the
67th. year of his age, having held the Papal Chair ten years, ten months, and
seven days: His Corpse were first interred in the Church of S. Peter, but
afterward transported to the Minerva, by his own Relations, and laid by the
Body of Pope Leo the tenth, over which they erected a stately Monument of
Marble.

PAVL III.
THE Funeral Rites of Clement VII. being performed with due solemnity, the
Cardinals entered the Conclave the 12th. of October, 1534. and the same day
toward night agreed unanimously in their Election, and published Alexander
Farnese Dean of the College of Cardinals to be with general consent chosen
Pope. The motives which the Cardinals might have to hasten with such facility,
and unanimous assent this election might be various; for his family was great,
and ancient; He had been forty years a Cardinal, and thereby acquired a
competent knowledge of the Affairs of the world, and of the practices of the
Court of Rome; and being 68 years of age, and of a weak and tender constitution
of body, the more robust, and ambitious Cardinals expected, that his Reign
could not be long before he made way for one of them. And in regard, that in
all the actions, and negotiations of his life, he had ever showed an
indifferency, not inclining either to the Imperial, or French Faction; the
parties of neither side did make it their business or concernment to oppose
him; for tho the Family of Farnese were Guelfs, and Vrsins, rather than
Gibellins, and of the party of Colonna; yet this Alexander did contain himself
within that happy neutrality, that neither Faction had a prejudice to him, or
did violently oppose him: so that all parties concurring with a common voice in
his Election, did without farther demur, or delay, salute and pay their
respects and ceremonies of Worship to him, as Universal Bishop: the which
Election was so free and easy, neither constrained by an overawing force of
armed Bands, nor by the power of a prevailing Party; that for many ages the
like had not been known to the great joy of good men, who are always pleased
with regular proceedings.

Alexander being thus chosen, he took on himself the name of Paul the Third; in
consideration as some conjecture, that he was born in the Reign of Paul the
Second in Canino, a place in Toscany, which was the paternal seat of his
Fathers.

Being now Pope, he declared much against Nepotismo, or advancing Favorites, or
Nephews to eminency, or greatness; and therefore expressly forbad his natural
Son Pier-luigi to come to Rome, or meddling with the Affairs of the Church, or
State, requiring him to promise unto himself no other benefit or advantage by
his promotion to the Papal Sea, than only to live a quiet, and a commodious
life. Howsoever he was not so firm, or constant to this resolution, but that he
promoted the Son of this Pier-luigi, a youth of 14 years of age to the Dignity
of Cardinal, by the name of Cardinal Farnese; and another also yet younger than
the former, named Ascagno Sforza, his Sisters Son: the which unreasonable
promotions at a time, and conjuncture of Affairs so unfit, afforded just matter
of discourse, and obloquy to the Lutherans, and Reformers of Religion; who
besides the impieties of former Popes, had yet some thing material to object
against the levity, and weakness of the present Government: howsoever, as if he
intended to make amends for this unripe fruit, he assumed others of more mature
age and wisdom to this Dignity, whom he promoted either for their Virtues, or
Learning, or Nobility of their Families; amongst which John Maria de Monte
Arezzo, Archbishop of Siponto was one, who was afterward made Pope by the
name of Julius the Third: He also created John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, as
also Renard de la Poole Cardinals, together with many others to the number of
seventy one, during his Reign, or time that he was Pope.

And as this Pope Paul the Third was very bountiful in these promotions, so he
was no less magnificent, and stately in his Structures; having in the first
year laid the Foundations of that sumptuous Building at Rome, called by the
name of The Palace of the Farnesi, which is one of the most noble and
magnificent Edifices not only in Rome, but in all Europe: the which I the more
willingly mention, because that being my self at Rome, I observed it to be most
agreeable to the antique Buildings of old Rome: and that besides the outward
Magnificence, it was rarely furnished within side, with many excellent Statues,
as that of Hercules, of Flora, and a Gladiator, esteemed the best pieces in the
world, which are in the Court, or Area below: Then above stairs you have the
Statues of Julius Caesar, and Augustus, Homer, Herodotus, Pindarus, Cicero,
Seneca, and others; but that of Caracalla is beyond them all: he looks fierce,
and wants nothing but motion to make you believe it is alive: there are also
some Idol gods, and a Statue of Socrates on a Pedestal of the same Marble: but
the most famed piece of Art, is the Toro Farnese, which is a furious Bull held
by the Sons of Dirce, who are tying their Mothers Hairs to the Horns of the
Bull; it was brought from Rhodes, and esteemed at a very high value. This
Palace was begun by Antonio Gallo, an excellent Architect, and finished by
Michael Angelo Buona rota. Upon the Frontispiece of the Gate, these Verses are
engraven. Tertius has Paulus struxit Farnesius aedes,
Quarum forma oculos ponitur ante tuos,
Aspicis immensos hospes qui frontis honores,
His similes, dices, Roma nec orbis habet.
Thus much had the pacifick, and quiet spirit of Paul the Third effected; that
amidst the troubles, and inquietudes of Government he was able to attend to
such an expensive piece of Structure; the which shows his aversion to War: for
stately Buildings, and ornaments of Cities are always the happy effects of
Peace: and indeed the Maxim which this Pope observed of keeping himself in a
discreet neutrality between the Emperor and the French King, did marvellously
contribute to his ease, and prosperity; for by that means, he was courted by
them both, and lived without the troubles and expense of War, until he was
necessitated thereunto by other emergencies. Moreover, the first year of this
Popes Government was so very happy in the seasonableness of the Weather, and
fruitfulness of the time, accompanied with so many other auspicious
circumstances, as made those, who had suffered in the late cloudy, and
tempestuous times of Adrian, and Clement, bless the returns of Romes glory, and
prosperity, as if the Golden Age had again entered, attributing all to the
conduct, and wisdom of Paul the Third; of whose great Parts and Abilities they
had received apparent instances in the Reign of Clement VII. who so kindly
accepted the solicitations and labors which this Alexander when he was Cardinal
had performed to relieve him when he was besieged in the Castle of S. Angelo,
by bringing Lautrec to his assistance, that he gained the primary station of
authority and esteem with him; so that being sick, and oppressed with a pain in
his stomach, he would often say, that if the succession to the Popedom were
hereditary, or could be disposed of by Will and Testament, he should judge no
other so worthy to be his Heir, as this Alexander; who now, as we have said,
being elected Pope on the 12th. of October, was Crowned on the second of
November following, with all the Ceremonies usual at that Solemnity.

Being thus settled in his Pontificate, he resolved to adhere to his ancient
Principle, and Maxim of Neutrality; and therefore could never be persuaded to
revoke, or annul the League which was made between Clement the Seventh his
Predecessor, and Charles the Emperor at Bologna: for tho that League was
principally calculated, and designed to drive the French out of Italy, to
which, tho perhaps the dominion of the Imperialists might be equally grievous,
and oppressive; yet considering, that such a breach of Articles, in favor of
the French, could not be performed without innovations, which must necessarily
produce Wars, and disturbances in Italy, nor effected without impeachment of
that Neutrality, which he had often avowed to be indispensably belonging to the
Office of Popes, who were the common Parents of all Christian Kings; and
therefore he would never give ear to those suggestions which the French
Ministers, and Faction would frequently inculcate in favor to that King. And
whereas the former Pope was always averse to the instances which the Emperor,
and French King and other Princes made to him for a General Council to be held
for reforming abuses crept into the Church, and suppressing the Opinions of
Luther, which they called heretical, and which began to dilate, and spread
themselves in all parts of Christendom: Now this Paul the Third was of such a
different sense herein to his Predecessor, that he freely declared for a
Council, showing himself willing to meet the desires of the Princes, and
promised in a short space to appoint the time, and place, where such a Council
should be held, and celebrated. And farther to confirm and improve this good
correspondence with the Christian Courts, he dispeeded his Emissaries, and
Legates into all parts, whose care it was as well to advance the private
interests of his Family, as the common benefit of the Church; and particularly
to solicit, and promote such a good correspondence, and peace between the
Emperor, and the King of France, that uniting their Forces for the common
safety of Christendom, might jointly make War upon the Turk, and other enemies
to the Christian Faith: but herein his desires found little success, for the
French being beaten out of Italy, could not support the prosperity of the
Emperor, against whom breathing nothing but revenge, could never be induced to
unite their Arms in a common Cause; or join in a design then preparing by the
Emperor against the Kingdom of Tunis, which one Barbarosso had usurped: who
having by the help of Soldiers, and a strong Fleet furnished and equipped at
the expense of Soliman Emperor of the Turks, droven Mulcasses King of Tunis out
of his own Country, did with the pyracies he committed, very much infest the
Coasts of Spain and Sicily; and being arrived to a considerable power,
threatened to invade the Kingdom of Naples. This growing greatness of
Barbarosso, and the daily Pyracies he committed were sufficient provocation to
Charles the Fifth to wage War against him; and being a Tyrant, and an Infidel,
the Pope also became concerned in this Holy Cause to concur with the Emperor,
for whose assistance, he furnished out nine Galleys, which were fitted at
Genoua, besides three others which were the usual Guard of the Coast; over this
Fleet Virginio Orsinio, a person of great quality was constituted Admiral, to
whom was joined Paulo Giustiniano a Noble Venetian, and one of great experience
in Sea Affairs. The preparations of the Emperor also were very great, his Fleet
was commanded by Prince Doria, who was made Commander in Chief at Sea, to whom
the Pope made a present of a short Sword, or Poniard with a Hilt set with
Jewels, and the Scabbard rarely Engraved, and consecrated with the usual
Ceremonies; likewise a Cap of Velvet Embroidered with Pearls, which were the
accustomary Donatives which Popes made to Generals that were employed in a Holy
War against Infidels. The Marquess Del Vasso was created General of the Italian
and German Infantry, and being on his Voyage toward Tunis, he touched in his
way thither at Civita Vecchia; to which place the Pope went in person to bless
the Army, that he might evidence to the world the great zeal he had for the
Christian cause: the which office of Benediction he performed on the top of a
high Tower, from whence surveying the Fleet of Ships, and Galleys, he solemnly
prayed with a Choire of Priests for the happy success of this enterprise,
making thousands of Crosses on the empty Air; and then descending into the
Church, he delivered the Banner and Scepter of the Christian Religion into the
hands of Vi^ginio Orsino his General.

The success of this Expedition was, that the Emperor having landed a great
Army on the Coast of Tunis, defeated Barbarosso, and put his Forces to flight,
took the City of Tunis, and restored Mulcasses the vanquished Prince to his
Kingdom on conditions of Homage, and Tribute; for better security of which
payment, and performance, he built two Castles at the Goleta, which being
Garrisoned with Spaniards, served for Block Houses to that Port; and having
released twenty thousand Christians from Captivity, which Barbarossa had by his
depredations at Sea, and Land taken, and enslaved, he returned with his Fleet
to Sicily, and then to Naples, where he solemnly entered in a triumphant
manner, with such joy, and festivals as are due to such successes. Nor was this
good news less welcome to Rome, where Processions of Thanksgivings were made,
and Te Deum sang in the most solemn manner, and farther to ^estifie the great
joy which the Pope conceived for this success, John Piccolomini, and Alexander
Cesarini were sent from him to congratulate with the Emperor for this glorious
and happy Victory.

Whilst the Emperor was in his passage between Sicily and Naples, advices were
brought him of the decease of Francis Sforza, who was the last Duke of Milan,
by whose death that Duchy devolved to the Empire, being afterward governed by
Antonio de Levae, in form of a Province: howsoever the Title thereunto was not
so clear on the Emperors side, but that the King of France laid his claim unto
it, not only by right of inheritance, as descended from his Great-Grand-Mother
Valentina, but by virtue also of a concession granted by public Act from
Maximilian the Emperor to King Lewis XII. of France, on a valuable
consideration of money paid for it, after Lodowick Sforza had been taken, and
droven from thence. But this pretense seemed of little moment to the Emperor,
who judging this Dukedom of great importance to his State, came from Naples to
Rome with intent to persuade the Pope to join with him in a League against the
French, that so Italy might be more in repose, and quiet by expulsion of the
French, who were always esteemed great disturbers of the peace of it. On the
5th. of April 1536. Anno 1536.
the Emperor came to Rome, where being received by the Cardinals, Bishops, and
all the Orders of the Clergy, with the Citizens, he was conducted to the Church
of S. Peter, where the Pope attended him on the steps of the Porch: and the
usual Ceremonies being passed, he was lodged in that apartment of the Vatican
Palace, which was built by Innocent VIII. During the residence which the
Emperor made at Rome, he entertained frequent Conferences with the Pope
concerning a League to be entered into, between them and the other Princes of
Italy, for expelling the French out of that Country; who having been always
known under the character and notion of the disturbers of their peace, they
could neyer hope, or expect quietness, whilst that restless people had any
hold, or possession in their Quarters. And farther, the Emperor in a public
Assembly of the Pope and all the Cardinals, and Foreign Ministers did most
severely inveigh against Francis the French King, as the most ungratetul, and
faithless of all the Princes of the Universe: but being sharply answered, and
replied upon by Monsieur Bellay the Ambassador of France, the Emperor became
more moderate in his terms, and discourses on that subject; during which time
there was a most profound silence amongst all the Cardinals in that August
Assembly. But then as to the proposition made of a League between the Italian
Princes for expulsion of the French, the Pope did with singular respect to the
Emperor, approve, and praise the pious affection he had for the care, and
repose of Italy; but yet as to himself he could not recede from his Principle,
and resolution of Neutrality, which he had grounded on the foundation of his
Pastoral Office, and Charge, which enjoined him to seek, and endeavor to the
utmost of his power an Union, and Peace between Christian Princes; and
therefore he heartily urged him to a Peace with the King of France, offering
himself to become the Mediator and Umpire in the accord between them: But so
far was the Emperor Charles transported with anger, and disdain against Francis
the French King, that he treated him with all the terms of obloquy, that his
rage could suggest; concluding, that nothing could determine, or put a period to
the differences between them, but only the death of one of them two; and
therefore did publicly defy and challenge Francis to a single Combat: but the
Pope being desirous to mitigate this heat with fair words, and gentle
persuasions, embracing him, desired him not to give way to his passion; and
when the Ambassadors of France would have answered something farther in favor
of their King, he required them to be silent, resolving not to give ear to any
of their Expostulations. Hence a cruel War arose between the Empire and France;
for the Emperor having remained 14 days at Rome, departed thence with design to
Invade France; and so passing through Toscany, and the Jurisdiction of Genoua,
at the persuasion of Antonio de Leva, he entered Provence, where for want of
all Provisions, and by reason of the Distempers and Sicknesses which at that
time reigned in that Country, his Forces were reduced to great difficulties;
which was the reason that this War did not continue a year, before a Truce was
concluded of ten months between them: the opportunity of which quiet interval
the Pope improving for making a firm, and constant Peace, labored to appease
the incensed Spirits of those two Princes by an interview at Nice, which he
proposed as a place for their Meeting, and where he himself offered to be
personally present: for tho being 73 years old, his age might excuse him from
the fatigue of such a Journey; yet for the sake of the peace of Christendom,
and the piety of this work, he offered himself to be Arbitrator of their
Controversies: the which being assented unto by the two Princes, about the
beginning of June, 1538. the Emperor, and the French King, and the Pope also
personally appeared at the place appointed, where the Pope taking the
Propositions, and the Demands on both sides into consideration, he found so
many difficult and knotty points to be determined, that despairing of any
conclusion in manner of a Peace, he proposed a Truce for ten years between
them; during which time, all acts of Hostility were to cease, and free
Commerce, and intercourse of Trade to be admitted between their Subjects: the
which being accepted by both parties, the Emperor, and King returned to their
Dominions, and the Pope to Rome; where he was received with the common joy, and
acclamations of all the City.

But to return from these secular Disturbances, and Treaties, to matters more
nearly relating to Religion, and the Church. It was now about twenty years that
Luther had preached his Doctrins in Germany, and other parts; and that the
Christian Princes had long desired a General Council; against which this Paul
the Third having never showed himself averse, but rather testified a
willingness, and inclinations thereunto, it was now thought fit to assign the
time, and place for assembling this Council; 1537.
the which was published by a Bull, penned with great caution, and subtilty, by
six Cardinals, and three Bishops, lest the words should prejudice, or in any
wise infringe the Papal Authority; the which was dated in public Consistory
the 12th. of June, and signed by all the Cardinals: the Tenure of which was to
this effect.

That since the time that this Pope entered into the Papal Dignity, he never
had more passionately desired any thing, than to purge the Church of Christ,
(the care of which was committed to his charge) of all Errors and Schisms, and
to restore it to the ancient Discipline and severity of the Primitive times; to
effect which, Hist. Trent.
he judged no expedient so agreeable, and proper, as a General Council, the
which he had often signified both to the Emperor, and other Kings; in hopes
that after all Errors were corrected, and exploded, and abuses in manners
reformed; that such a Sacred Convention would procure, and beget a right
understanding between all Christian Princes, that laying aside all Quarrels and
Animosities amongst themselves, they would unite together in a War against
Infidels, for recovery of the Countries they had usurped, and rescue of our
Christian Brethren who suffer under their servitude, and slavery. To which end,
by virtue of that absolute Power committed to him by God, and by and with the
consent of his Brothers the Cardinals, he did Indict, and publish a General
Council to be held at Mantoua, at, or upon the 27th. of May, of the year
following: Commanding and requiring all Bishops, and Prelates of what degree or
place soever, to be assistant, and present thereunto, as they were obliged by
Oath, and by Holy Canons, and Decrees instituted on such occasions. Desiring
and entreating the Emperor, and all Christian Princes, for the love of Jesus
Christ, to be present and assistant there in person, if it were possible, and
consistent with their Affairs; and if not, then to depute their Ambassadors,
and Ministers with plenary Power, and Authority; as they had already promised
both to Clement and himself, etc.

The Pope also published an other Bull at the same time, to purge, (as he
called it) the City of Rome from Vices, and corruption of manners; that so, as
his intentions were to reform all that was amiss in the Christian world, (of
which in spiritual matters he was the Head, and Chief) so it was most pious to
begin at home; that the streams from the original Source might descend more
pure, and limpid into other parts.

But the first Bull indicting a Council at Mantoua, had not been long
published, before the Duke of that place, considering, that for the security
thereof, it would be necessary to maintain a stronger Garrison, than usual; the
extraordinary charge, and expense of which he demanded of the Pope; with many
other hard conditions derogatory to the Papal Power, and such as did infringe
that liberty which was always accorded to places, where General Councils had
been celebrated: it was therefore thought fit to assign an other place; the
which being not as yet agreed, the time of Assembling was deferred from May,
until the first of November following.

The month of November approaching near, the Pope published an other Bull,
appointing the Council to be held at Vicenza, a City under the Jurisdiction of
the Venetians, upon the first of May next, in the year 1538. deputing for his
Legates the Cardinals Campeggio, Simonetta, and Jeronimo Alexandro, alleging
for cause of such prolongation the nearness of the Winter, which would be very
incommodious to those, who were to travel thither from remote parts. Howsoever
upon diverse obstacles, and inconveniences thereupon occurring, the place for
meeting of this Council was altered, and the time deferred for some years
after, as will appear by the sequel hereof. In the mean time Henry the Eighth,
King of England, who in the year 1535. was by Act of Parliament Authorized Head
of the Church of England, did now absolutely throw off all Obedience to the
Papal Sea; at which time the whole Clergy of England was charged by the Kings
Learned Council to be in a Praemunire for supporting and maintaining the
Legantine power of Cardinal Wolsey: Baker's Chron.
and were thereupon called by Process into the Kings Bench: but before that day
of appearance came, they in their Convocation concluded an humble submission in
writing, and offered the King a hundred thousand pounds to have their Pardon by
Parliament, which offer after some pause, and deliberation, was accepted, and
their pardon promised. Until this time the Popes, that is, Clement VII. and
this present Paul the third had subtly dissembled matters between them and
Henry King of England, intending if necessity had required to have confirmed
his Divorce from Queen Catharine; to which end Cardinal Campeggio was sent into
England, and joined in Commission with the Cardinal of York, with Authority to
give Sentence in favor of the King; and that the matter might receive a speedy
dispatch, and not be spun out by length of time, required in the solemnity of
Judgment, and passing Sentence; a Brief was ready framed, and drawn up, and the
Bull, or Seal thereunto affixed, whereby the Marriage with Queen Catherine was
made null, and void, in the most ample manner, and with Terms and Clauses so
full, as nothing could be more expressive, nor more large than that Instrument,
with instructions notwithstanding not to present or publish the same, unless
they received assurances, that Henry would continue firm and constant in his
Obedience to the Authority of the Church; and in this manner things stood, and
thus far had proceeded in the year 1528. Clement the Seventh being then Pope;
and so remained in suspense until the time of this present Paul the Third, when
Henry bidding defiance to the Papal Authority, proceeded to actions never to be
reconciled with that Church; whereupon the Pope issued out his Bull, dated the
30th. of August, 1535. whereby he cited King Henry to appear personally before
him, and the College of Cardinals at Rome, to give answer to all those
Cruelties, Sacrileges, Adulteries, and other Crimes whereof he stood accused:
and in case of refusal, he pronounced him, and all his Subjects to remain under
censure of Excommunication; declaring him actually deprived of his Crown, and
Kingdom; his Subjects absolved from all Obedience; all actions of Religion
interdicted and forbidden to be performed, or celebrated in his Dominions:
commanding all Ecclesiastical persons to depart from his Kingdoms, and the
Nobles to rise up in Rebellion against him. But all this lightning and thunder
of Excommunication did little terrify the resolved mind of King Henry, but
rather incensed him to proceed in that course, which since that time, has laid
the happy beginning of that blessed Reformation, under which by Gods mercy we
enjoy the true, and glorious light of the Gospel.

On these terms England stood in reference to the Pope, when publication was
made of a General Council to be held at Mantoua, and then altered to Vicenza;
in which case King Henry, judging himself concerned in despite of his
Excommunication, published a Manifesto in his own name, and in the name of all
his Nobility, whereby he protested against any such Convocation assembled by
the Popes Authority, as being in it self of none effect; excepting also against
the place, as unsecure, and the Country as infested with continual Wars. But
whereas he was desirous of a General Council, as being the only means whereby
to reform the dissolute matters of the Clergy, and suppress the exorbitant
Tyrannies, and Usurpations of the Clergy: he should willingly give his consent
thereunto, provided that such Convocation were assembled by the Authority of
the Christian Kings and Princes, who had the sole power and disposal of such
matters; for as to the Pope, he esteemed him only as a Bishop in his own
Diocese, with no farther extent of Jurisdiction, than that which reaches
thereunto; the which also was most reasonable at this time, when the abuses of
the Court of Rome were the chief matters to be reformed, and to be presented to
the cognizance and censure of such a Council. Besides this great defection of
England from the Papal Obedience, which gave a fatal blow to the Church of
Rome, the Doctrine of Luther daily grew, and dilated it self in all parts of
Germany and France, with much disturbance; for allaying of which, and
establishment of the truth of the Gospel there was no other remedy mentioned,
and cried up by all parties, but a General Council; but this admitted of so
many scruples, disputes, and nicities, as to the time and place, that nothing
could as yet be resolved. In the mean time the Turks taking advantage upon the
discord amongst Christians, entered Dalmatia with Fire and Sword, and took the
strong Town of Clissa, which the pope had fortified with all sorts of
Provisions, and Ammunition; which misfortune the Pope greatly resenting,
ordered solemn Processions to be made in Rome, at which he was present in
person, and walked on foot; and sent his Legates to most Christian Princes,
exhorting them to lay aside the Quarrels, and Wars amongst themselves, and
unite together against the Common Enemy: in order whereunto a League was made
between the Pope, the Emperor, and the Venetians; the conditions whereof were,
that the Emperor should set 82 Galleys to Sea, and the Venetians the like
number, and the Pope 38; with which force of 200 Sail, they agreed to invest
the Turks Dominions in some parts of Greece. Andrea D'Oria was constituted
Admiral of the Emperors Fleet, Vicenzo Capello of the Venetians, and Marco
Grimano Patriarch of Aquileia, of the Popes; and in case any descent were made,
or Forces landed, then Fernando Gonzaga, Vice-King of Sicily was to be
Generalissimo, or Commander in Chief: but the success did not answer so great
preparations, which proved rather dishonorable, than advantageous: for this
formidable Fleet being at Sea, near the Promontory of Antium, had sight of the
Fleet of Barbarosso; and might with much ease have charged and vanquished them;
but Andrea D'Oria the Emperors Admiral refused to engage; so that leaving the
Enemy, they all divided themselves into three Squadrons under their respective
Commanders, sailing away in manner of a flight, to the great ignominy, and
shame of the Christian Arms; which inglorious action did greatly displease the
Pope, and more especially the Venetians, who instead of some great benefit
which they expected in return for all their expense, and hazard, lost
Castlenuovo, which was soon afterward taken by the Enemy.

Howsoever this public Disgrace was in some manner repaired by the favor, and
good will of the Emperor toward the Pope, whh bestowed on his Son Pier-luigi
the City of Novara, and gave Margaret of Austria, the Widow of Alexander de
Medicis in marriage to his Nephew Ottavio, with a Portion of 250 thousand
Ducats.

It happened about this time, that Francis Naria da Meltro, Duke of Camerin,
died, the Pope immediately resolved to make seizure of Camerino, pretending
that that place was devolved to the Church, ever since the death of John Maria
Varano, whom Leo X. had made Duke of that place; for that he leaving no Heirs
Male, Feltro had by Usurpation taken possession of that place, in right only of
Julia the Daughter of John Maria Varano, whom his Son Guido Vbaldo had taken to
Wife, and held the same in despite of Clement the late Pope. And now whereas
the present Duke was a youth of tender age, and no experience, the Pope made
use of this opportunity to lay his claim, (which he had concealed during the
life of the old Duke) and to make it good raised an Army, and marched against
Camerino, with which this young Duke being terrified, surrendered the place
without other difficulty to the Pope, who having satisfied all pretenders to
any Arrears by disbursement of great sums of money, he invested his Nephew
Ottavio Farnese in the place, creating him Duke of Camerino, chief Prefect of
Rome, and Censuary of the Church.

By this and other expenses the Chamber was greatly exhausted of its Treasure;
to recruit which the Pope laid new Gabels and Impositions on all Commodities in
his Dominions, and especially upon Salt; the which so discontented the People
of Perugia, that from a mutiny they took Arms, and appeared in open Rebellion;
but being soon que^led by the Popes Forces, all their Immunities, and
Privileges were seized, whereby they were forced to send their Messengers to
Rome, with all humility, and submission to beg Pardon from the Pope, promising
all Loyalty, and Obedience for the future.

1539.
Ascanius Colonna making also some disturbance on the like occasion, was for
his contumacy deprived of his Estate in Campagna, Paliano was dismantled, and
his Fortress of Rocca entirely demolished.

Things being thus reduced, and settled in the Temporal State, he converted his
thoughts to the quiet and security of the Church; and considering that
disturbances in the world proceeded commonly from want of good Instruction, and
corruption of manners, he commanded the Bishops to their respective Diocesses,
enjoining them to reside there, and teach their Flocks with good Lectures, by
their own exemplary lives.

In the year 1540. 1540.
he augmented and enlarged the Immunities, and Privileges of the Chamber, and
the Authority of the Referendaries: He gave liberty to Clergy men to dispose of
their Estates by Testament without leave, or interruption of the Apostolical
Chamber: He gave liberty also to Jews which were converted to Christianity to
dispose of their Estates according to their own will and pleasure, and reformed
many abuses in the administration of Civil, and Criminal Causes; and toward
the end of this year constituted Cardinal Farnese his Nephew Legate at Avignon
in the place of the Cardinal D'Auch deceased.

The Pope (as we have declared before) showing himself unresolved in the matter
of a Council, being very wavering as to the time, and place, tho he seemed
always ready to agree thereunto; and from the first time, that he was created
Pope, evidenced an earnest desire above all things to comply with the Christian
Princes in that particular; at length the Emperor and Princes of Germany
finding their Country tossed, and embroiled with various disputes of Religion,
resolved to call a Diet at Regensburg, supposing that a National Assembly might
settle, and determine Controversies in want, and for defect of a General
Council; and in pursuance thereof a Diet was opened at Regensburg about the
beginning of March, Hist. Trent.
1541.

At this Diet the Emperor himself was present with great hopes, 1541.
that all Controversies about Religion would be here determined, and Germany
united in the same opinion. Hereunto the Pope sent Cardinal Gaspar Contarini to
be his Legate; a person of excellent prudence, and learning, accompanied with
several others well instructed in the Interest of the Court of Rome, and with
public Notaries skilful in drawing up Authentic Acts, and Forms of Law, to
whom above all things it was committed in charge, not to receive any Papers, or
Memorials which might tend to the least abatement, or diminution of the Papal
Authority; but in such case to break up abruptly, referring those matters to
the determination of a General Council. In short, after long Conferences, and
Debates, the Diet broke up on the 28th. of July, the Emperor referring all that
had been done, or transacted there to a General Council, or to a National Synod
of Germany, or to a Diet of the Empire; promising to go himself into Italy, to
treat with the Pope on that matter, and in case the Pope should appear
refractory thereunto, that then notwithstanding he would within the space of
eighteen months, by virtue of his own Authority issue forth his Writs for
calling a Diet of the Empire, for settling the Affairs of Religion, and prevail
with the Pope to send his Legate to it: And in the mean time he commanded the
Protestants not to receive any other new Doctrins, than such as had already
been debated; and enjoined the Bishops to reform the abuses of their Churches.
He forbad also the dissolution of Monasteries, or any seizure to be made on the
Estate of the Church, and any person or persons whatsoever to change, or alter
his or their Religion. And for the better satisfaction and contentment of the
Protestants, that in those points which were still under Controversy, he left
every man free, and at liberty in his own judgment; and farther, that such
Monasteries as were not yet demolished, should still remain, but howsoever
should be reduced to a Godly and Christian way of practice. That the Goods of
the Church should not be seized, but left for maintenance of the Ministers
without any distinction or difference relating to their Sect in Religion. He
also prorogued the Assembly at Ausburg, until such time as the points there in
Controversy could come to the decision of a General Council, or a Diet of the
Empire.

After this the Emperor passed into Italy, and at Luca met the Pope, where in a
long discourse he treated at large concerning a Council, and the management of
a War against the Turks; the result of which was this, That the Pope should
send a Nuntio into Germany, to advise the Diet which was to be held at Spira on
the beginning of the next year following, and assure them of his resolution to
assemble a General Council at Vicenza at the time formerly prefixed. But in
regard this City was under the Dominion of the Venetians, the Pope thought fit
to intimate first this intention to the Senate, before he signified this
resolution at Spira: the which was advisedly considered, for the Venetians
rejected the proposal, being jealous of the ill consequences, which the
concourse of such multitudes might produce to their State; and in regard they
had lately made a Peace with the Sultan, they apprehended, that a Treaty and
Consultation held in one of their Towns, for uniting in a Confederacy against
him, and carrying on a War, might be the occasion of a Rupture, and breach of
the Peace, which lately they had with great charge, and much labor concluded:
upon which answer from the Venetians the Pope was forced to take other
measures. In the mean time the Cardinal Coutarini lay under the severe censure
of the Pope, having been accused, for behaving himself with too much easiness
at Regensburg in matters which concerned the interest of the Church, for that
he seemed as if he had been a little shaken, and staggered with the subtle
Arguments against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and heard with too much
indifferency, the discourses which tended to the diminution of the Papal
Authority. But the Cardinal Fregosa being his friend, defended him in despite
of all his enemies, until such time as returning to the Pope at Luca, he
rendered such an account of all matters transacted in his Embassy, as gave the
Pope entire satisfaction.

This was the state of Affairs toward the end of the year 1541. when at the
beginning of 1542. the Pope dispatched John Mora the Bishop of Modena to the
Diet held at Spira, under Ferdinand the Emperors brother, giving them to
understand that the Pope continued his resolution of holding a General Council,
which he had for some time deferred in expectation of that good issue which it
was hoped the Diets, and National Conventions would have produced in the
settlement of Religion: but seeing that those means had failed, he now again
reassumed his former deliberation about a Council, which he should gladly
cause to be assembled in Germany, were not the fatigues of so long a Journey,
and the alteration of Air dangerous to a person of his age: and therefore after
he had thought of Mantoua, Vicenza, Ferrara, Bologna, and Piacenza for places
proper and convenient for such a Convention; He did at length pitch upon Trent
as a City without exception, being situated on the Frontiers of Germany, and
therefore did now unalterably appoint a Council there to be opened on the 13th.
of August next ensuing, desiring all those there present at this Diet that they
would lay aside all Animosities and Factions, and appear at this Council with
clear and sincere souls to favor the cause of God, and the truth of the
Gospel. Upon this proposal Ferdinand, and the other Princes which favored the
Cause of the Roman Church, returned their thanks to the Pope, saying, that
since there was no City in Germany judged convenient for this Council, that
they were contented with this assignment of Trent, where they promised to come,
and there to be assistant. But the Protestants refused to accept of this
intimation, alleging that the Pope had neither Authority to indict a Council,
nor that Trent was a place convenient for it; which was the cause that no
farther resolution was taken hereupon at this Diet.

Howsoever the Pope proceeded forward in his intention, and published his Bull
dated the two and twentieth of May, for assembling a Council at Trent to meet
on the first of November following; the which was dispatched from Rome to all
the Princes of Christendom, but without any great success. For in the month of
July, Francis the French King had denounced War against the Emperor, having in
a Manifesto published his reasons for it in such severe terms, as greatly
reflected on the honor of the Emperor, and which so much provoked him to anger
in that ill humor wherein he was newly returned from his unhappy adventure
before Algier into Spain, that when the Bull was delivered to him, he gave this
answer; that he was in no manner satisfied therewith; in regard that it made no
distinction in the terms, and style thereof between him and the King of France:
for tho he had refused no pains, nor spared expense to compass the assembling
of a Council; and that the French King on the contrary had endeavored by his
Ambassadors at Spira to nourish discords, and so to embroil the affairs of
Religion, as to put them into a condition beyond all hopes, or possibility of
accommodation; yet this Bull treated the disservices of the French with the
same equality of merit, as it did the unwearied zeal of Him the Emperor, whose
great incumbence it had always been to render faithful, and effectual Offices
of Duty to the Church: And then rehearsing the many provocations the French
King had given him, he desired the Pope to consider, if the Behavior of that
King toward him did correspond with a design, or intention of advancing the
interest of Christendom, or did appear with such a face, or guise of Peace, and
Reconciliation, as was necessary at such a time when a General Council was to
be convened; of which we may then conceive the most promising assurances of
success, when it commences with Candor, Friendship, and Charity, which are the
best, and most excellent dispositions toward the establishment of truth, and
peace. But seeing that the French King has ever countermined, and disturbed
this course, some other way, was to be found for the settlement of Religion
besides a Council; and in the mean time he desired that the Pope would
attribute the disappointment thereof to the French King only, to whom it was
necessary, that he should declare himself a public enemy, in case he ever
hoped to expect good from a Council, in the settlement of Peace, and Religion
in the world. The French King being well assured that the War which he had
commenced at this unseasonable time, would certainly be interpreted, as
prejudicial to Religion, and as if he favored the Protestant cause; did
therefore, to forestal such suggestions, publish most severe Edicts against the
Protestants; forbidding them to assemble at any Meetings, causing all their
Books, written in defense of their Doctrine to be burnt, and enjoining the
Sorbonists to make severe inquisitions concerning such, who observed not Fish
days, or days of Abstinence, or said not their Prayers in Latin, or in any
manner contradicted, or withstood the Principles, or Doctrins of the Catholic
Church. Moreover, he wrote an Apology for himself to the Pope in answer to what
the Emperor had accused him of; recalling to memory the hard and sacrilegious
usage which he had practiced against Clement VII. how he had sacked Rome, and
imprisoned the Pope, and at the same time in a most hypocritical manner,
illuding God Almighty, had made Processions at Madrid for the Pope's
deliverance, when he himself was the sole Author of his confinement: farther
purging himself of being any impediment, or hinderance to the proceedings of a
Council, or giving an interruption to the quiet, and settlement of Religion.

Hereupon the Pope, that he might show himself the common Father of Christian
Princes (on which title he laid the great stress of his Authority) desired to
interpose himself, as Mediator of their differences; and to that end,
dispatched Cardinal Contarini to the Emperor, and Cardinal Sadoler to the
French King; but Contarini dying in his journey, Cardinal Viseo was constituted
in his place, who being a person not very acceptable to the Emperor, was not a
proper instrument to effect the Pacification intended. Howsoever, tho the War
proceeded, and that acts of Hostility were committed in diverse places, yet the
Pope prosecuted the design of a Council, judging it his honor to be now
positive, as to the time and place, and accordingly toward the beginning of
November, he sent three Cardinals, viz. Peter Paul Parisio, John Morone, and
Reginal le Poole an Englishman to be his Legates, for preparing matters in
order to the Council, which was appointed to be holden at Trent: besides whom,
many other Bishops were sent, who were all men of excellent Learning, and
subtle Disputants; but the Protestants refusing to meet at that place, by
virtue of the Pope's Authority; these learned Doctors became all of one side,
and finding none to make opposition against them, they might with much facility
have confirmed, and established what Fundamentals and conclusions they had
pleased. But as yet things were not prepared for any public Act, nor had the
Legates Instructions as yet to conclude any thing, but only entertain the
Prelates, and Ambassadors which were sent thither. The appearance at first was
very thin, and few Princes had sent their Ministers to Trent; howsoever the
Emperor tho he entertained little hopes of a good issue of these proceedings,
yet he resolved for prevention of Plots, or Designs against him to send Don
Diego de Mendoza, and Cardinal Granvel to be his Ambassadors at that place; who
being arrived, pressed the Pope's Legates to proceed to the business, that
their time might not be there consumed to no purpose; which the Legates
endeavoring to evade, and still to put delays, and impediments in the way, it
was so displeasing to the Emperor's Ministers, that they protested against
those delatory excuses; to which the Legates giving no answer, Granvel was
recalled, and sent to reside at the Diet at Noremberg, which was opened about
the beginning of the year 1543. so that nothing moved forward in this Council
by reason of the many obstructions, and especially of the fierce War, which now
grew very hot between the Emperor, and the French King, and of the Plague which
was begun at -- so that after some few Sessions to little purpose, the Council
was by order of the Pope adjourned to Bologna.

1543.
The Pope having advice that the Emperor, who had now entered into a League with
Henry VIII. King of England, against France, intended to pass into Flanders by
way of Italy; he resolved to meet, and speak with him, pretending that his
Errand was no other, than like a Father, and Spiritual Pastor, to persuade, and
exhort him to Peace, and Unity, and to impart some things to him relating to
the Council of Trent; tho in reallity he had a more secret, and peculiar design
under the covert of these public interests: which was, to procure the Dukedom
of Milan, for one of his Nephews; and for an inducement thereunto intended to
make offer of a good sum of money, which he supposed might be very prevalent
with the Emperor at a time when his Wars in Flanders were pressing, and
expensive. And therefore departing from Rome on the 26th. of February, and not
regarding the coldness of the season, which was inconvenient to one of his age,
he traveled through the Dominions of the Church, and taking Modena, Reggio,
Parma, Ferrara, Ancona, Perugia, and Viterbo in his way, he at length came to
Bologna, where he remained until the middle of Summer, when Charles V. arrived
at Genoua, where he was received into the Palace of Prince D'Oria, prepared for
him in all Royal and sumptuous manner; he was there complemented by several
Princes of Italy, and particularly by Pier luigi Farnese, whom the Pope had
expressly sent to the Emperor, entreating him to assign a time, and place where
the Pope might have discourse with him in order to some matters of great
concernment. The Emperor who was pressed to make all the speed possible into
Flanders, and had resentment of things which he took unkindly from the Pope,
made several excuses* pretending that his Affairs would not permit him the
leisure for such a meeting; and that in case the Pope's business were
exhortations to Peace and Reconciliation with France, the matter was too far
gone for him to afford any ear thereunto, until he had first received some
revenge, and compensation for the injuries which had been offered him.
Pierluigi not succeeding in this request, the Cardinal Farnese was immediately
dispatched in post to Genoua to urge the Emperor with more pressing instances;
and being a person very eloquent and importunate, he prevailed with the Emperor
to meet, and discourse with the Pope at Busetto, a place between Vicenza, and
Cremona; provided that this interview should not retard him in his journey, for
above the space of three days. Accordingly the Pope came to Busetto on the 20th
of June, and the next day also the Emperor arrived, when falling immediately
upon business, the Emperor would by no means hearken to the proposition which
was made him for investing his Nephew Ottavio in the State of Milan; and tho a
sum of money was offered for it, which the present necessities did greatly
require; yet being supplied with two hundred thousand Crowns by agreement with
Cormo de Medicis, whereby he released to him all the Fortresses of the State of
Florence, he would upon no terms give ear to the proposition concerning Milan;
which when the Pope perceived, and that his arguments, and importunities for
it, were all insignificant; he turned his discourse to matters of more public
concernment, desiring him to consider the present state of the Church, which
was torn in pieces by diversity of Sects in Religion, which took their
advantage of those confusions, which the Wars between him, and France had
caused; and farther he represented to him the great danger in which his Brother
Ferdinand was engaged by the formidable forces of the Turk, which threatened
Hungary; in consideration of all which, he begged of him to put an end to his
Wars against Christians, that he might repress and give a stop to the violent
incursions of the common enemy: all which discourse had no other effect, than
only, that hereupon Julio Or^^no was dispeeded with thirty Companies of Foot to
Guard and defend the Confines of Hungary: and thus the Pope having spent five
days at Busetto, with no other advantage to his Affairs, he returned again to
Bologna, where he celebrated the Feast of S. Peter the Apostle.

About this time Barbarosso, who had been instigated by the French, to do all
the damage they were able to the Emperor, had coasted along the shore by
Naples; and having slaid some time before the Isle of (...), they at length
appeared near Civita Vecchia, at the mouth of the (...) which gave such an
alarm to Rome, that the Inhabitants had certainly abandoned the City, and fled
to the Mountains, had not Poline the French Envoy aboard the Fleet of
Barbarosso, written a Letter to Cardinal Rodolfo, giving him assurance, that
there was no design upon Rome; with which the tumult was quieted, and their
fears dissipated.

Now began the year 1544. which was very remarkable for the unexpected Peace
concluded between the Emperor and the French King, on the 18th. of September at
Crespy, a Castle in Valois, after the bloody Battle of Cerisoles: the which was
received with extreme joy by all the Christian Princes, and especially by Pope
Paul, who being returned from Bologna to Rome, had lately made solemn
Processions for the Peace and quiet of Christendom; the which unexpected news
surprising the Pope, was interpreted by him, as a return of those Prayers and
Supplications, he had made for Peace, tho inwardly he conceived some secret
resentments, that he had not been concerned as Mediator in it. Upon this news
of Peace, the Pope thought it seasonable to publish an other Sessions of the
Council to Commence in March following, which had on occasion of the late Wars
been prorogued: but this hasty indiction of a Council was not pleasing to the
Emperor, who expected to have been first consulted; esteeming that it had been
more agreeable to his Authority, and more acceptable to the humor of Germany,
had he been made the principal Author of this Council: Howsoever that he might
seem to be the first mover of the work, and the Pope only to act in the second
place, he issued out many Commissions to the Prelates of Spain, and of the
Low Countries, and to many Divines at Lovain, to meet together, and consider of
several Theses, and Propositions which were to be debated in the Council, which
being reduced to six and thirty Heads, he required their solution of them
positively, without any proofs, or references to Holy Scripture. All which
solutions being made, were confirmed by the Emperor's Magisterial Authority,
and Edicts, requiring all people to yield entire faith, Hist. Trent.
and belief thereunto. And farther, the Emperor not being able to conceal the
displeasure he had conceived against the Pope, vented his choler frequently to
the Nuntio in very severe and sharp terms: and whereas the Pope in the month of
December had created thirteen Cardinals, those three which were Spaniards
amongst them were forbidden by the Emperor to accept the Dignity, or to take
the Title, or wear the Habit.

1545.
Tho the Emperor had testified this open displeasure against the Pope, yet he so
far complied with him, as to send Don Diego de Mendoza, who had lately been his
Ambassador at Venice, with ample Commission to the Council of Trent, as did
also the other Princes who were in amity with the Pope: but the Protestants who
had sent their Commissioners to the Diet at Worms, over which Ferdinand
presided in the place of the Emperor, refused to send their Ambassadors to
Trent, alleging, that the Assembly held at that place, was not legitimate, nor
could be termed with the quality, and character of a General Council. The Pope
being highly incensed at this refusal, and separation of the Protestants, which
he esteemed an affront to the Papal Authority, dispatched his Nephew the
Cardinal Farnese, in quality of Legate, with ample instructions to the Emperor;
wherein besides some other particular interests, he encharged him most
especially to incite the Emperor to make a War of Religion against the
Protestant Princes* of which he conceived the greater hopes, in regard that by
frequent advices from his Nuntio, he was assured of the displeasure, and
disdain the Emperor had of the Protestant Cause, and that he willingly gave ear
to those suggestions which advised him to compel their Assents, and Compliance
by force of Arms. To this Proposition, the Emperor made answer, that he
acknowledged this Counsel which the Pope gave him to be good, and almost
necessary, and which he resolved to follow; but howsoever, that it was to be
executed with its due caution; and that a Truce was first to be concluded with
the Turk, which was secretly treating: and then that some discords, and
dissentions were to be sowed amongst the Protestant Princes; for that being
united together, their numbers were so formidable, and great, that instead of
maintaining the Catholic Religion, he should put it into apparent danger, and
hazard, which a doubtful state of War may produce.

This Treaty, tho secretly carried, was yet suspected by the Protestant
Princes, who took a most sensible alarm from the Sermon of a Cordelier Friar
that preached one day before the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and the Legate, and
used many invective Speeches against the Lutherans: he told the Emperor
plainly, that it was his duty to defend the Church by force of Arms; and that
God had put the Sword into his hands for extirpation of this Heresy, and
destruction of this pest of mankind, which he ought not to suffer to live in
this world. This Sermon and discourse made great noise, being interpreted for
the sense of the Legate, and to be an effect of the Treaty which he secretly
held with the Pope, and that the Friar Preached in that manner by his order;
wherefore to abate, and surcease those reports, the Cardinal departed secretly
by night, and with all expedition returned into Italy.

In the mean time the Debates at the Diet at Worms proceeded, where the Emperor
in person endeavored to persuade the Princes to contribute toward a War
against the Turk; which they absolutely refused to do, until assurance were
given them, that the Peace between them and the Emperor should be continued,
and maintained without any respect to the determinations, and conclusions at
Trent, which they could not esteem a General Council, or to have any Power and
Authority to oblige them to an observation of those Decrees, and Canons which
were formed therein: to which the Emperor replied, that he could not assure
them of Peace, or observation of any Articles, which should exempt them from
the determination of that Council, to which all Christians were obliged to
submit; and that he should not know how to to excuse himself to other Kings and
Princes, in case he should endeavor to procure that exemption for Germany
only, from obedience to the Council, which was chiefly convened, in respect,
and in order to the settlement of their Affairs. With which this Diet was
dissolved on the 4th. of August, and an other published to be held in the month
of January following at Regensburg. 1546.


In this manner time passed without any issue or determination of Disputes: the
Protestants refused to own or acknowledge the Council of Trent to be lawfully
Convened; and the Pope could not suffer the Points of Religion to be debated in
the Diets of Germany, which were assembled by the Secular Authority. So that
the Pope published a Jubily to be held at Rome on the 15th. of July, 1546. in
the Bull for which, after he had amply set forth the great care and pains he
had used for the suppression of Heresy, which could not be compassed by any
other human means, than by a General Council: yet such was the obstinacy of
Heretics, that they contemned, and slighted its Sentence, and denied Obedience
to its Authority: And therefore as the last remedy, and ultimate prevention of
these growing evils, he declared, that he was forced to make a League with the
Emperor, that he might by force of Arms, reduce those to the Church, who were
by no other more gentle means capable to be reclaimed from their Heresies and
Rebellion: for the success of which, he exhorted all good Catholics to have
recourse unto God by Prayers, Fastings, Confessions, and Communion.

The Emperor on the other side, on the 20th. of the same month, published a
Remonstrance against the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hess; in
which, omitting to mention any particulars about Religion, he charged them with
disobedience to his commands, and opposition to his designs; that they had made
Alliances, and entered into Confederation with other Princes of the Empire
against him; that they had seized Bishoprics, and Ecclesiastical Benefices
into their own hands, under the specious pretenses of Religion, Peace, and
Liberty. And therefore that as seditious Rebels, Traitors, and Disturbers of
the public Peace he resolved to proceed against them; absolving the Nobility
from their Oath of Allegiance to them, and requiring the people to withdraw
themselves from their Obedience, not to join with them, nor afford them any
aid, succor, or assistance.

Tho the Pope and the Emperor were joined in the same League, and intended the
same thing; yet the motives for this War mentioned in their Remonstrances were
displeasing to each other, as not corresponding to their mutual interests: for
the Emperor was unwilling to have this War styled a War of Religion, lest that
denomination should engage a stronger, and a more numerous party than he was
able to Master: the Pope howsoever was desirous to have it so named, and
believed, that the Emperor having to contend with a numerous, and formidable
Enemy, his Power might be attempered, and his Greatness reduced to some
tolerable equality in the Balance of Christendom.

1547.
Notwithstanding these different considerations, the Pope united his Army with
that of the Emperors; who now casting off all thoughts concerning the
transaction of Affairs at Trent, attended wholly to the War: in prosecution of
which, on the 24th. of April 1547. both Armies were drawn up, and stood ranged
one against the other near the River Albi^: O^uf.
the Protestant Army consisted of eighty thousand Foot, and fifteen thousand
Horse: that of the Emperors was much inferior in number, not amounting with the
three Italian Regiments, and six hundred Horse sent by the Pope, to more than
three and forty thousand men. Howsoever the Emperor gained the Victory, the
Elector of Saxony being wounded, and taken Prisoner, and his whole Army
defeated: and in a few days after the Landgrave of Hesse by mediation of
Maurice his Son-in*law, and the Duke of Brandenbourg, with all submission came
in, and presented himself before the Emperor. The Duke of Saxony was in the
first place tried and condemned to dye; but afterward procuring a remission of
the Sentence, he yielded to some other very severe terms, and conditions, with
exemption notwithstanding from being obliged to the Acts, and determinations of
the Council of Trent in points of Religion, with which the Emperor was willing
to dispense, provided he would subscribe, and oblige himself to other Articles.
The Landgrave tho he was hardly pressed to that point also* yet would not
subscribe; but only in general terms, that he would refer himself to the
Decrees, and Determinations of a Council, that was free, and holy, and purged
from the leven of a corrupt Head, and Members, as did also Duke Maurice of
Saxony, and the Elector of Brandenbourg. Howsoever the Duke of Saxony was
condemned to perpetual imprisonment, and the Landgrave during the pleasure of
the Emperor. By which great Victory the Emperor becoming absolute Master of all
Germany, and having gained much Cannon and Artillery, and exhausted great sums
of money from the Towns and Countries which were in subjection to those Princes,
whom ho had conquered, he was arrived to that pitch of height, and greatness
which the Pope could not gladly allow; and in this condition, for security of
the peace, and quiet, and for the better regulation of the Affairs of Germany,
the Emperor assigned a Diet to be held at Ausbourg.

Upon the first news of this Victory, the Pope to outward appearance seemed to
be transported to an extremity of joy; and thereupon immediately dispatched
away the Cardinal Francis Sfondrato with Congratulatory Letters for the success
of this Victory, stiling the Emperor Invictissimus, and Maximus Imperator.
Howsoever his secret thoughts did not correspond with these external
Demonstrations; for ever since the denial which the Emperor had made of
investing his Nephew in the Duchy of Milan, he had conceived a grudg against
him, which he dissembled, until this time, when his displeasure being exalted
with a jealousy that the Emperor by this success would aspire to the absolute
Dominion of Italy; and observing with what little regard the Prelates of the
Empire had comported themselves, during the Council of Trent toward the Papal
Authority: and reflecting farther, that he could never obtain from the Emperor
the confirmation of his Son Pier-luigi, in the States of Parma, and Piacenza,
which he had conferred upon him; he could not longer suppress these
resentments, but vented with all the spite imaginable many reproaches against
Charles, saying, that out of malice to him, he had joined himself to Henry
VIII. King of England, who was condemned of Heresy, and Excommunicated from
the Church. In which passion he prorogued the Council, which in compliance with
the Emperor he had called at Trent, to be now transferred, and held at Bologna;
for which he seemed to have received some just motives from the Behavior of
certain Prelates, who having banded themselves into Factions, seemed to intend
something in diminution of the Popes Dignity, and Prerogative: to prevent
which, all those Prelates which sided with the Pope, pretending that the Air of
Trent was too sharp for them, removed to Bologna; from which place the Emperor
was not able to dissuade the Pope, with all the excuses and entreaties he could
use. This and other matters raising and exalting these feuds, the Pope applied
himself to the French King, intending to join in League with him, and other
Princes of that party; and the Emperor finding no effects, or issue of Affairs
at Trent, repaired to the Diet at Ausburg.

The Diet there began on the first of September, where the Emperor presiding in
person, labored with all the earnestness, 154^.
and with all the art, and endeavors he was able to compose the differences,
and settle a Peace in Germany; but in regard the point of Religion was the
cause of all their Troubles, whenever that came into question it occasioned
great Commotions. For the Ecclesiastical Electors, or such as belonged to the
Church did desire, and urge that an entire, and absolute reference of all
things should be given to the Council at Trent, without any reserve, or
condition. The Secular Electors who adhered to the Doctrine of Luther were
contented also to refer the matters in dispute to the Council, provided that
neither the Pope, nor any other deputed from him, should preside thereat; and
that the Council should be free, and holy, and that what Bishop soever was
thereunto admitted, should be absolved from any Oath he had taken, which might
render him partial to the Papal Sea.

During the time of this Diet at Ausbourg, the Pope remained in a continual
trouble of spirit, not knowing what those Sessions might produce. During which
on the 10th. of September, advice was brought him, that his Son Pier-luigi Duke
of Piacenza was murdered in his own Palace by certain Gentlemen who had
conspired against him, and who in an ignominious manner had thrown his Body
into the Streets to be a spectacle to the people: and in a few hours after
several Troops arrived from Milan by order of Ferrand Gonzaga, Governor, to
take possession of the City. The which unhappy fate, and violent death of a
Son, as it sensibly touched the Pope with natural grief; so the loss of so fair
a City did serve to augment the sense of this mischief, which by all the
circumstances of it, did appear to have been perpetrated by the knowledge, and
contrivance of the Emperor.

This unexpected outrage caused great consternation at Bologna, and gave
interruption to the proceedings of the Council at that place; for the Pope in
his great affliction could not bend his thoughts to any transactions there;
only he forced his mind to read the particulars of what was debated, and
concluded at Ausbourg, which were twice a week dispatched thence by an express:
the which Diet being held until the year 1548. 1548.
with various discourses, and arguments, and nothing as yet concluded: But
being the general sense of all that it was necessary for the common quiet of
Germany to center at length in some resolutions, and that such resolutions
tending to a composure could not be expected from the Council which was now
transferred from Trent to Bologna, at least during the Reign of this Pope;
wherefore it was proposed to make choice of some few persons to whom the care
of this work should be committed; but not being able to agree in the persons to
be elected, the choice was remitted solely to the Emperor, who at length
pitched upon three persons, namely Julius ^flug, Michael S. don, and John
Islebe to be the Compilers of a Formulary of Religion; the which after several
consultations being reduced to a method, it was reviewed, and examined so
often, by such different Heads, and Judgments, with additions, and
retrenchments, puttings out, and in; that at length being finished, it looked
like a patched piece, compounded by men of dissenting Judgments, and differing
designs. Howsoever being completed, it contained five and thirty Chapters, or
Heads; a Copy of which was delivered to the Legate by order of the Emperor to be
sent to Rome to receive the Pope's Opinion, and Approbation thereunto. But lest
this Formulary of Religion should give scandal to the Pope, and Cardinals, as
if the Emperor in a Diet had given new forms of Faith, and Religion, the Title
Page of this Book was qualified by an Interim, that is, that the same Heads,
and Points contained in that Book should be no longer Authentic, or esteemed
Catholic, or obliging Doctrins, than until such time as the same should be
altered, and changed by the more unerring determinations of a General Council,
to whose judgment they were submitted. When this Book came to Rome, where the
Pope was now retired, it caused great consternation and noise. The Clergy
exclaimed highly, That a Temporal Prince in an Assembly composed only of
Seculars, should adventure to handle all matters and Points of Religion: upon
which the Learned Men, and such as were read in Histories, called to mind the
Henoticon in the time of Zenon, the Ecthesis in the time of Heraclius, and the
Typus of Constance, who were Emperors; and the Schisms, and Divisions in the
Church caused by the Imperial Constitutions relating to Religion, with which
they compared, and adjoined this Interim of Charles V. And farther, that which
gave the greatest cause of fear, was, lest this Interim should be an
Introduction to a greater Change; and that the Emperor intended this compliance
with the Protestant Doctrins, to be a prelude, or a preparative to a total
defection from the Church of Rome, after the manner, and example of Henry VIII.
King of England,

The Pope, who was wise, and accustomed to dissemble matters, until such time
as he was able to remedy, or revenge them, reflecting with mature consideration
on this present emergency, did make an other judgment thereof than appeared to
ordinary understandings; for he concluded that this new Formulary did tend more
to the prejudice of the Emperor than to the Ecclesiastical State: wondering
greatly that a Prince of so much Prudence, should so far be elated with his
late Successes, as to believe himself able to be the Arbitrator, and Moderator
of all mankind; or to be in a capacity by his single Interest to oppose both
the great, and prevailing parties in the world. It was possible for a Prince
adhering to one of them to suppress the other; but to oppose both at the same
time, would be a match unequal. For the Pope wisely foresaw that these Doctrins
for the most part would be as displeasing to all Catholics in general, as to
the Court of Rome, and would be no less contradicted by the Protestants; so
that being oppugned on all sides, it would consequently fall by the contrariety
of Factions. To which end, the Pope seeming in himself little concerned, did
yet underhand suggest jealousies in the minds of the German Prelates; the
which being dexterously insinuated by the Cardinal Sfodrato the Popes Legate,
who according to his Instructions gave in a memorial to the Emperor,
representing the ill foundation, and consequences of this new Formulary of
Doctrins, and then took his leave, and departed, that he might not be present,
when the same was published. In short, this matter succeeded according to the
judgment of the Pope: for tho the Emperor did most strictly forbid, and inhibit
any person to oppugn the Doctrins contained in this Book of Interim, either by
Practice, Writings, or Preaching: yet notwithstanding the Protestants on one
side did not forbear to refute this Confession of Ausbourg by their public
Writings, and Disputations: and on the other Francis Romeo General of the
Dominican Friars did by command from the Pope appoint several Learned men of
that Order to refute that Formulary of the Interim: In France also many wrote
against it, and in a short time great numbers both of Catholics and
Protestants oppugned it with heat of argument, it having happened in this matter
as in others of the like nature, that where middle terms, or moderate
expedients have been proposed between the extremes of opposite Factions for
accommodating or reconciling their differences; there the event has been no
other, than that the contrary parties have impugned the expedients, and both
have been hardened, and confirmed in their own Tenants, and Opinions.

1549.
These debates and troubles gave a stop to the proceedings of the Council at
Bologna, for the space of two years; and until almost the end of the year 1549.
when at the beginning of November news came to the Pope then at Rome, that the
Duke Ottavio Farnese his Nephew, (who having against his own inclinations been
detained by the Pope at Rome, out of tenderness to his life, lest he should
incur the same fate, as Pierluigi had done) was privately escaped out of the
City, and was then actually dealing with Ferdinand Gonzaga the Governor of
Milan to instate him in Parma, in despite of Camillo Orsino, who was to keep
and defend the Town in right of the Ecclesiastical State. The which news so
surprised the mind of the Pope with sensible grief, and commotion of spirit,
who was not as yet recovered of the sorrow he had conceived for the fate of his
Son Pierluigi that he presently fell into a swound, or Leipothymie, from which
being revived, was seized by so violent a Fever, that in three days he died
thereof, being the 10th. of November, at his Palace of Monte Cavallo, where he
usually resided, because it was esteemed a place of the best Air in Rome. He
had held the Papal Sea 15 years, and 28 days, and was arrived to the age of 81
years, eight months, and 10 days: He was buried in S. Peter's Church without
any great pomp, or State; and afterward the Sea was vacant two months, and 29
days.

JVLIVS III.
THE Cardinals having (as accustomary) celebrated the Funeral Obsequies of the
Pope deceased, for the space of nine days, did on the tenth enter into the
Conclave; but then considering the small appearance of Cardinals, few being
then present, the formal recess and retirement into the Conclave was deferred
for some time. And here it is to be observed, that the Cardinals were divided
into three Factions; the first favored the Emperor; the second was inclined to
the French King; and a third consisted of such Cardinals as had been the
creatures of the late Pope deceased, and by him promoted to several Benefices,
and Dignities; the Cape, or chief of which, was Cardinal Farnese, Nephew to
Paul the Third, who tho young, was yet active, subtle, and of a judgment solid,
and of as good experience in the Court, as could be expected in a person of his
years. This last party as it was numerous, so it was composed of ancient
Cardinals, men of great authority and knowledge in the world, and such as were
able to bear down the balance in favor of any person, to which they inclined;
for which reason great courtship was made to Cardinal Farnese both by the
Imperial, and French Ministers; whose arguments on both sides were so forcible
to draw him to their party, that being doubtful unto which he should incline,
resolved on a neutrality, as the safest course whereby to steer, tho in
reality, he seemed on occasions to lean most to the French party.

This was the state of affairs at Rome, when about the beginning of the month
of December 1549. the Cardinals entered into the Conclave: Farnese in the first
place proposed to his own Party, the choice of Cardinal Poole, an English man,
a person, against whom for the nobility of his extraction, his godliness, and
exemplary life nothing could be objected: and being also acceptable to the
Imperialists, and displeasing to no party, he found many friends ready to give
their Votes for him, amongst which the most considerable were the Cardinals of
Trent, Sforza, and Crescentio, who had drawn also Morone, and Maffei to their
Party; who being all men of considerable interest did agree immediately to
present him in the Conclave, and assume him to the Papal Dignity. But some of
the old Cardinals, who seemingly assented thereunto, yet being inwardly envious
to see a younger man preferred over their heads, did advise to delay the time
for a while, lest the Election which ought to be mature and grave, should seem
to have been overhasty, and precipitate, tho in reality this delay was caused
by that hopes which every one entertained of being himself the person that
should be elected: by which means the choice of Poole being until the next day
suspended, the contrary party, such as Monti, Cesis, and Gaddi, who were all
Pretenders, and Candidates, had time to make their Parties; Cardinal Salviati
laboring all the night for the exclusion of Poole. The next day the Cardinals
being assembled in the Chapel to the number of 49. Cardinal Fortone one of the
French Faction publicly accused Poole of Heresy, and for that reason
protested against his choice. Howsoever his Friends esteeming his report false,
and scandalous, pressed forward the scrutiny; in pursuance of which, the Votes
being put into a Chalice, 26 were found in favor of Poole; but in regard that
33 at least out of 49 were required to make the Election legitimate, Poole was
excluded, to the great disappointment of himself, and the Imperial Party, who
esteemed the choice to have been secure and certain. In relation hereof I have
been the more large, because it concerned one of our Countrymen, and may have
reference to some particulars which are to follow.

After which, several other Cardinals experienced their fortunes; but to no
effect, the Factions being every day more heated, and embroiled, so that they
could not come to any agreement: at length they resolved to nominate nine
persons, out of which the Imperialists might choose one that was most
acceptable to them. The persons proposed were three French men, viz. Lorene,
Tornon, and Bellai: three Italians, Salviati, Ridolfi, and Trani: and three
Imperialists, Theatino, Monti, and San Marcello, against whom nothing was
objected; excepting Monti, whom Cardinal Ghisa accused of a wicked life,
publishing many Vices of which he was guilty, and rendering him unworthy of the
Priesthood and Holy Orders, into which he was entered. Howsoever at length the
Cardinals growing weary with so long a continuation of the Conclave, resolved
generally to adhere unto Monti; to which also Cardinal Farnese assenting,
labored with all his power to reconcile Ghisa, and Monti, which after some
words, and secret conferences together being happily concluded; all parties
concurred in the Election, and on the ninth of February 1550. Monti being
accompanied by 42 Cardinals descended into the Church of S. Peter, where being
seated in the Chapel of S. Andrew, all the Cardinals paid their respects and
obedience to him, which they testified, as was usual, by kissing his feet;
which being finished, he called himself by the name of Julius III. in memory of
Julius II. from whom he derived the beginning of his greatness. He was
afterward crowned by Cardinal Cibo, on the 21. of the same month of February.

His Reign began with the year of Jubilee 1550. the which in its regular course
ought to have commenced the Christmas before: but in regard the Chair was then
vacant, that solemnity was deferred until the 24th. of February, being the
Festival of S. Matthias, when the four Gates were opened, according to the
accustomed manner, and great numbers of people flocked from all parts of Italy,
who having visited the four principal Churches, namely S. John of Lateran, S.
Peter's, S. Paul's, and S. Mary's the Great, received the Indulgences,
Privileges, and Absolutions, which are the fruits and rewards of that Devotion;
with which this Holy Year ended on the day of the Epiphany of the year
following. Amongst the other Pilgrims, which were but few in number from the
Western parts, by reason of the Wars, and confusions about Religion; Stephen
the Patriarch of the greater Armenia in company with an Archbishop and two
other Bishops came to Rome to gain the Jubilee. This people who had been always
of the Eastern Church, and submitted to their own Supreme Patriarch called,
were persuaded by the Missionaries from Rome in the time of Paul III. to submit
to the Roman Church upon promises of Preferments and increase of their Revenue;
in which Faith they have ever since continued, adhering to all Points of that
Church; tho perhaps little regard has been had to an augmentation of their
Benefices; for I have been acquainted with one of their Patriarchs accompanied
with two Dominican Friars, who were so poor, that in their Travels to Rome,
they have begged Alms to defray their charges.

During this year of Jubilee, and the first of his Reign, the Pope Indicted the
Council which Paul III. had transferred to Bologna to be held at Trent, and to
begin in May following. Charles V. was then at the Diet of Augsburg, when this
Bull of the Pope was delivered to his hands, which he caused to be promulged in
the hearing of all the Princes, who were present at the Diet. In obedience to
these summons, some of the Bishops of Germany, Spain, and Italy attended and
made their personal appearance; to which place also the Pope sent Cardinal
Crescentio to reside as his Legate, assisted by the Archbishop of Sipontino,
and the Bishop of Verona: and being desirous to perform acts of Favor and
Grace soon after his Inauguration, he bestowed twenty Cardinals Hats, amongst
which he gave one to a Youth of thirteen years of age, called Innocent de
Monte, born at Piacenza, one of poor and mean Parentage, whom he received and
adopted by that name into his Family, none knowing the ground or reason for it,
which gave a large and copious Theme to the Pasquils at Rome.

About that time George Martinuno, who governed the Affairs of Transylvania
during the minority of that King, was at the instance and request of Ferdinand
created Cardinal by this Pope Julius; but he afterward secretly plotting and
conspiring with the Turks against the Prince, who was under his charge and
tuition, upon discovery and proof made of his treacherous designs was justly
put to death. This Pope who was of a pacifick temper, and naturally inclined to
peace, had also farther inducements thereunto by the long experience he had in
the affairs of the Church, which he had observed to thrive, and prosper most
with the lenitives of peace, rather than by Arms, and Slaughter, which were
incongruous and dissentaneous to those principles on which the Church was
originally founded: howsoever the Pope contrary to these principles was
unhappily forced, and engaged in a War on this occasion, which we shall here
relate, with as much brevity as we are able. Paul the Third, after Piacenza was
lost, and his Son Pier-luigi slain, committed the charge and defense of Parma
to Camillo Orsino (who was reputed a great Soldier in his time) to keep and
defend that City in the name and behalf of the Church, strictly commanding him
not to resign or entrust that care into any other hands, without express and
positive Commission. Paul being dead, and Julius III. being in treaty for the
Succession, promised Cardinal Farnese, who (as we have said) was Chief of a
powerful Party, to deliver Parma into the hands of his Brother Ottavio, in case
he would favor him with his Vote, and Interest; which he assenting unto, and
Julius being made Pope, the conditions were complied with; the Commission of
Camillo being vacated, and the Government of the City surrendered to Ottavio:
provided notwithstanding that it should not be in the power of Ottavio to
consign the City into the hands of any Prince whatsoever, without the knowledge,
license, and consent of the Pope: and that Ottavio might be the better enabled
to maintain the Garrison against the force, and temptation of the Imperialists,
a stipend was allowed him of 2000 Crowns a month. In a short time Ottavio
finding that the Imperialists were pressing upon him, and that he was not able
to defend the City against Charles V. without greater supplies both of men, and
money, desired the Pope, that he would either augment his Allowance, or else
give him the liberty to join, and enter into Alliance with some other Prince,
that was able to secure and defend him against the artifices, and violences of
the Emperor. The Pope not penetrating the depth of the matter, without due, and
mature consideration answered, that confiding in his prudence, he gave him
license to provide for his safety in such manner, as he thought most expedient.
Ottavio taking these words in the largest sense, and supposing he had obtained
license to do, and act as he pleased, agreed privately with Henry II. King of
France to receive a French Garrison into Parma; which being done, and the Pope
too late complaining thereof, as a matter concluded without his knowledge or
permission; and also apprehending that the Emperor would certainly believe that
this was acted by his assent, and concurrence, that he might disabuse the
world, and persuade the Emperor to the contrary, he banished Cardinal Alexander
Farnese to Florence, and calling the Emperors Forces to his assistance, made
War upon Duke Ottavio; so that all Italy on a sudden began to be embroiled and
enflamed with War. For Parma was presently besieged by Fernando Gonzaga, who
was Governor of Milan under the Emperor; and by Angelo de Medici Legate for the
Pope: and in the mean time Monsieur de Thermes General of the French Forces was
raising Men in Mirandola, and making preparations of Ammunition, and provisions
for a War, and Peter Sirozzi, and Oration Farnese Captains of Henry the French
King made incursions as far as Bologna, spoiling, and laying waste the Country
round about; wherefore the Imperialists having joined the Popes Army laid siege
to Mirandola, so that Parma and Mirandola were both besieged at the same time:
in this manner the War continued for the space of a whole year without any
memorable action on either side, only fire, and sword, and miserable
devastations raged in all parts of Italy; of which the Pope being touched with
an inward compassion, and being naturally inclined to Peace, having began this
War more in compliance with the Emperor, than his own humor or affections, or
with intention to possess himself of Parma, did at the instance of certain
French Cardinals make a Peace, with which the Siege was raised both from before
Parma, and Mirandola: howsoever with this accommodation on the Popes side, the
Wars did not end between Henry of France, and Charles the Emperor, but being
continued from one year to another produced nothing but slaughter, ruin and
miseries to their People. In the mean time the Pope having proclaimed, that the
Council held at Bologna should be transferred to Trent, commanding by his
Indictions, and Bulls, all Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops to repair
thither, and having sent thither Cardinal Crescentio to preside as his Legate,
together with his two Assistants before named, the eleventh Sessions was
commenced on the first of May, 1551.

1551.
Howsoever, before it could be agreed to transfer the Council again to Trent,
many, and serious Debates were held thereupon, and the reasons of Paul the
third for adjourning it to Bologna being very forcible, it had still been
continued there had not the considerations of pleasing the Emperor prevailed,
which in that conjuncture was esteemed necessary: and also it was resolved,
that all the Acts, and determinations which had been concluded, and agreed in
the former Sessions should be esteemed authentic, and ratified, and not
farther to be called into question, or debate either in any Diet, or in this
Council: for which reasons the Protestants refused to appear at Trent,
alleging that the place was neither secure for them, nor the Council free in
such manner, as that every one might deliver his Sense, and debate his
Opinions; and that unless the conclusions made in the Council might be again
examined, and that the Divines, who composed the Confession of Augsburg, might
have a Decisive, as well as a deliberative Voice, and that unless the Pope not
being permitted to preside in the Council, the Bishops might be absolved from
their Oath, which obliges to the Papal Sea, and suffered freely to give their
own true, and real Sentiments, it could not be expected, that any happy result
should issue from this Council, and therefore they were resolved to absent
themselves, and not give their attendance according to the citations and
summons from the Pope. Wherefore the Emperor entering into a closer Treaty
with the Ecclesiastical Electors, and others inclining to the Church of Rome,
advised them to attend personally the General Council to which all due, and
humble obedience was to be given, promising them all security, and safety both
in going and returning; For as he was in the quality of Emperor, so he was
Advocate of the Church, and the Defender of Councils, the which Office that he
might be in a better capacity to perform, he would take up his residence at
some place on the Frontiers; where he would be assistant to their Liberty, that
every one might have a freedom to propose, and speak what he in Conscience
judged most agreeable to the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the Ancient
Fathers.

This Declaration of the Emperor seemed to be made, and erected as a Battery,
or Counter-work to the Popes Bull. For whereas the Pope pretended to govern,
and direct Councils, the Emperor resolved to take the care, and charge to see
them orderly, and regularly directed. The Pope pretended to preside, and to be
himself the Rule, and have the casting Voice; and the Emperor commands that
all Decisions be made according to Scriptures, and the Holy Fathers. The Pope
directs that the conclusions made at former Sessions stand in force, the
Emperor leaves them free to be disputed, and debated as every Man's conscience
directed: In short, the Court of Rome not being able to digest these
contradictions, complained much of the encroachments which the Emperor made on
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and that his Declaration was an other
Convocation of a Council.

The Emperor having declared his resolution to grant his Passes, and safe
conduct to all such, as should go to this Council. The Protestant Princes began
to discourse in all parts of Germany of sending the most acute, and learned Men
amongst them to Trent: and accordingly Maurice Duke of Saxony commanded
Melancthon, and other Divines of singular note, and reputation to repair
thither. In like manner the Duke of Wirtemberg provided others of equal
Learning; but considering that a safe Conduct, or Passeport from the Emperor
was not sufficient, as had been formerly experienced at the Councils of
Constance, and Basil; the Emperor was desired by those Princes to obtain by
the means of his Ambassadors safe conducts, under the public Seal of the
Council: which the Emperor promised to do, and accordingly gave order to Count
Monfort one of his three Ambassadors residing at Trent to procure the same,
the which afterward gave occasion of much Debate, and Dispute in what manner,
and with what Expressions it was to be formed.

The Pope though to outward appearance seemed very desirous to have the Council
commence and be continued at Trent according to the time appointed: yet did not
seem much concerned, or greatly pressing to have the Catholic Prelates
assemble: only the Emperor seemed most urgent, conceiving the determinations
of a Council to be the only means to quiet, and appease the disturbances in
Germany; and therefore instantly pressed the Electors of Cologne, Triers, and
Metz together with several Bishops of Spain, and such as were in his Dominions
of Italy to hasten their Journey unto Trent: so that during the space of eight
months, that the Council continued, the whole Assembly of Persons actually
present comprehending also the Presidents, and Princes did not exceed the
number of sixty four.

Time being protracted unprofitably from the first of May to the first of
September: a Sessions was then held: at which it was declared, 1651.
that considering the small appearance of Bishops by reason of the absence of
the German Nation; the Sessions of the Council had been until that time
deferred. But now in regard that two of the Electors were already come, which
gave hopes, that many others of the same Country would follow their example,
and speedily attend the Summons of the Holy Council; it was resolved in
expectation thereof to adjourn for the space of forty days, that is from the
first of September to the eleventh of October. At which time these particular
Articles would be then treated, and discussed. First of the Sacraments in
general: and next of Baptism, the Eucharist, and confirmation in particular:
After which the Count de Monfort made a Speech in behalf of his Master the
Emperor; and several Commissions and Letters of Credence from diverse Princes
were publicly read by the Secretary of the Council.

After which Amiot Abbot of Bellosane presented a Letter from Henry the French
King, directed to the Council, and delivered to be read by the Secretary; the
Superscription whereof was this, Sanctissimis in Christo Patribus Conventus
Tridentini. Against which the Spanish Prelates took great exception, cried out
with a loud Voice, That that Letter was not directed to them, who were a
General Council, and not an Assembly, as that Superscription would insinuate,
and therefore desired that the Letter might not be read, but that in case the
Bearer had any thing to propose from his Master, he might be heard by a
Committee, or at some private House: the word Conventus, gave great Scandal,
and an occasion of much noise and disturbance; until such time as the
Archbishop of Metz rising from his Seat, asked them, how they would be able to
admit audience to the Protestants, who styled them Conventum Malignantium, when
they so ill relished the title of Sanctissimum Conventum: howsoever the
Spaniards continued their Exclamations until the Legate and his Assistants
together with the Emperors Ambassadors retiring a while into secret
Conference, returned again, and gave their assent to have the Letter read,
being willing to have the word Conventus taken in the largest and most
favorable sense. The Contents and substance of which Letter dated the 13th. of
August was to this effect. That the King out of due respect to that Council,
and according to the custom of his Ancestors had thought fit to signify to
them the reasons why he had not sent any of his Bishops to that Assembly
convened by Pope Julius the 3d. under the title of a General Council; the which
was caused by the Obligation he had upon him both in justice, and honor to
assist the Duke of Parma; for which cause there being a necessity laid upon him
of making War against the Pope, and the Ecclesiastical State, there could be no
security or safety either to his Ambassadors, or Bishops in any Dominions of
the Church, whilst this misunderstanding between him, and the Pope remained:
and therefore he hoped they would accept this, as a just reason and excuse, to
whom he appealed as favorable, and impartial Judges in the case, etc. After
the Letter a Protest was read, containing all the Particulars, of which
Mounsieur de Terms Ambassador for France complained at Rome to the Pope, in
name of the King, the substance whereof was this: That having taken upon him
the protection of Parma, he had endeavored to represent his Reasons for it to
the Pope, and Cardinals; giving them to understand, that his principal Motives
thereunto were reasonable, pious, and Royal, and such as had no mixture of
interest, but purely respected the welfare, and benefit of the Church; as might
appear by the Articles of agreement with Parma, which only respected the
Church, and the peace and liberty of Italy: of which having informed the Pope,
his Holiness seemed not willing to understand the same, seeming more inclinable
to gratify his own humor, than prevent those mischiefs which would embroil
all Europe, and interrupt the proceedings of the present Council, which he
could not esteem, or style with the Character of General, but of a particular
Convention, assembled only to serve a turn, and promote private interests; so
long as he who was the most Christian King, and the eldest Son of the Church
was excluded thence; not being able to send his Ambassadors or Bishops thither
with that security to their Persons, and freedom in their Votes, as was
required in a General Council, etc. This Protest being read, the Answer
thereunto was deferred until the eleventh of October.

In the mean time this Protest afforded matter of Discourse to all Christendom:
some were of Opinion that the Pope hereupon would be induced to dissolve the
Council, which could have no Authority, or be termed General, so long as the
French Nation, which was a principal Member was excluded from it: But the Pope
was of another Opinion, pretending that his sincere endeavors of persuading
that Nation to join themselves to it, was sufficient: and the Imperialists, who
cared not much for their Company, judged that scruple immaterial; since that
being cited, and required to appear thereat, as members of the Catholic
Church; their causeless, and obstinate absence ought not to prejudice the
proceedings of the Council; for in regard the greater part include the Minor;
the whole body of France was obliged to own those Acts of the Council to be
Canonical, and Obligatory, having by their absence, when they might have been
present, or by their silence assented thereunto.

Howsoever the Parliament of Paris was of an other Judgment: for tho it be true
that the greater number carries the point, in those Assemblies, where is a
common concurrence in Votes: But where one part absents it self, and refuses to
join, the Acts of the other cannot oblige the dissenting Party, and in that
case that Rule takes place, Prohibentis potior est conditio; of which nature
are all such Ecclesiastical Assemblies which how numerous soever they may be,
their Acts have only an Authority to oblige their own Countries, but not such
as have dissented, or are not concurring with them: which was the sense and
Opinion of ancient times, as we may read in the Treatises wrote by S. Hilarious,
Athanasius, Theodoret, and Victorinus expressly upon this Point: for which
reasons certains Canons have been received in some Churches which have been
rejected in others: and as St. Gregory testifies, that upon the same account,
the Canons of the second Council of Constantinople, and of the first of Ephesus
were not received by the Church of Rome. But lest the French King should by
this manner of Nonconformity seem Schismatical, or be suspected of an intention
to alienate the minds of his People from the Catholic Religion; he published
diverse severe Edicts against the Protestants; promising rewards to such, who
should detect, and accuse them.

Now according to the Promise made to the Abbot of Bellozare, that an Answer
should be given to the Letters and Protest of the French King his Master on the
eleventh of October following; the Crier of the Council at the Church-gate,
made Proclamation, that in case any were there present for the most Christian
King, he should then appear. But the Abbot knowing well, that no Answer would
be given him, but such as was forged at Rome by the Spanish Party, had by Order
from his Master the King withdrawn himself; wherefore none appearing to receive
and hear the Answer, Order was given to have the Answer which was prepared for
that time to be publicly read in the Council, the substance whereof was this;
That the Council was not conscious of having given any such offense to his
Majesty, that he should have cause to pass such hard Censures upon it: that it
had been at first convened by the Authority of Paul the 3d. and now continued
under this Pope Julius, and therefore could not be suspected of having had it is
original from any private Designs of advancing particular interests, as his
Majesty would insinuate, and therefore they desired his Majesty would be
pleased to send his Bishops to the Council, that they might concur in this holy
Work, which was carried on with no other aim, than a just and a sincere
intention to settle Religion on its true basis, and to produce peace and
quietness in the World: Adding farther, That in case his Majesty should upon
any private considerations, or animosities decline this happy Union denying the
pretense and attendance of his Ministers at this Sacred Assembly; that yet
notwithstanding they were well assured that all those Acts performed there,
would have the same force, and Authority obligatory upon Men's Consciences, as
if his Majesty had by the presence of his Ambassadors and Bishops concurred
therein.

Nor did the French King only deny to send his own Subjects to the Council,
but also prevailed with the Suisses, and Grisons by his Ambassadors to do the
like, who being well acquainted with the secret Designs and Intrigues of the
Court of Rome instilled that prejudice in their minds to this Council; that as
well Catholics, as Protestants then assembled in a Diet at Basil, denied and
disclaimed all concurrence with that Council, and as an evidence thereof
recalled Thomas Plant Bishop of Coire from thence.

Notwithstanding all these difficulties, and oppositions the Council proceeded
in their Decrees, and determined eleven Points with Anathema against all such,
who should not close in faith and in belief thereof. First, against those, who
should deny the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ together with his Soul, and
Deity to be really and substantially contained in the Eucharist; but confess it
to be only in sign, or figure, or mystically: the which conversion of the
Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Body and Blood of Christ, they called
Transubstantiation. Secondly, against those, who should hold that the whole
Sacrament of the Eucharist is not contained in one of these two Species;
Thirdly, against those who hold, that the Body and Blood of Christ is then
only contained in the Species when the same is received, and not before, or
after. Fourthly, against those, who hold, that the chief fruit, and benefit of
this Sacrament is the remission of sins. Fifthly, against those, who hold, that
Christ in the Eucharist is not to be adored with the Service of Latria, or
carried in Procession, or publicly exposed to Worship and Adoration. Sixthly,
against those, who being come to the age of discretion shall not communicate
once a year, and that at Easter; with five other Points relating to the
Sacrament, all which were confirmed as irrevocable, and immovable fundamentals,
of which it was not lawful to doubt, much less to dispute. These and other
Points being already passed in the Council, were taken as granted, and
concluded, and therefore were not to be again re assumed to Debate: But now in
regard the matter of the Passports to be given to the Protestants, was again to
be considered, it was judged fit, that the Tenure thereof should be restrained
with prudent cautions, that when the Dissenting Party should intermix with
their Assembly, it should not be in their Power to unravel those Doctrines
which had been already settled, and determined; but giving them for granted,
should proceed to examine other Points of lesser moment, which they limited to
four Articles. First, Whether it were necessary to Salvation that Christ's
faithful People should receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds.
Secondly, Whether he that receives in one kind alone, receives less than he
that communicates in both. Thirdly, Whether the Church be guilty of an Error in
having ordained, that the Laity should communicate in one kind only. And then
Fourthly, Whether the Sacrament of the Eucharist may be given to Children.
These Points of limitation being thus laid down, the Preamble to the Passports
ran in this manner; That whereas the Protestants did desire to be heard upon
these Points before they were finally determined, and for the end they might
have free and safe admission to this Council, without any let, hinderance, or
interruption whatsoever: It was therefore by the Authority of this Council
ordered, and enacted, That out of a desire, and zeal they had to reduce the
erring Christians into the true way of the Gospel, they did with humble charity
condescend unto their Demands, giving, and granting unto them the public
faith, and assurance to come, and repair freely to this Council, and there to
debate of the preceding Particulars, Provided that they came, and gave their
personal attendance there in Council, at, or before the 25th. of January next
following, and in the mean time that the Points being frequently debated and
discussed, might be prepared and made ready for determination against the end
of that Month.

The Tenor of this Passport being read, and considered by the Protestants,
appeared strangely captious, and such as gave them just occasion of
astonishment and admiration; for considering that the Protestants had not only
in all their Diets, but in all their public Remonstrances and Writings avowed
their resolutions to hear all matters in Dispute to be examined in their
presence, and that without such personal intercourse and consent, they would
never receive or obey any Precepts or Articles which should be enjoined, or
imposed upon them from Trent: it seemed strangely magisterial and surprising,
that the Council should assume a liberty to say, that the Protestants desired
to be heard only upon those four Points; it being most evident that the Design
of the Passport was no other than to delude unthinking Men by a fair appearance
of invitation, and safe Conduct, and yet keep the Authority of the Pope, and of
the Roman Church upon its guard and reserve; wherefore the Protestants
rejecting the allurements of such feigned Disguises, by general agreement
resolved not to repair unto the Council, unless it were under the protection of
such a safe Conduct as was given be the Council of Basil to the Bohemians: one
Clause of which was, That the Holy Scriptures should be the Judge of all
Controversies; which in case they could not obtain, they might have wherewith
to excuse themselves before the Emperor.

The Pope having understood these resolutions of the dissenting Germans, more
earnestly urged the coming of the Catholic Suisses to the Council, with whom
also the Emperor joined in the Invitation; but the French King had so charmed
them by his Ambassadors, who being a Person well versed in all the Intrigues
and contrivances of the Court of Rome, had wrote a Treatise on that Subject,
sufficient to create in them a Diffidence and jealousy of the Roman Counsels,
and so exposed the Designs intended against them, that not only the
Protestant, but also the Catholic Swissers did at a Diet held at Bade
unanimously concur not to send their Deputies to Trent, by which the Grisons
also taking an Alarm, conceived a jealousy, that some thing was contriving at
Rome to their prejudice, and for that reason recalled Thomas Plant the Bishop
of Coire from his residence with the Council.

Whilst these matters were in Treaty two Ambassadors from the Duke of
Wirtemberg arrived at Trent, whose Commission was publicly to represent the
Confession of their Doctrine before the Council, giving them to understand,
that in case they would admit their Divines to a Debate, and grant them a free
Passport as large and ample in the Tenure of it, as was that of Basil, that
then they should appear in the Council, and expound and explicate their
Doctrine, and Tenants according to the true sense and meaning of them: but
before these Divines were admitted, it was ordered by the Legate, that they
should first present and make known to the President the Summary of their
Commission, that so it might be considered whether the particulars therein
contained were such as were lawful, and which might be regularly admitted into
the Council, which was the method of their proceedings. But the Ambassadors
whose Instructions were, not to own, or acknowledge the Authority of the Pope,
or power of convoking, or presiding in Council either in Person, or by his
Deputies, could not be persuaded to make applications to the President, being a
matter contrary to the principal Article resolved in Germany.

1551.
About the same time also being the beginning of November the Emperor arrived
at Inspruck; which being a City not above three days journey from Trent, was
for that present made the place of his residence, that so he might with more
ease receive daily Advices of the proceedings of the Council, and be more near
at hand to administer assistance to his Wars at Parma. The news of the
Emperors near approach did not much disturb the thoughts of the Pope, who
depended on the reiterated Promises which the Emperor had made him of being
firm, and steady to the interest of the Church, and the Court of Rome. But to
the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg he studied not much to give a Reply, or new
Instructions to his Legate; but only recommended to him a firm constancy in
defense of the Papal Authority, which having in the time of Paul the third
convened that Council, and which had by the same Power been ever since
continued; he ought not in the least Point give way to schismatical, and
seditious motions: but with courage and zeal, defend the Right and Title which
the Pope singly had both to Assemble, and to preside as Head in all
Ecclesiastical Councils. The Ambassadors having continued at Trent without
being heard, pressed very earnestly for a Dispatch, and that their Doctrines
might be read in the Council, and a safe Conduct granted to their Protestant
Brethren according to the form of that given at Basil, that so they might have
liberty to deliver their Doctrines, and Argue, and Dispute in maintenance
thereof without interruption, or danger to their Persons. But the Legate would
not yield to either of the Propositions; saying, That as to their Doctrines,
they were already notified in their own Books, and lay before the Council to
consider, and either to approve, or condemn them; and that the Censure given
ought to be conclusive, and received with humility and submission, as a final
Determination. And whereas they desired that their Doctrines should be read in
the Council, it seemed as if the Dissenters intended to give Laws, and
Precepts, and teach the Church what was Orthodox, and what Erroneous: And as to
the form of the Passport in any other latitude than what had lately been
prescribed, it seemed so insufferable an indignity to the Council, and to the
Church of God to have their former resolutions questioned, and again
unravelled, that all good Christians were obliged to engage their Lives for the
prevention thereof.

At the same time the City of Strasbourg, and five other Towns sent their
Ambassadors to Trent with the like Orders to represent their Doctrines before
the Council; who finding the same repulse, did jointly address themselves to
the Emperor, complaining, that contrary to the Promises of his Imperial
Majesty their Doctrines could not be read in the Council, or received into
consideration: but the Emperor being willing to content them, acquainted them
that the Ambassadors of Saxony were shortly expected, and that when they came,
they should have a fair hearing, and be admitted to a charitable, and friendly
Conference.

On the seventh of January 1552. 1552.
the Ambassadors from Maurice Elector of Saxony arrived at Trent to the great
joy of the other Electours, and Prelates of Germany, who uniting together in the
same Interest made their first Addresses and applications to the Emperor's
Ambassadors: acquainting them that their Princes, being desirous to cultivate
Union, and Charity amongst Christians, had sent their Divines to the Council,
who were moderate Men, learned in the Law and Gospel, and such as were lovers
of Peace, and Christian Charity, and that all the other Protestant Princes
would in like manner send their Ministers to the Council under the protection
of such a Passport, or safe Conduct, as had been granted at Basil, Provided,
that all matters, and Points already Determined might be again examined, and
called into question: and the Pope not admitted to preside as Chief of the
Council, but be equally liable to the Sentences, and Censures of the same with
other Bishops. And in the mean time their desire was to be admitted directly to
the Council without any intermediate Addresses to Crescentio the Pope's Legate;
and that in public Assembly their Commissions might be read, and their
Doctrines exposed to public consideration: But these Proposals, though gently
received and hearkened unto by the Emperor's Ambassadors, who were unwilling
to disoblige the Electours of Saxony, and Brandenbourg, were violently opposed
by the Pope's Legate, and Nuncios; who alleged, that it was a matter of high
indignity to the Council, which represented the Church Catholic, to have their
Decrees, and Determinations canvassed, and reversed by an inconsiderable number
of Sectaries, who seemed to come prepared and armed rather to confound, than
establish the Council: for seeing that their Principles were, to disown the
Pope's Authority, on which that Council was founded; and then to be admitted to
a freedom of Speech, in which they might vent their blasphemous Doctrines, and
reproaches to the dishonor of the Apostolical See, was such an Indulgence to
Impiety, and a betraying the Power of the Church, as rather than admit, were
ready to sacrifice their lives, or at least withdraw from any Meetings, where
such matters were Debated, or Acts Decreed. But notwithstanding these positive
refusals, the Emperor's Ambassadors endeavored to induce the Pope's Party to
admit the Dissenters to audience in the Council; for that their very entrance
to it did imply a tacit owning of the Pope's Authority, though the usual
Ceremonies, and Compliments which were but superficial Points, were
pretermitted by them, the which would be an act most religious, and Christian,
for perhaps such charitable condescension would be a means to prevent a War,
which might endanger the safety of the whole Church: to which the Cardinal of
Toledo one of the Emperor's Party, farther added: That he had often heard in
Sermons, how that the salvation of one Soul was so dear, and precious to Jesus
Christ, that for the saving thereof he would descend on Earth, and be again
crucified; and then, said he, let us consider, if we imitate this example, in
case for the saving of all Germany, we should deny to recede from the least
punctilio of our honor, and prerogative. At length, to be short, after many
Debates, and consultations in despite of the Legate and his Adherents, the
Authority of the three Electours, and the Cardinal Madrutio promoted by the
mediation of the Imperial Ambassadors prevailed.

But then another difficulty arose concerning the treatment of these
Ambassadors when introduced to the Council, with what place, and precedence
was to be granted to them; and how, and where the Divines were to be seated,
who expected a rank, and freedom of Voice, and suffrage equal with others;
which seemed very dangerous to be yielded to known Heretics, who by Ancient
Canons, and Papal Decretals were never admitted to a Communion or Society with
other Christians, unless having first renounced their Errors, they desired with
humility to be taught, and directed: this Point though at first disputed with
the same difficulties as the former; yet at length it was concluded: That the
necessity ought to excuse the transgression of such Canons, which after mature
deliberation had been dispensed within all the Diets of Germany; and that the
like might be safely practiced at this Council; in case that in the Preamble to
this Admission, it were declared, that such Indulgence was yielded out of
charity, and compassion, to the end that Men who were gone astray, and fallen
into error might be reclaimed, and reduced to the true Faith, and Orthodox
Doctrine of the Church. And though the Legate would not yield to any of these
means of Accommodation, yet it was concluded against him; that on the 24th. of
this month of January a General Convocation should be held, at which the
Ambassadors of Saxony should be received, and heard; and that in the mean time
the Divines who remained at some distance from Trent might repair thither, and
that the 25th. should be the day of Session; which being agreed, a Committee
was chosen to draw up this Decree, together with the Preamble to the Admission,
and the safe Conduct.

The Imperial Ministers having made this report to the Protestants, and
signified in an eloquent Speech the tenderness the Council had for them, and
willingness to condescend to their weak Consciences: the Protestants retired a
while, and having considered the minutes of the safe Conduct; made their
exceptions to it, being in four particulars different to that of Basil,
formerly granted to the Bohemians, and on which they were obliged by their
Instructions to insist. As first, That in Council they might have a Vote, and
free suffrage. Secondly, That the holy Scripture, and practice of the Primitive
Church, Ancient Councils, and Fathers who were Expositors of the Scriptures
might be the Judges of all Controversies. Thirdly, That all Ambassadors during
the continuance of the Council, might have the free Exercise of their Religion
in their own Lodgings. Fourthly, That nothing should be said, or acted which
might tend to the defamation of their Religion, or render it ridiculous. These
particulars being offered to the Council, were generally concluded to be
unreasonable, and such as might ensnare their wisdom in inextricable
difficulties; and therefore it was resolved not to change, or alter any thing
in the Minutes of the Safe Conduct, in expectation that the Protestants
observing their resolution and constancy might with time be induced to
condescend to their terms.

Matters being thus protracted till the 24th. of January the General
Convocation was held at the House of the Legate, where the Electors, all the
Fathers, and the Emperor's Ambassadors were present; who having taken their
Places, the Ambassadors of Saxony were called in, who having made their
Reverence, and Salutes to the Assembly, one of them began his Speech, with this
Compellation, Reverendissimi, and Amplissimi Patres, and Domini; My Lord and
Master Maurice Elector of Saxony after his hearty Wishes, and Prayers, that God
would inspire all your Counsels with his Holy Spirit, has commanded me to let
you know, that he has a long time desired to see a General, Christian and free
Council held, and celebrated, wherein all Errors might be refuted, and abuses
in the Church corrected, and reformed; and that the Holy Scriptures might be
made the Rule of our faith and practice: in which good work that he might be
assistant, he has sent his Divines to represent their Confession to this
Council, being commanded to abide at some Leagues distant until a safe Conduct
could be procured for them; for having understood, that according to a
constitution of the Council of Constance, it was not necessary to keep faith
with Heretics, or those who were so reputed; and that the Bohemians being
sensible of such Tenants, had with due caution armed themselves with assurance
of safe Conduct under the Seal of the Council of Basil; so in like manner his
Master the Elector did desire and expect the security of safe Conduct for his
Divines, Counselors and their domestic Servants in a more ample, and large
form than what appeared in that Draught, and Copy which had lately been
presented to him. Which request being granted, and admission given to the
Divines to take their place in Council, his next Proposition was to have them
heard upon those Points, and Articles, which were in Controversy between the
Protestants, and the Catholics; and though the same had already been
determined by the Council, yet that they might again be revised, and examined,
and determined by the Word of God, and according to the common belief of all
Christian Nations.

After these Ambassadors had finished their Oration, those of Wirtemberg were
introduced, who having delivered their Message almost to the same intent, and
purpose with the former they were caused to retire; and after a Debate whether
any addition, or alteration should be made in the form of Safe Conduct, it was
generally concluded in the Negative, lest by giving the liberty proposed, the
Council should be intrigued in most inextricable Disputes, of which Volumes had
been wrote already without hopes of arriving at any definitive Sentence or
Determination.

The next day being the 25th. of January which was the day of the Session, all
things were managed with great Order, and Solemnity; and after Mass was ended,
the Council sat, and in the first place determined all points relating to the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and Sacrament of Ordination, that those material Points
might be passed before the arrival of the Protestants, in expectation of whom
(as was then declared) and in hopes that they came provided with real, and
peaceable intentions to acquiesce in the truth, and confirm the Decrees of
their Mother the Church, and not to ruin, and destroy its fundamental
Principles, they had prorogued their next Session until the 19th. of March
following; and as to the form of the Safe Conduct it appeared to them so large,
and ample that nothing could be devised, or imagined to render it more
extensive, or of greater validity.

With this, and the like tenderness of brotherly compassion the Council seemed
to outward appearance to treat the Protestants, though the chief motive
thereunto, was to please the Emperor, who apprehending great confusions, and
Wars in Germany, on the score of Religion was earnest by all the Solicitations
his Ministers could make to bring matters to some tolerable accommodation. The
Emperor also being desirous to abate something of the Authority and arrogance
of the Church, imagined that the Protestants might be made use of, as the happy
Instruments to effect the same, and that the depression of the Papal Power
might increase the grandeur of the Imperial. The Pope, and his Party
discovering these secret agitations did after this last Session think little of
the farther proceedings of the Council, and therefore on force of this
jealousy entertained private Treaties with France managed by the Cardinal
Tournon in behalf of that King, in pursuance and execution of which it was
believed, that an entire, and absolute dissolution of the Council would
necessarily follow of it self, without any Act of the Pope therein.

Howsoever these matters not as yet discovered; the Protestants testified their
dislike of the Narrowness of the Passport, as not comprehending that amplitude,
which their Princes required. And also observing that the general Congregation
proceeded to prepare all matters in Controversy concerning Marriage, adoration
of Images, worship of Saints, Purgatory and the like, which they called Minute
Points, to be offered against the next Session, all which were to be passed
without the intervention of the Protestants, they took just offense against the
proceedings, and complained thereof to the Emperor's Ministers: of which also
the Emperor himself taking notice, dispatched an Express both to Trent, and
Rome, giving them notice, that this hasty precipitation of Affairs gave just
cause to suspect, that nothing was intended fairly toward the Protestants, who
on these due and reasonable Resentments would become more obdurate in their
Opinions; to prevent which, he laid his Commands on the Prelates not to act, or
join in any farther proceedings; which resolution being signified at a General
Congregation, all Synodical actions and Decrees were ordered to surcease, until
the pleasure of the Council should be known to the contrary.

The Pope being greatly incensed at this, and other actions of the Emperor,
gave license to this Prorogation for a few days only, and that afterward they
should again assemble, and reassume their Debates with such Christian fortitude
as became their Ecclesiastical functions, without respect to any worldly
consideration.

During this vacation a Friar preaching on the Parable of the Tares sowed
amongst the Wheat, applied that Doctrine to the present dissenting Opinions,
which he called Heresies, and which ought, (as he said) to be extirpated with
fire, and the gallows; at which and other affronts the Protestants taking
particular exceptions greatly complained of their ill usage, which tended to
make the breach wider; and the Elector of Triers took this pretense to depart,
feigning also an excuse of his health; though in reality a secret intelligence
which he held with the French King was the cause thereof.

About the beginning of March the Ambassadors of Saxony received Letters from
their Prince to prosecute their Demands with new instances to the Council,
giving them to understand, that for the more effectual dispatch thereof, he
intended personally to wait on the Emperor; which was cause of great amusement
to the Papal Party: but in a few days, it was generally bruited, that a League
was made between the French King and the Protestant Princes to make War upon
the Emperor; which news giving an Alarm to the Electors of M^tz and Cologne
they departed, taking Auspruck in their way homewards, entered into serious,
and private consultations with the Emperor. The Ambassadors likewise of
Maurice Duke of Saxony fearing least in those rumors, their Pesons were not
safe, privately withdrew from Trent, and by different ways returned to their
own Country. Notwithstanding which the Ambassadors and Divines of Wirtemberg
and two of Strasbourg remained still in Trent; where not having been able to
procure License for their Confession to be received and read in Council, they
printed several Copies of them, and caused them to be dispersed in all places,
which gave public offense to the whole Council; nor could the Interest of the
Imperial Ambassadors prevail farther, for the Papal Party suspecting that all
those instances made by the Emperor in behalf of the Protestants, tended to no
other end than to depress the Court of Rome, embraced all occasions of excuses,
and delays: for now the Emperor's interest was grown weak at Trent by the
retirement of the German Bishops, who upon the Alarm of Wars in their Country
were retired to their own homes: indeed the report of Wars raised by the French
King in confederacy with the Princes of Germany against the Emperor was
confirmed, and Manifests, and Protests in defense of Religion and the liberty
of Germany were printed and published; and in pursuance thereof on the first of
April the Elector of Saxony laid siege to Augsbourg; 1552.
the which combustions had so great influence on the Affairs of Trent, that the
Italian Bishops departed, as did also the Protestants; and a small number of
Prelates remaining, and the Legate greatly indisposed in his health, the Council
broke up, being prorogued for the space of two years, during which time it was
hoped, and expected that the present storms would be blown over, and Men return
to a more mild, and calm temper of spirit.

In this manner the Gown gave way to the Sword, which commonly decides the most
knotty difficulties, and puts an end to long Disputes of Councils, and the
Schools. For now Henry II. King of France having joined his Arms with Maurice
Duke of Saxony, and other discontented Princes of Germany made War on the
Emperor; the King was inveterately angry for the injury he had received in the
matter of Parma; the Duke incensed by reason of the ill treatment of his
Father-in-law Philip the Lantgrave of Hesse, whom the Emperor suffered to
languish in a tedious imprisonment; and all in general being jealous, and
fearful of the Emperor's growing greatness, (whatsoever there might be of
Religion pretended in the case) united their Arms upon different
considerations. The Duke with a strong Army marched to Oenipont in Rhetia; and
with such expedition that the Emperor was forced to rise, and retire from
thence at midnight to Villaco in the Dukedom of Austria, on the confines of
Italy; by which means the Duke became Master of Oenepont, a place distant about
three days Journey from Trent. But in regard the successes of this War were
various, and not pertinent to our present Treatise, we shall proceed to matters
more nearly relating to the Life, and reign of this Pope Julius III.

The Council of Trent being dissolved, and the Pope quiet in Rome, he made
choice of a certain number of Cardinals in resemblance of a Council to inspect
the present Errors, and abuses which were crept into the Church, and the
dissolute, and corrupt manners of the Clergy; and to consider of means to
correct, and reform them: but whilst they attended to these matters, they
found themselves so engulfed, and immersed in difficulties, which were past
their wisdom to redress, that after several meetings being unable to conclude
any thing, the business grew cold, and frequent delays, and adjournments from
one week to another put an end thereunto without any effect: only it was
agreed that the prorogation of the Council which at first was limited unto two
years only, should now be farther enlarged to the term of Ten.

The Pope who had been in repose until now, was also disturbed by the commotion
of his Neighbors: for Vrtado de Mendoza who (after having been Ambassador
from the Emperor to the Pope) was now constituted Governor of Siena; to secure
which from the civil Discords, which then arose, and to keep the City in
obedience to his Master, he began to lay the foundations of a Citadel; of
which the Inhabitants being apprehensive, lest it should subject them to a
perpetual slavery, resolved secretly to resign themselves into the protection
of France: and having secretly for that purpose dispatched their Ambassadors
to Henry the Second, they received such favorable assurance of aid and defense
from him, that the People, in a tumultuous manner arose in Arms, and being
encouraged by the Count Petigliano and Farnese, (who maintained the French
interest in that part of Tuscany), they raised their Forces with such
expedition, that falling on the Spaniards in a kind of surprise, they cut them
to pieces; and having demolished and subverted the very foundation of the
Citadel, they returned to their ancient form of Government, seeming to outward
appearance to have recovered their pristine Liberty. The news of this revolt of
Siena was brought to the Emperor, whilst he was at the siege of Metz the
principal City of Lorain; upon receipt of which he instantly dispatched his
Orders to Don Pedro de Toledo Vice-King of Naples, that he should in Person
attend this War and endeavor the recovery of Siena. Don Pedro having received
these Orders in the depth of the Winter, which was the beginning of the year
1553. 1553.
began his march with a formidable Army of twenty thousand Men composed of
Italians, Spaniards, and Germans. The Pope remembering the times of Clement VII.
when a Napolitan Army sacked Rome; and fearing to be surprised with the like
calamity, levied speedily eight thousand Men; the conduct of which he committed
to Camillo Orsino. So that now all Christendom being in Arms, the Pope sent his
Legates to the Emperor, and the French King to pacify, and mediate their
differences in order to a general Peace; but so far were the spirits of these
Princes exasperated against each other, that no gentle remedies were available,
or any other trial, but such as should be determined by the judgment of the
Sword: and now no preparations being made but for War, the Pope constituted
Guido Vbaldo Duke of Vrbin General of all the Forces of the Church; whilst
Cardinal da Este, and Monsieur de Terms an excellent Soldier defended Siena
with a strong Garrison in the name of the French King, The Imperial Army being
on their march took Montechio, add besieged Montalcino, a Fortress belonging to
Siena, where happened many Skirmishes, and Rencounters, with great slaughter on
both sides: and Wars being begun in Siena, Montalcino, Orbitello Grossetto,
Chiusi and many other places, all Tuscany was in Arms, Fire, Sword, Rapine, and
Violence raging in every part thereof: but amidst of these Combustions Don
Pedro dying after a tedious sickness at Florence, the French gained the
advantage; and the Imperialists having placed strong Garrisons in the Fortresses
which they had taken returned again with their Troops to Naples. And this was
the issue of the first years War.

But then the second was more fatal to Siena, proving the final overthrow of
the Liberty, and Government of that Republic. For Henry King of France on
whose protection Siena depended, being incensed against Cosmo de Medicis Duke
of Florence for favoring the Emperor's Party against the People of Siena, did
about the beginning of the year 1554. An. 1554.
send Peter Strozzi, one banished from Florence, and the mortal Enemy of Duke
Cosmo with a formidable Army into Tuscany; but the Arms of the Duke prevailed,
and obtained such success against those of Strozzi; that the Marquess
Marignano, who was the Duke's General, adventured to attempt Siena, in which he
was so successful that he surprised the Bastion next adjoining to the Post
Camollia, putting all the Country round, which was the most fruitful and
flourishing Soil of Italy to fire, and sword: to the relief whereof Strozzi
coming with all his force was overthrown by Marignano; which unhappiness
reduced Siena to its ultimate extremity; and being at last constrained to
surrender by reason of Famine, many were made Prisoners, the City sacked, and
plundered, and the Spoils and Booty brought to Florence, many of the People,
especially those of the Nobility disdaining to become Subjects to the Duke of
Florence, retired to Montalcino, a place strong, and impregnable by nature,
setting themselves in the form of a Republic under the protection of France.

The People of Siena lamenting their unhappy fate, accused Pope Julius in a
great measure to be the Author of it; for that he had by his Money bought up
great stores of Provision, Victuals, and Ammunition in Marca, Vmbria, and
Tuscany, and therewith relieved, and supported the Army of Florence: and that
not considering the public interest of Italy, nor the common justice of
mankind, he, for gaining a poor, and inconsiderable Title of Marquis of Mount
Sabino, with a little Land to his Brother Baldwin, and on the promise of
obtaining the Daughter of Duke Cosmo for Wife to his Brother's Son, had basely,
and ungratefully betrayed the City where he was born, and exposed it to utter
ruin and desolation* But all this obloquy, and defamation little, moved the
mind of the Pope, who perceiving that all his solicitude, and care for the
general Peace and quiet of Christendom availed little, resolved to enjoy, and
give himself up to Buildings, and other divertisements: so that placing all his
thoughts on a Country House, Gardens, and Vineyards which he had erected, and
made without the Porta del popolo at Rome, he was so enamoured of his new
Paradise, where he continually made Feasts and Banquets, that he seemed wholly
to have cast off all care of the Church, and sense of the miseries of
Christendom; and what was most undecent, and misbecoming a Person of above
seventy years of age and of his gravity, and function, he immersed himself in
pleasures as if there had been no other Life, to the great scandal of the
World, and damage and greater danger of Rome.

In this year 1554. Edward the Sixth King of England died, and the Queen Mary
succeeding, immediately sent her Ambassadors to Rome to signify to the Pope
the conversion of her whole Kingdom from Heresy to the Catholic Church, and
to acknowledge, and Vow all Obedience to the Papal Sea, desiring to have the
Excommunication taken off, and a general Pardon, and Absolution given to her
Catholic Subjects: on which grateful Message the Ambassadors coming, were
recieved with great kindness, and solemn Processions of Thanksgiving
celebrated, at which the Pope assisted in Person. The same year Philip Son of
the Emperor Charles the Fifth was married to Queen Mary, the Kingdoms of Sicily
and Naples being settled upon him, together with Milan, Flanders and some other
of the United Provinces: with which news Philip dispatched his Ambassador the
Marquis de Pescara to the Pope, to acquaint him therewith, and according to the
custom of former Kings to do homage for the Kingdom of Naples, which he held in
Fee from the Pope.

And now Pope Julius the Third being by reason of his great age, and the
torment of the Gout, which miserably afflicted him, become very infirm, was
persuaded by the Physicians to change his Diet, and his usual regimen of
living; the which ill agreeing with his habit of Body, brought him to a Fever,
with which taking his Bed in the month of February 1555. 1555.
he lingered therewith until the 23d. of March, and then died at his Palace,
being aged seventy seven years, six months, and fourteen days: he was
afterward carried without any great Pomp or State to the Church of S. Peter,
where his Corpse having been publicly exposed for three days to the view of the
People, he was afterward buried in an ordinary Sepulcre of Bricks near the
Altar of S. Andrew. After which the Sea was vacant seventeen days.

This Julius was tall of Stature, of a plain Country Visage, his Nose great;
his Eyes showed him to be Choleric, and hasty, but soon pleased; his Diet was
gross, and plain, being much pleased with a sort of large Onions, which were
sent him from Gaeta, the alteration of which Diet hastened his Death: When he
was first Pope he so strangely favored a young Boy, whom he called
Innocentius, that without any apparent motive for it, he bestowed upon him a
Cardinals Hat; which when the reason was asked; He replied, What reason had you
to choose me Pope? Fortune favors whom she pleases. He was very facetious in
his Discourse, but more familiar, in his Conversation than was decent; for
without respect to the Majesty of his Office, and gravity of his Function; He
would often shoot such Bolts, and use such Expressions, as were unseemly, and
which those that heard, pitied, and blushed for him.

MARCELLVS II.
JULIVS the Third dying on the 23d. of March, and his Funeral Obsequies being
performed after the accustomed manner; the Cardinals to the number of thirty
seven entered the Conclave, and without much faction, or dispute chose Marcellus
Cervinus Cardinal of St. Cross at Jerusalem to be Pope, of which publication
was made with the usual Ceremonies on the 9th. of April 1555. the Sea having
been vacant for the space only of eighteen days. His Father was Robert, or as
some call him Richard, Treasurer of the Marquisat of Ancona, and the place of
his birth was Montfano: his Father pretended to great Skill, or knowledge in
Astrology, by which Art calculating the Nativity of his Son at the time of his
birth, it appeared that the Stars under which he was born, would be very
propitious to him in his promotion to Ecclesiastical preferments; for which
reason Marcellus being first sent to have his Education in the University of
Siena; he came from thence to Rome, where he dwelt with Felix the Datary of
Clement the 7th. afterward he obtained the Office of Secretary to Paul the
Third, and by him created Cardinal of St. Cross of Jerusalem; and lastly, as we
have said, elected Pope on the 9th. of April.

The day following he was consecrated Bishop by the Cardinal of Naples; and the
very same day without much Pomp or Solemnity was Crowned with the Pontifical
Miter by the Cardinal of Pisa who was Archdeacon. And as he refused to change
his Name, calling himself no other than Marcellus the Second, in imitation of
Adrian the Sixth, so he survived a much less time than he, having possessed the
Papal Chair not above twenty one days after his Election; so that there remains
little more observable of him, than that after his Choice, he would give no
invitation, or encouragement to his Kindred, or Relations of coming to Rome, in
hopes of benefit and preferment by his greatness: howsoever his intentions were
good and his Designs great, having drawn a Scheme, and method whereby to
restore Peace, and Unity in the Church, and the Papal Power to its ancient
luster.

This Design of his, he communicated to the Cardinal of Mantoua, maintaining
that there was no other way to reconcile differences in Religion, but only by
a General Council; and that the reason, why hitherto, that means had been
ineffectual, was no other, than because, they began at the wrong end, and
proceeded not with the due method: for that first they should begin with an
entire reformation of Manners, which would supersede, and quiet all superficial
Debates, and disputations about words, and reduce Controversies to such a
substantial issue as would be easily determinable by a Council. That for want
hereof his five immediate Predecessors had much erred, for that they abhorred
the name of Reformation, not out of a dislike to that desirable State, but from
a belief, that it would be a means to abate and diminish the Papal Authority,
whereas on the contrary he was really persuaded, that a Reformation was the
only means to render it more Glorious, and powerful, as most plainly appeared,
and was proved by the Histories of past-times, in which those Popes only were
famous, and renowned, who had supported their Papal Chair by an exactness in
Manners, and purity of Life: that Reformation respected the entrinsecal, and
circumstantial appendages of Religion, and served only to retrench the luxury,
and superfluous pomp of the Clergy, which made the Prelates envied, and
contemptible; when as a modest train, and decent comportment adjoined to a
severity, and mortified way of living, rendered the Prelates awful, and revered;
and such Men encompassing the Papal Chair made it appear more holy, and
Apostolical; and above all so fortified it with the Divine Protection, that
nothing would be able to remove, or shake the firmness of that Throne, which
was established on so sure a foundation.

These Designs being published, and discoursed of in the Court of Rome, were
received with different Sentiments: such as were of the Pope's Party applauded
the intention, as pious, glorious, and such as favored of Peace, Charity, and
zeal to Religion: but those who were of a contrary Faction made an other
interpretation, construing all the actions of this Pope to be regulated by
Astrological Schemes, to which he gave much credence, in regard that both his
Father, and himself had been much advanced by that Art. Moreover, amongst other
things projected by this Pope; he intended to have erected a new Order of
Chivalry, consisting of a hundred Knights, of which the Pope was to be the
Chief Commander; all which were to enter into an Oath of Allegiance, and
fidelity to the Pope, never to desert his Cause, or Person, but always to
advance his Power, and Interest: and for maintenance of this Degree five
hundred Crowns of yearly Pension were to be issued out of the Apostolical
Chamber to every Person of them: the which allowance was never to be augmented,
or enlarged, nor could other Revenues be bequeathed or purchased for an
additional maintenance; only they were capable by their Virtues, and merits of
being created Cardinals without any impeachment of their Vow, or rules of their
Order. Out of these he intended to choose his Nuntios, and Ministers for all
Treaties, and Negotiations, his Governors of Towns, and Legates, and in short
to extract all his Officers out of this Society: and so far was this Project
resolved that several wise Men, and Persons of merit, living at Rome were
already nominated, who were to be listed and admitted into this Order.

Thus did the Pope with subtle reasonings and refined Discourses draw his
Methods, and Schemes of Politics, which would have proved more rude, and
prickly in the handling. But whilst the Court of Rome was filled with talk,
and Novelty, unexpectedly and on a sudden, the thread of all these Designs were
cut off by the death of the Pope, who having, as is said, wearied, and tired
himself with the many superfluous and painful Ceremonies, which he sustained in
the Holy Week before Easter, and at his Inaugurations, fell into a fit of an
Apoplexy, and died the last day of that month of April in which he was created,
having been Pope no longer than twenty one days; which was a far shorter time
than what the predictions he had made by his Art in Astrology had flattered his
belief.

PAVL IV.
THE Funeral Rites and Ceremonies of Marcellus being ended; the Cardinals to
the number of sixty four returned again to the Conclave, where as preliminaries
to the future Election, the Cardinals of Augsbourg, seconded by Cardinal Moron
instantly pressed, that to the other Articles which were accustomary and which
Popes swear to maintain after their Election, these two should be farther
added; namely, That within the term of two years next following, the Pope
should oblige himself by Oath to convene a Council to finish the matters of
Reformation already begun, and to determine the Disputes, and Controversies in
Religion, and endeavor by all means to induce Germany to accept the Doctrines
of the Council of Trent; Secondly, That in regard the College of Cardinals by
the licentious munificence of former Popes was become very numerous, That the
succeeding Pope, should not have Power to create above four in the space of two
years next following. The which being premised after some sharp, though not
long Contests, John Caraffa commonly called Cardinal Chieti, was by general
consent elected Pope, being then sixty nine years of age: though there was a
strong Party made against him, yet by the powerful interests of the Cardinals
Farnese, and Ferrara prevailed, who having formed a Party of forty four, the
dissenting number was obliged to condescend to a concurrence with the plurality
of Votes.

This Pope who took on himself the name of Paul the 4th. was the Son of Anthony
Caraffa Count of Montorio; he was first created Bishop of Chieti by Julius II.
He afterward received a Commission from Leo X. to gather the Peter Pence in
England, where he resided for the space of three years. He was afterward made
of the Privy Council to Ferdinand King of Spain, and therein confirmed by his
Heir and Successor Charles V. By Hadrian VI. He was recalled to Rome to join
with other Fathers, whose incumbence it was to consider in what manner the
lives and practices of the Clergy might be reformed, and amended; under Clement
the 7th. he not only refused the Archbishopric of Brundufium, but quitted
also his Bishopric of Chieti; and retiring to Mount Pincio from the noise, and
bustle of the World, and almost from humane Society, he there instituted a new
Order of Regulars: afterward going to Venice, he affected a Society and
Communication with learned, and religious Men, renowned for Wisdom and Sanctity
of life; with whom he first instituted the Order of Theatini: from the name of
his Bishopric called both Chieti, and Theatina. At length Paul III. in the
year 1536. calling him to Rome, made him reassume his Bishopric, creating him
Cardinal of Santa Maria trans Tiberim, and Archbishop of Naples: and then
under Julius III. He was made Bishop of Tusculum, Ostia, and Velitres: and
lastly, being elected Pope in remembrance of his late Friend, and chief
Benefactor, who had called him to all his promotions, he caused himself to be
named Paul IV.

In all the course of his former Life, being of a morose, and Saturnine temper,
he showed great severity, and exactness of Life; so that his Election struck a
great fear, and terror to all such who were ill inclined to a Reformation,
imagining that his humor would transport him to such severe proceedings, as
would be terrible and inconsistent with those methods, which gently lead Men to
conversion and reformation of Manners: a testimony of which he had given by
being the first Author and Contriver of the Inquisition, having advised, and
persuaded Paul III. to appoint, and authorize a certain number of Cardinals to
be Inquisitors of such, who had embraced the new Doctrines of Luther, and to
proceed to Capital Punishments in such manner as is provided in the Canon de
^aeretico comburendo, the which severity of Councils being by some interpreted
for zeal toward God, and by most to be a ferocity in his Nature, his Election
was entertained with fear and dread, by all those who were dependants on the
Court of Rome. However he so palliated, and disguised his humor at the
beginning, that he comported himself with an humble, and affable behavior
toward all, but especially toward Strangers, whom he treated, and caressed in
that friendly manner, that his Servants, and Dependants were glad to be so
happily mistaken: but this good Nature being forced, and constrained did soon
vanish, and then his fierce, and supercilious temper returning to its natural
course, all his actions were influenced with a spirit of Pride and haughty
severity. An instance of which, he gave to the Steward of his House, when he
demanded of him, in what manner he was pleased to be served; his Answer was
short, saying (as became a Prince.) His Coronation he ordered with more Pomp
and Ceremony, than was ever before practiced; and in all things he affected
Magnificence, and State, and was no less indulgent to his Nephews, than the
most tender, and fondest of the Popes.

Soon after his Coronation, he ordered the first Consistory to be public, that
he might with the greater State, and Pomp give Audience to the Ambassadors of
England, who in the time of Pope Julius had been dispatched thence from Queen
Mary, and Philip her Husband. The Ambassadors being introduced to his
presence, and prostrating themselves at his feet, did one after the other (for
so the Pope would have it) confess and acknowledge the faults, and errors of the
Kingdom of England, in having strayed, and deviated from the flock of Christ,
and the Sheepfold of the Church; but now repenting, and returning again, did
humbly beg Absolution and to be received into the bosom of the Church, though
by the obstinacy and perseverance in their Errors, they had rendered themselves
unworthy of such mercy, and indulgence. The Pope having for some time beheld
these Ambassadors at his feet, and contemplated their humble posture with some
satisfaction of spirit, raised them at length from the floor and embraced them
with the tenderness of a Father, testifying great satisfaction in the happy
conversion of this Kingdom: and because the Queen and King were the happy
Instruments of this blessed, and religious work; in reward of so much Piety, he
confirmed their right and title to Ireland; and by virtue of that Power, which
he had received from God to dispose of all Earthly Crowns, he conferred on them
that Kingdom, dignifying them amongst their other Titles with that of King and
Queen of Ireland. Which piece of vanity though ridiculous to others, was
extremely pleasing to the Pope, who fancied himself in that Throne of Fools
Paradise, to which the Devil had in his Pride exalted himself, when he tempted
our Savior with all the Kingdoms of the Earth. But then afterward in private
Conference with the Ambassadors, he blamed England for having but in part
showed their penitence, for that whilst they retained any thing of the goods of
the Church and did not make restitution to the utmost farthing, a Curse would
remain on the Kingdom, and the people remain in a perpetual snare, and danger
of Damnation. He farther told them, That the sooner, and the more readily they
paid the Peter Pence (for collection of which he had sent an Officer into
England) the more easily would the Gates of Heaven be opened to them; for how
could they expect that St. Peter should turn his Keys whilst they denied him
those Fees which were the dues of his Office. In fine, the Ambassadors having
behaved themselves with humility, (which was the only means to procure the
favor of this Pope) they departed from Rome, laden with Praises, Honors, and
Graces from his Holiness: and then attending to a full Reformation in England;
he purged the Universities of Oxford, and Cambridg of those Tenants, and
Lectures which had been there taught by Peter Martyr, and Bucer, and deprived
Cranmer of his Archbishopric of Canterbury.

Having thus obtained his pleasure, and Designs over England, he next
endeavored to gain an Ascendant over the Emperor and King of France, both of
which courted him to that Degree, that he expected to have them both at his
Service, and Devotion: but in regard it was impossible to entertain them both
in the same equality of respect, and dearness; both Parties strained to outvy
each other in Proposals of advantage, which might give them admission to his
favor: in pursuance of which, the Cardinal of Lorain, (who was well acquainted
with the humor of the Pope) publicly declared in a full Consistory, that
besides the many steps which the King of France had made in Obedience to the
Papal Chair, he did acknowledge that the Gallican Church had need of
Reformation; toward which he was ready to afford all the aid and assistance to
the Pope that he was able, and to act therein by such ways, and methods as his
Holiness should direct, whether it were by sending his Prelates to the Council
or by any other means, that should be esteemed more proper and expedient. The
which so took with the Pope, that France for that time gained a preeminence in
his favor.

And yet notwithstanding this Pride, and rudeness in his nature, he did several
things at the beginning to gratify and please the People of Rome, which he
performed by abating the Taxes and Imposts laid on Provisions, and in other
things acted with such obliging circumstances, that the People in
acknowledgment for such abundant favors, erected a Statue of Marble for him in
the Capitol. He regulated the Manners of the Jews, and retrenched that liberty,
and freedom they used; and for the better distinction of them, ordered them to
wear yellow Hats. He published several severe Decrees against such as denied
the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and that he died for the redemption of Mankind.
In short, besides many good Laws and Acts which he ordained against corrupt and
dissolute Manners, which were grievous to the Clergy, who were unaccustomed to
a Severity, He selected a hundred Citizens of the Gentry of Rome, which he
created Knights of the Faith to be a standing Lifeguard to the Popes. He
repealed several Decrees of Julius III. and imprisoned many of those who had
been his Creatures, and familiar Friends.

Amongst the Counselors, and Familiar Confidents which he entertained, there
was none who had at first had a greater share in his favor, than Osio, whom he
declared Datary, and chief Notary, or Register of Petitions, and created Bishop
of Riete: but he being of a rude, and morose temper did always clash against
the humor of the Pope, which was hard, and inflexible like his; which
therefore ill according together, Osio was by the instigation also of the
Pope's Relations, who were always busy at his ear, deprived of his favor, and
sent Prisoner to the Castle, where he remained for the space of four years.

In the next place, by a new Decree, he retrieved all those goods, and
Ecclesiastical Revenues which had been alienated from the Church since the time
of Julius II. to his days. He reformed also the abuses which were crept into
the Office of the Penitentiaries, and regulated the Habit, and Tables of the
Clergy, and refused to admit any into Benefices, but such as had been approved
for holiness of Life, and severity of Manners. Toward the three Conservators
of Rome, he behaved himself with great respect, enlarging their Power, and
Authority, adjoining thereunto the jurisdiction of Tivoli, which belonged to
the Cardinal of Ferrara; and to the People he enlarged their Privileges, and
confirmed all their former Immunities by a new Charter.

But all this indulgence, and kindness toward the Citizens was but in order to
some Design of a higher nature, which soon after discovered it self: for
whilst he was thus busied in matters of Government, and things laudable enough
in themselves, he suffered some reports of a Plot against his Life to take
impression in his mind; which being suggested by many probable circumstances,
he immediately seized on the Persons of as many as were suspected to be guilty
thereof, and committed them to Prison; and then joining with the French, and
Switzers, he commenced a War against Philip King of Spain, by which those
ancient Feuds and Animosities between those Kings, which had for some time been
extinguished, or as it were raked up in the Embers began again to revive, and
be enflamed. The original, and cause whereof was this.

Ever since the time that Rome had been sacked by the Spaniards, who had
plundered, and sequestered the Estate, and Rents of the Family of Caraffa; this
Pope Paul the 4th. conceived an implacable anger, and an inveterate hatred
against that whole Nation: the which also was increased by that ill treatment,
and injustice, which the Vice-King of Naples once used toward his own Person;
for he being created by Paul III. Arch bishop of Naples, was debarred from the
possession, and benefits thereof by the Vice-King, on no other pretense, than
that he was suspected to favor the French Party; the which so enraged his
impetuous spirit, that with all the arguments, which subtilty, and malice could
draw from the Topics of Religion, and public good to the Church, he
endeavored to persuade Paul III, to a War against Naples, promising him to
assist him with the whole Estate of his Family, and with all the interest he
had (which he pretended to be very great) in that Kingdom: but Paul III. being
too prudent to give ear to his persuasions, and Discourses, commended his
Piety, and zeal toward the Church, but refused to engage himself in that
hazardous War. So that the anger and fury of this Paul IV. being suppressed
until he became Pope, did then burst forth, and vent it self: so that then with
thoughts full of disdain against the Spaniards, and with imagination that the
Napolitans would gladly shake off their yoke, and be eased of the Spanish
Servitude, and that France would enter into the Alliance with him, he
positively resolved on a War, swallowing already into his thoughts the
enjoyment and addition of that Rich Kingdom to the Dominions of the Church.
This Design was promoted by a stricter Union with France, occasioned in this
manner: Henry King of France had taken from Charles Sforza Prior of Lombardy
two Galleys, the which coming afterward into the Port of Civita Vecchia,
Alexander the Brother of Charles, and Chief Clark of the Camera, or
Chamberlain, made seizure of them, and without any respect to that Protection
under which they were within the Pope's Harbor, he carried them away by force
to Gaeta: of which the French Ministers at Rome, complaining to the Pope, he
conceived not only anger and indignation against Alexander, but suspecting
that such an action could not be contrived without the privity of his Brother
the Cardinal, he loudly exclaimed against him, and clapped his Secretary Lotini
into Prison, who was lately returned with some secret Negotiations from the
Emperor Charles V. the which serving to increase and heighten the differences
between them, many Cabals, and Consults were formed amongst the Cardinals of
the Imperial Faction; at which the Pope being alarmed he reinforced his Guards,
and levied Soldiers, and to break the seditious Meetings clapped the Cardinal,
and Camilla Colonna, and the Abbot of Brisegna, who was a Spaniard, into
Prison: Mark Anthony Colonna, who upon these stories, was fled from Rome, was
cited to appear there, and give answer to the Accusations charged against him:
but afterward the Galleys being again restored to the French King, Cardinal
Sforza, and Camillo Colonna, upon Bail given were freed from Imprisonment; but
Alexander Sforza who was Chamberlain not appearing upon the Summons, was
deprived of his Office; and because Mark Anthony Colonna did not appear at the
time prefixed by the Summons, all his Estate within the Territories of the
Church was sequestered, and seized to the use of the Pope: with which Joan of
Aragon the Mother of Colonna being greatly affrighted, escaped secretly from
Rome about the beginning of the year 1556. contrary to the Command, and
Injunction of the Pope; with which he was so incensed, that he then resolved to
act, and put all those mischiefs into practice against the House of Colonna,
which he had before only meditated, and contrived in his thoughts: and in
pursuance thereof, he in the first place excommunicated Mark Anthony, and his
Father Ascanio Colonna, and having confiscated all their Estate within the
Dominions of the Church, he bestowed it on his Nephew John Count of Montorio,
whom he created Duke of Paliano; and not long after he declared Anthony Carafa
an other Nephew to be Marquis of Montebello, having lately dispossessed Count
Bagno of that Marquisate for having converted those Moneys which the King of
France sent to the Pope for carrying on the War in Italy to his own use. All
which served to incense the spirits of a great, and powerful Faction, and raise
those Wars, which ended in miserable desolation of Italy. But the Pope, who was
of Opinion, and often said, that a happy Peace was only to be procured by a
calamitous War, did in Order thereunto fortify Paliano with all provisions
requisite thereunto; for that being a place situate on the frontiers of Naples,
was of great importance in that conjuncture: And lest the Truce which was made
for five years between the Emperor and France should be an obstruction to this
War, he dispatched Charles Caraffa his Legate to Henry II. pretending, that his
Message was in order to a farther accommodation, and to convert the Truce into
an everlasting Peace: but the Negotiations of Caraffa being of an other nature,
he possessed Henry with great hopes and expectation of success by a War with
Naples; wherefore though at first he sent but two thousand Men for assistance
of the Pope, (seeming to reserve some little respect to the Truce so lately
concluded) yet afterward the Popes forces not being able to withstand the
Power of the Imperialists; a greater Army of twelve thousand Foot, and two
thousand Horse were sent to Naples under the conduct of Francis Duke of Guise.
With these Auxiliary aids the spirit of the Pope being highly swelled, and
become implacable, he imprisoned Juliano Sesarini Camillo Colonna, with his
Bother the Archbishop of Taranto, and diverse others, whom he suspected to be
in any manner affected, and inclinable to the Imperial Faction. Ferdinand of
Toledo Duke of Alva then Vice-King of Naples, being alarmed by these
proceedings resolved not to attend the assaults of the Enemy; but rather, that
he might be, beforehand with them, made Incursions into the State of the
Church, and without much resistance took Pontecorvo Frosolone, Anagna, Marino,
Valmontone, Palestrina, Tivoli, Ostia, Gave, Genazzano, Nettuno, Albano,
Vicovaro, Monte Fortino; and in short, made himself Master of all the Campania
of Rome: the Pope on the other side with the aid, and assistance of the French,
and Switzers, recovered several of those places again; but the War being
continued for the space of a whole year with great fury, and resolution on both
sides, that Country became most miserably harassed, and laid desolate by fire,
and sword. By the vast expenses of this War the Pope's Treasury being much
exhausted, many exorbitant ways were contrived to replenish it again; as
namely, the Tithes upon all Benefices were doubled, the Gabelles, and Customs
were raised to an intolerable degree; half a years Revenue was exacted from all
Offices: and the Debts which particular Persons owed to their Creditors, were
required to be paid into the Treasury; upon which the Debtors being discharged,
Debentures were given from the Pope to the Creditors, and the same charged as a
Debt upon the Church. He farther seized on all the Horses in Rome to serve in
the War, and compelled all the Friars of what order soever to labor on the
Works, and carry Earth to the Fortifications: many of the Churches he converted
into Granaries and Storehouses, wherein to lay Provisions; besides many other
Exactions, and agrievances, which he imposed on the People, who were by this
time possessed with a detestable hatred against his Person, and his Actions.
Howsoever, neither the Cries, nor Exclamations of his Subjects, nor the
miseries of his Country were able to incline the fierce and resolute Spirit of
the Pope to any terms of Peace, whilst he found himself seconded by the French,
and Switzers: Howsoever in the Month of August following, the French having
received a Defeat at the Battle of St. Quintin, in which a great part of the
Nobility of France were taken Prisoners; and thereby also the expectation of
the Pope being in some measure defeated; his haughty Spirit began to abate and
hearken to some terms, and proposals of Accommodation: for then the sad
Spectacle of Italy, laid wast with fire and sword appeared before him, and the
dreadful apprehension of Treason against his Person, which was plotted to
betray Rome into the hands of Mark Anthony Colonna, and Ascanio della Corona,
who at the beginning of the War revolted to the Spanish Party, did much
affright him: so that as I say, the Pope's mind being become more flexible, a
Peace was concluded on the thirteenth of September 1557. 1557.
by the mediation of the Venetians, the Duke of Florence, and Cardinal Sforza,
and signed by the Cardinal Caraffa in behalf of the Pope, and by the Duke of
Alva in the name of Philip King of Spain. Which being concluded the Duke of
Alva coming to Rome, with Christian humility kissed the feet of the Pope, and
received absolution; and being treated with high honor obtained the freedom of
all those who had been imprisoned on account of the late War.

Matters being by these means reduced to some tolerable quiet, the Pope
dispatched his Legates both to Spain, and France to labor a cementing of that
Peace, which he himself of late had been an Instrument to break; recommending
more particularly in their Instructions the confirmation of the Dukedom of
Paliano on his Nephew. So that now being wearied with War, the fatigues, and
expense, and unquietudes of which he had never before been acquainted with, the
Pope betook himself to his more agreeable trade of regulating the Manners of
Men, and the corruptions and abuses crept into the Church: but in regard the
particulars hereof were various, and burthensom, he committed the greatest part
of that trouble to the Conduct of Cardinal Caraffa: Attending himself with
sedulity and attention to the Court of Inquisition, as the sole Tribunal then
capable to suppress Heresies, and the present distempers of the Age; and
therefore to the cognizance of that Court he reduced several Crimes triable at
other Bars of Judicature; so that the Prisons of the Inquisition were filled
with Malefactors: and in this way of Judicial proceedings he was the more
passionate, because he had been the first that persuaded Paul III. to erect
that Court, and had contrived the Methods, and Rules for the proceedings
thereof: and therefore coming now himself to the Popedom, he put all those
Orders into practice, which he had formerly meditated, constituting Cardinal
Alessandrino Inquisitor General, together with sixteen Cardinals, who were made
Judges of the Court; whose first work was to publish an Index Expurgatorius of
all Books in the least manner suspected, or attainted of Heresy, forbidding
all Persons under pain of Excommunication to read them, or have them in their
possession. He recalled Cardinal Poole from his Office of Legate in England, on
account (as some believe) of an old Pique that had been between them, and
having accused Cardinal Morone of Heresy, by reason as some believe of his
friendship to Poole, he imprisoned him in the Castle together with the Bishop
of Cava, and had (as was certainly believed) deprived them of all their
Revenue, and Dignities, had not his malice against them been interrupted by his
Death, acting in every thing with a bitterness agreeable to the virulency of
his nature.

About this time the Emperor Charles V. being wearied with the turmoils, and
troubles of this World renounced his Imperial Crown to his Brother Ferdinand of
Austria, who was already elected King of the Romans, and his Kingdom of Spain
and other Dominions to his Son Philip II. But this Abdication the Pope would
not understand, not admitting on the score of old grudges which he owed to
Charles, that according to ancient Canons an Emperor could make such a
renunciation without consulting first, and taking the advice, and consent of
the Pope; and for that reason, he would never acknowledge Ferdinand for
Emperor, nor under that Notion, and Character receive Ambassadors from him.

In this manner with a froward severity acting all his Affairs, he would admit
of no excuses that any Man made for a failure in his Duty; and particularly
having commanded all Monks, Friars, Abbots, and Priors to return to their
Monasteries, he would not admit an Excuse from any Non-Residentiary, unless he
had obtained a License on occasion of some public Service for the Church: and
for discovery of such Trespassers he employed Officers, or Visitors as severe,
as himself, who upon strict enquiry having found any Non-Residentaries, they
immediately proceeded against them as Disobedient, and Delinquents, committing
some of them to Chains, and others to the Galleys.

This Severity howsoever was much applauded, when after an unknown and
unpractised manner of Justice, he spared not the Crimes of his Nephews, into
whose hands he had committed the most important Government of the
Ecclesiastical State: for they having misbehaved themselves; the Pope in a
public Consistory discharged Cardinal Caraffa of his Government, and Legantine
Power in Bologna: the Duke of Palvano he dismissed from being General of the
Ecclesiastical Army and Admiral of the Galleys belonging to the Church, and the
Marquis of Montebello from being Captain of his Guards: which Sentence against
them the Pope thundering with impetuous Rage, certain Cardinals would have
offered something to mitigate his fury, and extenuate the faults of his
Nephews; but those Lenitives adding more flame to his Fury, he instantly
charged the Cardinal Caraffa without farther delay to depart from Rome, and
remain confined to the City Indivina, and the other two unto their respective
Castles: in places of these, he constituted other grave Prelates, whom he
esteemed able, and worthy to bear that share of Government, which by reason of
the infirmity of his old age he was incapable to support.

And having thus disposed the Affairs of his Temporal Government, he returned
his thoughts to perfect that Reformation, which he had then projected when he
first came to the Papal Chair, believing that the accomplishment thereof would
be the greatest Ornament of the Apostolical Sea, and give it a reputation over
all the World. In pursuance whereof, he erected a Congregation composed of
twenty four Cardinals and forty five Prelates, and other Persons of the most
wise, and learned of all the Court, to the number of one hundred and fifty.
These he divided into three Classes or Chambers; to each of which he allotted
eight Cardinals, and fifteen Bishops, and as many others, as made up the number
of fifty; the chief incumbence and business of whom was to examine, and enquire
into the several degrees, and natures of Simony; the which being stated, and
concluded by this Congregation, Coppies thereof were taken, and published and
sent to all Universities, and Schools of learned Men, requiring them to take
notice of the particular Cases stated, and concluded by the Holy Sea, which was
the Chief Doctor, and Cathedratical Casuist in all Points of Religion, and
Conscience. And though he himself, as he affirmed, had no need of such
Regulations being well acquainted with the mind of Christ, and versed in the
Duty of that Office to which he was called; yet that he might in all his
endeavors for Reformation, forestall the Objection which might be made him of,
Physician, cure thy self; he resolved to begin at home, and reform the Crimes
of Simony, which were objected as the crying sins of the Court of Rome, and
that when he had gone so far, he would then remonstrate unto other Princes the
Simony of their own Courts, which was more rife, and more intolerable in them
than was ever allowed, or practiced at Rome.

But when the particular Cases of Simony came distinctly to be handled;
instancing in what manner Money might be taken and in what not; there arose
such diversities of Opinions; that at length the conclusions came to be laid
before the Pope, as the ultimate Moderator of all Differences: the which he
having with some perplexity considered, he finally resolved, That it was not
lawful to receive any Price, Money, Alms, or any reward whatsoever for
conferring any spiritual Graces, or Benefices Ecclesiastical: and that as to
the Dispensations in cases of Matrimony, though it had been the custom to
receive Money for them, he resolved, that the same should never be again
brought into practice by himself. Howsoever, so many scruples and Objections
arose in many particular matters, that nothing could ever be drawn to general
Heads; and so being environed by difficulties which procured delays, nothing
came to a full resolution: the which a certain Cardinal having observed,
proposed to have these Questions reserved for a General Council: at which the
Pope being moved with extreme Choler, replied, That he had no need of any
Council being the supreme Head and above it; but the Cardinal being desirous to
mollify, and appease his anger with some qualifications of his Speech, said,
that though it was true that a Council was not necessary for giving force, and
Authority to the Pope's Determinations; yet it might be convenient to have a
Council, for settlement of that Uniformity of Worship which was necessary in
all Christian Churches: to which the Pope assenting, farther added, That in
case he should at any time call a Council, that the same should be held at Rome
and not at Trent, which was in the midst, and almost the Nest of the Lutherans.
Moreover, in case he should at any time call a Council, it should be composed
of none, but Catholics; for that they might with as much reason admit a Turk
to those Debates, and Consults of Religion, as a Lutheran or any other
Heretic: and that it was unreasonable, and preposterous to send sixty able and
learned Bishops and forty Doctors to a Town within the Mountains, (as had been
done twice already) on supposition that they were better able to govern the
World than the Vicar of Jesus Christ, joined to the wisdom of his College of
Cardinals, who were selected out of the most wise, religious, and excellent
personages of the Chistian Church.

During his time this Pope at four several Ordinations created nineteen
Cardinals; and changed the Festival of St. Peter which by ancient Canons was
celebrated on the 18th. of January to the end of June, supposing that season of
the year most convenient for that Solemnity.

It is certain that this Pope intended well, and designed with the strictest
severity the reformation of Manners; but his way of acting therein was so
fierce, and with those disobliging circumstances, having a motion with his Head
which spoke anger, and spite; that he could perform nothing though never so
holy, and laudable, but what was ill censured by evil Tongues, and indeed he
was generally hated, and that even by good Men. And though all the good actions
which this Pope performed, were done with so ill a mien, as made them appear
bad; yet he had the good Conduct, and fortune to prove a successful Instrument
in making that memorable Peace between Philip King of Spain, and Henry King of
France; for which happiness, and Rejoicing, Tilts and Tornaments being
appointed at the French Court, King Henry himself acting a part in it, was
unfortunately slain, and his Son Francis II. being then a Youth, succeeded in
his Throne.

About which time the Pope being fallen into a Dropsy with which finding
himself to decay, and his end approach; he summoned all the Cardinals to his
Chamber, desiring them to cast their thoughts upon some Person, excellently
qualified both for holiness of Life, and Wisdom, whom they might judge worthy to
succeed him in the Apostolical Chair, but in an especial manner he recommended
to them the continuance of the Inquisition, to which he gave the Epithet of
most Holy, declaring to have by good experience proved, that the same had been
the support of his Authority, and would be the chief Basis, and Pillar of the
Papal Dignity.

But so soon as it was noised abroad, that the Pope drew toward his end: the
People arose in a tumult, and without Counsel or Rule running through the City
cursed the name and actions of Paul IV. damning all the Family and Party of
Caraffa; and having opened all the doors of the common Prisons, they ran to the
House of the Inquisition, of which having opened the Gates, and released the
Prisoners, they set fire to the Building, which consumed the Prison, and the
place of Judicature together with all the Processes, Papers, and Records of
that Court; and had proceeded to have offered the like to the Minerva, where
several of the Judges of the Inquisition were lodged, but that the Rhetoric,
and persuasions of some who had power with the Rabble diverted their fury.

In fine, this Pope died the 18th. of August 1559. 1559.
being aged eighty three years, one month, and twenty two days, and having
governed four years, two months, and twenty seven days, and his Body was
carried with little Pomp, and buried in a Sepulcre of Brick, in the Church of
St. Peter, after which the Sea was vacant four months, and seven days, but no
sooner was the breath out of his Body, than the furious, and mad Rabble ran to
the Capitol, where he had a Statue of Marble erected by an excellent Artist,
and placed amongst the Conservators of Rome, the Head and right Hand of which
they having taken off, drew them for three days together through all the filth,
and ordure of the City, and afterward wearied with the sport, they threw them
into the Tyber: and, finally by public Decree of the People of Rome, it was
commanded, that in what place soever of the City the Arms of Caraffa were found
either painted, or engraven, they should be defaced, or broken; the which was
executed with so much readiness, that in one days time, there were no signals,
or memorials of the Caraffian Family remaining in the whole City. By all which
it appears, that this Paul IV. had been happier, and more reverenced had he
died with the Title only of Cardinal Caraffa, and with the Opinion of being
worthy to govern, though he had never reigned.

Dignus fuisset Imperii si non regnasset. PIUS IV.
PAVL the Fourth being dead, and his Funerals performed, the Cardinals after
the Accustomed manner entered the Conclave to the number of forty four for
Election of a new Pope; the Contests on which were so many, and so obstinately
maintained by the interest of powerful Cardinals, whose equal Authority, and
grandeur of Families were in such an even balance, that after a thousand
shufflings, and alterations of Suffrages which happened in the space of four
months and seven days; all the Votes came at length on the 24th. of December
1559. being the Eve of the Feast of Christmas to terminate in the choice of
John Angelo de Medicis Cardinal of Santa Prisca: On the Feast of Epiphany, or
Twelfth-day 1560, he was Crowned to the common joy, and satisfaction of the
whole City of Rome, which conceived great expectations of good Government, from
the testimonies of Piety, and Virtue which he had given by many instances of
his past Life, in conformity whereunto he took on himself the name of Pius IV.

This Pope was of the Illustrious Family of the Medicis, born at Milan, to
which place his Father amidst the turbulencies, and intestine Discords of
Florence was constrained to sly for refuge: he was in his youth educated and
trained up in all the Methods of good Literature, in which having run through
all the Studies and Exercises of Philosophy and Physic, and then studying the
Civil Law he took his degree of Doctor, applying himself afterward to the
practice of the Law. In the time of Clement VII. he was made one of the
Protonotaries which they call Partecipanti: under Paul III. He exercised many
considerable Charges, and Offices, amongst which he was made Commissary of the
Army of the Church, then Archbishop of Ragusa, and lastly, before his
preferment to the Popedom, he was by Paul IV. made Priest and Cardinal of Santa
Prisca.

Du Chesne, and others who write of the election of this Pope, report, that the
Debates thereupon having been long, and intricate, the Choice came at length to
be decided by the Holy Ghost, which in the form of a Dove, entering the Chapel
of Sixtus, after many flights round, came at length to pierch on the Cell, or
Seat of Cardinal Santa Prisca, which being observed was agreed to be the Holy
Omen, by which the Holy Ghost pointed out the Person to be Elected, concluding
all Controversies by a Miracle: but other more judicious Authors are silent in
such a foppery, and particularly Onufrius Panvinius, who writing the life of
this Pope, mentions nothing of this nature, though he prosesses to have known
him, and to have frequented his Table when he was Cardinal, which was always
encompassed with Men of Learning, and parts, who conversing one with another
with much ingenuity and Candor, seemed to form a College of wise, and virtuous
Persons: and he farther declares, that having been present at the solemnities
of his Election, and Inauguration, he had seen, and observed all the passages
of it. He moreover pretends to have had a personal acquaintance with him, and
that he was in his own nature generous and compassionate, having by many, and
great Charities he had performed, obtained the Title of Father of the Poor; and
thus having acquired a general esteem amongst the Cardinals of a meek, gentle,
and pious temper, he found a more easy access to the Papal Chair, which had
lately been possessed by gall, and bitterness, and from whence nothing but
Thunder, and Lightning and terrors had proceeded.

But this Pope being desirous to rectify this harsh humor of the Chair, gave
himself the name of Pius IV. And for instances thereof; his first care, and
incumbence was to pass an Act or Decree of General Pardon to all such who
during the vacancy of the Sea had committed any enormous Crimes, and in common
to all the people who had with insolent despite broken the Statue, and defaced
the Arms of Paul IV. Then his next business was to enquire into, and redress
the Oppressions, and agrievances imposed by his Predecessor, referring the
examination of those matters to a Committee of wise and sober Men, who
rectifying that which was amiss, all things might at length return to their due
and accustomed Channel: upon revision of which cases, many Decrees passed by
Paul IV. in point of Simony were repealed, or at least moderated: many Friars
who had with too much severity been expelled their Monasteries, were restored:
the punishments, and cruelties of the Inquisition were regulated with more
moderation; and in fine, many of those who under color of Heresy, though in
reality out of malice, or other design had been committed to that Prison; were
by Order of the new Inquisitors released and set at liberty; amongst which
Cardinal Morone, was one.

Now as Mercy is always to be accompanied with Justice: it was resolved, that
those intolerable miseries, and devastations which all Italy almost had
sustained in time of Paul IV. should be considered, and the Family of Caraffa
who had been the Instruments, and wicked Incendiaries in all those Calamities
should be questioned, and tried for the same: in order whereunto on the 7th. of
January, being the day after the Incoronation, the Cardinals Charles, and
Alfonso coming from the Consistory were seized, as was also the Count of
Montorio, then called Duke of Paliano, who was the Brother of Charles the
Cardinal, together with Count Alife his Wife's Brother, and Leonard de Cardini
one of the Kindred; for these having been evil Counselors, and worse
Instruments of the fury and cruelty of the late Pope, were all committed
Prisoners to the Castle, as were also several other Servants, and Ministers of
the late mischief. The Process against them for these Crimes was encharged to
certain Cardinals in Commission with the Bishop of Savona, and Governor of
Rome, the Indictments being preferred against these Persons, and the
Depositions severally made and taken, which work took up the space of nine
months, in which time the proofs, and testimonies being given, and every thing
prepared for a Trial, the whole Process was read before the Pope and Cardinals
in public Consistory; where the Accusations being proved, and made clear by
several credible Witnesses, Cardinal Charles Carafa was by the Pope himself
convicted of Felony, and the Count of Montorio, with Count Alife, and Leonard
de Cardine found guilty by the Governor of Rome of Murder, and other enormous
Crimes, and all delivered into the hands of the Civil Judges, that Sentence of
death might be passed upon them; in execution of which the Cardinal, and the
two Counts were strangled, and de Cardine beheaded. Onufrius Panvinius tells
us, that he having had a familiar conversation with this Pope had often heard
him lament the sadness of this Tragedy, which he was constrained to execute in
respect to the Duty he owed to Justice; and for example, and caution to the
Nephews, and Relations of succeeding Popes, who when they soar aloft on the
wings of good Fortune may by the fate of others be forewarned, how they commit
the like excesses, for which they may be questioned, when times should alter.

Howsoever this Pope himself, according to the custom of his Predecessors
admitted his Sisters Sons to Rome, raising them to all those Benefits, and
Dignities he was able to bestow upon them; amongst which he had the fortune to
have Charles Borromeo to be his Relation, a Person of that modest, wise, and
industrious temper, as might deserve that honor, and preferments which he
designed for him; for being skilful and well experienced in the Civil Law, and
in the management of worldly Affairs, he committed the most important charge of
all matters relating to Government to his fidelity, and conduct; of which
Borromeo so well acquitted himself, that being created Cardinal, he gained the
reputation of a wise Minister during the time of this Pius, and afterward by
the holiness of his life in succeeding times was canonized for a Saint.

To this Borromeo, and to Cardinal Morone he communicated all his thoughts and
Counsels, taking their Opinion in the highest emergencies and exigencies of
State; amongst which nothing appeared more difficult, and worthy of
disquisition, than two things, namely the recognizing, or acknowledging
Ferdinand for Emperor; and reviving again the Council of Trent. The first as we
have said, was denied by Paul IV. on allegation, that the Constitution of an
Emperor did essentially require the Pope's authoritative approbation; but in
truth the obstruction was in the Electors, who challenged a right of electing
the Emperor. But now it was resolved to wave all that, and to grant the
Emperor's desires, before they were demanded, that so the frankness of this
Pope's nature might be distinguished from the severity of his Predecessors. In
pursuance whereunto Letters were wrote to the Emperor adorned with all his
Imperial Titles, wherein the Pope approved the Surrender which Charles had made
of the Empire, and the succession of Ferdinand thereunto; the news hereof was
received with that satisfaction by the Emperor, then at Vienna, that he
immediately dispatched his Ambassador, the Count d' Arco, with Letters to the
Pope, congratulating his exaltation to that supreme Dignity, and rendering him
thanks for having out of his wisdom, and paternal Justice freely determined
that point in his favor, which Paul IV. against all sense, and reason had
denied him. But yet things did not so smoothly pass, but that the Ambassador
being arrived at Rome, encountered some difficulty before admission to his
Audience; for he having in his Instructions, Orders only to acknowledge
Reverence to the Pope in behalf of his Master, the expression seemed to sound
low, and to intimate, as if the Emperor intended to infer an Equality with the
Pope; and therefore to clear that Scruple, it was required, that the word
Reverence, should be changed into Obedience. The Ambassador having no such
warrant in his Instructions absolutely refused to accept his Audience upon
those terms, alleging that Imperial Ministers had never used that Style
toward any of his Predecessors; in which resolution also he was farther
confirmed by the advice of the Spanish Ambassador: Howsoever the Cardinals
Morone, and Madrucio persuading him to the contrary, their Opinions prevailed,
because the Emperor had in all points of difficulty, directed him to be
governed by their Sentiments.

This difficulty being overcome; It was resolved, That the Pope should with the
same free spirit declare his intentions speedily to assemble a General Council
at Trent, or rather a continuation of the same after diverse Prorogations; that
so he might forestall the desires of the Christian Princes, whom he understood
were ready with their Addresses to that purpose. But in regard the turbulent
commotions about Religion were heightened with that fermentation in all parts
of Christendom as would not admit of those slow Methods of cure which were to
proceed from the Debates and Resolves of a General Council: it was in the first
place desired by the Duke of Savoy, that Authority might be given him by the
Pope for a Conference touching certain points of Religion to be held within his
Dominions, for better instruction of the People, who were ready to fall off,
and revolt from the Church of Rome: and indeed this expedient seemed most
urgent at this time, in which many, who having made a total defection from the
Church, and finding themselves persecuted in Poland, Germany, Provence, Puglia
and other parts, were fled into the Valleys of Mont-cenis, Luserne, St. Martin,
and the places adjoining, where they maintained themselves in separate
Congregations under certain Ministers, until such time as the Doctrine of
Zuinglius, should be planted, and settled in the City of Geneva. And whereas the
Duke being resolved to reduce his Country to the profession of the Catholic
Religion, had by the Authority of the Inquisition established, condemned some
to the Galleys, and others to the Fire: yet finding that these severities
operated little upon minds already prepossessed with an Opinion of Religion,
and Conscience, he was desirous to make trial of the more gentle, and soft
means of Instructions, lest his People becoming desperate under their hardship
and torments should be persuaded to believe it lawful to take up Arms in
defense of their Persons, and their Religion.

The Pope ill relished this Proposal, declaring that he would never consent to
have his Authority put to compromise, or his Power compounded for: that he was
well acquainted with what obstinacy the Heretics maintained their Doctrines,
which were never to be confuted but by the Sword; the which he esteemed to be
the most effectual way of Instruction; and having persuaded the Duke to that
remedy; a War was begun in the Valleys which continued for a long time.

Nor were the disturbances in France less grievous than in Savoy: where many
were put to death for no other cause than for their zeal to the true reformed
Religion, and the salvation of their own Souls: though it is true, that many,
who were ambitious, and desirous of Novelty did under this guise, and cloak of
Religion, and with pretense of rescuing the King, and the Dignity of the
Sovereign Magistrate from the usurpations, and tyranny of the Duke of Guise,
and his Party, take up Arms, and enter into Rebellion against their King; but
being afterward beaten and many killed, others were afterward tried, and for
their Offenses justly condemned to die: and to all others, who being misguided
by Religion should lay down their Arms in the space of twenty four hours,
Proclamation was made, that they should be received to mercy by a full and
plenary Pardon from his Majesty.

But now the humors of the People being moved, and hopes conceived of
obtaining liberty of Conscience: great tumults were raised in Provence,
Languedoc, Poitou, and other places; so that how to suppress these tumults and
quiet the minds of the people, which were feavered with the heats of Religion,
was the great matter debated in the Councils of France: and whereas it was
objected by the Cardinal Armagnac, that no Ecclesiastical remedy could be
applied without the assent, and concurrence of the Pope; this scruple was soon
exploded by the contrary Opinion of the most of the Council: who alleged, that
God had given to every Nation a full Power, and Authority within it self to
provide remedies necessary, and agreeable to the present government of their
State, without having recourse to foreign and far distant Powers: for as it were
unreasonable in case of fire, and terrible incendiations within the City of
Paris, to expect till waters were brought from the Tybur to extinguish the
flames: and in the mean time neglect the use of the more near and convenient
streams of the Seine, and Mearne: so also would it be in this great
conflagration of civil-War to neglect remedies at home, until we can fetch them
from remote, and distant Countries. In short therefore it was agreed that a
National Council should be assembled, composed of all the Prelates of the
Kingdom, whose business it should be to consult, and find out means to give a
stop to the growing evils, and to the course of those infections which were
ready to poison, and overwhelm the whole Kingdom.

Howsoever, lest this Edict for summoning a National Council should be ill
taken by the Pope, and interpreted for a point of disrespect to the Apostolical
Sea, without his consent thereunto, or at least an intimation given thereof: it
was ordered that the Ambassador residing at Rome, should by word of mouth
represent the many dangers, and growing evils within the Kingdom of France,
which could be cured by no other remedy than a National Assembly, and that the
dangers thereof were so pressing, as not to admit the slow Methods of foreign
Assistance.

These matters being exactly in this manner represented to the Pope, were very
ill resented by him, judging that such an Assembly of Prelates could not be
convened without a breach of the Ecclesiastical Canons, nor without prejudice
to the Papal Authority: which to make more clearly appear he resolved to
dispatch the Bishop of Viterbo into France, to make known unto his Majesty;
That such an Assembly was never admitted by former Popes in any Country or
Kingdom whatsoever; they being well assured, that such a meeting would serve to
no other end, than to administer unto greater division, and confusion, and
produce a Schism in the Church Catholic: and, That it would serve farther to
exalt the pride of the Prelates, inspiring them with an Opinion of some
superior Authority inherent in them, above that of the Pope, or of the King;
but if he would apply a true, and an effectual remedy, none could be so
successful as a General Council, which he had resolved shortly to assemble; and
that in the mean time nothing could be so available, as that the Bishops be
commanded to repair to their respective Dioceses, and the Curats to their
Parishes, and there to watch over their Flocks, and hinder Thieves, and Wolves
from breaking within the Fold: and finally, desired that their Spiritual
Authority might be reinforced by the Power of the Civil Magistrate, and the
Arms of Regal force.

The Bishop of Viterbo being with these Instructions dispeeded into France; he
was farther commanded in his Journey thither to negotiate matters in the same
form at the Court of Savoy; and to incite the Duke to make War upon Geneva,
which they called the Nest of Heresy, and the root from whence sprang all the
false Doctrines of the new Religion: the Bishop accordingly did not fail on his
part to represent all matters to the Duke agreeable to his Instructions, and
found in him a ready disposition to embrace all the Proposals made him by the
Pope, especially the Enterprise against Geneva, provided, that with the consent
both of Spain, and France he might possess, and enjoy that City: This Demand
was easily admitted on the side of Spain; but they well knew, that it would
never be granted by France, which had long aspired to that Dominion; to which
the Spaniards would accord, being more willing to see that place the Capital
Throne of the new Religion, than a Seat of the French Power; for that being
near to the Dukedom of Burgundy might prove an ill Neighbor to that part of
the Spanish Dominions. Howsoever, that the King of Spain might follow the
Pope's inclinations in concurrence with the French as far as prudence, and
caution directed, he dispatched Don Antonio de Toledo his Ambassador into
France to offer unto that King his utmost assistance, and to join his Arms unto
his for the total ruin, and extirpation of Heresy.

But the Court of France would yield no ear to either of these Propositions;
they would gladly indeed have had the possession of Geneva, but the Enterprise
seemed difficult whilst the Civil Wars continued, and whilst Geneva remained
in League with the Swisses, who had promised to afford their utmost succor,
and aid unto that place: and as to the National Synod they persisted in their
resolution, promising the Pope that nothing should be attempted therein
derogatory to his Power, and the Authority of the Church. But this assurance
did little satisfy the jealousy of the Pope, who suspected the very Prelates to
be tainted with Heresy, and to have an inclination to set up a Gallican
Church, as they called it, separate, and independent of the Roman Sea.

The fear and jealousy hereof constrained the Pope positively to resolve on a
General Council, and to hasten the convocation thereof with all speed possible,
supposing that the convention of a General Council would break the former
Measures, and invalidate the Authority of all National Synods: This being
agreed, the next thing proposed, was the place; which the Pope would have had
to be his own Town of Bologna, but that he knew, it would be generally disliked
by the Prelates; nor would the Spaniards consent to have it held at Milan, for
though they were zealous Catholics, yet in matters of worldly interest they
distrusted the Pope, as much as other Princes: In fine, Trent was agreed to be
the most commodious, and least subject to exceptions of any: howsoever the
French were of another Opinion, as was also the Emperor who proposed Worms,
Triers, Constance, or Hagunaw, as more convenient; for that the Protestants did
so abhor the name of Trent, that they would take a prejudice to any thing
formed there; nor would they endure to have the Council styled a Continuation
of a former, but one new, and established on its own foundation: nor was this
the only scruple of the Emperor; for he declared, that he could not answer for
the Empire, unless it were first prepared, and disposed by a General Diet, nor
would the Clergy of his hereditary Countries be induced to be present at the
Council, unless the Cup in the Sacrament were first granted to the Laiety, and
License for the Priests to marry; but all these matters being diametrically
opposite to the Papal interest, the Pope declared his resolution was, rather to
give his life, than his assent thereunto.

In the mean time the numbers of those of the Reformed Religion increased
greatly in France; so that it was resolved, in case a General Council were not
speedily assembled, that a National Synod should meet at Meaux on the 13th. of
January 1561. for the tumults, and combustions about Religion were so pressing
that they required a speedy, and an effectual cure: the fear of which so
touched the Pope, as did also the Declaration of the Emperor; that taking no
notice of the exceptions of either, he resolved to surmount the difficulties,
and therewith signed the Bull for calling a Council, to commence on Easter day
1561. giving this Title thereunto, Indictio Concilii Tridentini, as if it had
been to be a New, and not the continuation of a former Council: howsoever in
the body of the Bull the word Continuation being mentioned, it gave great
scandal and offense to all, though the Pope's Legates endeavored to smooth it
over, by saying, that the Continuation could be no impediment to any revision
of what had formerly passed, nor hinder the Council from repealing any Act
which had been Decreed, and ordained in the times of Paul, and Julius III.

And now Francis II. King of France being dead, and his Brother Charles IX. a
Youth of ten years of age succeeding, gave great expectations, of a happy
change to the Protestants, for that the King of Navarre having declared himself
of the Reformed Religion, to whom of right as first Prince of the Blood, the
Government belonged, during the minority of the King, and that he was ruled
much by the Counsels of the Admiral de Coligny, who was the grand Protector of
the Reformed, gave them hopes, that the severity of proceedings against them
would be abated, and liberty of Conscience granted to the whole Kingdom: the
which though it did not take effect fully to their desires, yet at an Assembly
of the Estates at Orleance, it was ordained, That an Arrest of judgment should
be given, and all penal Processes stopped which were made against any for
account of Religion: and at the same time Orders were given to the Prelates to
prepare themselves for their Journey to Trent.

At this time the Protestant Princes were assembled at Naumbourg, with
intention to guard themselves from the Plots which would be contrived against
them in the Council of Trent; and to take off the reproach of Divisions, and
disagreement in the points of Faith amongst themselves. But such was the
variety then of Opinions that it was difficult to concur in one Symbol of
Faith; for the Confession of Augsburg had lately been printed in several
Editions, and every one with some difference from an other. And as to a General
Council they petitioned the Emperor, that such an one might be convened as was
free, and where the Pope might not preside, and overawe the Votes of the
Protestants; the which request they made rather in excuse for their not going
to Trent, than out of any prospect of a concession to their grant.

In the mean time the Pope having sent two Nuntios to the Emperor, he advised
them to go to Naumbourg, accompanied with two of his Ambassadors, and receive
the sense of the Assembly which was there convened: The Protestants received
the Ambassadors with great respect, and heard the Nuntios with equal
civilities; but still continuing firm to their Principles, declared that they
could not acknowledge the Pope's jurisdiction, and therefore could not esteem
themselves obliged to make known unto the Pope the Opinion they had of a
Council, having already signified their thoughts thereof unto the Emperor: with
the like coldness they were received at Norimberg, Frankfort, Ausbourg, and
other Protestant Towns. Elizabeth Queen of England at the same time refused to
admit the Abbot Martininguez sent by the Pope, within her Dominions: And the
King of Denmark in like manner denied entrance to the Nuncios within his State,
saying, That neither his Father nor he having ever had to do with the Pope, he
knew no business his Nuntios could have with him. Thus did these Nuntios meet
Oppositions in all parts, nor did they find any encouraging compliance in the
Emperor himself, who insisted on the Indiction of a new Council, which was not
founded on the Continuation, or basis of a former. France likewise made many
exceptions to the Bull of Indiction, being for a New and not for a Continuation
of the Old Council; Nor was this all; many other things concurring in that
Kingdom to the diminution of the Pope's Authority: 1561.
for not only were the penal Laws against the Protestants taken away, but also
at a Convention of the Estates at Orleance, the Pope's Annates or yearly
Revenue was taken off and all Moneys forbidden to be carried to Rome; the
agreement between Leo X. and Francis the First was made void; and all Friars,
and other Religious were made subject to the Bishop of their Diocese. So that
France seemed in a manner to be lost: only Spain being a people not given much
to innovation, adhered to the Pope's Authority, and to a Continuation of the
Old Council.

The Feast of Easter approaching which was the time appointed for the opening
the Council; the Pope deputed the Cardinals of Mantoua, Warmia, Seripanda, and
Simonette to be his Legates, and Presidents of the Council, and hastened all the
Bishops of Italy to repair unto Trent, that so they might counterballance the
number of the French, and Spanish Bishops, who came, as was believed, with no
other intention, than to gain one Point, which was, that a General Council in
its Determinations, was superior and above the Authority of the Pope; a
Position which the Bishops of Italy, who had the honor of being the Head of
all the Clergy, ought on no terms whatsoever to admit.

But as yet there was a very thin appearance of Bishops at Trent; for the eyes
of all were fixed on the issue, which the Convention of the Estates at Orleans,
and the Conference at Poissy would produce, which in every Act struck at the
Pope's Authority, and exposed unto the people the corruptions and abuses of the
Roman Sea. In fine, after all, the Queen Regent wrote a Letter to the Pope,
wherein she represented to him the great numbers of Protestants in France, and
the daily increase of them; to suppress which a Reformation in many things was
necessary; as namely, to take away Images out of the Churches; the Spittle, and
Exorcisms in Baptism, to grant the Eucharistical Chalice to the Laiety, to
admit the Divine Service in the vulgar Tongue, and expunge the late Festival of
Corpus Christi out of the Calendar; All and every Point of which were such
mortal blows to the Church, that the Pope could not think thereof with any
patience, nor give other answer thereunto, than that those, and other matters
should be deferred to the decision of the Council.

With these expectations, and Discourses the time was protracted until the
month of December, 1561.
by which time there was a considerable appearance of Bishops at Trent, so that
the Pope commanded without farther delay, that the Council should be commenced;
but by reason of some other Obstructions, and at the desire of the Emperor's
Ambassadors it was again deferred until the middle of January following.

The first Session was held the 18th. of January; 1562.
at which the first preliminary afforded great matter of Dispute; for it was
there to be made a standing Rule, That nothing should be propounded, but what
was first moved by the Legates, Proponentibus Legatis: which being opposed by
four Spanish Prelates, was notwithstanding overruled by the greater number, and
the next Sessions appointed for the 26th. of February following.

In the mean time on the 17th. of January the Edict was made at St. Germans,
whereby the Protestants had liberty given them to have their Churches, or
Temples without the Cities, to live under the protection of the King in
observance of their own Discipline, Provided, that they taught nothing contrary
to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, and to the Council of Nice.

At Trent after several Congregations held there, another Sessions commenced
the 26th. of February, at which some matters were determined in relation to
Precedence, and the Index Expurgatorius; and then the Council adjourned, until
the 14th. of March, which time being come, nothing passed at that Session
worthy of observation, only they adjourned until the 14th. of May; and then
again to the 4th. of June.

At the beginning of this Session the Marquis of Pescara, who was Ambassador
for Spain, instantly urged that this Council might be declared a Continuation
of the former under Paul, and Julius; but the Emperor's Ambassadors made such
fierce opposition that nothing for that time was concluded therein: after which
the Marquis de Pescara departed from Trent upon pretense that the affairs of
his Government required his presence at Milan; though in reality it was to
avoid a concurrence with the French Ambassadors, who were then upon their
Journey to Trent, namely, the Lord of Lansac, Ferrier who was a President of
Parliament, and Fabre Lord of Pibrac, one also of the Long-Robe, who arrived
two or three days after the departure of the Spanish Ambassador.

And now misunderstandings increased between the Court of Rome, and the Council
of Trent, the Cardinal of Mantoua himself who was one of the Pope's Legates,
being suspected of not having had sufficient zeal for the Authority of the
Court of Rome, because he had not seconded the Votes of the Spanish Party, who
would have declared this present Council a Continuation of the former: so that
it came to be debated at Rome, whether it were not necessary to recall the
Cardinal of Mantoua from his Presidency, or to place some other Colleague in
Commission above him. On the other side the Council was as much dissatisfied
with the Court of Rome, as the Court of Rome was with Trent; because that many
things were designed there to moderate the Papal Authority, and give a greater
latitude of Power to Princes, and Archbishops in the exercise both of the
spiritual and temporal jurisdiction: nor were the Prelates free from all
variance amongst themselves, whose interests several times interfering one with
other, administered subject of Dispute, which ended in Reproaches, and Obloquies
of one against the other.

The French Ambassadors being admitted to Audience in a Congregation assembled
the 26th of May; Fibrac made a very eloquent and pathetical Oration, wherein he
reproved the indiscreet and ill-guided zeal of those, who would not part with
one insignificant ceremony, to gain the common quiet, and peace of the Church,
and the salvation of many souls. He also openly declaimed against the violence
imposed in the Council, which ought to have been free; And considering that
preceding Councils had for some Ages past suffered their Opinions and
Sentiments to be overswayed by a superior Power, and serve an interest for
whose sake they were not assembled, he did therefore now exhort the Fathers
then present, that they would take such measures as might without mixture of
other considerations cure, and heal the Diseases of the Church, produce Peace,
and propagate Charity in the World; and secure the Flock of Christ from
usurpation, and Oppression. This Speech so startled the Council, that the
Prolocutor having nothing to reply, gave an end to the Congregation of that Day.

On the 4th. of June a Session was held, in which the Commissions of
Ambassadors were read and an Answer given by the Prolocutor to the Speech of
Pibrac, which was ill resented by the French, and then the Session ended, and
another appointed on the 16th. of July.

In the mean time several Congregations were held, whereat the chief matter
debated was the administration of the Sacrament of the Holy Communion to the
Laiety in both kinds: the Imperial and French Ambassadors contended for it, as
did also the Minister of the Duke of Bavaria; and on that subject joined
together in a Memorial: in which they represented, and produced the Writings of
the Popes Paul, and Julius, wherein they had acknowledged the necessity of
yielding the Cup to such of the Laiety, as should demand it, it being the only
means whereby to conserve the Kingdom of Bohemia in obedience to the Sea of
Rome. That already in the Kingdom of Hungary the People did force the Priests
to administer the Sacrament to them in both kinds, threatening for want thereof
to seize their Estates, and take away their lives.

After many Debates on diverse Subjects at several Congregations, at length the
day of Session came being the 16th of July; at which the Decrees were read, and
four Canons confirmed with Anathemas thereunto annexed. First, That the
faithful Laiety are not obliged by any Command to communicate in both kinds.
Secondly, That the Church upon very good grounds, and reasons had taken away
the Cup from the Laiety. Thirdly, That whosoever receives the Bread only,
receives Jesus Christ, as fully, and entirely to all ends, and purposes of
spiritual Grace, and Salvation. Fourthly, That the Communion is not necessary
for Infants. All which was impertinent to the question demanded, namely,
whether such as were not satisfied herewith might not receive the Sacrament in
both kinds, if desired by them: wherefore to please the Germans, who made great
noise about this Point, the determination thereof was referred to the following
Session: likewise many other matters were enacted, and decreed for Reformation
of abuses committed by the Questors, who were a sort of Rascals, and
Caterpillars, who under the pretense of recommendatory Letters to all Good
People, exhorting them to contribute their Alms to pious Works, such as the
building of Hospitals for the sick, and for maintenance of Orphans, framed a
thousand damnable Artifices to extort Money from the People; in which for the
more formality they disguised themselves in strange Habits, and by sound of
Bell carried before them, assembled the People, and offered their Indulgences
to sale, terrifying those who refused to buy them with a thousand Curses, and
Maledictions; the which Money by agreement with Officers at Rome was
appropriated to their own use and a part to the benefit of those, who had
procured the Authority for raising these Collections. So that this abuse was
condemned, and wholly abolished. Likewise other Decrees passed for regulation
of Dioceses, Parishes, and Non-Residencies: And in the mean time Posts ran
continually from Trent to Rome, and back again with Treaties, and Negotiations
between the Ambassadors of several Princes, and the Legates, besides a thousand
other Intrigues formed by the Prelates, who were increased to a number four
times greater, than in the time of the two preceding Councils under Julius and
Paul III. All which in the conclusion produced so little, that we may well
apply that saying.

Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus. The French Ambassadors attended all
this time in the Council without any reasonable satisfaction; for they observed
that the most material Points of Religion were debated, and determined in the
absence of their Bishops, all being carried by the Vogue, and suffrages of
Spaniards, Portugueses, and Italians: Wherefore they earnestly wrote to the
King to hasten his Bishops, who might maintain and support the Points they had
to propose for a Reformation; for want of whom and that nothing could be
proposed in the Council, but by the Legates, that clause availing in the Method
agreed, Proponentibus Legatis, the Court of Rome became absolute Moderator in
all Disputes, carrying every thing at pleasure, by the great numbers of their
Pensionary Bishops; and in short, that there was very little hopes of any good
result from the determination of this Council.

After this Session; matters were preparing at several Congregations against
the next, which was appointed to be held on the 17th. of September for
confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Mass: in discussing of which Point; an
unlucky question was started, Whether Jesus Christ did then offer, and
sacrifice himself, when he first instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist: for
if he did not at that time sacrifice himself, then the Mass which is founded on
this Institution, Do this in remembrance of me, is no Sacrifice: and if he did
sacrifice himself, it must have been propitiatory, and then the Sacrifice on
the Cross had been unprofitable, and unnecessary; for it is said, He Offered
himself but once; and then the sins of mankind had been expiated by the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist: the which created so much doubt, and Dispute, that
some were of Opinion, that it were best to leave the ceremonies of the Roman
Mass free, and undetermined by any particular Decree or Canon of the Church:
the which Opinion though displeasing to the generality of the Council, was yet
seconded by the Bishop of quinque Ecclesiae, the Emperor's Ambassador; who
moved that Germany might not be obliged to any uniformity of Ceremonies, and
particularly might have the Cup granted to their Laiety in the Sacrament, and
not be obliged to have their Service in the Latin Tongue. The which he
represented in the name of his Master to be so agreeable and necessary to the
present State of that Country, that without such a Dispensation it was
impossible, to contain his people under any obedience to the Church, or oblige
them to make resistance against the Turk, whose violences they less feared,
than the impositions, and tyrannies of the Papal Sea. This matter being argued
with great heat on both sides, and without any determination, it was moved,
that this Proposal of the Germans should be remitted to the Pope; but this also
was opposed by the Bishop of Lavaur; who argued that it was very improper to
remit that to the Pope, which he had referred to the judgment of that Assembly:
and that it might reasonably be questioned whether that reference were made to
him under the notion of being Superior, or Inferior to the Council; and then
in that case, that question was first to be determined. Howsoever, at length it
was carried in the Affirmative, and the question referred to the judgment of
the Pope to consider, and determine under what restrictions, and circumstances
the Cup might be granted to the Laiety.

In this manner with a thousand Disputes and difficulties, 1562.
an other Session was held on the 17th. of September. At which after the usual
Ceremonies were performed; they immediately fell upon the particulars treated
in the preceding Congregation, containing nine several Articles, all which were
confirmed, and strengthened with Anathemas: the contents of which were to
establish the Doctrine of the necessity of a perpetual Sacrifice, to verify
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and that the same was truly and really propitiatory.
The Ceremonies also of this Sacrifice, and the purity of the Canon of the Mass,
and the celebration of it in the Latin Tongue, were all confirmed: as likewise
that the Mass might be performed without other Communicants than the Priest
only, that it might be celebrated in honor of the Saints, and that the Wine
ought to be used with a mixture of Water. To which particulars the Fathers gave
their Placet 22, or 23, only excepted, amongst which the chief was the
Archbishop of Granada, who could by no means be persuaded to relish the
Doctrine, that Jesus Christ did offer himself in the first institution of the
Holy Eucharist. Moreover, other Decrees were read, and passed relating to the
regulation of Bishoprics, giving the Bishops full power to inspect the nature
of Dispensations, whether they were fairly or subreptitiously procured; as also
Authority to visit Hospitals, and Colleges, and survey the Buildings of
religious Foundations, with this clause, and under this Character howsoever, as
being Delegates of the Holy Sea. Likewise other things passed of no great
moment, with which this Session was concluded.

The Decrees of this Session were satisfactory to very few: for the Emperor
remained highly displeased, that the matter of the Cup was referred to the
Pope, well knowing that the concession of this Point would have been much more
acceptable to his Subjects from the Council, than from the Pope, against whom
they had demonstrated a detestable aversion. Exceptions were also made to that
Decree, which gives the Bishops a Power over religious Houses contrary to the
intention of the Donors, who desired that the Revenues, and management thereof
should be administered by Lay-persons: for thus said they, was the manner how
the Clergy possessed themselves of the Lands, and Revenues of Hospitals, and
Colleges, and other religious Foundations, making themselves Owners, and
absolute Masters of what they were only Stewards, and Administrators: and this
formerly the Parliament of Paris looked upon as an Usurpation, and encroachment
of the Clergy on the civil Right, and Jurisdiction; the like judgment also they
gave of Wills and Testaments, the inspection into which by the Bishop, was
judged an intrenchment, of the Secular Power.

Howsoever, the Pope remained extremely satisfied with the conclusion of this
Session, all things having been managed according to his own Orders, and
Instructions. And now for the future he resolved to stand upon his guard, and
countermine the Plots, and Artifices of the Cardinal of Lorain, who came, as he
was well assured, with vast designs, as did also the French Bishops who were
armed with Maxims diametrically opposite to his Authority; against whom and the
other Ultramontanes, he resolved to reinforce his numbers, and power in the
Council by new recruits of Italian Bishops.

The same day that this last Session was concluded, the French Ambassadors
received Letters from their Master, requiring them to move the Council, that a
stop might be given to their proceedings in matters of Doctrine, until the
Bishops from France should arrive; and that in the mean time they would prepare
matters tending to the Reformation of manners and abuses crept into the Church,
which was the only Sovereign remedy capable to cure the distempers of the
Church: the which Instructions the Ambassadors having made known to the
Legates, by whom according to due Order all matters were proposed; received this
Answer from them: That they could not invert the Rule, and method already
designed, for decision of the Doctrines of Faith, and reformation of Manners,
but were forced to proceed, in their usual course, without any delay, and
interruption; and if their King had any thing to propose, it might be done by
them his Ambassadors, whom he had deputed to represent his concernments at the
Council. This Answer did little please the Ambassadors, so that they appeared
openly discontented: and the Pope on the other side fearing lest the power, and
wisdom of the Cardinal of Lorain, should be stronger than his Auxiliaries of
Italian Bishops, endeavored by his Legate in France to take him off, persuading
him that his Negotiations in the Council could procure him no reputation, in
regard that all things were already done, and concluded.

And indeed they were much in the right, for the Legates having a desire to
dispatch, and put a period to the Council, were resolved to hearken unto no
delays, but to proceed to the two Articles of Doctrine, namely, the Sacraments
(as they called them) of Ordination, and Marriage, which were the only Points
remaining to be examined, and determined. On which Points the Congregations
began to treat on the 25th of September, and continued their Discourses and
Treatises thereupon until the second of October. 1562.
But all the Disputes which arose upon these Subjects seemed impertinent, and
loss of time to the Bishop of quinque Ecclesiae, and the other Hungarian
Prelates, as also to the Polanders and Spaniards; who at a private Conference
amongst themselves concluded, that their meeting was chiefly with design to
reform abuses in manners which were crept into the Church, rather than to
determine matters of Faith; that in this work it was necessary to begin the
Reformation at the Court of Rome, which was the Head, and source from whence
the streams ought to be derived in their purity; reflecting with deep sense of
displeasure, on the encroachments which the Court of Rome made on their
Episcopal Dignity: and in order hereunto the Archbishop of Braganca was of
Opinion, that the first thing to be done, was to reduce the Cardinals to their
primary Institution; for that until the 10th. Century they were mere Priests;
and only began from that time to exalt their Dignities, and yet until the
12th. Century they were esteemed inferior to Bishops; though since that time
by several degrees and steps they have so elevated, and promoted their quality
with Titles, and extention of Power, that a Bishop is esteemed to have had
honor sufficient, in being only admitted a domestic Chaplain to a Cardinal,
and therefore to bring the Episcopal Dignity again into request, it were
necessary to have it expressly declared by the Council, that that Hierarchy is
Jure Divino, and that Bishops hold their Power, and Authority immediately from
Jesus Christ, and not from the Pope. The which question came at a seasonable,
and an opportune time to be discussed; for one Article under consideration
being then to define that the Order of Episcopacy was above that of Priesthood,
it fell naturally into the Enquiry, Whether that Superiority was by Divine
Right or not. Now the Legates at first not comprehending the meaning and design,
why this question was proposed with so much heat, suffered it to proceed to a
free examination: but so soon as they discovered by the Bishop of Fortosa who
was a Spaniard and yet Pensioner of Rome, that the Archbishops of Granada, and
Barganca intended on the consequences of this Determination to infer, that
their Order being established by Divine Right and not received from the Papal
Chair, their Power would seem more inherent in themselves, and less dependant
on the Supreme Bishop. So that the Legates being awakened by this intimation,
denied to have that question put on the trial, and notwithstanding the high and
passionate words which intervened between them, and the Archbishops of Spain,
they positively forbad the Divines to treat farther on that Subject. Howsoever
after the Legates had considered, that the Authority of these great Men had so
deeply impressed this Opinion in the minds of the inferior Clergy, as was not
to be defaced by the single dash of an overruling Power; they appointed four
Divines to confute the Arguments of the Spanish Prelates, and to prove that the
Bishops held their Power from the Pope, and not immediately from Jesus Christ;
and that Episcopacy was no otherwise of Divine Right, than as the whole Order
of that Hierarchy was inherent in the Pope, as the Head, and source from whence
all Ecclesiastical Power was derived; by virtue of which, it was in him only
to ordain Bishops over particular Churches, to augment, enlarge, or restrain
their jurisdiction, and to depose, suspend, and transfer their trust, and
dignity unto others, as he in his wisdom, and infallible judgment should
determine, and command. In defense of this Opinion Lainez General of the
Jesuits, an Orator of particular Note was appointed in a set Speech, and at a
Congregation purposely called to hear him on this question; and thereupon such
liberty was given him of Discourse, that he declaimed for the space of two
hours without any interruption, alleging every thing which with any appearance
of color might be deduced from Scripture, or the Ancient Fathers; all which
was concluded with the general Applause of the Papal Party; whilst others of
the contrary Opinion were offended, and netled in the highest degree. Amongst
the rest the Bishop of Paris at the next Congregation spoke high, and protested
publicly against this Doctrine, which (as he said) was invented by Cajetan,
who thereby merited the reward of a Cardinals Hat, that the gentle Government
of the Church was degenerated into Tyranny, that the Spouse of Jesus Christ was
made a Slave, and prostituted to the Arbitrary pleasure of a single Person.
That for his part he was weary of those affronts, and contempts which were
daily offered to the Episcopal Dignity, on which every petty Monk began to
trample; nor could he longer support the neglects which the Order of begging
Friars put on that Sacred Function, nor the insolences of the upstart Company
of Jesuits, who being neither Seculars, nor Regulars, but a mixed composition
of both, acknowledged no other Jurisdiction, but their own. All which was
delivered with such heat and vehemence, as moved the blood, and farther
incensed the minds of all those who were already enflamed with Resentments
against the Speech of Lainez; so that there was a common murmur through the
whole Council, universally concluding that the Speech of the Bishop of Paris
was a clear refutation of all the frothy Oratory, delivered by the General of
the Jesuits: howsoever the Legates still persisted in their Assertion, and for
support thereof were forming a new Party against the Spanish Prelates. But these
Disputes, and heats were for a while suppressed by the many instances which
were made by the Spaniards, French, Germans and others for a Reformation;
desiring that all other Debates, and Controversies being laid aside, the
Council would be wholly intent to that great work of rectifying abuses, which
was the only means that could produce peace, and quiet in the Church. But the
Legates withstood this shock, and endeavored by delays and Artifices to evade
this Assault made upon the Papal Power: on which they dreaded the storm, which
the Cardinal of Lorain would make thereupon; for he being now on his Journey to
Trent, gave out in all places through which he traveled, that his Design was
to abate the greatness and pride of the Pope, and to ease the People of their
Oppressions, and Tyrannies which they suffered by the Court of Rome. This
Cardinal was a Person of great Power, Interest, and Revenue in France, and
therefore impatient of subjection to a Foreiner, and desirous himself to be
Pope, or supreme Head of the Gallican Church; to break all these Measures, and
countermine these Plots, the Legates proposed several, and different means:
sometimes it was resolved, that the Pope should come to Bolegna, that his near
residence might overawe the Council; but not knowing how this might operate;
the next expedient was to adjourn the Council to some other place, to pro^ogue
it for some certain time, and in fine, if all should fail, then to dissolve it.
But this Remedy seeming too violent, it was judged more convenient to suspend
for a while the ordinary course of the Congregations, hoping that with time the
spirits, and heats which Lainez Discourse had raised, would abate, and be
allayed. But this Remedy produced a contrary effect; for the Prelates being at
leisure, banded together, and dividing into several Factions, and Meetings,
formed as many Councils, as were Parties, or interests. Thus seven days passing
without Congregations, the Spaniards grew weary of the delays, and with a
haughty, and arrogant manner associating themselves together came to the
Legates, and possitively demanded, that Episcopacy should be declared to be by
Divine Right, to oppose this Spanish stiffness, natural to the humor of that
Nation; eighteen or twenty Prelates were set up to contradict this Demand, and
require that no Determination should be made of that Controversy. So that the
Legates making use of these divisions to excuse themselves, not being able to
satisfy both Parties, all things remained in suspense, and in the mean time
there was nothing but confusion, and tumult, and Consults, how, and in what
manner to make Parties, and Interests; which gave the Legates just cause to fear
the ill effect which these Disorders might produce.

After this intermission of Congregations; on the 3d. of November they began
again to meet; when many Expedients were proposed to accommodate the Disputes
which made so great a noise, namely, Whether Episcopacy, and the Residence of
Bishops in their respective Dioceses, were instituted by Divine Right. As to
the latter the Cardinal of Mantoua, one of the Legates, did propose to have the
question remain undecided; but howsoever, that every Bishop should be obliged
under severe penalties to reside in his Diocese; it being not material, whether
such residence were Jure Divino, or not, provided that every person, observed,
and performed his duty therein. But the first question was controverted with
more passion, the Bishop of Segovia averring, that the Order of Episcopacy was
declared by the Council held under Julius III. to be Jure Divino. Upon reading
the Act, though the Roman Party would not dare* to say, that the Council had
erred in that Point; yet they endeavored to evade the force of it, by
distinguishing between the Order abstractively, and the Jurisdiction of it.

During these Contests the Cardinal of Lorain arrived at Trent, where he made
his entry on Horseback with a great Train, and Pomp, supported between the two
Cardinals of Mantoua, and Seripande, who were the principal Legates. By this
addition the Council began to be numerous; the Prelates only amounting to the
number of two hundred and eighteen, which though much inferior to Ancient
Councils, were howsoever a greater appearance than any, that had yet been known
in Trent. The favorers of the Roman Party looked on this increase, as a
recruit of Auxiliaries, which were come in to reinforce their Enemies: and
therefore to redouble their vigilance, and augment their force, the Pope
dispeeded all the Power he had of Cardinals and Bishops to the Council; fearing
that the Union which was formed between the Spaniards, French, and Germans,
would be too powerful for his Italian Adherents.

The 23d. of November was the day when the Cardinal of Lorain made his first
appearance in the Congregation: when as a Prologue to all the rest, the King's
Letters were first read, containing little more, than to pray, and exhort the
Council in general terms, that they would bend all their labors, and
endeavors, toward a Reformation, and to those means, which might restore
Peace, and Unity in the Church.

The Letters being read, the Cardinal, in an elaborate, and pathetical Speech
began to relate the calamities which the Wars about Religion had caused in
France: desiring the Council that for a remedy thereof they would be pleased to
be indulgent to the Protestants, in condescending to their weak, and tender
Consciences so far, as was consistent with the Doctrines of Faith: and then
declaiming against the corruptions which were crept into the Church, he
instantly desired, that an inspection might be made into the many abuses of
which the Clergy were guilty, to whom he ingeniously applied the History of the
Prophet Jonas. We, said he, are the cause of all these storms, we that have
departed, and fled from the face of God, cast us into the Seas, and the tempest
will abate. This Discourse was seconded by the French Ambassador du Ferrier,
much to the same purpose, and then concluded, thus: If you ask me, why France
is not in Peace, and what is the cause of all these divisions which thus
miserably rend, and tear out the bowels of that distressed Nation; I must
answer you in the same manner as Jehu did to Joram 2 Kings c. 9. v. 22. when he
asked, Is it peace, Jehu? How can it be peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy
mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so many? In fine, he frankly told them,
That in case they took not some course to reform the disorders in France, all
the blood that was there spilt, would be laid to their charge: and though this
plain dealing did infinitely displease the favorers of the Court of Rome, yet
they judged it seasonable to dissemble their Resentments, fearing lest France
in that doubtful state, should make a total defection from the Sea of Rome.

And now it is curious, and worthy our observation to consider, that whilst
the specious Proposal of Reformation was offered, it was plausible, and
consented unto in general terms by every Party, and Interest; but when they
descended to particulars, and would apply the remedies to the respective
abuses, then there appeared a strange, and prodigious diversity in their
Opinions, every one being willing to reform others, but not himself, or his
Party, easily observing the Moat in their Brothers Eye, but not the Beam in
their own. The Court of Rome would gladly assent to a reformation of Princes,
and Bishops, but not yield to any inspection which might be made into the
corruptions of their Consistories, or into the Power which they had usurped.
The Bishops could easily agree to a reformation of Manners in the Courts of the
Pope, and of their respective Princes, but could not hear of having their
Authority, or Revenues retrenched. The Kings and Princes instantly pressed to
have a reformation of the Clergy both of the Head and of the Members, but could
not endure to hear of having their Regalia diminished, or the Power of
conferring, and disposing Benefices according to their pleasure. Wherefore it
was impossible, that all their different Interests could ever be reconciled, or
at the end concenter in a single Tertio, or common agreement.

Wherefore being wearied with these Debates, and finding out new Expedients,
which could never square with the form of such Dissenting Interests; they again
reassumed the old and wearisom Debates about the being of Residencies, and
Episcopacy by Divine Right in which nothing of the former heats were abated.
The Bishop of Auranch declared positively, that his Opinion was, that
Episcopacy was by Divine Right, and that the Authority of the Pope differed not
from that of an ordinary Bishop, but only in degree, and was restrained within
the limits of the Canons: He farther applauded the Decrees of the Parliament of
Paris, which declared the abusive Bulls of the Pope to be void in their own
nature, and forbad to have them put into Execution; and thus much, said he, the
Power of my Master is able to verify, and make good. But the heats about
Residencies began to abate; it being made appear, that if that Point were once
gained, it would not only be an eclipse, but a total ruin of the Papal
Authority; for if the Residence of Bishops were declared to be by Divine Right,
it would follow, that the Pope thenceforth remains divested of all Power to
transfer, diminish, divide, or make any change, or alteration in the Episcopal
Seas. All which though the Spaniards knew very well, and that their aim was
only to advance their own Interest and Authority, yet they would seem to
maintain the contrary, and that this Concession would serve to render the Papal
Power more considerable, and glorious. In fine, it was agreed to send this
Point about Residencies to the Pope by the Bishop of Ventimille. Thus was this
whole year consumed in these Controversies, the last day of December,
concluding with a Congregation, at which it was resolved, that the Session
should be deferred for fifteen days.

At the beginning of this year 1563. 1563.
the French proposed thirty four Articles in order to a Reformation; the most
part of which respected the Clergy, tending to the correction of abuses in
Ordinations and promotion of unworthy Persons both for their lives, and
knowledge, to places of eminence, and honor in the Church. Some also related to
the Court of Rome, and to the retrenchment of its Revenue, the exaction whereof
was an agrievance to the People of France. Other Articles forbad Plurality of
Benefices; and Moneys, or rewards to be given for administration of the
Sacraments. It was also required that Divine Service might be rendered, and
performed in the French Tongue, at least that the principal Prayers be
pronounced both in the French and in the Latin Tongue. That the Communion be
delivered in both kinds. That Bishops within their respective Dioceses have a
jurisdiction over the Religious in Monasteries, as well as over Seculars. That
all abuses be taken away in the superstitious worship of Images, and the fond
and vain imaginations which Men conceive of Relics, Pilgrimages and
Indulgences. That the Doctrine, and practice of Penance should be again
renewed, and established according to the custom of the Primitive Church. All
or most of which Articles were ungrateful to the Legates, both for the substance
of them, and circumstances with which they were delivered, the Ambassadors at
the same time declaring, that in case they were not granted, such provisions
would be made in France by a National Council as were agreeable to the State of
their Affairs. Howsoever the Legates seemed favorably to accept them, and
dispatched them to the Pope by the Bishops of Viterbo.

And now by this time the Pope was ready to make a return of the conclusions he
had made in the Point about Residencies, dispatched from Trent by the Bishop of
Ventimille; the matter of which though couched with great Art, and in such
ambiguous terms as might admit of various interpretations; yet that artificial
fraud could not pass on such subtle Heads, who for their Learning, and
experience were chosen out of the wisest Men of Europe; for they easily
discovered the Pope's intent to advance himself above an Universal Council;
they could have been contented to have admitted him the Chief super Ecclesias
Vniversas, but not super Ecclesiam Vniversalem; that is over all Churches in
particular, but not over the Universal Church as it was aggregated into one
body in a General Council. Hereupon great Contests arose; the Pensioners of
Rome produced in favor of the Pope's Authority a Canon made by the Council of
Florence, which having been received by the Spaniards, gave them some trouble
in what manner to make an Answer thereunto. But the French, who had never
received the Articles of that Council for Canonical, opposed the Councils of
Constance, and Basil against it, which had determined, that General Councils
were superior to the Pope: but the Italians, who maintained, that the Council
of Basil was Schismatical, and that the Canons of Constance were partly
received, and partly rejected, so heated their French Opponents, that Reasons,
and Arguments being on both sides declined, the Dispute ended with high words,
and reproaches of one against the other. Which the Legates well observing, and
that there could be no good issue of such high Contests, desired time to remit
these matters to the Pope's Censures; and so proceeded again to the Point about
Residencies: the which having already caused inextricable difficulties (for the
Pope's words did not please the Council) the Cardinal of Lorain proposed
something by way of Accommodation, putting in some gentler terms which might
serve the turn of both Parties: but the Legates penetrating with their
accustomary Acuteness into the words, found that the sense would bear an
Interpretation, which might be expounded in favor of the Opinion that
Residencies were constituted by Divine Right. Wherefore slighting, or laying
aside the words which the Cardinal had projected, they framed another according
to their own humor, and presented it to the Congregation: the which so
incensed the Cardinal of Lorain, that from thence forward, he began to deal
plainly, and express himself in free, and high terms, protesting that for the
future he would meddle no farther, for that he observed a secret Combination,
which in Cabinet Consults assumed to its self an Authority to dispose matters
differing from the Sentiments of the General Council. That the Legates sought
nothing more than occasions to break up the Council in discontent. That nothing
was acted, but according to the will of the Legates, who moved by such measures
only as they received from the Pope, whose resolution in every thing they
expected from Rome according to that old saying, That the Holy Ghost was
brought every week from Rome to Trent in the Courriers Portmantle. That he for
his part was resolved to have patience until the next Session, at which if
matters were not managed with more fair proceedings, he was resolved to retire
into France with his French Nation then at the Council, where renouncing all
farther applications to Rome, or Trent, they were resolved to assemble a
National Council, by which they would establish such a form of Concordat, as
should be agreeable to the present state of their Country, and which might
secure the safety of the King and the quiet of his People. To the same purpose
the French Ambassador expressed himself at Rome; but the Pope who had been
long used to such kind of Menaces, and a noise about National Councils; little
regarded their Censures, or Threats: but briskly answered, That the Council was
free even to a licentiousness; that if there were Parties, and Factions, they
were unknown to him, and were only made by the Vltramontane Bishops, whose
design was to trample on the Authority of the Papal Chair: And in this manner
such distractions, and Disputes arose at Trent occasioned by the Power and
Interest which the Cardinal of Lorain had there with the greatest part of the
Clergy, that the Congregations were for some time suspended, until the Cardinal
of Ventimille returned from Rome, freighted with abundance of Complements, and
Salutes, and especially with supplies of Money for the Pope's Pensioners; and
then the Congregations being again commenced, and with them the Discords
renewed; it was agreed, that the next Session should be deferred until the
22th. of April, which was presently after Easter. The Cardinal of Lorain though
he seemed outwardly to consent hereunto with some reluctance, and only in
compliance with the rest of the Council, yet in reality he was well enough
pleased, hoping that a short time would put an end to the life of this Pope,
who was very aged, and infirm; when he imagined that his Greatness, and
Authority would be very instrumental in promoting such a Person to the Papacy,
as would be facil, and easy in granting every thing agreeable to his desires.

And now to allay a little the heats about the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and
Residencies, the Council diverted their thoughts and Discourse to eight several
Points relating to Marriage. During which time, and the Interval between that,
and the next Session, the Cardinal of Lorain took the opportunity to visit the
Emperor's Court at Inspruck, which administered great cause of jealousy to the
Pope; who not only observed the Cardinal's dissaffection from his proceedings
in the Council, but likewise from his Letter, wherein complaining of the many
Factions, and Intrigues which his Italian Bishops had caused, he concludes,
that if matters were carried on with the same Measures, there would remain
nothing more for him, either to consider, or act, than only to pray unto God
to direct the Council with his Holy Inspiration.

The Cardinal of Lorain being arrived at Inspruck, where he remained five days,
had frequent Conferences with the Emperor, and his Son the King of the Romans,
touching the many disorders, and corruptions of the Council at Trent; as also
of the means how, and in what manner the Cup might be restored to the Laiety;
how Marriage might be granted, and dispensed to Priests; and Divine Service
performed in the Vulgar Tongue; but more especially their thoughts were busied
about reformation of the Church, and the dissolute Manners both of the Head and
Members of it.

The Cardinal being returned to Trent kept all his Discourses, and Negotiations
at Inspruck as a Secret, declaring himself only in general terms, that he
observed in the Emperor a passionate desire of a Reformation, but yet without
any diminution or abatement of the Papal Authority. About this time the
Cardinal of Mantoua died, who was the first President of the Council, by whose
decease the Cardinal Seripanda being the next Legate, took on him that Office
until such time as the Pope nominated two other Cardinals (namely Moron, and
Navagier to succeed into his place, the which he did with admirable expedition
to prevent the instances, which the French might make in the behalf of the
Cardinal of Lorain.

And now the Point of Celibacy, or single lives of Priests which was one of the
eight particulars relating to Marriage came into question, which was reserved
until the time that the Cardinal of Lorain could be there present; in handling
of which all the Divines agreed; that it was Heresy to believe, that the
Priests of the Western Church being under a Vow, and an Ecclesiastical Canon to
the contrary, were capable of entering into a lawful State of Marriage; only
the difficulty was, whether it was in the Power of the Pope in some cases to
grant a Dispensation to a Priest against his Vow of Celibacy, and Chastity; and
whether the present emergencies, and necessities were such, as might induce the
Pope to grant such Dispensations. In discussing of which question, it was
confessed, that the Oriental Churches, did frequently confer Holy Orders on
Persons, who were already married; but yet that it was never their custom, to
give liberty to unmarried Priests to change the State of their single life. But
others extended this liberty yet farther; not restraining even Monks from that
satisfaction, in maintenance of which they alleged the Authority of St.
Austin; whose Opinion it was, That Monks taking Wives, their Marriage was
Legal, though it was undecent, and what rendered them Prevaricators from their
Vows to God, and their Promises to the World. In fine, though the generality of
Voices would not proceed so far as to make the marriage of Monks lawful, yet by
Plurality of Votes, it was carried, that in some cases a Dispensation might be
granted for a Priest to marry: for which Sentence, and for hazarding that
question on its trial; the Pope much blamed his Legates, in excuse of which,
they alleged their inabibility to withstand the earnest instances which the
Emperors, and the Duke of Bavaria's Ambassadors had made in that particular.

About this time the Cardinal of Lorain received the bad news of the death of
his Brother the Duke of Guise, who was murdered by a Ruffian before the City
of Orleans; which alarmed the Cardinal and caused him to set a more secure
Watch, and Guard over his own Person; nor was the Council less concerned in the
death of this great Man, who was esteemed the Head, and Chief Protector of the
Catholic Party in France.

Amidst these troubles the Bishop of quinque Ecclesiae returned from Inspruck
to Trent bringing two Letters with him from the Emperor; one whereof was to the
Council, instantly exhorting them to labor in the work of Reformation; and
another to the Pope, earnestly entreating him not to dissolve the Council, lest
thereby he should give scandal to the Heretics, and cause them to reproach,
and divide both the Church, and its Assemblies. But above all, he desired that
the Council might be free, and not confined by the Orders of his Court, nor by
such Methods of proceeding as stopped the mouths of all but his Legates, there
being nothing to be propounded but by their words, Proponentibus Legatis: and
in fine he complained, that after all the labors, and Disputes of the Bishops,
and Divines to set things right, there was no conclusion, or establishment of
any matter, until it had first received its approbation from Rome. This bold
Letter which the Emperor adventured to write with more plain dealing than ever
Charles V. or his other Predecessors durst to use, highly offended the Pope,
causing him to return a smart Answer to it in terms very disobliging to the
Emperor; telling him amongst other things, that he was very acute in observing
the Disorders of the Council; but in the mean time was blind in discerning from
whence they proceeded; which if well considered, were chiefly from himself, and
from others who instead of receiving Laws, were pleased to give them, and that
had he followed the example of Constantine, and Theodosius, those divisions,
and discords which appear in the Council would never entered, or would speedily
have vanished.

Howsoever, the Emperor still continuing to oppose the Pope, joined with the
Cardinal of Lorain, and the French Party, to examine* and confute the arguments
which the Papal Faction brought to sustain the clause of Regens Ecclesiam
Vniversalem, which set up the Pope above the Authority of a General Council. So
that the Pope perceiving, that there was no hopes of gaining either the
Emperor, or the French to his side, resolved to join himself to the Spaniards,
who having received the Council of Florence were easily persuaded to admit the
clause, against which the others had objected. So that the Pope having his
chief support from the Spanish party treated the Ambassador of that Nation
with a distinguishing kindness, and respect; for which reason the Count de
Luna, then Ambassador for Spain at the Emperor's Court, wrote to the Secretary
of the Embassy at Trent, as also to the Archbishop, and Bishop of Granada,
Leon, and Segovia, desiring them to persuade the other Spanish Bishops to
moderate their passions against the Court of Rome, and convert them into a zeal
for the Papal Interest; so that the like inclinations swaying that whole
Nation, the Count d' Avila who was Ambassador for Spain at Rome, became
extremely partial to the Pope's side: for when the Imperialists at a Conference
with the Pope demanded, that the Cup might be given to the Laiety, and that
Priests might be permitted to marry, the Spaniards opposed both; by which
Divisions the Pope gladly made his excuse to determine neither Point,
pretending in that doubtful condition to refer all to the determination of the
Council.

About this time the Cardinal Seripanda one of the Legates died, as had not long
before his Colleague the Cardinal of Mantoua, so that for some time the
Congregation adjourned, until the supply of new Legates were come from Rome, who
were daily expected.

And now the Pope, who with long delays and general terms had wearied out the
patience of those, who expressly contended for a Reformation, began to consider
of the ways, and means, how he might absolutely throw off the thoughts of it,
and handsomely acquit himself with the French Nation thereupon, He was once
inclined, as was* said, to have granted all the Points demanded, which did not
entrench upon the Papal Authority, and voluntarily have yielded a License for
Priests to marry, and to the Laiety the Communion in both kinds: but then
considering that these concessions would open a gate to other Demands, and to
such a crowd of Novelties, which pressing in at this breach might ruin, and
overrun all the constitutions, and Canons of the Church; he therefore resolved
to keep himself firm to the present State of Principles, and Governments, which
he doubted not but to maintain, in case he could work off the Emperor from the
French Party; to which end, he ordered the Cardinal of Moron who was to succeed
into the place of one of the deceased Legates to pass from Trent to Inspruck,
there to treat with the Emperor; and representing to him, how fatal such
Novelties would be to the Church, endeavor to persuade him not to insist
farther on those Points, but leaving the French to their own Opinions, to take
part with the Pope, and the King of Spain, whose friendship was more stable,
and secure, than that of France. At this time news came to Trent, that the King
had concluded a Peace at Orleans with his Protestant Subjects; and it was
suggested at Rome, that this Peace was made by contrivance of the French
Bishops, who secretly, and in their hearts were tainted with Heresy; at which
the Pope was so incensed, that at a Congregation of Cardinals convened the 31.
of March, he ordered the Judges of the Court of Inquisition to proceed against
such Persons, as were Instrumental in that Peace: and accordingly Coligny
Cardinal of Chatillon, St. Romain Archbishop of Axi, John de Monlue Bishop of
Valence, the Bishop of Troy, the Bishop of Pamiers, and the Bishop of
Chartres, were all accused of Heresy, and cited to appear at Rome before the
Tribunal of the Inquisition. By these Accidents the quarrels of France
increasing both at Trent,, and at Rome; the French Divines being displeased
both with their ill treatment, and with the long delays in all matters at
Trent, resolved to take their leave of the Council; which the Legates easily
granted; and to which the French Ambassadors so readily assented, that they
even forced them to retire, by denying to them their Pensions, in case they
continued in that station against the pleasure of the King; howsoever three
Friars who were Pensioners of Rome continued still there at the Pope's charge,
resolving to see the utmost issue of all those Affairs.

The 22. of April having been the day formerly appointed for the Session, a
general Congregation was held the day before; at which the Legates declaring
that matters were not prepared for a Session did propose, that it might be
again deferred until the 3d. of June following: to which the Cardinal of Lorain
replied, that it seemed derogatory to the wisdom, and gravity of that Council,
so often to appoint times for a Session, and then again to subject them to
farther delays; wherefore it would be much more advisable to prefix the 21th.
of May following for the time when a day should precisely be appointed for
holding a Session: This Proposition so generally pleased the Council, that with
a common Voice they assented thereunto; and though this unanimous concurrence
with the Cardinal in this matter of small importance administered subject both
of jealousy, and envy to the Legates; yet they could well enough relish any
thing of delay, in hopes that the most violent, and hot spirits being wearied
with long expectation* would either abate of their mettle, or else retire in
despair or discontent.

The Cardinal Moron was detained at Inspruck for a longer time than he
expected, by reason that the Emperor suffered all his Papers, and Memorials to
be inspected, and examined by certain of his own Divines; which the Cardinal
highly resented as an indignity to the Pope, whose Proposals were more sacred,
than to be exposed to the censures of a few silly Priests; and indeed it was
believed, that this manner of treatment proceeded from the dictates of the
Cardinal of Lorain, who at that time had dispatched one of his Gentlemen to the
Emperor, desiring him to speak plainly to the Cardinal Moron, giving him to
understand; that the Council ought to be free, and not to be translated from
Trent unto any other place, as some had contrived out of no good intent to the
public welfare.

In the mean time the Pope was dealing with those Ambassadors who resided with
him at Rome, to prevail with their Masters, to refer all Disputes about
Reformation to himself, rather than to the Council: for that the abuses in
Discipline were never esteemed the causes of Heresies, as plainly appeared in
the Primitive Church, where Heresies were very importunate and troublesome,
notwithstanding the purity of their Government and the incorruption of their
Manners. That it was impossible to extract a Reformation from the common
consent of such different Interests, most of which being guided by a zeal
without prudence, served only to discover the nakedness of the Church, and
make it manifest to all the World, that her Evils were incurable.

After a long vacation for some weeks a Congregation was held on the 14th. of
May, when the Cardinal of Lorain made a long and Eloquent Oration about
Bishops, and the means how to prevent the abuses in their Election; he first
began with those of France, which was only an Introduction to his Satyr
against the Court of Rome, which he termed the source, and original of all the
abuses, and corruptions in the Church: he inveyed chiefly against those
Cardinals who held Pluralities of Bishoprics; showing that all the tricks and
contrivances for holding several Benefices in Commendam, and the like, were
only Artifices to delude that wise God, who would neither be mocked nor
deceived. Which Discourse might proceed well enough from the mouth of another;
though it became not the Cardinal who was known to possess a Revenue from the
Church of a million of Livers per annum; to all which the Cardidinal Moron who
was newly returned from the Emperor, replied with great sharpness, nor sparing
the Cardinal himself in the least, which served to inflame those Feuds, which
had taken their Original from former causes.

And now upon return of Cardinal Moron from the Emperor, every one began to
discourse of the issue, which his Negotiations had produced; on which Subject,
the common report was, that the Emperor had promised to defend the Authority of
the Pope against the opposition and resistance of Heretics. That he would not
pass beyond Inspruck, nor consent to have the Council removed from Trent to
Bologna; nor could he accept the Proposition of coming to Bologna, and there be
crowned by the hands of the Pope without the advice, and consent of a Diet.
This, as we said, was what appeared above-board, and the more common Discourse
of the Town: but the truth, and the secret of it was this, That the Cardinal
Moron had persuaded the Emperor, and the King of the Romans to consent to have
the Council dissolved; for in regard the intention and design of the Council
was really no other, than to reform the Church, and the many corruptions in the
several Members of it, and whereas it was apparent by plain experience, that a
Council composed of such different Interests, and Members, who were wedded to
their own Parties, and their self-conservation would never endure a
Reformation, which should impair, or lessen their condition: which being
granted for a certain truth, the continuance of this Council would serve only
to multiply trouble, and inflame dissentions: of which the Emperor being
perfectly made sensible, consented to have an end put to the Council: but lest
a sudden dissolution of it, should make too great a noise, and render it
ridiculous, or contemptible to the Protestants; it was judged most convenient
to have the Council die of a Consumption by suffering the Members to retire by
degrees, whereby it would come to expire without noise, or trouble: and indeed
every one growing now sensible, of the little fruit, which might be expected
from the continuation of this Council, were of themselves inclined to retire;
many of them reflecting on the saying of Gregory Nazianzen. That the troubles
of the Church are always augmented by the Assemblies of the Bishops.

Now when the 20th. of May was approaching, 1563.
which was the day appointed to consider of a time to be prefixed for the
following Session; it was thought fit, at a Congregation held on the 19th. to
defer the day for appointing a Session until the 10th. of June following, by
reason that the spirits of Men were still boiling with high fermentation, all
Controversies being still in dispute, and nothing tended to a conclusion. And
in the mean time the Count de Luna Ambassador from Spain, being to be
introduced publicly into the Congregation, gave occasion to revive that
ancient quarrel about precedence between the Crowns of France and Spain; the
which Point being obstinately maintained by both Parties, various ways, and
expedients of Accommodation were contrived both at Rome, and Trent to satisfy
and content both Parties: but the French who resolved not to retire the least
step backwards, declared, that they would keep that station and rank which was
due to their place, and rather than recede in the least they would abandon the
Council, and protest against all the Acts of it. So that the Count de Luna
found great difficulty in being admitted to a place in the Council; nor could
he be received there but at a time, when it was purposely contrived that the
French Ambassador should be absent. At Rome also the like Dispute arose
between the two Ambassadors, which the Pope finding impossible to be
reconciled with indifferent terms, thought fit at length to speak plainly to
the Spanish Ambassador and tell him, that he was resolved to maintain the King
of France in his privilege of Precedence, of which he had ever been possessed:
Hereupon the Spanish Ambassador desired liberty to make his Protest; which
being admitted, and he introduced into the Pope's Chamber with four Witnesses,
he kneeled down, and having declared that his Master justly challenged the
Precedence, as well on the Title of ancient Right as from the grandeur of his
Kingdom of Spain, and the large extent of his other Dominions; he proceeded
farther to magnify the constancy of his Master to the Catholic Cause, which he
had with Valor, and success defended against all its Enemies, having never
condescended, as the French had lately done to terms prejudicial to the Church,
nor dispensed with the Articles of Faith with such easiness as they had done by
their Treaty with Heretics at Orleans. The Pope being greatly overswayed with
this last argument, began to relent of his former Sentence, and gently replied,
That he was ready on all occasions to serve, and favor the Catholic King, and
therefore not to appear positive in his own Opinion, he intended to remit the
consideration of this knotty difficulty to the College of Cardinals.

Thus gently was this matter managed at Rome; But at Trent it made greater
noise, and disturbance; for notwithstanding the various contrivances, and
Propositions which were made to accommodate, and salve the honor of both
Nations in this Point, nothing proved effectual; the expedient offered to have
a separate place both in the Chapel, and in the Congregation for the Spanish
Ambassador, which should neither seem above, or beneath the French: and that
when the Incense, and Peace were given at High Mass, they should be performed
at the same time by two Censors, and two Officials, that so neither Ambassador
could have cause to complain, that the other was preferred before him. But this
equality, and concurrence was dispeasing to the French, who would not be
contented with indifferent terms which should conserve the Point undecided; but
required that judgment should be clearly given in right of their Precedence; in
default of which the Cardinal of Lorain did not only threaten to cause great
disturbances; but the French Ambassadors declared their resolution to make
their Protest: not (as they said) against the Legates who acted according to
their Instructions, nor against the Catholic King, who had reason to support
and maintain his own Right; nor against the Count de Luna, who obeyed the
Orders of his Master; nor yet against the Papal Chair to which they bore all
Devotion, and Obedience, but against Pius IV. who falsely styled himself Pope,
having by Simony, and corruption subreptitiously got himself to be Elected, and
placed in the Apostolical Sea. In proof of which they produced two Cedules for
considerable sums of Money. One of which the Cardinal Caraffa had received from
the Duke of Florence for the favor, and assistance he had given in the
Election of the Cardinal of Medicis; the which was afterward sent by the said
Caraffa to the French King; the other Cedule, though not produced, was
positively alleged to remain in the possession of the Cardinal of Naples,
subscribed by the proper handwriting of the Pope himself. And farther, besides
this high manner of proceeding by Protest; the Ambassador du Ferrier prepared
an eloquent Speech in Latin, which was afterward published in Print, though
not spoken in the Council, wherein, after he had proved the right of Precedence
to belong to his Master, he reproached the Person, and conduct of Pius IV. for
having sowed the seeds of Dissension, and War between two such great, and
powerful Allies; and that having by a criminal Ingratitude forgotten all those
Obligations, which the Apostolical Chair owed to Pepin, Charlemagne, and Lewis
his Son Kings of France, by whose favor it had been exalted to its present
greatness; he did therefore Protest, that he would never more acknowledge this
Pope for the Vicar of Jesus Christ, nor own the Acts of this Assembly as of a
General Council, having never been free, but restrained wholly to the Dictates
of this Pope: And therefore he did in the name of his Master Order, and command
all the Prelates of the French Nation to retire unto their respective Dioceses,
until such time as a more free, and lawful Council were convened. To this high
pitch and degree of Dissension were both Parties transported, that no other
event, or issue thereof was expected, than a speedy and rash dissolution of the
Council, of which every one growing weary, wished to see an end of their
fruitless labors; but the Spanish Ambassador remitting something of his
former heat, desired time to acquaint his Master with all the preceding
passages; in which Interval these Heats abated, and the Council proceeded to
other matters.

And now after all these Stirs, and Combustions, and the many Protestations
which the Cardinal of Lorain made against the Pope, and his complaints against
the abuses, and corruptions of the Court of Rome; on a sudden his humor, and
affections changed without any visible causes which might move him thereunto,
so that now instead of inveighing against the Pope, or being the Chief in
private Cabals against him; he with wonderful address applied himself to the
Legates, and received the flatteries of Cardinal Moron with a pleasing relish,
contenting himself to hear the Legates tell him, that they desired to act
nothing without his privity, wishing that he would bear a share of the burden
with them, being infinitely satisfied to have all their Affairs guided by his
direction. But this dearness between them lasted not long, before the Queen
Regent wrote a Letter to the Cardinal, in which she required his speedy return
into France, where his presence would be much more serviceable to the Crown,
than it could be at Trent, from whence no good effect either toward Peace, or
Reformation could be expected. That having now concluded a Peace with her
Protestant Subjects, which seemed to be well established, and permanent, there
was no farther necessity of giving them other satisfaction from Acts of the
Council, or concessions of the Pope; and therefore that for the future he
should give Order to the French Clergy, not to combat with the Papal Authority,
but rather to be concurring in whatsoever might fortify, and confirm the same:
To which part and action the Cardinal seemed easily to incline; in regard that
standing on ill terms with the Protestants, who were mortal Enemies to the
House of Guise, he found it necessary to support himself with the favor of the
Court of Rome, to which notwithstanding all former quarrels, and Piques, he
professed himself a true Friend and an obedient Servant.

And now a new Ambassador called Birague arrived at Trent from the Court of
France with Letters, rendering an account unto the Council, of the Peace lately
concluded with the Protestants, for which, and for the Articles granted to them
in the free exercise of their Religion, there was such a necessity, that
without such an accord, the Crown, and welfare of France would have been
exposed to utmost extremity; the which being performed with design of reducing
the straying, and wandering Sheep into the path, and fold of the Church; it was
hoped, that the Council would put a good Interpretation on this transaction,
and approve of this Cure, and remedy which was unavoidable. The Council being
doubtful what Answer to make unto this Letter, desired time to consider
thereof, intending to dispeed it by the Ambassador Lansac, who was preparing
for his return into France; Birague having in the mean time Commission to pass
unto the Court of the Emperor. And now the Congregation proceeded to examine
the Point about Ecclesiastical Ordinations; in the discussing of which, the
Bishops did not so strictly adhere to the matter in hand, but that they made
frequent excursions into the abuses of the Court of Rome; and thence descended
to the old controverted Points about the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and
Residences, which were never mentioned without Heats and Quarrels. In the
treating of which Lainez General of the Jesuits undertook to give a more
home-blow than any had done before him, which he did with so much heat, and
vehemence, as if the salvation of mankind had depended thereupon: He took that
occasion also to excuse Dispensations, the Impositions and Taxes laid by the
Church, the Riches of the Court of Rome, and all those things which are
commonly termed Abuses; thence he proceeded to exalt the Papal Authority above
the Council, above all the Church, nay above the Clouds, and higher than we can
imagine: the which Discourse, tho displeasing both to the Spaniards, and
French, and all but the Pensioners of Rome, was highly applauded by the Legates,
to whom his long Orations did never seem tedious, as if they had chosen him for
the Interpreter, and Explainer of all their thoughts and designs; to which end,
when his turn came to speak he was commanded to take his place in the middle of
the Assembly, and heard always with patience, and applause of the Legates, when
the Chiefes of other Orders were ordered to speak in their places, and were
brow-beaten, and discouraged. Howsoever, a certain Benedictin Monk offered to
confute Lainez, and prove that the Position maintained by him, namely, That the
Tribunal of the Pope, is the same with that of Jesus Christ, was impious, and
scandalous. But the Cardinal of Lorain, who had now changed his Designs, and
Interests, moderated the zeal, and heats of both Parties; and the Legates
labored to pen such a Determination of that matter, as might by the subtilty,
and ambiguity of those words seem to content all Parties: which Instrument
though the Cardinal of Lorain seemed to remain satisfied, yet the Canonists of
Trent, and Pensioners of Rome made a thousand difficulties, imagining that the
words did not screw or strain up the Papal Authority to its true Note, and
degree. About this time Maximilian who was no great Friend to the Pope, having
been lately chosen King of the Romans, sent his Ambassador to Rome to give him
notice of his Election; but not in the same method which his Predecessors had
practiced, who promised, and swore to whatsoever the Popes imposed upon them:
for before he would pass that Point, he desired first to know what terms the
Pope would require of him; to which answer was made by the Cardinals, That he
should acknowledge his confirmation to the Pope's Authority, and swear Obedience
to him in such manner, as his Predecessors had formerly practiced; which
though the Ambassador in the name of his Master refused to do, in such strict
sense, as the Pope required, and would only promise Devotion, Reverence, and
compliance with the Apostolical Chair; yet the Pope was pleased to accept
thereof, and interpret those Expressions to be equivalent to the term of
Obedeince, and accordingly granted the Confirmation, which was never demanded,
and accepted the Obedience, which was never offered.

At a Congregation held on the 21th. of June, all things were preparing against
the Session appointed for the 15th. of July following, that nothing might then
obstruct the proceedings, or give occasion to defer the time, as had formerly
been done to the great dis-reputation of the Council, and scandal of its
Enemies. The great difficulties, in the questions so often discussed, about
Residences, and Institution of Bishops were still undecided; and therefore the
great care then incumbent on the Legates was to frame, and pen those Points in
such words, as might please at least the Plurality, or major part of the
Congregation, which being tired out, and wearied with the frequent recital of
those Arguments Pro, and Con, were willing to accept of indifferent terms, or
such, as might bear a dubious Interpretation, or such perhaps as contained no
sense at all; and others were for having those Articles buried in silence; only
the Spaniards remained unchangeable and unwearied, being still constant to
their first Principles. Howsoever, the Legates were resolved to exhibit their
Decree about Residences, in the manner, they had already penned, namely, That
all those, who have a Cure of Souls were obliged by the Commandment of God, to
have a particular knowledge* and acquaintance with every Member of their Flock;
which not being to be performed but by a continuance in the Parish, or Diocese,
it was thence inferred, and interpreted that Residences were by Divine Right.

The second Point about Episcopal Institution was concluded in general terms,
that the Hierarchy of Bishops was an Ordinance of God. Howsoever these terms
did not please the subtle, and hotheaded wits of neither side. The Spaniards
did not think the words plain, and explicit enough: and the Bishop of Tarante,
and the other Favorers of Rome, who were jealous of the least shadow of that,
which might infringe or abate the Papal Authority, were apprehensive, that such
consequences might be deduced from those words, as might plainly infer, that
the Orders of that Hierarchy were rather by Divine, than Papal Institution: but
these People were more jealous of the Pope's Authority, than the Pope himself;
for though this very form of words had been debated above a hundred times at
Rome, and approved, and proposed by the Legates, yet these Canonists, and
zealous favorers of Papirius were violent sticklers against and opposers of
the Decree; howsoever the Assembly by plurality of Voices passed the Decree,
and ordered, that they should remain in the same form and words delivered.

In fine, the 15th. of July which was the day of the Session being come, which
had been so often adjourned, and with such impatience expected; all the points
of Doctrine were* reduced to four Chapters, and eight Canons with Anathemas.
The first established, that Ecclesiastical Ordination is a Sacrament: That
under the New Testament there is but one visible Order of Men, which can offer
the Sacrifice of the true, and real Body, and Blood of Jesus Christ: That there
are several degrees higher, and lower of this Order: That Priesthood has a
character impressed upon it; and inspires with it the Holy Ghost. That Unction
is necessary at the institution of a Priest: That the Hierarchy of Priests is
by Divine Right: That Bishops are superior to Priests; That the Bishops, and
Priests who are established by the Pope, or by Authority derived from him, are
only true, and Evangelical in their Orders.

Then proceeding to the eight Canons which respect Reformation; the first was
that about Residence, which had made so much noise, and disturbance, the words
of which obliged every Pastor to be acquainted with and to feed his Flock; in
explanation of which, this Canon forbad all long absence from their charge
under severe penalties; howsoever, that clause was moderated with a
Dispensation for three months, and with a proviso, unless the benefit, and
service of the Church, and State should require it. The other Canons had
respect only to the collation and regulation of Orders: and that they were not
to be conferred upon debauched persons, or such, as were unworthy of them; and
directed the manner, and government of Seminaries, in which Priests were
educated; with several other matters of little importance; all which passed,
and were enacted in the Council without any opposition, or disturbance: though
the Spaniards would never more be reconciled to the Cardinal of Lorain, for
deserting their party, in the point of Residencies to which he had so often
promised, and assured them of his constancy; but what he lost on one side, he
gained on the other; the Legates, and favorers of Rome crying up his wisdom,
and conduct, and true zeal to the Church and the Apostolical Sea.

All Europe in the mean time was in great expectation of the issue of this
Session, which had been preparing for the space of ten months, and with the
wit, and contrivance of two or three hundred Prelates, and Divines. At the end
of which, nothing could be more surprising to the World, than to find their
expectations so wholly defeated, and the product of this mighty Machine, or
Engine to be so inconsiderable as not to have yielded matter sufficient to have
employed the brains of one intelligent person for the space only of a single
Week: the contradictions which appeared in their Canons, and the weak preambles
to all their conclusions were the common talk, and subject of sport and
derision in all places, and administered matter and discourse for the
Protestants to treat, and rally upon in their Sermons; particularly Vergere who
had once been the Pope's Nuncio in Germany, but now become a preaching Minister
in the Valtoline, (which is a Country of the Grisons, did with great
perspicuity, and strength of reason lay before his Flock the many false
reasonings, and vain contestations amongst the Bishops, and the scandalous
proceedings of the whole Council; the reports of which with all the particular
passages he dispatched to all places, where the most Eminent Divines, and
Preachers of the Protestants resided; for he being a near Neighbor to Trent,
was in a better capacity to receive true, and constant information of all
passages, than those who resided at farther distances: for which the Pope and
the Cardinal Moron were so offended at him; that they endeavored by menaces to
affright, and drive him to more remote parts: but he resolved still to continue
his Station, notwithstanding several attempts, that were made upon his life.

The Session being in this manner ended, the Legates designed to hasten all
remaining Points, and contract them in such a compass, as might tend toward a
speedy end, and conclusion of the Council. The points of Indulgences,
Invocation of Saints, Images, and Purgatory were gathered all into a bundle
requiring no great examination, in regard that being matters which entrenched
on the Interest of no Party, administered little cause of Dispute, or
opposition: only a Controversy arose about Clandestine Marriages, or such, as
were contracted without the consent of Parents, which the French would have to
be declared in themselves void, and null, by reason of the inconvenience, and
ruins which such sort of Marriages have proved to certain Families in that
Kingdom: but herein a difficulty arose, for that Marriage which is one of the
seven Sacraments being once celebrated, is of force, and not to be again
dissolved, but by Authority and dispensation of the Church. After diverse
debates thereupon, the Bishop of Metz was so happy as to find a form of words
for that Canon, which contented all Parties, which was this, That though the
Church has ever forbidden, and detested Clandestine Marriages, yet whosoever
denies Clandestine Marriage to be a Sacrament, let him be Anathema. The
marriage of Priests admitted now of no farther difficulty; for though the
Emperor, the King of France, and the Duke of Bavaria, demanded that privilege
in behalf of their People, yet that Point was now laid aside, and all instances
in that matter were denied to be heard, or admitted to farther question, or
examination in the Council.

After this the Legates proposed thirty eight Articles in order to a
Reformation, which contained the many abuses, and encroachments which Secular
Princes had made upon the Rights of the Church: but the Cardinal of Lorain was
for abbreviating the Articles, and for cutting off all those which might
administer matter of Controversy, so that by a speedy dispatch thereof the
Council might tend toward a conclusion; which caused many to wonder, that the
zeal which he had so warmly evidenced at first for a Reformation, should so
soon vanish and be evaporated. A Copy of these Articles being communicated to
the Ambassadors, every one made his observations, reflections, and additions
thereunto, as was most consistent with the affairs of their respective Masters;
For the chief Remarks and alterations of the Ambassadors tended to something
which might abate the Power, and Authority of the Pope over the Ordinaries, and
the jurisdiction of the Bishops themselves over the Civil and Municipal Courts.
But the French were the most severe of any in the rules of Reformation. For
they would have the number of Cardinals restrained to twenty four; that the
Nephews of Popes, during the life of the Pope should not be capable to receive
a Cardinals Hat, that Cardinals should be made incapable to hold Bishoprics;
that criminal causes against Bishops should not be judged at other Tribunals,
than such as are within the Dominions of France. That Bishops should be endued
with plenary Power to give absolution in all Cases. That Ecclesiastical persons
should not be concerned, or intermedle in secular Affairs; and in short, that
they do no act or thing which may infringe the Law of France, or entrench on
the Liberties of the Gallican Church. These particulars for reformation of the
Church thus delivered, were to be prepared against the next Session, and as
resolved so to be enacted; and for Reformation of the Courts of Princes it was
by agreement of the Ambassadors reserved as the chief matter, and subject for
a subsequent Session.

These Proposals were in no manner acceptable to the Pope who could not endure
such fatal attempts on the Power and prerogative of the Church; to avoid which
nothing could be a defense, or remedy, but only the dissolution of the
Council; to which end he earnestly wrote to all his Nuncios residing in the
Courts of foreign Princes, commanding them to use their utmost art, and skill to
persuade the respective Princes to be aiding, and concurring herein. And
farther, gave orders to his Legates at Trent to grant freely whatsoever could
not be refused, and with all decent speed to put a final end and conclusion to
the Council: but this Design encountered some rubs, and obstructions from the
Spanish Ambassador and others of that Party, who complained of the private
Cabals which the Legates held with certain Cardinals, and other Confidents, in
exclusion of the Spanish Interest. But their complaints were little regarded by
the Legates, whose greatest incumbence then was, to satisfy the Bishops, without
whose concurrence the Council could not be dissolved. For now the intention of
the Bishops being to make use of this occasion to enlarge their Power, and
obtain some privileges which were derogatory to the Papal Chair; made that
point of gaining the good will of the Bishops to be the more difficult; because
that their pretenses of subjecting Monasteries and regulation of Friars, and
certain privileged Churches to the Episcopal Jurisdiction, which were exempted
from it by Orders of the Pope, found most opposition from the Generals of the
respective Orders; and indeed the Ambassadors themselves did not much favor
this Demand, which seemed too highly to advance and exalt the pride and power
of the Bishops.

Whilst these things were under Debate, the French Ambassadors received a
large Packet from their Master, in answer to the late Proposals projected for
a Model to reform abuses in the Courts of Princes: the which much displeased
the King, and his Ministers of State, who wondered at the daring attempts of
the Clergy on the King's Royal Power and Authority under a pretense of
Reformation, contenting themselves in the mean time with a slight, and
superficial review of their own abuses: and therefore persuaded the Fathers of
the Council, to attend unto matters purely Spiritual, and to such Acts as might
serve to reform corruptions crept into the Church, and to correct the debauched
lives of Priests, and Monks, (the scandal of which had been the cause of all
the Schism in the Church) rather than to intermedle with the sacred Prerogative
of Kings, or abett, and maintain the Clergy in their opposition and contumacy
against their Sovereign. Thus much the Ambassadors had Orders to signify to
the Council, with farther Instructions, that in case they should
notwithstanding this intimation, proceed to encroach on the King's Regalia,
that then they should make their Protest, and retire to Venice; all which the
Ambassadors made known to the Cardinal of Lorain, and declared to the Legates,
requiring the Bishops to supersede their pretensions to those honors, and
privileges which were the sole Right, and Prerogative of Kings. The Bishops
who were resolutely bent to maintain those Emoluments which so nearly concerned
them, protested before the Legates, that they would neither enter more into the
Congregation, nor give their advice, or Voice in any matter, unless they were
first secured of the Rights to which they pretended, which a hundred of them
obliged themselves by solemn Oath never to remit. All which violent Contests
took up so much time, that when the 15th. of September was come which was the
day before the Session, 1563.
nothing was duly prepared in order to pass into a Canon; and therefore the
time was prorogued until the 11th. of November, that so in the interim the
Cardinal of Lorain might have sufficient time to make his Journey to Rome,
where he was greatly desired by the Pope, and all that Party.

The Cardinal being arrived at Rome, was received with all the joy, and honors
imaginable, he was lodged in the Pope's Palace and immediately in Person
visited by him, which was a Complement that never Pope had made before to any
under that character of a Cardinal. After which there passed such kindness
between them at several private Conferences, that the Pope seemed to refuse
nothing which might engage, and oblige the Cardinal, having at his instance
granted an alienation from the Church of three hundred thousand Livers a year
to the King of France, which Been had formerly been demanded, and solicited
with great importunity, but could never be obtained, until this endearment
happened between the Cardinal, and the Pope. For now their mutual intimacy, and
friendship began to be so great, that the Pope opened his bosom and heart to
him, giving him to understand, that the Council being become a burden to him,
which he could not support, he had therefore sent a private Bull to his Legates
either to prorogue, or adjourn it to some other place, as should be most
agreeable to the state of Affairs: but the Cardinal who professed to have the
same Interest, for that his occasions required his presence in France, yet
could not concur in Opinion either to have the Council prorogued, or adjourned
to an other place; but rather to dispose matters in order to a Conclusion,
which might easily be effected, by laying aside all those Points which might
administer matter, or cause of Dispute; promising to contribute to this Design
all the Power, and Interest he had with the Ambassadors and Bishops, that so
every thing might terminate happily, and to the satisfaction of the Court of
Rome. The Pope being overjoyed with these Promises, was comforted in the
highest degree by the consolatory expressions of the Cardinal; in return for
which, he promised to use all his endeavors to create him his Successor, by
engaging such a number of Cardinals in his favor as should secure his
Election; promising in the mean time to make him the chief Instrument of all
his grand Designs. Thus was the one elevated in his hopes, and expectations of
high preferments; and the other encouraged against the refractory opposition of
the French Prelates, who were now grown mutinous, and the Papal Authority
rendered contemptible to them. For at that time Chatillion had voluntarily
renounced his character of Cardinal, and called himself by the title of Count
de Beauvais, and in contempt of that Dignity, was married in the habit of a
Cardinal, as if he intended by that action to have rendered that Honor
ridiculous.

The French Prelates also being disgusted, five of them retired from Trent,
having easily obtained their license from the Legates, whose chief endeavors,
and labor was now to appease the Sedition, and mutinies of the Bishops, who
were come to that unbridled usurpation, and entrenchments on the temporal
jurisdiction of Princes, and Magistrates, that they constrained the Legates to
read in the Congregation, that Model of a Decree which they had projected for
Reformation of Secular Magistrates; the particulars of which were so
licentious, and extravagant, as deserve to be noted for discovery of that Pride
which reigned amongst the Clergy of those days, the contents of which were
these: That a Clergyman was not liable to the Sentence of a Secular Court, nor
could he be tried at that Bar, though he himself should consent thereunto, that
the Secular Judges should not intermedle with causes relating to Matrimony, to
Heresy, to Tenths, Advowsons, or rights of Patronage, nor with any other
causes whether civil or criminal, wherein the Ecclesiastical Censure was or
might be concerned, That no Injunction be issued out of a Secular Court, to
hinder the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical, in points of Excommunication,
though taken out against the Emperor himself or against Kings. Nor shall the
Civil Law contradict, or interfere with the Ecclesiastical in matters which
relate to the Affairs, Goods, or possessions of the Church; which is endued
with a Power of constituting its own Courts, and Officers of several degrees,
ranks, and qualities. That the Clergy shall be exempt from Taxes, Imposts,
Tithes, or Subsidies whatsoever. That Princes or Magistrates shall not have
Power to quarter Soldiers, Officers, or Horse within the Houses, or on the
possessions of the Clergy, with several other Articles of like tenure, which
were so repugnant to the Power of Kings, that is seemed to shake their
Authority, and set up an other Sovereignty within their own Kingdoms
independent of the Regal Jurisdiction: for which reason the French Ambassadors
having made their Protest against these Articles in the space of fifteen days
afterward, retired from Trent to Venice, according to the Orders which they
had received from France.

The news of this retreat of the Ambassadors was very unwelcome to the Court
of Rome, and especially to the Cardinal of Lorain, who apprehended that this
unexpected accident would much eclipse his Credit, and Reputation with the
Pope, and defeat the hopes he had conceived of his new preferment; which that
he might still keep up, he promised the Pope to write and accordingly did write
unto the King in such terms, as plainly evidenced, how far he had abandoned the
Principles he brought from France, and sacrificed them to a new aad strange
Interest which he had acquired at Rome. After which the Pope wrote to the
Legates to prepare for the following Session according to the time appointed,
and to commence immediately after the return of the Cardinal to Trent; and then
speedily to wind all things up, so as to put a final conclusion to the Council,
in which there seemed no great difficulty, for that the French, and Germans
being drawn off, they had none to deal with, but only with the Spaniards.
Howsoever the Pope resenting highly the retirement of the five French Bishops,
accused them of Heresy, and cited them to make their defense before the
Tribunal of Inquisition at Rome: in like manner he issued out Process against
Jane Queen of Navarre Widow of Anthony of Bourbon upon an accusation of
Heresy, in order to depose her from her Crown and Dignity; the which Decrees
were divulged, and affixed on all public places. And though the Cardinal did
in dislike thereof, represent unto the Pope, that this manner of proceeding was
contrary to the received Maxims of France, and the liberties of the Gallican
Church, and that it was not seasonable to proceed with such rigor against a
Queen, who was an Ally of France, and the Relict of one lately slain in Battle
against the Hugenots; and that it was too early to summon Bishops to receive
judgment at Rome, against which the Council of France had so lately protested:
yet the Cardinal having performed this Office in a cold, and perfunctory
manner, as if he intended rather to acquit himself with his Master, than gain
his Point, gave no satisfaction to the Government of France; which therefore
making use of the Ambassador Monsieur d' Oisel in this Negotiation; his
endeavors succeeded so well; that the Process against the Queen of Navarre and
the five Bishops, was superseded, and the whole matter buried in silence: And
that the King might show, how little he regarded the Decrees of the Council; he
proceeded actually to alienate the Lands of the Church, before the License and
Grant of the Pope arrived his hands, and raised thereupon two millions and five
hundred thousand Livres. By this time the Cardinal of Lorain was returned, and
the eleventh of November came, which was the day appointed for the Session;
after the usual ceremonies of which were performed, the Article about
Clandestine Marriages was read, and after some Contests thereupon, was passed
by plurality of Voices: but yet it did not pass the raillery of some witty Men;
who reflected on the words of the Canon, which pronounces Anathema against
those, who deny Clandestine Marriage to be a true Sacrament; and yet in the
conclusion says, that the Church has ever disapproved and detested it.
Afterward the Decrees of General Reformation were read, which are too long to
be here inserted, upon passing of which, the Cardinal of Lorain declared, that
the French Nation did so far accept them, as they were not prejudicial to the
Privileges, Rights, and ancient Constitutions of the Kings of France.
Howsoever, amongst all the Chapters of General Reformation, there was not one
Point of those many touched, which the People of diverse Nations required;
nothing being therein contained, or resolved, but what served to advance the
Pope's Authority over the Clergy, and warrant the Power of the Clergy in
oppression of the People. Amongst these Points of General Reformation, there
was one which made void all Titles, or Rights to Benefices which were obtained
by Simony, which in the Opinion of some, would have ruined the greatest part of
the Pope's Annates, or yearly Income, had it been strictly observed: but this
was as duly obeyed, as the Canon which prohibits Cardinals to enjoy plurality
of benefices; in both which, time, and experience have shown us, how little
either the one, or the other has been regarded. Another Chapter which ordained
that those who had publicly sinned, should do public Penance, seemed, as if
it designed to restore the Primitive Discipline; but that was again spoiled by
this clause, Ni aliter Episcopo videatur, with these, and matters of the like
nature, this Session concluded.

And now the Scene of Affairs began much to change their face; for every one
growing weary of Disputes, passed every thing almost without examination, or
contest. The Pope was infinitely tired, and fainted under the burden of the
Council. The French who now expected no benefit from this Assembly, followed
the dictates of the Cardinal of Lorain, who had entirely devoted himself to the
Papal Interest. The Germans had long since abandoned the Council, despairing of
any good, or cure from it: only the Spaniards to whom delays have been always
pleasing, and to whom by force of gravity all fatigues of long continuance are
rendered Ease, were those, who willingly would have protracted the longer
course of the Council; but not being able to stem the Torrent, with which other
Nations precipitated the Council to a conclusion, they yielded to the same
humor, and concurred with the Cardinal of Lorain, and others in their Design
to put an end to the Council at the next Session.

The Points about Indulgences, on which Luther had grounded his first quarrel
with the Pope, Adoration of Saints, Purgatory, Images and Fasts, were all
slubber'd over, and passed in the space of fifteen days: The greatest
difficulty was that, which related to the Reformation of Princes, against which
the Ambassadors of France had so seriously protested; which being a knotty,
and insuperable Point, it was resolved to leave it undecided: and in lieu
thereof to perform something for the better satisfaction of the Clergy;
allowing unto the Bishops some enlargement of Power over their respective
Chapters. But as to the Decree which was drawn up, for reforming, and
moderating the Authority of Princes, they thought fit in lieu thereof to renew
the tenure of the Ancient Canons, not enforcing them with Menaces, or
Anathemas, but only with exhortations to Princes, to conserve, and maintain
the Church in its privileges, concluding with gentle terms full of respect to
the Sovereign Power.

The expressions of this Article being thus moderated to the satisfaction (as
the Cardinal of Lorain imagined) of temporal Princes, he endeavored to
persuade the French Ambassadors to return again from Venice to Trent, which
they absolutely refused to do; for though the Article for reforming Princes'
was revoked, yet several other Acts being passed to the prejudice of the
Gallican Church, the Ambassadors pretended that their return and presence,
would imply or argue a concurrence, or an assent to all the Decrees of the
Council. Notwithstanding this refusal, the Council proceeded forward to
consider of the reformation of Friars, Monks, Abbots, and other Religious; in
respect to whom, few Rules were altered, only some additions were made,
according to the Proposals and desires of the Generals of the respective Orders.

All other things (as we have said) proceeded smoothly, the Point of
Indulgences being superficially touched; for considering the many difficulties
comprehended in that question, which might, if distinctly treated, have taken
up a long time in the examination of every Point; it was thought fit to couch
all in few words, prohibiting the abuses thereof in general terms. Thus did
matters hasten toward an end, but what did more eagerly precipitate a
conclusion, was the Pope's indisposition of health; for it was feared in case
the Pope should die during the Session, that then the Council would by the
example of that of Constance, take upon themselves a Power of electing an
other; so that notwithstanding the opposition of the Spaniards (who desired to
proceed with gravity, and phlegm, until they could receive an answer of what
they had wrote to Madrid) the ultimate Session was appointed for the 9th. of
December: but in regard that time seemed too long to Persons impatient of an
end, the day was shortened to the third of that month, and to be continued on
the day following in case the Affairs seemed too weighty and various to be
ended at one sitting. The Spanish Ambassador with fourteen of his Bishops not
being able to withstand this general Torrent, promised to concur with the
others on these two conditions; First, That the Pope should regulate all
matters not determined by this Council; And secondly, That in the Chapters of
Indulgences, the word ( gratis) should not be used, lest it should prejudice
the Indulgences granted by the Crusada of Spain.

All the difficulties being now overcome, the Session was held on Friday the
3d. of December, at which, after the Sermon, and usual Ceremonies, all the Acts
prepared according to form were read, but being too long for the work of one
day, the remaining part was left until the day following: at the conclusion of
all, fearing lest in any of the Decrees of Reformation, some words should have
escaped, which might seem to entrench, or diminish the Pope's Authority; it was
determined that the Interpretation of the Canons, and the liberty to dispense
with any of them should remain in the breast, and at the free pleasure and will
of the Pope; in confirmation of which it was publicly declared by common
Voice, that the intention of the Council in all, and every of their Canons was
to maintain the Papal Dignity in its ancient Power, and Authority, without any
abatement, or diminution thereof. And finally an Act was read, and published,
whereby it was declared* That the place, or rank which any Ambassador or
Representative had holden, or possessed in that Council, should give no Title,
or ground of claim for the like degree, or place for the future; the Council
not pretending to determine any thing in prejudice of the rights and
privileges of Kings, Princes, or States. Lastly, at the breaking up of the
Council, Excommunications and Anathemas were read against all Heretics in
general, mentioning Luther, Zuinglius, or others in particular. And then the
period was closed with loud acclamations in praise of the Pope, the Emperor,
the Kings, the Legates, and all the Fathers: which was performed in a different
manner to the practice of other Councils, which ended with acclamations, and
blessings pronounced with the confused noise, or murmurings of the whole
Assembly; but at Trent it was performed by way of Responses, or Antiphonas; in
which the Cardinal of Lorain pronounced the first Sentence, and was again
answered by all the Prelates; which being the part of a Deacon, or Chanter,
seemed an Office too mean to be personated by his Eminence, and not only gave
subject of railery to the World, but subjected him to a thousand Censures at
his return home, where it was charged upon him, that in the Acclamations, or
Antiphonas, then made, there was no mention of the King of France. And in the
last place it was ordained, That all the Prelates should sign the Decrees before
their departure upon pain of Excommunication; for execution whereof a form of
Congregation being appointed, the Hands, or subscriptions consisted of four
Legates, two Cardinals, three Patriarchs, twenty five Archbishops, two hundred
sixty eight Bishops, seven Abbots, thirty nine Procurators, or Substitutes in
behalf of such as were absent, and seven Generals of the Religious Orders: the
subscriptions of the Ambassadors were not required, to avoid the late
Contestations, and Disputes about place. And yet notwithstanding this number of
Bishops, there was not one of Germany present in the last Convocation, which
was far the most numerous, and solemn of any: for Hungary, or Poland, there
were very few Bishops present; there appeared not one for Sweden, Denmark,
England, or the Low Countries. The Bishops of France which came only toward
the latter end, being joined with the Bishops of Spain, could not in all make
above the number of forty; so that of the two hundred and odd Bishops of which
this Council was composed, there was at least one hundred and fifty of them
Italians, who were Creatures, and Pensioners of the Pope. For which reason this
Assembly was justly termed the Council of the Pope, and his Italians.

The Council being in this manner broken up every one returned to his home, and
Country; and all things being concluded to the satisfaction of the Pope, caused
great joy in the Court of Rome, where the Legates, and the other Favorers
thereof were received and welcomed with applause, and commendations; and the
Pope to gratify his Friends, who had taken such pains, and served so well in
this important Affair, promoted nineteen of them to the Dignity of Cardinals,
and amongst the rest the Archbishop of Taranto was in a singular manner
remembered, and gratified.

Nor had the Pope so much taken up his thoughts with the Council, but that
being transported with a spirit of munificence and Building, he could attend to
raise, and continue his Name by mighty, and Excellent Structures: and figuring
to himself a model of the ancient Rome, as if he intended to have restored it
to its antique glory, he commanded the ancient Monuments to be conserved, the
Streets restored, and at his great expense the Aqueducts which brought the
Water from distant places to the City to be again repaired. It was this Pope
who rebuilt the Baths of Diocletian upon Mount Quirinus, converting them into
a Church, and to a Monastery, which he personally consecrated. He fortified the
Castle of St. Angelo and repaired the ruins of the Castle of Civita Vecchia,
and made many other Structures for convenience, and Ornament of the City.

1564.
Whilst he was intent upon these Affairs, a certain number of Villains designed
to have murdered him, and to have perpetrated this wickedness at the time,
when he was busied in reading a Paper which they were to consign into his hand:
the Person who was to deliver him the Writing was one Acolti; and the Contents,
or substance thereof was a persuasion to resign up his Papal Authority into the
hands of such a Person, whom they should describe to him; for they pretended to
have received a Revelation, and seen a Vision, that the Successor to this Pope
should be of an Angelical Spirit, elected by the common consent of all
Christendom, that he should become the Universal Monarch of all the World,
reform the Manners of Mankind, teach them to live up to the perfection of
humane Life; and in short, convert all People and Nations to the Christian
Faith. Acolti having delivered his Paper, and being about to strike the fatal
blow, his heart failed him: upon which one of the Assassinates discovering the
Conspiracy, they were all seized, and justly executed with such torments as the
blackness of the Crime deserved.

Not long after this being on the 10th. of December, 1565. the Pope died,
having governed five years, eleven months and a half; he had during his time
created forty five Cardinals, some out of favor to Princes, and others in
reward of their own worth, and merit; and had he lived, his intention was to
have made up his number a full hundred, so that they might have been called,
Centum Patres. But he died in the 77th. year of his age, and his body was
buried in the Baths of Diocletian, lately converted into a Church by him, and
called Sancta Maria Angelorum. And the Sea was vacant twenty nine days.

PIUS V.
PIUS the Fourth being dead, and his funeral Rites after the accustomed manner
being performed, the Cardinals entered the Conclave to the number of fifty two,
and by common consent with the concurrence of Cardinal Borromeus (afterward
canonized for a Saint) and of Cardinal Farnese, the two leading Men at that
time, elected Anthony Ghisler to the Succession in the Papal Chair. This
Anthony Ghisler so called by Papyrius Massonius, but by Cicarella named
Michael, was born of mean and ordinary Parents at a Town called Boschi, not far
from Alexandria della paglia, which lies between Montferrat, and the State of
Milan; he was entered into the Order of Jacobin Friars at the age of fourteen
years, and then changed his name to Michael; he was ordained Priest at Genua,
and proved a most strenuous Preacher, and Master of a most powerful, and moving
Eloquence; he was afterward constituted Prior of his Convent of Vigevani, and
Commissary of the Inquisition; he was by Paul the 4th. made Bishop of Nepi, and
then Cardinal de Sancta Sabina, but in regard, that he was born at Boschi not
above six miles distant from Alexandria, he was commonly styled Cardinal
Alessandrino; and then as we have said, without much faction, or debate, he was
with common consent on the 7th. of Jan. 1566. created Pope.

All the Writers of his Life, give him the commendation of unblemished Virtue,
of a strict, and severe Devotion, and of a most excellent Spirit in the
government of the Church; but for a more perfect Character of him take the
words of Papyrius Massonius, which are these:

He did neever seek, or pursue honors, but walking always in the direct, and
even path of Virtue, he was always courted and overtaken by them: the Dignity
of Cardinal had changed nothing in his humor, and served only to render his
Virtues more conspicuous to the World: for he still reserved the same sweetness
and affability in his nature, the same severity in his life and discipline, and
the same freedom, and candor in his advice and Counsel, as he had maintained
in his private condition, having always a more strict regard to Justice, and
Truth, than to the favor, and flattery of great Personages; and in delivering
his Advice, as his words were plain, and sincere, so his gestures, and
countenance enforced them with prevailing Authority. Thus was his advancement
to the Papal Authority raised on the pedestal of his own merit, so that there
is no place left for doubt, but that his Election proceeded from Divine
Providence, or Inspiration, rather than from the judgment, or direction of Men:
for he had no fumes, or vanities of an ancient Family to boast of, no grandeur
of richness, nor favor of Princes, which might assist, and concur to his
Instalment, and prepare his way to the Papal Sea; only the same Virtue which
had accompanied him from his youth, gave him favor in the eyes of the World,
and lead him by the hand to this degree of Sovereignty.

On the Festival of St. Anthony being then of the age of sixty two, he was
Crowned Pope but not without the fears, and apprehensions of the World, who
imagined, that his quick, and hot nature being prone to sudden anger, being
conjoined with that severity of Life which he had always professed, would
render him as froward, and impetuous as Paul IV. but his teasty nature which
was subject to sudden anger, was as easily, and quickly past; and then his good
nature returning again, he would execute his passion, which being free from
Pride and Ambition, and worldly considerations, did never transport him beyond
the limits of Decency, and Reason. Being now seated in the Papal Chair, the
Establishment, and Ornament whereof he esteemed to be holiness of Life in
himself, and purity, and religious deportment in the Clergy; he endeavored to
put those Rules of Piety into practice, which the Council of Trent had
prescribed for reformation of Manners, and Discipline amongst Priests, and
religious Persons. In order unto which, he designed to banish all the Cortesans
from Rome, which was a work of no small adventure at that time, when those
Ladies of pleasure possessed the most sumptuous, and magnificent Palaces of the
City, and were favored by the Patronage of some Senators, and Cardinals, who
to hinder that unkind action, alleged, that the Church would not only lose a
considerable Revenue, which did arise from the pains of that industrious sort
of People, but also Strangers be deprived of those entertainments of Music,
and Dancing; which they promised to themselves during their residences at Rome:
howsoever, though these considerations did not wholly avail with the Pope, yet
they did moderate the rigor of his Sentence; so that some of the Cortesans
were permitted License to remain, and abide in a certain corner of the City
being forbidden to pass through the high, and public streets, and to frequent
any of the Churches, excepting two or three which were appointed for them,
where Masses were allowed and Sermons preached on Texts proper to their
condition, and in order to reduce them to contrition, and conversion of life.

As he was severe in this manner against the Cortesans, so he carried a strict
Eye over all the Clergy; enjoining all such as enjoyed any Benefices from the
Church to have the Crown of their head constantly shaved, and never to wear
Silk in any of their Habits and Garments, unless in their Stoles and Vestments
in which they officiated, or celebrated Mass; the like modesty, and grave
deportment he ordained amongst all the Officers of his own Family, where he
appointed three Lectures of Divinity to be read every Week for entertainment of
the Clergy: and commanded his Suisses, and Soldiers of his Lifeguard to
comport themselves with Civility toward all, without Extortion, or Insolence.

As to his own Relations, he commanded them all to retire from Rome, having
provided for them in other places with small Pensions; excepting only one
young Nephew, who was a Student in the German College; and an other called
Michael Bonnello who being a youth of excellent parts, and a hopeful
disposition, was at the great instance of Friends promoted to the degree of a
Cardinal.

A certain rich Jew at Rome called Elias, one learned in the Rabbis and
Mosaical Law, and Master of a Synagogue, did usually frequent the Society of
this Cardinal Alexandrino, before he came to be Pope; between whom questions
being often controverted about Religion: the Cardinal by the force of Reason
and the Example of his holy life so prevailed at length upon the Jew, that he
promised to become a Christian, and profess that faith, so soon, as this
Cardinal should be created Pope: the which promise Alexandrino immediately
challenged so soon as he was promoted to the Papal Chair: the Jew was not able
to resist or deny the engagement; but believing that this unexpected
advancement of his Friend to the Popedom, was an impulse of the Holy Ghost for
his conversion, did immediately profess the Christian Faith; and together with
his Wife, three Children, and a Nephew were all baptized by the Pope himself
about the Feast of Pentecost in the year 1566. And thus much shall serve for a
Character in general of the humor, and temperament of this Pope Pius V.

Now as to the management of his temporal Power; he was extremely zealous
against the Protestants on the one side, and against the Turks on the other:
For as to the first he sent Cardinal Commendone to be present at a General Diet
in Germany, convened by the Emperor Maximilian and be their assistant to the
Roman Catholics, and offer such cautions, and Caveats in their proceedings, as
might defend, and secure the Papal Authority, as much as was possible.

Then to subject and subdue the Protestants in France, he furnished King
Charles IX. with an Army of four thousand four hundred Foot; and nine hundred
Horse under the command of the Count St. Fleur: and farther to supply the
occasions of this King with Money, he gave license to sell, and alienate so
much of the Church Lands in France, as might suffice for the carrying on of
this War, in which Trust of Sales the Cardinals of Lorain, and Bourbon, being
made Commissioners, the Lands belonging to the Church, which were then sold
amounted to the value of one hundred and fifty thousand Crowns of yearly
Revenue.

In the next place, it was this Pope Pius V. who out of his great zeal,
excommunicated Elizabeth Queen of England, with all her Subjects of the same
profession. And in the year 1569. conferred on Cosmo de Medicis Duke of
Florence, the Title of Great Duke of Tuscany; in Gratitude for which the Duke
coming to Rome to acknowledge the honor done him, was there crowned with a
Ducal Crown by the hands of the Pope, about the Circle of which this Motto was
engraven, Pius quintus Pont. Max. ob eximiam Dilectionem, ac Catholicae
Religionis Zelum praecipuumque Justitiae studium donavit.

Then to demonstrate his zeal against the Turks, the prevailing Enemies over
Christianity under the conduct of Solomon the Magnificent, who at that time was
entered into Hungary with an Army of two hundred thousand fighting Men: He
instantly desired, and exhorted the Christian Princes unto Unity amongst
themselves, that they might repulse the common Enemy of the Christian Faith:
and to show that he would not persuade others to that performance, in which he
did not readily offer himself to be an Example; he freely sent unto the
Emperor a Present of ninety thousand Ducats, with promise to furnish fifty
thousand Crowns more every year, so long as the Wars should continue.

And indeed at that time there needed Counsel, and Arms, and Money to resist
Solomon, who had besieged the strong Fortress of Segeth, which was then
commanded by Count Serini, whose Family like that of Hanibal against the
Romans, had ever sworn enmity, and irreconcilable hatred to the Turks. It
happened, that though Solomon died in the Siege against this City, yet the
assaults, and force were continued by Mahomet the Grand Vizier, who concealed
the death of Solomon, until he had first advised the news thereof unto his
Successor Sultan Selim the Second, during which time, he plied the Town with
such continual storms, as reduced the Defendants to the last extremity; and to
a resolution of selling their Lives at the dearest rate; which they accordingly
performed by a Sally of five hundred Men, in which all of them being slain with
their Leader Count Serini, the Town was soon after surrendered into the hands
of the Turk.

It was now the year 1570. when Sultan Selim succeeding his Father the Great
Solomon, and being a Prince as ambitious and as desirous to enlarge his Empire,
as was his Predecessor, resolved upon the Conquest of Cyprus, then belonging
to the Venetian Dominions. But that he might not seem to attempt the Countries
of his Neighbor, before he had first denounced War; he dispatched a Chiaus to
Venice, demanding the surrender of the Kingdom of Cyprus, as a dependence on
the City of Constantinople, and a Member of the Grecian Empire, to which he had
gained a Title by the power of his Sword. This Message or Summons being
delivered in full Senate, was seconded by many Incursions made into Dalmatia,
and Sclavonia, and great preparations for transporting Soldiers into Cyprus.
The Venetians being thus assaulted by the potent Enemy of Christendom, applied
themselves to the Pope, desiring him that he would be pleased out of his
paternal commiseration to the Christian Cause, to administer some effectual
help from his own hand, and exhort all other Christian Princes to enter into a
League, and unite their Forces against the common Enemy of the Christian Faith:
In compliance with this Request, the Pope prevailed with the King of Spain to
furnish the Venetians with fifty Sail of Galleys under the Command of John
Andrew d' Oria, a valiant, and experienced General, requiring him to obey Mark
Anthony Colonna Commander in Chief of the Pope's Galleys; and accordingly in
the Month of August 1570. a very considerable Force met at the Rendezvous in
Candia consisting of one hundred and eighty Galleys, eleven Galeasses, and six
Ships of War. But the Turks being more forward in this Expedition, had a Month
before that time landed a formidable Army in the Island of Cyprus; where after
having taken the Cities of Nicosia, and Famagosta with great effusion of blood,
they made themselves Masters of the whole Island; whilst in the mean time the
two great Commanders Colonna and D' Oria, being at variance, for D' Oria
refused to yield to Colonna, the design was frustrated, and the Fleets returned
home without any Action considerable in that Voyage, which verified the truth
of that saying of Livy, Quam plurium imperium bello inutile. However ^his ill
success did not discourage these Allies from making farther trial of their
fortune; for being all concerned to resist the Turk, they renewed their League
again for the succeeding year which was An. 1571. And that they might prevent
the misunderstandings which the year before had happened between the two
Generals; it was agreed, that Don John d' Austria, who was natural Brother to
the King of Spain should be Commander, or Generalissimo of the whole Navy, that
Mark Anthony Colonna General of the Pope's Galleys, should be his Lieutenant,
and accordingly preparations being made, Messina in the Island of Sicily was
appointed for the place of Rendezvous, where about the Month of August the
whole Fleet joined together, consisting of one hundred Venetian light Galleys,
6 Galleasses, two Ships, besides Brigantines, Felucas and other smaller Vessels
under Dominico a Nobleman of Venice. The Pope's Galleys were twelve, commanded
by Mark Anthony Colonna, and the Fleet or Spain commanded by Don John d'
Austria consisted of eighty one Galleys, amongst which the three Galleys of
Malta were comprehended, and twenty two Sail of Ships. With this Force this
mighty Fleet departed from Messina on the 16th. of September 1571. and sailed
to Corfu a safe Port belonging to the Venetians in the Adriatic Sea: where
having advice that the Turks Armata, was in the Gulf of Lepanto; they weighed
Anchor, and stood directly for that place, where on the 3d* of October they
joined Battle with the Turks, and gave them that memorable overthrow; which
has ever since disabled them from forming any considerable Force at Sea
against the Christians: for in that fight the which continued not above five
hours, the most formidable Fleet that was ever equipped, or set out from
Constantinople, was destroyed; for they lost one hundred and seventeen Galleys,
eighty Brigantines, or smaller Vessels which were sunk, or burned, or put
ashore, forty Sail of Galleys, or thereabouts were taken in the pursuit. Of the
Turks were killed thirty two thousand Men, amongst which were many Bashaws, and
Beglerbeges, and three thousand five hundred Captives were taken, and fifteen
thousand poor Christians were released, who had been chained to the Oar in the
Galleys of the Turks: Of the Christians after the fight was ended, upon the
numbers wanting in every Vessel, the account of the slain amounted to seven
thousand six hundred fifty six. This signal Victory was attributed as much to
the devout Prayers, and Benediction of the Pope, as to the valor of the
Soldiers, and conduct of the Captains: the report of which as it filled all
Europe with joy, so it made way for the glories of Don John, who was received
into Messina with all the Triumphs, and Festivals which that City could
express; also Antonio Colonna was with the like honor, and triumph received at
Rome. Nor did the Venetian General want such encouragements and honors, as
that Republic commonly bestows in reward of Valor and Merit; In memory of
which signal Victory, they stamped diverse Medals with this Inscription, Anno
Magnae Navalis Victoriae Dei gratia contra Turcas.

This memorable Victory was obtained in the time of this Pius V. who was
certainly one of the best of the Popes, and therefore I know not why we may not
say without offense to any; that this happy success might be given in reward of
the Devotion, and Piety of this Pope; for I am persuaded that God has a
particular care of godly Kings, and Princes, for whose sake as he often
blesses their people, so he bestows some memorable blessings on them of signal
Remark in their Reign. On which persuasion, I am apt to believe, that as God
bestowed this Victory on the Christians in the time of this Pius V. against
that great Sultan Selim II. So now in these our days, he has given Victory,
and unexpected success to the Christians before the Walls of Vienna against
Mahomet IV. in reward of the great Piety, and Devotion of Leopold the Emperor,
whose Devotion, and Prayers joined to the Arms of the King of Poland, and of
other Princes have operated Miracles, and delivered Germany in a wonderful
manner from the power of the Turk.

And yet notwithstanding the religious temper of this Pope, we find that he
excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, as far as his Bull would operate he deposed her
from Royal Dignities, and conferred her Crown on Mary Queen of Scots; and
persuaded Philip King of Spain, to seize on the effects of the English
Merchants at Antwerp, and other parts of the Low Countries, and to assist the
Catholic Subjects in England in their godly, Lib. 3. cap. 9.
and religious Conspiracies, as Gabutius calls them, against the Queen their
natural Sovereign. Pius oblatam occasionem haud contemnendam esse ratus,
efflatigabat ab Rege ut Anglorum in Elizabetham pie conspirantium studia
foveret. Thus we see, how far a mistaken zeal may transport good Men, which
though it may in some measure excuse from the aggravation of a Crime, yet it
cannot prove sufficient to set Men entirely upright at the great day of the
just Balance.

This Pope added also to his other Excellencies* the Virtue of loving wife, and
learned Men, and such as were endued with a vivacity, and acuteness of parts;
for he scarce preferred any to considerable Dignity, but such as were excellent
in some degree or other; and of the twenty one Cardinals which he created at
three several times, there were five of them at least who were Men of
extraordinary Abilities, and famous in their Generation.

He founded certain public places for Learning, and Piety, amongst which he
endowed a College in the University of Pavia, for the Education of Youth, and
affixed over it the Arms of the Ghislers; at Boschi the place of his Birth, he
built a Monastery for Dominican Friars, and endowed it with a competent
Revenue; and to demonstrate his gratitude to his Ancient Benefactors, he
created a Magnificent Sepulcre in memory of Paul V. by whom he was created
Cardinal: and in short he made many new Buildings, and repaired several that
were decayed in the Vatican, and both within, and without the City of Rome.

After all which about the middle of March 1572. he became indisposed by a
stoppage of Urin, of which he commonly had a fit in that Month; the which
illness increasing upon him gave him notice, that his end approached, from
which time converting all his thoughts to holy, and pious meditations, he spent
the short remainder of his time in the preparation of his Soul for death, which
happened on the first of May following; the same day he died, his Body was
embowel'd, and three little stones found at the neck of his bladder, which the
Physicians declared to be the cause of his death.

He was generally lamented by all, and especially by virtuous Men for
considering his principles, his Enemies had nothing worse to object, than that
he gave a Dispensation to Philip King of Spain to marry with the Daughter of
his Sister and of Maximilian his near Kinsman, and yet would never be induced
to consent unto the Marriage of Margaret of Valois Sister of the King of
France, with Henry King of Navarre, making the difference of Religion a greater
bar to Marriage, than the degrees of consanguinity forbidden by the Levitical
Law.

The day after his death his Body being clothed in the habit of a Jacobin was
carried into the Church of St. Peter, where the people assembled in great
numbers to render him Honor, and Veneration, every one touching their Beads,
and Rosaries at his Body in the same manner as was their practice at the
Relics of Saints; and afterward he was honorably buried in the same Church;
where his Body lay deposited, until afterward Sixtus V. in grateful
remembrance of the benefits he had received from him, transported it to the
Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, and erected a stately Monument over it in a
Chapel built for that purpose with this Epitaph inscribed upon it.

Pio V. Pont. Max, ex Ordine Praedicatorum Sixtus V. Pont. Max. ex
Ordine Minorum grati animi monumentum posuit.
GREGORY XIII.
PIUS the Fifth being dead, and his Funeral Rites after the accustomed manner
being performed; the Cardinals entered the Conclave, and with common consent
elected Hugo Buoncompagno, who was Priest and Cardinal of S. Sixtus to the
dignity of Pope; he was born at Bologna of the ancient Family of the
Buoncompagni, his Father was called Christopher, and his Mother Agnola
Marascalchi, by whom he was at first educated in the Studies of the Civil Law,
in which having made great proficiency; he took his degree of Doctor in the
University of Bologna at the age of twenty eight years, and in a short time was
made Judge of the Court of Trade, erected in that City for trial of Mercantile
Causes; afterward in hopes of better preferment he went to Rome, where he was
constituted an Assistant to the Senator, who was Judge of the Court held in the
Capitol, and the year following he was made Clerk of the Signet for
Dispensasations, and other Beneficences. In the time of Paul III. he was
employed at the Council of Trent, and made Vice-Auditor of the Camera: under
Julius III. he was made Secretary Apostolical, and sent Vice-Legat with
Cardinal Cigalla into the Campaign of Rome. Under Paul IV. he was ordained
Priest and Bishop of Vest, and in the year 1562. he was employed to the
Council of Trent, where he remained until the prorogation thereof. Under Pius
IV. he was constituted Assessor of the Papal Chapel, and on St. Gregory's day
was created Cardinal of St. Sixtus, and employed by him for his Legate into
Spain; from whence returning again to Rome in the time of Pius V. he performed
his several Offices with such Integrity, and general satisfaction; that having
acquired a singular Fame, and good esteem, he was by the common consent of all
the Cardinals, and particular concurrence of Morone, Granvel, Farnese, Altemps,
and Borromeo, who were the Leading Men in the Conclave, promoted to the Papal
Chair, and on the 13th. of May 1572. declared Pope, stiling himself by the Name
of Gregory XIII. out of the great devotion, and respect he had to Saint Gregory
Nazianzen, on whose Festival he had been created Cardinal. In which Election
there was nothing more remarkable, than that it was made in the space of four
or five hours, different to the Customs, and former practices of Conclaves, in
which by Factions, and Artifices of prevailing Cardinals Elections have been
protracted for several Months.

On the day of Pentecost or Whitsunday Gregory XIII. being Crowned; and
established in the Papal Chair, his first Enterprise was in prosecution of the
Design commenced by his Predecessor against the Turk, in which the Spaniard
and Venetians being already engaged; the Pope for better strengthening of this
League dispeeded Fulvio Cardinal of Vrsino into France unto Charles IX. with
Letters exhorting him to enter into the Alliance, and sacred League which he,
with other Princes, had formed against the Turk: but that King being then
engaged in a War with his Protestant Subjects, had neither Men nor Money to
spare; so that the Legate returned to Rome with fair words, and professions only
of Obedience to the Papal Sea.

Howsoever the Allies being encouraged by their late success, proceeded in the
War; in order unto which, Colonna was confirmed General of the Galleys by this
Pope's Commission, and with his Fleet joined to that under the command of the
Providitor General Soranzo, and to 20. Galleys supplied by Don John of Austria,
(who promised to follow them with the main body of his Fleet unless he were
diverted by the Wars in Flanders) they sailed to the Rendezvous at Corfu.
Toward the end of July 1572. 1572.
they arrived at Corfu, and there joining with Foscarini General of the
Venetians, composed a considerable Fleet, consisting of one hundred and thirty
Galleys, six Galleasses, and ten Ships, with which they esteemed themselves of
sufficient strength to encounter the Turks, whose force, (notwithstanding the
late Defeat) was reported to consist of two hundred and fifty Sail; but they
being for the most part Vessels built in haste, and framed of green and
unseasoned Timber, were notwithstanding their numbers esteemed of inferior
force to the well built and equipped Fleet of the Christians; who on that
confidence resolved to attaque the Turks, then anchoring on the Coast of
Mavoisia. The Christians being come as near to them as Cerigo, weighed their
Anchors, and had sight of the Turks about Capomalio: upon which Vzun Hali
Captain Pasha of the Turk's Armata not adventuring to stand a shock with so
well composed, and so well ordered a Force, turned the stern of his Galleys to
the Enemy, and rowed to the Westward, directing his course to the Isle of
Cervi: the Christians in the mean time toaing their heavier Vessels, pursued
them so slowly, that the Night came on, before they arrived within shot of the
Enemy; at which time Vzun Hali putting a good face on the business, as if he
intended to engage, but with hopes, that the Night would soon separate them; he
turned the Prow of his Galleys on the Enemy, whom when he observed coming on,
with heat, and valor; he tacked about, and basely put himself into flight, and
rowed away so hard, that the Christians not being able to overtake him,
returned again to Cerigo; where having remained for the space of two days, they
returned again in pursuit of the Turks: and on the 10th. of August, they
discovered them at an Anchor in the Port of Quails under Cape Matagan. The
Turks on fight of the Christians not daring to engage with them, fled and saved
themselves in the Port of Coron; from whence the Christians returned again to
their Rendezvous in Cerigo. By this time advices came that Don John was arrived
with his Fleet at Corfu, and that he was highly displeased, that the
Confederates should endeavor to engage the Enemy without the conjunction of
his Forces; Colonna was sensibly touched at this displeasure of Don John, as
were all the other Commanders, and therefore it was agreed, to return unto
Corfu, to unite themselves with Don John; which being accordingly performed,
and the Forces joined; the whole Fleet consisted there of one hundred and
eighty light Galleys, eighteen Ships, and six Galleasses: Upon this conjunction
of Forces a Counsel* of War being held, it was resolved, to surprise the Turks
in Coron, but they having Watches on the top of the Hills, discovered the
Christian Fleet at a distance, by which means they had time to retire to the
Port of Modon, which being a secure and well guarded place, they could not be
provoked by all the insults, and defiance the Christians could make to
adventure a Battle with them: for now not farther confiding in their Maritime
Forces, they applied themselves to fortify the Hills, and Eminences about the
Town with Canon, for better defense and security of the Haven; by which this
Enterprise on Modon appearing difficult, the Christians resolved to attempt the
Castle of Navarine, and to that end landed three thousand Italians, and one
thousand two hundred Spaniards under the command of Prince Alexander Farnese,
intending the next day to raise Batteries against the Castle; but being advised
by some fugitive Slaves which escaped from the Turks, that great preparations
were making, and eight thousand Horse were already in a Body, for the relief of
the Castle, the Design was given over, and the Forces recalled again aboard the
Fleet; upon whose retreat a Body of ten thousand Horse appearing, the
Christians had been greatly worsted, had they not embarked under the security
of their own Cannon. It being now about the 7th. of October, that the Winds
were high, the Rains falling in great abundance, and the Seas unsafe for
Galleys; and no hopes appearing, that the Enemy would be drawn to an
Engagement; it was resolved to conclude the Designs of this year; And so the
Christian Fleet sailing to the Westward, Don John and Colonna directed their
course to Messina and Foscarini to Corfu. When the success of this year was
told the Pope, his Answer was; That it was well it was no worse, for if the
first year of his Reign had been celebrated with the like glory, as was the
former; his beginning would have been too happy, and auspitious. Therefore that
the ensuing year might prove more fortunate, he intended to make it his chief
employment of the whole Winter, to offer his Prayers, and supplications to God
with fasting, Masses, and Processions, that he would be pleased to favor, and
assist the Cause, and Arms of the Christians against the Enemies of the Cross
of Christ.

But whilst the Pope was meditating of these things, and contriving means to
prosecute the War with most advantage; the Venetians unexpectedly about the
beginning of the year 1573. clapped up a Peace with the Turks by the mediation of
their Bailo, who then with the French Ambassador at Constantinople had treated
the Conditions with good success; to which Sultan Selim the more readily
inclined; for having done right to his honor by the Conquest of Cyprus, and by
taking several Fortresses in Dalmatia, he more easily condescended to terms of
Peace without diminution, or disparagement as was supposed to the greatness of
his Power. But both the Pope and the Spaniards were not satisfied with the
Venetians, for having without their consent and privity, and contrary to the
Articles of their League made this Peace with the Turk: In excuse for which the
Venetians dispatched their Ambassadors to the Pope and King of Spain, giving
them to understand, that the extreme urgency of their Affairs, which by many
circumstances were rendered difficult had forced them to an Accommodation with
the Turk; and in like terms they expressed themselves to Cardinal Buoncompagno
the Pope's Nephew, whom Gregory had in the year 1574. sent unto Venice to
complement Henry King of Poland, who by the death of Charles IX. was returning
by that way into France, to take possession of that Kingdom.

In this manner the Pope being eased of his expensive War against the Turk,
converted the current of his Treasure to the assistance of Henry III. against
his Protestant Subjects in France: for supply of which, he raised the sum of
four hundred thousand Crowns by Impositions, which he laid on Cities belonging
to the Church; and confirmed the Bull given by Pius V. for sale of
Church Lands; of which there remaining as yet to the value of fifty thousand
Crowns of yearly Rent, unsold: he constituted the Cardinals of Bourbon, Guise,
and Lewis d' E^^e, Commissioners for the Sales.

Nor was this Pope in other matters esteemed less generous, and magnificent;
for to the Duke of Bruswick, who came to visit him at Rome, he made a Present
of seven thousand Crowns, and erected many Churches there from the foundation,
and built Colleges and Churches to the number of twenty seven in diverse remote
parts of the World for Seminaries, and places of Worship, and Religion. And for
the more solemn, and ornamental Celebration of the Jubilee in the year 1575.
An. 1575.
he enlarged the Street leading from the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore to the
Lateran, for the more commodious passage of Pilgrims; and having repaired the
Portico or Porch of S. Mary's, which was become ruinous, he caused this
Inscription to he engraven over it. Gregorius XIII. Pont. Max. Eugenii labantem
Porticum refecit, and magnificentius restituit. Viam rectam ad Lateranum
aperuit. Anno Jubilei MD. LXXV.

In this year arose dangerous Discords, and civil Dissentions between the
ancient, and the new Nobility of Genoua; to which latter the Commonalty of the
City adhered, having by them been possessed with an Opinion, that the Ancient
Nobles, in favor of whom most of their Laws ran, intended to usurp such an
Authority over them, as should be little different from Slavery; this jealousy
made so deep an impression in the minds of the people, that they betook
themselves to Arms, and had proceeded to blood, and ruin, had not a stop been
made thereunto by the Wisdom, and Oratory of Senarega the Chancellor, who
being a moderate Person, and one, of whose prudence, and honesty the people had
a great Opinion, persuaded both Parties to remit their differences to the Pope,
the Emperor Maximilian, and the King of Spain. The which being accorded on all
hands, Senarega was in behalf of the New Nobility dispeeded to the Pope; with
whom whilst he was stating the case between both Parties, Intelligence was
brought to Rome, that Don John d' Austria was then at Gaeta preparing a very
great Fleet against Genoua, in expectation, and with probable hopes to prevail
by the means and advantages of those intestine Discords of the City. But the
Pope at the request and upon the applications made by Senarega, dispatched a
Letter to Don John, exhorting him to desist from his Design, which was so
displeasing to him, that in case he persisted therein, he was resolved to raise
all the force of Italy to oppose his Enterprise; the which Menaces having given
a stop to the proceedings of Don John; several persons were substituted
Arbitrators in these differences by the Pope, the Emperor, and the King of
Spain; namely, Cardinal Morone, Castacciaro, Borgia, and Idiaquez; who taking
the state of the whole matter into their consideration, rectified, and reformed
many ancient Statutes, established new in their places, and so governed all
things with that even hand, that an accord was made and concluded in the Month
of May 1576. with that satisfaction to both Parties, that the Citizens, and
Inhabitants who had retired from Genoua for fear of the civil Dissensions,
returned again to enjoy their repose and ease according to their accustomed
Liberty.

Nor was the Pope less concerned for the Peace of Poland, where great
differences arose amongst the Nobility (as has been accustomary) about the
election of a King. For Henry III. of France, having (as we have said) resigned
his Elective Government to take possession of his hereditary Kingdom of France;
the Election of a new King administered great cause of dispute, and argument; by
reason of the many powerful Princes which stood in competition, and were
Candidates for the Election; as namely the Emperor Maximilian II. and Ernest
his Son, with his Brother the Arch Duke of Austria, Stephen Battori Prince of
Transylvania, Alphonso II. Duke of Ferrara, together with the Great Duke of
Moscovy. The Contests between these mighty Rivals proceeded to that degree,
that nothing but force of Arms could determine the Controversy; which the
Archbishop of Gnesne with many other Associates intending to prove, forsook
the place of Election, and with armed Bands declared for Maximilian the
Emperor; against whom an other party appeared in favor of Anne Daughter of the
Royal Family of Jagellona in Poland, intending in right of her to confer in
Marriage the Crown upon Battori Prince of Transylvania: but these dissentions
were soon after concluded by the death of Maximilian the Emperor; Battori being
after his Marriage with Anne by general consent of all the Nobles received, and
crowned King of Poland; and thereupon sent his Ambassadors to Rome to pay his
respects, and obedience to the Papal Chair.

In the year 1576. a grievous Pestilence afflicted most parts of Italy,
especially Trent, Milan, and Venice: it is recorded of Cardinal Borromeo who
was Archbishop of Milan, that he was in a most pious manner charitable to the
Poor, and others of his City at that time of common Calamity, to whom he not
only contributed a maintenance for their food, and Medicines for their
sickness, but in person visited such as were afflicted with the Pestilence, and
administered to them the Sacraments of the Church and other spiritual comforts;
for which and other works of like piety he was afterward canonized for a
Saint. Nor was Venice less afflicted with this spreading Contagion, of which
most of the Friars, and other Religious, whose duty it was to visit the sick,
died of the same Disease; for which reason the Pope sent his Indulgences into
the aforementioned places, that all such who died with a sorrow for their sins,
should obtain the same pardon, as if they had confessed, and communicated, and
received the other Sacraments of the Church required for dying persons.

It will not be very pertinent to this History to relate the Troubles which
happened in Portugal in the days of this Pope; which in reality were very
great, caused by the rashness of Sebastian King of that Country; who suffering
himself to be persuaded by Mahomet King of the Moors, who was expelled his
Kingdom, transported an Army of thirty thousand Men into Africa, to restore
again the expelled King to his Government. But as this Design was commenced
against the Opinion, and counsel of the King of Spain and the other Friends of
King Sebastian; so accordingly the success was unfortunate, for his whole Army
was defeated near the City of Alquivir, 1578.
and himself slain in the year 1578. Sebastian dying in this manner without
Issue, Cardinal Henriquez Uncle to the deceased, and Son of King Emanuel was
Crowned King; but he being at that time Aged and infirm, and unfit for
Matrimony convened an Assembly of eleven Barons of the Land, to consider of a
Successor, that so future Contests, and civil Wars for the Crown might, if
possible, be avoided. Whilst this matter was under consideration the Cardinal
King died, and then all things were in confusion; the Commonalty cried up for
Don Antonio who was the bastard Son of Don Alvize Brother to the Cardinal; but
the Nobility declared for King Philip of Spain, to whom the right of succession
to the Crown did legally appertain according to the Opinion of all the Doctors
of the Civil Law, this Controversy came at length to be decided by the Sword,
in which King Philip having the advantage, sent an Army of thirty thousand Men
under the Command of the Duke of Alva into Portugal, where having taken several
Towns, at length made himself Master of Lisbon; where Philip soon after
arriving was acknowledged King, and Fealty paid him by all the Nobles, and
Commonalty of the Land; and having remained some short time at Lisbon returned
in peace to his Court at Madrid. Whilst these things were in action the Pope
sent Cardinal Riario to accommodate differences, and moderate between both
Parties; but coming too late, after the Controversy was decided, he changed
his Office of Mediation to Complements, and joy for the successes of the
Conqueror.

About this time Pope Gregory confirmed the Excommunication which Pius V. had
published against Elizabeth Queen of England; and outed Gilbert Truckhesius
Bishop of Cologna of his Archbishopric, for marrying, and for adhering to the
Confession of Augsbourg: He also rectified the Calendar, which we call the New
Style or Gregorian Account, differing ten days from that which we use in
England, called the Julian Account: the which was to commence in all places
where they would receive it in the year 1583.

About this time also there happened an irreconcilable difference between the
Grand Master of Malta and the chief Knights of that Order; which arose to that
degree and height, that the Knights deposed their Master, put him into Prison,
and having accused him of many enormous Crimes, they created Marturin Romagasso
a Gascon to succeed him in his place. On the other side the Grand Master
appealed to the Pope, and complaining of the many injuries he had sustained,
desired that he might be removed to Rome, and his cause heard before the
Apostolical Tribunal. The Pope highly resenting this insolence, and indignity
which the Knights had exercised toward their Master, dispatched his Legate to
Malta, who by virtue of a Writ from the Pope, brought the Grand Master to Rome;
and with him came three hundred Knights on three Galleys; where being arrived,
the Pope favored the Cause of the Master, and in evidence thereof, sent eight
hundred Horse to meet him, which with great pomp, and triumph conducted him to
the Palace of Cardinal d' Este, where he was lodged with much honor. After a
few days allotted for his refreshment he was admitted to Audience with the
Pope, and having in humble manner kissed his feet, he repeated the Hymn of Nunc
dimittis,, or, Lord let thou now thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy Salvation. Which piece of flattery so pleased the Pope, that he
would give no credence to the Calumnies, and charge of his Accusers, but
dismissed his Cause, and returned him back to his Lodging with honor, and
entire satisfaction. After which Romagasso his Rival coming to Rome to hear,
and see how matters were carried; and finding himself discountenanced both by
the Clergy and by the Princes, conceived so sad a resentment of this
miscarriage, that falling sick with grief, he soon after departed this life
about the beginning of November 1581. Two Months after which the Grand Master
being also transported with a different passion died at Rome; both which
accidents so happily concurring obviated all the difficulties which might offer
about a new Election, Hugh de Verdal a Gascon being chosen by common consent
without trouble, or other tumult.

The year 1583. began with two unfortunate Calamities which much afflicted the
Pope, and the City of Rome: the first was Famine, and want of Bread-corn which
so miserably pinched the poor, for the space of two Months, that many of them
were starved to death. The other was a sad, and doleful Tragedy which began at
Rome, and ended at Padoua; the cause and matter thereof in short was this. The
Head Bailiff of Rome with his Followers, understanding that a certain Bandito
was come for a Spy to Rome, and for Sanctuary was fled to the Palace of the
Orsini; by one means, or other he seized, and brought him from that place; but
it happened that as he was carrying him from thence, Raimond, Orsini, Savillo,
and Rustici being on Horseback with their Servants unhappily met the Bailiff,
and commanded him to release the Prisoner, who was illegally seized within the
privileges of the Orsini. The Bailiff refusing so to do, Rustici struck him
over the Head with his Cane, which so incensed the Bailiff that he commanded
his Followers to revenge this affront with their Arms; which they readily
obeying immediately shot Rustici dead from his Horse; and so mortally hurt
Orsini, and Savello, that in two days after they died of their wounds. This
unhappy accident troubled all Rome, but especially incensed the party, and
Creatures of Orsini to that degree, that rising in a tumult, they ran with
Weapons in their hands to kill all the Sbiri or Bailiffs they could find, and
having waylaid all the Avenues, where they could make an escape, the confusion
continued for the space of two days, and rendered the City a sad spectacle of
blood, and massacre. In the mean time the Pope, and civil Government not being
able to apply a Remedy gave way to the fury of the people, which (as it was
believed) would have been inflamed higher by opposition of the civil
Magistrate; The Head bailiff having hidden himself for some days was at length
taken, and beheaded at Rome. But this evil ended not here: for from this fatal
accident, another quarrel arose between Vitelli who was Deputy to Buoncompagno
General of the Church and Lodwick Orsino Brother of Raimond, who was lately
killed; in prosecution of which, Orsino taking with him several persons in
disguise, and Masks, assaulted Vitelli in his way from Monte Magnopoli to Rome,
and shot him dead with a Carbine in his Coach, for which offense Orsino being
condemned to banishment, he departed from Rome, and went to live at Padoua,
where having taken up his Lodgings, he soon after committed a like murder on
Vittoria the Wife of Paul Giordano, and her Brother; for which Crime being
prosecuted by the Justice of Venice, he fortified himself within his House,
resolving to preserve himself by force of Arms; but not being long able to hold
out against the Soldiers which were sent against it, the House was almost
levelled to the ground, and the Defendants taken Prisoners, which being all
punished by death, or other Sentences of Justice, this fatal Tragedy was at
length ended.

After these sorrowful Stories, the Pope being willing to cheer and comfort the
City, created nineteen Cardinals, amongst which his Nephew was made one with
the title of St. Sixtus, and John Anthony Fachinesti of Bologna, who was
afterward made Pope by the name of Innocent IX. After which he received no
small contentment to see his Stately Structure of the Jesuits College finished
at Rome, over the Gate of which these words were Engraven. Greg. XIII. P.M.
Religioni, and Bonis Artibus MDLXXXIII. in memory and in gratitude for which
the Jesuits at their own expense painted in their wide Court, or Area, all the
Colleges, and Foundations which this Pope had built, and endowed in diverse
parts of the World: and particularly in reference to their own College, this
Inscription was engraven in Capital Letters. Gregorio XIII. Pont. Max. Hujus
Collegii Fundatori Societatis Jesu amplissimis ab eo Privelegiis Munita, and
Ingentibus Aucta Beneficiis, Vniversa in hoc totius Ordinis Seminario parentis
Optimi Maximi Memoriam, suique grati animi Monumentum P.

Nor were these favors ill bestowed on the Jesuits, who had always been so
industrious, and true Drudges to the Sea of Rome, that they brought Proselytes
from the most remote parts of the World; and in the year 1585. after a long
Navigation of three years, conducted four Ambassadors to Rome from the Island
of Japan in the East Indies, sent from some great Lords, and from the Community
of Christians converted in that Country to the Faith of the Gospel. The arrival
of such Strangers at Rome filled all the City with Discourse, and Novelty; and
were entertained with free treatment at the expense of the Church, being lodged
in the Jesuits College, who were the Authors, or Apostles of their conversion:
though some years afterward by the indiscreet management of the Jesuits, who
usurped too much on the civil Jurisdiction and temporal Power of that Kingdom,
Christianity was totally extirpated by the most cruel persecution that the most
fierce Enemies to the Gospel of Christ had ever exercised against his People:
for the particulars whereof which are most doleful, and Tragical to relate, and
not pertinent to this History, we shall refer the Reader to the Writers of the
Description of Japan. But as to these four Ambassadors who were all young Men,
not much exceeding the age of twenty years, they had remained but few days in
Rome before Pope Gregory departed this life. He was rather surprised with
death, than reduced thereunto by long sickness, his indisposition being
discovered by his countenance, before he was really sensible thereof within
himself; his Distemper was esteemed by the Physicians to be a Quinsy with which
he was suffocated, and died the tenth day of April 1585. being aged eighty
three years, and three months. He may be numbered amongst the good Popes, having
ended his days with a general good esteem of all, and especially of the people
of Rome who bewailed his death, and in honor to his memory engraved these
words, under his Statue of Brass which he had in his lifetime caused to be
erected in the Capitol.

Gregorio XIII. Opt. Max. ob farinae vectigal sublatum
Vrbem Templis and Operibus Magnificentis exornatam
H.S. Octingenties
Singulari beneficentia in egenos distributum
Ob Seminaria Exterarum Nationum in urbe, ac toto pene Terraram Orb
Religionis propagandae causa instituta
Ob paternam in omnes gentes caritatem
Qua ex ultimis Novi Orbis insulis Japoniorum Regum Legatos
Triennii Navigatione
Ad obedientiam Apostolicae Sedi Exhibendam
Primum venientes Romam Pro Pontificia dignitate accepit.
S.P.Q.R.
The Pope being dead, his Corpse were with funeral Pomp brought into St. Peter's
Church, and buried in a Chapel which he himself had erected, which was
afterward richly adorned, and beautified by his Kindred and Relations.

He was naturally of a cheerful Countenance, and pleasing Aspect, and being of
a good habit of Body, and sound temperament by temperance and sobriety he
conserved that good constitution unto old Age: he used much Exercise, and
delighted in Riding, being so active, that to his latter time he could mount on
Horseback without the help of his Servants; the place of his Recreation, and
retirement was Monte Dragone at Frescati, about ten Miles distant from Rome
where he frequently enjoyed the fresh Air, which is accounted the most
healthful of all Italy. This Palace now belongs to the Prince Borghese, and is
situated in a most delightful prospect from one of the open Galleries, of which
I copied these Verses.

Thessala quid Tempe, qui quaeris Adonidis hortos?
Haec tibi pro cunctis villa Dragonis erit.
Prospicis hinc Tybur, colles, and rura Catonis
Pulchrior aspectu quae tibi Scena subit.
The greatest care and trouble which this Pope sustained in the time of his
Reign, was to suppress the unruly numbers of the Banditi who were grown to that
bold insolence, that they commanded and pillaged all the Cities round; nor were
the Lives, nor Estates of honest Men safe, nor secure within the Cities. It is
incredible to relate what numbers they murdered in diverse places, and what
Robberies they committed; and though this Gregory sent many Troops of armed
Soldiers against them, yet he was not able to extirpate those bands of
villainous Men; that work being reserved for Sixtus Quintus, whose Life is the
next which offers it self to our Pen.

SIXTVS V.
GREGORY being dead, the Cardinals to the number of thirty nine entered the
Conclave on Easter day being the eleventh of April, which were all that were
then present at Rome; to which in a short time afterward three more were
added, namely, the Cardinals of Austria, Madrucci, and Vercelli: The Conclave
being divided into no less than six Factions, prolonged the choice by the many
Scrutinies that were made; but at length all things seemed to favor Cardinal
Montalto and the minds of the Conclave to incline toward him; for he was
considered as a Person learned, peaceable, pleasant in his Conversation, and
one, who was free of dependancies or Relations; for he had only some Nephews
by a Sister who were all so young, and of that tender age, that they were never
likely to put him to expense, or intrude into the management of Affairs:
besides he had been always obliging in his carriage, and given demonstrations
of due honor, and respect to all the Cardinals; he was also of a quiet
behahaviour living in a modest retirement, and having at any time entertained a
Dispute, or controversy with any Cardinal in the Consistory, he would rather
gently yield the question, than seem obstinate in any impertinent adherence to
his own Opinion. When at any time he had been reviled, as once he was in the
Consistory, where one of the Cardinals called him, the Ass of la Marca, he
laughed, and took it for a jest, and as an effect of that intimacy, and
familiarity which was between them. In short, his plausible carriage made him
acceptable to all and opened a way to his Election, which happened the 24th.
day of April, the Sea having been vacant fourteen days only.

This Pope was named Felix or Felice born of poor, and obscure Parents at
Montalto in the Marches of Ancona: at the age of fourteen years he took the
habit of St. Francis and became a Cordelior Friar, in a Convent at Ascoli not
far distant from the place of his birth. As he grew forward in years, he became
a good proficient in his Studies, and so subtle a Disputant, that he was always
challenging and provoking his fellow Students to Disputations, which moved them
to that anger, and envy against him, as made them often to fly into passions,
and revile him with the meanness of his birth, terming him with the reproach of
being the Son of a Hog-driver, or the Boy of a Swineherd; all which he took
very mildly, and without displeasure to be accounted of mean Parentage; for he
would often in jest, say, that he was born of an Illustrious House which was so
conspicuous, that the very Sunbeams darted through it. But when he had passed
from his Sophistry to more substantial Learning; he took his Degree of Doctor
of Divinity in the City of Fermo; and soon after in company with certain other
learned Fathers he went to a public Disputation held at Asciti, where in
presence of Cardinal Carpi, who was then Protector of the Franciscan Order, he
showed so much subtlety, and acuteness of Wit in defending certain conclusions,
that he acquired the esteem both of a learned Disputant and an elegant Orator.
In the year 1551. he was ordained Preacher, at Siena, and the year following at
Camerino; and afterward by order of his General he was appointed one of the
Lent Preachers, in the Church of the Holy Apostles at Rome, and therein
acquitted himself with great honor and applause. Afterward he was made one of
the Council of the Inquisition, and constituted by Pope Pius IV. Vicar General
of his Order, and together with Cardinal Buon-compagno made Legate Apostolical
in Italy. Pius V. created him Bishop of St. Agatha, and Cardinal with title of
St. Jerome: And lastly (as we have said) he was on the 11th. of April 1585.
chosen Pope, giving himself the name of Sixtus V. though desired by others to
assume the name of Nicholas in honor to Nicholas IV. whose memory he was
observed much to affect, as appears by a stately Monument, which he at his own
charge, when Cardinal, erected over the Sepulcre of that Pope in the Church of
Santa Maria Maggiore at Rome: But the name of Sixtus prevailed with him, both
in Complement to Cardinal St. Sixtus, as also in honor to the memory of Sixtus
IV. who was a Friar likewise of the same Order.

Sixtus being thus Elected, he contrived to be crowned on Wednesday the first
of May; which day had often proved auspicious to him; for on a Wednesday he was
first initiated into the habit of St. Francis, and on a Wednesday he was
created Vicar General, Cardinal, and Pope; on Sunday following he went to St.
John of Lateran (according to usual custom) to take possession of his sublime
Office. But before we proceed to the particular Affairs which occurred in his
Government; it may not be unpleasant to the Reader to recite some delightful
passages which happened upon his Election. For when the Scrutiny was past and
that Montalto thought himself secure of his Election, he immediately began to
cast off his disguise of Humility, with which he had for above fifteen years
cloaked his Ambition: for no sooner were half the Votes recited in his favor,
by which he found himself secure of his Election; but being impatient to enjoy
the honors of the Papal Throne; he arose on his Feet, before the Scrutiny was
wholly finished, and placing himself in the middle of the Hall; he threw away
his little Staff, which he usually carried for a support of his crooked old
Age, and then strutting and stretching himself bolt upright, he seemed a foot
higher than before, that all wondered to see the Pope grown in a moment so much
taller, than when he was Cardinal: and with that he began to hum, and spit with
as much force as any young Man of thirty years of Age and of sound Lungs was
able to do. At which the Cardinals looking one upon the other, wondered at this
strange Metamorphosis showing some kind of dissatisfaction at their Choice; and
therewith the Cardinal Deacon cried aloud, Hold, fair and softly, here is an
Error in the Votes, the Scrutiny is not good. But Montalto would by no means
be so put off, but boldly replied, It is good, it is good, and began to sing Te
Deum Laudamus, with such a clear and Audible Voice, that he made the whole Hall
ring again; though an hour or two before, he did not speak a word without
Coughing, or spitting three or four times.

And therewith placing himself before the Altar, with his Eyes on a Crucifix,
he said a short mental Prayer, as was accustomary; and then the Master of the
Ceremonies asked him, Whether he was pleased to accept of the Papal Office? At
which turning about with a Majestic, and grave Countenance; he replied: We are
not now to receive that which we have already accepted; but if you had another
Popedom to confer, we were capable also to receive that, for by the Grace of
God, we are well assured, that we have force, and vigor sufficient to Rule,
and govern two Worlds with as much facility, as we can do this one Popedom.

When the Masters of the Ceremonies vested him in his Pontifical Habit, they
observe;d with what mavelous vigor he extended his Arms, to cloth himself
with his Robes, which he performed with such haste and agility, as if he feared
to lose his Office, and honor, by appearing slow and unactive, which Cardinal
Rusticucci attentively observing, said to him, Most Holy Father, the Papal
Dignity is a most admirable Medicine, for it turns old Cardinals into young
Men, and sickly and unfirm Persons, it makes sound, and robustious; To which
the Pope replied, That it was very true, for he found it so by good experience.
But what was most remarkable in this Pope was, that no sooner was the Scrutiny
past, than immediately the Scene was changed with him; for he was now no longer
the humble, modest, and infirm Cardinal Montalto, but the haughty, Majestic,
and grave Pope Sixtus,; he was now no longer familiar, and jocular with the
Cardinals, but severe, and morose, disdaining to maintain an easy conversation
with any, nay even with those who had promoted him to the Papal Dignity.

Being thus habited in his Pontificalibus, and conducted to St. Peter's Church,
where was a great concourse of People from all parts of the City to behold the
new Pope; and being come to the Portico, he was met by the Canons of that
Church singing that Antiphona. Ecce Sacerdos Magnus, qui in diebus suis placuit
Deo, and inventus est Justus; which is, Behold the High Priest, who in his
days, was pleasing unto God, and was found just. As he passed forward into the
Church, he went making Crosses, and scattering his Benedictions on the People,
with such firmness of Hand, and strength of Arm; that they all wondered at the
change, and as if they could not give credit to their Eyes, they cried aloud,
which is the Pope? which is the Pope? Others also running to one, and other,
said, is this the Cardinal, who the other day was so feeble and decrepit, that
he seemed ready to fall at every step? is this he, who walked always stooping,
with his Head hanging down, and awry toward one shoulder, but how is he now
changed! with what vigor and Majesty does he now walk like another Aaron! It
is reported, when his Physicians came to pay him their respects and adoration,
as he sat in his Throne in St. Peter's Church, that one of them should say to
him, Your Holiness seems to have another garb, and mien, than when you were
Cardinal: to which the Pope replied; It Is true indeed, for when we were
Cardinal, we went always stooping, and poring on the ground, to find the Keys
of Heaven gate; but now having found them, we need not to look so low, but
rather cast our Eyes aloft toward Heaven; having need of no other matter now
upon Earth.

The Ceremonies in S. Peter's being over, he was conducted by the Cardinals to
the usual Lodgings of the Pope, where having left him alone, he refreshed
himself only with a little Biscuit, passing the whole day with great
abstinence: and being alone, his Servants observed him to walk in his Chamber
quick and fast, but in a thinking and pensive manner, at which they much
wondered; because they never knew him before to move from his Chair, to walk in
that manner; and being in this melancholy motion, the Steward of his House
came to him, (as usually) to know what he was pleased to order for his Supper;
whereunto the Pope replied, with his Eyes fixed on him, and with a stern
countenance. It is not accustomary to demand of great Princes what it is that
they are pleased to eat; but prepare us such a Supper as is Royal, and then we
shall choose that Dish, which is most agreeable to our Palate. Then he
commanded, that the Cardinals Alessandrino, Medici, Rusticucci, Este, San-Sisto
and Altemps, should be invited with him to Supper: which being accepted by
them, they all appeared, except only Este, who for some reasons excused
himself; and being sat down at the Table, the Pope began a Discourse of the
great honor which was due to the Papal Dignity; and of the high favor which
Christ had bestowed on the Pope in making him his supreme Vicar on Earth,
repeating often those words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church. And then with vehemence of Speech, he proceeded: O said he, how
profound are the Judgments of God: Christ would not ordain on Earth more than
one Peter, one high Priest, one Vicar, one Head; To one single Person only, he
gave Authority to govern his Flock, and to feed his Sheep. Tu es Petrus. Thou,
Thou only art High Priest: To thee will I give the Keys of Heaven, To thee
only do I give the Keys to open, and shut, and to bind and loose. To thee, to
Thee only do I give Authority to sustain, and govern my Flock: to Thee only
who art my Vicar, and not to others, who are Servants, and simple Ministers of
thine.

The Cardinals had all this while wit enough to understand, that this whole
Discourse was levelled only at them, and at the beginning to take them off of
all expectation of governing, or managing Affairs for him. For he was willing
to eradicate that Opinion out of their minds, which they had conceived of him;
that being a weak, and an infirm person, he would easily have submitted to the
management and direction of his Cardinals; which was true enough, and which
doubtless was the chief motive at his Election. And to evidence farther his
resolution to rule alone, he would scarce suffer any of them to interpose a
word, but he would take them short; and still repeat that saying, That in the
Church there ought to be but one Commander.

With this satisfaction the Cardinals after Supper returned to their own
Lodgings, discoursing as they went of the Complement the Pope had passed on
them, and of the manner how he had unfolded his mind and thoughts; but above
all, Cardinal Medici seemed to be most concerned, having had the fairest game
in all appearance at the Election; and therefore could not contain himself from
saying: I see a great storm coming toward us, but who is to be saved, shall be
saved.

The day following, or some short time afterward, the Pope called before him
the Governor of Rome, and all the Judges of civil and criminal Causes, to whom
he recommended with great fervor and zeal of spirit an impartial, and severe
Administration of Justice, but uttered his words with such vehemence of speech,
that they seemed rather like Menaces, than gentle Exhortations, concluding at
their dismission with these words: Non veni pacem mittere, sed gladium, I came
not to bring Peace into the World, but a Sword.

The reception he gave to Ambassadors and foreign Ministers as also to Princes,
and great Lords of Rome, was with a cheerful Aspect, and Countenance; but their
Audience was but short, excusing himself, that the first days of his
Pontificate were taken up with so much solid business, that he had not leisure
to bestow much time on superficial Complements. Howsoever he showed himself
more benign, and obliging to the Ambassadors from Japon, who (as we have said)
arrived in the latter days of Pope Gregory late deceased; and to whom Sixtus
was very ambitious to show the glory of his Coronation, which being now
preparing with great pomp and magnificence, he was desirous to have the report
of his State and Grandeur extend to the remote confines of the World.

And now Sixtus being seated in his Chair, he was affected with the same
desire, which commonly possessed the mind of Popes, of showing his greatness,
and glory to his near Relations; in compliance wherewith, he gave orders for
conducting his Sister Camilla with her Sons to Rome, warning them beforehand,
that they should content themselves with that sober modesty which became the
meanness of their birth, and the gravity of those who were related to the Papal
Chair, where nothing but decency, and awful reverence did reside. But so soon
as news came, that the Lady Camilla was near the City, the Cardinals Medici,
Este, and Alessandrino, intending to oblige the Pope, went forth to meet her,
and having detained her at a Palace near adjoining, until she was dressed in
the habit of a Princess, they afterward conducted her to Rome, where the Pope
expected her with great impatience: but being presented before him in that garb
and habit, by Cardinal Alessandrino; the Pope would not seem to know her,
saying, where is my Sister? Behold her, quoth the Cardinal, Most Holy Father
here before you. No, replied the Pope, this cannot be she; for I have but one
Sister and she a poor Country Woman living in a Cottage; but this wherewith you
present me here, is a Princess of Rome: when I see her, in such a homely, and
Country habit, as I left her in, I shall then own her, and ackowledg her for my
Sister.

The next day Camilla returned to him again in her own simple, and Country
habit, accompanied only with her Daughter, and the two Sons from that
Daughter; and then when he saw her he tenderly embraced her, and said, This
indeed is my Sister, we now acknowledge you in this habit; and none shall make
you a Princess but my self; for his humor was to be obliged by none, nor would
he have his Cardinals to boast and glory in a report of having clothed, and
adorned his Sister, and setting her up in the garb and state of a Princess.

The first of May was now come, which was the day appointed for his Coronation,
which was performed with all the solemnity and pomp that could be contrived.
After which he proclaimed that public Prayers should be made, that God would
be pleased to illuminate his Vicegerent here on Earth with Grace and Wisdom
sufficient to govern the vast extent of his Universal Church, granting to such
as were devout Supplicants in his behalf Indulgences, and Pardons in a most
ample manner. Which being performed, he armed his mind with such constancy, and
resolution in the administration of Justice, as seemed to surpass the usual
severity of former Popes; and for the first Assay, and proof thereof, he caused
four Men to be hanged, for carrying prohibited Arms, notwithstanding the great
Intercessions, and Interest which particular Friends made in their behalf. The
which piece of Justice was most seasonable in those days, considering the
insolence of the Banditi, or banished Men, who in the late times of Gregory,
did so infest all parts of Italy, that neither the City, nor Country could
secure the Estates or Lives of honest Men from their rapine and violence.

Nor was he rigorous only in his own proceedings, but required the like
severity in all the Officers and Ministers of Justice, that acted under him: so
that if he observed any of his Judges either remiss in their duty, gentle, or
inclinable to mercy, or moderation in what the Law inflicted; he would
presently discharge them from their Office, and place others more severe, and
morose; and in case he observed any of a Saturnine, tetrical aspect; he would
presently enquire after him, and having received any tolerable character of his
condition, he would esteem him a Man sit for his turn, and prefer him before a
mild and gentle temper, which he thought very disagreeable to the constitution
of Magistracy.

As to his Politics, he thought Intelligence to be the life of Government, and
therefore would have Spies over every Cardinal to watch his most private
actions; that nothing was either said at his Table, or whispered in his
Bedchamber, but what was reported to the Pope. He appointed also Spies over
the Princes and Barons of Rome; and over the Prelates of the Court who observed
their actions, and remarked their Discourses: others also crept into Shops, and
insinuated themselves among the vulgar at public Meetings; others had a
Station allotted in the Monasteries, that the very Secrets of the Cells were
discovered: the like course was taken in all Towns and Cities of Italy; and
with such secrecy was every thing managed, that one Spy was not acquainted with
the walks, nor business of the other. To all the Nuntios, and Inter-Nuntios
residing in the Courts of foreign Princes, it was ever an Instruction the most
warmly recommended of any, to be diligent in their Advices; and not to content
themselves with the common reports of the Town; but to penetrate into the
secrets, and Cabinets of Princes; to which end, no Money was spared which might
corrupt the chief Ministers, and Secretaries of Councils.

He ordained certain Visitors to review all criminal Cases, which for the space
of ten years past, had been recorded in any Court within the Ecclesiastical
State, with power to reverse the same, and proceed against the Offender, in
case the Sentence upon due examination should be found remiss, or moderated
below that rigor which the Law required: In prosecution of which, many who
were already dead were mulct, or fined in the Patrimony they had left; others
who for the space of four or five years past had been released from Prison,
either by the Intercession of Friends, or by Bribery, or by other indirect
means, were remanded back again, until the extreme rigor of the Law was
satisfied.

He farther issued out Warrants of discovery of all Thefts and Robberies
committed; charging the people upon pain of Excommunication to reveal, and
inform every matter of bribery, corruption, or misbehaviour, which they knew,
or of which they could accuse their Judges, who had for the space of five or
six years sat in the Seat of Judicature. By these means every day one poor Judge
or other, who perhaps also was out of employment, was dragged away to Prison,
and close shut up for what Crime he knew not, or perhaps had forgot the
Sentence he had passed in the Case, for which he was accused. These and many
such like cases of severity struck such a terror into the minds of those who
sat on the Tribunals of Justice, or managed any public employment; that every
one became cautious, and nice in the Sentences he gave, or how, by fear, or
bribery he remitted the least scruple, or severity which the Law enjoined, or
required.

Farther, he gave strict charge to all Sindics and Governors of Towns, and
Castles, to give in, a particular List, or account of all Felons within their
respective Precincts, who had for the space of ten years past been accused, or
branded with Capital Crimes; and also of all such, who had been convicted for
scandalous, and infamous persons, and Incorrigible during the time of their
Sindicate; In which Lists he required such an exact impartiality; that upon
Information given against the Sindic of Albano, how in the List of the
Dissolute and Incorrigible, he had omitted to insert the name of his Nephew; he
was sentenced by the Pope himself to undergo the Strapado in the public
Marketplace, from which punishment all the Intercession, and Prayers, and
Interest which the Spanish Ambassador could make in his behalf, was not able
to deliver him. By these means the Lists of Dissolute Persons which were
immediately directed to the hand of the Pope, were so very exact, that no
person was exempted, who was guilty of the least Crime. Which when the Pope
saw, and observed every Week, as they were sent him, he was greatly pleased,
and especially with those which were filled with a great number of names; for
in reading of them, he would often say, Oh happy Galleys, which I intend to
build: O happy I, who have first found Men for my Galleys, before I found
Galleys for my Men. The which severity of the Pope, (from whom there could
never be any expectation of Pardon) so terrified all sorts, and conditions of
People; that every one comported himself with the greatest modesty, and gravity
imaginable, that an Oath, or a rude, or uncivil word was not heard through any
of the streets of Rome: but every one being alarmed, and dreading, as if he had
always a Constable, or a Pursuivant at his back, walked with his beads in his
hand, repeating a Paternoster, or some other Prayer, with a sorrowful and
penitential countenance.

By these Methods all the Banditi, who being grown licentious under the gentle
Government of other Popes, and who spoiled and destroyed all Italy, were now by
the Justice of this Pope almost wholly extirpated; for such as fled out of the
State of the Church to the Dominions of other Princes, he so prosecuted, by
laying Fines on any who secured, or succored them, and setting a price on the
head of every considerable Bandito; that in a short time he reduced them to a
small number, and totally suppressed the pride and insolence of that pest of
mankind. And thus resolutely was Sixtus bent to punish the Enormities of wicked
Men; that whereas it had been the custom of former Popes to show acts of mercy
and pardon on the day of their Coronation, opening the Prison Gates, and
enlarging the Prisoners; this Sixtus absolutely refused to grant releasement to
any, though instantly urged by the Cardinals; alleging, That there were Rogues
sufficient about the streets, without ransacking the Prisons for them: That he
had taken a resolution, when he was first made Pope, to chastise the wicked,
and not suffer their Villainies to corrupt, and intermix with the Virtues of
good Men. By these severities all people lived in quiet and peace one with the
other: no Sword was drawn in the City, nor quarelsom words, or uncivil language
uttered: it being a common saying to Men at variance together, Remember these
are the times of Sixtus. Thus when the Banditi were suppressed, the good and
benefit was so great to all Italy, that the Citizens of Rome erected a Statue
of Brass to the memory of this Rome, on which these words were engraven.

Sixto V. Pont. Max. ob quietem publicam compressa Sicariorum Exulumque
licentia restitutam Annonae inopiam sublevatam, urbem edificiis, viis,
aquaeductu illustratam SPQR. And farther, to demonstrate the inflexible humor
of this Pope; it is observable, that a poor Youth of about seventeen years of
age, making a resistance against the Bailiffs, who came to distrain an Ass, for
some Duties owing, and by Law ordained to be paid; in which seizure though the
Officers made a mistake, for that the Ass did not belong to the party who owed
the Money; yet because he offended against the course of Justice, by making
opposition to it, he was condemned to die; nor could the persuasions or
Intercessions of the G. Duke's Ambassador, nor of the Cardinal of Medici
prevail in his behalf, or mitigate the rigor of the Sentence: and when the
Governor of Rome alleged that the youth being under age could not by Law be
put to death for this Crime: the Pope replied, If he want years, I will lend
him ten of mine.

Nor did Sixtus exercise this severity only toward his own People; but he was
brisk, and haughty toward all Christian Princes, for in a few days after his
Coronation, or at most in two months after, he quarrelled with Henry III. King
of France, with Henry King of Navarre, and with Philip II. King of Spain. The
occasion of his quarrel with Spain seemed to have had no other cause or
foundation, than his own pride, and desire of usurpation, and which happened in
this manner. It had been the custom ever since the time of the Emperor Charles
V. for the King of Spain by his Ambassador at Rome, to present yearly on the
29th. day of June, which is the Festival of St. Peter, a white Horse, with a
Purse of seven thousand Ducats in Gold to the Pope, for a Tribute, and
acknowledgment for the Kingdom of Naples, which that King holds, as feudatary
to the Ecclesiastical State: And now on the usual day Sixtus appearing on a
Throne with pomp, and mignificence to receive his Tribute, which the
Ambassador in a quaint Speech, and with fine Complements presented: he seemed
not very well satisfied therewith, but returned this tart, and Satirical Reply:
You think now, said he, that you have made a fine Speech, and indeed so you
have, for you have made us change a Kingdom for a Beast; and still seeming
uneasy, as he was about to rise; he added these suspicious words: But we
believe, that this business will not proceed long in this manner. These words
immediately touched the Ambassador to the quick; and giving him just cause of
reflection thereupon, he dispatched them for Spain by the first Post, and to
the Duke of Ossuna then Vice-King of Naples; the which administered not only
cause of jealousy, and incited the Vice-King to be watchful against the least
commotions; but was the cause of misunderstanding and ill correspondence
between Sixtus, and Philip of Spain.

But the quarrel which he had with the French King was of another nature, and
grounded on more substantial differences: and considering the fierce resolution
of Sixtus might have produced more prejudicial consequences. The Dispute had
its beginning from a Message sent by the Pope to the French Ambassador,
signifying to him by break of day in the morning; that it was the Pope's
pleasure, that in t^^ space of two days time he should depart from Rome, and
from the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical State: the occasion of this
intimation was this. The Pope for reasons best known to himself, had recalled
from the Court of France his Nuntio the Bishop of Bergamo, with intention to
dispeed Fabio Mirto the Archbishop of Nazaret to reside in his place; for he
being a Person of prudence, and noted for his admirable conduct, and dexterity
in the management of Affairs, the Pope took an extraordinary liking to him,
especially for having managed the Office of Nuntio at other times with great
success: but the French King so soon as he received Intelligence, that this
Archbishop of Nazaret was coming Nuntio to Paris, and understood by his
Character, that he was a Person zealous, and entirely devoted to the Interest
of the Pope; he immediately dispatched an Express to him with Letters, desiring
him, that wheresoever those Letters should be delivered to his hands, he should
remain, and abide, until new Orders should come to the Pope, whom he had
instantly desired, that the Bishop of Bergamo might still continue in his
Office. The Archbishop of Nazaret being proceeded as far as Lions, when he
received the King's Orders, seemed greatly surprised with this unexpected
interruption; saying, that his Master the Pope, who was impatient of Injuries,
would highly resent an Affront of this nature; and that whereas he had
Instructions to return back from what place soever, he found the least
difficulty, or interruption in his Journey; he was resolved the next day to set
his face toward Rome; the which would produce an ill correspondence with
France; for the Bishop of Bergamo would certainly be recalled, and the Kingdom
left without the residence of a Nuntio.

So soon as this News was brought to Rome, the Pope resented it in a fierce
manner, and with high words against the French King, threatened revenge with
Thunderbolts of Excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical Censures: and in the
heat of this fury without the consultation of a Consistory, he sent immediately
to the French Ambassador to depart from Rome, and out of the Dominion of the
Church. On the other side when this news arrived at the French Court, the King
expressed his resentments thereof to his Council, and calling together all the
Ministers of foreign Princes, he in their presence, stated the difference in the
case between himself and the Pope, protesting against the Injuries he had
received. In fine, after several Letters which passed by Expresses between the
King and the Pope, without any good understanding on either side, for the Pope
was resolved not to yield his Point; at length by the mediation of foreign
Ambassadors at Paris, and the interposition of Cardinal d' Este, and other
Cardinals at Rome the matter was accommodated, so that the King received the
Archbishop of Nazaret at Paris, and the Pope recalled the French Ambassador
the Sieur St. Godart to Rome, whom in his fury he had lately dispeeded from
thence.

But such quarrels as these, were like the fallings out of Friends, which are
easily reconcilable; and of small importance in respect of those grand Feuds
which were commenced between the Pope, and Henry King of Navarre on the score
of Religion: for in regard, that in the Reign of Gregory XIII. a League was
made against the Protestant Religion, and directed against the Person of the
said Henry; which Pope Gregory refused to subscribe: but now this Sixtus V. who
was of a towering Spirit, and one, who delighted out of the pride of his heart,
to mortify Princes, and contend with great Personages, not only subscribed to
the League in a most solemn manner; but with terrible maledictions issued out
his Bulls of Excommunication against the person of Henry King of Navarre, and
the Prince of Conde, declaring them guilty of Heresy, and to be the chief
Fomenters and Protectors of the heretical party: and that consequently the said
Henry, his Heirs, and all descended from him was by the just Censures of the
Canonical Law rendered incapable to succeed in the right of any Principality,
and particularly to the Crown of France; and accordingly he did absolve all his
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and the Obedience they had sworn to him.

Notwithstanding all these Menaces of the Pope, and the power of the League,
Henry comported himself with that Courage, and generosity of mind; that the
Pope could not but much admire the heroic spirit of that King, and conceived
such an extraordinary Opinion of his Abilities and worth, that he would
frequently say, that there were only two Princes in the World, namely the King
of Navarre, and Elizabeth Queen of England, whose friendship, and
correspondence he would court and desire; but that the guilt of Heresy had
rendered them incapable of his Acquaintance. And in such esteem those two were
with him, (notwithstanding the prejudice he had to them, for the cause of
Religion,) that in his ordinary Discourse he would use this saying: That to
make things go well in the World, there was need only of three Persons, viz.
Elizabeth, Henry, and Sixtus. It is said also that Queen Elizabeth conceived
such an esteem for this Pope Sixtus, that she would often commend his Talent,
and excellent Qualities for Government. And that when some would discourse of
her Marrying; she would often say, that if she did marry she would have no
other Husband, than Pope Sixtus; which being reported to him again, he replied
thereupon, That if they two should lie one night together, they should beget an
other Alexander for the World.

The Duke of Ossuna in the time of this Sixtus was Vice King of Naples, a
Person esteemed the wisest Governor, and the best Politician of his Age; and
yet was highly blamed by this Pope, for not revenging the murder of Starace,
who in a popular Insurrection was assassinated by the people, for no other
reason, than that he was esteemed a Confident, and a Creature of Ossuna: upon
which neglect, and default the Pope entertaining Discourses frequently with the
Spanish Ambassador, would often say, That two Instruments were necessary for
the people, that is, Bread and cold Iron, repeating those words often, Bread I
say and cold Iron. But Ossuna, who had no need of those Admonitions, not long
after, (or so soon as it was convenient) revenged the blood of his Friend
Starace in such a signal manner; that the Pope changed his Note, and began to
applaud him, and ^estow the Character on him of a most Excellent Governor.
These Commotions happened at Naples some few days after Sixtus was elected
Pope; and before he was scarce warm in his Chair: for had he been well settled
therein, it may reasonably be collected from some sayings of his; that he would
rather have nourished, and somented those broils, then instigated the Vice-King
to punish the Authors of them: for having always had an ambition, to convert
the feud of that Kingdom into an actual possession, he would have made use of
those late disturbances, to inflame the minds of the people and exasperate them
against the Government, as a means to introduce his own Authority into the
place thereof; and so much may be collected from his words one day to Cardinal
Rusticucci when discoursing of the death of Starace. This Man, said he, might
have done us great Service, had he lived at least one year longer.

Sixtus all this time would not suffer, or endure any Counselor to advise or
direct him in his Affairs, but affected to manage all by his own wisdom and
conduct: howsoever he was desirous of Confidents, and familiar Acquaintance,
with whom he might discourse matters, and use for Spies to inform him of all
passages in the World: amongst this sort of Creatures, his Nephew Cardinal
Montalto possessed a considerable share of his affection; for though he was but
a young Man, yet he was of a mature judgment, and for his years well practiced
in the Affairs of the World: howsoever he gave him this caution, that he should
beware how the kindness he had for him, did encourage him to a confidence of
making any request for Benefits, or favors either for himself, or others: the
like Admonition he gave also to his Sister, and his other Nephews, whom he
tenderly loved, and labored to make rich; oftentimes forbidding them, to ask
any thing of him: For, said he, I charge you, never to make any motion to me in
behalf of any; for we resolve to do all our selves; and consider, that what
bribes soever you take, are but unlawful, and ill-gotten goods; but what Money
you receive from us, will be hallowed, and blessed.

Notwithstanding this severity, and morose humor of Sixtus, he would sometimes
divertise himself with more pleasant and delightful entertainments; amongst
which he took a particular contentment to read a Book of Memoirs, or recital of
several passages, which in the time, when he was a young Friar, he had wrote
for his own remembrance; the which being now Pope, he was much pleased to read,
and contemplate. One whereof was, That being at Macerata, he had occasion to
buy a pair of shoes, for which the Shoo-maker demanded seven Giulios or three
shillings and six pence English. Friar Montalto desirous to get them cheaper,
offered him three shillings, and assured him, that some time or other he would
bring him the other six pence: Yes, said the Shoo-maker, and when? when you are
Pope, I warrant you. Yes, said he, stay but till then, and I promise to pay you
the Money with full Interest until that time. The Shoo-maker laughing,
delivered him the shoes, and said, since I find you disposed to accept the
Popedom, be sure you remember to pay this Debt, when you are exalted to that
Dignity. Sixtus, as I say, reading this passage in his Book; immediately wrote
to Macerata, to know if this Shoo-maker were living; which when he understood,
he ordered the Governor of the place to send him up by one of his Officers.
The poor Shoo-maker surprised, and affrighted with the news, that the Pope
desired to see him in Rome, for he neither remembered any thing either of the
shoes, or of the Giulio, it being a matter of forty years standing; so that at
every step he made, he was still thinking, and wondering at these Summons,
recalling to mind all the sins he had committed in his life, considering for
which of them he was thither cited. Being come to Rome, and introduced to the
Pope's presence; He asked him, whether he remembered ever to have seen him at
Macerata? the poor Shoo-maker trembling, told him, No. Nor do you remember ever
to have sold me a pair of shoes? No, said the poor Fellow shrinking up his
shoulders: but, said the Pope, we well remember, that we are your Debtor, and
have sent for you to pay you your Money; for we owe you a Giulio on account of
a pair of shoes, which we are now to pay you with Interest according to
agreement: and so calling for the Steward of his House to pay him the Giulio,
with the Interest upon it for forty years which amounted to two Giulios more,
he then dismissed the Shoo-maker, bidding him go in peace. The Shoo-maker
having received his three Giulios; murmured, and complained very much, that the
Pope should send for him, and bring him from so remote a place, and from his
Trade and Employment, which was above twenty Crowns charge and damage to him,
only to give him three Giulios, or eighteen pence; which he always carried in
his hand, and complained to every one he met. The news of the Shoo-maker's
laments being brought to the Pope by his Spies; he presently sent for him
again, and demanded of him, if he had a Son? the Shoo-maker answering, yes, and
that he was an honest good Priest of the Order of the Servi; whereupon the Pope
caused him to be called to Rome, and before the departure of his Father,
invested him in a small Bishopric within the Kingdom of Naples: and then bid
the Shoo-maker make up his Account, and see, to what sum the Interest of his
Giulio had amounted. Many are the stories of this nature recounted of this
Pope, which we shall omit, contenting our selves to have given the Reader this
familiar Tale, which seems too light, and frivolous for History: yet since it
is our end, and design to give a Character of the Popes; their humor, and
disposition, may some times be more clearly shown by familiar passages, than by
the more profound transactions of business.

The Jesuits, who formerly were in high esteem with Gregory XIII. and
influenced his Counsels in such manner, as that he acted nothing but by their
pleasure, and direction: were very studious to insinuate themselves in the like
good Opinion of Sixtus; and to that end courted Cardinal Montalto, inviting him
often to the Recreations, and Exercises of their Schools, that (if possible)
they might prefer a Confessor to the Pope: which motion when it was made to
Sixtus; he in great indignation answered, That it were better, that the Jesuits
confessed to the Pope, than the Pope to the Jesuits.

Howsoever, they still continued their courtship toward him, and invited him
one day to hear Mass in the new Chapel built by Gregory; and being introduced
thereunto by way of the Cloisters, he was detained a while by the young
Scholars who rehearsed many Verses in honor of their great Benefactor Pope
Gregory, particularly recounting the thousand Benefits and Donations they had
received from him; hoping by this example to excite Sixtus to the like bounty;
but he not being a Person to be wheedled with fine Verses; after he had heard
all they could say, he told them plainly: Fathers, said he, you are much
mistaken, you take us to be Gregory, and we are Sixtus, and We promise you ever
to remain the good Sixtus, and never to be the bad Gregory.

At another time being persuaded by them to come to a solemn Festival
celebrated at their College; they with that occasion showed him the
magnificence, and neatness of their House, and the convenience of their
Offices: all which Sixtus much approving, merrily told them, That he would
rather see their Treasury, than their Refectory: to which the Father Rector
answered: That they had never been so poor, as at present. Continue so still,
said Sixtus, for unless you be poor, you shall never be truly Religious; for
your Poverty is beneficial to the Church, and your Riches prejudicial to the
Popes. By these sharp Replies, the Jesuits had touched the pulse of the Pope,
and finding that nothing was to be gotten by him, would never trouble him
afterward with Requests or begging Petitions. Howsoever Sixtus in his heart
loved and affected this People, ^eing excellent Spies, and such as brought him
the best Intelligence; and therefore he was often heard to say, That the
Jesuits were the best sort of Religious Orders, and useful in the Church, and
that he loved them heartily, because they asked him nothing.

Sixtus had for a long time got a fancy, or project in his head to confine all
the Courtesans, or Whores in Rome within a place, or circuit of the City, as
the Jews were; and having communicated this Design to the Governor of Rome, he
was made sensible by him of the great difficulty of the thing; for that their
numbers filled the greatest part of the City: howsoever, not being able to
suffer the propudious, and shameless Courtesans to live intermixed with the
honorable, and virtuous Matrons; he banished the most common and impudent
strumpets from the City, confining the remaining part within a certain limit,
and quarter of the Town. But this remedy of Vice, enereased two great Evils:
for the small number of Courtesans did not abate the sin, but procured greater
custom and Trade to the Ladies of Pleasure, who having more employment than
they could turn their hands unto: the looser sort of Italians for want of Women
burned in lust one toward the other, and addicted themselves to that
abominable, and unnatural Crime of Sodomy; of which the Pope being made
sensible, he reversed his sentence, and gave license to the banished Whores to
return to their usual stations: howsoever strict Orders were given, that
Priests should not entertain Wenches in their Houses under the notion of
Servants, or Housekeepers; which yet was so connived at, that when it was told
the Pope, that a certain Cardinal kept a Mistress; The better, said he, for
having his Conscience stained with this scandal, he will be the more cautious,
how he speaks boldly, or with freedom in our presence.

This first year of the Pontificate of Sixtus was in the Month of December
ended with the promotion of eight Cardinals, all Men of honor, and merit;
amongst which Hippolito Aldobrandino of Florence was one, with title of
Cardinal Pancratio, who was afterward created Pope, and called Clement VIII.

Sixtus being now at ease in his Chair, began his second year with the long
desired work of raising the Obeliske, called by the Italians Aguglia, An. 1586.
or Guglia, which had lain for many years neglected in the Circus of Nero,
where now is the Sacristia or Vestry of St. Peter's Church. This Obeliske, as
some Writers affirm, was made by Nycoreus, who reigned in Egypt about the time
of Numa Pompilius; and that at first it was one hundred and fifty Cubits high,
but in raising of it, it broke, and so was shortened fifty Cubits, which
afterward with several others of less magnitude was brought to Rome, and
consecrated to Octavianus Augustus, and Tiberius his adopted Son, as may be
seen by this Insciption now remaining, Divo Caesari Divi Julii F. Aug. Tiberio
Caesari Divi Aug. F. Augusto Sacrum.


But being erected in the times of Christianity, it was consecrated to the Holy
Cross, with this Motto: Sanct. Cruci Sacravit Sixtus V. Pont. Max.
E priore sede avulsum, and Ces. Aug. and Tib. ablatum.


On the Basis of it on the South side are these words; Sixtus V. Pont. Max.
Cruci Invictae Obeliscum Vaticanum.
ab impura superstitione expiatum justius, and felicius
Consecravit Anno MD.LXXXVII. Pont. II.


To erect this Obelisk without breaking it, was accounted a matter of that
difficulty, and Art, that none would undertake it: till at length Domenico
Fontana a rare Architect of Como contrived the Engines to perform the work,
which were so many, that the materials of them, the labor, and the workmanship
cost thirty six thousand Crowns; there is a Book extant in the Vatican Library,
which I have seen, that describes all the Instruments, and Engines which were
formed for that Design. The whole weight of the Obelisk rests on four Lions of
Brass, which are placed on a Pedestal.

Besides this great Work, Sixtus also was very industrious this year, and
intent in great and mighty works of Munificence and Charity. For he raised, and
repaired four other Obelisques in diverse parts of Rome. He built also a Chapel
in Santa Maria Maggiore which he dedicated to the Manger of Christ, called ad
praesepe, which he adorned with rare, and precious stones of the finest Marble,
Porphiry, Alabaster, Agats and the like, which cover the walls of the Chapel
within; he erected a stately Sepulcre, or Monument in memory of Pius V. He was
at great charge, and expense in bringing the Water by Aqueducts to his Palace
of Monte Cavallo, anciently Mons Quirinus. He also brought Water to Rome by
Pipes from the possessions of Prince Colonna far distant from Rome; yet by the
help of two thousand Men which he employed for the space of eighteen Months, he
happily finished the same; the charge of which amounted to 270000 Crow^s,
comprehending the sum of twenty five thousand pounds, which he gave to Prince
Colonna in purchase of that stream of Water, which he had taken from his Land.
To which Aqueduct he gave the name of Felice, which was the name he owned, when
he was a Friar.

He built also the Portico of the Lateran which is a Noble Sructure. He caused
a Statue of St. Peter to be cast in Brass, and placed it on the Pillar of
Trajan; and an other of St. Paul, which he set on the Column of Antonius Pius.
He enlarged many of the streets in Rome, made them strait, and so wide, that
five Coaches might pass abreast. He built a very stately Church and dedicated
it to St. Jerome, and endowed it with a plentiful Revenue. But amongst all the
magnificent structures which he has raised, there is none so famous, and
worthy of his Name as the Vatican Library, being about three hundred and
eighteen foot in length, and sixty nine in breadth; on the Walls are painted
all the General Councils in Fresco, with the famous Libraries mentioned by
ancient Authors, as also the manner of raising the Guglia or Obelisque before
St. Peter's. At the entry to this Library are two Statues of Marble, that on the
right hand represents Aristides an ancient Philosopher of Smyrna, that on the
lest is Hypolitus who first invented the perpetual Calendar, he lived fourteen
hundred years ago. The Books are all kept in Presses containing twenty thousand
Manuscripts, and sixteen thousand Books which are printed; round about thee
first Chamber the Pictures are placed of all those, who have been
Library-keepers since Sixtus V. The Books commonly shown here to Strangers are:
The ancient Copy of the Septuagint, a vast Bible in Hebrew, a little Book
written on the bark of a Tree, certain Sermons, with Annotations wrote by
Thomas Aquinas, and with his own hand, an old Terence wrote one thousand two
hundred years ago, a Letter which Henry VIII. of England wrote to Anne of Bolen
with his own hand, as also his Book against Luther: hereunto is added the Duke
of Vrbin's Library, bequeathed to this place, as also that of the Prince
Palatine Frederick, transported from Heidelberg to the Vatican, after that Town
was plundered by the Duke of Bavaria. All which and many other rare Works of
the like nature were performed at the charge of this Pope, which are now extant
at Rome and commonly seen and observed by Travelers. Besides all which he
built several other Colleges, Monasteries, and places of Charity at Bologna and
in his own Country. And at a vast expense he turned the poor Village of
Montalto, where he was born into a City, encompassing it about with a Wall, to
perform which he was forced to cut through a Rock, and threw down a high Hill
to make it equal to the lower Level; and to give some more esteem and honor to
this place, he made it a Bishopric, endowing it with a thousand Crowns of
yearly Revenue, besides many other privileges, and immunities which he
bestowed both on the Diocese, and the Government of the City: during the time
of which Work he built a Bridge at Rome over the Tybur which was of great use,
and benefit to the Trade and Commerce of the City, called at this day il ponte
Sisto tras Tevere.

Thus far have we discoursed concerning the humor and disposition of this
Pope, his Conduct, and Wisdom in the management of Affairs relating to Rome,
and the Church, together with his Munificence, and greatness of his Soul in
matters of building, and stately Structures, which have perpetuated his memory
to these times. Let us now proceed to other particulars which may demonstrate
his dexterity and conduct of Affairs relating to Negotiations with foreign
Princes; and in what manner he studied to fortify the Ecclesiastical State as
well with the Sword of St. Paul, as the Keys of St. Peter.

In order whereunto, in the first place, he formed and settled the Militia of
the Church in so good a method, that he was able within the space of one Month
to bring twenty thousand fighting Men into the Field; and in the next place, he
consulted with the most knowing Enginiers in what manner the Ecclesiastical
State might be most commodiously, and with most advantage fortified, the which
was executed with most Labor, and Art on that side which borders on the
Kingdom of Naples; which was a just cause of jealousy to the Spaniards, who by
the words, and actions of this Pope, had long suspected, that his Intentions
and Designs tended toward that Kingdom, the possession of which he had for a
long time swallowed in his thoughts, resolving not longer to content himself
with the bare feud, or tribute for it: the which jealousy was increased, when
they found the Pope intent in building ten new Galleys, for defraying the cost
of which, and of their maintenance, he imposed a new Tax on the people of Rome,
and the whole Ecclesiastical State.

About this time the Cantons of Switzerland, which continued firm to the Church
of Rome, sent their Ambassadors to the Pope, not only to make their
acknowledgments of Obedience to the Papal Sea; but likewise to inform his
Holiness of the unhappy state and condition of their Country, caused by the
neighborhood of the Protestant Cantons, who daily sent Preachers into their
Dominions, who seducing many from the Catholic Doctrine, their numbers, and
force did daily increase. For prevention of which and to confirm the doubtful
in the Catholic Religion they desired, that the Pope would be pleased to send
his Nuntio into those parts, which would be an encouragement to the people to
continue in the way of truth, as well as an honor to their Country. The Pope
with all readiness embracing the Proposition, dispatched Baptista Santorio
Bishop of Fricarico and Steward of his Household, to be, and remain his Nuntio
within the Dominions of the Catholic Cantons.

Santorio being there arrived, found all things in great disorder, the people
living without, (as it were) any respect, or dependence on the Roman Sea, by
reason that for many years the Popes had not thought this Country worthy the
charge or maintenance of a Nuntio therein. But now Santorio appearing there
with the Character, and in the quality of a Nuntio, caused speedily a Diet to
be convened in the Month of October 1586. at which two things were agreed, and
concluded highly advantageous to the Papal Authority. The first was, that all
the Deputies, which were present in great numbers received the Communion from
the hand of the Nuntio, and then entered into strict League and Confederacy
together, solemnly swearing before the Altar to maintain, and uphold the Papal
Authority, and to sacrifice their lives and fortunes in the defense thereof. In
the second place, they gave full power and Authority unto the Nuntio to
exercise a free, and Arbitrary Jurisdiction over all Ecclesiastical persons
within their Dominions, subjecting them to his Courts as well in criminal, as
in civil Causes: which was a concession, that the Wise Republic of Venice did
never judge fit to grant, notwithstanding all the bluster, and noise with which
the Popes required, and challenged it from them. But this Power given to the
Nuntio, was the cause soon after of some disturbance amongst the Cantons; for
it happened, That one day the Nuntio having Complaints brought him against a
certain Priest for scandal, and misbehaviour, he immediately issued out his
Warrant to the chief Constable and his Officers to take, and seize the person
of that Priest, and put him into safe custody: the Priest hearing of this
prosecution, fled into the Dominions of the Protestant Cantons, where the
Officers pursuing him, took him, and by violence and force brought him thence,
and secured him in the Nuntio's Prison. The news of this Attempt alarmed all
the Protestant Cantons, who by way of Reprisals seized the first Priest they
could meet, and confined him within their own Prison, resolving not to set him
at liberty, without the release, or enlargement of the other. This Accident
caused great disturbance and commotions both amongst the Protestants, and
Catholics: Diets being called on both sides, matters ran so high, that a
general rupture, or War was feared of all the Cantons. The Nuntio being also
sensible of these disorders, and not knowing unto what they might amount, wrote
to the Pope the whole sum of this matter, to which he returned answer in this
manner: We have sent you to pacify, and quiet matters, and not to make
disturbances, to give ease, and repose to the Catholics, and not to put Arms
into the hands of the Heretics, to convert the one, and not to put the others
into danger, no people will be contented to lose their own right; the point of
Jurisdiction is more nice, and brittle than a Crystal Glass, and therefore
those cases are to be managed tenderly, and with severe caution: troubles, and
disquiets are dangerous to Catholics, but to Heretics it may be profitable to
fish in troubled Waters: to give to Heretics is a great evil, but to take from
them is highly dangerous. Be therefore prudent in this case, both for your own
quiet, and for mine. The Nuntio collecting from this Answer, that it was the
Pope's pleasure to accommodate these matters; He ordered it so, that the Priest
should be set at liberty, but by way of escape, rather than by formal
enlargement; the like expedient the Protestants took, as to the other Priest,
by which means these matters were pacified, and concluded.

Henry III. King of France, (as before related) having composed his quarrel
with the Pope about reception of his Nuntio the Bishop of Nazaret; so good and
fair a correspondence passed between them, that the King adventured to demand
license of the Pope to raise a hundred thousand Crowns from the revenue of the
Church. Sixtus who was unwilling to deprive the Church of such a sum, nor yet
to disoblige the King by a plain and positive refusal; entertained his
Ambassador the Marquess Pisani with a delatory Answer, such as this, We shall
consider, we shall do nothing rashly, but with Mature consideration; which
being often repeated, and the Ambassadors wearied with such insignificant puts
off, which according to the style of Italy, and Rome, imported no less than a
civil denial, acquainted the King with their Sentiments in the case, which
were, that nothing could be expected from the Pope's bounty or concession; upon
which advice, and upon a belief, that this refusal was instilled by such
Instruments, as were employed in the Catholic League, and particularly by the
Duke of Guise, and his party: the King resolved to stand on his own bottom and
to steer a course between the League, and the Hugonots, for as he durst not
confide in the Catholic League, so he feared the issue of the War against his
Protestant Subjects, both which though to appearance were equally dangerous,
yet a peace with the latter seemed most safe, and desirable; in pursuance of
this Counsel, a peace being concluded with the Protestants by negotiation of
the Queen, the promotors of the League, of which the Duke of Guise was the
Chief, dispatched an Express immediately to Rome, giving the Pope to understand
the matter in these precise words: That the cause of Religion was betrayed:
That the Cause of the Hugonots was openly, and publicly favored: That the
measures of the War were broken, and all expectation of good, and benefit lost,
which might redound by means of the League to the Catholic Cause: That the
heart of the King seemed much estranged to the Catholic party, resolving to
espouse, protect, and maintain the Heresy in France.

The Pope, so soon as he received this Intelligence, called the French
Ambassador, to whom with words full of disdain, and fury he complained of the
proceedings of the King, whom he mentioned as one infected with Heresy, and
already alienated and estranged from the Papal Sea; and having called a
Consistory, Letters were wrote to the Nuntio Nazaret, with Orders to intimate
the Pope's just complaints to the King, giving him to understand, how much he
did resent the Resolution he had taken to the prejudice of the Catholic
Church, which was of such ill consequence, as took deep impression in the mind
of the Pope, and would be recorded with everlasting Characters of Infamy in the
Histories of his Reign. The Nuntio having received these Instructions, and
being backed by the instigation of the Duke of Guise, represented the Pope's
sense in warm, and passionate terms: In return unto which, the King, contrary
to the equal temper of his nature, retorted an Answer in brisk and sharp
Expressions: That it was a fine, and easy matter for the Pope to stand and
behold at a distance the miseries and afflictions of his Country, and to give
Counsel without assistance, or contribution to the War; for want of which, and
of a license to alienate so much of the Lands of the Church, as might serve to
raise the sum of a hundred thousand Crowns, he was forced for preservation of
his Kingdom, and Regal Dignity, to accept those Conditions, which they called,
ruinous to the Church. And then moderating his passion a little, in more
gentle, and mild terms, he desired the Nuntio, to assure the Pope; That he
would ever adhere, and remain constant to the faith of the Catholic Church,
and act in every thing to the advancement of it, so far, as he was able, and
that the want only of Money had forced him to this resolution. These
particulars being wrote to Rome, quieted a little the mind of the Pope, who did
all the time before, do nothing either in the Consistory with the Cardinals, or
in his Discourses with the foreign Ministers, but rail and storm against the
French King. But being now satisfied by his Nuntio that the King had changed
his mind, and would be induced to continue the War against the Protestants,
provided he could be assisted with Aid from the Church; the Pope immediately
appointed a Bull to be drawn up, and sealed, giving Authority and Power to the
King, not only to raise a hundred thousand Crowns out of the Estate of the
Church, as the King had demanded, but also twenty thousand Crowns more for
better encouragement to continue, and persevere in the assurances given;
enjoining the Nuntio to raise those sums on the Clergy, without any
contradiction, or delatory proceedings.

Thus as Sixtus was zealous, and profuse in such Expenses, as he judged
conducive to the support of the Papal Authority; so he was no less generous in
works, which might tend to the honor and ornament of it: In which
consideration reflecting one day on the manner, and garb, in which he desired
his Nuntios might live in the Courts of foreign Princes; he thought it would be
more magnificent to buy, or purchase Palaces for them, in the Capital Cities,
and Courts, rather than to rent Houses which appeared mean and low in the Eyes
of the World. The Venetians so soon as they understood the Pope's Design
herein, which they were extremely forward to gratify, immediately wrote to
their Ambassador residing at Rome, ordering him to acquaint the Pope, that the
Senate out of their good will, and affection to the Papal Sea, had resolved to
bestow on the Nuntios Apostolical a Palace, wherein to reside at Venice, and to
remain to them, and their Successors for ever: And accordingly gave
possession, to Matteucci the Pope's Nuntio then residing, of a magnificent
Palace in the square of St. Francis at Venice; and by Deeds, and conveyances
under the Seal of St. Mark passed over the right, and title thereof unto the
present Nuntio and his Successors for ever. The Pope having received the news
hereof, confirmed by the authentic Copy of the Deed, was so greatly pleased,
that with a Letter full of kind Expressions he returned his thanks to the
Republic for their generous Present; and lest he should seem to be backward or
defective in the like liberal returns, he assigned to the Minister of Venice an
other Palace at Rome, in lieu of that which they had presented to his Nuntio at
Venice. Other Princes according to this Example were inclined to accommodate
the Papal Minister with a Habitation; in expectation of a like exchange at
Rome; but the truth was, the Pope began to grow sensible of an inconvenience in
this sort of Presents; for that he could neither find Palaces in Rome
sufficient to receive so many Ministers, as were sent him from foreign Princes,
in lieu of those which were allotted to his Nuntios in the respective Courts;
nor situation of places so fitted to the humor and rank of each
Representative, but that the condition of the Palace being more, or less
magnificent might administer cause of exception, and quarrel to the respective
Ministers: for which reason the Pope considering better of this matter, refused
after the Present made him by Venice, to accept the like from any other Prince,
declining the Obligation with a Complement, and an Excuse; and that rather than
put the Prince to so great an Expense, he was resolved to purchase Houses for
the convenience of his Nuntios with his own Money.

Thus as Sixtus was haughty in his nature, and affected high, and glorious
matters; so he was severe, and morose, judging every criminal action, or
misbehaviour in Men to proceed from a contempt, or want of fear, which Men
ought to bear toward his Government. Several instances of which might be
given; but because we would not enlarge into many particulars, we shall only
mention one Story not unpleasant to be related, which was this: The Statue of
Pasquine (into the hand of which all Libels are put at Rome, from whence they
are called Pasquils) was one day covered with a very dirty Shirt; and that
other Statue called Marforio asking the reason of it, Pasquine answered,
because his Landress had left him to be made a Princess, alluding to the Lady
Camilla the Pope's Sister, who from a Landress was promoted to be a great Lady.
The report of this Pasquil was immediately brought to the Pope, who conceiving
thereat a secret indignation, endeavored by his Spies to detect the Author of
it; but this being a secret known only to the Party himself, the discovery
seemed impossible by other means, than the Confession of the Author; to procure
which, the Pope published an Edict, wherein he promised upon the word of a Pope
to give two thousand Pistols, together with the safety of his life to any
person, who should reveal the matter and confess himself to be the Author of
this Pasquil; and on the contrary threatened the Gallows, and Torments to
whomsoever should be discovered, and by sufficient testimony be proved guilty.

The Author being more covetous of the two thousand Pistols, than wise, went
directly to the Pope, and confessed and acknowledged himself to be the Person,
who made the Pasquil: which when the Pope heard; he admired not a little at the
boldness of the Man, and earnestly looking on him gave him this Answer: We are
obliged to maintain the word and faith we have given you, and therefore we
order, that the Money promised you, shall be paid: which being performed, and a
Receipt given for it, the Pope farther added: It is true, said he, We promised
you the Money, and your life, both which we have performed, but howsoever we
have reserved another Reward for you in our breast, which is a Sentence that
both your Hands, and Tongue be cut off, that so you may not be able to speak,
or write more Satyrs of this kind. In pursuance of this intention of the Pope,
this person was taken into custody* and immediately his Confession produced as
a testimony against him before the Judges; by which being convicted,
immediately without delay his Hands were cut off, and his Tongue bored through;
which sort of severe poceedings affrighted all Rome, which was not accustomed
to such Cruelties; the which action, with several others of the like nature
struck an awe, and fear into the minds of all Men, so that generally people
walked with great circumspection, lest they should fall into the merciless, and
unrelenting hands of Sixtus. Cardinal Buoncompagno, who was constituted Gran
Penitentiary by Gregory XIII. dying this year with great Riches; that Office by
his decease becoming vacant, it was expected, that the Pope would have
conferred the place on Cardinal Montalto his Nephew: but to convince the World,
that merit, and not affection prevailed in his mind, he readily conferred that
Office on Cardinal Aldobrandino, a person of singular prudence and Learning,
and one whom he gladly found an occasion to gratify the services he had
performed to the Church; the choice of a person so deserving was acceptable to
all Men, and of whom the Pope conceived such an esteem, that he communicated to
him all the secrets of his Counsels, being confidently assured of the prudence,
sincerity, and profoundness of his judgment.

87.
The year 1587. being the third year of the Pontificate of Sixtus, was now
entered, when the People of Rome reflecting on the great plenty, and abundance
of all provisions within the City, caused by the care and wise contrivance of
the Pope, whilst all the neighboring Dominions labored under want, and
scarcity: And also beholding the City of Rome by the munificence of this Pope
adorned with stately Edifices; the Citizens received so much satisfaction
thereby, that they erected a Statue of Brass to him in the Capitol with this
Inscription: Sixto V. Pont. Max. ob quietem publicam compressa Sicariorum,
Exulumque licentia, restitutam Annonae inopiam, sublevatam urbem, Edificiis,
Viis, Aquaeductu illustratam, S.P.Q.R.

Sixtus for his divertisement did often use to walk about the City Incognito,
or in disguise; in which kind of perambulation passing once in his Coach by the
Convent of the Holy Apostles he was pleased to alight and enter into the
Convent; the Gate being open, he went first into the Porters Lodge, who was
then a Probationer, or in the first year of his Novitiate: the Pope surprising
him, whilst he was eating a dish of Beans, was pleased with the remembrance of
his own poor condition, when in the like posture he was forced to content
himself with the same Diet; in contemplation of which, he sat down on the
stairs, and taking a wooden Spoon began to eat heartily, and help the Porter to
make an end of his Mess. The standers by wondered at the humor, and fancy of
the Pope, and especially to see him eat up the oiled Beans so heartily; which
when he had done, he arose up and thanked the Porter: saying, These Beans will
add two years of life to us, because we have eaten them with a good appetite,
and without fear. And then lifting up his eyes to Heaven, he said, Blessed be
thy Name most Almighty Father, that thou have granted this favor to thy High
Priest to eat once in peace and quietness. Thus much he was apprehended to say,
out of the caution and fear he had of Poison; for he was confident, that the
Porters Beans were free from such Ingredients; though he could not be secure of
his own Dishes at home; of which living in continual suspicion, he confined his
Cook always ways to his Kitchen, keeping a Guard always upon him to keep him
from all correspondence or communication with others. The Pope thus pleased
with his Entertainment, commanded that the Porter, who was a Probationer only,
should be immediately vested in the Friars habit; which being performed; in his
presence he gave him his Blessing at departure, adding these words: We have
been what you are, do you endeavor to be what we are.

But we must not omit to recount one pleasant passage, before we return to more
serious, and important Affairs. Sixtus out of an affection to the Friars of his
own Order, had a desire to celebrate this year a Chapter General, over which he
would preside in Person, giving license not only to such Friars as were
invited thereunto; but also to all others, who had the curiosity to be there
present: and not to burden the Order with the expense, which such a concourse
of people might bring, he declared that he would bear the charge on his own
account; by reason of which, never was any Chapter at Rome celebrated with such
State, and Magnificence as this. At this Chapter a new General of the Order
being chosen; the Pope commanded, that after the Election all the Friars should
walk in procession to kiss his Feet at the Vatican; giving the Friars to
understand the day before, that he gave license to every one of them to demand
some grace, or favor from him, by which distinguishing Act of benevolence, he
might give sufficient testimony to the World of that love, and affection which
possessed his heart toward the Companions of his Order.

The Friars receiving this gracious Message by their Cardinal Protector, were
highly exalted in their spirits, and every one began to consider with himself
what Boon, or Gift, or privilege would be most corresponding to his own
convenience. In the mean time the report of this excessive Grace flying about
into all Convents of the City: the Friars of other Orders began to envy the
happiness and fortune of the Cordeliers: the Dominicans murmured against Pius
V. who had never evidenced the like respect toward them: the Cardinals also
repined, and blamed the prodigality, and excess of the Pope in promising favor
to every individual Friar of his Order; when on all the Cardinals together he
never bestowed one ray of his bounty, nor granted one privilege to the whole
Sacred College.

But these Discourses little touched the mind of Sixtus, who the next day gave
admission to the Friars one after the other, as they were in Precedence, and
Seniority; at the reception of whom the Pope sat in his Chair of State, and his
Secretary on his left hand at a little Table to take their Names, and a brief
of the Petitions, and Requests they made, the which for the most part were so
ridiculous, and extravagant, as yielded the Pope, subject sufficient for
laughter, and pass-time: For one being a Napolitan whispering in the Pope's
Ear, desired, that he might have license to renounce his Order, and marry, or
else, that he might have a Dispensation to keep a Wench, and not be liable to
the Censure of his Superiors: some of them demanded to be made Cardidinals,
others to be made Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots with other Dignities: some
would have crept into the Offices which belonged to other Orders: one
particularly demanding to be made Chief Master of the Sacred Palace, which
belongs to the Dominicans: and an other desired to have Bishops removed to make
places for them. In short, their Requests were so exorbitant, that to satisfy
them all, Sixtus must have overturned the whole Order of Friars, and unhinged
all the Dignities, and Rules of the Church. Only it is observable that a poor
Lay-Brother, who had been a Cook, and Butler in a Convent, being one of the
last to kiss the feet of the Pope; shed many tears of joy at his admittance to
so unexpected an honor, which having done, the Petition he made was this: That
since his Holiness was pleased to suffer such a poor wretch as he, to speak to
him, all he had to desire, was only this, that he would vouchsafe out of his
great bounty to build a Fountain for his Convent, which suffered very much (as
his Holiness well knew) for want of Water.

The Friars having thus in their order exposed their several Petitions, they
were called in together: and then in a full Assembly, the Pope made this
general Answer to them all; Had your petitions, and demands been correspondent
to our expectation, we should have made no difficulty of giving satisfaction to
your desires: We imagined, that you, who are persons sequestered from the World,
would have entertained no thoughts of particular interest: for Friars having
their wills restrained, and bound up with chains of Obedience; can possess
nothing in reference to their own persons, but only with regard to the public
benefit; to which Rule had you confined your desires, our bounty had been
enlarged to the ultimate concession of what you could demand; which we are now
forced to deny, lest we should offend against the Rules of your primary
Institution and Vows, which require you to mortify, rather than me to gratify
your Ambition.

Thus were the Friars all dismissed from the Pope's presence, where Petitions
and Desires became the common talk and laughter of the Town, and served to
discover the secret, that the minds of mortified Friars are as capable of vain
thoughts and ambitious desires, as those of secular Men, who profess not the
like strictness of mortification and sanctity. Howsoever, the poor
Lay-brother's request for a Fountain was taken into consideration; for that
being agreeable to the Munificent humor of Sixtus was received, and
immediately ordered to be put in execution by bringing Water to the Convent
from the Pope's Gardens at Monte-cavallo, which flows there in plentiful
streams. But now to proceed unto more serious matters.

Toward the end of this year 1587. Stephen Battory Prince of Transylvania, and
King of Poland, having reigned in that Kingdom for the space of nine years,
departed this life: his death was universally lamented by all, having proved a
most excellent Prince, and a zealous Champion of the Christian Religion against
the Turk: for he recovered the Dukedoms of Suevia, and Smolensko from the
Moscovites, and united them again to the Crown of Poland. He also behaved
himself with constant resolution against the Turk, who having in the year 1584.
demanded according to ancient Articles assistance of some Polish Troops against
the Persians: Battory resolutely denied them to him, saying, That, whereas the
white Eagle of Poland had lately moulted her feathers, and was displumed, and
become weak, she had now recovered her wings, and her train, and had sharpened
both her beak, and her talons: Which brisk Reply and bravery of Battory in all
the actions of his Reign, did calm the spirit of the Turks, and checked those
frequent Incursions, which they made into Poland.

But Battori, as we have said, dying this year, the Nobility of that Kingdom
were very desirous to elect a King, who might in Wisdom, and Courage prove
equal to the valor of the deceased Prince. Many there were, who offered
themselves Candidates for that Election. Ridolphus the Son of Maximilian the
Emperor, was one, who for being of the House of Austria, seemed qualified for
that Crown: Some cast their eyes on the Duke of Parma, who for his prudence,
and experience in War, was one of the most renowned Captains of those days: but
being an Italian, it was suspected, that his humor would not be agrreable to
the customs of Poland. The Vaivod of Transylvania, and Cardinal Battori were
others, who appeared fitly qualified for this Dignity: the first being a young
Man, and full of spirit, assisted with the advantage of his own Riches, and in
great reputation with the Turk, appeared with a luster deserving a Crown, but
having been Nephew to the late King, his Alliance prejudiced his pretentions,
not being consistent with the policy of that Nation, to have a succession in
the same Family; the same consideration also was an impediment to the Cardinal,
though otherwise a Prince of excellent Endowments.

The Duke of Ferrara was an other proposed, but he, as well as the Duke of
Parma was an Italian, whose humor was inconsistent with the Poles.

Many Nobles also of Poland it self seemed fitly qualified both in Riches, and
Virtue for that Dignity; amongst which Zamowski the Grand Chancellor had a
most considerable party: for, he having managed all the Affairs of that Kingdom
during the Reign of Battori, who communicated all his Counsels with him, and
entrusted him with the greatest secrets of State; by which he became the most
experienced in Affairs, and high in Reputation, living little inferior to the
Royal pomp: howsoever the Nobles not enduring at that time subjection to any of
their own degree, and Country; and having never for the space of six hundred
years admitted a Prince of their own to reign over them, they would neither now
introduce a Novelty repugnant to their ancient customs, and constitutions.

Upon the preceding considerations the election falling on none of the
foregoing Princes; the Votes came at length to concenter between the Prince of
Sweden, and the Archduke of Austria called Maximilian, Brother of the Emperor
Ridolphus, a person of that affable, and obliging deportment, as took much with
the humor of the Polanders. Howsoever, the contrary party and the most
prevalent objected; that being Brother to the Emperor, he might be too potent,
and in time by the power of Germany subvert the Government, and turn it from an
elective to an hereditary Kingdom: wherefore totally declining Maximilian, this
party resolutely fixed on the Prince of Sweden a youth of twenty years of age,
greatly favored by the Poles for being descended from the Family of Jagellona;
which for having added the Dukedom of Lituania to their Commonwealth, was so
highly esteemed by them, that the merit to that Family could be no otherwise
extinguished, than by transferring the Crown to the Prince thereof. But these
considerations in favor of Sweden were turned to quite contrary Sentiments by
the differing party, so that the whole body of the Nobility being divided
between these two Princes, the Election still remained in suspense; both
designing to determine the Dispute by force of Arms.

Whilst the Election remained under these doubtful circumstances, Sixtus wrote
to the Archbishop of Naples, then Nuntio residing at the place of Election,
secretly to favor the side of Maximilian, but yet with such caution, as not
too far to engage himself, but that, in case fortune favored the Prince of
Sweden, he might without a blemish declare himself for that party, that so he
might own in some measure his Election unto him.

Maximilian to make good his cause appearing before Cracovia with an Army of
sixteen thousand fighting Men, demanded of the Citizens to receive him in; but
they refused it, and sent with all diligence to the Prince of Sweden to
expedite his March, for that delays in this case were dangerous, and that the
day of his Coronation was fixed to be celebrated on the Feast of St. Luke, then
near approaching: In the mean time, they repaired their Fortifications, and
strengthened their Suburbs, making daily Sallies on the Forces of Maximilian,
and most commonly were successful therein to the great encouragement of the
Citizens.

In a short time after, Ambassadors arrived at Cracon from the Prince of
Sweden, advising that the Prince, though detained by contrary Winds, was come
as far as Donzilca, and that though it was impossible for him to be so soon
with them as St. Luke's day; yet certainly he would not fail to be there by St.
Martin's, which was on the 15th. of November, and be ready to receive that
Dignity on the Sunday following; for according to the custom of that Country
the Coronation must always be solemnized on the Lord's Day.

During all this time the Army of Maximilian was greatly weakened for want of
provisions; and having neither Wine, nor good Beer, they were forced to drink
bad Waters, which with the cold and moisture of the season caused Fluxes and
Dysenteries and other distempers amongst the Soldiery, which reduced them to
small numbers. Howsoever Maximilian leaving the City of Cracovia, marched
toward Pietricovia with intention to stop the march of the Prince of Sweden:
but finding that the Army of his Enemy was greater, than his own, and that he
received the worst in many Skirmishes, he retreated to Bellone, and thence to
Pitschen of the frontiers of Silesia belonging to the Duke of Briga. But being
pursued thither by the Enemy, he was there besieged, and afterward taken
Prisoner toward the end of January 1588.

The Pope who was greatly concerned for this disgrace of Maximilian, dispeeded
Cardinal Aldobrandino into Poland to treat a Peace, and an Accommodation
between Maximilian, and the Prince; the which after various difficulties, and
Disputes was happily concluded, about the beginning of March 1589. The Articles
of which were, that Maximilian should renounce all Title, and pretense to the
Crown of Poland by reason of the late Election, or any other demand whatsoever;
and that the Prince of Sweden should remain the lawful and undoubted King:
which being agreed the Prince took possession, and was named Sigismond III.

The Pope, who was no less zealous for the success of the King's Arms in France
against his Protestant Subjects; sent a Sword to the Duke of Guise, who was
chief of the Catholic League, as he had lately done to the Prince Farnese, who
was Governor of Flanders; the which was delivered by a Bishop who was
purposely sent to present it, and therewith to tender his paternal love, and
benediction to the Duke, assuring him that he possessed a large room in the
heart and breast of the Pope. The Ceremony of delivering this Sword was
performed with such pomp, and triumph at Paris, and with such popular
acclamations of the multitude in favor of Guise, as administered just cause of
jealousy, and fear to the King; and though Guise was ambitious enough to be
pleased therewith, yet being immoderate, and irregular, his modesty told him,
that they were undecent. The King in the mean time being eclipsed by the
popular grandeur of Guise, and by the troubles of a Civil War with which his
Kingdom was infested, did seem to resent the favors which the Pope showed to
Guise, as unseasonable; of which when Sixtus had knowledge, and of the popular
acclamations at the delivery of his Sword, he was much troubled; for he being
of a humor always desirous to maintain Sovereignty in its highest degree of
Honor, and Power, did by a Letter to the King exhort him to maintain his
Prerogatives, and conserve the honor of his Crown against the Insolences, and
rebellions of his Subjects: adding, That a Canker in the bowels of his State
was curable only by cauterizing, and by fire, and Sword: and that it was
necessary to vent some of that blood, which was too redundant in the veins of
his Subjects.

The King made frequent reflections on this Letter, and often gave it to the
Duke of Guise to read, and consider: and being one day in Parliament, where
many Debates arose touching the ways, and means by which the Civil Wars might
be accommodated, and a good understanding produced between him and his
Subjects; the King declared the great aversion of his mind to blood, or other
extremities; which though he might justly by the Counsels, and persuasions of
the Pope, yet he was more tender of the lives of his Subjects, than to cure his
troubles by such severe Remedies; and to confirm the truth thereof, he produced
the Pope's Letter, causing it publicly to be read in that Assembly: which when
the Parliament heard, they Blessed themselves, and as well the Catholics, as
Protestants remained astonished and scandalized at this cruelty of the
Universal Pastor, who with such little remorse could suck the blood of Christ's
Sheep, as if he had rather been the Wolf, than Shepherd of the Christian Flock.
Which when the Pope understood, and was informed of all the Satyrs, and Libels
which the Protestants had composed on this occasion, he was greatly disturbed,
that the King should so publicly expose his Counsels, which he designed for
his secret directions; and having signified his resentment thereof by his
Nuntio, he would never afterward adventure to write him a Letter, but on all
occasions of business referred himself by word of mouth to the report of his
Nuntio.

And now Sixtus whose thoughts were ever employed on means which might enlarge,
or make great the Church; did much incite Philip II. King of Spain to make War
on Elizabeth Queen of England, pressing him to reassume his Right to that
Kingdom which he had once governed; and for encouragement thereunto, he
promised Count Olivarez the King's Ambassador at Rome, that so soon as the
Spanish Army should be landed on any part of the English shore, he would
immediately contribute a million of Crowns to that Design. Nor was the Pope
moved hereunto out of a zeal only to Religion, but out of a secular Design;
supposing that the chief Flower of the Nobility and Soldiery of Naples being
drained thence on this Enterprise, he might have a more facil passage to the
possession of that Kingdom.

In pursuance therefore of this Design, a great and wonderful Fleet of vast
Caracks to the number of one hundred and fifty Sail being set to Sea, on which
were twenty three thousand Land Soldiers, with two thousand pieces of Cannon,
of which the Duke of Medina Sidonia was made General; they entered the Channel
of England, where being met by a small Fleet of Ships under the Command of Sir
Francis Drake, several broad-sides passed between them: but at length the
Divine Providence assisting England, and defending the Protestant Cause; the
valor of the English, and the successful direction of the Fireships prevailed
with admirable fortune over the Spaniards, against whom also God himself
fighting, (as we may say) by his Storms and Tempests: totally defeated, and
destroyed this invincible Armada, as we may more at large read in our
Chronicles of England.

Sixtus having received the news of this unhappy defeat, wrote Letters to
Philip to condole with him for the loss: and therewith taking an occasion to
blame the management and conduct of his Officers, he attributed the miscarriage
of all to the want of care, and experience of the Chief Commanders: by which
reflection of disgrace his intent was, to prevent all Demands from him of
reparation for this loss; and on this subject he proceeded in a public
Consistory to blame, and tax every Individual Chief both in the Army, and in
the Council of ill administration; only he took upon him to excuse Alexander
Farnese Governor of the Low Countries, and to answer the aspersions which his
Enemies had charged upon him, declaring him to be the only person, who for his
personal Valor, and excellency of his Conduct was the most approved Captain of
that Age.

This Letter of Condolance wrote by the Pope was dispatched to his Nuntio at
Madrid to be delivered to the King, whose constancy of mind, and evenness of
temper was such, that though the Nuntio well knew he had no need of Cordials,
or consolatory Exhortations, yet the Commands of his Master, were to be obeyed,
and the formality observed. Whilst King Philip was reading the Letter, he
often smiled, as if the Style had rather been to congratulate his Victory, than
to condole for his loss: Howsoever he thanked the Nuntio, and promised to
return an Answer thereunto speedily, the which he accordingly did in the space
of two days after in words to this effect.

That his Holiness would be pleased together with him to render thanks to God
Almighty, for being pleased to conserve the remnant of his Fleet from such
dreadful storms, and tempests, and for bestowing on him Riches, and Power
sufficient to set out, and equippe an other equal to the former. That he had
sent his Fleet to fight against the Enemies of Christ, but not to Combat with
the Seas, and Winds, and therefore saw no cause to blame his Officers either
Civil or Military: And in fine, perceiving the subtle manner of the Pope to
forestall his demands of succors, or reparations, he concluded his Letter in
this manner: That the loss did as well concern the Pope, as himself, by whose
directions, and encouragement he had undertaken that Enterprise: That he having
had the glory to have lost a Fleet in the service of Christ; had already
performed his part; and that now for the future the next attempt belonged to
the Church, in which he promised to follow, but not to precede. It was
believed, that the King wrote with this resolution, and indifferency of mind to
the Pope; to let him know that this misfortune did not abate his Courage, or
force in defense of his own Dominions; for the King was jealous, and had cause
sufficient to suspect, that the Galleys which the Pope had lately built, and
the vast sums of Money, which he had lately amassed were with design on the
Kingdom of Naples; on which the Count Olivarez Ambassador at Rome, having
always a vigilant Eye, did constantly inculcate to the Pope in his Discourses:
That so much as his Master had lost in seeking the Conquest of others Kingdoms,
as much he did not doubt but to recover on any Prince, who should attempt on
his Dominions.

This year 1588. famous for the destruction of the Spanish Armada, was
signalized also toward the end thereof on the 23d. of December by the death of
the Duke of Guise, a Prince of such popular esteem, that he appeared greater
than the King, and to eclipsed the Sovereignty, that not longer enduring to be
so clouded, he resolved to break through the obscurity, by the destruction of
the Duke, whom the King caused to be assassinated by eight Executioners, as he
was entering into his Closet, being thereunto called by his Command; these
Officers of the King's displeasure so effectually performed their work, by the
mortal stabs they gave him, that he had not time to utter one word, but only
breathed out his life with dying groans: the same day the Cardinal his Brother
was imprisoned, and the next day being the Eve of Christmas was put to death:
the which misfortune to the House of Guise was followed by the imprisonment of
the Cardinal of Bourbon the Pope's Legate at Avignon, the Archbishop of Lions,
and of the eldest Son of the Duke of Guise.

The news of the Duke's death was dispeeded to Rome with such diligence by an
Express, that the Pope received it on the 3d. of January 1589. at the same
time, that he was discoursing with the Cardinal Joyeuse touching the Affairs,
and interest of France. The Pope at the arrival hereof, did not seem troubled,
or in the least manner surprised; for though the Duke was a zealous Defender of
the Roman Catholic Religion, yet considering that he was ambitious, and
popular, and one who checked the Sovereign power; the Pope who was a great
Assertor of the Monarchical Authority in its Supreme degree, received the news
of his unhappy fate without any remorse, or resentment; and so shrinking up his
shoulders, said: Had we been King of France, we should have done the same. And
when the particulars were all recounted, he added, Such is commonly the destiny
of Men, who committed many Errors with subtle Arts, but then know not how to
conserve themselves with mature judgment, and due caution. But when about four
days after that Intelligence came, how that the Cardinal of Guise was likewise
put to death, and that the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Archbishop of Lions
were imprisoned; he then began to fume and storm like an enraged Bear, venting
his passion with ten thousand violent expressions against the King, clapping
his hands, and stamping with his feet on the floor, in such manner as
affrighted all his Servants, and Attendance.

Henry III. of France being acquainted with the humor of Sixtus; and how apt
he was to resent the least injuries toward Ecclesiastical persons, and
encroachment on his Authority; dispatched Girolamo Gondi a Florentine Gentleman
with all expedition to Rome to join with his Ambassador the Marquess Pisani in
making excuses for the death of the Cardinal, and the imprisonment of the
Cardinal of Bourbon, and Archbishop of Lions, being thereunto necessitated
contrary to his own nature for the conservation of his own life, and Crown.
Gondi being arrived at Rome, and having consulted together with the
Ambassador, the way, and manner, to address themselves unto the Pope; and
being admitted to Audience, the Pope with a stern Countenance looked on them,
and with sharp, and severe terms began to reproach the King, wondering how he
could dare to violate the immunities, and privileges of the Ecclesiastical
State, and the dignity of Cardinals, and against all Laws both Divine, and
humane, could entertain so much wickedness in his heart, as to murder a
Cardinal, and imprison two others of eminent dignity in the Church, as if they
had been subjected to the Secular power.

The Ambassadors for Reply hereunto in modest terms, but yet with grave, and
unmoved constancy began to relate the Treason, and Plots of which the Cardinal
was guilty contrary to the Faith, and Allegiance which he owed unto the King,
with whom also the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Archbishop of Lions had been
Accomplices. It is true, said they, it would have best become the righteousness,
and judgment of a King to have proceeded in a juditiary way according to all
the methods, and rules of Law, but the Cardinal assisted by the power of his
Brother, and by the Authority of the two other potent Prelates, was become too
strong for the Law, or to be treated by the usual formalities of common
Process; for they having forced the King to abandon his Palace, and fly in
disguise through the streets of Paris, there remained no mild terms of
Accommodation, but either the King must become a Subject unto them, and divest
himself of his Dignity, and resign his Power into the hands of those Guardians,
as if he were in his pupillage, or years of minority, or else he must serve
himself of those means, which God appointed him for conservation of his Crown,
and Regal Office in which he was anointed. In fine, they concluded, that the
King was an obedient Son of the Church, and was ready to satisfy the desires
of his Holiness to the utmost of his power; and to that end he had expressly
sent this Gondi now present before him, humbly to beseech his Holiness to
pardon what was past, and as a testimony, and evidence of his reconciliation to
send him his Blessing. But Sixtus having neither by these reasons, nor yet by
the gentle and submissive terms of the Ambassadors, abated the fury and anger
which appeared in his countenance: Replied with a loud Voice; That, he was well
assured, that Gondi was dispatched on an other Errand, than this; and that by
any thing they had said, there was no judgment to be made of sorrow, or
repentance in the King for the Crimes he had committed, or of such obedience,
which they professed to the Apostolical Sea, so long as contrary to the
privileges thereof, he detained the Prelates in Prison; and that in case he
expected absolution, he was to seek it with tears, and by a Person express, and
employed to no other purpose, and that there ought to be a Session of Prelates
thereupon, to consider, whether such repentance were real, and unfeigned. And
at last concluded with these sharp words. You, said he, think you have to do
with some poor simple Friar, that is unacquainted with Men, and the World; but
you shall find, that you have to do with Sixtus, who is ready to expend blood
in defense of the Dignity of the Holy See. After which he dismissed the two
Ambassadors, and the next day called a Consistory, in which he appeared with a
countenance full of Choler which boiled in his breast; and then began to
exclaim against his Legate Morosini residing at Paris, as if he had consented to
the death of the Cardinal, or at least might have prevented both that and the
imprisonment of the Prelates, in case he had vigorously appeared against such
indirect Counsels: In the next place he railed against some Cardinals, who had
the boldness to excuse the murder which the King had committed; wondering that
Cardinals should so little esteem their Dignity, and degree, as to expose the
sanctity of their purple to be profaned, by the unhallowed violences of an
usurped jurisdiction. As to us (said he) it concerns little what affronts are
put on the Cardinals dignity, but we are sure, that it is of a high consequence
to you: for we cannot believe, that you would readily consent to be dispoiled
of their Authority, your liberties, prerogatives, and other privileges with
which you are adorned: of which you will certainly be, if this murder of a
Cardinal be connived at, or passed by without any resentment. We therefore are
resolved to perform our duty, and do that which God, and his Laws require at
Our hands: and if from thence, as you may possibly object, ill consequences
ensue to the Kingdom of France, we shall remain acquitted in the sight of God;
for justice must be done, though the World should be ruined, and dissolved
thereby.

The Cardinals remaining all silent, none daring to make a Reply. The Pope
proceeded, and said: We shall depute a Congregation of Cardinals to examine
this case, and search farther into this matter, and accordingly the persons
nominated were Anthony Sorbellone, the Arch bishop of Santa Severina,
Facchinetto, Lancilotto, Sastagna and others; the which Deputation was now the
common Discourse, and filled all the World with high expectation of the
success, and issue thereof.

The King being informed of these proceedings, redoubled his Guards, and
cautions in the Court of Rome, to which place he dispatched the Bishop of Man's,
a person of singular probity, and eloquence to make his defense: and having
received his Instructions, and being fully informed of all the reasons, and
arguments which might be produced in behalf of the King, he arrived at Rome,
where having first consulted the Ambassadors, he was with them admitted unto
Audience with the Pope: to whom he began with most profound humility to argue
and plead: That the King had not incurred the punishment of any Ecclesiastical
Censure, having in no manner violated, or infringed the Liberties, or
Immunities of the Church. For that the Cardinal having been found guilty of
high Treason against the King, was by the fundamental Laws, and constitutions
of France, subjected to the Secular Power: and in regard he was a Peer of that
Realm, his Cause was more immediately triable in the Parliament of Paris, and
in a grand Assembly of all the Princes, and Officers of the Crown; so that if
the King had trespassed against any Laws, it was against the privileges of his
own Parliaments, and not against the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical State.
In the next place he argued, that a King of France according to the privileges
of the Gallican Church could not incur the Censure of Excommunication.

But these Arguments, and ways of reasonings were in no wise pleasing to the
humor of Sixtus, being against the Idea, and Scheme that he had figured to
himself of the Power of the Church and Keys: but rather served to inflame his
passion, and therefore setting aside all those Arguments, as not worth an
Answer, he declared, and sentenced, That in case within a certain time limited,
the King did not free, and set at liberty the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the
Archbishop of Lions: and that in case within the space of sixty days after
such releasement, the assurance thereof were not intimated to himself and the
Apostolical See, by writings under the King's own hand, and the Royal Signet,
That then in such case the King remained actually Excommunicated, and incurred
all the Ecclesiastical Censures, as expressed in the Sacred Canons, and
Constitutions of the Church. Farther, The Pope cited the King to appear at Rome
either in person, or by his Proxy within the space of sixty days after
intimation of these Summons should be given him; to render an account, and to
give answer to the accusation charged upon him, for having murdered the
Cardinal of Guise, and imprisoned the Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Archbishop
of Lions: and for default of such appearance, that then the King did actually
incur the pain of Excommunication, from which he could not be absolved by any
other person whatsoever, than only by the Pope himself, unless at the point of
death; nor then neither, unless upon a confident, and faithful assurance and
Vows to act, and obey all matters and Injunctions whatsoever which should be
enjoined, and commanded by the Holy Church.

Two Months, and some few days after the Pope had issued out this
Excommunication; it happened, that the King being at the Head of a great Army
near St. Clou about two Leagues from Paris was on the first day of August 1589.
stabbed in the Belly by a Dominican Friar, who was a youth of about twenty
three years of age: and with him ended his quarrel with the Pope.

1589.
Such being the fate of Henry III. the news thereof flew speedily to Rome, where
the Spaniards caused a report to be spread: that the Affairs of the King of
Navarre were reduced to a mean, and a low condition, and almost desperate; and
that not only those of the League, but also the whole Kingdom had declared the
Cardinal of Bourbon to be King by the name of Charles XI. Upon this grand
Crisis of Affairs, the Pope resolved to dispeed Cardinal Cajetan in quality of
his Legate into France with a numerous train of Prelates famous for their Wisdom,
and Learning, intending to furnish him with the sum of a hundred thousand
Pistols to defray the charge, and pomp of his sublime Character.

Whilst things were thus preparing, Advices came from the Duke of Luxemburg
that Henry of Vandosme King of Navarre having been victorious in many bloody
Battles, was acknowledged by all the Nobility to be the true, and lawful King
of France: and that he, (namely the Duke of Luxemburg) was designed Ambassador
by the said Nobility unto his Holiness, to inform him of the reasons, which
moved them to such an acknowledgment, and to demand his Counsel and direction,
as the common Father, how, and in what manner they might apply such remedies,
as might tend to a happy, and a well grounded peace. The Pope discovering
hereby, that the Agents of the League had falsely represented the state of
Affairs to him, immediately dispatched a Letter in answer to the Duke of
Luxemburg, acquainting him, that his Person should be welcome at Rome and
civilly treated; together with an other to the Nobility of France in the Camp
of Navarre, exhorting them to remain firm and constant to the Catholic
Religion; adding, that as to the person of the King, it was indifferent to him,
who it was that reigned, provided, he were a true Son of the Church, and such
as the Nobility desired.

And now the Legate being upon departure, the Pope altered many particulars of
his former Instructions, and expressly warned him to keep, as much as was
possible, an even, and steady hand in all the pretensions of Secular Princes;
but that he should be sure always to incline toward the side of the Church,
and Religion: that he should not show himself an open Enemy to the King of
Navarre, until his case was desperate, and past all hopes of being reclaimed to
the Church; but that so soon as he found him wavering, he should then encourage
him; but stand a Neuter, until he professed himself a true Convert, and from
that time to declare for his Person, and Interest.

But the Legate not well observing these Rules, but running quite contrary in
favor of the League, and making his abode at Paris, which had declared it self
against the King of Navarre; did greatly incur the displeasure of the Pope, who
not approving his Negotiations, gave a stop to those sums of Money which he had
designed for him.

In short therefore this deportment which the Pope used toward Henry, did
greatly contribute toward his establishment: for the World observing, that so
wise a person as the Pope, professing no other quarrel to him, than only on
the score of Religion; and that this scruple being removed, he was ready to
side with him against all other Interests; and that he had induced the wise,
and politic Senate of Venice to acknowledge him for King of France: there is no
doubt, but that these favorable appearances did bring great reputation to the
Arms of Henry, and much facilitated his ascent to the Crown.

Having in this manner laid down the Methods, and ways of proceedings in
Secular Affairs, and with foreign Princes; let us now before we conclude the
Life of this great Man, return to the treatment which he exercised toward his
own People, and the rules he observed in the maintenance, and nourishment of
his own natural Body.

Sixtus having now for five years observed many things relating to Government:
nothing appeared more extravagant than the gallantry which people used in their
Clothing; which was become so excessive, that for the regulation thereof, he
constituted Cardinal Aldobrandino to be the Reformer; by whose care, and wisdom
such sumptuary Laws were enacted, as reduced all persons into a modesty of
dress, and habit; which being imposed with severe penalties on the
Transgressour, which Sixtus would never remit, all the Rules were observed and
obeyed, during the time of this Pope, who did not supervive for many Months
after.

It is observable that this Sixtus, when he was a Friar, and a Cardinal, and
not encumbered with a load of business, was very temperate, and abstemious in
his Diet: but being made Pope and burdened with an intense application of mind
to business, he seemed to want greater nourishment to keep up his spirits,
which otherwise might have sunk under the weight of Affairs; and therefore did
eat much, and drink often of diverse sorts of delicious and exquisite Wines, and
would often sit two or three hours at Meals discoursing of Theological, and
political Subjects: howsoever his Diet was ordinary, and course, and his Table
as frugal, as of any Pope that ever preceded him. He slept little, having his
mind always intent to Studies, or businesses, giving Audiences to foreign
Ambassadors, or hearing the Consults, and Advices of his Cardinals, or
administering Justice, so that he was never observed to be idle, or at leisure.

He was ever chiding in a clamorous manner with his Servants, and yet he loved
them, preferring many of them to high degrees, and dignities, having made three
of them Cardinals, and Bishops besides Castruccio Ardas; as he was forward to
advance those who had merited well from him, so he was rigorous and severe
against any, who offended either out of negligence, or malice: An example of
which, he showed in the condemnation of Bellochio his Cup Bearer, to the
Galleys, for having affixed the Annulus Piscatorius, or the Pope's Seal to a
certain writing, which Sixtus had refused to pass; nor could he be dissuaded by
all the Entreaties which the Friends of Bellochio used, and being cast into the
Galleys, he died miserably in two Months time of his disgrace, and servitude.

He was extremely tender and affectionate to his own Kindred and Relations, and
in an especial manner to his Sister Camilla, one of whose Grandsons by a
Daughter, a youth very young he raised to be a Cardinal in the first Month that
he was made Pope, who so well improved himself by time, in the dexterous
management of all Affairs, that he became so very useful to his Uncle the Pope,
that he bestowed a Revenue upon him of an hundred thousand Crowns of yearly
Rent. The Palace of Montalto is to this day to be seen at Rome rarely
furnished, and famous for the abundance of rare Pictures, Statues, and Urns,
and the Garden one of the best in all Rome.

He was infinitely covetous, and contriving for Money, for raising of which he
laid Taxes on those things which were never before charged, and sold those
Offices, which were never until his time set to sale; so that he advanced the
Papal Revenue to above six hundred thousand Crowns a year, above the ordinary
Income: and in the first year of his Reign, he laid up a million of Gold in the
Castle of St. Angelo, ordaining, that this Money should never be employed in
any thing whatsoever, unless it were toward maintenance of a War for recovery
of the Holy Land. In the third year also of his Pontificate, he laid up another
million to the same end and purpose, swearing himself never to make use of the
same, but for that War, or for some other War in defense of the Church against
Infidels, or Heretics; and this Oath of his, he would have all Popes obliged
to conserve, and keep inviolate. And that he might the better accumulate Wealth
in this nature, as he was sparing in his Diet, so he was also in his Clothing,
causing his very Shirts to be patched before he would give them to his
Servants: and besides these two millions, he laid up three other in the same
Castle; so that at his death five millions were found of his hoard, and heaps.
And yet notwithstanding all this Riches, which he had spared, he had been most
profuse in his public Buildings, and magnificent in Noble Structures,
Aqueducts, and other things of common use, and benefit; and besides all this,
he employed a stock of two hundred thousand Crowns to maintain plenty in Rome,
during the times of scarcity and famine in other parts of Italy.

He ordained that the number of Cardinals should not exceed seventy in all,
amongst which four at least ought to be Doctors in Divinity, chosen out of the
several Orders of Friars as well Mendicants as Regulars: and that Cardinals
should never be ordained, but in the Ember Week of December, as had been
observed from the time of Clement I. though in the promotions of Cardinal
Allen, and Morosini he himself transgressed that Rule: and created in his time
thirty three Cardinals.

For more speedy decision of matters of Law, and that Suits might not spin out
into many years, he erected a Court of Conscience, composed of wise and godly
Men, and such as feared God. He enacted that Adultery should be punished with
Death; and prohibited judicial Astrology.

About four Months before his death, he began to find himself indisposed, and
complained of an illness in his Head; of which distemper and of the nature of
his Disease he often discoursed with much reason according to the Rules of
Galen, and Hippocrates; howsoever during the time of this indisposition, he
omitted nothing of his business, and ate and drank of such Meats, and Liquors,
as are usual for Men of the best health; having often in his Mouth the saying
of Flavius Vespatian the Emperor, That a Prince ought to die on his feet, and
in action, signifying that a Prince ought to die in the work of his Vocation.
But being more grievously feised by a malignant Fever on the twentieth of
August 1590. on the thirtieth of the same Month in the Evening he died, being
in the seventieth year of his Age, having governed the Papal Sea five years,
four months, and three days. The Night after, his Body was carried in a Hearse
to the Church of St. Peter near the Vatican, for he died at his Palace of Monte
Cavallo; from whence Cardinal Montalto caused it to be transported with solemn
and Princely equipage to a Chapel which Sixtus had built adjoining to the
Church of Santa Maria Maggiore. After whose death the Sea was vacant eighteen
days.

URBAN VII.
URBAN the Seventh, called John Baptista Castagna was born at Rome, his Family
came from Genoua, being descended from the Ancient Nobility of that City; but
his Mother was a Roman of the house of the Ricci. He was educated in all the
usual Methods of good Literature; and applying himself chiefly to the Studies
of the Canon, and Civil Law, he became so good a Proficient therein that he
attained the degree of Doctor in the University of Belogna: In the time of
Julius III. he accompanied his Uncle Veralli into France, who was employed in
that Court in quality of Legate; and acting there under his Uncle, he gave clear
demonstrations of quickness of parts, and vivacity of Spirit, fit for great and
important undertakings: returning afterward to Rome, he dwelt in the House of
the Archbishop of Rosano. Paul IV. made him Governor of Perusa: and Pius IV.
who immediately succeeded him, sent him with the Character of his Legate into
Spain; in which employment he was continued by Pius V. for the space of seven
years. Gregory XIII. recalled him out of Spain to Rome, and bestowed on him the
Archbishopric of Rosano, without reservation to himself of any quit-rent
thereupon: and afterward delegated him his Nuntio to Venice, and with that
Character gave him a Commission to treat a Peace in the Low Countries between
King Philip and those States. At his return to Rome, he was made Counselor of
the Ecclesiastical State, and assumed into the number of Prelates of the Office
of the Inquisition; in which Employments he continued until the year 1583. when
he was created Cardinal by the said Gregory with the Title of Saint Marcellus
at a promotion of nineteen Cardinals, and soon after he was sent Legate to
Bologna. He was also held in great esteem by Sixtus V. and entrusted by him in
the management of the most important Affairs both in Church and State; and by
him judged the most probable person to succeed him in the Papal Chair; the
which he expressed one day, when contriving in what manner to enlarge the
Street from Santa Croce to Santa Maria Maggiore, and thence how it might be
continued in a direct line to Santa Maria del popolo, he turned about to
Cardinal Saint Marcellus, and told him, That to finish that work, would belong
to him; meaning, that the succession being his, it would appertain to him to
complete what he had happily begun.

Nor was it only the Opinion of Sixtus, that Cardinal Marcellus was to be his
Successor; but the common Voice, and rumor of the people fixed the Papal
Dignity upon him; the which accordingly succeeded: for so soon as Sixtus was
dead, and the usual Obsequies of his Interment solemnized; the Cardinals to the
number of fifty four on the 7th. of September 1590. entered the Conclave, where
a very great party labored much for the election of Cardinal Colonna; who
though he were a person of merit and worth, yet he was so highly opposed by a
contrary faction; that both parties being intrigued in difficulties, did, as it
were by mutual consent concur in their suffrages for Cardinal St. Marcellus,
who was a person without exception, and grateful both to Princes, Cardinals,
and People; for no sooner was the Scrutiny begun, than all things so appeared
in his favor, that on the 14th. of September at Night, the Cardinals were
assured of the person, on whom the Election should fall; more Votes appearing
for him than the Complement required; howsoever, though the Election was
deferred until the next day at Noon; yet so unanimous, and constant was every
person to his Vote, that the delay of time produced no alteration: so that on
Saturday the 15th, he was with common consent declared Pope. And then clothing
himself in his Pontifical Habit, whilst he took the Rocket, which is made of a
fine sort of Tiffany, he was observed to say these words: Who would think that
this light Habit should be of so weighty a Burden. And now being seated in his
Chair, and adored after the accustomary manner by the Cardinals, he was pleased
to call himself by the name of Urban VII. signifying thereby the urbanity of
his Disposition, which was inclinable to use all Persons with an obliging, and
gentle treatment.

The same Evening that he was created Pope he presented two thousand Ducats to
Cardinal Sans, and a thousand to Cardinal Alano in consideration of the want,
and poverty of their condition: and when Cardinal Albano desired him only two
days forbearance of the payment of three thousand three hundred Crowns, which
were lent him by Sixtus V. he freely forgave him the Debt, as he did several
other great sums of Money, which he had lent when he was Cardinal.

The second day after he was chosen Pope, not finding himself well disposed in
his health, he determined to remove from the Vatican to Montecavallo, as being
a more wholesome and pleasant Air; but being put in mind, that it was not the
custom for Popes to remove or pass the streets of Rome without an Equipage, and
attendance of Cardinals, Prelates, and other Lords, which was never done, until
his Coronation was solemnized; in compliance with such admonition, he deferred
his removal until that function was performed; when the day following his
indisposition turning to a malignant Fever, he grew worse and worse, and on the
27th. of September he expired his last breath, dying on the thirteenth day of
his Papacy, and in the seventieth year of his Age, and was buried in St.
Peter's Church. Some do alledg, that having not been Crowned, he ought not to
be numbered amongst the Popes; but this matter is otherwise determined by an
Ancient Canon, which says: Vt is, qui electus est in Apostolatum si juxta
consuetudinem inthronizari non valeat; electus tamen sicut verus Papa obtinet
auctoritatem regendi R. Ecclesiae, and disponendi omnes facultates illius, guod
B. Gregorium ante suam coronationem cognovimus fecisse, etc.

Urban being dead, the Sea was vacant two months and nine days.

GREGORY XIV.
GREGORY the Fourteenth, called Nicholas Sfrondati, of a Rich, and ancient
Family in Milan, was on the 5th. of December of this year, elected Pope: his
Father was Francis Sfrondati a Senator of Milan, and by Charles V. was
constituted Governor of Siena. Pope Paul III. who was always inquisitive after
wise, and able Men whom he might raise, and prefer unto places of Trust, made
him Bishop of Cremona, after the death of his Wife, and Cardinal with the same
Title. This Nicholas being descended from Francis a wise and excellent Parent,
was educated in all manner of Learning, and good literature agreeable to his
rank and quality: he first studied at Perusa, afterward at Pavia, where he
took his degree of Doctor of the Civil Law: Pius IV. created him Bishop of
Cremona, with which Title he resided at Trent three years, during which
Council, the affability he used in his Conversation, was very pleasing to the
other Fathers, and the knowledge he had in the Law made him useful in the
service of the Pope; though he was one of those Prelates who contended much,
that Risidences were Jure Divino. Gregory XIII. promoted him to the Dignity of
Cardinal, and in honor to his memory, when he came to be elected Pope, he
called himself hy the name of Gregory XIV.

The Conclave in which he was chosen was very memorable, as namely for the
number of Cardinals there present who were fifty four, also for the many
pretenders to the Papal Dignity, who were no less than sixteen, all persons of
great worth and merit, also for the Leaders, and Heads of Parties, who were
six, and for the time that the Conclave continued being almost two months;
which at first according to the common Opinion, was believed not to last two
days, all persons concluding, that the Election would terminate in the person
of Cardinal St. Severina, one of great Learning, and experience in Affairs, and
most zealous for the welfare, and honor of the Papal Chair: But he being a
person of a morose humor, and austerity of life, was rejected, and endeavors
made for Cardinal Colonna, a Prince of that high reputation and merit, that at
Rome his Election was generally believed, and concluded to be certain; but for
want of some Votes, both he and Mandovi, who stood equal with him were laid
aside. Cardinal Aldobrandino was the next brought to the Scrutiny; and after
him Cardinal della Rovere, but those, who delighted to find difficulties in all
matters rendered their Elections void, like the former. At length to bring
things to a period, seven Cardinals were proposed, who were esteemed Men of
that Integrity, and of that general good reputation with all, that none of them
could be chosen amiss, and that (as it was believed) the choice would come to
terminate in one of them: but upon a Scrutiny made, the same difficulties
occurred, as in the former; the like also happened to Paleotto, and Santi
quatro. At length after diverse, and various turnings of Affairs,, Cardinal
Montalto followed by many other Cardinals to the number of twenty six, who were
his own Creatures moved for the Election of Cardinal Cremona, and with this
train went to his Chamber, where they found him on his knees at Prayers; in
which posture Montalto told him, that he should prepare himself against the
next day to receive his promotion to the Papal Chair: and accordingly the next
Morning early he raised him from his Bed, and causing him hastily to cloth
himself, conducted him with seven Cardinals to the Chapel, where Scrutiny
being made, Cremona was with common consent, and suffrages of all elected Pope:
presently after which the Adoration was made with all the other usual
Ceremonies.

So soon as he was promoted to this Dignity, he made large Presents to many of
the Cardinals, giving a thousand Crowns to each, telling them, that it was to
defray the charges they had been at, during the long time they had resided in
the Conclave. He bestowed also great sums to pious uses: and ordered that the
domestic Servants of his Family should be clothed in new and rich Habits: He
provided against the scarcity, and dearness of Corn and other provisions; and
restored those Romans to their Places, and Offices which Sixtus V. had taken
from them. Howsoever the day but one after he was chosen, finding himself
indisposed, he refused to give Audience either to Cardinals, or to the
Ambassadors of Princes; yet notwithstanding on the 18th. of December, being
the Feast of the conception of our Lady, he forced himself in despite of his
distemper to pass all the Ceremonies of his Coronation, and on the 13th. to
take solemn possession of the Papal Chair at the Lateran; all the streets
through which he passed were hung with Tapistry, and other Ornaments, and
thronged with people to receive his Benediction; at which great honors, though
he was observe;d to smile, and carry a countenance not becoming the gravity of
a Pope, yet he would often praise God, and say, Lord, I thank thee, that with
all these honors, and worship, thou have not suffered the heart of thy servant
to be puffed up, or transported with worldly glory. And for the greater
solemnity of this Procession, the People of Rome erected a triumphal Arch, with
this Inscription, Gregory XIV. ob Egregia, and Felicia Pontificatus auspicia
pristina Munera, and Beneficia Capitolio restituta, Civitatem egestate, atque
annona laborantem opportuna liberalitate sublevatam, insignibus ejus virtutibus
SPQ.R.

On the other side were Inscribed.

Optimo Principi Gregorio XIV. Pont. Max. ab ineunte aetate per gradus verae
Sapientiae, Pietatis, Beneficentiae, caeterarumque virtutum ad Apostolici
Fastigii gloriam, and Majestatem evecto, ob fausta Sacri, Augustique
Principatus initia, and non dubiam spem rerum Maximarum Reipub. Christianae
oblatam, S.P.Q.R. Fornigem Triumphalem pro tempore excitavit; On the other
sides were diverse Verses Inscribed out of Holy Scripture, signifying the great
hopes, and expectations they had from the administration and good Government of
Gregory. On the 19th. of this Month of December he held the first Consistory,
commonly called the Consistory of peace, because as is usual the Popes do with
fair words harangue the Cardinals, and endeavor an amicable correspondence
with them; after which, he at this Consistory created his Nephew Cardinal.

On the 18th of January he published a form of Jubily, whereby he ordained.
That all Christians should offer up their Prayers unto God in his behalf; that
he might have grace faithfully to feed the Flock of Christ, and wisely, and
successfully to administer the Affairs of the Universal Church.

On the 6th. of March following he created six Cardinals; and a short time
afterward he made his Nephew Count Sfrondati Duke of Mont-Marcian, and General
of the Forces of the Church, sending him into France with an Army for
assistance of the League, in which War he spent five hundred thousand Crowns of
Gold. At Whitsunday which happened that year on the 9th. of May, he bestowed on
the Cardinal Friars a License, and privilege to wear red Hats, for until that
time, their Hats were of the same color with the habit of their Order: the
which favor of wearing red Hats, and Caps was demanded in the time of Pius V.
Gregory XIII. and Sixtus V. but it was refused, and those Cardinals confined to
their own color.

In the Month of August the Duke of Ferrara came to Rome, to receive his
Investiture into the Dukedom from the hands of the Pope; where he was received
with great pomp, and honor, and his Table, and other Charges defrayed at the
expense of the Pope.

On the 22th. of September he began to find himself indisposed of a Fever, the
which increasing daily, caused by the Stone, and retention of his Urin, he
expired his last on the 15th. day of October 1591. with excessive pains. Being
dead his Bladder was opened, a stone taken from thence weighing two ounces and
a quarter. His Body was carried that Night to St. Peter's, where it was buried
in the Chapel of Gregory. He had been Pope ten months, and ten days, after
which the Sea was vacant fifteen days.

INNOCENT IX.
IF ever any Person was elected to the Popedom with the common, and general
consent of the whole Conclave, and without those factions, and parties which
usually arise at those Meetings, it was certainly this Innocent IX. who in the
Conclave, which chose his Predecessor Gregory XIV. had so fair a prospect of
this promotion, that he missed of it then but by some few rubs only, which he
had time afterward to remove: and so probable was the Papal Diadem to be his,
that the Mitre of Gregory fell on his Head, when he came in an humble manner to
pay his Respects, and obedience at the feet of the Pope; the which accident
seemed to foretell, and be prophetic of that fortune which afterward ensued.

An. 1591.
In this manner on the 29th. of October 1591. the Papal Chair was again supplied
by John Anthony Fachinetti commonly called Cardinal of Santi Quattro, taking on
himself the name of Innocent IX. but his time was short, for he reigned only
two Months: his Father and Mother were Natives of Gravegni a City in Navarre,
but he was born at Bologna, and there educated in good Learning until the year
1544. when he took the degree of Doctor: Afterward coming to Rome, he was
entertained in the Family of Cardinal Farnese, who sent him for his Vicar to
Avignon, and afterward to Parma. Pius IV. created him Bishop of Nicastro a
City in Calabria, and in the year 1561. employed him at the Council of Trent.
In the year 1566. Pius V. delegated him his Nuntio at Venice, where he was a
successful Instrument in making a League, and confederacy between the Pope, the
King of Spain, and the Venetians against the Turk. Gregory XIII. created him
Patriarch of Jerusalem, President of the Court of Inquisition, and Cardinal
with the Title of Santa Quattro, by which appellation he was commonly known.
And lastly, after the decease of Gregory he was unanimously elected on the day
beforementioned.

The first thing he did after his Election, and which he was so ready to
perform without loss of time, that even then, when he was vesting himself in
his Pontifical Habit, he signed the Bolle, De non alienandis bonis Ecclesiae;
and then declared with words proceeding from the depth of his heart, that he
was resolved to provide for the afflicted people of Rome, and contrive some
effectual means to relieve the necessities of the City, which labored almost
under a Famine, or scarcity of Bread: To which end he summoned a Congregation,
and commanded that the Barons of Rome should bring their Corn into the City,
and made Vitelli Overseer of the Provisions, or Praefectus Annonae.

On Sunday the second of November he was Crowned, but not on the stairs
ascending to St. Peter's, but in a little Apartment which looks toward those
stairs, by which means a thousand Crowns were saved of the expense: the next
day he held the first Consistory, at which he returned his hearty thanks to the
Cardinals for favoring his Election, proposing several things which he
esteemed convenient for conservation of the Ecclesiastical State; amongst which
he gave them to understand, how necessary it was to keep always a considerable
sum of Money in the Treasury, as a reserve at all times to supply the
necessities, and emergencies of the Church: the which had been an ancient
practice in the Republic of Rome, where as Tacitus says, they ever reserved a
secret Treasure distinct from their running Cash, never to be used, but then
only, when the ultimate exigencies of State required it.

In the next place, he wrote Epistles to all Patriarchs, Archbishops, and
Primates, giving them advice of his promotion to the Papal Dignity, exhorting
them within their respective Jurisdictions to make Prayers for him, that God
would inspire him in such manner with his heavenly grace, as might enable him
to support the great, and important burden of Ecclesiastical Government.

The 29th. of this Month of November, the Duke of Mantoua arrived at Rome to do
him homage, and was received with a cheerful welcome, being lodged in the
Pope's Palace, in the Apartment belonging to his Nephews.

On the 11th. of November he issued forth a regulation of the prices of all
Provisions, which were mounted to an excessive rate: On the 18th. he created
two Cardinals, namely Segas Bishop of Piacenza, and Anthony Fachinetti his
great Nephew, whom he also constituted Referendary of both the Seals.

On the 21th. he began to find himself indisposed in his health, which
increasing to a high degree did on the 23th. give indications of a malignant
Fever, which in eight days time put an end to his life, and dying on the 29th.
of December 1591, his Body was buried in the Church of St. Peter, having
reigned only two Months: and the Sea was vacant a month, and a day. And now to
show the frailty of humane condition, and the uncertainty of great Places, one
year, four months, and three days made an end of four Popes.

CLEMENT VIII.
IN the place of Innocent Cardinal Hippolito Aldebrandino was elected Pope, and
possessed the Chair thirteen years or thereabouts. He was descended from an
ancient Family of Florence, which had continued from the Langobards for the
space of a thousand years, originally called Hildebrando, or Hildebrandino, and
so by corruption Aldebrandino: his Ancestors had held the chief Offices, and
Dignities in that City, having the honor to have had the chief and supreme
Magistracy of Gonfaloniere twenty three times in their Family, of which great
promotions, and Dignities in that City none can boast so much, as this, unless
the House of the Medici, who in this Age are Dukes of that City and Country.

This Hippolito was the Son of Silvester Aldobrandino, born at Florence, where,
and at Pisa having studied the Law, he gained considerable knowledge therein, to
which having added an excellency in the gift of Eloquence, and a just, and
upright mind he became fit and qualified for Government, and for management of
the most important Trusts, and charges of State. After many honors and Places
which he had obtained, as well at Florence, as with the Dukes of Ferrara, and
Vrbin; he was at Rome made Auditor of the Rota, and Datary under Sixtus V. who
afterward created him Cardinal, and sent him under Character of his Legate into
Poland. He afterward was employed in matters of great importance under Urban
VII. Gregory XIV. and Innocent IX. in all which acquitting himself with
singular Justice, and Wisdom, he prepared his way to the attainment of that
supreme Dignity, after which the Cardinals so much thirst, and languish.

The Funeral Obsequies of Innocent being performed, the Cardinals having
celebrated the Mass of the Holy Ghost, and heard an Oration pronounced by the
Bishop of Traw de eligendo Summo Pontifice, they entered the Conclave on the
10th of January to the number of fifty two, singing the Hymn of Veni Creator
Spiritus.

Many and various were the endeavors, and practices amongst the Cardinals,
during the time of this Conclave: Montalto who was the great stickler, and
promoter of Elections, designed the choice for Cardinal Santa Severina, being a
person much esteemed for his Virtues, and Learning; but such opposition
appearing against him, as could not be withstood, diverse others were put into
the predicament, as Como, Paleotto, and others: Colonna had a fair prospect of
success, and so also had Madruccio, but were all excluded by contrary factions:
so at length Montalto proposed Cardinal Aldobrandino, who being nominated, was
generally acceptable, and esteemed for his rare qualities, and the excellency
of his Virtue, and Piety; and disquisition or trial of Votes being made, there
soon appeared a unanimous consent, and concurrence to create him Pope, which
was accordingly effected on the 30th. of January 1592. and publication made in
the Conclave that Aldobrandino was chosen: whereupon Madruccio, Montalto, and
others assembling together went in company to his Cell to congratulate his
Election; which he received without any alteration, or change of countenance;
and being conducted thence to the Chapel Paolina, he was there by public
Scrutiny of all the Cardinals, and with their common, and unanimous Vote
Elected Pope.

It is said, that after his Choice, he kneeled down before the Altar, and
instead of showing that joy, which Sixtus V. and others had betrayed, he let
full abundance of tears, seeming to be filled with great fear and confusion:
and when according to the usual formality, it was inquired of him by the
Masters of the Ceremonies, whether he accepted of his Election to the Popedom,
he remained silent without returning any Answer, so that the Cardinals who were
standing near his Person, made Answer for him, that he did accept it: but the
Masters not accepting this assent from the mouth of others: told him, That his
consent could not be recorded from the words of others, but only from his own;
wherefore being thus urged, he with abundance of tears expressed himself in
this manner: O Lord God, who see the hearts of all Men, and from whom no
secrets are hid, and know what is present, and what is to come; if this
Election which thou have made of me, to be thy Vicar on Earth, shall not be to
thy glory, and service, and good of thy faithful people, Grant, I beseech Thee,
that my Tongue may cleave to the root of my Mouth, Vt lingua mea adhaereat
faucibus meis: but if thou by thy Providence do foresee that I shall be
useful, and serviceable to thy Holy Church, then do I in virtue of thy Divine
Assistance, accept of this Office, and be it unto thy Servant according to thy
Will.

And thus being, as accustomary, vested in his Habit, and placed in the Chair,
he was with great joy of all the Cardinals adored by them; calling himself by
the name of Clement VIII. he was afterward conducted to St. Peter's, where he
was met by the Canons, singing the usual Antiphona: Ecce Sacerdos Magnus, qui
in diebus suis placuit Deo, and Inventus est Justus.

All the Ceremonies of his Election, and Inauguration being completed; he
immediately applied his mind to the Affairs of Government. And in the first
place after the Example of Sixtus V. he resolved to destroy and extirpate that
vile, and abominable sort of Men, called Banditi, who were Vagabonds, and
Robbers, and committed most execrable Murders, and spoils in all parts of the
Roman Territories: to effect which he sent several Troops of armed Men against
them, who cut them in pieces, and destroyed them without any remorse, or
compassion, as the Enemies, and pest of humane Society. But that which was of
greatest importance to him, was the success of the League against Henry King of
Navarre; to support and strengthen which, he dispatched the Bishop of Viterbo
into France with Instructions, and Money to favor the Party and Interest of
the Allies against the King and his Protestant Party, who stood Excommunicated
by Pope Sixtus. I^ is not our part here to relate all the passages, and
successes of that War, being that which appertains to the History of France; we
can only say, that Henry IV. being victorious in all the Battles which he
fought, and having entered all the Provinces of that Kingdom with Triumph: we
may imagine that France stood at that time on its vertical point of becoming
all Protestant. But certainly that wise King considering, that Victory in War
is not sufficient to settle a Prince quiet, and secure in his Throne, unless
his inauguration be attended with the affection of his People, and a
concurrence, or conformity with the professed, and established Religion of the
Country, did suffer himself to be overborn by those arguments, which were
produced in favor of the Church of Rome, whose greatest weight consisted in
those considerations which had respect to the Union, and peace of the Kingdom.
And thereupon, all the pretenses of opposition to their lawful Sovereign being
taken off from the people; Meaux, Lion, Orleans, and Bourges with other places,
which stood in Rebellion against him, submitted to his pleasure, and the King
was received into Paris with all joy and triumph imaginable.

The King having made profession of the Roman Catholic Faith, was absolved by
the Archbishop of Bourges in the Church at St. Denis; at which the Pope was
highly displeased, in regard the absolution of Monarchs in cases of Heresy
could not be performed but by the Pope himself in Person, or by immediate
Deputation from him: Howsoever the Duke of Nevers being sent Ambassador to
Rome, carrying with him from the Nuntio Attestations of the King's sincere
conversion; which was confirmed not long afterward by the Sieur du Perron, the
Excommunication was taken off, which Pope Sixtus had thundered against him; and
having received him for the eldest Son of the Church, the Pope solemnly gave
him his Absolution, and blessing in the year 1595.

In this year Pope Clement restrained the liberal Grants of Indulgences, which
having for Money been issued to every Chapman, they became common even to
contempt; for remedy of which he imposed a greater difficulty on the
concessions of them. He also at that time relieved the people of Rome by
abatements on the price of Corn, having caused great quantities to be imported
from Sicily: he likewise suppressed by his Naval Force the many Pirates which
infested the Mediterranean Sea: and concluded a League between himself, the
Emperor, the Prince of Transylvania, and the Princes of Germany against the
Turk: for the effectual prosecution of which, he afterward in the year 1597.
sent ten thousand Men into Hungary paid at his own charge under the conduct of
Francis Aldebrandino, which being joined with six thousand, which the Emperor
sent into Transylvania, and other Forces raised, and paid by the circles of the
Empire, composed a strong and formidable Army against the Turk.

Howsoever the Wars between France and Spain still continuing without any
probable appearance of accommodation, the Turk availed himself of those unhappy
divisions; and forced the Emperor to raise the Siege of Raab; and shamefully
caused the Transilvanians to retreat from Temeswar, and being victorious in all
parts of Hungary, threatened to enter Germany by force of Arms: with which the
Pope being greatly alarmed, and fearing the success of the common Enemy of
Christendom, bended all his thoughts toward making a Peace between Spain, and
France, which he hoped to effect in that juncture of time, when the
circumstances of Christendom made it almost necessary to put an end unto the
War: In this grand Affair he employed Cardinal Alexander de Medicis, (who was
afterward his Successor) to be his Legate to Henry IV. of France, and by his
Nuntio who resided with Philip II. in the Court of Spain, he used many
instances, and warm Exhortations, persuading both of them that laying aside the
hatred, and animosities which were between them, they would seriously apply
themselves to embrace such Conditions, which might produce Amity and a
Christian peace between them, that so they might join in a League against the
Turk, who was now victorious, and breathed out ruin, and destruction to all
Christendom: but because these two Princes were high spirited, and haughty, as
not to be the first to condescend, and ask a peace, the General of the
Cordelier Friars was employed by the Pope, to carry the Offers, and proposals
of mediation between one, and the other, in which he had such success, that
laboring with the Legate, and Monsieur de Sillery, who was aftewards made
Chancellor of France, they agreed at St. Quintin on the most difficult, and
disputable Points and Conditions, which were afterward perfected, and
concluded at Vervins in the year 1598.

But that which had like to have interrupted and spoiled all this Treaty, was
the restitution of the Marquisat of Salluces, which the French King demanded of
the Duke of Savoy: but lest this pretension should frustrate and defeat the
former Agreement, the King was contented to constitute the Pope sole Arbitrator
and Judge of this difference, promising to stand to his Umpirage and Award,
provided, that his Sentence were published in one year after the Date of this
present Peace. But this Peace did not produce that union of Arms against the
common Enemy, as the Pope expected; the Kings resolving to make use of this
Peace, for the quiet, and repose of their Subjects; and therefore taking no
notice of any preparations against the Turk, they dispatched their respective
Letters to the Pope, freighted with Salutes and Thanks for the good Offices he
had performed toward the happy establishment, and conclusion of a Peace.

But before this Peace was agreed in the Month of October 1599. Alfonso d' Este
the second of that Name Duke of Ferrara died without issue Male, by which the
City of Ferrara, and the Territory thereunto belonging devolved to the Papal
Chair, which the Pope made known to the Cardinals in a full Consistory; with
his Claim thereunto, according to ancient Articles agreed between the Ancestors
of the Duke of Ferrara, and the Sea of Rome: But news coming afterward that
Cesare d' Este Bastard brother of the Duke deceased, had made seizure, and
taken possession of the Dukedom by virtue of his Brother's Testament, resolving
to defend his Title thereunto by force of Arms; the Pope was greatly troubled,
and incensed, and immediately gave Orders to raise an Army of twenty five
thousand Foot and three thousand Horse, to march under the Command of his
Nephew Cardinal Aldobrandino; ( John Francis Aldobrandino, being, as we have
said, at that time in Hungary) and to make these temporal Arms the more
available, he accompanied them with the Spiritual Artillery of Excommunication,
which he caused to be thundered out, and affixed in all the public places of
Ferrara. The Cardinal being proud of the honor to be so great a General, used
such diligence in raising and providing his Army, that in less than two Months
after his departure from Rome, he had completed his Leavies, and appointed his
general Rendezvous at Rimini. With the unexpected news of this speedy dispatch,
Cesare d' Este was much surprised, and being now in great fear, and doubt of
his success, began to consult of what moderate, and reasonable propositions he
might offer unto the Pope: wherefore he desired his Friends at Rome to
intercede for him, and by their hands offered many, and various expedients,
condescending every day to Conditions more favorable to the Pope than the
former: but the Pope refusing all other terms than those, which made him Master
of the City, and jurisdiction of Ferrara; he was at length obliged to yield
thereunto, whereby that Dominion devolved to the Church, and the delivery
thereof was agreed by Articles signed at Faenza; of which when the Pope
received advice, he sang Te Deum, and rendered thanks publicly to God; and
with the general concurrence and Counsel of the Cardinals in a full Consistory,
he constituted Cardinal Aldobrandino his Legate at Ferrara; giving him order to
take possession of the City; which about the end of February 1598. An. 1598.
was accordingly surrendered with all quietness, and peace, not so much as with
a Sword drawn, or a Musket fired: before which time Don Cesare retired to
Reggio, and Modena, of which Cities he was shortly after created Duke by the
Emperor and invested in the Government thereof, and also made Prince of the
Roman Empire. Afterward the Pope resolving to make a Journey to Ferrara, to
settle, and establish Affairs in his new Dominions, he caused on Sunday being
the 12th. of April (according to the usual Custom, when Popes travel) the
Sacrament of the Altar to be carried the day before his departure; and then the
next day after Mass, laying his Vestments aside, and clothing himself with his
shorter Garments, the Antiphona was sung: In viam pacis, with other short
Prayers for the happy success of this Journey: and then mounting into his
Horse-litter he was accompanied to the Gate of the City by the Cardinals, where
turning toward them he gave them his Benediction, and proceeded on his way, in
this order. First, after the Baggage, belonging to the Kitchen, the
Horse-litters, and Horses appertaining to the Pope preceded, led by the Grooms
of the Stables, clothed in red: next followed the Carriages with the Robes:
next to them a Squadron of Light-Horsemen with four Trumpets before them, then
the Pope's Family, with the Guard of Switzers on foot armed with Carbines, and
Halberts: after followed the Governor of Rome, who accompanied his Holiness as
far as Ponte Molle, then went the Standard Bearer carrying a Crucifix, and
immediately after him went the Pope in his Litter, and then followed the
Cardinals Baronius, Arigoni, Monte, and St. Georgio on Mules with Ombrelles in
in their hands, with a great number of other Prelates, some on Horses, and
others in Coaches: In this manner they traveled until Thursday in the Evening,
(being treated on the way by several Cardinals) when they arrived at Loretto,
and there for Devotion, and for refreshment remained until Sunday. When the
Pope being on his departure, presented to the Lady of Loretto a stately Cross
with six Silver Candlesticks, and two Bases of massive Silver, with a thousand
Crowns in Money, and rich Vestments with which the Pope was clothed, when he
said Mass in that Chapel. Departing on Sunday from Loretto; they arrived that
Evening at Ancona, where being received with Triumphant Arches and splendid
entertainment, they were pleased to remain until the Friday following; during
which time Cardinal Aldobrandino arrived, and was received by the Pope with all
the demonstrations of kindness, and respect imaginable. On Thursday being
Ascension day, and the day before the Pope's departure, the Sacrament of the
Altar took its journey forward for Sinigaglia, where the day following it
arrived, as also did the Pope, being received by the Duke of Vrbin with a
sumptuous, and splendid entertainment. From Sinigaglia they came to Fano, which
being the City where the Pope was born, he was received with all demonstrations
of joy, and triumph; from thence they traveled to Pesaro, where the Duke of
that place was not wanting in his respects and duty, and next day to Rimini
where the Duke of Modena came to kiss the feet of the Pope. On Tuesday they
came to Ravexna, on Thursday they arrived at the Church of St. George, not far
distant from Ferrara, where was a stately Monastery possessed by Monks of the
Order of Mount Olivet; the Sacrament being there arrived in the Morning, was
met about a Mile distant from the Church, by the Clergy, and Religious of
Ferrara, with all reverence, and devotion: where the Pope coming afterward
about an hour before Sunsetting, retired into the Convent, where his Lodgings
were prepared, being the very same, in which Clement VII. had formerly been
received: and here all things were prepared for the solemn Cavalcade, and entry
into Ferrara.

We shall not need to entertain the Reader with the Order and sumptuous manner
of this Cavalcade, as we have done of the Pope's Journey to this place; it is
sufficient to mention that the Entry into Ferrara was truly Royal, and
Magnificent, and what might suit with the State, and glory of the greatest
Monarch of Europe. During the time of the Pope's residence in that place which
was from the Months of April, until the middle of December following, several
matters, and actions of importance succeeded: and particularly a contract of
Marriage between four persons of the same Name, Family, and bearing the same
Escutcheons, and Arms; to wit, between Philip III. King of Spain, and Margaret
of Austria, Sister of the Archduke Ferdinand of Austria; and between the
Archduke of Austria Albert, late Cardinal, with the Infanta Isabella Clara
Eugenia Sister of the King of Spain; the which most illustrious Persons were
joined together by the hands of the Pope, during the time that the Pope resided
at Ferrara. For though in the life of Philip II. the Marriage was agreed
between his Son, and the Lady Margaret, yet not being celebrated before his
death, the consummation thereof was deferred until the days of mourning for the
deceased King were accomplished: which happening to be at the time, when Pope
Clement was at Ferrara; it was thought fit, that the Lady Margaret in her
passage to Spain, should take Ferrara in her way; which accordingly she did,
being splendidly treated by the State of Venice, as she journied through their
Dominions, and being conducted by the Governor of Milan with a numerous train
she entered the City of Ferrara, where she was magnificently received by the
whole College of Cardinals, and lodged at the expenses of the Pope. The same
Evening that she arrived, she made her visit to the Pope, and being admitted to
his presence, she kissed his feet; and then his Holiness vouchsafed to arise,
and bow to her, and give her his blessing: after her the Arch-Dutchess
presented her self; who was received with the like forms of blessing. On the
Sunday following, which was the day appointed for the Marriage, the Queen
appeared richly adorned like a Bride, and being conducted into the Cathedral,
which was magnificently prepared, she was there by the hand of the Pope
espoused to Philip the third King of Spain, the Archduke Albert representing
the person of the said King; and then the Archduke himself espoused the
Infanta of Spain, the Ambassador of Spain standing in her stead, and in
representation of her person. After all which Ceremonies and Festivals were
ended, at which there was a concourse of almost all the great personages of
Italy; the Queen took her journey by way of Mantoua into Spain, where she was
splendidly treated by that Duke. And the Pope also having resided for the space
of eight Months at Ferrara to the great satisfaction of his new Subjects, who
were not used to such sights, not to such plenty of Money, as the concourse of
such great Personages had brought them, were highly pleased with the
Ecclesiastical Government. At length the Pope intending for Rome, departed from
Ferrara with many expressions, and evidences of love, and affection toward his
people, recommending them to the care of Cardinal St. Clement, whom he had made
Governor of that City, and jurisdiction belonging to it. On the 20th. of
December the Pope arrived at Rome, full of joy, and triumph for the happy
acquisition of his new Dukedom; but this contentment was much allayed by the
sudden irruption of the Tybur, which overflowing all its banks, made such an
inundation as drowned all the City, and the Country round about; which was not
only of damage to many in their Estates and ruin of their Houses; but diverse
persons were drowned with all their substance, and Estate; never did Rome
endure such desolation; for on Christmas Day the Churches being filled with
Water, there was neither Mass nor Prayers, nor Priest, that was heard, or seen
within those Walls, and the Pope himself was forced to pray on the tops of the
Hills of Rome: the poor that had saved themselves, were yet in great misery and
want, and though spared by the Waters, might have perished by Famine had not
the charity of the Pope, and Cardinals administered a relief to them; and herein
especially Cardinal Aldobrandino was signally useful; for he visited the Houses
of the poor in Boats, and supplied them with Bread and other Victuals, as their
occasions required. The like almost we read of in the Life of Adrian I.

And now the year of 1599. An. 1599.
being entered, the Pope began to make preparations for the following year,
which was called and appointed for the year of Jubilee; and in order thereunto
he exhorted all Christian Princes to peace, and unity, especially his labors
were more intent, and concerned for peace, and good correspondence in Italy,
inviting all Sovereign Princes by his Apostolical Letters (as they called them)
to Rome to gain the Jubilee, promising all those Blessings, Indulgences, and
Pardons which are of as high moment, as the Salvation of their Souls. And
because I am of Opinion that the form of this general Letter may be curious,
and pleasing to the Reader, I have undertaken to transcribe the same, as
translated from the Latin, the words are these: Clement the Bishop, Servant of
the Servants of God, to all the Faithful in Christ, who shall read these
present Letters, be Health, and the Apostolical Benediction. Since that by the
Grace of God (beloved Children in Christ) the acceptable year of our Lord,
Isaiah 61.
which is the year of Remission and Pardon does approach: and the day is come
of Eternal Salvation, and redemption from your sins: Cor. 6.
Now that we are come to the year so much desired by all Christian people,
which is the most Holy Jubilee, and which since the birth of Christ born of the
blessed Virgin Mary, is the year 1600. and which is now according to the usual
custom to be celebrated with so much the greater joy, and concourse of people,
by how much it is to be represented without corruption in the pure Original,
and primary Institution thereof: for in regard we have by ancient Tradition,
and testimony of our Forefathers received assurance, that it was accustomary
for the Church of Rome to grant Indulgences, and remission of sins to all such
who in every Age, that is in the term of every hundred years, came to Rome to
visit the Churches of the Holy Apostles St. Peter, and St. Paul: and because
that this Custom should not be esteemed by the World, as a vain, and
superstitious rite of Gentilism, Boniface VIII. our Predecessor thought fit to
confirm the same by his Apostolical Decree to all Ages: howsoever other Popes
who were our Predecessors have undertaken to reduce the same to a shorter term
of years.

And indeed, it has not without the Divine, and mysterious Ordination been
enacted, and decreed, that within the Age, and memory of Man, this great
benefit of God to mankind should be celebrated, and remembered: who when like
the Sun of Righteousness, he arose from the Enclosures of the Virgins Womb, to
bestow eternal Salvation on all the World, he was pleased to appoint, that the
remembrance of this Benefit should be celebrated in no other place, than this
(of Rome) which is the Rock, and the receptacle of the Christian Religion,
where all the Subjects, as Sons of one Father, and Sheep of one Shepherd,
resort to the Chair of St. Peter, and to the firm Rock of Faith which shall
never by the continued Course of Ages, nor variety of times be altered, or
changed: that the World may see one Sheepfold, and one Shepherd, and the true
splendor of one Faith, and all the members thereof joined, and cemented
together under one Head with the bonds of Love, and Charity: and lastly, that
they may see, with what unity in the Roman Church, the religious Solemnity of
this year is observed in its due course which we may truly style the Holy year.
This year therefore we may reasonably call the Holy year of Our Lord, and the
acceptable year; because that Jesus Christ himself, who is the Author of our
Salvation, the Son of God, who was sent by the Eternal Father in the fullness of
Grace, and of the Holy Ghost, has so named it: Isaiah 61.
To heal the contrite in heart, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the
opening of the Prison to them who are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of
our Lord. And whereas we though unworthy, do sit in the Seat of Christ upon
Earth, and are stated in this sublime Place, watching as a Sentinel, and a
Guard Apostolical, do declare, publish and preach to all you who are the
faithful in Christ this year of Jubilee; which though it be a year of
repentance, yet it is also a year of Jubilee, and of spiritual joy and comfort.

Now because the love of Christ for whom we are Ambassadors to all Nations
constrains us, and the zeal which we have for your Souls, 2 Cor. 5. Psalm* 68.
does consume our spirit; we exhort, and beseech you all by the blood which
Jesus Christ has spilt, and by his coming in the last day of Judgment,
especially at this time of Jubilee: That every one be converted from the evil
of his way, and turn unto the Lord with a pure heart, Hebr. 12. Isaiah 35.
and good conscience and faith unfeigned, because the Lord is gracious, 1 Timothy
1.
and merciful, full of compassion and long-suffering. Joel 2.
Wherefore according to the duty of our Pastoral Office, we do call, and
cheerfully invite you Our dear Children in Christ, namely the Emperor, the
Kings, and Catholic Princes, with all the faithful of Christ wheresoever
dispersed in the most remote parts of the World, that they would be present at
this joyful solemnity of the Jubilee; though we cannot but at the same time be
miserably afflicted with consideration of the great numbers of people who have
separated themselves from the union and Communion of the Catholic and
Apostolical Church, within the last Age of one hundred years past did with one
mind and heart celebrate this holy year of Jubilee: for the eternal salvation
of whose souls, we would gladly and willingly spill our blood, and give our
lives. Wherefore you who are obedient Children, and Catholic, and beloved of
God and us, Venite, and Ascendite ad locum quem elegit Dominus. Deuteronomy. 26.
Come unto this spiritual Jerusalem, and to this holy Mount of Sion, not
according to the letter, but Allegorically and by spiritual understanding;
because that from this place, the holy light of Evangelical truth has from the
first beginning of the Primitive Church been diffused through all Nations. This
is that happy City, whose faith the Apostle praises, and commends in these
words: Romans 1.8.
I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken of
throughout the whole World. This is the City where the Chief of the Apostles
Peter and Paul, did vent their Doctrine with the effusion of their blood; that
Rome being the sacred Seat of St. Peter, might become the capital City of the
World, the Mother of all the Faithful, and the Majesty of all the other
Churches. Here is the Rock of Faith placed, and from hence springs the fountain
of the Priestly unity; from hence are derived the clear streams of the purest
Doctrine; here are found the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven with full power to
bind, and loose: and lastly, here is conserved that Treasure of Indulgences
which shall never fail, of which the Roman High Priest is the principal keeper
and Dispenser. And though he does dispense some part hereof every year, as
occasion does require, yet more especially in this Holy year of Jubilee a
greater affluence thereof is dispersed, when according to the solemnity of the
most ancient Churches of Rome, when the gates are opened by the pious and
liberal hands: that so entering into the presence of God with joy, and having
cast off from their shoulders the yoke of sin, and the tyranny of the Enemy,
you may be reconciled unto God by means of the Sacrament; and therefore come
you as true Children, Heirs of Heaven, and Possessours of Paradise.

Given at Rome near St. Peter's, in the year of our Lord's Incarnation, 1599.
June 18. in the 8th. year of our Pontificate.

The Copy of this Letter being sent to all Christian Princes in communion with
the Court of Rome, the Pope busily employed himself in making preparations, and
provisions for entertainment of Pilgrims, who in the following year of Jubilee
crowded in those numbers to gain the Indulgences and Pardons as of Men and
Women the account made, amounted unto three Millions of Persons.

But the Pope was not so busily employed in his preparations for the Jubilee,
but that he attended to the decision of the Controversy of the Marquisat of
Saluces, which (as we have said) was at the late Treaty at Vervins put into his
hands and power to be concluded, and determined in the space of one year: In
order unto which the President Bruslard was dispatched to Rome in behalf of the
French King, and the Count d' Archonas of the Duke of Savoy, and both met there
about the beginning of this year 1599. the Cause being pleaded before* the
Pope, both Parties pressed the Arguments so home in favor of the right of
their respective matters: that the Pope esteeming the Point difficult to be
decided, required some longer time before he would undertake to pass his
judgment: and in the interim proposed, that the Marquisat should remain in his
hands as a Depositary, and an indifferent person between both Parties. And
though neither the King nor the Duke were well pleased with these delatory
proceedings, yet the King was contented to allow two Months for such
determination; but the Duke, who had been possessed by the suggestions of his
Minister at Rome, that the Pope required to be the Depositary with design to
bestow the Marquisat on one of his Nephews, conceived such a jealousy of the
Pope's intentions, that he began to decline the Umpirage; which when the Pope
understood he with great indignation refused to interpose farther, resolving
neither to meddle with the Arbitration, nor the Deposite. The King who knew
well, in what manner to do right unto himself by his Sword, was not much
concerned for the rejection which the Pope had made of the Arbitration: and the
Duke being contented to have his Cause pass by other formalities than that of
the Consistory, judged his right more secure, and more easily convincing by a
personal Treaty with the King himself; which matter being now taken out of the
hand of the Pope, we leave to the temporal determination of these Princes and
proceed to other matters more agreeable to this History.

Henry IV. of France being in good favor, and correspondence with Clement
VIII. treated with him about obtaining a Divorce, or rather a dissolution of
marriage between him, and Margaret Duchess of Valois; to which this Pope might
perhaps be more inclinable and easy on some reflections he made on the ill
consequences which the delays of the like Divorce to Henry VIII. of England,
produced to the Papal Power. The Cardinal d' Ossac with the President Monsieur
de Silery, having Orders to prosecute this matter in the Court of Rome,
represented to the Pope the state of the marriage with Queen Margaret, and that
though the King their Master had ever since his conversion to the Catholic
Religion entertained reverend, and obedient thoughts toward the Papal Sea, and
might on score of being the eldest Son of the Church expected more than
ordinary favors, yet on consideration of the Nullity of this Marriage, he
desired nothing more than common justice. The Pope who was very desirous to
favor, and oblige the King, referred the disquisition, and examination of the
Marriage to the Cardinal Joyeuse, the Bishop of Modena, who was Nuntio for the
Pope in France, and the Archbishop of Arles, whom he delegated to consider of
those reasons which were offered to invalidate the legality of the Marriage. In
the mean time Henry treating a Contract of marriage with his Mistress Gabriele
d' Estrees, God disposed otherwise of that intention; and the Delegates who
were willing to comply with the desires of the King, declared the Marriage Null
having been in the third degree of consanguinity, by which both parties were
set at liberty, and put in the same estate and condition as before their
Matrimony. Of which the King having received information from his Ambassador
Monsieur de Sillery then residing at Rome, he immediately dispatched the Sieur
d' Alincourt Governor of Pontois, to render his humble thanks to the Pope for
his obliging determination, and to demand his Counsel concerning the Alliance
which he intended to make with the House de Medicis, having placed his
affections on the Princess Mary Niece to the Grand Duke of Florence. The Sieur
de Sillery taking Post upon this Errand arrived at Rome the 6th. of February
being Ash Wednesday in the year 1600. An 1600.
and the year of Jubilee, which made that Lent the more Solemn, and devout,
than that of common years: for it was commanded that Prayers of forty hours
continuance should be made in the Churches of the Jesuits: the Pope himself
with the College of Cardinals began the first hour, and every hour afterward
was employed in Prayers, and ended with an Exhortation made by some Cardinal,
or Learned Prelat.

To gain the Indulgences of this Jubilee though many personages of great
quality did resort to Rome, yet none was of higher dignity than the Duke de
Bar, who Incognito and with a small train, and equipage traveled to Rome to
gain a Dispensation for his Marriage, which he had celebrated between himself,
and the Princess Catharine the Only Sister of the French King: for having
performed the same within the degrees of consanguinity forbidden by the Church,
the Bishop of Lorain, and others had refused to admit him to the Sacrament, and
Communion of the Church. Thus we see, whilst the King sues for a Divorce, the
Duke desires a confirmation, and dispensation of his Marriage and both were
granted, though the same reasons, and considerations were in both cases; the
same ground which might dissolve the one might null the other, and the same
salve might serve for both Cures: In short, the Duke de Bar applied himself
with all the humility, and submission imaginable to the Papal Chair, and
carrying with him the King's recommendatory Letters to the Cardinals
Aldobrandino, Ossac, and his Ambassador, he obtained as much favor in his
Cause as he could expect, or desire.

On the other side, in pursuance of the late Divorce, the Sieurs de Sillery,
and Alincourt went to Florence to treat a new Marriage between the King* and
the Princess Mary de Medicis. As the Duke of Florence received the honor of
this Match with great readiness, it being an addition to the grandeur of his
House; so the Pope to forward the same, contributed on his part a hundred
thousand Crowns with many Jewels by way of Dowry, or Portion, which was agreed
to be six hundred thousand Crowns in ready Money. So soon as the Articles were
signed, the Duke of Florence published the intended Marriage; and the King to
bring it to a consummation, being then at Lions in order to his Journey to
Grenoble deputed Bellegarde his Grand Escuyer with Commission to the Grand
Duke, to espouse Mary de Medicis in his name: and the Pope to have a farther
hand in this work, deputed his Nephew Cardinal Aldobrandino to be his Legate at
Florence, and to be present at the Nuptials, which he accordingly performed,
and bestowed the Benediction in the Pope's Name.

The Cardinal having performed this piece of service hastened away by order of
the Pope to Tortona, there to find the Duke and stipulate with him the
conditions of a firm Peace; for the King had already commenced a War, and taken
several places both in Savoy, and Bresse. The Cardinal representing before the
Duke the danger, and inequality of a War with France, persuaded him to resign
his pretensions and interest to the Marquisat of Saluses; and having obtained
this promise, he proceeded to Lions, where managing this Affair with the King,
a Peace was concluded* and published in the year 1601. on Conditions, that the
Duke should quit all claim to the Marquisat of Saluces in exchange for Bresse,
and some other Countries.

In the mean time the Queen embarked at Ligorne with seventeen Galleys,
arrived happily at Marseille, and thence was conducted with great honor and
pomp to Lions, where meeting with the King the marriage was consummated, and
the Nuptial Benediction given by Cardinal Aldobrandino the Pope's Legate before
the great Altar of St. John's Church in the City of Lions. All these kindnesses
passed between the Pope, and the King; the Pope resolved to make use of this
good Correspondence to intercede in behalf of the Jesuits, whose whole Order
having for certain reasons been banished, and exterminated from the Dominions
of France, was now at the instance and desire of the King restored again under
certain Conditions to their possessions, and habitations in that Kingdom.

And in regard the Emperor was at the same time hardly pressed by the Turk, the
Pope, as at other times furnished him with a hundred thousand Crowns, which was
a seasonable Recruit and supply in those exegencies of the Empire.

And now it was about the year 1603. An. 1603.
that Elizabeth Queen of England dying, and James VI. King of Scotland
succeeding to the Crown, when the Pope conceived great hopes, and expectations,
that by means of this King, (whom he fancied to be a favourer of the Roman
Church) the Kingdoms of Great Britain would submit unto, and acknowledge the
Papal Authority; but what ground, or reasons there were for such an Opinion* or
why the Roman Catholics in England had conceived, and (for forty years
together) had framed such a fancy to themselves no rational account can be
given: but this conceit soon vanishing by the contrary effects which appeared,
the Papists of England made two Remonstrances to the new King in favor of
their Religion, desiring at least that a liberty of Conscience might be granted
to them; but these had no more effect, than the Declaration, which the
Protestants made the same year in favor of their Religion in France.

The Cardinals Bonvisi, and Ossac dying this year at Rome, An. 1604.
Henry the French King did greatly urge the Pope for a promotion of Cardinals,
recommending several of his own Creatures, and Friends to that Dignity: And
though the Pope was very desirous to have reduced the Order of Cardinals to
their ancient number, yet being overcome by the instances of some Friends, he
bestowed a Cardinals Cap on the Son of one of his Nephews, being a Youth of
about fourteen or fifteen years of age; and suffering himself to be prevailed
with by the passion of Princes, he created in this very year at least eighteen
Cardinals, amongst which there were not above two French, and two Spaniards.
The first which was found in this List was Serafim Olivari Patriarch of
Alexandria, who was originally of Italian extract, but born at Lions, and
proved to be a Prelat of Incomparable parts, and Learning, being always
educated amongst Men, and business; the Bishop of Eureux was an other promoted
to this Dignity, which were the two Frenchmen, who received this honor by the
recommendations of their King: all the others were Italians, unless the Bishop
of Cracovia who was a Polander, and Madrutio Bishop of Trent, who was a German,
and two Spaniards. Cardinal Aldobrandino preferred also his Secretary Erminio
to this honor; and the Pope himself forced Anselme Marzat a Capucin to accept
the red Hat; which he had often refused, protesting that such preferments were
against the Rules, and a violation to the Orders of St. Francis, but the
express commandment of the Pope prevailing; he unwillingly, (or at least seemed
so) from the mere consideration of obedience submitted to the promotion.

About this time three Questions were moved, and discussed at Rome, the first
was managed by a notable Disputant, and a great Sophister; his position was
this: That it was not an essential, or a fundamental point of Faith, to believe
that Clement VIII. was the true and lawful Successor of St. Peter: it was a
bold Thesis for that time, and place; for he was imprisoned for his
impertinence, and it had cost him dearer, had not the Spanish Ambassador
interceded for him. An other published an Opinion, That Confessions wrote in
Letters and sent by the Post, were as available, as those, which were whispered
into the Ear of the Priest. A third was about Grace, and Free Will, in such
manner as held, and maintained by Pelagius; which latter was debated in the
presence of the Pope and Cardinals but remained without determination, by
reason of more important matters which at that time lay before the Consistory.

For then the Canonizing of Ignatius Loyola for a Saint was first propounded:
and also the Deputies of the Clergy of the City of Milan presented themselves
before the Pope, and Cardinals, desiring that their ancient Archbishop Charles
Borromeo might be canonized. Upon these two motions the Pope constituted a
certain Committee of Cardinals to enquire into the sanctity of the Lives, and
of the Miracles which were done at the Invocation of the Names, and at the
Sepulcres of these Saints.

After which an Ambassador was introduced into the Consistory from the
Emperor, representing the many occasions of advantage which were lost in
Hungary for want of Money to carry on the War; to which the Pope gave Answer,
That his Coffers at the present were empty, but howsoever he would lay a Tax of
decimation on the Clergy, whereby to supply the urgencies of the Emperor
against the common Enemy.

Thus did this Pope, (who in reality merited the name of a good Man) employ his
whole time in the Consistory, either designing to make peace between Christian
Princes, or to carrry on a War against the Turk, who is the common Enemy of
Christians; and in these good works of Piety he incessantly labored, being
frequently in consultation concerning the temporal, and spiritual Affairs in
the Church; in discharge of which his fortune was to be assisted with many
wise, and able Cardinals, such as Joyeuse, Serafim Olivari, and Perron and
other Counselors, who amongst several other matters advised him to take a
Guard of Corsi, or Men of the Isle of Corsica, who being quartered in several
parts of the City might be ready to suppress the Banditi who began again to be
troublesome and to infest Rome, as well as other parts of Italy; from which time
until the reign of Alexander VII. this Guard was maintained, when upon some
Affronts, and violences offered to the French Ambassador, they were disbanded
and dismissed never afterward to appear in Rome.

The Archbishopric of Ravenna in this year 1605. An. 1605.
becoming vacant, the Pope bestowed it on his Nephew Cardinal Aldobrandino, who
was no sooner received into that City with such pomp and solemnity, as became
the dignity of that Episcopal Sea, than news arrived of the Pope's
indisposition, which speedily posted the Cardinal back to Rome; for the Pope
falling ill on the 10th. of February his sickness still increased,
notwithstanding all the Remedies, and care which Aldobrandino, and his
Physicians could use: for after he had sat in the Papal Chair for the space of
thirteen years, one month, and three days, he expired his last breath on the
third of March, in the sixty ninth year of his Age, An. 1605.
and was interred in St. Peter's Church, and the Sea was vacant twenty nine
days.

LEO XI.
CLEMENT the Eighth having departed this Life, and his Funeral Obsequies being
performed, the Cardinals to the number of sixty one entered the Conclave on the
14th. of March, and having according to the accustomed manner sung the Hymn of
Veni Creator, and celebrated the Mass of Spiritus Sanctus, and every Cardinal
having received the Sacrament from the hand of the Dean of the Conclave, they
immediately made the first Scrutiny, whereby it might appear unto whom the
plurality of Votes was most probable to incline; but at first the Conclave was
so divided, that no person had any considerable number of Votes bestowed on
him; for Bellarmine, who had the most, accounted but eleven, and Baronius but
eight, and all others an inferior number: at length after several other
Scrutinies, Baronius by the assistance of Cardinal Aldobrandino arrived to
thirty, thirty one, and thirty two, and thirty seven, but still wanting some
few more to make the number arise unto two thirds of the Conclave, the Election
was imperfect: nor could he arise higher, by reason that the Spanish faction
opposed him out of a pique and exception they had taken against him, for what
he had wrote in the 11th. Tome of his Ecclesiastical Annals, disproving the
title of the King of Spain to the Kingdom of Sicily. Whereupon Cardinal Joyeuse
concurring with Aldobrandino, (without whom nothing was to be done in the
Conclave) nominated Alexander de Medicis; who was no sooner proposed than a
strange concurrence, and union appeared in the minds of all the Cardinals
toward him, so that he was as it were elected by an unanimous consent, and
saluted Pope on the first of April 1605. calling himself by the name of Leo XI.
He was then of the age of seventy years, or thereabouts, of a cheerful and
sanguine Aspect, grave in his Speech and deportment, and of a strong and
vigorous Complexion, only he sometimes was subject to pains of the Cholick; he
was a great lover of the virtuosi, and Learned Men and zealous for the interest
of the Church.

After his Election he seemed not in the least manner altered, or transported,
conserving still a Majesty becoming the gravity, and seriousness of the Papal
Chair unto which he was promoted. Nor did he ascend unto this height on a
sudden, but by degrees, and previous dispositions; for besides the advantages
of his birth being the Son of Octaviano de Medicis, Cousin of Cosmo Great Duke
of Tuscany, he had exercised many honorable, and important Offices: for in the
first place he had been Archbishop of Florence, and Francis the Great Duke of
Florence had sent him his Ambassador at Rome. Gregory XIII. created him
Cardinal under the Title of St. John and St. Paul; and the 13th. of December
1593. Clement VIII. deputed him his Legate to Henry IV. King of France and
Navarre; in which Office he was a good Instrument in making the Peace between
this Henry and Philip II. King of Spain, in recompense of which, and to
evidence the respect he had for him, King Henry presented him with a Jewel of
ten thousand Crowns: and finally being chosen Pope to the general satisfaction
of all Rome, he was on the 2d. of April carried with the usual pomp to the
Church of St. Peter's, where Te Deum was solemnly sang; after which the people
of Rome coming to salute him, he promised to abate their Subsidies, and Taxes,
to adorn the City, to treat the Nobility with favor, and respect, and conserve
and maintain the privileges of all People respectively according to their
qualities and conditions.

On the 10th. of April being Easter day he was solemnly Crowned, but the day of
Procession to St. John de Lateran where the Pope takes the possession was
deferred until the seventeenth instant, when the Florentines, and the several
Orders of the City did endeavor to outvy each other in such demonstrations, as
might evidence the satisfaction, and contentment they received by this
Election: amongst which the Florentines erected a Triumphal Arch with this
Inscription on the one side thereof: Leoni XI. Florentino P.O.M. Florentini ad
declarandam fidem, laetitiam, and animi alacritatem. And on the other side:
Dignus est Leo in virtute Agni accipere librum, and solvere septem signacula
ejus. But this joy, and contentment did not continue long; for the Pope being
wearied with the tedious length of these Ceremonies, and overheated with the
Weather, and weight of his Vestments took an extreme cold which turned to a
Fever, which increasing daily on him, he expired his last breath on the 25th.
day after his Election, and in the seventieth year of his age; the same Evening
his Body was carried to the Chapel of Sixtus, and the next day being the 28th.
of April to the Church of St. Peter's, where according to the usual custom great
numbers of people thronged to kiss his feet. The sadness at Rome for this
sudden accident was certainly very great; but none had so much reason to lament
this loss, as his own Family, who had not time to receive the honors designed
for them, and particularly his great Nephew Octaviano on whom he intended to
bestow his own Cardinals Hat. After which the Papal Sea was vacant for nineteen
days.

PAVL V.
LEO the Eleventh being deceased, the same Cardinals who had elected the
preceding Pope to the number of sixty one, entered the Conclave on the 8th of
May, where the day following the first Scrutiny was made; but without effect,
by reason of the diversity of Votes, and divisions amongst the Cardinals. Sauli
was then proposed, but excluded: Bellarmine was then next who in all
probability might have carried the Prize, had not the Scrutiny been deferred,
after the Pratica was made for him. Camerino, and Clemente were also put to the
Votes, but excluded; only Cardinal Tosco had gained so great a Party, being
assisted by Aldobrandino, Montalto and others of the best Interest, that his
Election had certainly been perfected, had not Baronius, and Farugio crossed
the matter, which caused a loud cry for Baronius, but by a like accident of
contradiction, as well Baronius, as Tosco was excluded: at length after
diversity of Successes Cardinal Borghese being nominated, such unanimous
consent appeared in all the Conclave, that every one seemed to assent having no
other objection against him, than the small number of his years, having scarce
attained to the age of fifty three, but that scruple not availing, he was
conducted to the Chapel of Paolino, where he was elected, and having vested
himself in his Pontifical garments was worshipped as Pope on the 16th. of May,
which being performed he took on himself the name of Paul. V.

This Camillo, for so was his Christian Name, was born at Rome, his Father was
Antonio Borghese of Siena, but his Mother was a Roman Lady. His Studies were
chiefly in the Civil Law, in which having taken his degree of Doctor he became
so famous, that he was made Referendary both of one, and the other Signet. In
the year 1588. he was constituted Vice Legate of Bologna. Gregory IV. made him
Auditor of the Chamber, which is an Office that requires great dexterity, and
experience in Affairs. Clement VIII. created him Cardinal with the title of St.
Chrusogono, and afterward made him his Vicar, which is one of the four
principal Dignities of Rome.

In this manner he still advanced in greatness and honor, until he came to the
height of the Papal Dignity, seeming to have arisen thereunto rather by the
force of his own merits, and Virtue than by fortune, or the favor and
recommendation of Friends or Patrons. On the 29th. of May being Whit-sunday he
was Crowned with all the usual Ceremonies; and then he bestowed freely his
general Indulgences, exhorting all people to pray for the increase of God's
Church, the tranquillity and peace of the Christian State, and extirpation of
Heresy. He abated, or took off some of the Taxes, which lay most heavy on the
People, moderated the price of Provisions at Rome, and contrived a great
abundance of all things necessary, or convenient for humane life. And to give
some indication to the World of his magnificence, and generous Mind, he built a
Chapel in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, just opposite to that of Sixtus
V. which he enriched, and adorned with Porphiry, and Marble, and endowed
afterward with a considerable Revenue.

Paul V. being thus settled in the Papal Chair, and invested with all the Power
attendant on that supreme degree, made it the scope, and chief end of all his
designs, and Counsel to scrue up the Ecclesiastical Authority to the sublime
pitch of greatness; or (to use his own words) to restore it to that State from
which his Predecessors, and particularly Clement VIII. had by their
remissness, or want of care suffered it to elapse, and decay. And indeed his
own natural disposition, and the course of his life seemed to have fitted him
for such a work as this; for having been educated a Lawyer, and made Auditor of
the Chamber, whose title is, Sententiarum, and censurarum intus, and extra
latarum universalis Executor, he made such use of his Trade, that all the Popes
his Predecessors, for above fifty years before, had not thundered out so many
Briefs, Monitories, and Excommunications, as he had done, in the space only of
five years: In order to this design of advancing the Ecclesiastical Power, (to
which all his thoughts were applied) he constituted a new Congregation at Rome,
whose business it was to contrive ways and means to amplify, and enlarge the
Authority, and Dominion of the Church: and all the Nuntios, or Ministers which
he sent to Christian Princes were all prepared, and composed of the same
humor, having special Instructions to cry up the Virtue and sacred force of
the Ecclesiastical Authority; amongst these Champions none was more zealous
than Oration Mathei Bishop of Gierace, whom the Pope had made his Nuntio at
Venice; where one day making a Speech before the Doge and Council; he had the
impertinence, or rather the impudence to say, That Alms-deeds, and other works
of Charity and Piety, and frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament, and the
most sublime works of Christian devotion, ad nihilum valent, were all nothing,
unless they were attended with respect, and favor to the Ecclesiastical
liberty and authority. To which he added: That the Pope had commanded him to
persist in this Opinion to the death, and accordingly he was resolved to endure
martyrdom, rather than be remiss or cold in advancement of the Papal Authority.
And these words he delivered with such arrogance, and supercilious affectation,
that he seemed to say, I am Pope in this place, and expect no Reply, or
Contest, but only Obedience.

Howsoever at first for several Months this design was not prosecuted with such
heat as the importance of the matter did require; for we must allow some
abatement, and allay for the joy, and satisfaction which the Pope would take
within himself for his late Achievements: And likewise upon farther thoughts,
he judged it not convenient to erect the Congregation he designed; for that it
would be a means to lay open, and discover his contrivances, and make Princes
more jealous: a proof whereof was given by the Congregation, which was
constituted for management of the Affairs of England; which served only to
give better light and aim to King James than reigning, and to render him more
watchful, and observing over all the actions, and designs of the Papists in
England. And moreover, the Pope having passed some few days of joy after his
Inauguration, was possessed with a melancholy caused by an hypocondriacal
Fancy, that he should speedily depart this life, which gave some retardment for
a while to the heat of his actions: and indeed the ground of his apprehension
proceeded from a common report about Rome, that the Image of the Virgin of
Subiaco had sweated, which commonly fore-runs the death of Popes: also a Dutch
Astrologer had predicted, that Clement VIII. should die in March, and that
after him Leo, and Paul should succeed, and both Reign for a short time. The
thoughts hereof so disturbed, and perplexed his mind, that for the space of
five Months he could not apply himself to any business of moment; until in the
Month of September certain of his Friends being desirous to cure this
melancholy assembled all the Astrologers, and Diviners together in the House
of the Pope's Brothers, where having had a Consultation, they all concluded,
that there had been certain black and unhappy Influences which threatened the
life of the Pope, but being now past and blown over, there remained nothing but
cheerful, and auspitious Omens, which promised long life, and happiness, and
great successes unto him.

Thus being relieved of his Melancholy, his thoughts were at liberty to
reassume the design to advance the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; in order to
which his first beginning was to persuade the King, that the Council of Trent
might be received in France. In Spain he labored to gain an exemption for the
Jesuits, that they might be freed from payment of their Tenths. At Naples he
endeavored to have had the Marquess of Morcone called the Regent of Ponte,
sent to Rome, for condemning a Bookseller to the Galleys, for printing
libellous Pamphlets, the which he pretending to belong to the Inquisition, was
an encroachment on the Ecclesiastical Power, and therefore merited the Censure,
and punishment of the Church. He also took away certain Rents, and Benefices
belonging to the religious Order of Malta, and conferred them on Cardinal
Borghese, who was his Nephew by the Sisters side, called Scipio, of the Family
of Caffarelli a youth of twenty three years of age. But these, and other
matters of this nature made no great noise, and only served to open the gate or
way to particulars of greater importance, the which soon afterward happened in
two considerable Instances. The first related to the Republic of Luca, which
observing that many of their Citizens having professed the Protestant Religion
were retired from their Habitations and Country, had in the times of former
Popes forbidden, and interdicted them from all Commerce, or correspondence with
their fellow-Citizens: the which Act though well approved by the Pope to be in
it self both pious, and commendable, yet he pretended, that such Act of
Interdiction belonged to the Ecclesiastical, and not to the Civil Power; and
therefore required that the same should be cancelled, and made void, that so
place, and room might be opened for the Censure of the Church.

The second related to the City of Genoua, where at the Jesuits College an
Oratory or Chapel was set up for Christian exercises, and here the Citizens of
this Congregation agreed amongst themselves to favor none with their Votes at
the Election of Magistrates, but such as were entered and enrolled in this
Confraternity. This resolution being made known to the Supreme Rulers of the
City, they immediately dissolved the Congregation, not knowing what might be
the ill effects and consequences of such Sedition. This, and other matters of
like nature were ill resented by the Pope, as encroachments on the
Ecclesiastical liberty; wherefore he commanded that such Orders be reversed,
and if not, then he threatened them with Censures, and Excommunications.

But the Pope began to deal more roundly with the State of Venice; for being
very urgent with them to assist the Emperor with Money toward his Wars against
the Turks in Hungary, he exacted it in such a manner, as Kings, and Emperors
require contributions from their Subjects; which though the Venetians could not
digest without secret resentments, yet their Answer was with much modesty: That
though the Senate would gladly contribute toward a War against the Turk, yet
being at high charge, and expense to conserve their own State, and secure
themselves against those fears, and jealousies which were given them by their
Neighbors, they could not apply their nerves and sinews of War to any design,
but what tended to their own security at home. This Answer seemed very strange
to the Pope, who had learned from the doctrine of the modern Casuists, That
Popes might lay any Tax or Imposition on Christian Princes, and require from
them whatsoever they judged for the common good, and welfare of Christendom.
But the Pope did not think this ground to have sufficient foundation, on which
to build, and commence a quarrel, but rather on the matters, which did more
nearly relate to the Interest of the Papal Sea.

It was not long before an occasion of this nature offered it self by means of
one Scipio Saraceno a Prebend of Vicenza, who had contemptuously torn off, and
broken the Seals which the Magistrates had fixed on the Episcopal Chancery,
during the vacancy of that Office: and likewise finding that he could not
debauch a Lady of known Virtue, whom he tempted in the Churches, and Streets,
and in all places where he could have any convenience to meet her; he became so
enraged with lust, and malice, that he besmeared with filthiness and tar the
Gate, and front of her House; which being a high affront, and disgrace to the
Lady, she with the advice of her Friends cited this insolent Prebend before the
Court of Justice at Venice, who as readily and willingly appeared, being
encouraged and bolstred up by the Bishop of Citta Nuova, a person of great
esteem in Venice, and one who was Director of the Affairs of all the Nuntios
and Papal Ministers at that place. The Nuntio who was desirous to obtain a
licentious exemption of all Priests from the Secular Power, embraced the cause
of the Prebendary with all readiness imaginable, and immediately dispatched the
news hereof to the Pope, and to the Bishop of Vicenza, who was then at Rome;
where after diverse Consultations, it was resolved as an essential Point
relating to the Ecclesiastical liberty, that the Cause of the Prebend should be
maintained and defended: and therefore the Pope who was glad of this occasion
to assert the Authority and Rites of the Churches, stormed, and raved with the
Venetian Ambassador, telling him, that he would not endure or suffer the
imprisonment of an Ecclesiastical Person by the Precepts of a Secular Tribunal;
nor would he admit that a Judge of temporal matters should take cognizance of
any Cause, wherein a Priest, or Churchman was concerned. Of all which, the
Ambassador gave advice to the Senate.

The Pope at an other Audience complained to the said Ambassador, that the
Senate of Venice had since the death of Clement VIII. made a Statute of
Mortmain, whereby Lay-persons were forbidden, and restrained from bequeathing,
or bestowing their Estates on the Church; which Statute though it were founded
on an old Law, yet the new one was more restrictive: but both of them being
against the ancient Canons, Councils, and Imperial Laws were in themselves
void, and null, being scandalous, and impious, in that they made the state, and
condition of Churchmen worse than that of infamous persons; and therefore those
who made these Laws did incur the Censures of the Church: in the like terms the
Nuntio at Venice explained the mind of the Pope unto the Senate: and when the
Ambassadors arrived at Rome to congratulate the Pope for his exaltation to
that dignity, he could not refrain even before the Ceremony was ended, to make
his resentments, and complaints of those Laws made in derogation of the Rites,
and immunities belonging to the Church. And thus we have laid down the true
state of the quarrel between the Pope, and the Venetians: to which we shall add
a third Point, namely a Law made at Venice in the year 1603. prohibiting the
building of Churches without consent, and license for it obtained from the
Senate; which the Pope termed a piece of Heresy.

These being the three Points in Controversy, the Senate for answer thereunto
commanded their Ambassador to represent in their name unto his Holiness; That
the just Right, and Title they had to judge Ecclesiastical Persons in Secular
Causes was founded in the natural Power of the Supreme Prince, and confirmed by
an uninterrupted course of a thousand years, the which may be proved by the
Pontifical Briefs extant in their public Archives, or Records. That the Law of
Mort-main, or Statute restraining Laymen from alienation of their Estates to
the Church, was not only enacted at Venice or peculiar to the Cities under
that Metropolis, but exercised in other Christian Kingdoms, and States; and
that this Law was more conducing to the welfare of Venice, than to any other
people; being that which could only conserve its Forces entire against the
common Enemy of Christendom, which would otherwise be enfeebled by those daily
Legacies, and Endowments which were bequeathed, and conferred on the Church.

The Pope was so netled with this way of reasoning, that he sat all the time
uneasy in his Seat, shrugging his shoulders, and turning his head which
intimated the unquietness of his mind. At length he replied: That those
arguments were invalid, and of no force: for that there was no foundation to be
made on the accustomed course of their Judicature, which was so much the worse,
by how much more they pretended Antiquity. And as to the Briefs, there was no
authentic Register or Record of them, but what was found at Rome, and that the
others were forged Copies, and cheats imposed on the Clergy. And as to their
Acts, and Ordinances, he was so well acquainted, and versed in them, since the
time of his youthful Studies; and that having passed the Offices of Vice-Legat,
Auditor of the Chamber, and Vicar of the Pope, he was sufficiently assured,
that that Law could not stand, and that the old Act made in the year 1536.
which takes from the Laiety a power of disposing of their own private Estates,
was in it self void, and of no force, and a tyrannical imposition on the
Subject. That the Senate themselves were so sensible of this injurious Law,
that they were ashamed to issue forth any Copies of it: and if in case a Law of
this nature, were found in any other Country, it was established by the
Authority and with the concurrence of the Popes; and then he concluded, that he
was resolved not to make a long work of it, for that in case he were not
obeyed, he would make use of such Remedies as he thought convenient, being so
positive in this matter, and zealous for the Church, that he was ready to spill
his blood in this righteous Cause, and in the defense thereof; That in case it
were necessary to give a stop to the alienation of Lands, or a restraint of
building Churches, he would always have been ready to have followed the
sentiments of the State, and to have concurred in just causes with the desires
of the Secular Council: but as to the point of drawing the Clergy to the
Secular Tribunals he would never admit, that such as were his Subjects, should
be liable to the sentence of an other Jurisdiction; this in fine was his
resolution on the three foregoing Cases, in which he was resolved to be obeyed,
and make use of that Power which God had given him over all things, and over
all Princes to depose them, and could command Legions of Angels to come to his
aid and assistance.

The Senate having received these Informations from their Ambassador did well
weigh, and consider the anger, and furious displeasure of the Pope on the one
side, and the public liberty, and the necessity of upholding their Government
on the other: and having put both these considerations into the balance, they
returned this answer to the Pope's Nuntio, and wrote also to their Ambassador
at Rome to this effect. That they could neither release the Prisoners lawfully
arrested, nor repeal, or dispense with those Laws which were justly
established, lest they should violate that natural liberty which God had
bestowed on their Republic, and which had been conserved for many hundreds of
years by the wisdom, and with the blood of their Ancestors. For that to admit
such a breach into their Power, would breed such confusion in their Government,
as could not but end in a dangerous Sedition. The which resolution was so
unanimous, and general that not one Vote in the Senate was dissenting, and
accordingly it was signified to the Nuntio, that so they might disabuse and
take off the Pope from those expectations, which the Jesuits had promised, of
making a division, and Schism amongst the Senators.

But these reasons made little impression in the mind of the Pope, or did in
the least move him from prosecuting the violent course he designed, and
accordingly he ordered two Briefs to be drawn up; one relating to the two Laws,
and the other to the two Prisoners; for besides the Canon or Prebend whom we
have formerly mentioned, the Abbot of Nervesa was also apprehended by the
Secular Justice. The Crimes laid to the charge of this Abbot were such as were
flagitious, and of a high nature, being accused of having exercised an
unlimited tyranny upon his Neighbors, and Tenants; that he had robbed, and
taken away their goods at the prices he was pleased to set; that he lived in
Whoredom, and committed Rapes on the Bodies of virtuous and chaste Women; and
that in order thereunto he used Magical Spells, and Enchantments, and
compounded subtle Poisons, by which he had destroyed his own Brother who was an
Augustine Friar, and with him his Servant; that by his Poisons he had macerated
the Body of his Father in such manner, as had reduced him to the last extremity
of life. That he had committed Incest with his own Sister, and poisoned her
Maid, lest his Crime should be detected by her; besides many other Murders,
and wickedness of the deepest dye of which he was guilty: and this was the
precious Fellow, with his Comrade the Canon of Vicenza whom the Pope was so
instant to defend and exempt from the Sentence of the Secular Justice.

The Breviates (as we have said) being wrote, and Sealed were directed in this
manner, Marino Grimano Duci, and Reipub. Venetorum, and then dispeeded with all
secrecy by the Pope to his Nuntio at Venice: which when he had done he called a
Consistory of Cardinals, and then first published, and made known the whole
matter to them, enlarging himself with such heat, and vehemence on every
particular Point, as that he seemed impatient of any contradiction, not
admitting any debate, or consultation thereupon. The Cardinals not being used
to this manner of treatment, who according to the ancient constitution of
Consistories were not only reputed Counselors, but Parties also in all
matters of this moment, did murmr at this rash and precipitate resolution of
the Pope: and having understood the reasons of the Pope on the one side, and of
the Republic on the other, were divided into various Opinions: The Consistory
being ended, the Cardinals Baronius, and Perron used many arguments in private
to the Pope persuading him to desist from so difficult and hazardous an
Enterprise; at least that he should expect a more favorable conjuncture of
Affairs, rather than adventure all by a hasty and inconsiderate advice: but the
Pope who was fixed on his Design became deaf to all Counsels which concurred
not with his sense.

The Nuntio having received the Briefs, delivered them on Christmas day in the
Morning to the Counselors at the time when they were assembled, to hear the
high Mass; but the Doge Grimani lying at that time on his Deathbed, and dying
the next day, the Senate delayed to open the Briefs, until according to their
usual Methods, they had completed the election of a new Prince. Of which the
Pope having advice he immediately dispatched Orders to his Nuntio, commanding
him to protest against the Republic, and against their Election, as being
void, and invalid, and of no power, whilst they remained under the Censure of
Excommunication: with this new device the Pope expected to make a division, and
a confusion in their Councils; for he measuring the constitutions of Venice at
the death of their Prince with those at Rome during the vacancy of the Sea, did
imagine that such a Bone as this thrown into so numerous an Assembly would
beget great disturbances, and diversity of Opinions; but this Government which
has always been firm, and constant, and which admitted of no Interregnum kept
constant to their ancient Principles, refusing to give Audience to the Nuntio
or any other foreign Representative, unless it were to pass the Offices of
Condolance for the death of the Prince.

Thus (as we say) this Election admitting of no interruption, the same was
completed on the 10th. of January 1606. An. 1606.
by the unanimous consent of the Nobles concurring in the choice of Leonard
Donato a Senator of great eminence, and esteem for the probity of his life,
his experience in Government, and knowledge in Learning: besides his heroic
Virtues, and qualities which recommended him to all mankind. After this
Election all the Ambassadors from foreign Princes went to congratulate with the
new Doge; only the Pope's Nuntio refrained from this Office; notwithstanding
which the Doge according to the usual form wrote to the Pope giving him advice
of his Election; to which the Pope contrary to his former intentions returned a
favorable answer, giving his Nuntio Order to pass the Complement, and in
person to congratulate with the Doge for the honor with which he was invested.

The first thing which after the election of the Prince was transacted in the
Senate, was the Controversy between the Pope, and the Republic; and in the
first place the Cavalier Peter Duodo was appointed Ambassador to be dispeeded
to Rome, Then the Pope's Briefs were in the next place to he considered: the
which being opened, and read, were found to run almost in the same style, and
tenure; one having reference to the Laws, and the other to the Prisoners, the
Contents whereof were as follows.

That whereas for some years past the Senate had in their public Councils,
transacted, and established several matters against the Liberties and
Immunities of the Church, and against the Canons, Councils, and Pontifical
Constitutions: And whereas the Council of the Pragadi in pursuance of such Laws
made by their Predecessors, had in the year 1603. Ordered, and enacted, That
no Churches, or religious Houses should be built, or erected without license
first obtained from the Senate: And whereas such Laws being in themselves void,
ought to have been repealed, and cancelled; the said Council did not only
confirm but enlarge the same, making those Laws which were once restrained, and
limited to the City of Venice only, to reach, and extend to all parts and
places subjected to that Dominion, under severe forfeitures, and penalties to
the Offenders; as if both Churches, and Ecclesiastial persons were subjected to
the temporal Jurisdiction, and as if it were a capital crime, nnd wickedness to
build a Church. And whereas in pursuance of an other Law made in the year 1536.
whereby a Statute of Mortmain was made, and penalties laid on such, who should
without license obtained from the Senate alienate the Lands of Lay-persons and
bestow them to pious uses; which Law, as it ought to have been repealed, so on
the contrary in the Month of March last past the Senate did not only confirm
the same, but did likewise enlarge, and extend the power thereof to all parts
within their Dominions: as if that Signory which is but a temporal power had
Authority with consent, or concurrence of the Pope to dispose of Ecclesiastical
Estates, Goods, or Revenues, though left by pious, and faithful Believers as an
Offering for sin, and as an ease to their burdened Consciences. The which
things being damnable, scandalous, and contrary to the Ecclesiastical liberty
are null, and void in themselves, and from the observance of which, all persons
are disobliged. And it is hereby farther declared, that those who have been
contrivers, or Legislators of these or the like Statutes, have incurred the
censure of the Church, and a forfeiture of all those Lands which they hold of
the Church, and their States, and Dominions are also liable to other
punishments. So that unless every thing be restored to its pristine State,
perseverance in the same will be an aggravation of the crime, for which no
absolution can be given, but on terms of restoration of all matters to their
original condition.

Wherefore being exalted on our supreme Throne, on which we cannot nor ought to
dissemble any matters, We admonish you to consider the danger of your Souls,
for which this Republic is obliged to provide: for we command under pain of
Excommunication that the aforesaid Laws, whether ancient, or modern be revoked
and cancelled, and that the same be published in all parts of your Dominions;
and in case you refuse to perform the same, We shall then be forced to proceed
to the execution of this Our Sentence, so soon, as we have understood the
presentation of these Our Letters, from the report of Our Nuntio; and
afterward you are not to expect any other citation, or process from us: for we
are unwilling, that God should in the last day of Judgment demand an account of
this matter, and condemn us for want of performance of Our duty in this case.
Wherefore we, whose end, and design it is to govern the Christian State in
peace, and righteousness, cannot dissemble in cases, where the Apostolical Sea
is offended, the Ecclesiastical liberty trampled under foot, the Canons
neglected, the Rites of the Church and the privileges of the Clergy violated,
which is the sum of this Our accusation against you. And We do farther make
known unto you, that we are not moved to pass this Our Censure out of any
worldly respect, having only an ambition of zeal to exercise our Apostolical
Government as far as we are able, in its due perfection. And as we would not
entrench on the temporal Authority, so neither will we permit that the
Ecclesiastical should be infringed. But in case the Republic would be obedient
to these Our Commands, they would free Us from great troubles, and anguish of
mind which we sustain for their sakes: And they also may conserve the Lands
which they hold from the Church: nor can this Republic defend themselves from
the force, and violence of Infidels by any better, and prevailing means, than
by doing right, and justice to the Clergy, who day and night watch over them,
and pray unto God for this Republic.

The Senate having read, and considered these Briefs, thought fit to confer,
and consult with the most judicious, and able Lawyers of their age, such as
Antonio Pellegrini, and Erasmus Gratiani, together with Father Paul of the
Order of the Servi a person profoundly learned in Theology, and the Canons of
the Church: unto these three, they added several other learned Men, eminent for
wisdom and piety of Life, not Subjects only to the State of Venice, but
belonging to other parts of Italy, namely Menocchio President of Milan, and
others; in consideration of which case, they perused, and searched the Books,
and Writings of the most famous Doctors of France and Spain: and according to
the Opinion, and sense of all those learned Men in the Law, the Controversy
between the Pope, and the Republic did relate wholly to temporal matters, unto
which the Papal Authority did not extend; and that the Republic might in such
cases order, and determine according to the nature, and exigency of their
Affairs: and in farther proof and testimony hereof, many Laws were cited, which
had been enacted in other Christian Countries, and Dominions, of the same
substance, and tenure with these. And in this manner the Senate having received
and understood the Opinion, and report of their Doctors returned their answer
unto the Pope to this effect, dated the 28th. of January. An. 1606.


With much astonishment and trouble of mind this Republic has been informed
by Letters from your Holiness, that those Laws which for some ages have been
observed with much benefit to this Republic, and never questioned by your
Predecessors, should now be reprehended, and repealed by the Authority of the
Apostolical Sea, the which Laws are so sound, and safe for us, that the
alteration of them would shake the very foundation of this Government; And we
are troubled to think that those Persons who were of excellent piety, and
virtue, that made and established these Laws, and who are now in Heaven, should
be termed, and branded as violators of the Ecclesiastical liberty. And now
according to the desire of your Holiness, we have caused all our Laws, both
ancient and modern relating to the points in Controversy to be reviewed, and
examined; and we find nothing which has been established by the Power of the
Supreme Prince, in the least derogatory to the Papal Authority: it being
apparent, that it is the duty of the Secular Magistrate to inspect and consider
what kind of Companies are fit to be admitted into the City; what Edifices are
fit to be erected, and what are not, and what may in time prove hurtful to the
public safety: for in regard the Dominion of Venice does abound with Churches,
and religious Houses, as much as any other part, and that when it was
convenient to erect more, a license to build was not only granted, but
contributions made thereunto by the public liberality, and munificence; so
when it was necessary to set bounds and limits thereunto, this Senate made use
of their own Power alone without any diminution to the Canons of the Church.
And whereas the Pope has a Power to restrain the Clergy from alienating their
Lands, and Estates to the Laiety without his consent, and dispensation, so also
has the temporal Prince the like Authority to forbid and inhibit all
Lay-persons from making alienation of their Estates unto the Church. Nor do
Ecclesiastical persons lose any thing by this restriction, but rather procure a
benefit; for when the temporal Power is weakened by such alienation, this State
which is the Bulwark of Christendom, will not be able to withstand the common
Enemy, nor afford due protection either to the Clergy, or Laiety. And therefore
the Senate does not believe, that they have incurred the Ecclesiastical
Censure, considering that Secular Princes have received that Power from God of
making Laws, which no other humane Authority is able to take from them: and
much less have the Briefs of your Holiness any place, or prevalence in matters
purely temporal, which are clearly distinct from those which are spiritual, to
which the Papal Power does singly extend. Nor can this Senate imagine, that
your Holiness, who is full of Piety, and Religion, will persist in these your
Comminations, until the cause has first been fully examined, and discussed.
And thus much they thought fit in short to make known unto your Holiness,
referring all things to be treated and explained more at large by their
Ambassador Extraordinary.

These Letters of the Senate being arrived at Rome were presented to the Pope
by the hands of the Ambassador, who immediately opened, and read them; but the
Contents so little pleased him, that he was angry, and froward all the time
that they were in reading: and in fine, he told the Ambassador, that those
Letters were no Answer to his Admonitory Briefs, that the Answer was frivolous
and insignificant; that the matter was clear and evident on his side, and that
therefore he was resolved to proceed unto Sentence: that the Senate must
resolve to submit, and obey, for his cause was the cause of God. Et Portae
Inferi non praevalebunt adversus eam. If the Monks of Padoua had purchased more
Lands than were requisite, or consistent with the welfare of the State, upon
address made to him he could have applied a Remedy, but the Senate proceeding
in another manner were Tyrants, Usurpers, and Men of Principles different from
their Ancestors: wherefore he exhorted them not to deceive themselves with the
thoughts of protracting the time, in hopes of deciding the Dispute by his
death, for that in case he received not satisfaction therein, in the space of
fifteen days he would then proceed to execution of his Sentence. The fifteen
days were scarce expired when the Ambassador Nani acquainted the Pope that
Duodo was dispatched from Venice in quality of Ambassador Extraordinary to
inform his Holiness more amply of all matters; to which the Pope replied, that
there was no need of farther expostulations, the matter was clear, and he would
be obeyed.

But notwithstanding the Pope's have time was protracted till toward the end
of March, when Duodo the Ambassador Extraordinary arrived at Rome; to whom the
Pope would not have patience to grant all the methods of Complements, but
immediately at his arrival admitted him to Audience; when the Ambassador
largely discoursing on every point in Controversy, concluded that the Senate
could not yield to the Demands of his Holiness, without betraying that Power
which God had put into their hands. But the Pope making no reply to the
Arguments in particular, adhered close to the Conclusion, that Ecclesiastical
persons were exempted Jure Divino from the Secular Dominion, that he had heard
enough from Nani of this kind of reasoning, that the Cause was God's, and must
prevail.

This resolution of the Pope being made known at Venice, the Senate thought fit
to communicate these their differences to the Ministers of foreign Princes,
desiring their Opinions on those Points. From which the Spanish Ambassador
excused him, not desiring to concern his Master in those matters, which might
yield the least displeasure to the Pope; but the Imperial, and French
Ambassadors were much more frank and open in their Opinions; for the first did
allow and approve the reasons of the Senate, alleging the Customs of his own
Country the French Comte, where the same things were practiced, and Monsieur de
Fresnes the French Ambassador declared, that he could not understand those
Papal Laws which deny unto Princes the Government of their own State, and
therefore the Republic was much to be commended for preferring their liberty
before any other respect.

At Rome the Cardinals of Verona, and Vicenza used all the Interest, and
persuasions they were able to induce the Pope to defer the promulgation of his
Sentence for some time; putting him in mind, that the Spiritual Arms were not
to be exercised, but in cases where they were sure to prevail; Then said the
Pope, I shall make use of the Temporal: and in the mean time to manifest to the
World my patience, and tenderness toward them, I shall grant them the term of
twenty four days to consider, and repent: and accordingly having formed and
printed his Monitory on the 17th. of April, he caused it to be read and
published in the Consistory. After which he added, That he had greatly studied
this Point, and having consulted with the most famous Canonists, the general
Opinion of them all, was, that the Republic acted contrary to the Authority of
the Apostolic Sea, and against the liberties, and immunities of the Church;
alleging in his favor the Council of Simmaco, and of Lions under Pope
Gregory, with other Decrees made by the Councils of Constance and Basil: and
that the same was so declared in the case against Henry II. against the Kings
of Castile, and other Kings; and caused a Constitution made by Innocent III. to
be read; and to proceed the more regularly in this important matter, the Votes
of the Cardinals were distinctly required: the number of Cardinals then present
in the Consistory were forty one, all which did either in few words assent, or
more at large produce the Authority of the Canonists in confirmation of the
Pope's reasons. And indeed little less than this free concurrence could be
expected from them: for though some few out of a zeal toward the
Ecclesiastical liberty, might really be possessed with this Opinion; yet the
generality were guided by other Principles; some perhaps were unwilling to
displease the Pope in expectation of preferments of themselves, or Friends;
others had a prospect of arising to the Popedom, and for that cause were
willing to exalt its Power: every one had some consideration or other for his
own benefit, but not such consideration as was required in study of the case,
or to find out the truth of the matter under debate. For Popes in the
Consistory are always sure to find the Cardinals pliant, and ready to yield
assent unto whatsoever they propose, that is Assentiri in Assentari.

The Consistory being risen the Monitory was affixed in all the public places
of Rome; of which a multitude of Copies both in Latin, and Italian were
printed, and dispatched into all the Cities of Italy, especially into the
Dominions of Venice, and dispersed into all parts by the Jesuits accompanied
with seditious Letters, and Pamphlets derogatory to the honor of the
Republic. The Monitory was directed to the Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicars, and all Ecclesiastics either Secular, or Regular, who held any
Dignities, and preferments of the Church within the Dominion of Venice, and
therein it was exposed.

That whereas some Months past he was given to understand, (that is the Pope)
how that the Doge, and Senate of Venice, had for many years past made several
Decrees in prejudice of the Apostolical Sea, and privileges of the Church,
notwithstanding that the same were repugnant to the General Councils, and to
the ancient Canons, and Constitutions of the Popes of Rome: and now more lately
a Law was made in the year 1602. whereby Ecclesiastical persons are
incapacitated to appropriate to themselves any Lands, or Estates. Secondly, He
mentioned the Law made in the year 1603. which restrains, and prohibits the
erecting or building any Churches, or religious Houses without the leave or
license of the Senate. Thirdly, He mentioned the Law in 1605. which extends
these Laws over all the Dominions of the Republic which formerly were
terminated to the City of Venice only; and lastly, the imprisonment of the
Canon of Vicenza, and the Abbot of Nervesa: by which particular offenses the
Ecclesiastical liberty being infringed, the Doge, and Senate of Venice have to
the danger of their own Souls and scandal of the World incurred the
Ecclesiastical Censures to the forfeiture of their Lands, and Jurisdiction,
from which they cannot be absolved but by the Pope himself, who being satisfied
with their repentance, demonstrated by a repeal of those Laws, and restoration
of all things to their pristine condition, has the sole power to receive them
again into the bosom of the Church. And whereas the Doge, and Senate after many
fatherly Admonitions, have not repealed those Laws, nor released the Prisoners,
he could in no wise suffer, that the liberties and immunities of the Church,
and the Authority of the Apostolical Sea should be violated, and infringed: And
though those Laws are in themselves void and of none effect, yet by the example
of ten Popes and more his Predecessors in confirmation hereof, and by and with
the consent, and counsel of the Cardinals (with whom he had advised hereupon)
he does farther declare those Laws to be null, and cancelled: and does farther
declare, and denounce Excommunication against the Doge, and Senate in general,
in such manner, as if they had been particularly named, and against their
Successors, Councillors, Adherents, and Abettors, in case the said Doge and
Senate shall not within the space of twenty four days after the publication
hereof, (assigning eight days for each term of Admonition) repeal, cancel, and
make void the aforesaid Decrees, with all Writs, and Orders proceeding
thereupon: and without farther delay or Excuse, shall not restore all things to
their former, and original condition, with promise never to do, or perform the
like again; And shall not consign into the hands of his Nuntio both the Canon,
and the Abbot, giving advice, and notice of all unto the Pope himself: and for
default thereof the Excommunication to remain in force, from whence no
Absolution can be granted, but by the Pope himself, unless at the point of
death: from which State in case the person so absolved shall recover, and still
continue, and persist in the same obstinacy, he shall again be liable to the
same Excommunication as before; and in case he die his body notwithstanding
shall not be interred in any consecrated place, until obedience be yielded unto
these Commands by all others concerned. And in case after the expiration of
twenty four days the Doge, and Senate shall still persist in their contumacy
for other three days, then he did Interdict all their Dominion, forbidding all
Masses, and divine Offices to be performed therein; unless in such places,
manner, and cases as are granted by the Common Law: And farther, he did deprive
the Doge, and Senate of all their Revenue, and possessions which they hold of
the Roman Church, or other Churches and of all the privileges granted them in
favor thereof; reserving still unto himself, and his Successors a Power to
aggravate and increase the Censures, and penalties against them, their
Adherents, and Abettors therein, etc. And to proceed unto farther punishments,
and Remedies in case of continuance in such like contumacy. Notwithstanding,
etc. Commanding all Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Inferior
Clergy upon penalty, etc. That after the receipt of these Letters, or notice
thereof given, that they publish the same in the respective Churches, at such
times, as when the greatest concourse of people is present, and to affix the
same at the Church doors, etc.

After publication was made of this severe Excommunication thundered out
against a Republic of such greatness and esteem in the World: all the
Ambassadors and Ministers of foreign Princes residing at Rome were greatly
troubled, and concerned, considering that an Act of this nature had some
oblique reflection on every Prince, that professed obedience, or devotion for
the Papal Sea. Wherefore every one of those Ministers residing at Rome made
their applications, and addresses to the Pope, desiring him to moderate, and
prorogue the Sentence until the matter were examined, and considered by the
Republic, and ways or means contrived for an accommodation. To whom the Pope
returned this general Answer, That the way to compose, and accommodate these
differences were to incline the Republic to a resolution of becoming obedient;
but that word Obedient would not well pass with the Ministers, who made some
reflections thereon, as unbeseeming the degree of Sovereign Princes, and
therefore persuaded the Pope rather to use some more moderate, and gentle
terms, and enlarge the time allotted for termination of the Sentence.

The news hereof being come to Venice, the Senate immediately and in the first
place ordered, that Prayers should be made in all Churches, and Chapels
imploring the Divine assistance in that great emergency of Affairs; and in the
next place they resolved to recall their Ambassador Extraordinary from Rome,
leaving Nani to reside there, lest they should seem to despise, and stand in
open defiance against the Apostolical Sea. Sir Henry Wotton was at that time
Resident for the King of England at Venice, when the Senate thought fit to
communicate to him the rigor of the Pope's Sentence, for until then they had
never mentioned any thing with him of their Controversy with the Pope, as they
had also ordered their Ambassador in England not to discourse any thing of
that Point unto his Majesty or his Counselors. But when the matter came to be
advised to Sir Henry Wotton, he complained that the Senate had been much more
free, and open to other Ambassadors than to him; and as to the pretensions of
the Pope, he said, That he could not understand that piece of Romish Divinity,
which was contrary to Justice, and moral honesty.

And now to provide against all those inconveniences, and mischiefs which might
be the consequences of this Excommunication, the Senate commanded all Prelates,
and Ecclesiastical persons not to permit or suffer any Bulls, Briefs, or any
other Writing to be affixed at any Church door, or public place whatsoever,
ordaining upon pain of the Prince's displeasure that every person whatsoever,
who had any of the Copies of that Brief, which was lately published at Rome
against the Republic, should immediately deliver them up into the hands of the
Magistrates in Venice, and to the Rulers, and Governors respectively in all
places subject to that Dominion: which the people so readily obeyed, that in a
short time so great a number of Copies were brought in, as was wonderful to
consider, how so many could be printed: and such diligence was used by the
Magistrates, and by the people themselves, that not one Brief was affixed in
any public place; the persons who endeavored to act therein being discovered,
and prevented.

And farther, the true state of that difference, which the Republic had with
the Pope was advised, and intimated to all the Ministers for foreign Princes
residing at Venice: and the same also signified to all the Agents residing for
that Republic in foreign parts. In like manner the Senate wrote to all their
Governors, and Magistrates of Towns, and Cities subjected to their Dominions,
acquainting them with the injuries they had received from the Pope, and with
the reasons they had to defend their Laws, and Liberties, all which being
signified as was commanded unto the Counsels, and Magistracy of the Cities; it
took such impression every where that the people yielded a most entire, and
cheerful obedience thereunto, showing themselves ready to defend the public
Liberty, and in maintenance thereof every one offered Money, and Arms according
to his ability: and in pursuance of such Resolution, furnished the same, as
time required.

After publication made of the Monitory Brief, the Pope's Nuntio spent most of
his time in the Jesuits College, where many of those Fathers were received, who
had been eminently known for the confusions, and disturbances they had created
in the World: and particularly amongst the rest was one Bernardino of Siena,
who had lately acted the like part at Paris, when the Jesuits were expelled
from that City: and Antonio Possevino who was famous for his Actions in
Moscovy, and Poland, and skilful in the management of Intrigues: there was also
Barone a Venetian a bold confident Fellow, one that would have a hand in every
matter of public disturbance: likewise John Gentes, who made profession of
truly stating all cases of Conscience, being endued with an excellent faculty,
of finding fault, and of condemning, and reproving every thing which was acted
without his concurrence, and of justifying every thing which was appointed, and
directed by the Jesuits; all of them being excellent Instruments in their way,
and faithful performers of the fourth Article of their Vow.

But the Nuntio having thus frequented the Society of Jesuits, and learned his
Lesson in every particular made a visit to the Doge, to whom having in the
first place expressed his grief for the unhappy estate of Affairs, he desired
his Serene Highness to consider of some ways, and means, by which these
differences might be composed, and in order thereunto he promised his ultimate
endeavors, and all the good Offices which his authority, and interest were
able to perform: which Discourse he sweetened with the most persuasive, and
affectionate expressions imaginable, often invoking the name of Almighty God;
of whom when he had occasion to speak, he called him Our Lord, and in like
manner, when he had occasion to mention the Pope, he called him, Our Lord, so
that in his Discourse, it was difficult to distinguish which of the two Lords
he meant; only some observing persons, had taken notice, that when he intended
the name of God, he kept his head covered, but when he meant the Pope, he
always took his Cap off.

The Pope having understood how resolute the Senate seemed in maintenance of
their Laws, and Liberties, and with what cheerful readiness the people obeyed
them, conceived little hopes at the present of obtaining his desires; and
therefore judging that his Nuntio could not continue longer with honor at
Venice, he dispatched his Letters to recall him from thence, and intimated to
the Ambassador Nani by the bishop of Soana that he should depart from Rome,
not leaving any of his Domestics, or Substitutes in his place.

At Venice the Superiors and Priors of Monasteries, and other Churches were
convened before the Council of Ten, who signified to them, that the pleasure of
the Prince was, that they should still continue to officiate and perform the
Divine Offices, and that none of them should leave the State without license
obtained. It was also declared, that protection should be given to such as
remained, and that such as would depart, should not carry with them the
Utensils, or Vestments, or Riches belonging to the Church. And that in case any
Brief should be sent them from Rome, or Order from their Superiors, they should
first present it to the Magistrates, before it was read by themselves; and the
like Command was given to all Governors of Cities, and places under Dominion
of Venice.

As yet the Capucins, Theatins, and other Religious, had not entertained
thoughts of departure; for when the Monitory was first published at Rome, the
Provincial, and other Capucins held a Consultation together, where it was
concluded, that in regard the differences between the Pope and the Republic
had no relation to matters of Faith, they were not obliged to follow the Pope's
dictates so far in this case, as to abandon their Habitations, and subsistence:
yet afterward the Superiors obeying the pleasure of the Pope expressly
commanded all sorts of Religious Orders to depart, and leave their Dwellings
within the jurisdiction of Venice; saying unto them, Come forth from them, O my
People.

The term of twenty four days being almost expired, when the Monitory was to
Commence, the Senate called the Jesuits to know their resolution whether they
would continue in the City, or not: to which they made answer, That they had
intentions and desires to stay, but could not promise to say Mass, excepting
which, they would engage to perform all other Divine Offices, and Service. The
Senate taking this Answer into consideration; resolved that the Jesuits should
either celebrate Mass, as formerly, with all the other functions of Priesthood,
and not remain in a kind of indifferency between the Pope, and the Republic,
serving God and Mammon, or otherwise should have intimation to depart. The
which Order was signified to them by the Patriarchal Vicar, with positive
Orders immediately to depart, and to consign into his hands all the Plate,
Vestments, and goods belonging to their Church: and in like manner Orders were
given to all Governors to execute the same Decree in their respective
jurisdictions. This Command being signified to the Jesuits, they assembled all
their Votaries into their Church, and gathered great Contributions from them;
and persuaded the Capucins, that when they departed, they should march two and
two in a rank, as in Procession, with a Crucifix on the breast of every one
which perhaps might move some disturbance in the minds of the Commonalty, who
beholding so many Crucifixes departing from them, might apprehend also, that
Christ himself, and the light of the Gospel was leaving their City, which
Opinion might be the beginning of some happy Sedition.

The Jesuits themselves were hastened away, and forced to depart about two hours
in the Night, every one carrying his Christ as they called it about his Neck;
the People flocked in great numbers to see their departure, and accompanied
them to the Boats, shouting, and crying aloud, Let them go to the Devil. In
diverse parts of the City they had concealed, and hid away the Vessels, and
precious Ornaments of their Church, and their best Household Stuff with their
Library: leaving their College empty, and void of all Furniture whatsoever, or
of any thing of moment, unless the Library given to them by the late
Archbishop Lewis Molino, with an other Library of prohibited Books. And though
the Jesuits of Venice had burnt many of their Papers, yet at Padoua they left
diverse Copies of a certain Book containing eighteen Rules, with this title,
Regulae aliquot servandae, ut cum Orthodoxa Ecclesia vere sentiamus. In the
seventeenth Rule of which, they were commanded, not to insist overmuch in their
Sermons, on the force and energy of the grace of God. And in the third Rule,
they were enjoined to believe according as the Hierarchy of the Church
believed; that is, if the Church determined any thing to be white, they should
believe it so to be, though the color appeared black to the sight of their own
eyes. And lastly, they left unto their Disciples and Votaries certain Rules,
whereby to govern themselves during this Interdict.

But though the Jesuits, Capuchins, and other Orders of St. Francis Reformed
had abandoned Venice, and were retired to other Convents in Milan, Mantoua,
Bologna, and Ferrara; yet the Capuchins of Brescia, and Bergamo, (where were no
Jesuits to seduce them) remained in excellent Concord and Obedience; and
securing themselves with that Protection which they received from the Senate,
remained resolute, and constant to their Principles against all the Censures of
Excommunication, and other Spiritual penalties issued against them by their
Superiors; and in regard many of them were sober and learned Men, they
retorted all those Spiritual Arms with great force, and power of argument and
reason.

It was certainly believed at Rome, that this Monitory would have produced
three notable Effects: First it was given for granted, that all the Religious
Orders would immediately abandon the Dominions of Venice, by which the
Interdict must of necessity have been observed. Secondly, That the City, and
People finding themselves deprived of all the Divine Offices, would rise in a
mutiny against the Government, and compel them to give satisfaction to the
Pope. Thirdly, That it would beget a misunderstanding amongst the Nobility, and
cause them to divide into several Factions, toward which the Jesuits, (though
absent) did labor with all the Art, and industry imaginable. But the Court of
Rome against their expectations finding that all matters had a contrary effect,
that Mass, and other Offices of the Church were Celebrated without
interruption, that the people frequented the Churches with greater Devotion
than before; that the Senate were unanimous in their Counsels, and the
Commonalty quiet, and obedient; they began to repent them of this proceeding,
and many severely blamed the Pope for being over-rash, and hasty: for that
though there might be reason in the merit of his Cause, yet the prosecution of
it was of that importance, as ought to have been attempered with prudence, and
the consequences well weighed, before matters were screwed up to that Degree,
as admitted of no indifferent terms, or accommodation.

Wherefore now it concerned the Pope, and Clergy to labor with Art, and power
of the Spiritual Arms in vindication of their Cause, in order whereunto the
Cardinals were set at work to prevail with the refractory Friars, and Monks to
leave their Dwellings, and Party and come over to them, promising in reward of
that good Service, honors, and preferments in the Church; and on the contrary
threatened them with Censures, and punishments both Spiritual and Temporal.
Howsoever, they observed a different manner in treating with the rich Friars,
and the poor Mendicants. For to the Poor they said, that if they could not
observe the Inderdict, they should then depart, and leave all they had for sake
of the Gospel; and if that were not permitted, they should then seek after the
glorious Crown of Martyrdom; But to the Rich, they thought better than to use
this hard saying, Durus est hic sermo, for though they were commanded to
observe the Interdict, yet were advised not to leave, or abandon their
Monasteries, and Revenues; and the better to inculcate these persuasions,
Commissaries were appointed out of the same Orders privately to convey
themselves into the Dominions of Venice, to instill, and foment this Doctrine in
the minds of the Regulars; but the ways were so obstructed by the diligence,
and watchfulness of the Governors in their respective Dominions: that not a
Friar durst adventure to steal in, and engage in that Errand.

Seeing therefore that this course would not take: the next expedient was to
raise a dust, and disturbance in the Court of foreign Princes. And in the first
place, the Jesuits (who were and still are very prevalent in Poland) labored
to put an affront on Foscarini Ambassador for the Republic to that King;
causing two of the Gentlemen belonging to his Retinue to be disturbed at Mass,
and expelled the Church: And the Nuntio made very warm Instances to the King,
that the Monitory against Venice might be affixed in all public places of his
Dominions: but the King on the contrary did not only refuse to grant this
request, but highly resented the late Affront offered to the two Venetian
Gentlemen, in satisfaction for which by the King's Order, the Marshal of the
Court, and the Cardinal of Cracow, having assembled the Friars together, and
duly reprehended their insolence, commanding them the next day to sing High
Mass in their Church, to which having invited the Ambassador they obliged the
Friars to ask his Pardon for the affront offered to his Servants: And farther
the King, with approbation of his Council gave Orders to all his People to
treat the Ambassador, and his Retinue with all kindness, and due respect: and
moreover wrote a Letter to the Pope, complaining of the late design of his
Nuntio, attempting to publish Ecclesiastical Censures against foreign Princes
within his Kingdom, which was a new and an unknown practice within his State;
and had been refused in the Case of Henry III. King of France, and in the Cause
of Cesare d' Este Duke of Ferrara: much less could he be induced to allow of
such proceedings against the State of Venice, whose Cause was the same with
that of his own Kingdom. And considering that that State had merited well of
Christendom by the opposition they made with their Arms against the common
Enemy, he exhorted his Holiness to supersede farther proceedings, for Causes
which ought to be stifled, and which for better peace of the Church ought never
to be brought into question, An. 1606.
or Dispute.

Francis Soranzo a Cavalier of Venice being at this time Ambassador at the
Emperor's Court, did rightly inform the Imperial Ministers with the true state
of the difference between the Pope, and that Republic: and in regard the
Constitutions of all Germany were the same, they could not do less than approve
the Cause of the Venetians, and condemn the Cause of the Pope, which confirmed
the Protestants in their reasons which they alleged, for detaining
Ecclesiastical Benefices in their own hands. Howsoever, the Great Chancellor,
and Marshal Prainer were of different Opinions, taking part with the Pope
against the affections, sense, and Interest of the whole Court.

When news came first to the Court of Spain of the differences between the
Pope, and the Venetians; the constancy and firmness of that State to the
Principles of their Government, was highly applauded, being the common Cause of
all Secular Princes. Howsoever, the Nuntio made it his business to have the
Venetian Ambassador declared in all Pulpits to be under Excommunication: The
Genoeses also who were powerful in that Court, being touched with envy on old
grudges, and for having lately yielded that Point of their liberty to the Pope,
which Venice still conserved, did all the ill offices they were able against
the Republic: but above all the Ambassador of Tuscany joining with the
Jesuits showed himself an open Enemy, and so prevailed with the King, and
Council, that a Congregation of twelve Divines was held at Madrid in presence
of the Cardinal of Toledo to consider, whether the Ambassador of Venice ought
to be admitted into the Church at the time of Celebration of Divine Offices?
the result of which was, that the Ambassador should not be excluded, every one
concurring in that Opinion, the Nuntio, and Jesuits only excepted.

So soon as the news came to Paris, that the Monitory was published against
Venice, Barberino the Pope's Nuntio made urgent addresses to the King, that
Priuli the Venetian Ambassador should be excluded from admission into the
Church; but his desire was positively rejected; both because the King was
willing to remain Neuter, and because it was and is a Maxim of that Kingdom.
That Popes have no power over the Temporal Government of Princes, and have no
Authority on account for Secular matters to proceed against them, or their
Officers by Ecclesiastical Censures.

In England we may easily imagine what Opinion was conceived of these
proceedings: for when Giustiniano the Ambassador of Venice had acquainted King
James with the state of the difference between the Pope and the Republic: the
King did much applaud the Laws and Constitutions of Venice, and the constancy,
and resolution of the Senate in the maintenance of them: adding, That he would
gladly see a free Council established, which was the only means to reform the
Church of God, and put an end to all Controversies amongst Christians, which
had no other original, or source, than only from the usurpation of Popes, and
ambition of the Clergy: in which holy, and sacred Design, he did not doubt but
that the French King, and all other Christian Princes would readily concur; and
that perhaps a beginning thereof might arise from these troubles, and labors
of the Republic. And farther the King added, That the Popes exalting
themselves above God were the ruin of the Church, and that it was no wonder,
that their Pride admitted of no serious reflections, or moderate advices, being
puffed up, and elated by the common adulation, and flattery which was used
toward them.

The States of the United Provinces wrote very obliging Letters to Venice,
proffering to assist them with Arms, and Provisions, in case they came to an
open rupture, and acts of hostility with the Pope.

In the mean time many effectual good Offices were performed both at Rome and
Venice by the Dukes of Mantoua, and Savoy, and by Guicciardin Ambassador of
the Great Duke of Tuscany; and more especially by Monsieur de Fresnes the
French Ambassador at Venice: To all which instances, and applications from
several Princes the Senate thought fit to make this general Answer: First, they
returned thanks for the good endeavors, and labors toward a Mediation, and
then complained of the firm resolutions of the Pope, which could not be shaken,
or made pliable by any reasonable terms which the Republic could offer. That
there could be no hopes of accommodation until the Pope by taking off his
Censures, did open a way to Treaties, and terms of Peace. That the Pope had
proceeded so far in his injuries and affronts, as were past all manner of
reconciliation, and yet the Republic which was truly Catholic would still
bear their due respect to the Pope, so far, as was consistent with their
liberty, and with that right of Government which was committed to them by God.

But whilst matters were thus in Treaty at Venice and Rome, and in the Courts
of Princes; the Jesuits who were vigilant, and intent to do all the mischiefs
they were able against the Republic; did not cease to disperse Scandals, and
Libels as well without Italy, as within, and to preach, and rail against them
in their Pulpits, and Schools, endeavoring to possess their Auditories with
the most malicious impressions they could beget, or frame in minds of Men; they
also wrote Letters into all places defaming the Republic; some who would not
adventure into the Dominions of Venice, treated on the Confines with their
Disciples and Votaries: and others in disguise entered within the Dominions
sowing Division, and Faction in all parts, promising extraordinary Indulgences
to all such as should observe the Interdict. They also forged several Letters
entitling one from the Republic of Genoua to the Senate of Venice, another
from the City of Verona to the City of Brescia which were most scandalous, and
abominable Papers. Then in other Writings they justified themselves for having
in their Sermons inveighed against the Republic, calling it a Lutheran,
Heretical, and tyrannical Government, with infinite other abominable Epithets.
In fine, it was proved, that the Jesuits were the causes of all these
disturbances, having instigated the Pope to this Design, upon assurances, that
they were able to divide the Senate, and by confusion of their Councils to make
way for the Pope's Authority. It was farther proved, That they had kept
correspondence with the Enemies of the Republic to the great damage, and
prejudice of the State, always interposing, and insinuating themselves into
public Affairs. That they were always contriving to inveigle sick and dying
Persons, persuading them for the sake of their Souls to bestow their Estates,
and Inheritance on them, to the ruin, and destruction of their lawful Heirs and
Families. And* farther, the Senate took into their consideration, their
Principles, which were always Monarchical, in prejudice, and depression of
Aristocracy, and dangerous to the Maxims, and principles of their Government.
It was farther also alleged, that the Jesuits had been the Causes, and
Instruments of all the tolerations, seditious disorders, and evil successes
which had happened in our age in all the Kingdoms, and Provinces of the World:
and herein not only some particular persons were culpable, but even the whole
Society, and order of them were dangerous and rotten in their Principles, and
destructive to the Government under which they lived. All which being proved,
and made good in the Senate against them; It was deliberated, An. 1606.
and carried in the Affirmative by Decree of the 14th. of June, That the
Jesuits, who from their first beginning had been received into Venice, and
there cherished and favored, and having in recompense of such Indulgence and
respect returned nothing but Ingratitude: being at present the Authors of all
the troubles incumbent on the Republic, vilifying the same with all the
Obloquy which could be uttered from the blackest Tongue of malice, and having
been false Traitors, and Men of insupportable Insolences; the most Serene
Republic did therefore spue them out, and banish them for ever the precincts
of the State; and did Decree, and Enact, that they should never be again
received without a concurrence of five Sixths at least of the Senate, the
number of which was to consist of one hundred and eighty Votes. In passing of
which Act, it is most apparent that their Crimes were as enormous, as they were
clear and evidently proved; for the Scrutiny being made by the Ballot, their
banishment was passed with an unanimous concurrence, and a Decree made for
their eternal Exclusion; though perhaps some few might be excepted who had been
their Votaries and Penitents.

This perpetual banishment of the Jesuits made the breach wider, and more
difficult to be reconciled: and the Pope being sensible, that the hopes he
conceived from the contrivances of the Jesuits were vain and fruitless, he
applied himself to some other new Inventions; one of which was a Jubilee, which
was published on the 19th. of June, inviting all Christian people to pray unto
God for the unity and peace of the Church, granting Indulgences, Absolutions,
and Remissions unto all, excepting such as belonged to Venice, and the
Interdicted Churches, to which none of those graces, blessings, and pardons
were to be dispensed. Now in regard that nothing is so desirable in Italy, as
the benefit of a Jubilee, It was conceived to be a most admirable Artifice to
make the Venetian People sensible of their separation from the Church, when
they should find themselves incapable to receive the Indulgences, and excluded
from all the privileges of the faithful: upon which advantage the Jesuits
showed all their Art in the Towns bordering on the Dominions of the Republic,
preaching up the Blessings of a Jubilee, and lamenting the miseries of that
People, who by their disobedience, and contumacy had extruded themselves from
without the Pale, and become unworthy of such mysterious graces.
Notwithstanding which, the World was so well satisfied with the Cause, and
ground of this Jubilee, that though at other times Men were fond of this
privilege, and held it in great esteem and Devotion, yet the Indulgences
granted hereby were coldly received in every place: nor did the Venetian
Commonalty so much repine at this loss, as to quarrel or mutiny with their
Government for want of that Spiritual Benefit.

Thus when all religious Arts failed, and the Weapons of the Church were not
keen enough to do Execution, the Pope resolved to try what might be effected by
the temporal Sword; but in regard his own was not sharp enough, for the
Venetians; he applied himself to the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, desiring to
write to his Master the King; giving him to understand, that he did entirely
cast himself under his Protection, desiring his favor and Aid against his
Enemies; and therewith delivered him two Letters, one directed to the King,
wherein he exposed the Reasons for his proceedings against the Venetians: and
another to the Duke of Lerma, chief Minister of State, in which he recommended
himself, and his Affairs to his care and defense, and with many obliging
Expressions and acknowledgments, called him the Basis of the Crown of Spain, on
which the Catholic Monarchy was established, and on which the foundation of
the Church solely was reposed, and depending. This kind Letter so pleased the
Duke of Lerma, that an Answer equally pleasing was returned from the King to
the Pope, and with much formality delivered by the Spanish Ambassador attended
with three Cardinals, the substance of which was: That the King was extremely
troubled to observe, that the breach and differences between him and the
Venetians were so widened, and so far proceeded: but in regard the honor of
his Holiness was far engaged, he was resolved to vindicate the Dignity of the
Apostolical See with his Arms; and accordingly had wrote to his Ministers, and
Officers in Italy, and other Princes depending on his Crown. This Letter being
read, was the subject of great joy and satisfaction to the Pope, and all his
Party, and was proclaimed through*all Italy much to the reputation of the Papal
Cause; howsoever the triumph, and joy hereof was somewhat attempered by the
Proposals which were made by Spain in recompense of the troubles, and
inconveniences they were to receive by a War: the which Demands were; A
release of the yearly Tribute for the Kingdom of Naples; a surrender of Ferrara
for a Garrison to offend the Enemy, and of Ancona for an Arsenal and maritime
Provisions. The which Conditions being grievous, and difficult to the Pope were
only answered in general terms; but the report hereof was like a Trumpet of War
which alarmed all parts of the Venetian Dominions: and caused the Senate to
write immediately to their Proveditor General in Candia to send all the Galleys
under his Command into the Gulf: Orders also were given to the Proveditor
General in Dalmatia to raise four hundred Albaneses, and Croats under four
Captains, and to embark them on ten Vessels which were built for that purpose,
placing forty on each Vessel. Likewise thirty Captains were nominated and
appointed to be ready as occasion should require.

The Pope on the other side, repaired his Fortifications at Rimini, and Ancona,
and reinforced his Garrison at Ferrara with a thousand Foot; he likewise
banished all Strangers from Marca, and Romagna, and commanded the Natives
thereof to return into their own Country. But to the management of this War
designed, many difficulties occurred: for in the first place, there was an
excessive scarcity of all Provisions in Rome, and the Ecclesiastical State as
also in Naples and Abruzzo, by reason of which the People cried out nothing but
Peace, and Bread: and on the contrary, there was great abundance of all things
within the Dominions of Venice, from whence the People of the Pope's Country
receiving the most part of their Provisions were kindly affected to the
Venetian State: but notwithstanding all these difficulties, the Pope resolved
to proceed in his War, and to recruit his Troops; and for maintenance thereof
new Impositions were laid on Salt, Flesh, and Paper, with intention also to lay
a Tax on Wine, and Timber, if occasion should require. And in the mean time the
Count de Fuentes Governor of Milan gave out, that he would have an Army
speedily in the Field consisting of twenty five thousand Men, composed of
Germans, Napolitans, Switzers, and Spaniards.

Though the Venetians did not neglect all due care toward the provisions of
War, and to make their Defense whenever they should be attacked; yet with
more especial regard they had an Eye to Plots, and Conspiracies within the
State; giving Orders to their Sea-Captains to stop all Vessels which sailed in
the Gulf, unless such as had Passes from the King of Spain for his own
particular Affairs; which caused great embroils along the Coast of Romagna, and
the Marca d' Ancona, which seemed, (as it were), to be blocked up: Orders were
likewise given to hinder all exportation of Corn out of the Dominions of
Venice; and Sequestrations laid on the Revenues of the Clergy who had quitted,
or abandoned the Venetian Countries; for which cause many Prelates at Rome were
forced to retrench their Families.

But notwithstanding the Promises made by the Spaniards of administering Aid to
the Pope, which at the first heat were positive and large; yet the Court at
Madrid coming to make more mature reflections on the tenure of their former
Letters, thought fit to explicate their sense more at large, and to signify to
the State of Venice, That it was not the intention of his Catholic Majesty to
make a War on the Republic, but only to demonstrate unto the World, that that
Crown, would on all occasions be joined to the Apostolical Sea. And accordingly
D. Inigo de Cardenas Ambassador residing in Ordinary at Venice, did on the
13th. of July present a memorial to the Senate. signifying: That the King being
desirous of doing good Offices in the mediation of Peace between the Pope, and
that Republic, had commanded him his Ambassador to interpose therein,
assuring him, that whatsoever he should act in order thereunto would be most
pleasing to his Majesty. And that some Overtures might be made in order to this
Accommodation, Cardenas desired, that for a beginning thereunto, the Senate
would give him leave, in their name, to desire and supplicate the Pope, that he
would be pleased to take off his Censures from them, being much troubled that
they had ever given his Holiness any cause of displeasure; which being words of
formality, and Complement only, could not in reality be prejudicial to the
right of their Cause; and yet were in this state of things of importance, and
absolute necessity. To which the Doge made Answer, That neither by himself, nor
by the Senate was there ever any just cause of displeasure given to the Pope;
and therefore to Scandals, and Disgusts voluntarily taken, and not given, there
was no other remedy, than voluntary Acknowledgments.

The same day the French Ambassador urged the Senate, to be the first to make
Overtures of Peace to the Pope, which could be no dishonor to the Republic,
considering with what respect, and duty all Christian Princes treated the Pope,
and that it is, Jus Commune, to submit, and humble themselves before his
Holiness for other matters, they might with all confidence rely on the
directions of his Majesty herein, whom they had always found a true Friend, and
a faithful Ally. That considering on what terms the King of Spain stood with
them, and how he had declared himself of the Papal Party; it was not now
seasonable to disgust the King his Master, and that therefore they would be
pleased to think of some Answer, which he might with confidence communicate to
the King.

The Senate having taken these particulars into consideration, gave almost the
same Answer, as they had newly done to the Spanish Ambassador; Adding only to
the French, That by way of Mediation, he would be pleased to represent unto the
Pope; That the Senate was troubled, that his Holiness would take displeasure at
the actions of a Republic, which was entirely devoted, and dedicated to the
glory, and service of God, to the public quiet, and tranquillity of the World,
and to the maintenance of that liberty, and Power which was committed to them
by Divine Right.

These Negotiations being ineffectual, and fruitless; the Senate gave Order to
Giustiniano their Ambassador in England, to inform King James with the
progress and success of all these Affairs, and differences with the Pope: which
when the King had rightly understood, he returned this Answer: That he was
highly satisfied with the constancy of the People, and unanimous resolution of
the Senate in defense of their Native liberty, and justice, and of that Power,
which God has bestowed upon Princes. That the Declaration made by Spain in a
Letter was ridiculous, and that matters of such importance required more than
words: That he was highly sensible of the honor which the Republic had done
him in sending him an Ambassador Ordinary, and Extraordinary; wherefore that
he might return them the like demonstrations of sincere Friendship, he promised
to grant and condescend to all the desires of the Senate; for that he should be
very ungrateful, and unjust in case he should deny protection to that righteous
Cause of the Republic, which was engaged in the maintenance of that liberty
and Authority, which is the common Right of all Princes in the Universe. And
therefore in case the Senate should at any time be engaged in War for this
Cause, they might be assured, and rely on the word of a Prince, that he would
assist them with all the power he was able, and that he had given Commission to
his Ambassador at Venice to assure the Senate the like in his name: And
farther, the Earl of Salisbury by the King's Order added, That the King was not
induced to grant them these succors, on expectation, that they should leave
Communion with the Church of Rome, but only from a principle of Justice, by
which he esteemed himself obliged to vindicate the Cause of Princes, and the
Authority of the Secular Power; as also from a Spirit of Animosity, being
resolved to take that side, to which Spain was declared an Enemy: in return for
which the Senate made their due acknowledgments to the King.

An. 1606.
Whilst these things were in Treaty, the Spaniards endeavored to raise a War
between the Turk, and the Venetians, supposing thereby to drive the Senate to
those streights, as would inevitably compel them to a composition with the
Pope: To perform which, the Marquess of Santa Croce having received the
Nuntio's Benediction, departed from Naples with a Fleet of twenty six Galleys:
and having advice that the Venetian Armata was then at Corfu, he privately
crossed the Gulf, and on the 10th. of August arrived at Durazzo a City of
Albania; which being empty almost of all its People, at that season of the
year, when the Inhabitants are for the most part in their Fields, and Gardens
gathering their Fruits, he easily surprised the place, sacked, and burnt it,
carrying away Captives about one hundred fifty five Men, Women, and Children,
together with thirty pieces of Canon. The news hereof coming to Venice, did
much trouble the Senate, who apprehending lest the Turks should attribute this
act of Hostility to the Venetians, would in revenge thereof make War upon them:
to prevent which they immediately dispatched advice to their Bailo at
Constantinople, giving him to undestand the truth of this Aggression, which
being performed by the Spaniards, and not by them, ought to be represented to
the Grand Signior in such manner, as might not be occasion of any Rupture. The
Grand Signior being rightly informed of the truth of this matter, did believe
that this attempt was performed by the Spaniards with Artifice, and design, and
therefore gave Order to the Captain Pasha or Admiral of his Galleys, to
entertain a perfect good correspondence with the Venetians, and join with them
to the confusion of the Pope, and the Spaniards. Some few days after this, the
Turkish Fleet consisting of fifty five Galleys came to an Anchor not far from
Corfu, commanded by Gieffier Pasha, to whom General Pasqualigo, who then
commanded the Venetian Fleet and was at Corfu, sent a Complement by his
Secretary to the Pasha, which was in like manner returned with many obliging
Expressions, telling him of the great Esteem and honor which the Grand Signior
had for the Republic; and as a demonstration thereof had given him Commission
to join with the Venetian Fleet, and to make War on the Pope, and the King of
Spain, in such manner, as he should receive direction from the Venetians,
acting a part, or in the same body with them, as they should think convenient
and necessary: and in farther assurance hereof he dispeeded three Galleys
commanded by the Bei of Damiata to inform Pasqualigo of these Resolutions,
which he had received in Commission from his Master the Grand Signior: to which
friendly offer, Pasqualigo returned a like courteous acknowledgment; saying
howsoever, that he could neither do, nor act any thing herein without Orders,
and directions from the Senate; and in the mean time, whilst these Advices
were in going, and Answers expected, he prevailed with the Turks to withdraw
their Forces from those Seas, promising to give them timely notice, An. 1606.
in case there should be occasion to desire their Assistance.

About this time being in the Month of August, the Pope in justification of
these his proceedings, employed Scipio Gobellucci to write the reasons, and
arguments which moved and directed him in this Cause, which Papers were
dispersed over Mantoua, Milan, Cremona, and Ferrara, and Copies thereof sent
into Spain, and other parts: which Writings the Senate taking into
consideration, It was proposed that they should be answered by some learned
Hand, and that all the Letters, Reasons, and Proceedings in this Cause should
be printed, and published to the World: but this Proposal was generally
disliked by the Senate, as a matter which would exasperate, and keep alive the
difference, and rub on the Sore which already smarted too much: that the Cause
of the Senate was sufficiently known to the World; and that silence would look
more like contempt, esteeming such Pamphlets not worthy the public notice, or
consideration; and would argue greater reverence to the Apostolical Sea, than
to expose and lay it open even in those matters, wherein the Republic had
received most manifest Injuries. Howsoever, it was impossible to restrain the
Wit, and Pens of some working Heads and Spirits, who still were writing Papers
on one side, and the other, which being as yet only in Manuscript could not be
so public to common view, as when they were issued from the Press: howsoever
in Milan there was a scandalous Pamphlet printed, and set out by some
Churchmen; in which against the Rules of all Sense and Reason, it was
intimated; that during this Interdict, all Marriages, being a Sacrament of the
Church, were invalid, the copulation adulterous, and the Children Bastards; the
which Paper being spread over all Bergamo, Brescia, and Crema, it was thought
fit that in confutation hereof a Treatise wrote about one hundred and fifty
years ago by Gerson, should be reprinted, and divulged; which was so opposite
to the matter in hand, and so properly accommodated to the present times, and
differences, that nothing could then have been better, nor more fitly applied:
to which was annexed a Letter without name, exhorting all Curates to attend
their Flock, and Charge, without fear of giving any offense to God by not
observing the Interdict. This Treatise of Gerson being wrote so many years
past, carried such Authority, and weight, that Bellarmine esteemed it worth his
Answer; and Baronius cried it down, with such passion, as if the belief thereof
had been a total subversion of the Christian Religion: The Authority of these
two learned Cardinals was so great, and considerable; that the Senate of Venice
thought fit for the better ease of pious, and tender Consciences, to give a
License to certain learned Writers to publish their Reasons, and Arguments in
defense of the Republic, restraining themselves always within the compass of
those Rules which the Laws prescribe: that is, That nothing should be asserted
contrary to Faith, good Customs, and manners, and the Authority of the Prince;
for perusal, and approbation of which, five Divines were appointed to assemble
in the House of the Patriarchal Vicar; and to allow all writings of that
nature, with their Imprimatur, before any Printer should dare to put them in
the Press, or publish the same.

Thus were all the Wits set at work in writing, some on one side, and some on
the other: the chief Heads which those who wrote in favor of the Republic
were these:

That God had constituted two sorts of Government in the World, one Spiritual,
and the other Temporal: The Spiritual was committed to the Apostles* and their
Successors; the Temporal unto Princes, and both were restrained within such
limits, as that one ought not to meddle, or interfere with the other. That the
Pope has no Power to annull the temporal Laws made by Princes, nor to depose
them, or free their Subjects from their Allegiance to them; the which practice
though endeavored for the space of above five hundred years to be introduced,
is yet contrary to the Scriptures and the Example of Christ, and his Saints.
That the Doctrine which teaches, that in case of Controversy between the Pope,
and a Prince, it may be lawful to persecute such a Prince either by open War,
or secret Treason, and that Dispensations may be given to Subjects to rebel
against such a Prince; is a damnable, seditious, and sacrilegious Position.
That by Divine Law the Clergy are not exempted from subjection to the Secular
Power, either as to their Persons, or Estates though by many immunities, and
privileges granted to them by the favor of pious Princes, from Constantine to
Frederick II. several exemptions have been granted according to the exigence of
times, and convenience of places. That the Exemptions which Popes have given to
the Clergy from the Secular Power have not been received in many places; and
where they have been received, the Concessions, and Grants are no farther
obligatory to the Prince, than whilst they are consistent with the present
state, and convenience of the Public.

Another Point insisted upon was this: That the Pope was not Infallible, but
only in such matters wherein God had promised him his Divine assistance: which
according to the Doctrine of some Modern Divines was only in necessary points
of Faith. And that the Power of binding, and loosing, was only, Clave non
Errante. That according to the Doctrine of St. Austin, An Excommunication
against a multitude, or against any one who Commands in Chief is dangerous, and
sacrilegious. That the new name of Blind Obedience invented by Ignatius Loyola
was unknown to the ancient Church, and every good Divine, the which as it takes
away our Election, and desire of knowledge in every good work, so it exposes Men
to the danger of offending God, and has been the cause of those many
Seditions, which have arisen in the World for the space of forty years past.

The Popish Party on the other side proceeded on these Maxims: That the
temporal Power of Princes is subject to the Ecclesiastical; on which ground the
Pope has Power to depose Princes from their Authority for Errors committed in
their Government, when the Pope judges it may be beneficial to the Church. That
the Pope has Power to absolve Subjects from Allegiance to their Prince, the
which some moderate and modest Men explaining, said, not that Christ had given
this temporal Power absolutely to the Pope, but indirectly as it was necessary
to the better Government of the Spiritual; but others who were more bold did
not think it worth the while to mince the matter, but confidently wrote, That
the Pope was endued with all Authority both in Heaven and Earth, and made
Supreme over all Princes of the World, who were his Vassals, and may punish
them for their faults, and errors; that he is the Supreme Temporal Monarch
over all the World and appeals may be made to the Pope from all Temporal
Princes. That he can give Laws to all Princes, and annull theirs; As to the
Exemption of the Clergy, they all denied that they were subject to the temporal
Law; and that this privilege was not given them by the favor of Princes; but
(as some would have it) Jure Divino, others by the Constitutions, and Decrees
of Councils, and Popes; but in this they all agreed, that they were not subject
to the Prince, not so much as in cases of Treason; and that they were not
obliged to obey the Laws of the Land wherein they lived, but only Vi
Directiva. And some were so bold as to proceed so far, as to say, that the
Clergy were Judges, whether the Laws of Princes were just or not, and whether
the people were obliged to obey them. That in regard the Pope who has the
Spirit of God cannot err, his Sentences are to be observed, whether they be
just, or unjust. That so powerful, and authentic is the Opinion of the Pope,
that it ought to prevail against all other determinations of the World. That
the Pope is God upon Earth, the Sun of ^^stice, and light of Religion, that the
sentence of God, and of the Pope are the same, and their Tribunal the same: but
it is very observable, what Bellarmine asserted; That to restrain obedience due
to the Pope unto matters appertaining only to the Soul is to reduce it to
nothing; that St. Paul appealed unto Caesar who was not his Judge and not to St.
Peter, was because he would not make himself in those days ridiculous. That the
ancient Popes professed subjection to the Emperors was to comply with the
humor, and affection of those times. Others also have added, That the Empire
of the Pope was to be introduced by degrees, and insisted upon with some
moderation out of respect to the infirmities of Princes who were lately become
Proselytes to the Church.

But to return now to the matter of Treaty. Toward the end of August an other
Overture was made, which was the summary of all this Negotiation, though
various things were afterward treated without any effect. For about the 17th.
of August Monsieur de Fresnes, the French Minister at Venice did in the name of
his Master propose, as entrance to an Accommodation; That the Senate should
suspend the Execution of those Laws, which gave offense to the Pope,
conditionally that the Pope suspend the Censures of his Monitory for the space
of four or six Months: but if this Expedient would not be accepted, then it was
proposed, That the Prisoners should be consigned into the hands of the Pope at
the instance, and desire of the King without prejudice to the Right, and Reason
of the Senate; for that it was necessary to give some color of submission, and
condescension to the demands of the Pope; there being no President, that any
Pope did ever recall his Boles unless that which by Authority of the Council of
Constance was repealed.

These Proposals being debated in the Senate, it was in the first place
concluded, and agreed, That the liberty of the Public was to be conserved, and
preferred before all other worldly respects whatsoever. That the Prisoners
indeed might be resigned into the hands of the Pope at the instance, and
request of the French King, without being made a precedent in like cases, or be
a prejudice to the Liberty in times to come; but that to suspend the force of
the Laws, was a certain violation of it, and a shake of the Foundation of that
Government which had for many hundreds of years been rooted, and established;
for that every suspension of a Law does argue either weakness in the Authority,
or in the Council, which being the substance of this Consult, it was given for
Answer to Monsieur de Fresnes the French Ambassador, as also to the Spanish
Ambassador de Cardenas, who insisted on the like Terms.

An. 1606.
Whilst these things were negotiating by the foreign Ministers; and that the
Senate was resolved to adhere to that Principle, That no way or concession was
to be given to the least point or particle which might prejudice the public
Liberty; News came about the beginning of September, that a new Congregation
was erected in Rome, called the Congregation of War, which was appointed to
assemble twice every Week to consult of the manner, and means of waging the
Temporal War; This new term of a Congregation of War, which was never heard of
before in Rome, administered subject of Discourse to all Italy, both because it
was contrary to the ancient practices of that Court, which did always cover
their temporal Designs with Spiritual names; and because the management thereof
was committed to the care of fifteen Cardinals, who were all Men of Letters,
but not of Arms: howsoever they served the present turn, for being Men of the
Spanish faction, and depending upon Spain, it was believed, that their Interest
and Power would have been very available in that Court for carrying forward the
War, and engageing the principal Ministers in their quarrel.

All Princes of Christendom being now concerned in this difference, and great
endeavors made for reconciliation; it was encharged to Giustiniano Ambassador
to the Court of England to represent unto that King the provisions which were
making at Rome for a War, desiring, that his Majesty would prepare those
Forces, which he had already promised in defense of their Republic; for that
Spain was arming, and threatened on all sides to invade them: To which the King
answered, That he was resolved to defend their Cause, not out of any grudge or
quarrel of his own with the Pope; but, (as he called God to witness) out of a
principle of duty to conserve that Liberty which God had given to Princes: nor
had he any respect to his own particular benefit, or hopes to receive Rewards
from the Republic; but only to the justice of that Cause which was most just,
and pleasing to God: and that therefore he would speedily perform his Promise
with more sincerity and constancy of mind toward the Republic, than the King
of Spain had done to the Pope, whose Letters, and Promises contained nothing
but froth, and vanity.

Thus were all Christian Princes concerned in this quarrel on one side, or the
other, some being intent to accommodate differences by middle, and moderate
terms, and others to take Parties, and assist with Arms, and open Violence:
until at length about the middle of October, the Pope taking it into his
consideration, that so much the longer, that this quarrel continued, and that
the Venetians remained in their separation from the Church, so much more did
his Reputation suffer, and the Power of the Spiritual Authority discover its
own weakness: wherefore calling Monsieur d' Alincourt the French Ambassador
unto him, he declared, and protested, that he was infinitely desirous of an
Accommodation, and was ready to accept of any terms which were not prejudicial,
or derogatory to the honor of the Papal Sea: Upon which Alincourt entering
into consultation with the French Cardinals, some Proposals were sent to the
Republic, and communicated by the hand of de Fresnes, containing a Project,
for making, and establishing a Peace. Nor was the King of Spain unactive
herein; but to show his zeal, he dispatched an Ambassador Extraordinary to
Venice upon this occasion, who declared in the Senate, that his Master was so
passionate in this business, That if he had two Sons he would be contented to
sacrifice one of them on condition, it might be an offering of atonement, and
reconciliation between the Pope and the Venetian State.

Whilst all these Treaties, and Instances were a foot, An. 1607.
Letters were dispatched from the Court of Spain to the Count de Fuentes
Governor of Milan, that he should levy an Army to be in a readiness for
assistance of the Pope, and accordingly three thousand Italian Foot were raised
for this Service, which with the other Forces already prepared and levied in
other parts: the King designed to compose an Army of twenty five thousand Foot,
and four thousand Horse.

The Senate of Venice observing, that the Spaniards armed, did not think it
agreeable to the Rules of good Government for them to sit idle, but to put
themselves in a posture of War to repel Force with Force, and to be in a
readiness on all occasions which might happen. And accordingly they added six
hundred Italian Foot, and one thousand Albanians to the nine thousand six
hundred Foot, and six hundred Men at Arms, and one hundred and fifty Albanian
Horse which were already listed and in a readiness. They also ordered Count
Martinengo to raise four thousand French Soldiers, and six hundred Curassiers:
and not to be wanting in their Fleet at Sea, they ordered that to the thirty
eight Sail of Galleys already equipped, twelve more should be set out with
addition of five more which were recalled from the Islands in the Levant.

An. 1607.
Whilst the Spaniards, and Venetians were arming in this manner on one side and
the other: Priuli Ambassador for the Republic in France, acquainted the King
with all these preparations, desiring his Majesty would be pleased to declare
himself in favor of the Senate: to which the King gave Answer, That it was not
as yet time; and that there remained still hopes of Accommodation; and that
being moved and solicited herein by all the Princes of Italy, he was
dispatching the Cardinal Joyeuse to Venice and thence to Rome to interpose
effectually in this Mediation.

And indeed this Cardinal was the most fit and proper Instrument of any to
effect this accord: for he was not only a Person of great Esteem and Authority
in the Court of Rome, being a Cardinal of the first degree, and rank; but also
of great reputation with the Senate of Venice; who being desirous to commit the
Office of mediation to the Interest of the French King, whom they had found
more sincere, and real to them, than the King of Spain and his Adherents, they
received the Cardinal with entire satisfaction, who arrived at Venice about the
middle of February.

The Cardinal spending little time in formal Ceremonies, and Visits,
immediately entered on his business, delivered his Credential Letters, and
opened his Commission: and in the first place insisting that as it was
necessary to provide for the security, and reputation of the Republic; so also
it was necessary to contrive such means as might give satisfaction to the Pope,
whose Proposals were these: That an Ambassador be sent from the Republic to
desire his Holiness, that he would be pleased to take off the Ecclesiastical
Censures which he had passed upon them; That all the Religious, as well Jesuits
as others, who had left, and abandoned their dwelling, and Habitations, should
be again restored. That the King should give his word to the Pope, that during
this Treaty at Rome, the Laws about which this Controversy arose, should be
suspended: And the Cardinal insisting more on this Point, than on any other,
earnestly urged that some resolution might be taken speedily, and with secrecy
on which the King might with confidence establish this his promise and
assurance. On this last Point the Cardinal insisted with more than ordinary
pressures, declaring, that the season of the year which was now only proper for
Consultations, and Treaties was but short; and that the time of War, and action
approached, and therefore it was necessary to come to a determination; and that
the Senate would more especially declare themselves concerning the Laws: for as
the King did not desire, nor approve, that any Decree, or Law should be made
and recorded for suspension of these Laws, nor any other thing which might
prejudice the dignity of the State, and the public Liberty: so he also did
consider: That as the Pope had passed these Censures openly, and in the sight
of the World, so he could not take them off, without some apparent reasons and
causes, which might salve his reputation, and his honor. And because the King
his Master did well know, that the Republic was extremely averse to such
suspension, he was willing to touch that Point very tenderly, and ease them
therein by taking the whole burden on his own shoulders, giving his word to the
Pope, that those Laws should be suspended during this Treaty, without any
Decree, or Declaration on part of the Republic: conditionally, that as the
Pope shall hereupon without farther delay take off the Censures; so the
Republic shall promise unto the King not to execute these Laws during the time
of this Treaty: the which being assented unto by the Senate, he did not doubt
but to give satisfaction unto the Pope, and maintain and secure their Liberty,
and conclude all with a happy and blessed Peace. As to that Article, which
concerned the Jesuits, his Master's desire was, that they should be restored;
it being an ordinary concession and grant in the conclusion of all Treaties;
that such as have been Parties, Fomenters, or Abettors on either side should be
remitted, and included in the Articles, for that indeed it was not consistent
with the honor of the Pope, that those, who had suffered for his Cause, and
for their Obedience to the Apostolical Sea should be excluded, and suffer for
the performance of their duty.

To this Speech of the Cardinal the Senate made this Answer, That the expulsion
of the Jesuits was resolved, and decreed upon very sound, and mature
considerations, and the Law against them so firmly established, as could not be
repealed: and yet to salve the Pope's reputation herein; all other Religious,
such as Friars, and others, who were Parties and Abettors of the Pope's Cause,
should be included, and restored to their pristine state, and condition: but as
to the Point of giving their word to the King for non-execution, or suspension
of the Laws during this Treaty, they could not recede from the determination so
often repeated, which was, That in the use of these Laws, they will not depart
from their ancient Piety, and Religion professed.

But the Cardinal insisted, and desired to have had some thing more plain, and
agreeable to his Proposition: but howsoever (being well acquainted with the
Pope's mind to agree almost on any terms) he made this Reply to the Senate,
that though he expected to receive an Answer more satisfactory to his Demands;
yet considering that it was the King's pleasure that the Republic should have
entire contentment, he rested satisfied with this Answer, which he desired
might be kept as a Secret, lest being divulged, it might be interrupted by the
contrivances of unquiet, and malicious spirits.

Howsoever, the Senate resolved to communicate all that passed to Don Francisco
the Spanish Ambassador, who had offered a like Equivolent; and having been to
make the Cardinal a Visit had desired to join with him in this Negotiation;
which the Cardinal refusing, Don Francisco was very urgent to know all
particulars, which the Senate very readily communicated to him.

Thus were the Treaties so far proceeded, as administered great hopes of Peace,
had not the great preparations made for War by the Count de Fuentes Governor
of Milan, and the disturbances amongst the Grisons rendered all things cloudy,
and tending to a storm: howsoever the Cardinal Joyeuse with such Answer, and
Proposals, as he had obtained from the Senate, resolved for Rome, and
accordingly departed from Venice on the 17th. of March.

The Cardinal was no sooner departed, but the Marquess de Castiglione arrived
at Venice with Character of Ambassador from the Emperor to the Pope; And
though the Duke of Savoy was employed for the Emperor, and then resided at
Venice in quality of his Ambassador, yet Castiglione had Orders in his way to
stop there and incline the Senate, (as well as he was able) toward a Peace;
but this Marquess could obtain nothing more than what was delivered to the
Ministers of France and Spain; of which the Ambassador Don Francisco made
collections in writing, with the proceedings of all the Treaty, Copies of which
he sent with diligence to Rome, and were not only showed to the Pope, but
dispersed through all the Court, to the intent, that it might be made known to
the World, that the French were not able to procure, or gain other terms from
the Senate, than such as had been already granted to the Ministers of Spain,
and other Princes. Of which the Senate having information, thought fit for
prevention of false Reports to send authentic Copies of all proceedings to
their Ministers in foreign Courts, and particularly that of their last
resolution.

The arrival of the Cardinal at Rome filled all the Town with Discourse; every
one speaking variously as his passion guided, some being of Opinion that the
matters were all concluded; others of different sentiments believed, that they
were impossible: and indeed the Pope himself being distracted by both sides,
remained unresolved for the space of three or four days; during which time, he
confessed himself to have been as it were tormented on the wrack: For he
considered, that to yield unto the Venetians almost in every Point, was a
scandalous diminution to the Papal Power; and to abandon the Jesuits his
faithful Officers was yet more hard, and intolerable; for if for two Clergymen
only there had been such a clutter, how much more ought he to be concerned for
a whole Order, and for the conservation and re-establishment of his most
beloved Emissaries. But in regard the Venetians seemed resolute in that Point,
the Cardinal Perron persuaded the Pope to wave the Dispute, lest when all other
Points were agreed, it should be said, that the particular Cause of the Jesuits
should become the Universal Concernment of the whole Church; and that it was
necessary in the first place to establish the Papal Authority in Venice, before
he could hope to gain admission for the Jesuits: and that herein he would do
well to follow the Example of Clement VIII. who in a Controversy he had with
France on the same Subject, was contented to wave the Point concerning the
restoration of the Jesuits, and in the time obtained that, which at that
present seemed impossible: upon which Advice the Pope was contented to leave
that matter wholly to the management of the Cardinal, with Instructions to
perform the best he could therein, but not to break off upon the refusal of it.

The Cardinal having agreed all matters with the Pope, and received
Instructions how to manage his Interest, (for he confided more in the Cardinal
than in any other of the Ministers:) he in the first place gave account to the
King his Master of his success; and then taking Post rode very hard to Ancona,
from whence taking a Boat he arrived in have at Venice, hoping in the Holydays
of Easter to operate better in favor of the Pope, and prevail on the minds of
the Senate, which he expected to find more gently disposed in the days
preparatory to that Festival.

The next day after his arrival the Cardinal had Audience of the Senate, to
whom he declared the substance of his Negotiations, but did not yet so far open
himself, as to specify the particulars, which were contained in the Pope's
Breviate, though the Senate was well advised, that the Cardinal had no other
Writing, than certain Instructions subscribed by the Pope's own hand: but yet
the reputation which the Cardinal had of being one of the first Degree in the
Court of Rome, forbad all farther enquiry into his Power or Authority. The
Cardinal therefore in the first place enlarged himself in a Rhetorical Speech
concerning the good will, and intention of the Pope, which was directed to no
other end, than the good, and welfare of the Christian Church, being desirous
to support, and maintain the Papal Dignity with a constancy becoming the
Apostolical Chair: and though the Pope had long since endeavored to
accommodate his differences with the Serene Republic, yet the conclusion had
been often interrupted by the ill Offices, and contrivances of Men not well
inclined to the public Peace; Howsoever his Holiness being willing to surmount
all Controversy, the difficulties were reduced unto two Heads: The first Point
was, that an Ambassador should be designed unto Rome before the Censures were
taken off; and the second, that the Jesuits should be restored: howsoever,
since the Senate had made so much difficulty on the first Point; he had
received Instructions to yield it unto them, and in the first place to take off
the Censures; but as to that concerning the Jesuits it admitted of longer
Dispute, of which he desired to be heard at a more private Audience.

In conclusion, after that matters were debated for three or four days in the
Senate, all came to be resolved in this manner: That the Cardinal should
publicly in the Palace of St. Mark, and in the face of the whole Senate
declare that the Censures were taken off, or that he did then make them void,
and null. For though the Senate did still insist on their Innocence, and that
they had never justly incurred the penalty of the Ecclesiastical Censure, yet
however it being judged an Act of no prejudice to their Cause, the Cardinal's
Declaration was admitted: though the Senate would not consent, to accompany the
Cardinal to St. Mark's Church, and there after Mass was ended to receive a
Benediction from him, lest it should appear to the People, as if the Censures
were taken off by that Benediction, which would be a tacit Confession that the
State was guilty of some fault, which they in no wise yielding unto, would not
admit of the least color, or appearance of Absolution.

Secondly, That at the same time when the Cardinal declared the Censures taken
off, the Doge should deliver to his hand a revocation of the Protest which the
Senate had made, when the Censures were published.

Thirdly, The manner, and form was agreed for delivery of the Prisoners.

Fourthly, It was agreed, that all Friars and other Religious should be
restored again to their Monasteries, and Convents, excepting only the Jesuits,
and fourteen other Friars who were fled for their Crimes, and not on account of
the Pope's quarrel*

Fifthly, It was agreed, that an Ambassador should be immediately chosen, and
with all convenient speed sent to the Pope.

An. 1607.
The Articles being thus agreed, and confirmed, the 21th. of April was the day
appointed for putting matters in Execution, which were performed in this manner:

The Cardinal being lodged in the Palace of the Duke of Ferrara, Monsieur de
Fresnes early attended him at that House, where Mark Ottobon the Secretary,
accompanied with two Notaries belonging to the Ducal Office of Chancery, and
with other Officers of the Prison, brought before the Ambassador the two
Prisoners, viz. the Abbot of Nervesa, and Scipio Saraceno Canon of Vicenza: and
then the Secretary having made his Obeisance to the Ambassador; said, These
are, my Lord, the Prisoners, which our most Serene Prince, according to a late
agreement has sent to be consigned to your Excellency: Protesting howsoever
that the same was done with intent, and design only to gratify his most
Christian Majesty, without prejudice, or infringment of that Authority and
Right which the Republic has to pass Judgment on Ecclesiastical Persons, and
to cite them before their Secular Tribunals of Justice. To which the
Ambassador replied, That he understood it so, and in that manner he received
them; Of which the Ducal Notaries taking notice, entered the same in their
public Registers. This being done, the Prisoners recommended themselves to the
Ambassadour's protection, who promised them his favor; and causing them to
follow him into a withdrawing Room where the Cardinal was seated; He said to
him, These are the Prisoners, which are to be delivered into the hands of the
Pope; Then said the Cardinal, consign them into the hands of this Person
(pointing to the Officer, who was Claudio Montano the Pope's Commissary, sent
to that end and purpose;) who having touched them in token of seizure, and
possession, he desired the Ministers of Justice that they would be pleased to
take the care, and custody of them.

This matter being past, the Cardinal with the Ambassador went to the Doge,
who after Mass returned to the College, attended with the Signory, and the
Savii; and having there taken their Seats the Cardinal entered, and declared
himself in these words: I rejoice much to see this most happy day, greatly
desired by me; in which I declare to your Serene Highness, That all the
Censures of the Church are taken off from you, as in reality they are; and
hereof I cannot but testify a most sensible satisfaction, in respect to that
great benefit which all Christendom, and Italy in particular will receive
thereby. Then the Doge delivered into the hands of the Cardinal the revocation
of the Protest, which was in this form directed to all the Prelates, to whom the
Protest was sent, and was to this purpose:

That whereas expedients and means have been found to make the Pope sensible of
the true candor of mind, and the sincere actions of this Republic; so that
all Causes are removed of the present differences: And whereas this Republic
has always endeavored to maintain a perfect good understanding with the
Apostolical Chair; so now more especially it remains satisfied in having at
length obtained this their most just desire, of which it is thought fit to give
them notice. Adding farther, That all matters being performed on both sides,
which were most equal, and the censures taken off, the Protest also was
revoked.

In the Evening the Senate assembled for choice of an Ambassador to be sent to
Rome and reside with his Holiness; the Person elected was the Cavalier
Contarini, who in Company with three others had formerly been employed to
congratulate with the Pope for his assumption to the Papal Chair: and herewith
ended this great Controversy between the Pope, and the Venetians, which had
disturbed all Christendom, and might have been the ruin, and destruction of the
Papal Authority, had not the Pope wisely in time been made sensible thereof,
and granted every thing almost, which the Venetians required: In the beginning
and progress of this whole matter, we may observe the spirit of this Paul V.
who aspired to make himself as great, as Sixtus V. and seemed to follow much of
his way, and method; but he undertok an Enterprise which was too difficult, and
out of his power: his Error in which was grounded on a mistake; that he was
better able to cope, or deal with a Republic, than with a Monarch; for that
the first being composed of diverse Heads, and humors might sooner admit a
division in Councils, than in a single person; and that many of them being
zealous, and most of them superstitious in Religion might be affected by
Ecclesiastical Censures, and terrified by Excommunications. But the contrary
was made to appear by the effects, which most evidently have signalized the
Wisdom, and Constancy of this Republic, which would never be obliged to become
pliant, and flexible by all the fires of Hell, and damnation which the Pope
could threaten. And indeed it farther appears, that as the Republic was of
Opinion, that the Censures of the Pope were invalid, when they were not
established on just, and legal causes; so likewise they believed, that they
could not depart from the least scruple of their temporal Power which God had
given them, without betraying that Trust, which God had committed to their
charge; and herein they were so resolute and constant, that lest they should
seem to acknowledge a fault in any one step of the late transactions, they would
not so much as accept of the Cardinals Blessing, lest it should seem to be
given in form of Absolution.

This Controversy being ended, which had hitherto allayed all the joy, and
contentment which the Pope conceived for his late exaltation to the Papal
Dignity: the Venetians in pursuance of the Articles agreed, dispatched the four
Ambassadors to Rome, namely Francisco Molino Procurator of St. Mark, John
Mocenigo, Peter Dudo, Francisco Contareno, all Knights, and Senators of Chief
Renown; whom the Pope received with all imaginable honor, being overjoyed to
have put an end to a business so full of danger to himself, and in which his
measures having failed him, he no longer argued in defense of his Cause, nor
entertained the Ambassadors with Expostulations concerning matters past, which
having had little foundation in any reasons, he was desirous to pretermit, and
to have buried in silence.

Soon after the promotion of this Pope, in the Month of November 1605. that
diabolical Plot of the Gunpowder Treason to blow up the King and Queen of
England, all the Nobles and Commons assembled in Parliament was happily, and by
God's immediate Providence discovered, the particulars of which being recorded
in our Chronicles, and believed, to have been contrived at Rome, we shall not
need to relate in this place: only that King James for security of himself and
his Dominions issued forth a Proclamation commanding all Roman Priests,
Seminaries, Baker's Hist.
and Jesuits as being the chief Incendiaries of troubles to depart the Kingdom
of England, and not to return upon pain of the severity of those Laws which
were made against them: as also all Recusants to return home to their
Dwellings, and not to remain in London or come within ten miles of the Court
without special License. After which Proclamation, the Oath of Allegiance was
presently administered to all sorts of people, and their names certified to the
Lords of the Council, who refused to take it. The form of this Oath administered
to the Recusants in England was brought to Rome, and examined, and discussed by
the College of Cardinals, who after mature, and serious deliberation did
unanimously concur, that the said Oath could not be lawfully taken by any true
Catholic with a safe Conscience. Wherefore the Pope signified so much by his
Brief, exhorting his people in England to refuse the said Oath, and with
patience, constancy, and faith to suffer those persecutions which for this
cause were laid upon them.

In the year 1607. the King of Congo sent an Ambassador to this Pope called
Anthony Emanuel Vunthi, for so the Jesuits and other Missionaries into those
parts had named him; he was received honorably at Rome, where the Pope
promised to furnish him with several learned and godly Preachers, which should
return with him into his own Country, and there labor to increase and
propagate the Gospel; but this Ambassador falling sick soon after his arrival
at Rome, was buried in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, and with him ceased
the design of sending Apostles into those parts. Howsoever the Archbishop of
Goa, in imitation of the late Ambassador from Congo, procured Letters from the
King of Persia to this Pope dated at Spahaun the 20th. day of January 1608. and
were afterward followed by an Ambassador called Ali Golikek Mordar, who
arrived at Rome in the year 1609. and was received into the Vatican, where the
Pope sat on his Throne, and on each side the Cardinals in form, and manner of
a Consistory.

Those Writers who favor the Papal Cause, pretend that the King of Persia sent
then to acknowledge Obedience to the Pope, who for that cause returned solemn
thanks to God for having enlightened those remote parts with the rays of his
Gospel, and that the Sun of Righteousness was arisen in those parts, after so
long a Night of obscure Gentilism, and false Religion. But the success of
following times proved the mistake of this matter, the King's of Persia
continuing still in the Doctrine of their Prophet Ali; and therefore it may
with more reason be asserted, and believed, that this Ambassador from Persia,
was sent in favor and at the instigation of some of the Persian Subjects, who
were, or had been Christians of the Armenian Church, which by some Friars crept
in amongst them had been seduced from their own to the Roman Church; which was
not difficult to perform, if we consider the poverty of those poor Armenians,
who were easily inclined to the profession of that Faith upon promises of
preferments in the Church, so that until these days there are several Bishops
of the Roman rite in Armenia, and Monasteries of Dominican Friars.

In the year 1610. An. 1610.
this Pope beatified Ignatius Loyola, who was the first Founder, and Institutor
of the Order of Jesuits, giving them leave and permission amongst themselves
and publicly in their own Churches to invoke him as a Saint, or as one of
those happy Souls who live, and reign in Heaven with God; but not to be prayed
unto, or invoked by the Universal Church. But with more Ceremony, and joy he
canonized the same year Charles Borromeo the Archbishop of Milan. In the time
of Clement VIII. the people of Milan had earnestly desired this grace, and had
begun the methods, and rules of proceedings observed in that case, the which
being continued until the time of this Paul V. were then at the desire and
request of the Kings of Spain, Poland, and Sweden, as also of the College of
Cardinals, and Bishops of the Province of Milan, consummated, and finished with
great pomp, and expense. In the Month of May of this year 1610. Henry IV. King
of France was wickedly, and traitorously assassinated by Ravillac, the
particulars of which are specified in the French History, the which diabolical
Act, as it astonished the whole World, so it sadly affected Pope Paul, who had
received many Obligations from that King, being endeared to him by many late
circumstances in the Controversy with Venice, and upon this score he deeply
lamented this unhappy fate, which he said was a loss to all Christendom, and
the Universal Church; and understanding that some young French Men, then at
Rome rejoiced at the fact, and styled the villainous Assassinate The Deliverer
of their Country, he caused them to be seized, and upon Process made against
them, he condemned them to the Galleys. And though Popes do seldom assist at
the Obsequies of deceased Princes, yet he was resolved to be present at these,
which were celebrated at Rome with great solemnity, where one Sequier preaching
the funeral Sermon of this great Prince, he bestowed on him these Titles of
Praise, and Dignity, calling him The Protector of the public Peace, the
Ornament of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, the sole Arbitrator
between Christian Kings and Princes, and the delight of the Universe; with
which the Pope was so well affected, that he acknowledged all that was said of
him, to have been true, but yet that this Elogium came far short of the merit
of this great Prince.

Besides these honors performed to the three forementioned Parties, he
beatified Phillippus Nerius Founder of the Order of the Fathers of the Oratory,
called in French Les peers d' Oratoire, and in Spain known by the name of
Observantes Minores; as also the Virgin Teresa, who for it instituted the Order
of descalced Carmelites, with diverse others.

But now to enumerate the many public works done by this Pope, we shall find
none to have exceeded him in Magnificent Structures. For in the first place, he
highly beautified the Vatican Basilicon called by us the Church of S. Peter,
which being begun by Julius II. and amplified and increased by Gregory XIII.
and Sixtus V. was not yet perfected until the time of this Pope, who by the
help, and contrivance of Michael Angelo de Bonarora, caused the old Building of
Constantine to be demolished, and began a most stupendous work, erecting from
the very foundation the whole body of the Church from the Chapel of Gregory to
the farthest end, building the Quire, Chancel, and both the lower and upper
Portico, from whence the Pope on certain days blessed the People: and in
remembrance whereof this Inscription is engraven within the Church.

Paulus V.
Pont. Max.
Vaticanum Templum
a Julio II. Inchoatum.
Et usque ad Gregorii and Clementis
Sacella
Assiduo Centum Annorum
Opificio Productum.
Tantae Molis Accessione
Vniversum Constantinianae
Basilicae Ambitum includens
Confecit
Confessionem Beati Petri Exornavit
Frontem Orientalem and Porticum
Extruxit.
But besides this foregoing work of great Magnificence and charge bestowed on
St. Peter's Church, he enlarged the Vatican Palace, adding several convenient
Stairs, and passages into the Garden called the Bell vedere; by which in a more
direct way he might pass into it; for that Palace is said to be so great, as to
contain five thousand six hundred and fifty Chambers: He also enlarged the
Vatican Library, and adorned it with the Pictures of many Men famous in their
Ages, made, and drawn by excellent hands; to this Library he added a place to
keep the Records of the secret transactions of the Roman Sea, which he called,
Archivium Apostolicum.

Nor did his Munificence end with this work, but with more State and charge he
erected a Chapel called the Chapel of Burghese, in the Church of Santa Maria
Maggiore, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin; the outside of which though built of
Stone dug from Quarries on the banks of the Tybur, yet the inside was
enriched with Numidian, and Carian Marble, and with Granite Marble, and
Alabaster fetched from Chios, and Phrygia, the High Altar was supported with
four lofty Pillars of Jasper-stone beset with Topaces, Rubies, Emeralds,
Chrysolites, Onyx, Amethysts, and diverse other precious Stones from Persia and
India: and dressed up the Image of our Lady upon it, with rich embroidered
Cloths, with Chains of Gold, and Pearl, and the rarest Gems. To this Chapel he
gave a Cross of Silver weighing one hundred twenty eight pounds, costing two
thousand one hundred and fifty Ducats; He also erected the Statues of the
Twelve Apostles in Silver, which cost six thousand Ducats of Gold, with six
silver Candlesticks gilded, which cost three thousand Crowns: also two massy
Candlesticks of Silver, which were placed at the foot of the high Altar,
weighing one hundred and fourteen pounds, and cost one thousand four hundred
Ducats of Gold. Moreover, he gave the heads of six Saints in Silver, which cost
two thousand and thirty Ducats, and the Arms of six Saints, which cost one
thousand two hundred Ducats; and also two Silver Basins, weighing twenty three
pounds, and which cost five hundred pieces of Eight, the Crown which he
bestowed on the Image studded with precious Stones, was valued at twelve
thousand Ducats of Gold, before which was hanged a Lamp of Silver weighing
thirty one pounds, with many other rare and rich gifts, which amounted in all
to 31725 Ducats of Gold. I remember my self to have seen, and observed this
Chapel with great admiration, and particularly noted the four Pillars of
Jaspar and Bases of Brass, and that the back of the Altar was all of Lapis
Lazuli, and the Cupolo of the Chapel was painted by Guido Rheni of Bologna:
this Chapel is just opposite to another built by Sixtus V. the chief
Architect, of which was Domenico Fontana, and cost seven hundred thousand
Crowns, they are both additions to the Sancta Maria Maggiore, which is one of
the greatest Churches in Rome, it is seated on Mons Esquilinus, and by some is
named Sancta Maria ad Nives, because that in the heats of the month of August
it was revealed in a Vision to those, who first founded this Church, that they
should build it in that place where at that season they found Snow, which it
seems appeared within the compass of that Church, and gave measures for all the
dimensions of it, there being no Snow in any other part of all the City or
Country.

And in regard the Vatican Palace was esteemed to be situate in an unhealthy
Air, and almost pestilential in the heats of the Summer, it was accustomary for
the Popes in the hot season of the year to remove themselves to a small House
on the Mons Quirinus, hiring to the great inconvenience of the Inhabitants,
several Houses for accommodation of the Servants, and followers of the Court.
But this Pope Paul who was of a great and large Soul, not enduring to be
confined within so narrow a compass; bought several Houses belonging to the
Neighborhood, the which having pulled down, he in the place thereof erected
that large and stately Palace, now called Monte Cavallo, from the two Horses
which are erected on a Pedestal before this Palace; in memory of which Building
on the Eastern side thereof there is this Inscription engraved, Paulus Quintus
Pont. Max.
Anno Salutis MDCXI.
Pont. Sui VII.
There was no Pope that was ever more magnificent in Building than this, or who
delighted more in public Works, which tended to the common benefit of the
City, either for use or Ornament; for he enlarged the ways on the Mount
Quirinus leading to this Palace, which were before very narrow and
inconvenient, and brought several Aqueducts to it with plentiful streams; many
streets of the City which were before crooked, he made direct and straight with
much Beauty and Ornament. All that part of the City which is situate on the
other side of the Tybur called at present Frastevere, suffering much for want
of Water, he refreshed with admirable Streams flowing in great abundance, Ex
Agro Braccianensi, which he brought by Aqueducts at thirty five miles distance,
partly under ground, and part with arched Work; which was divided into four
Fountains, or rather Rivers of Water, falling from the top of that Hill where
is now a Church, and Monastery of Franiscan Friars: and there they showed us a
Chapel built over that place, where St. Peter, (as they said) was crucified,
and the very hole where his Cross was fixed. On the high Altar of this Church,
was that excellent and famed Piece of our Savior's Ascension made by Raphael
Vrbin; he was himself so pleased with it, and so much admired it, that he
ordered it should be carried next to his Coffin when he went to be buried.

Besides all these, and many other public Works which this Pope performed, he
was much to be commended for his charitable Gifts, and Alms to the Poor;
amongst which it was none of his least acts of Charity; that he established a
Revenue, out of which every month there was raised a convenient Portion whereby
to bestow an honest and virtuous Maid in Marriage. He was greatly pleased with
Frescati, a Village about ten miles distant from Rome, called anciently Villa
Tusculana, where Cicero was much delighted, and made it the place of his
retirement and Studies; and for that reason this Pope enlarged the Papal Palace
there, and brought it into great reputation with the Cardinals, and Nobles of
Rome.

During the Wars between the Emperor and the Count Palatine of the Rhine,
which happened in the Reign of this Pope, he laid a Tax on all the Clergy
toward the maintenance and support of the Catholic Cause: and a new Order of
Knighthood was created under the patronage of the Blessed Virgin, St. Michael,
and St. Francis, who entered into a Vow to make War against the Heretics, and
extirpate them and the Heresies they professed: And about this time began that
great Controversy between the Jesuits and the Dominicans concerning the
immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, which was rather smothered, than
decided.

Thus did this Pope Paul V. pass his time in Peace; for the quarrel he had with
the Venetians, having given him some taste of the inquietudes of War, he ever
afterward attended to a pacifick and reposed Life, which produced those
excellent effects of Peace, such as great Structures, and munificence toward
the Poor, which by unquiet Spirits are always diverted by the expenses of War:
And thus having consumed his days, he departed this life on the 24th. of
January 1621. and in the seventieth year of his Age, having reigned fifteen
years, eight months and thirteen days, he was buried for a while in the Church
of St. Peter, but his Body was in a short time after removed from thence to his
Chapel, which he had erected and added to the great Church of Santa Maria
Maggiore. During his Reign he created sixty Cardinals.

The Epitaph on his Monument is as follows:

Paulus V. Pont. Max. Patria Romanus, ex Burgesia Familia
Cui perpetua Vitae innocentia and sectata Virtus;
Bononiae Prolegato praefuit, mox a Gregorio XIV.
Causarum Came. Apost. Auditor Creatus, and a Clemente VIII. Ad Philippum II.
Hispaniarum Regem de gravissimis rebus Legatus;
In Amplissimum Ordinem cooptatus inter Generales Inquisitores Adscriptus,
Et Vrbis Vicarius Electus, cum omnes tantorum Munerum Parts
Summa cum laud obivisset Ad Summum Pontificatum Leone XI. e Vivis Erepto
Florens Adhuc Aetate Incredibili Patrum Consensu Evectus Est
Cumque Vigili Solicitudini Securitatem Annonae Copiam
Justitiam, Et Quietem Populis Ecclesiasticae Ditionis
Concordiam Vero Et Pacem Vniverso Christiano Orbi Semper Praestitisset
Religionem Summa Pietate Coluissit
Vrbem Magnificentissimis Adificiis Ornasset Atque Gregoriis
Omnium Virtutum Officiis Aditum Sibi Ad Immortalitatem Aperuisset
E Mortalibus Raptus Grave Cunctis Sui Desiderium Reliquit.
Sedit in Potificatu Annos XV. Menses VIII. Dies XIII. Obiit Anno
Sal. MDCXXI. Die XXII. Januarii.
GREGORY XV.
THE Funeral Obsequies of Paul V. having been celebrated for the space of nine
days according to the usual Form and Custom; the Cardinals on the tenth day
being the eighth of February, entered the Conclave, to the number of fifty, to
which two others were added, who arrived at Rome a few days after the death of
the Pope, one of which was Cardinal Alexander Ludovisio, Archbishop of
Bologna, who after many and various Factions, and diversity of Opinions in the
Conclave, was chosen Pope: the first and most ancient Party was that of
Montalto, the second of Aldobrandino, the third of Borghese, the fourth was
that of the Spanish Faction, the fifth was of the French, besides which were
Bonti, Sforza, Farnese, Medici, and Este, all which stood on their own bottoms,
and formed distinct Parties of their own. When the first Scrutiny was made
Bellarmine had far the greater number of Votes, but falling short of two Thirds
he was excluded, Campori made the greater bustle, and so also did Aquino, but
great and strong Parties opposing against them vacated their Elections. At
length Cardinal Borghese naming Ludovisio, was followed by a general
concurrence of almost all the Cardinals, almost we may say, because Campori
upon the news thereof, turned pale and ready to fall into a swoon, Aldobrandino
also and Aquino fell sick, and were carried out of the Conclave; and Aquino
having now lost all hopes of being made Pope, took it so grievously to heart,
that in two days he departed this life. Thus Ludovisio being elected, he was
conducted into the Chapel Parlina, where he was vested in his Pontificalibus,
and acknowledged, and adored for Pope on the 21th. of February 1621. and took
the name of Gregory XV.

This Pope was born at Bologna on the third of January 1554. his Father was
Count Pompeo Ludovisio, and his Mother Camilla Blanchina, he was in his
youthful years educated in the Jesuits College at Rome, where he was instructed
in all sorts of Humane and Philosophical Learning: returning afterward to
Bologna he studied the Civil Law, in which he arrived to the degree of Doctor,
and thence again settling himself at Rome, he gained the friendship of three
succeeding Popes: by Gregory XIII. he was chosen and created Principal Judge of
the Capitol; by Clement VIII. he was made Referendary of both Signatures, and
presided in all Civil Causes, in the place of Deputy to Cardinal Rusticuccio
the Pope's Vicar; he was afterward assumed into Commission with the Auditors
of the Rota, which Office one of his Ancestors named Lodowick Ludovisio, had
about one hundred and fifty years before, with great satisfaction, and prudence
admitted. He was likewise by the same Clement VIII. adjoined in Commission with
Maffeo Barbarini Clerk of the Apostolical Chamber, (who afterward was Pope)
and sent to Beneventum to appease Tumults and Seditions arisen between the
Officers of the Pope, and those of the King of Spain. And lastly Paul V.
created him Archbishop of Bologna; upon promotion to which Prelacy, he wrote a
Letter to his Diocesans full of Charity, and paternal affection, which was
printed at Bologna, and is extant at this day. About this time a War was begun
between Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, and Ferdinand Duke of Mantoua, grounded
on certain differences about some places in the Duchy of Montferrat, which
were the cause of great trouble in Milan, and other places of Italy, in regard
that Philip III. King of Spain took part with the Duke of Mantoua: to appease
which disturbances, and compose which differences Pope Paul employed this
Alexander Ludovisio, qualifying him with the Title of his Nuntio in those three
Provinces to confer with the Ambassadors of France and Spain; in which
negotiation he so well acquitted himself, and with such honor toward the
Papal Sea, that Peace being concluded and all Disputes ended, the Pope in
reward of the pains and prudence of Ludovisio, on the 20th. of November 1616.
promoted him to the degree of Cardinal, with which Title he resided in his
Diocese, until news came of the death of Paul V; when he immediately repaired
to Rome, and entered the Conclave, on the 8th. of February with the other
Cardinal, and on the 21th. of that month was himself created Pope.

Some few days after which, being crowned in St. Peter's Church with the usual
pomp, he took possession of the Sovereign Power of the Church in the Church of
St. John de Lateran: which Ceremonies being past, he published Jubilies, and
Pardons over all Christendom to all such, who should with sincere minds pray
for the prosperity and happiness of his Reign.

At this time a War began to be inflamed between the Inhabitants and Neighbors
of the Valteline, in which the Kings of Spain, and France became involved, the
causes and original of which does not appertain to this History: Spain being
desirous to interest Gregory in this Cause, offered to deposite the Forts of
the Valteline in his hands, making great ostentations of their desires to Peace
and quietness: but in Rome the Opinions and Counsels upon an offer of such
importance were doubtful, and divided; for those who penetrated the most deeply
into matters of Policy, were not willing that the Authority of the Church and
Power of the Pope should be so far engaged, or that the professed neutrality,
and mediation should run so much hazard, for that being once accepted by the
Pope, the Conditions of Peace would be rendered more difficult, and perhaps
impossible: for if in case an agreement should happen between two Kings of
restoring all things to their former estate; it would be difficult to conceive
with what decency the Pope could restore into the hands of the Protestants,
(whom he esteemed Heretics) those places which were committed to his
Guardianship and custody. The Venetian Republic being of the same Opinion sent
Soranzo Ambassador Extraordinary to Rome to disuade the Pope from lending his
Name, and Authority to the interests of Spain: but he yielding an Ear to his
Nephews, who were overcome by Pensions and Benefices from Spain, was possessed
with an Opinion and belief, that at the appearing of his Colors, all the Arms
of the Enemy, would out of Veneration fall from their hands; upon which the
glorious memorial of Peace preserved, and Religion protected would remain as an
Ornament to his Name, and a Crown upon his Sepulcre. But the French showed
themselves displeased, that Gregory had not expected the sense of that Crown
upon the matter, before he resolved to accept the Deposite: howsoever in the
French Councils the Opinion prevailed, that the Pope should accept of the
Deposite with certain limitations and reserves; and it was declared, that the
Deposite should remain until the end of July (it being now the month of May)
within which time, the Forts being demolished, and all restraints upon the
Grisons, and Armies removed which did oppress them, affairs should be restored
to their former State; which not being performed, the League should supplicate
the Pope to join himself to their Arms, thereby to obtain the effect. In
pursuance of these resolutions the Duke of Fiano the Pope's own Brother, a dull
and sottish Man, was sent with fifteen thousand Foot and five hundred Horse to
take possession of the Towns to be deposited; but had been resisted in the
Valley had not the Governor of Milan removed all obstacles, but these matters
came to no maturity: for amidst these transactions the Pope departed this life.

In the year 1622. Lewis XIII. of France was involved in great Wars against his
Protestant Subjects, and rendered himself Master of the Provinces of Poictou,
Xantonge, Gascony, Dauphino, and Languedoc. Philip IV. King of Spain was
employed in Wars against the Hollanders: likewise the Emperor Ferdinand II.
waged Wars with the Protestants in Germany, and with assistance of Marquis
Spinola, and the Duke of Bavaria despoiled the Prince Palatine of the Rhine of
his Dominions; and having the plunder of Heidelberg, the Duke of Bavaria sent
the Library anciently belonging to the Princes Palatines to Rome, which by this
Pope was transmitted into the Vatican with this Inscription: Sum De Bibliotheca
Quam Heidelberga Capta Spolium Fecit, Et Pont. Max. Greg. XV. Trophaeum Misit,
Maximilianus Vtriusque Bavariae Dux S.R. Imperii Archi-Dapifer Et Princeps
Elector Anno M.DCXXIII. Besides which, several Standards taken at the Battle of
Prague were sent to Rome, and there by the Pope's order hanged up, in the
Church of Sancta Maria de Victoria.

The success of the Catholic Princes being to the great comfort of the Pope
thus fortunate, he encouraged the Duke of Savoy to make War upon Geneva, and
render himself Master of that place, whereby he would not only do justice to
his own Right and Title, but also overthrow the capital Seat of Heresy, and
Calvinism. With the like zeal did the Pope require of the four Venetian
Ambassadors, sent according to custom to congratulate his promotion to the
Papal Chair; that the Republic would again admit into their State those
Religious People of the Society of Jesus, which had been banished from thence
in the time of his Predecessor Paul V. But this request being repugnant to many
Laws and formalities, and the indissoluble bonds of Government, could not be
obtained; though it was pressed more home by the Marquis de Coevre, who passed
from Rome to Venice in the name of his Master King Lewis III. and seconded with
earnest importunity by the Bishop of Monte Fiascorie the Pope's Nuntio, and the
powerful Letters of the Cardinal Ludovisio. For the Senate declared, that they
could not depart from their first resolution, which being founded on Decrees,
and solid considerations could in no wise be altered; and therefore Princes in
Amity with them, ought not to press them unto that, which was neither permitted
to them to grant, nor could they deny without doing a displeasure to themselves.

An. 1622.
In this year Osman the Emperor of the Turks invaded Poland with a powerful
Army; but King Sigismond III. being assisted with Money from the Pope, made a
vigorous resistance, and gained a signal Victory against the Enemy.

In this year also Antonius de Dominis, who was Archbishop of Spalato in
Dalmatia, deserting his Bishopric and all his Ecclesiastical Preferments for
the sake of the Gospel, and the true Protestant Religion, went into England,
where he wrote a Book against the Ecclesiastical State: but being unconstant,
and wavering in his Principles, he returned to Rome where he renounced all the
Principles of the Protestant Faith; and yet afterward in the year 1624. in the
time of Urban VIII. being troubled in Conscience for his Apostasy, and
reassuming again the Profession he made in opposition to the Roman Church, he
was imprisoned in the Castle of St. Angelo, where he died; after which his Body
was burned together with his Writings.

The Congregation de Propaganda Fide was first instituted by this Gregory V. as
appears by his Letters Patents for the same dated the 10th. of July 1622. and
for maintenance thereof he settled a certain Revenue to support such, as
employed themselves in that important work.

In the same year also he canonized Ignatius Loyola first Founder of the
Jesuits, who was formerly beatified; likewise Philip Neri Founder of the
Oratorians, called in French, les Peers d' Oratoire, with Isidore a Spaniard,
who had been a Husbandman, Teresia a Nun that reformed the Order of the
Carmelites, and Francis Xaverius a Jesuit, whom they call Apostle of the Indies.

Moreover, this Pope at the instance and desire of King Lewis XIII. advanced
the Bishopric of Paris to be an Archbishopric.

But what is more observable in his time, was a Diploma, which he made for the
more orderly, and easy Election of Popes by way of secret Suffrages, which
diverse had attempted to perform, but could never be perfected until this Pope
wrote and published the same, the which Rule was afterward practiced at the
Election of Urban VIII. the succeeding Pope.

This Pope had created eleven Cardinals during the time of his Reign, which
lasted only two years, five months and twenty nine days, he departing this life
on the 8th. of July 1623. after which the Sea was vacant twenty eight days, his
Body was carried to the Church of S. Peter, where it was deposited only for
some time, and afterward translated to the Roman College of Jesuits, where it
was buried in a most magnificent Chapel, erected by his Nephew Cardinal
Ludovisio, with this Epitaph inscribed thereupon:

Gregorius XV.
Pontifex Ter Maximus
Terrarum Orbis bene-merentissimus
Multa brevi jaculatus Imperio
Quot Mensium tot Lustrorum aequavit Annos,
Immortali dignus Nomine
Rebus praeclare Gestis
Romae pro Roma;
Pietatem auxit novo Cultu Religionis,
Religioni Aras extruxit;
Nova Sanctorum Apotheosi
Inter quos
Ignatium Societatis Jesu Fundatorem
Franciscum Xaverium Antesignanum
Gemellum Numen
Coeli Albo
Vtriusque Orbis gemellum veluti Castorem
Festa Omnium Acclamatione intulit.
Fecisset plura, ni Eato abreptus praepropero Objisset.
Lugendus semper, quod imperasset parum.
An. Sal. MDCXXIII.
URBAN VIII.
GREGORY XV. being dead, and his Funeral Rites according to Custom being
performed; on the 19th. of July early in the morning the Cardinals to the
number of fifty four entered the Conclave. It was the common Opinion of most
people that the Election would be long, and take up much time before it were
determined; because, that as the Rules and Methods prescribed by the Bull of
Gregory V. for Election of Popes (which as yet had not been put in practice)
might increase the difficulty; so also, it was observed, that the Cardinals
were much divided in their Opinions, and Votes; there being many persons at
that time, who for their Age, Virtues, and Services formerly rendered to the
Ecclesiastical State, stood Candidates, and esteemed themselves worthy of the
Papal Dignity, namely four Princes, viz. Farnese, Este, Savoy, and Medici, and
four Nephews of Popes, Bourghese, Ludovisio, Buoncompagno, and Aldobrandino;
howsoever contrary to common Opinion, and beyond expectation of all, the
Cardinals agreed, and on the 6th. of August being Sunday, and the day of the
Festival observed in remembrance of the Transfiguration of Christ, they all
concurred with common Voice in the Election of Maffeo Barberini, who was the
fourth Pope, which the City of Florence had given to the Church, namely three
of the House of Medicis, Aldobrandino, and this Barberini who was the fifth.
This Pope was of the age of fifty six years when he was chosen; much to the
wonder of the Electors themselves, who were amazed to have deceived their own
hopes by promoting a Person, who for his complexion, and vigor might out live
the greater part of them.

This Family of Barberini had flourished for the space of five hundred years in
the little Republic of Simi-Fontana, which was situated between Florence and
Siena, and not above two miles distant from the Town of Barberini: but this
Republic being afterward destroyed by the Florentines, the Family of
Barberini transplanted themselves to the City of Florence, where they lived
with great honor and esteem, and being employed in honorable places of charge
and trust, they rendered their House most illustrious by their faithfulness, and
dexterous management of Affairs.

But it will not be pertinent to our purpose to enumerate the many great Men of
this Family; we shall only name Antonio Barberini, who was the first of this
name, who settled his House at Rome, and was the Father of two Sons Francis and
Antonio. This latter was the Father of our Maffeo who was born at Florence the
fifth day of April 1568. he had five Brothers, three of which died in their
youth, but two of them had the satisfaction to see Maffeo installed in the
Papal Throne, one of which being a Capuchin, was called from his Cell to the
College of Cardinals, and dignified by his Brother with the Title of St.
Onufrio.

But as to Maffeo, having been carefully educated in his youth, and having
applied himself to all sorts of Learning, and Virtue; he was so greatly
beloved, and admired by Sixtus V. that at the age of twenty one years, he was
made Abreviator of the principal Tribunal of Justice, and Gregory XIV.
conferred on him the Signet Office for Grants of favor and Grace. Clement V.
sent him to Fano to be chief Governor of that City and of the Marches of
Ancona, where by his modesty, and sweetness of his carriage he acquired the
friendship, and good will of all the Inhabitants of those parts. Afterward he
was made one of the seven Pronotaries of the Records of Rome; in execution of
which Office, he faithfully delivered in writing all the particular Acts, and
Ceremonies observed at the two illustrious Marriages celebrated at Ferrara
between Philip III. King of Spain, and Margaret of Austria; as also between
Albert Archduke of Austria, and Isabella Clara Eugenia Infanta of Spain: and
being made afterward Clerk of the Apostolical Chamber* he was joined in
Commission with Alexander Ludovisio Auditor of the Rota; with whom it was his
good fortune to compose the Differences which arose about the limits, and
borders of the Ecclesiastical State, and the Dominions of the Kingdom of
Naples, in determination of which, the Proposals, and offers of Maffeo were
applauded, and accepted to the great contentment and satisfaction of Pope
Clement VIII. who afterward sent him in quality of his Nuntio into France, to
carry the Blessed Clouts to the Dauphin who was born in the year 1601. and
succeeded to his Father Henry IV. with the name of Lewis XIII. On this occasion
Maffeo obtained the re-establishment of the Jesuits in France, who had been
banished from thence in the year 1594.

Having thus acquitted himself with great honor in France, he returned again
to Rome; from whence he was again sent into France with the character of Nuntio
in Ordinary, Cardinal Bubalo (who had held that place formerly) being recalled
from thence. Upon receiving this charge, Maffeo was farther dignified with the
Title of Archbishop of Nazaret in the Kingdom of Naples; Clement VIII. being
dead, as was also his Successor Leo XI. Maffeo was still continued by Paul V.
in his Office of Nuntio; but in the year 1607. after the differences between
that Pope, and the Venetians were composed, he was recalled to Rome, where he
received the honor of the Cardinals Hat in October of the same year with Title
of St. Peter de Monte Aureo, which he afterward changed for that of S.
Onufrio, and kept the same until the time that he was elected Pope, when he
conferred it on his Brother, as we have beforementioned. After he was
Cardinal, he was constituted the Pope's Legate at Bologna where he resided for
the space of three years; he was Protector of the Scotch Nation; and having
resigned his Archbishopric of Nazareth, he was created Bishop of Spoleto,
where he kept his residence, and ordered all matters according to the Orders,
and Directions of the Council of Trent: and to keep up the force of the
Ecclesiastical Canons, he erected a Congregation of Casuists, by whom all
difficult, and doubtful Cases were explicated, and determined.

He was also a Man of that great Virtue, and Learning, that his House was a
Musaeum, and the Asylum of virtuous and learned Men, and received such
Strangers with great humanity, who were Persons of parts and Learning.
Wherefore Gregory XV. declared him Patron, and Protector of the Greeks, and
all the Oriental Nations, who coming to Rome represented their Causes and
Conditions without the help, and intervention of an Interpreter. And thus
Maffeo Barberini having made many steps in the degrees of Honor, and prepared
himself for the Pontifical Dignity by the many Services he had rendered to the
Ecclesiastical State; his turn came to ascend unto the Popedom; for (as we have
said) Gregory being deceased, this Barberini was on the sixth of August elected
Pope, taking the name of Urban VIII. with applause of the World by reason of
the high conceit then had of his Learning, and Ability.

The Pope soon after his Election fell sick of a violent Fever caused by the
inconveniences he had suffered in the Conclave, and the unhealthfulness of the
Air, to the great grief, and fear of the People of Rome, who being extremely
rejoiced with his Election, were much dejected with the danger of his death;
but being recovered again, he took this Motto: In Domino sperans non
Infirmabor. He was of the age of fifty five years, when he was first elected;
at which time before he would retire to cloth himself in his Pontifical
Vestments, he prostrated himself before the Altar, and with tears did earnestly
entreat of God, that in case according to his Omniscient Providence, he foresaw
that he were unequal for so great a charge, or should not prove an useful
Instrument to the Church, that he would rather be pleased to strike him dead,
than permit him to go forth, and cloth himself with those hallowed Garments.
After which, as if he would ascribe all to the glory of God, he stamped this
Motto on his Coin: Facit mirabilia magna solus.

The sickness of the Pope was the cause that his Coronation was deferred until
the 29th. of September, which was the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, whom
the Popes commonly have taken for their Guardian Angel. Alexander d' Este
Prince of the Cardinal Deacons had the honor to plant the triple Crown upon
his head, at which time the people made loud shouts, and acclamations. And now
Urban having a particular devotion for St. Michael, he erected the Image of
that Angel in Brass upon the Altar of Sancta Petronella in St. Peter's Church,
and his own person on his knees in an humble posture before him with these
words: Te Mane, Te Vespere. And because it was the custom for Popes on the
19th. of November to go in Procession from the Vatican to St. John de Lateran,
he performed that Custom with such Solemnity, beyond what was usual, that one
Mascardus thought it worthy his description in a particular Treatise of that
pompous Subject; in memory of which the People of Rome erected a Triumphal Arch
in the Capitol with this Inscription on the one side thereof:

Vrbano Octavo Barberino
Pont. Max.
Antiquae Gloriae Restitutori
Authori Novae
SPQR
In Veteris Capitolii ruderibus
Hoc qualecunque
Recidivae Majestis specimen
Ponit
At the beginning of his Pontificate he confirmed the Decree of Pius V. against
alienation of Church Lands, as also of the Towns, Places and Demesnes belonging
to the Church. And for imploring the blessing of God on his Rule and
Government: He ordered Prayers of forty hours continuance to be held in the
Churches of St. Peter, St. John of Lateran, and St. Mary ad praesepe, vulgarly
called Santa Maria Maggiore, and in two other Churches in several quarters of
the City. He instituted also a new Order of Militia with the Title of Knights
of the Conception of our Lady, who took the Vow, and observed the Rules of St.
Francis, under the protection of St. Michael, and St. Basil. This Order was
first honored by Charles Gonzaga, and Vladislaus IV. King of Poland, who took
this Knighthood on occasion of a War against the Turks; and Gonzaga coming to
Rome with a Noble Retinue, received the Cross, and Habit from the Pope. Of this
Order were seventy Knights, whose Banner was a Red Cross, carrying a Flag
fastened to it with a Golden Chain, in which was a bright Image of the Virgin
with the Devil under her feet with these words: Vince Hoc Insigni Vere Nostro.

And further at the beginning of his Reign, he appointed a select number of
religious, and grave Men to visit all the Monasteries both of Men, and Women,
as also all Colleges, and Hospitals, and other public places, to take an
account, and knowledge of the abuses, and disorders committed therein, and to
give their Opinions and advices for a redress of them: and of their proceedings
herein, their Instructions were to render weekly an account unto the Pope.

He exhorted also all Bishops to reside in their respective Dioceses: and not
to excuse the Cardin^ls from the like Duty, and Obligation, he admonished them
in a full Consistory to watch personally over their Flock and Charge, for
default of which, and of strict Discipline, a depravity of Manners, and
looseness of life was spread amongst the people: Vt nostrae conscientiae
consulamus, vos monitos esse volumus a caeteris Episcopis in hac part, non
differ Cardinales Episcopos, iisque non suffra gari, q^od dicitur, Pontifex
scit, and tolerat, quia in nobis nulla est tolerantia, nulla conniventia. But
this earnestness of the Pope in this Point was believed to proceed from a
desire he had to rid himself from some troublesome Cardinals, who were always
projecting and forming matters for Intrigues in the Court.

And now according to the Bull of Paul II. reducing the Jubilies to every
twenty five years; the time was returned in this year 1625. An. 1625.
for a Jubily, the last having been held in the year 1600. under Clement VIII.
To make a preparation hereunto, a Bull was issued under the date of the 29th.
of April 1624. to advise the World that the following year was the holy year of
Jubily, that so all those who were desirous to gain the benefit of Indulgences,
might have timely notice so to dispose their Affairs, as with convenience to
repair to the Holy City, and obtain the fruits of the Holy year; and
accordingly on the 24th. of December 1624. he opened the Holy Gate, in
conformity to the Ceremonies described in other places.

But before the beginning of this Jubily the Republic of Venice, sent their
Ambassadors to kiss the Pope's feet, and make tender of their Obedience to the
Apostolical Sea, the like was performed by Ambassadors from the Duke of
Florence, the Republics of Genoua, Luca, and other Princes of Italy: And when
in the month of July 1625. the Ambassadors from the Catholic King came to
perform their Obeisance, Don Bartolines de Castro uttered himself in this
manner. By this Man (meaning the Duke of Alcala who was Ambassador in chief)
who is chosen out of the principal Ministers of State, King Philip does offer
and present to you (most Holy Father) all that duty, and obedience, which may
evidence the subjection, and reverence which he acknowledges due to your
Holiness, and the Apostolical Sea; and therewith subjects all his Kingdoms,
Provinces, Islands, Seas and People, as a most obedient Son, and offers them at
your holy Feet. Then Urban* VIII. he adores on his knees: Thee he acknowledges
to be the Vicar of Christ Our Lord, and the Successor of St. Peter. To Thee
who art the Head of the Catholic Church and of all the Christian Commonwealth,
he willingly and freely offers all obedience, promising, and vowing to lend all
his Force, Riches and Strength both by Sea, and Land in defense of the
Apostolical Sea, and Orthodox Religion, from which no Power or other
consideration whatsoever shall be able to divert or separate his Resolutions.

The year of Jubily passing with these Ceremonies, and acts of Devotion, at the
end thereof being the 24th. of December 1625. the Gate of the Church of St.
John de Lateran was shut by Cardinal Levi Archdeacon of that Church; that of
Santa Maria Maggiore by Cardinal Millin, the Arch deacon also of that Church,
that of St. Paul by Cardinal de Monte Dean of the Sacred College: and during
the time that these three Cardinals were employed in these Ceremonies, the Pope
assisted at the Vespers in St. Peter's Church; which being ended, he himself
shut the Gates of the Church of the Vatican with the ordinary Solemnity, in
memory of which this Inscription was engraved: Vrbanus VIII. Pont. Max. Portam
Sanctam reseravit, Et Clausit
Anno M.DC. XXV.
Howsoever, in favor to Pilgrims the Pope thought sit to continue the benefit,
and privilege of his Indulgences until the first day of the year 1626.

And now the Pope, who at the beginning of his Pontificate had created Francis
Barberino his Nephew Cardinal Deacon of St. Onufrio; was still designing
greater honors for him; and in the year 1624. gave him the Title of Cardinal
of St. Agatha, and made him Praetor of the Cities of Tiburtia, and Firmiana,
Patron, and Protector of Aragon, Portugal, England, Scotland, etc.
Library Keeper of the Apostolical Sea, and Vice Chancellor of the Holy Church
of Rome; and farther to exalt him with higher honors, in the year 1625. he
sent him into France with the character of Legate a Latere, and to make his
reception more splendid, he dispatched Bernardino Mari a Patrician of Rome into
France to entreat Lewis XIII. that he would be pleased to receive his Nephew
under that degree, and quality. At his departure from Rome the Pope delivered
to him a Cross with his Benediction; and the Cardinals accompanied him to the
gate of St. Angelo. At his arrival in the Suburbs of Paris, he was visited in
the name of the King and Queen by the Duke of Nemours, and other chief Peers of
France; and at his entry he was accompanied by the Duke of Orleans, the King's
only Brother with a great train of Nobility of the first rank, and Order in
that Kingdom. This Legate who was young and but lately admitted into the Order
of Priesthood reserved his first Mass, wherewith to treat the King, and Queen,
which he offered to them as the first fruits of his Sarifices, celebrating it
at Fontainbleau on the 15th. of August, which is the day of the Festival of the
Assumption of our Lady.

Being returned afterward to Rome, his presence was desired by Philip III.
King of Spain under the same quality, and character at his Court, to be
Godfather in place of the Pope to the Daughter of the King, who was afterward
baptized with the name of Maria Clara Eugenia.

But not to confer all the stock of honor on one single person of his Kindred,
the Pope called Anthony Barberini his other Nephew, Son of another Brother from
his Capuchin's Cell, to rank him together with the Cardinals; it was he, who
was called for a long time Cardinal Antonio, he was esteemed a very upright
Man, and one who observed the rules of S. Francis, notwithstanding that his
degree of Cardinal excused him in a great measure from the severity of them.
During the absence of Francisco Barberino in France, Antonio was Chief Minister
with the Pope in his stead, which at his return, he did most voluntarily resign
into the hands of Francisco; in the execution of which, it is reported of him,
that he would never be present at the consultations of War, which at that time
infested Italy upon a Dispute concerning the Valteline, saying, that his Order
obliged him to the exercise of Peace, and works of Charity, the affairs of War
being incompatible with his Vow, and his Profession.

In the year 1626. this Pope had the honor to consecrate the great Basilicon
of St. Peter's Church, which having been created by Constantine the Great, was
afterward enlarged and adorned by the munificence of many other Popes; and now
being completely finished by this, he with great Pomp in presence, and with the
assistance of twenty two Cardinals, of which three were Bishops, performed all
the Ceremonies, and rites of consecration; in memory of which this Inscription
was engraven over the Walls:

Vrbanus VIII. Pontif. Max.
Vaticanam Basilicam
A Constantino Magno Extructam
A Beato Silvestro Dedicatam
In Amplissimi Templi Formam
Religiosa multorum Pontificum
Magnificentia
Redactam
Solemni ritu consecravit
Sepulcrum Apostolicum
Area Mole Decoravit
O Deum, Aras Et Sacella
Statuis Ac Multiplicibus Operibus
Ornavit.
And indeed that Area Moles, or the Corinthian Brass, with which he made the
high Altar, was fetched from the roof of the Pantheon, called now the Rotunda
from the form of it, built by Agrippina; the which Brass not only served for
the high Altar, for out of the surplusage of it, there was founded a great
Cannon, now in the Castle of St. Angelo, which gave occasion to that Libell,
which was put into the hands of Pasquin: Quod non fecerunt Barbari fecerunt
Barberini. And indeed it seems strange, that the Romans, who are so curious,
should destroy such a piece of Antiquity; for as I remember I took off this
Inscription from the Architrave of the Portico:

M. Agrippa L.F. Cos. Tertium fecit. And undeneath in lesser Letters: Imp.
Caes. L. Septimius Severius, Pius, Pertinax, Arabicus, Adiabenicus,
Parthicus Maximus. Pont. Max. Trib. Pop. XI. Cos. III. P.P.
PROCos. and Imp. Caes. M. Aurelius Antoninus Pius, Faelix Aug:
Trib. Potest. V. Cos. PROCos. Pantheum vetustate corruptum cum
omni cultu restituerunt.


This Temple formerly dedicated to all the Gods, was now dedicated to all
Saints.

Now as to matters of political Government, and his management thereof: the
Pope found himself much engaged by Gregory his Predecessor, who, (as we have
said in his life) had accepted the Valteline in Deposite; which bringing an
unseasonable charge upon him, he complained thereof, but found no way to get
out, for Ludovisio had strongly tied the knot, both of business, and decency.
And though Urban by reason of employments exercised in France, was judged
inclinable, and in a manner partial to that Court, yet it was fit that he
should appear serviceable, at least in name to the designs of Spain; and indeed
he was so in reality; for though the Deposite of the Valteline was said to be
in the hands of the Pope, yet Leopold continued in possession, and enjoyed the
conveniences and advantages, and the Grisons groaned under the burden, to
remedy which the Pope proposed diverse expedients, but the preliminary to all,
and his chief condition, was a reimbursement of the Money which he had
expended, before he would quit or part with his Trust. The Confederates readily
accepted the proffer, and willingly would have reimbursed the Pope, provided
the Valley were put into their hands, and rendered to the first Owner when the
Forts were razed, and Religion restored. But the Pope being fearful to offend
Spain, proposed, that a strong body of Soldiery belonging to the Valteline
should be razed, and united either to the Catholic Cantons of Helvetia, or as
a fourth League to the three Cantons of the Grisons. But the Confederates
proposing to themselves the end of restoring things to their former state,
judged, that by these means, they should be wanting to the protection, which
they had promised to the Grisons, and that the Spaniards should still enjoy the
predominancy, and liberty of passage to the exclusion of all others: upon which
considerations, and several others, the Dispute still continued until the year
1627, when the Pope acquainted the Cardinals in a full Consistory, that the
Disputes, and Wars arisen about the Valteline were composed, and ended, on the
conditions, that the Fortifications of those places which were committed to his
Trust, were by consent of the Kings of France, and Spain, to be ruined and
demolished. To which he added these words: At length (said he) we have attained
that which we much wished, and desired, for by mutual consent of both Kings,
the Peace is concluded, and established; we have omitted nothing, which might
conduce to the good of the Church, and it has been our principal care that the
Catholic Religion should suffer no detriment, the Kings themselves are
witnesses hereof, and God himself knows, that we have always had his glory, and
honor before our eyes.

And now that the Grandeur of the Apostolical Chair be advanced, and the
Consistory gratified and pleased; Urban in the year 1631. bestowed the Title of
Eminence upon the Cardinals, forbidding them to receive any other distinction
of honor, and for establishment thereof a Decree was made and entered into the
Records of the Congregation of Ceremonies that the Titles of Cardinals should
be, the most Eminent and most Reverend; but as to the Order of the Knights of
St. George instituted by Paul V. he wholly abolished it. The Illyrian College
founded at Loreto by Gregory XIII. but translated afterward to Rome by Clement
VIII. consisting in all but of twelve persons, he restored again to Loreto with
augmentation of the Revenue, and of the Scholars to the number of thirty six.
And in regard his hand was now employed in giving, and taking away Honors, he
was pleased to declare, that the Commonwealth of Venice was a crowned Head, and
was to be treated with a Dignity equal to that of Kings.

About this time great combustions, and terrible Wars threatened Italy; for the
House of Gonzaga which reigned in Mantua, was now considered without issue
male, and as a dead Corpse without hopes of any branches springing from thence,
neither could Ferdinand the elder Brother, nor Vincenzo the present Duke leave
after them any other, than the young Princess Mary their Niece, who as a Woman
was excluded from the Investiture of the Duchy, had yet some reason, though
doubtful to pretend to that of Montferrat. In her marriage therefore the
pledges of Peace, or the seeds of great contention seeming to be lodged, many
believed it expedient to marry her to Charles Duke of Rhetel, Son of the Duke
of Nevers, the nearest and lawful Heir: for this Branch, though transplanted to
a foreign Soil, was sprung from the same Root, enjoying in France the revenue of
three large Dukedoms, viz. Nevers, Rhetel, and Maine. The Spaniards who were
jealous of this House, and above any thing apprehended this Succession, lest it
should introduce the French into Italy, promised the pretensions of Ferrand
Prince of Guastalla, a branch also of the House of Gonzaga, but derived farther
than that of Nevers; but by how much the Austrians favored Guastalla with
benefits, and declarations, by so much the more was France earnest to
strengthen the rights of Nevers; with whom the Venetians also concurring in
Opinion, put the Duke in mind to establish the Succession in his lifetime, and
therewith confirm the Peace of Italy. Nor was Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy
less attentive to his interest, and game, than the others, designing upon the
death of Vincenzo, (now crazy, and infirm, not so much with age, as with riot,
and luxurious living) to revive his pretended title to Montferrat, and color
it with the marriage of Mary to his Son Maurice. To pervent which, Vincenzo
with great secrecy called to him Rhetel, that he might marry him to the
Princess, declaring him immediately upon his arrival Lieutenant General, and
his Heir by solemn Testament: To perfect this Marriage nothing was now wanting,
but the Pope's Dispensation in matter of consanguinity or nearness of kindred;
which being obtained, the Bull seasonably arrived the night before that Duke
Vincenzo died, so that the marriage was consummated, whilst the Corpse were yet
warm; and the day following, the Bridegroom, together with his mourning assumed
the Title of Prince of Mantua, and having in his power the Garrison, and the
Citadel called Porto, required from the people an Oath of Fidelity in the name
of his Father. Guastalla in the mean time published a Patent from the Emperor,
empowering him to take possession of Mantua, until the right should be
declared, and commanding the Governor of Milan to maintain this Decree by
force, if need should require: Guastalla also had thoughts of going himself to
Mantua, but the passage was already stopped by the anticipations of Rhetel:
wherefore he practiced upon Casal, endeavoring to alienate the minds of that
people from their new Prince; but all in vain, because the name of Nevers, was
universally cried up both at Casal, and in the Country of Montferrat.

The interest of Princes being now discovered, reason or justice were no longer
debated in the cause of Mantua, but calculations made of Force, opportunity,
and advantage. The Republic of Venice resolved to join with Nevers, as the
safest interest in which to maintain the liberty of Italy: howsoever being
willing to decline the assistance of France, and other Strangers, they designed
a middle party composed of a League with the Pope, and other Princes of Italy,
by which they believed it easy to protect the Justice of Nevers by
Negotiation, and defend themselves on all occasions against violence. This
Remonstrance of the Venetians Urban approved, and offered his interposition
with powerful Offices: But what, said he, can be promised from Reason without
Arms, in dealing with him who places Reason, and Justice in nothing but Arms?
the excess of Power in Princes makes little account of the Pope's Prayers, and
their Mediation is reduced to almost nothing else, but to adorn the
Frontispiece of Treaties with his Name. The intentions of Urban were in reality
conformable to his expressions: for he desired to maintain Nevers in the
succession of Mantua, but abhorred to engage himself so far, as to be obliged
to come to the extremity of taking up Arms. But whilst these things were in
meditation and discourse between the Pope, and other the Friends of Rhetel; the
Duke of Savoy taking the advantage of the diversion, which the Arms of Lewis
XIII. found against his Protestant Subjects in France, entered with his Army
into Montferrat, and hoped to be speedily Master both of that Country, and of
the strong Fortress of Casal which was besieged already by Marquis Spinola
Lieutenant General of the Spanish Forces in Italy; as was Mantua also at the
same time by the Forces of the Emperor. At length on the 18th. of July 1630.
in the Night the City of Mantua was by treachery taken by the Germans, and for
the space of three days committed to the pillage, and cruelty of the Soldiers,
with all the outrages, which lust, impiety, and license could suggest to
merciless Conquerours: the Princess Mary retired into a Monastery, where being
respected for her Sex and Quality, she obtained license to be carried to the
Empress, to whom she was nearly related; the Duke retired hastily into Porto,
where the Ammunition for full accomplishment of the Treason taking fire, he was
forced to surrender on condition, that he should be convoyed by two Companies
of German Horse into the Country of Ferrara to remain at Melara, where the Duke
was supplied with Money for his maintenance from the Venetians. The taking of
Mantua in this terrible manner increased the hopes of the Spaniards, who
besieged Casal, that they should speedily become Masters of that important
place, but their expectations were disappointed by the coming of the French
Troops under the command of Marshall Schomberg sent by Lewis XIII. for relief
of his Ally the Duke of Mantua; Thoiras who was Governor of Casal defended the
place with great gallantry, which gave such discouragement to the Enemy, that
upon approach of the French Troops the Siege was raised, and the Town conserved
to its lawful Master. In this manner was France, Spain, and the Emperor engaged
in a bloody War within the confines of Italy. But Pope Urban, after various
troubles and Negotiations established the Peace of Italy, and by the dexterous
management of Cardinal Mazarine then his Nuntio, appeased the differences
between Spain and France, and therewith established an universal Peace.

In the life of Sixtus IV. we have showed, how that that Pope married John his
Nephew, and Brother to Cardinal Julian, to Jane the Daughter of Frederick Duke
of Vrbin, by whom he had one Son called Francisco Maria della Rovere, who
succeeded in that Dukedom. And whereas for want of Heirs male, that Duchy did
of right devolve to the Demesnes of the Church; yet Sixtus to advance the
honor of his own Family de la Rovere, An. 1632.
was pleased still to continue that Fief in separation from the Church, the
which remained in such condition until the year 1632. when Francisco Maria
della Rovere, the last Duke of Vrbin dying, this Pope Urban assumed the
property, and without difficulty united it to the patrimony of the Church: for
this Pope having an Eye thereunto in the life of the Duke, who was then grown
very old, kept a Prelate in that Country, which assisted in all affairs; by
which means after his death Taddeo Barberino the Pope's Nephew Prince of
Palestrina, entered peaceably with his Soldiers, and took such quiet possession
thereof, as if the old Dominion had been continued, rather than a new one
introduced. The Pope expecting this accident, was already in Arms under
pretense of the commotions in Italy, so that in case amidst these confusions,
any one should have designed to disturb his peaceable possession he was in a
condition to maintain his right with a puissant Force. But the Princes were so
far from invading the Duchy, that they universally concurred in the
confirmation of his Title, advising him to invest one of his Nephews in the
Principality. But the Pope considering the severe Bulls of his Predecessors
against such alienations, feared that he might entail a patrimony of
unquietness, and trouble to his posterity; and therefore resolved to annex that
Dominion to the Church against the persuasions of diverse Princes, who were
willing to see the Ecclesiastical State increase in Temporal Power: in memory
of which Union of this Principality to the Church without Arms, or effusion of
blood, but only by prudence, and gentleness, these words are engraven in the
Vatican.

Civitates, and Ditiones Ducat us Vrbini Nomine comprehensae, quas a Romany
Pontificibus Feltria prius, deinde Ruveria familia beneficiario Jure possidebat
in Francisco Maria II. extincta utriusque sobole, in liberam Apostolicae Sedis
Dominationem concessere: Vrbano VIII. Pont. Max. Anno Salutis MDCXXXII. Regio
autem Virorum tum Militari studio, tum insigni Opificio, and Doctrinae laud
praestantium multitudine celeberrima est.

But that the Pope might not displease his Nephew Taddeo by this
disappointment, he conferred upon him the Pretorship of Rome, which had long
been enjoyed by the Family of Rovere. This Office, and Dignity which still
retained the ancient, and venerable Name of Praetor Praetorii, and in the times
of the Caesar's was in great esteem, and Authority, conserved now little more,
than an empty name without power; for which reason foreign Ambassadors who were
the Representatives of the Emperor, and Kings, refused to give precedence of
place to this Prefect, or Governor, at such times, when at the most solemn
Functions, they assisted at the Chair of the Pope. The Barberins depending on
the greatness of their Uncle, who was ever partial in the Cause and Interest of
his kindred, obstinately maintained their pretended Right, by which the
Controversy arose so high, that the Ambassadors by Order of their respective
Princes abstained from the Churches, and from all solemn Meetings, at which
they might be present with the Prefect. From this common distaste of Princes,
arose an other of a private nature, between the Cavalier Giovanni Pesari
Ambassador for the Republic of Venice, and Taddeo the Prefect; the occasion
was this: the Prefect casually meeting in the street with Pesari, caused his
Coach to stop; (as the custom is always in Rome, that when the Coaches of
Cardinals, Ambassadors and other Great Men meet, they always stop, and send
Messages of Complement one to the other) but Pesari not observing it by reason
that it was in the dusk of the Evening, drove on without notice of the Prefect;
which though Pesari sent afterward expressly to excuse, yet the Prefect was so
offended, that he purposely designed to meet him an other time; and that he
might requite the late neglect, he corrupted the Ambassadors Coachman to stay
his Horses, feigning that his Hat was fallen off; and so in the mean time, the
Prefect passed without notice of the Ambassador. Pesari intended to have
chastised his Servant for this piece of treachery, but that he was rescued by
some armed Men from the punishment he deserved.

The Court of Rome which is always talkative, and figuring a strange kind of
effects from such shadows, and appearances made great account of these
Formalities, discoursing of them with the same direful apprehensions, as Men in
other parts use to conclude from bloody Battles, and important Conquests. But
the Senate of Venice having notice hereof, was well assured, that by support of
the Uncle, the party of the Barberins would be too strong in Rome; ordered
their Ambassador Pesari, that for evidence of a public Resentment, he should
immediately leave the City without taking the least notice either of the Pope,
or his Nephews; and in the mean time at Venice the Nuntio was suspended from
Audience. To this disgust an other quarrel was annexed, occasioned by a Bull
made the last year by Urban, whereby he Decreed to Cardinals, the
Ecclesiastical Electors, and the Great Master of Malta, the Title of Eminence,
forbidding them to receive any other, unless from Kings. The Republic of
Venice, which have always adhered to their ancient Forms, and Style, and will
upon no occasion whatsoever be induced to alter, and change their Customs,
would never give other Title to them, than of Reverendissimo, and
Illustrissimo, which gave great disgust, and mortification to the Pope, and
served to increase the former discontent. To these were added other sharp
contests between those of Loreo, Subjects to the Venetians and those of
Ferrara, where Cardinal Palotta the Pope's Legate, encroached on the undoubted
confines of the Venetians, and imprisoning the Venetian Subjects, showed an
intention to attempt greater Novelties; and by erecting, and changing the
High*ways, diverted the course of the Waters in such manner, as made the River
Po almost useless. The Venetians provoked by these mischiefs, labored to
repair themselves with like returns: for Luca Pesaro Captain of the Gulf,
entering into the Sacca di Goro with some Galleys, and armed Barks, stopped the
Ships, which with Victuals, and Merchandise passed by Sea toward Ferrara: He
destroyed also the works, which were lately made in the River to divert its
course. The Troops also increased on both sides; and the Pope raised on his
Confines a Fort called della Bocchette, to which the Venetians opposed another
calling it della Donzella; so all things looked turbulent, as if they would
have proceeded farther than words.

But to give a stop to the heat of Arms the French Ministers interposed, and
both the Pope, and the Republic giving their promise to King Lewis not to
offend each other in a hostile manner, there remained a large field for Treaty.
The Pope assured the French Ambassador Monsieur Brisac, that of what had
happened at Rome to Pesar^, he had had no information until afterward, much less
that his Nephew had been concerned in the rescue of the Coachman, and was a
stranger to both matters; expressing himself much discontented for what had
happened, and that for evidence hereof he had punished the Offenders with
banishment. That as to the Title given to Cardinals of Illustrissimo by the
Republic, he was well satisfied, nor did he require them to alter their Style,
for that the Republic having always been connumerated with crowned Heads, they
were comprehended with Kings in exception of the Title of Eminence, and so
commanded the Cardinals to receive Letters from the State of Venice in the
usual Form; with which the Senate being satisfied, admitted the Nuntio to
Audience.

But the Dispute about the Confines being of more Ancient date, admitted of
greater difficulties: For the Pope came to lay claim to certain Lands which the
Po, and the Sea had left, called Alluvioni: the contest seemed of no great
value; but the Parties, especially the Venetians judged it of great importance,
because it carried with it the rights, and jurisdiction of the Sea. The
business at last was brought into Venice by the mediation of the French
Ministers, and the Treaty continued part of the year following; at length the
Venetians declaring themselves ready to accept any Conditions, which were
consistent with the jurisdiction of the Sea, to which also the mouths of Rivers
and the Sacca di Goro did appertain, preserved the ancient Covenants with those
of Ferrara, and the Power to divert the prejudices of Ports, and Channels,
which are the Veins, and life of the Capital City. Yet still the differences
continued, and though they broke not forth into acts of violence, and War, yet
the Dispute was not determined.

In the year 1633. one Centini a Cardinals Nephew, hoping that if Urban were
dead, his Uncle would be chosen into his place, contrived the Pope's death by
Witchcraft, and Negromancy; for having fashioned the Pope's Image in Wax, he
wounded it with Pins and Needles, after the ancient manner of Witchcraft, In
jecur urget acus, but the Villainy being discovered, Centini and a Friar his
associate, were punished according to their demerit.

But we must not omit to mention, in the great Hall of the Vatican, where the
Embassies of Kings, (termed the Embassies of Obedience) are received by the
Pope; there is that famous Picture, representing the History of Alexander III.
and under it was written an Elogy in honor of the Venetian Commonwealth, by
whose assistance the Pope prevailed over the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa;
which Elogy, this Pope Urban caused to be blotted out, and defaced. Rome it
self was amazed at such a Novelty, because the Inscriptions, by which the
Picture in the Hall of the most memorable Actions of Christendom were
explained, had been chosen and selected in the time of Pope Pius IV. and had
been approved by a Consultation of Cardinals, and other learned Persons, and
that in particular had been extracted out of the most Ancient proofs, the
consent of Authors, Inscriptions, Pictures, Marbles, and out of Authentic, and
infinite Memorials: and though in these later times Cardinal Baronius, (who
would justify the Pope, and the Church in all things, which either they would
say, or act) has called the truth thereof in question, yet the credit of the
History remains, and the praise of that Republic never to be forgotten. Now in
regard this Pope Urban had defaced, and blotted out the Elogium, he seemed to
deny the matter of Fact, and suppress the fame of that Victory which the
Venetians had gained, and deprive them of that merit, and gratitude which was
owing to them from the Church, abolishing out of the World the memorials, and
as much as he was able, cancelling the glory of their Ancestors, to which his
Predecessors had not disdained to confess themselves obliged. The advice
hereof greatly disturbed matters at Venice, and gave an interruption to the
Negotiation about the Confines which in the year 1635. An. 1635.
was again reassumed by the French Ambassador Monsieur de la Thuillerie at
Venice, and by Nani, and Soranzo deputed by the Senate; the Treaty was far
advanced, it being agreed to draw a line, which should terminate the Land; so
that there remained no difficulty concerning the change which the Po should
make in its Channels, for that if the Po should change its course and pass the
line to the Donzella, then it should be esteemed to belong to the
Ecclesiastical State, but if contrariwise, it should pass to the Goro, then it
should belong to the Venetians: but this, and all other Negotiations were
broken off by defacing the Elogium, which was so hainously resented at Venice,
that the Senate immediately commanded their Ambassador Rossi from Rome, with
Orders neither to take leave of the Pope, nor of his Nephews, nor Cardinals,
and that Audience also should be denied to the Pope's Nuntio at Venice: for all
confessed, that the Republic could no more send Ambassadors to venerate in
that Hall (as was customary) the Vicars of Christ, so long as their Illustrious
Memorials were suspended, if not condemned: wherefore the Republic would
maintain no other Minister at Rome, than only Girolamo Bono, with Title of
Secretary.

Whilst these matters were acting in Italy, all other Countries of Christendom
were for the most part engaged in War; for composing of which, and in
performing acts of mediation tending to Peace, the Pope was engaged; until
toward the year 1640. the War, and troubles came nearer home, caused by
Contests, and resentments between him and Edward Duke of Parma, the beginning,
and end whereof we shall here relate.

An. 1640.
Urban being much impaired with age, and weakened in the vigor of his
Authority, and Power, the Barberins his Nephews, took upon them to manage all
matters with an excess of Arbitrary Command: He that possessed most of the
Pope's favor, and affection was Cardinal Francisco, who was deep in his
Designs, conceited of his own Counsels, and eager and violent in the
prosecution of what he affected. On the other side, Edward Duke of Parma was of
a high and active Spirit, apt to resentments, but yet being adorned with Arts
both Civil and Military, might have been esteemed a most admirable Prince, had
either fortune given him an Empire and Power equal to his mind, or prudence
equalled his mind to his power and fortune. Many secret piques, and disgusts
had for some time passed between him and the Barberins, which were concealed,
and covered; until at length in the year 1639. Duke Edward going to Rome, the
ancient discontents brake forth more openly: for in the first place the Duke
thought he was not treated with that Ceremony, and respect which was due to his
condition and quality; then that his Brother Prince Francisco Maria was not
created Cardinal, as was promised: but what was most important of all, was the
disappointment of many favors, and concessions expected from the Pope; and
particularly an abatement of half per cent. on the revenue which the Duke paid
to Monti, which is an Annual rent anciently assigned by the Farnesi Dukes of
Parma upon the revenues of Castro, a Dukedom they held in Fief of the Church:
for though the Pope had made this Grant, and had not recalled it, yet is was
crossed by the Nephews, and with sundry delays, difficulties, and excuses
prolonged and diminished. The Duke resenting these neglects, and unkindnesses,
departed angrily from Rome, without taking leave either of the Pope or Nephews,
inveighing violently against Cardinal Francisco, and his Government. The
Cardinal to requite the Duke, persuaded the Pope to recall the Grant he had
given for exportation of Corn out of the Ecclesiastical State into the Country
of Castro, by which the people were not only ready to be famished, but the
best revenues of Castro ceased; for the Duke having farmed the Exportation of
Corn to certain Merchants for ninety seven thousand Crowns per annum; the
Exportation being forbidden, the Merchants renounced the agreement: whereupon
the sum failing to pay the Montists, they complained to the Courts of Justice,
and obtained, that the Duke being a Vassal, and subject to the Church should be
juridically cited. The Duke imputed all to the malice and covetousness of the
Barberins to despoil him of his Country, and believing that he should be
overborn by his Enemies, who were both Judges and Parties, resolved to fortify
himself against force, and accordingly dispatched a Gentleman of Montferrat to
be Governor with a Garrison to Castro, causing Half-moons, and Redoubts to be
cast up about the place. This being judged a Crime by the Barberins, and a
rebellion against his Sovereign, a Monitory was published by the Auditor of the
Chamber, limiting unto the Duke thirty days to demolish the fortifications of
Castro, and disband the Garrison, and otherwise declared him to have incurred
Rebellion, and Excommunication.

The quarrel being thus begun, the Barbarins raised six thousand Foot and five
hundred Horse with all speed under the command of Taddeo, the Prefect of Rome,
appointing their Rendezvous at Viterbo, where they fortified their Camp with a
train of Artillery, and provided it with all sorts of Victuals, and Ammunition.
These preparations administered occasions of various Discourse, and reflections
to the people, who attributed the blame of all to the pride, and ambition of
the Nephews; for the World would not be induced to believe, that the Pope, who,
when he was young cultivated peace in all parts, and was naturally of a quiet
Spirit, must needs be affected with strange thoughts, and designs, if now in
the extremity of his age, he should be persuaded to disturb it; and so much the
more in a conjuncture, when all Christendom was torn in pieces with War and
Dissension, and stood rather in need of his paternal mediation to produce
Concord amongst Princes, than to see him the Author and contriver of War in
Italy.

The Viceroy of Naples seemed above all jealous of the event of this War,
believing that the Barberins had engaged the French in the Design. Ferdinand
the Grand Duke of Tuscany was also displeased to see the Pope armed on his
Confines with intention to make new Conquests. Wherefore both the Viceroy and
the Grand Duke interposed in the Offices of mediation; to which the Pope making
some short replies, that his resolution was only to humble his Vassal, and
make himself obeyed, gave no place or opportunity for Treaty.

The Senate of Venice kept themselves silent for a while, which the Barberins
interpreted, (as indeed it was) an effect of their discontent, rather than a
token of their satisfaction: but being at length solicited much by the Duke of
Parma to interess themselves in the quarrel, after various Debates, it was
resolved with general consent, to entreat the Pope, that he would yield to the
instances and common satisfaction of the Princes, who with unanimous desires
interposed themselves for the Peace, by giving time and expedients for a
Treaty. To the Duke they gave Counsel of moderation, and to humble himself in
such decent sort to the Pope, as might pacify him, and bring him honorably
off from his Engagements and Enterprise. But in the mean time the Barberins,
that they might prevent the importunities of Princes, hastened their march
toward Castro, upon an Opinion, that having once taken the place, the fervor,
with which the Mediators interposed for a Peace, would be abated, and matters
reduced to such intricacies, as that in the end the glory of the Counsels, and
the merit of the Enterprise would fall out to their advantage. Howsoever, to
make the matter more plausible, another Bull was published in which the time
prescribed to Prince Edward was prolonged for fifteen days; and yet at the same
time on the 27th. of September 1641. An. 1641.
the Pope's Army entered the the territories of Castro, and appearing before
Rocca Montalto which is toward the Sea, the Guard consisting of fifty Soldiers
abandoned the place; and soon after Castro it self surrendered, upon conditions
of life, and enjoyment of goods to the Soldiers and Inhabitants; and so the
Garrison being two hundred and fifty in number marched forth, on the seventh
day after the Siege was laid: which news much troubled the Duke, coming to him
just at the time that he in person, and Count Palmia by permission of the Grand
Duke, was conducting Forces, through Tuscany for relief of the place.

Duke Edward being thus foiled, made new applications to the Senate of Venice,
fearing lest he should be attacqued in his Dominions of Parma and Piacenza: and
in the mean time to keep himself from those prejudices, which in the way of
Judicature, the Acts which had past might bring upon him, he caused a Protest
to be presented to the Auditor della Camera, wherein he declared, that the
Barberins being his Enemies, he had no other Judge left him, but Force, nor hope
of favor, but from his Friends.

But the Barberins being flattered by all upon these successes, and elated with
vanity and pride, denied to give admittance to any Treaty; the Pope seemed to
hear with trouble the Offices brought to him by Order of the Senate of Venice,
scorning to admit Mediators betwixt Sovereign, and Vassal.

Nor were the French either silent, or unactive upon this occasion; but laying
hold on this turbulent conjuncture of Affairs, proffered the Pope the powerful
Forces of their Crown to drive the Spaniards out of Italy; and raising his
thoughts to a more noble Design, than that of Castro, proffered to leave the
disposal of the Conquests to his own pleasure, and the Crown of Naples to his
Nephews.

But Urban looking on these Propositions, as more specious than easy,
absolutely refused them; and in despite of all the applications and addresses
made by several Princes in favor of Parma, the Duke was declared to have
incurred the greater Excommunication, and in virtue thereof to be deprived of
his Dominions, and Fiefs, and of the Dignity he held of the Holy Sea, and
condemned in all charges, done, or to be done: in pursuance of which Sentence,
his Palaces, and Goods in Rome were exposed to sale, and Castro taken into the
possession of the Camera, though not annexed to the Popedom by virtue of the
rigorous Bull ordained by Pius Quintus, which forbids all alienations of Lands,
or Goods, which were once united to the Papal Chair.

The Princes were highly moved, to find all their intercessions, and instances
so little esteemed by the Barberins; and much more alarmed when they
understood, that the Pope demanded passage for his Army through the Dominions
of Modena, against Parma, and Piacenza, which being places unprovided for War,
An. 1642.
and the Duke of Modena not having force to resist the powerful Army of the
Pope consisting of eighteen or nineteen thousand Men, consented to grant a
passage; provided, That there should be six days before the Army moved, and
that in other four it should have passed his Confines.

The Venetians, and the Grand Duke, who were averse to Arms, and not inclined
to use them, but as their last remedy: yet not being willing that the Duke
should perish, or the Barberins be accustomed to the happy issue of their
Counsels, sent a supply of seventy thousand Crowns to Parma, which gave courage
to the Soldiery and credit to the cause amongst the Subjects, who thence
conceived some hopes of greater succors.

In the mean time all the Offices, and warm instances imaginable of mediation,
were employed at Rome by the Ministers of Venice, and Florence, which produced
nothing but uncertain, and ambiguous answers, and to the Ambassador of France
it was plainly declared, that a suspension of Arms should be granted, when
promises, and assurances should be given by the Duke's Friends, that he should
testify due respect, and obedience to the Ecclesiastical State; and that no
words, or instances should be made for the restitution of Castro, which by
reason of the Debt to the Montists and the charge of the War, was already
forfeited to the Camera, and condemned thereby.

But such Answers as these not satisfying the Princes; the Venetians resolved
to send three thousand Foot and three hundred Horse, to join with two thousand
Men sent by the Grand Duke, to oppose the march of the Pope's Army into the
State of Parma. The news of these Forces, and their march, and the rumor of
Treaties, and Leagues forming in favor of Parma greatly perplexed the
Barberins; because that their Army, which was composed of new Men, and which
expected to enter the Country of Parma; as to an easy, and secure Triumph, was
so terrified with the noise of an Enemy, marching to oppose them that they ran
away in full Troops, so that their numbers were very much diminished in a short
time.

Urban growing sensible of the opposition which was making against the farther
progress of his Arms by the Neighboring Princes, did voluntarily, and of his
own accord offer to the French Ambassador a suspension of Arms for fifteen
days. During this cessation the Venetians, the Grand Duke, and the Duke of
Modena entered into a League to assist, and give succors to the Duke of Parma,
as occasion should require; who being encouraged by such Seconds, entered
boldly into the Eccle^^ast^cal State with three thousand Horse, without Foot,
or Cannon, or other preparations for defense of his Camp; which was looked
upon, as so rash, and inconsiderate an attempt, that the other Confederates
gave those Troops over for lost, and destroyed. But Duke Edward entering
resolutely into the Bolognese, struck such terror into the people, and the
Army of the Pope, that all was in a moment seen in confusion, and disorder: for
the Prefect retired flying into Ferrara, the Soldiers quitted their Quarters,
the Authority, threats, or entreaties of the Officers prevailing nothing
against their cowardice, and fears. Thus without blood, and without a Battle
Edward prevailed, and became Master of the Field, which is a passage the more
memorable, because that in an Enemies Country, nothing could have been more
done by an Army never so powerful. For Bologna it self a great and populous
City sent Letters to him full of respect; the Governor of Smola sent the
Keys* of the Town to meet him. Faenza opened its Gates, and the Governor
descended from the Walls to meet, and pacify him. Furli seemed as if it would
make some resistance; but soon surrendered at discretion; where he lodged only
for one whole day to refresh his Soldiers wearied with their march, and
incommoded with the Rains.

Upon these successes, the fear, and terror which possessed the minds of the
people at Rome, is not to be expressed; for that City being composed of a
cowardly sort of Inhabitants, such as Priests who are unaccustomed to danger,
and Strangers who are pleased with Reports, and Novelties, seemed distracted by
various affectations: for some feared plunder, others desired disorder, and all
reproached the Government. During these troubles, and distractions, Guards were
placed in the streets, and the command of them given to several Prelates,
Soldiers were levied in all places, and the Coach-Horses in Rome seized to
mount the Soldiers. The Prefect also was recalled to Court, and great
murmurings against him for having shown as much baseness in danger as he
exercised Avarice in the Government: in his place Cardinal Antonio was sent,
but Cardinal Francisco attended to the Arts of Negotiation, intending with
hopes of Peace to amuse the Duke, and frustrate the League.

Cardinal Antonio made his head quarters at Viterbo, whilst the Duke of Parma
was at Aqua Pendente: and the Cardinal having put considerable Garrisons into
the Towns, advanced with seven thousand Foot and two thousand Horse to
Montefiascone, intending to streighten the Duke in his quarters, and obstruct
his passage into the State of Castro: But the Duke mounting on Horseback, and
making a show as if he would advance toward him, though much inferior to the
Enemy in force; yet the Cardinal retired, and would not stand the shock,
choosing rather to overcome with Prudence, than run the hazard of Fortune. So
that now the month of October being come, and the Rains having fallen in great
abundance, the approach of the Winter seemed a season more proper for Treaty
than for War. In the management of which Cardinal Barberino laying more stress
on tricks, and delusions, than on the substantial points of solid Reason in
Treaties, dispatched the Abbat de Bagni to the Great Duke at Florence with
Proposals. That absolution of the Censures should be given to Edward with the
forms contained in the Ceremonial. The investiture of his Dominions should be
given to his eldest Son, with restitution of all that was past, except Castro
and Montalto, with so much of the Country round about as was within Cannon shot.

These Propositions being transmitted from the Great Duke to the Venetians,
were by common consent rejected, An. 1643.
seeming unreasonable to be offered to the Duke of Parma, and dishonorable to
the League; wherefore the Treaties at Venice were more closely confirmed
between Gondi the Great Duke's Secretary, the Duke of Modena and the Senate,
being resolved not to abandom their first intentions of protecting the Duke of
Parma. But amidst these Negotiations Duke Edward moved by the fury, and
impatience of his disposition, dispeeded three thousand Foot to cross the
Appenines, with design to embark them on some Tartanes, and other Vessels,
which were laid ready to receive them at that place, where the River Magra
falls into the Mediterranean Sea; that so surprising the Rock of Montalto they
might easily make themselves Masters also of the City of Castro: but not only
the Snows on the Mountains hindered the passage of the Soldiers so long, that
the design was discovered at Rome, and provisions made against it: but also the
Soldiers being embarked were encountered with such a storm of contrary Winds as
drove them to Genoua, and Porto fino, where being unprovided of Victuals, and
Money, part of them perished, and the remainder was received into pay by the
Spanish Ambassador, who seasonably sent them to strengthen the Governor of
Milan, who besieged Fortona. Duke Edward angered with this ill success, designed
to enter the Country of Ferrara, which beyond the Po confines with the
Republic; but being disappointed herein, he demanded passage through Tuscany
to go with one thousand five hundred Horse, and a few Foot for recovery of
Castro: but the Great Duke denied it, until matters were agreed, and better
ordered on more solid, and more probable grounds at Venice; because that he
going forth with weak Forces, and often foiled, his unhappy success diminished
the vigor, and reputation of the Arms of the Confederates equally with his own.

Thus the minds of Men being on all sides irritated, the War proceeded: and the
hot Spirit of Duke Edward not being capable of restraint, he with six weak
Regiments of Foot, and as many of Horse, composed of several Nations, and one
of Dragoons entered the Country of Ferrara, and came to Bondeno, defended by
Mauriconi a Neapolitan with five hundred Foot, and four hundred Horse; but he
no sooner heard a Volley of the Duke's Men, which in the duskiness of the
Evening approached his Fort, but he immediately abandoned his Post, and ran
away to Ferrara, where he was followed by his Garrison: then the Duke attaqued
la Stellata, which making some small resistance, afterward surrendered. But
Cardinal Antonio that he might hinder the Duke's farther progress, encamped at
Osteria Nuova, a convenient place between Ferrara and Bologna. Wherefore the
Confederates hastened the result of all their Counsels, thinking they had no
time to lose, but to close with this conjuncture, before the people were
delivered from their present fears, or that Cardinal Antonio should have
defeated, or made the Duke of Parma to retire. Wherefore it was agreed: That
their Forces should be increased to eighteen thousand Foot, and two thousand
six hundred Horse: These were to be divided into two Bodies, one in Toscany,
and the other in the Dominions of Modena, and in both, the colors of the
League were to be displayed: What was taken was to be held in the name of all,
until the Duke of Parma was restored to his own Dominions. It was also farther
agreed, That the Venetians should seize the Banks of the Po, and when there was
occasion of taking the Field, the Troops in Modena with those of Parma, if they
could join, should at the same time second the Enterprise. From Venice, and
Florence the Nuntios were to be discharged, and the Revenues of the Barberins
were to be sequestered.

And now several feats of Arms passed with various successes: for Cardinal
Antonio had removed his Camp to Cento, where he so well fortified himself, that
he equally defended the territories of Ferrara, and Bologna: The Confederates
to make some advance desired to dislodg him; but the Cardinal being better
fortified than was imagined, gave some demur unto their Counsels in what manner
to act. But in the mean time the Venetians employed part of their Forces at
Sea, infesting the Coast with six Galleys, and some armed Barks even to the
City of Ancona; they took also the Tower of Premiero, which being recovered
afterward by the Ecclesiastics was demolished: the Proveditor Delfino
surprised also in the Night that small Fort, called delle Bochette, which the
Pope, (as we have said) had lately built. The Towers likewise of del Abbate,
and di Goro were rendered; as was Arriano a great Town, which in a fear drove
out their Garrison, and yielded to Delfino. Cardinal Antonio on the other side
intending to carry the War into Modena, took in Spilimberto, Vignivola, and St.
Cesario open places of the Ftontier: but the Duke, with the Proveditor Corraro
followed him with all their Army, desirous to draw him to a Battle: and to
provoke him thereunto they resolved to invest Crevalcuore (a good Town in the
Country of Ferrara, but not strong) in the view, and sight of the Cardinal: but
this Exploit being put into execution with one thousand Foot and four hundred
Horse, only the Cardinal opposing them with a great Force, constrained them to
retire in disorder, leaving one of their Cannon sticking in the mire.

The Great Duke of Toscany in the mean time coming in person as far as St.
Casciano, had put the Army into the Field under the command of Prince Mathias,
but with direction of Alexander del Borro a valiant and experienced Soldier:
Cardinal Antonio sent a Body of five or six thousand Men against them commanded
by the Duke of Savelli; notwithstanding which the Florentines advanced into the
Ecclesiastical State, and having taken the strong Pass of Buterone, attacked
the City della Pieve, where a Garrison of one thousand five hundred Men without
force of Cannon, soon capitulated and surrendered on conditions, that they
might march forth with their Swords only; From thence Borri with two thousand
Foot, and eight hundred Horse made an Incursion as far as Orvieto, forcing
Savelli to retire farther into the Country.

Howsoever not long after, the Cardinal sent Valanze to enter Toscany with
three thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse; which he did with such expedition
that he attacked Pistoia before the Great Duke could supply it with such
succors as it required, yet the courage of the Inhabitants, and Soldiers was
such, that they repulsed the Enemy, and preserved their City: Howsoever the
news hereof struck a terror into the hearts of the people of Florence, who for
a long time had not been accustomed to so near an approach of the Enemy: but
the news of the success soon quieted their minds; and the Great Duke to show a
confidence in his people, put Arms into their hands, which had not been
accustomary for many years past.

Thus did matters pass with various successes, but most commonly in favor of
the Confederates, until the season proper for action ended; when the Winter
approaching, the Treaties interrupted by the War, were again reassumed: And
indeed Urban discovered not only an inclination, but a desire of Peace; for
being burdened with years, and weary of the cares which War carries with it,
was desirous to end his days in calmness, and quiet: and though his Nephews
endeavored to disguise matters which were the most tragical, and sad, yet the
clamours of the people, which had suffered under the devastations, and
pressures of War had come to his Ears: wherefore he consented to a Treaty with
the restitution of Castro, entreating the Cardinal Bichi, who was sent by the
Court of France for the Office of Mediation, to hasten the Peace, that the
short residue of his life might terminate in quietness: The Congregation of
State erected purposely for direction of the Military Affairs concurred in
their desires with the Pope, to which Cardinal Barberin, though much against
his will, was forced to condescend, knowing that with the restitution of Castro
a dishonorable Peace was to be the consequence of an unhappy War. With these
dispositions toward a Peace, Cardinal Bichi departed from Rome, and in his way
to Venice passed through Florence, where in Discourse he understood from the
Great Duke, that saving his own Rights, and Interests the Confederates would be
satisfied with the full restoration of the Duke of Parma. The Cardinal being
arrived at Venice was followed by the Dukes of Modena, and Parma; Gondi, and
Testi were already there, debating with Nani, and Gussoni, whom the Senate had
deputed for that purpose.

It was now the beginning of the year 1644. An. 1644.
when the Cardinal Bichi proposed, That Absolution and Pardon should be
demanded by France for Duke Edward, and that Castro should be restored to him,
and that the rights of the Montists should remain, as before: and that the
Confederates should restore that which they possessed belonging to the Church:
And to take off the diffidence which the Confederates conceived of
nonperformance of Articles by the Barberins he proposed the word of France for
Guarantie, upon declaration and promise, that their Arms should be employed
against him, that should fail in execution of the Agreement.

Urban falling extremely sick, whilst matters were in Treaty, Bichi hastened the
conclusion, considering, that his death would cause great alteration in the
Treaty: and as a preparation thereunto proposed a cessation of Arms; to which
the Confederates assented, being sensible that such an accident could not
happen without great revolutions in the Dominions of the Church; and that with
the death of the Pope, the Authority of the Nephews ceasing, those motives
would vanish, which had been the Original and cause of the War: but the Pope's
recovery altered all those Counsels which were contrived in case of his death;
and induced them to hasten a conclusion of the Peace. The Articles therefore
proposed by the Cardinal being debated in several Assemblies, were at last
concluded, and agreed; and subscribed at Venice by Cardinal Bichi for France,
by Giovanni Nani for Venice, by Battista Gondi for the Great Duke, and by the
Marquis Fassoni for Modena: and though the Duke of Parma refused to subscribe
upon certain difficulties he made; yet being overruled by the Confederates he
was forced to concur. The Cardinal with this Agreement posted in all have to
Rome, being entertained in all places of the Ecclesiastical State, with the
Acclamations, and Prayers of the People longing for Peace.

The Articles subscribed by the Confederates began with a Preamble, and
Declaration; That they had entered into this War with no other Design than for
the restoration of Prince Edward, reserving in all other matters their most
constant Obedience to the Pope, and the Holy See: That all acts of Hostility be
suspended, and that the Confederate Princes withdraw their Forces into their
own Dominions. That all Fortifications raised during this present War shall be
demolished on one side and the other. To the Persons and Places which had
served, or rendered themselves to any other Party, Pardon was granted: Prisoners
were set at liberty, the Religious Persons who had withdrawn themselves were
permitted to return, and the Sequestration was taken off from the Rents of the
Knights of Malta, and all Rights were clearly reserved to the Parties as
aforesaid. For execution of all which Hostages were given to the French King,
and the King for satisfaction of both Parties, declared, that he having become
Guarantie for the Peace, his Arms should be employed against those, who
observed not the Articles, and in favor of those, who executed the Accord.

Thus Castro was rendered, and the Accord on all sides executed, and Peace
ensued to the satisfaction of the Pope, and quiet of Italy; but Urban did not
long enjoy the happiness of this Peace; for being entered into the seventy
seventh year of his age, he died on the 29th. of July in the year 1644. having
reigned twenty one years, wanting eight days. He was certainly a Person of high
prudence, generosity, and fit for Business; in his youth he was esteemed a
great Poet; and excellently well versed in all the Books of Ancient Poesy. He
was very munificent in his public Buildings: and in his own private
Concernments he was no less splendid, having in his lifetime erected a stately
Monument for himself in a corner of St. Peter's Church near the Sepulcher of
Paul III. and adorned it with pillars of Marbles according to the contrivance,
and direction of Cavalier Bernini, with this Inscription. Vrbani VIII.
Barberini Florent. Pont. Max.
In Vaticano Tumulum
Excitavit and Ornavit
Johannes Laurentius Berninus Eques.
His greatest fault was Nepotisme, or too great a fondness for his Nephews, and
indulgence to his whole Family, which he was resolved to make Rich, and Great;
and indeed he had opportunity so to do in the long time of his Pontificate,
having reigned almost twenty one years, during which at nine several Creations
he made seventy four Cardinals, of which number of seventy four, three were his
own Nephews, viz. Francisco Barberino, Antonio Barberino the Capuchin, commonly
known by the name of Cardinal Barberino to distinguish him from the other
Cardinal Antonio, the younger Brother of Cardinal Francisco, who was Prior of
the Order of Jerusalem, and a Knight of the Great Cross of Malta, and made
General of the Ecclesiastical Army in the place of Taddeo Barberino the
Prefect, who for his cowardice, and ill success was recalled from that Charge.

INNOCENT X.
URBAN VIII. having, An. 1644.
(as is said) breathed his last on the 29th. of July; the Cardinals then
residing in Rome to the number of thirty nine assembled at a Congregation, in
order to dispose, and settle matters for the more quiet and regular management
of Affairs during the vacancy of the Papal Chair. The day following being the
second day Cardinal Montalto acquainted the Congregation, that he had received
Orders from the Grand Duke to let them know, that Cardinal de Medicis could not
judge himself safe at Rome, whilst the Power of the City and of the Militia
remained in the hands of Taddeo Barberin his mortal Enemy; and therefore he
desired, that either an other General of the Forces of the Church might be
nominated, or else that he might have license to enter Rome with his own Guards
of Soldiers for defense and security of his Person; and that otherwise in case
of refusal he protested against the legality of the Conclave, as not free, nor
secure to those Members who resorted to it. After mature consideration of this
Point, the whole Congregation of Cardinals (excepting some few) agreed, that it
was not fit to remove Taddeo either from one, or the other Office; but in
regard the Spanish Faction, who were close Adherers to the House of Medicis,
were of Opinion, that some satisfaction ought to be given to the Grand Duke
herein, it was concluded, and agreed; That the Sacred College of Cardinals
should by a Writing subscribed with their own hands, give Security, and
Assurance to Cardinal de Medecis that nothing should be attempted in Rome
against his Person. Secondly, That two other Cardinals should be joined in
Commission with Taddeo the Prefect in the Government of the City: And thirdly,
That a Lieutenant General should be created, Independent of the Prefect with
absolute Power over the Soldiery.

These Expedients having given satisfaction to Cardinal de Medicis, and the
Funeral Rites of Urban being performed, the Cardinals to the number of fifty
five entered the Conclave. The Persons which seemed to stand most fair for the
Election were the Cardinals Pamphilio and Sachetti, one of which Cardinal
Barberin was desirous to promote though he was most inclined to the first: for
though Sachetti was esteemed for a great Lover, and Friend of the Family of the
Barberins in general, yet Pamfilio was reputed to be more intimate with
Cardinal Barberin, and one who entertained a particular affection for his
Person. Howsoever Sachetti was the first in nomination, but wanting the number
of Votes required in the Scrutiny; the Conclave proceeded to others, all which
by the contrariety of Factions, and Interests were rejected. But at length
Pamfilio to whom Cardinal Barberin had passed some Promises, and assurances of
favor before the beginning of the Conclave, was after a contest of six weeks
by a general concurrence of all the Cardinals (five only excepted) assumed to
the Pontifical Dignity, to which the Power, and Interest of the Barberins did
much contribute, who by the long Reign, and Government of Urban their Uncle had
contracted great friendships, as well as enmities. Cardinal Pamfilio, whose
title was St. Eusebius, was born at Rome, his Father was Camillo Pamfilio, his
Mother Flaminia del Bufalo, both ancient Families of Rome. His younger years
were employed in profitable Studies, in which he became so great a Proficient,
that at the years of twenty he took his Degree of Doctor of the Civil Law, by
virtue of which he was made one of the Advocates of the Consistory, and thence
promoted by Clement VIII. to be Auditor of the Rota: by Gregory XV. he was sent
Nuntio to Naples: by Urban VIII. he was sent with Cardinal Francisco his Nephew
in quality of the first Minister of the Legation, or Embassy into France, and
at his return was created Patriarch of Antioch. Afterward he was sent with
Cardinal Francisco when he went Legate into Spain, and bore the same Office,
and quality of the first Minister of the Legation, as he had done in France; in
discharge of which, he gave such testimonies of his Abilities and faithfulness;
that the Legate being entirely satisfied with his management and conduct of
Affairs left him at his departure in the Residency of Nuntio in Ordinary for
the Court of Rome. In which Office, he so well acquitted himself to the
satisfaction of the Pope, and contentment of his Catholic Majesty, that in the
year 1627. he was created Cardinal; though by reason of his continuance in the
Court of Spain, his promotion was not published until the year 1629. And being
returned to Rome in the year 1630. he received the Cardinals Hat in a full
Consistory. After which he was made Prefect of the Ecclesiastical Immunities,
and lastly Supreme Judge of the Inquisition, An. 1644.
and Protector of the Kingdom of Poland: And having risen by such degrees, and
steps of Honor, he was at length elected Pope on the 15th. of September 1644.
calling himself by the name of Innocent X. in honor to the memory of Pope
Innocent, his Uncle by the Mothers side. The Cardinals then present at the
Conclave having after this Election performed according to the usual custom
their acts of Adoration to the person of the Pope; Francisco Barberino took the
Cross, and carried it before the Pope, though that Office properly belonged to
Cardinal de Medicis, the Chief Deacon, who perhaps for some dislike of the
Choice, and for want of concurrence in any thing pleasing to the Barberins, had
excused or absented himself. And thus Cardinal Barberin carrying the Cross
conducted the Pope before the High Altar of St. Peter, where with a loud Voice
he uttered these words: An. 1644.
Annuncio vobis gaudium magnum, habemus Papam Eminentissimum, and
Reverendissimum Joannem Baptistam Pamphilium, qui sibi nomen imposuit
Innocentius Decimus.

On the 4th. of October Cardinal de Medicis set the tripple Crown on his Head,
with great applause, and acclamations of the People: for though this Cardinal
had excused himself from carrying the Cross before him after his Election, as
his Office of Archdeacon did require, upon imagnations perhaps, that the Pope
would become a favourer of the Barberins his mortal Enemies; as his gratitude
to that Family might require: yet having in that Interval of time which was
between his Election, and Coronation discovered, that his inclinations were
otherwise disposed (as we shall hereafter make appear) he then altered his
Affections to the Pope, and became willing to plant the Crown upon his head. On
this occasion some Medals were stamped with the Image of our Lady with this
Inscription, Vnde venit Auxilium mihi. But his own Motto was: Da Servo Tuo Cor
Docile, ut Populum Tuum judicare possit.

And now all the Ceremonies of his Inauguration being past, he began to apply
his mind to the Government of Church and State; and in the first place he
ordained a Congregation to inspect and state the accounts of the Church, and
contrive some ways, and means for payment of Debts: and then according to the
custom of former Popes, he provided for a cheap year, and to make Bread, and
other Victuals plentiful in the City; than which nothing can be more acceptable
to the People of Rome, who always labor under the scarcity of Bread, unless
supplied from Sicily, or other parts.

The Barberins did now believe, that this Pope being sensible of the many
Obligations he had to their Uncle Urban VIII. whose Creature he had been; and
to themselves for his advancement to the Papal Dignity, would have protected
and defended the greatness, and Riches they had gained during the long
Pontificate of Urban: but his respects to them being changed with his
condition, made it soon appear, that Services to Princes are acceptable, when
they can be requited; but when the Obligations grow immense, and the Debt too
great, the sense of inability to make due returns, changes kindness into
hatred; Beneficia eousque lae^ dum videntur exsolvi posse, ubi multum ante
venere pro gratia odium redditur. Tacitus lib.

For so it fared with the Barberins: For whilst matters were preparing for
Coronation of the Pope, the Ambassadors from Christian Kings demanded the
place of precedence at that Ceremony before Taddeo Barberini Prefect of Rome;
for though in the time of Urban that place was granted to him in quality of a
Prince, for the relation he had to the Pope his Uncle; which now expiring, the
sole Office of Prefect could not entitle him to a precedence before
Ambassadors. The Marquis of St. Chamont Ambassador of France appeared most
vigorously against the Prefect, and was seconded by the Emperor's and the King
of Spains Ambassadors, who by several memorials given to the Pope, did protest
that they would be present at the Solemnity of the Coronation, and possess
their due rank and place which belonged to them; and if his Holiness should
think fit to restrain them by force from giving their attendance there, they
would counsel their Masters to recall them, and never send others to perform the
Embassies of Obedience. For answer hereunto the Pope made no great matter of
hesitation, or doubt, but immediately determined in favor of the Ambassadors.

Though this indifference, and coldness of the Pope to the Barberins was a
great mortification to them; yet they were more sensibly touched, so soon as
Cardinal Antonio was informed by the French Ambassador, how ill his matter was
satisfied with the late actions of his Family; in resentment of which, he had
Orders to require from him the Commission, which constituted him Protector of
the French Nation, and consequently to take down the Arms of France from the
Portal of his Gate; declaring that his unfaithfulness to his Majesty was the
cause of his displeasure, for that in the late Conclave he had been an active
Instrument in the promotion of Pamfilio to the Papal Dignity, whom he knew to
be an Enemy to him, and entirely dedicated to the interest of Spain. The two
Cardinals Barberins finding themselves thus abandoned by France, made their
supplications to the Ambassadors of Spain for protection; but here also they
found their way obstructed by the Cardinal de Medicis, who gave the Cardinal
Albornos, and the Spanish Ambassador to understand, that both he, and his
Nephew the Grand Duke should be forced to abandon the Interest, and Service of
Spain, in case they should think fit to espouse the quarrel of the Barberins,
and receive them into the protection of the Catholic King. And thus being
forsaken by these two powerful Crowns, they were desirous to cast themselves
into the Arms of the Pope, as their last refuge and Sanctuary: to gain which,
they proposed a Marriage between the Daughter of the Prefect, and Don Camillo
the Son of Donna Olympia; offering to give her in Dowry all the Lands of
Montelibreto, which they had purchased from the Vrsini for a million of Livers,
together with a Revenue of thirty thousand Crowns of yearly Pension to be
raised out of the Benefices which they held from the Church, besides such a sum
of ready Money as his Holiness should reasonably require. And though Donna
Olympia was well enough pleased with these Propositions, yet the Project was
crossed by the French Ambassador, who having represented unto the Pope the ill
satisfaction his Master would receive from this Alliance, quite broke off the
Match; the Pope declaring, that he had too much consideration for his Majesty
to be overborn by any Interest which might be displeasing, or inconsistent with
that of France: and farther to take of all suspicion, and jealousies of this
Match, and to put it almost into a state of impossibility, he created Don
Camillo Cardinal, to the great trouble, and disappointment of the Barberins;
who being now without Friends, or protection, remained exposed to the scorn,
and injury of the People; and to the covetous desires of the Pope, who now
casting off all considerations to the Family of the Barberins, in despite of
the Obligations he had to them, sought for a pretense, or color to seize th^^r
Estates, and enrich his own Family.

The Barberins esteeming their condition desperate, unless they could regain
the Protection, and favor of France, adventured to try their ancient Friend
Cardinal Mazarine, to whom they dispatched a Courier Express with a Letter,
representing their case to the Court of France; The Cardinal who was a
dexterous Minister, and soon hit that point of Interest which concerned his
Master, did with a most quick and piercing judgment consider that the Court of
Rome was then for the most part composed of a Faction entirely devoted to the
House of Austria, and the Grand Duke, and of which the Pope himself was Chief:
and that to counterpoise so prevailing a Party, it might be advisable to
support, and make use of the Barberins, who having still some Confidents, and
Adherenrs of their own, might be able upon the credit of France, to keep the
Cardinal Pamfilio, (formerly Don Camillo) the Spaniards, and Florentines within
some tolerable terms of modesty, and moderation. This Proposal being debated in
the Council of France, was judged reasonable, and agreed, that the Barberins
should be received into Protection, and favor, provided, that as pledges of
their future Fidelity, they should oblige themselves to purchase Lands, and
Demesnes within the Dominions of France.

The unexpected news of the restoration of the Barberins to the favor of the
French King, was strangely surprising at Rome, and much changed the Scene of
Affairs; for the Commonalty converting their hatred into compassion, did much
lament the persecutions, which the Barberins undeservedly sustained; but the
Pope, and his Party being highly incensed against Cardinal Mazarine, by whose
sole contrivance a Pardon was granted to the Barberins, labored underhand with
the Duke of Orleans against him, moving him by a thousand ill suggestions to
destroy the Cardinal, and for his encouragement and reward, promised to advance
his Confident the Abbat de la Riviere to the degree of Cardinal; but all these
Artifices produced little effect, for Cardinal Antonio without taking leave of
the Pope secretly departing from Rome; arrived at Paris, where casting himself
at the feet of the King was upon his submission received to Pardon, and favor.
And now the restoration of the Barberins to the protection of France, being no
longer a secret, both the Prefect, and Cardinal Francisco with that whole
Family loudly professed themselves Servants to his most Christian Majesty, and
in testimony thereof replaced the Arms of France again over their Gates.

The reception also of the Barberins to favor was signified by the King in a
Letter to the Pope, An. 1645.
which was delivered by the hand of Cardinal Grimaldi, who was at that time
employed in the Affairs of France; but this Letter operated little of good, but
served rather to irritate the mind of the Pope: for within three days
afterward he erected a Congregation of five Cardinals, all Enemies to the
Barberins to inspect the Affairs of that Family, and to proceed by the methods
of Law against them: so that Cardinal Francisco, who was esteemed innocent, and
unblameable in his Conversation, and had not as yet been attacked by any, was
cited to make his personal appearance before this Court, where an Act was
intimated unto him, which annulled, and made void the Dispensation which his
Uncle Urban had made to indemnifie his Nephews, and exempt them from rendering
an account of the public Moneys which had passed through their hands: and in
pursuance hereof Taddeo the Prefect was enjoined to bring in all the Accounts
of Expenses and Moneys which had issued out of the Chamber during the time of
his Uncle, though the Books and Receipts were in the hands and Office of the
Paymasters. And in regard that Cardinal Antonio was absent in France, a Brief
was sent him to appear personally at Rome within the space of two months under
pain of Excommunication, and forfeiture of all his Estate, Revenues, and
Benefices which he held of the Church; and in the mean time Cardinal Francisco,
and the Prefect were obliged in a Bond of thirty thousand Crowns to advertise
Cardinal Antonio of these proceedings, and not to remove any of their Goods,
Housholdstuff, Jewels, etc. out of their Houses at Rome, or any other place,
sequestring also the whole revenue of Cardinal Antonio. And whereas Cardinal
Francisco had been superintendent over the Revenues of the Church, he was
ordered not only to give an account of the Moneys, but of all other
managements, and transactions during the Government of his Uncle.

These violent, and severe proceedings against the Nephews of a former Pope,
seemed a Policy disagreeable to the inclinations and designs of Innocent, who
intended to advance his Nephew Cardinal Pamfilio, and was as passionate toward
his Relations as ever Urban had been, and more perhaps than he; for being
wholly guided by the directions of Donna Olympia Mildachini, a Woman of untamed
Pride and unsatiable Avarice; it was not to be imagined, that the Revenues of
the Church should be better employed, or used with more moderation than they
were in the times of the late Urban.

This Donna Olympia was but of an ordinary extraction in Rome, but being
married to Signior Pamfilio Brother to this Pope, made the offspring which came
from her to be illustrious; and for governing one, who governed the Church has
made herself famous in all the Histories of Italy, and the Ecclestastical
State. She was a Woman which naturally affected Rule and Dominion; and
therefore, because her Husband crossed her desires, and would subject her to
Obedience, she had a quarrel to him, and held him in abhorrence and
detestation, though his person was comely and handsome enough to be beloved: on
the other side, none was more pleasing, and acceptable to her than her
Husband's Brother, first Abbat, and then Cardinal Pamfilio; for though he was
one of the most ugly, and ill-favored persons in the World, yet because he
never entered on any Affair either public or private, before he first
consulted his Sister-in-law, making her his Oracle, and presenting her with the
entire disposal of his Will, she became perfectly enamoured of his Person, and
Soul, and would never be separated from his company. After he was created Pope,
she then took upon herself the State and Garb of a Princess, and seizing with
absolute Dominion, and Authority on the person of the Pope, exerted her Power
to such a degree, that she made the whole Court of Rome subservient to her
Beck, and obsequious to her Commands. The greediness of the Barberins in
amassing Money was the most exorbitant, that ever had been known before in
Rome: but when this Woman came, she swept with both hands, making the rapine,
and extortion which had been used before, seem to be attempered with some
qualifications of modesty, and mercy. For no Judge of criminal Causes being made
without her recommendations, they all received their Instructions from her,
which she gave with such Rules and Methods, as conduced to her Avarice. She
ordered them to bleed the Purse, rather than the Veins of Malefactors; that all
the Fines, and redemptions of the Guilty should be sent to her, that she might
employ them to the use and benefit of the Poor; by which means, and to satisfy
the Judges, who would always have their share in the Booty the Fines were
raised beyond all the measures of Justice, and though complaints hereof were
made unto the Pope, yet neither were the oppressed relieved, nor the Judges
punished.

We have said before, that the Pope had created his Nephew Don Camillo
Cardinal, who was the Son of Donna Olympia, and at her instigation was declared
Cardinal Patron, being a Title commonly conferred on the Pope's nearest
Relation; the which was done, to disappoint the match between Camillo, and the
Daughter of the Prefect. But this young Gallant being of a gay and light
temper, and incapable of serious thoughts, and business, was weary of his
Cardinal's Hat, which against the consent and without the knowledge of the Pope,
and his Mother, he laid aside to marry the Princess Rossana, who by the death
of her Husband the Prince was become a Widow. The news of this Wedding was
strangely surprising to all Rome, but more especially to the Pope and his
Sister, who after a conference of two hours together in private, resolved that
Prince Camillo, and his Lady should be banished from Rome.

The disgrace of these two personages, was as surprising to the World as was
the Marriage; for there was in reality no Objection to the match, especially
since he was the only branch of the House of Pamfilio, whose noble change to
join himself with a Lady of Beauty, Quality, Riches, and Understanding, was
conducing to that common desire of mankind, which is to keep up, and perpetuate
their Families: wherefore there being no just reason why the Pope should be
displeased at the match; the cause of banishing the new married couple was
attributed solely to Donna Olympia, who being jealous of having the Princess
Partner, or Corrival with her in the Government, thought fit to keep her at a
distance from the Court. But the World in the mean time, could not but remain
astonished at this passage: for, it was wonderful to see a Pope so senseless, as
to punish his Nephew for having directed his love to a Princess of equal
quality with himself; whilst he himself was so besotted as to be given up to
the extravagancy of an aspiring Woman; permitting her to govern his Person,
Church, State, and Court with an Imperious hand; and yet at the same time not
to indulge his Nephew the love of a young, Noble, and beautiful Lady, who
brought a considerable Patrimony to the House of Pamfilio.

Nor was Donna Olympia more kind, or less jealous of Nicolo Ludovisio Prince of
Piombino, who was married to her second Daughter, on hopes that as Nephew to
the Pope, he should enter into Offices, and Affairs: for this Prince having
been Nephew to Gregory XV. and Brother to that Cardinal Patron, who since the
time of his Uncle absolutely disposed of all the Affairs of the Church, did now
hope to find the same fortune, and reap the same benefit under this Innocent X.
But Donna Olympia was too wise to admit a Nephew into the privacies of the
Pope, or a Partner with her in business: for she entirely bestowed all
Benefices, whether great or small; the Officers of the Datary being charged to
keep them in hand, till she had fully informed herself of the value: whatsoever
Bishopric fell void, they that pretended to it, were to address themselves to
her; Abbeys, Canons, and all other Dignities and Governments, Ecclesiastical or
Civil, were all conferred at the pleasure, and command of Donna Olympia: there
was no appearing with empty hands before her. The Rates of all Places were set,
an Office of one thousand Crowns a year for three years was valued at one years
Revenue, and for six years at double; and so proportionably: if for life, then
it was valued at twelve years, and the moiety thereof to be paid in hand.

Cardinal Panzirolo who was then the great Favorite of the Pope and who
transacted all Affairs, durst yet act nothing without the consent of this Lady,
for such an absolute Ascendant she had over the Pope, that his Soul seemed to
be animated with hers, and his Will subservient to her dictates; and strange it
was to see her sit in Council with the Pope with bundles of Memorials in her
hands, to receive his Assent for formally only unto that which she had already
determined: so that it is believed, she had charmed him with some strange
diabolical Arts, Histories having never given us an Example of the like nature.

And now to give farther instances, and miracles of her Power, she introduced
into the place of Cardinal Pamfilio, (who had laid aside his Scarlet to marry
with the Princess Rosana) a certain Nephew of hers Son to her Brother, a youth
of about eighteen years of age; who was afterward called Cardinal Maldochino:
Olympia intended once to have made him Cardinal Patron, but he was so great a
Sot, and so stupid a Fool, that he was incapable of Business, abhorred by the
Pope, and a shame to the College and Dignity of Cardinals. The Office of
Cardinal Patron was ever esteemed of great Honor, and importance, and when
managed by a Wise and dexterous Person, was of great ease, and relief to him
who sat in the Papal Chair: for if the Pope were sick, or absent, he gave
Audience to Ambassadors, and presided in the Council; subscribed Letters to
the Nuntios, Legates, and Governors of Provinces. But this help being as yet
wanting to Innocent, for want of a Cardinal Nephew endued with some tolerable
understanding; Olympia contrived to adopt Camillo Astalli Brother of Marquis
Astalli, who had married her Niece into the Family of the Pope; with whom she
so prevailed, that he created him Cardinal Patron, and gave him the name of
Pamfilio, though not of the blood, nor allied to his Family. It was wonderful
to the Court, to see a young Man of twenty seven years of age, raised on a
sudden to so important a preferment. 'Twas true, he was endued with a gentile
behavior, and good address, and with qualities of mind sufficient to make
himself acceptable; but yet neither his years, nor his practice in Affairs
enabled him to support the great burden of Church, and State. In making of this
Creature, as well Panzirolo, as Olympia was believed to concur; she with a
design to advance the Brother of him that had married her Niece; but he, to
have an influence over all his actions, being well assured, that this young Man
would act nothing without his direction. But whilst Olympia thus governed all
Affairs, the Court of Rome became scandalous, nothing but libellous Jests to
the disparagement of the Pope were daily put into the hands of Pasquin at Rome;
In the Courts of the Emperor, of France, and Spain, the Nuntios seemed to lose
much of that Reverence, which was formerly given them; and when any of those
Princes were refused the demands they made, and expected from the Pope; it was
often said with raillery, That if Donna Olympia had made the request, it would
readily have been granted. It was the common Discourse in the Pulpits of
Geneva, that a Woman was Head of the Church, and the Universal Bishop, and that
now the mystery of the Whore of Babylon was plainly discovered. In the
Protestant Countries, the Comedies, and Farces represented the Loves, and
Intrigues of Innocent X. and Donna Olympia upon the Stage: all which the young
Cardinal Patron, at the instigation of Panzirolo made known to the Pope, who
being conscious of the truth thereof, and inwardly ashamed, resolved often to
forbid Olympia the Court, and all concernment, or intermedling in Affairs; but
knowing not how to come out with it, his inward grief suppressed his words: but
at length taking courage and resolution, he burst out into tears, and therewith
into words Interdicting Olympia all farther communication with the Court.

After this, Cardinal Astalli, I should have said Pamfilio, gained ground in
the affections of the Pope, and being guided by Panzirolo took daily deeper
root in his esteem; Panzirolo likewise himself kept in great credit, and
unshaken by his Adversaries; but being tired with the burden of business, and
continual watches, until after midnight in consultations with the Pope, he fell
sick and died, Nature effecting that which his Enemies endeavored.

The Cardinal Patron above all lamented his loss, presaging thereby the
mischief, which afterward ensued: for now Donna Olympia began, though
Incognita, to frequent the Court, and by degrees to repossess her first
Station. But we shall for a while leave this Lady weaving her Webbs, and
managing Intrigues, and return again to the Barberins, whose Cause was taken
into the defense and protection of France.

In the month therefore of January 1746. Cardinal Barberin, An. 1646.
and Taddeo the Prefect, in compliance with the Pope's Brief presented their
accounts, having had but fifteen days time allotted to bring them in; and in
failure thereof were to forfeit five hundred Crowns a day for every day, until
they were delivered. The Accounts being given, the Pope cast his eyes upon them
with much indignation and prejudice, not allowing them for true and legal,
excepting against the sum with which they had charged themselves, which the
Auditors would have to be eight Millions; But Counsel pleading in behalf of the
Barberins, desired for justification of them, it might be permitted to examine
the Books of Accounts which were remaining in the Apostolical Chamber, to which
for their own discharge they referred themselves. But this Demand gave no
satisfaction or stop to the proceedings of Court, whereby in an extraordinary
manner, and without form of Law, the Estate belonging to the Barberins in the
Monte, was sequestered with all the other Rents belonging to them within the
City of Rome, or any other place within the Ecclesiastical Dominions: wherefore
the Barberins being apprehensive of farther proceedings against their Persons,
(after consideration held with their Friends) both Cardinal Francisco, and
Taddeo the Prefect retired from Rome, and other parts within the Dominions of
the Church to places of Sanctuary, and Refuge. In the mean time proceedings of
Court against them were carried on with greater rigor, and severity; so that
the news of their arrival in France was the common Discourse of all Rome, and
their resolution therein greatly applauded by all indifferent persons, to be
prudent and agreeable to their present circumstances, considering that the
French King had espoused their quarrel, and taken them into his care, and
protection. But the little esteem and great neglect which the Pope seemed to
show to those instances which the King made in behalf of the Barberins were so
highly resented by his Majesty; that both the Senate of Venice, and the Great
Duke (though an Enemy to them) greatly fearing that this Cause might introduce
the French Arms into Italy, interceded with the Pope to moderate the anger he
had conceived against the Barberins, and to allow of some Conditions, and
expedients of Reconciliation; but all their good Offices were not able to give
any stop, or arrest of judgment, seizure being made of their Estates, and
Revenue, without any other reason, than quia hic placet.

The news hereof being extremely ill resented at the Court of France; it was
judged fit to send the Bishop of Angiers to Rome to confer with Cardinal
Grimaldi upon this matter, that so a greater Authority might be given to his
Negotiations. The Ambassador of Venice being recalled from Rome by the Senate,
before his departure thence, consulted with Cardinal Grimaldi, and the Bishop
of Angiers in what manner to govern his Discourse at his last Audience; and
having taken his directions from them, he warmly applied himself to the Pope,
representing the danger of a War with France, and that it was not prudent for
the Cause of a private Family, and to gratify some particular grudges, to
engage the Church, and all Italy in public calamities: but the Pope seeming
regardless of all those considerations, replied, That it became not his
greatness to capitulate with his Subjects; but in case the Barberins would
voluntarily come in, and throw themselves at the feet of his mercy, he would
show them such favor, as the World might take notice, how much the instances
of his most Christian Majesty, and the Republic of Venice in their behalf had
prevailed upon him.

But these general terms and uncertain expressions giving no satisfaction to
the French Court, the King wrote to his Ambassadors at Munster, where the
general Peace of Christendom was then in Treaty, Ordering them to give that
Assembly to understand the Passion he conceived for the Cause of the Barberins,
was such as would obstruct all proceedings, unless some Expedients were
contrived, and some Conditions provided for their security, and restoration: by
which the Pope was made sensible that the King resolved to carry these matters
to the highest extremity.

The Abbot of St. Nicolas having now for some time remained at Rome, and
informed himself of the true state of the Controversy with the Barberins, he
demanded Audience, and being thereunto admitted, he presented his Letters of
Credence, which the Pope received with many obliging expressions; letting fall
a few tears from his Eyes, when he declared how much he loved the French
Interest, and how affectionate he had showed himself thereunto, even to a
Passion; of which his Christian Majesty was so sensible, that had the whole
Power of the Conclave been in the King, he was persuaded, he would have created
him Pope, in exclusion of all others in the World. But the Abbat was little
surprised with those tears, esteeming them no indications of his mind, but his
usual preparations to important Treaties; proceeded to discourse in favor of
the Barberins, whom he beseeched to receive again into his grace, and good
will; which though his Master might expect from him, as a point of Justice, yet
he would take it as an act of kindness, and Obligation to himself.

That the Barberins should make their submission in such humble terms, as he
should require, and direct; and all things ordered to the greater reputation,
and glory of his Holiness; that the refusal hereof would disturb the quiet of
Christendom, obstruct the general Peace in Treaty at Munster, and hinder the
succors, which were then preparing to give the Catholics in England; and in
fine, would be the cause of great confusion and disturbance in Europe. In
answer hereunto, the Pope desired the Abbat to represent unto the Queen Regent
how much the Barberins had ruined the Church by the expense of more than twenty
Millions, which they had charged upon the People by unsupportable Impositions,
to maintain a War against the Duke of Parma, for which no justifiable account
could be given; that they had so abused the Authority and Government of the
Church in the last years of their Uncle's Pontificate, that all the World cried
out for justice and vengeance against them: and if now after all these
mischiefs they should find refuge, and protection for their crimes in France,
the Nephews of Popes would for the future become licentious, and not fear what
they acted, or designed, when after the example of the Barberins, they might
hope to find a Sanctuary and impunity for their crimes, if not in France, yet
at least in Spain, or Germany, or some other Prince, where they were able to
make an Interest, or a friendship. That the Avarice, and ambition of the
Barberins, was beyond all example; having purchased a Revenue of above two
hundred and fifty thousand Crowns a year, besides their many Benefices and
immense Riches, which they had concealed, and the magnificent furniture of
their Palaces, which out of respect to their Majesty's of France he had
suffered to remain without seizure or confiscation. With these and the like
Arguments was the cause of the Barberins debated between the Pope, and the
Abbat without any effect, and the Audience ending without satisfaction to
either side; the Cardinals of the French Interest concluded, that nothing would
be done until such time, as that the success of the Siege of Orbetello were
known, and the Fate of that place determined.

For now the Faction of the Barberins, An. 1646.
and particularly Cardinal Grimaldi, being sensible that nothing would operate
so easily with the Pope, as the near approach of the French Arms to the
Dominions of the Church, prevailed with Cardinal Mazarine to send a Fleet to
the Siege of Orbetello. In pursuance of this design (which was kept with great
secrecy) the French Fleet commanded by the Duke de Breze, and assisted with
some Troops by Prince Thomas of Savoy, landed their Forces at the Port of St.
Steffano, of which they easily made themselves Masters, as also of the Lands of
Talamone, which the Spaniard had guarded with a very inconsiderable Garrison;
and afterward the Duke de Breze came to an Anchor before the Port of Orbetello.

The news of the French Arms before Orbetello alarmed the City of Rome with
great terror; and so sensibly affrighted the Pope himself, that he evidently
discovered a mind much more flexible to the Cause of the Barberins than
formerly, moderating his Sentence, and granting many things in their favor,
which he had lately refused. The other Princes also of Italy, who were their
implacable Enemies, growing sensible of the near approach of danger, became
earnest Intercessours with the Pope to give all the satisfaction he was able to
the Crown of France; to which the Pope lending a gentle Ear, was contented that
the surrender which Cardinal Antonio should make of himself at his City of
Avignon, should be esteemed as a point of submission; and from thence receiving
Letters from him, he ordered the Commissioners of the Chamber to take off the
Sequestrations which were laid on their Revenue, and Estate; for which first
step of Grace Cardinal Grimaldi returned thanks to the Pope in a full
Consistory. But no sooner was Orbetello succored by the Marquis of Torrecuso,
who was dispeeded with a considerable body of Men by the Vice-King of Naples;
and the French forced to raise their Siege and return to Tolon, with the loss
of the Duke of Breze their Admiral; but the Pope reassuming again his ancient
displeasure and hatred against the Barberins, retracted all the favors, and
concessions he had lately granted to them, and inveighing against Cardinal
Mazarine with bitter words, called him a Betrayer of his Country, and unworthy
the Purple with which the Church had clothed him; having for the sake of his
own ambitious desires, and envy to the flourishing Estate of the House of
Pamfilio, endeavored to involve Italy in a most ruinous, and dangerous War.

An. 1647.
But these invectives which the Papal party used against the Cardinal served to
no other end than to provoke his choler, and whet his desires of revenge: so
that having fitted out another Fleet not inferior in number, and strength to
the former, commanded by the Mareschals de Milliarey, and Plessis Praslin, they
quitted the design against Orbetello, and Portohercole, and sailed to Piombino,
and Portolongone in the Island of Elba; the first being a place bordering on
Tuscany, and opening a passage into the Dominions of the Pope, was esteemed
convenient and advantageous against the Princes of Italy, and such as might
curb the Pope, and render him more respectful to the Interest of France; the
other being situate between Naples, and Milan was judged of great importance
for intercepting succors, and correspondencies between one and the other
Territory. The first attempt therefore was made upon Piombino, which being
defended by some few Troops of Spanish Horse, and a weak Garrison within, upon
appearance of a Battery of five Pieces of Cannon raised against it,
capitulated, and surrendered itself. The success of Piombino struck a terror
into the Defendants of Portolongone; which notwithstanding was for some time
defended by the Garrison; but the French having prepared some Mines, and being
ready to make a general storm the Defendants demanded a Parley, and surrendered
upon honorable Conditions; the which places the French looked upon, as so
considerable, as might be worth the labor, and charge of stronger
Fortifications.

The news hereof being brought to Rome, did immediately silence the Party
opposite to Mazarine, and again mollify the mind of the Pope in such manner,
that he began to give favorable Audiences to the French Ministers, and to
hearken again with some gentleness to those Proposals, which were made in
behalf of the Barberins; howsoever, he could not frame his mind to the
promotion of Friar Michael Mazarin to the degree of Cardinal, for his heart was
so full of distance against his Brother the Chief Minister of France, that he
could not contain his resentments, but ever vented them, so often, as he had
occasion to discourse with any of the French Nation.

It happened at that time that the Duke of Guise being at Rome, was admitted to
Audience with the Pope, and received with all the expressions of joy, and
tenderness imaginable, it being the custom of Innocent to abound in his
excessive demonstrations of love toward that Nation, which he inwardly
abhorred and detested. The Duke having this opportunity took the liberty to lay
before Innocent the present State of all Europe, and particularly that of
France, which was now governed entirely by Cardinal Mazarin, a Person so wedded
to the Interest of that Crown, that it were injustice to separate one from the
other, and that indeed he was so riveted in the favor of the Queen Regent, and
of all the great Men of that Court, (some few persons only excepted) that his
Holiness could not exercise effects of his displeasure against the person of
the Cardinal without disobliging the noble Court, and Nation of France. That
the Cardinal desired nothing more than the favor of his Holiness, and to live
in peace and amity with the Court of Rome, on which condition and upon the
least demonstration of kindness, the Cardinal would be ready to yield all
obsequious submission to his most Holy Person, and would adore, and reverence
him with highest esteem. But to make the first step herein he told him, that it
was necessary to call Friar Mazarin from Aix where he was Archbishop, unto
Rome, and freely and generously to confer upon him the Dignity of Cardinal; for
that by this means obliging the Archbishop, and detaining him by preferments
near his Person, he would easily become his Creature, and probably so influence
his Brother, that all misunderstandings, and disgusts between the Courts of
France, and Rome being reconciled, a happy correspondence, and peace would
ensue for the future. The Pope approving this Discourse, and proposal of the
Duke, immediately gave order to call Friar Mazarin then residing at his
Archbishopric of Aix, unto Rome, with promises of advancement; of which the
Duke gave advice to Cardinal Mazarin his Brother; but this Expedient was so
little satisfactory to the Cardinal, who was ever suspicious of the Pope's good
inclinations to himself and Family, that he endeavored to dissuade his Brother
from the danger of an affront, being perhaps unwilling to receive any
Obligations from the Pope, whom he believed, could never be heartily reconciled
to his Person, and Interest: but the Archbishop was so ambitious of the
Scarlet, that contrary to the persuasions of his Brother, he posted to Rome,
where after some few months, he was created Cardinal, to the great
satisfaction, and joy of the Duke of Guise, and of all the French Party, who
expected from thence the happy fruits of Peace, and of a perfect understanding
between France and the Papal Sea.

Howsoever the mind of the Pope was not yet quieted, An. 1648.
nor could he forget his quarrel to the Barberins, though he seemed to be so
far appeased, as to admit of the return of Cardinal Barberin to Rome, which
grant was obtained by the Marquis de Fontena, who succeeded the Abbat of St.
Nicholas in the Agency for France; but howsoever he could not so far prevail,
as to obtain the like favor for Cardinal Antonio, whom the Pope detested, and
would not hear of his admission, until he had given in his Accounts, and
answered the Crimes of which he was legally accused, as his Brother had already
performed. Nor would the Pope admit the Son of Taddeo the Prefect, a youth of
about eighteen years of age, to execute that Office, during the absence of his
Father, retired (as we have said) to the Court of France; though pressed with
the most warm instances imaginable, by the Marquis de Fontena, the Pope
positively refusing it as a judged case already by the College of Cardinals in
the time of Sixtus IV. when the Son of Antonio Colonna, though in joint
commission with his Brother, was declared incapable to exercise that charge in
the time of his Minority.

For indeed the Pope did not much consider the applications made from France in
any Affair, nor was he greatly concerned to satisfy their Ministers, knowing
that the Civil Wars at that time, had so employed the hearts and hands of that
Kingdom that no mischief could be derived from thence. Nor did Innocent show
himself much more favorable to any Nation, for the Emperor could obtain no
other help in his Wars against Sweden, than a few Indulgences, so that he was
forced to patch up a Peace to the disadvantage of the Empire, and the Roman
Religion. The Spaniards received nothing but flat denials to all demands, as
the Conte d' Ognate, and the Duke dell' Infantado who were then Ambassadors
did often complain. The French required nothing besides the restoration of the
Barberins, for if the Spaniards could obtain nothing, who had been chief
Instruments in the Pope's Election, what could the French expect who remained
as outlawed people, and as Enemies to himself, and party. Nor did Innocent
after the Example of other Popes interest, and concern himself much in the
quarrels between the Christian Princes: or like those who esteeming themselves
the universal Fathers, interposed by their Agents in the Offices of Peace, and
Mediation; but Innocent casting off those cares, and by the advice, and counsel
of Donna Olympia being desirous to excuse the charge, and expense of Nuntios in
foreign Courts, as useless and unnecessary, took up new Maxims, and grounds of
State: having an Opinion, that the intercessions of Popes availed little with
Princes, until their own conveniences, and pressures by War inclined them to a
Peace.

It is reported, that Innocent looking out one day at his Window saw two
Porters at Fifty-cuffs; some that were standers by, would have parted them, but
the Pope forbad it, giving Order that they should fight it out: They, after
half an hours scuffle, being weary, and out of breath, gave over of themselves,
and without other mediation parted: which when the Pope saw, he turned to
Pan^irolo (who was then living) So, (said he) will the French, and Spaniards
do; for when they are well wearied with beating one another they will part, and
agree of themselves without the mediation of others.

But Innocent was not so wholly averse from sending Nuntios into foreign parts,
but that with concurrence and approbation of his Olympia, he was ready to spend
Money in Negotiations, which were judged beneficial, and necessary for the
welfare of the Ecclesiastical State: in pursuance of which aim, considering it
of absolute necessity to have a Minister at the Treaty of Munster, where the
general peace of Christendom was in debate; he appointed Fabio Chigi a Senese
to be present at that Meeting, who with Aloisio Contareni a Senator of Venice,
and both Men of experience, were by general consent admitted Mediators: The
Emperor's Commissioners were Lodowick Count of Nassau, and Isaac Volmar Doctor
of the Civil Law, to them afterward Count Trotmansdorff a person of
extraordinary Abilites was superadded. Avossie and Servient appeared in behalf
of France. Count Pignoranda, and one Antonio a Sequanis, who with his two Pages
in a slashed Suit, and a tattered Coach, was of greater importance to the Work,
than half the Meeting besides, were Commissioners for the Spaniard; and Count
Oxensterne, and John Sauge Osnabrugge for the Swede; who being Protestants had
a Seat appointed for them apart, that they might not mingle with the
Catholics. Paw of Amsterdam, and Knute the Zelander, Commissioners for
Holland, were of greater eminency than those from the other Provinces: to
Avossie and Servient, Longueville of the blood Royal of France, was afterward
added, entering Munster with a train like an Emperor. These were the chief
Ministers which graced the Meeting at Munster, besides several Accessories sent
by their respective Princes. Fabio Chigi being of a mild, and patient temper,
did diligently remove all such things, as he judged might obstruct, or retard
the business of Peace; but Contareni, though a Man of able parts, yet being
passionate, did sometimes proceed with more violence, than wariness.

It will not be pertinent to this History, to relate the particulars of this
Treaty, what juggling, and what Sophistry was practiced. How much Money; how
much time was idly thrown away; how many Letters were written in Ciphers, and
how many deciphered; what insisting upon Punctilios; never did an Assembly more
gloriously play the Madmen, as if this Serious Meeting had been held about the
place of Princes, not for the peace of Christendom. In short therefore as to
what concerns our purpose, The Hollanders impatient for a peace, looking on the
French successes with a jealous Eye, resolved to improve the present
opportunity, and without the advice, and consent of the French, to strike up a
perpetual Peace with Spain. The French resenting this manner of proceeding by
the Hollanders, sent to the Hague to complain, but without any effect, that
people after their usual custom, preferring their quiet, and ease from War,
before the Leagues, and faith, and promises made with, and given to their
Allies. And thus this Assembly the most famous next to that of Trent, for the
resort of diverse Nations, was dissolved without any effect.

Chigi the Pope's Nuntio, laboring much toward the general Peace, had still in
his Eye the design of conserving the Revenue, and immunities of the Church
free, and entire; but finding that by the Articles of this hasty Peace, a great
part of the Ecclesiastical Revenue was remitted, and many Benefices of the
Church abandoned to the disposal and possession of Enemies to the Roman Sea,
did in a solemn manner protest against this Peace, remonstrating all the
damages, and losses, which did thereby accrue to the Apostolical Chair: And so
well, and with such Art did Chigi manage this, and other Affairs, that at his
return to Rome, he was promoted by this Pope to the degree of Cardinal; and
afterward had the good fortune to succeed him in the Papal Throne.

At Osnaburgh almost at the same time, was the agreement of the German Peace
concluded, without the intervention of the Spaniards; by which means the Swedes
gained the French Assent to the Capitulations, but the Princes, and Free-States
of the Empire having little to ask besides the exercise of their Religion,
rested satisfied with the enjoyment thereof, and liberty of Conscience to serve
God after their own fashion, which so angered Chigi the Nuntio, that he tore the
papers about the Peace, resolving never more to interpose therein.

During these transactions abroad, the Pope continued in his persecutions
against the Barberins to the utmost severity, and yet being in conversation
with Cardinal Barberin, he would with much tenderness weep, and lament the
unhappy fate of their House, terming his tears effects of compassion (which he
had always ready to vent) which others called tears of joy, to see the poor
Cardinal at his feet, reduced by him to the utmost extremity of Fortune. All
which ill treatment was against the former pretensions and Promises of the
Pope, who had given faithful assurances to the Marquis de Fontenay Ambassador
of France; that in case this Cardinal would return to Rome, so as that he might
have one hours discourse with him, he would forget and pardon all the late
quarrels, and would enter into as strict Friendship with him, and his Family,
as he had ever entertained with them before he was Pope; but contrary to this
faith given, the Cardinal was entertained with all the contempt and scorn
imaginable, notwithstanding that France had declared it self engaged in the
quarrel, and resented all the Affronts given to that House in the same manner,
as offered to their own natural Subjects, or to any Family of highest quality,
and esteem with that Court. Notwithstanding which, it had been the ultimate
consummation of all the joys which could have happened to the Pope, could he
have only allured the Cardinal Antonio by promises, and persuasions to Rome;
for then in despite of all his Vows, and Engagements, he would have sacrificed
his Family, his Reputation, and his very triple Crown in satisfaction of his
Revenge, and for destruction of that person whom, (Cardinal Mazarine excepted)
he hated above all things in the World.

An. 1651.
Never was the Interest of France in that low ebb in Rome as it was in this
year, when the Civil Wars and distractions of that Kingdom rendered its Power
less formidable abroad. And so the Pope presuming on the ill state of those
Affairs, little esteemed the character of Ambassador which the Bailly of
Valency maintained at Rome for the Crown of France, suffering him to receive
many Affronts from his Soldiers without redress, or satisfaction; for which
cause the Ambassador retired to Tivoli, whilst the Pope contrived to
dispossess him of the Palace of the Barberins, which he inhabited at Rome:
telling the Ambassador of Venice, that whenever a reconciliation should be
made between him and France, the first Article should be, that the French
Ambassador should quit that Palace. The Bailly of Valency being sensible of
all these matters made his complaints to the King his Master; upon which he
received Orders to expose, and lay before the Pope, all the ill usage, and
scornful treatment, which his Majesty had received from him since his
assumption to the Papal Chair; and accordingly being admitted to Audience, he
represented, That all those Cardinals, whom Lewis XIII. his Father of glorious
memory had gained to his Party, and allied by his friendship, were now become
the only mortal Enemies of his Holiness, some of which he had exiled from Rome,
and others, whom he had permitted to remain in the City, he had rendered so
uneasy in their Habitations, that banishment was much more desirable, than
the liberty he gave them to reside and breath within the precincts and air of
his Court. Witness the Cardinals, Brichi, Grimaldi, Antonio, and Mazarine, all
which received such daily affronts, and discountenances, for devoting
themselves to the Crown of France, that it was a capital crime so much, as to
own a concernment for that Party. That he had made Medicis the Protector of
Spain, but Barberin retained no more than a shadow of it, for France. In short,
he omitted no instances whereby he might make known the injustices done to the
House of Barberin: and the Affronts offered to the King, and particularly by
the succors given to Naples, and Portolongone to the prejudice of France. But
the Pope returned no solid Answer hereunto; but broke out into passion and a
hundred exclamations, which after his manner he accompanied with tears, and in
fine complained of the Cardinals devoted to the French Interest to be persons
in whom he could not confide, nor receive satisfaction in their Society or
correspondence.

The Pope being in this manner disturbed, and tormented with the continual
importunities of the French in behalf of the Barberins, entered into
consultation with his most intimate Confidents of the Spanish Faction
concerning the means, whereby he might ease himself, and throw off these daily
vexations. This matter being considered, an Expedient was projected, to draw
off the Barberins totally from the French Interest; and having joined them by
the Pamfilian, and Spanish Party, the Faction of France would be inconsiderable
in the Conclave; and to give a beginning hereunto the Pope would often smile,
and cast a gracious Eye on Cardinal Barberin, so often as he saw him in the
Consistory, seeming as it were to entertain some thoughts of entire
reconciliation with his Family. The Spaniards also to instill this Opinion, and
make it to be swallowed more glibly down, offered some advantageous
Propositions of Marriage for the Princess Palestrina with a considerable Person
of their Country; not that the Spaniards had any such real intentions, but
only by this Overture to give occasion unto Barberin, to write unto Cardinal
Mazarine, and Cardinal Antonio, giving them to understand, that since the
Spaniards had offered a convenient Match for his Niece; it was not reasonable
to neglect that Proposal, unless they resolved to provide more honorably for
her in France, where she was deposited as a Pawn for the fidelity of her Family
with the Queen Regent.

The Ambassador at Rome observing by these passages, that Barberin was
staggering in his adherence to the French Interest, signified his thoughts
thereupon to the Count de Brienne principal Secretary; advising it as
absolutely necessary for confirmation of the Barberins in their engagements to
France, that the Queen should match the Princess with one of the most
illustrious Families of the Kingdom; not that any Portion was required from her
Majesty; for that this Lady had sufficient of her own Estate bestowed by her
Uncle Urban VIII. to make her acceptable to the greatest Peer of France; only
that she would be pleased as a Jewel from her Cabinet, and with other obliging
circumstances to bestow her on some great Lord, that was most devoted to the
Interest of her Majesty. And farther the Ambassador pressed, that it was
necessary to give the Cardinal Barberin some speedy answer hereunto, lest
despairing of any substantial benefit from France, he should close with the
Spaniards, who had promised to restore him forty thousand Crowns a year, which
he held in Abbeys within the Dominions of his Catholic Majesty, so soon, as he
had given testimony of his detachment from the French Interest. That the
Cardinal apprehended, that Mazarine had no real kindness for him, and would
never assent to the marriage of the Princess Palestrina with any considerable
Match, which he reserved for one of his own Nieces.

The substance of the Ambassadour's Letter being well considered; it was judged
necessary to gratify the Barberins with some thing more than words; and
accordingly Cardinal Barberin was made Grand Almoner of France, and Cardinal
Antonio created Bishop of Poictiers, which the French Ambassador signified to
the Pope with such formality, as gave matter of discourse to all the Court. But
notwithstanding all these evidences of favor the constancy of the Barberins
was not able to withstand the favorable conjuncture which offered it self for
an entire reconciliation with the Pope: for none was more ready to embrace this
offer than Cardinal Antonio, who now having been almost eight years an Exile
from Rome and State, and living in foreign parts at the expense of some
Millions, besides the sequestration of his Revenue from the Church, was
infinitely desirous to close with any reasonable Propositions which might
restore him to favor, and his Estate.

The design hereof was projected by Donna Olympia, who made this Proposition to
Cardinal Francisco: that in case he would assent to the marriage of the Son of
Taddeo the Prefect with the Daughter of her Daughter by Prince Justiniani, she
would restore the Barberins to all their Offices, Revenues, and intimate favor
with the Pope; provided that this Reconciliation should be valued the price of
her Portion.

The Barberins looking on this unexpected Offer as a blessing from Heaven, made
this speedy and short Answer, That they should esteem themselves much honored,
and happy in such an Alliance; for having been for almost eight years under a
Cloud, and a great part of their Revenue seized; they began to fear, that if
Innocent should die, his Successor would detain their Revenues, and confer
them on his own Relations. Donna Olympia had contrived to have the match with
the eldest Son of Don Taddeo; but the Barberini, though very earnest to have
the matter concluded, yet pretended, that the eldest resolving to be a
Cardinal, had relinquished his Birthright to his youngest Brother, who in
recompense thereof had made a resignation of his Abbey to him, that was the
elder. This was a subtle Masterpiece of their Art, for by this means being
restored, they got another Red Cap, a thing not known of before, to have three
Cardinals at the same time of the same name and Family.

These resolutions being carried on with great secrecy, advices thereof were
dispeeded in Characters to Cardinal Antonio; who wearied with the promises, and
expectations of France, and with the delays of Cardinal Mazarine, who, (as he
was persuaded) designed no good to his Family; joyfully embraced the
Proposition, and immediately with privacy conveyed his Niece the Princess
Palestrina unto Padoua: the unexpected news whereof, and the strange change of
Affairs in the Court of Rome surprised the whole World, but more especially the
Queen Regent of France, and Cardinal Mazarine the chief Minister, who now began
too late to consider of the cold entertainment given the Barberins, and that
more substantial preferments should have been bestowed on them, to confirm, and
ever oblige them to the Interest of France: for indeed they were were grown
very high in their own imaginations, and could not stoop to a mean, or to an
indifferent way of living; for when they considered of the long R^^gn of twenty
years of their Uncle; during which they had missed of the Dukedom of Vrbin,
which devolved to the Church in the year 1631. by the decease of that Duke, who
died without Heirs; and when they farther considered how they were defeated of
their project designed upon the Republic of Lucca; and succeeded not in their
War against the Duke of Parma, whom they intended with all the Farnesi to drive
out of Castro, and all their Principality by force of Arms; when I say, they
considered these matters; they could not with patience read the Histories of
Sixtus IV. Alexander VI. Clement VII. Paul III. who had not reigned half the
time of Urban VIII. and yet were able to make their Nephews free Princes; they
could not, but much reproach their own fortune, and conduct; to repair which,
they resolved to close with this present favorable opportunity, breaking
through all their ties, and promises, and engagements to France.

And now Cardinal Antonio being returned to Rome, An. 1653.
the Scene was miraculously changed; for not only was Charles the eldest Son of
Taddeo created Cardinal, and their Niece married to the Duke of Modena, a
Prince of a noble descent, but Cardinal Barberin was admitted to the
Cabinet-Counsel which was composed of the Pope, Donna Olympia, the
Cardinal-Patron, and Monsignor Azzolini, who was Guard of the Briefs a place of
great care, and trust: they now governed with Donna Olympia all the important
Affairs of the Church; and were in such high esteem with the Pope, who denied
them no favors, that being Men well practiced in the Government, and in the
manner of Popes Favorites they so well managed their own affairs, that in the
two last years of Innocent's Reign, they licked themselves whole, and repaired
the losses, which their eight years absence, and disgrace had brought upon
their Estates. Nor is it to be wondered, that the Pope should add an other
Cardinal to this Family, though there were two already of great esteem therein,
since there was this justice, and reason for it. It has been an ancient and
common custom, for Popes to bestow their own Cardinals Hat on the kindred of
that Pope, from whom he had received his: so that Innocent, who was created
Cardinal by Urban VIII, and being obliged to relinquish his Red Hat, so soon as
he was created Pope, was also obliged to bestow it on one of the Barberins at
their instance; but they being under a cloud of his disfavour, could not obtain
this just request, until after their reconciliation, when, it was not farther
to be delayed, or refused to them.

So soon as the Barberins were fully restored, and received into intimate
favor with the Pope, the Power of the Cardinal Patron began to decline, being
seldom, or never admitted to secret Consultations: so that Ambassadors to make
the shorter work, omitting the usual address by way of the Cardinal Patron,
applied themselves to the Barberins, to whom the Pope began to disclose all the
secrets of his heart, being confident of success by the reputation they had
gained in the management of Affairs for the space of twenty two years of their
Uncle's Reign; so that there remained but a shadow of Power to the adopted
Nephew. For as the Authority and Interest of the Barberins increased, so that
of the Cardinal Patron abated: at first the Pope seemed very cold, and
neglective of him, but at length burst out into storms of rage, and indignation
against him: he forbad him his presence, banished him the Court, deprived him
of the title of Cardinal Patron, disclaimed the Adoption to be his Nephew, with
express Order, that he should no longer be called Pamfilio, but Astalli: all
his Revenues, Offices, and Preferments were sequestered, and at length was
banished from Rome, and not permitted to carry any of his movables with him.
These extravagant changes, and sports of fortune made most Men laugh, none
being able to assign the Cause or Original thereof. For they could not
attribute it to his Avarice or his unjust gains: for besides his ordinary
Emoluments, which might be worth to him about fifty thousand Crowns a year,
attended with a great expense, he had not laid up one farthing: the poor Man
had once made a little Money of a vacant Benefice, which so soon as Donna
Olympia had smelt out, she ran with open mouth to the Pope, and complained, and
caused him to refund all into her Apron.

Azzolini by exclusion of Astalli being created Cardinal was admitted into the
Cabal, where deep designs, and plots were hatching; the Barberins suggested the
conquering of the Kingdom of Naples, blaming the Pope, for not making his
advantage of the Insurrection of Masinello in the year 1647. Howsoever in this
declining Estate of the Spaniards, the design upon Naples seemed very feasible.
The Barberins promised to maintain an Army of ten thousand Men at their own
cost, until they had reduced that Kingdom to the Dominion of the Church:
provided that the principality of Salerno might remain to their Family,
independent of any other Prince: and with such fancies, and projects as these,
did they tire, and torment the decaying carcass of the dying Pope. But as the
Pope daily languished, so Donna Olympia was ever more industrious, taking
bribes with both hands, bestowing Benefices, and Livings in all parts of Italy;
having in the Marca only which is but a small Province, disposed of three
hundred thirty six Benefices, which were commonly known, besides what had
passed underhand: and at that time the Sin of Simony was become so scandalous,
and common, that People began to abhor Churchmen, and hate their Ministry, to
which they had attained by abominable practices.

These transactions at Rome were equally displeasing to the Courts both of
France, and Spain; who now considering that the two Parties and Families of
Pamfilio, and Barberin were united in one, they imagined them able to stand on
their own bottoms, and to have power sufficient to elect a Pope, in despite of
those two Kingdoms, or opposition of the Medices; The Spaniards were most of
all vexed at this Conjunction, entertaining an inveterate hatred against the
Barberins, to whom they attributed all the Affronts, and neglects passed upon
them, in the time of their Uncle, and judged the loss of Piombino, and
Portolongone to proceed from them, and on score of their quarrel with the Pope:
the French also though angry enough with the person of Cardinal Barberin, whom
they considered as unconstant, faithless, and wedded to his own Interest; yet
entertained more gentle thoughts of Cardinal Antonio, whom having obliged with
the honor of Grand Almoner of France with the Bishopric of Poictiers, and the
Order of the Holy Ghost, they imagined, that the impressions they had made upon
him, by such obliging favors could never be defaced by time, or altered by a
new Conversation: Nor did they wholly lose all hopes of conserving this
Interest, which was the cause, that when the French Ambassador at Rome made
his Complement to young Barberin Son of the Prefect on his promotion to the
degree of a Cardinal: he put him in mind of the good correspondence which had
passed between his Uncle Urban VIII. and the Court of France; what affection
that good Pope demonstrated to Henry IV. and after him to Lewis XIII. and
afterward to his present Majesty now reigning; the memory of which was so
grateful to him, and the Queen Regent, that they could not but rejoice in all
the good fortune of their Family, wishing it might still advance, and be
exalted to a greater height of grandeur, and glory. And now all the Art was,
and great labor used by the Pope, Donna Olympia, and Cardinal Barberin to draw
off Cardinal Antonio from his patiality, and concernment which he had a
thousand times vowed in the Interest of France, the which abated much of their
confidence in him, and gave a stop to many of their great designs: the French
Ambassador endeavored to keep him firm by many obliging favors; the Pope
persuaded him to a neutrality, which was most agreeable to a good Italian, and
a religious Cardinal: his Brother urged him to cast off the blue Ribbon of his
Order, as incompatible with the great Cross of Malta, and to entertain no
intimate communication with the French Ambassador, nor to affix the Arms of
France over the gate of his Palace: but Antonio giving no ear to any of these
insinuations, Francisco plainly told the Pope, that the only way to reclaim
his Brother from the French, was to show his displeasure by refusing to restore
to him the Offices and Places of Trust which Urban VIII. had conferred upon
him, and to bestow that of Great Chamberlain on his Nephew Charles lately made
Cardinal: but this course seemed too violent both to the Pope, and Donna
Olympia, they took a contrary way, and caused a Brief to be carried to Cardinal
Antonio for restitution of all his Offices and Places; the which was delivered
him by the Prince of Palestrina his Nephew, that so he might seem to have
gained these favors from the Pamfilians; and not from the French: After which
Cardinal Antonio with all liberty avowed his concernment for France; which
appeared much more generous to the Pope, than the dissimulations of Cardinal
Barberin, in whom the Pope could never retain a perfect confidence, nor an
entire affection; that it is believed, had the Pope lived but some years longer
he would have been as weary of the Barberins, as he had declared himself
satisfied in them, after some few months experience of their conduct the
misfortune of this Pope was, that he never knew how to make choice of a wise
Chief, or Directour of his own Party. Cardinal Pamfilio was ever esteemed as a
Partisan of Spain, and of the Medices. His whole Family, Mother, Children,
Daughters, Sons in law and Daughters in law were engaged in mortal Feuds one
against another. The Faction of the Barberins was not well united: for the
greatest part of the Creatures of Urban VIII. entertained a secret rancour, and
venom against Cardinal Francis Barberin, who after having vowed himself a
thousand times to the Interest of the Pope, of Donna Olympia, and that Family,
turned his Coat, and endeavored with all obsequious diligence to be received
into the Service and friendship of Spain.

Thus having continued the History of the Barberins with almost an
uninterrupted course, or mixture of other Affairs, we must return a little back
to other passages of moment which intervened in the Reign of this present Pope.

After the death of Edward Duke of Parma, which happened in the year 1649. the
Montists wanting the usual payments agreed by the Duke in the time of Urban
VIII. and afterward confirmed by him at the conclusion of the late Peace, made
their complaints to the present Pope; upon which license was obtained, and
Briefs were issued from the Camera to proceed against the Lands, and Estate
possessed by that Duke in the state of Castro. The prosecution of this matter
was more violently carried on by the persuasions of Donna Olympia, because she
was dissatisfied with that Duke for not selling to her his Naboth's Vineyard,
which was a certain Castle in the Dominion of Castro; and because, as she
supposed, he had been instrumental in persuading the Princess of Rossano, who
was his kinswoman to take Sanctuary under the protection of France, from the
Wiles, and Plots of her Stepmother; The Officers and Soldiers of the Duke made
resistance against the Commissioners of the Camera, who came to make seisures
for payment of the Montists; which greatly enraged the Pope, who was impatient,
and frowned at the least opposition made to his Commands; but the Great Duke of
Toscany apprehensive, that the consequences hereof might be an engagement to a
second War, he endeavored by means of Cardinal Albornozzi to compose the
differences, making diverse propositions to facilitate the payments, and
satisfy the Montists: but whilst these matters were depending, it
unfortunately happened that the Bishop of Castro was murdered by certain
Assassinates, who attended his passage on the confines of the Ecelesiastical
State. The Pope being furiously enraged by the perpetration of this impious
fact, which he attributed to the machinations of the Duke of Parma; immediately
dispeeded certain Troops under the command of David Vidman, and Girolamo
Gabriel to lay Siege unto the City of Castro.

At that time the French being Masters of Piombino, and Portolongone, and
having an Army in Lombardy under the command of the Duke of Modena, and
Marshall du Plessis Praslin, kept the Spaniards in awe, and gave countenance
to the designs of the Duke of Parma, in maintenance of his right invaded by the
Pope: the Duke encouraged by hopes given him by the French, and with an opinion
that the Pope, who was aged, and loved ease and quietness would gladly compound
upon reasonable terms, so soon as he found himself pressed by any vigorous
opposition: he therefore imitating the example of his Father raised a
considerable Army, which he committed to the conduct of Marquis Gaufrid with
Orders to march directly into the Dominions of the Pope; and lest in their
passage thither they should commit Violences, or acts of Hostility, or burden
the people, he furnished Money sufficient to defray all the charges necessary
for maintenance of the Army; whereby he might make appear the caution he used
to give no offense, and that his War was only defensive, and designed to no
other end, than to protect and maintain his own Subjects and Estate. This
tenderness of doing hurt to any, had been well accepted, and interpreted, if
the success had answered the hopes and expectations of the Duke: but the
contrary happened out; for so soon as Gaufrid was entered into the Dominions of
the Church, he was encountered by the Marquis Mattei a knowing, and an
experienced Captain, to whom the Pope had committed the charge, and defense of
those Countries; and being strengthened by a considerable force, and with many
Gentlemen Volunteers, who came from Ferrara and Bologna to signalize their
Valor; he gave Battle to the Enemy, and soon routed and defeated the Army of
Parma; the General Gaufrid shamefully flying, fell under the heavy displeasure
and disgrace of his Prince; and being accused by his Enemies of many enormous
Crimes, and miscarriages, and of not having observed the Orders of his Master,
he was with much ignominy put to death; whereby he gave a new Example to the
World of the mutability of fortune, which from an obscure beginning and birth
being raised on a sudden to the highest degree of reputation and esteem with
his Master, was with as swift a turn tumbled, and precipitated down to an abyss
of shame and dishonor.

The Garrison of Castro losing all hopes of relief and succors by this defeat,
surrendered the Town upon Articles into the hands of the Pope; who being
enraged for the murder committed on the Bishop, commanded for expiation of that
Offense, that the City should be demolished; and accordingly it was so entirely
ruined, that not one stone remained upon another. The Duke in the mean time
being terrified with these acts of severity, and with the victorious Arms of
the Pamfilians, who threatened the other Dominions of Parma; and finding that
neither French, nor Spaniards, nor other Princes did much take his cause and
sufferings to heart, he resolved to compound with the Pope by a sale of the
Dukedom of Castro and Ronciglione with all the Territories and dependences
thereunto belonging, with Power howsoever of Redemption within the space of
eight years. And thus ended these differences for the present, which several
years afterward broke out into new troubles; and will ever remain an occasion
of quarrel and scandal, until such time as equal expedients and proportionate
to justice are given for mutual satisfaction. After the City was thus
destroyed, the Pope set up a Pillar with this Inscription: Here was CASTRO; and
several Crosses in the places, where Churches had been with the same Motto: The
Bishopric of Castro with all the Benefices, and emoluments thereof was
afterward annexed to the neighboring Metropolis of Aquapendente.

It is very certain, that this Pope was extremely rigorous in doing justice,
well versed in business, and might have deserved the character of a skilful,
and an understanding Person, had he not blemished his Reign with his
unpardonable weakness toward a rapatious Woman: and therefore we shall as well
repeat his good actions, as his bad, and give the Reader some instances of his
Virtues, as well, as of his Vices.

He was a severe lover of Justice in his Officers, and would punish those
Crimes in them which savoured of partiality, or corruption, Examples hereof we
have in many kinds: and particularly it is not to be forgotten, that a certain
Nobleman of Rome having been guilty of many enormous Crimes, could not be
protected from his Justice by the Power and Interest of his Friends, and
Relations; for having threatened one of the Judges to be revenged one day upon
him, in the vacancy of the Sea; he was apprehended, and accused upon those
words; which though they would bear no action in rigor, yet they were so
severely interpreted against him, being aggravated by his former Offenses, that
he was condemned to die, and accordingly suffered in the public face of all
the City. Another instance we have of his fortitude in the punishment of a Judge
of the Court for Bribery, whom he committed to Prison, and afterward condemned
to the Galleys. With the like impartiality, and resolution, he punished the
people of Firma, for having in a Mutiny, and Sedition killed Viscount Vbert
their Governor: in prosecution of which justice, he sent Count Vidman his
chief Captain with some Troops against the City, that those, who were the
principal leaders in this Sedition might without fear, or favor be brought to
condign punishment: and accordingly some were imprisoned, others banished,
others fined, or sent to the Galleys, or put to death; and that he might
attemper in some measure Clemency with his Justice, he inclined a favorable
Ear to the submissive petitions of that People, and received them into his
gracious favor, and mercy. Nor was his justice less eminent in the punishment
of Mascambruno, who was Sub*datary of the Apostolical Chamber, in which Office
having behaved himself without regard to the faith, and integrity required; he
forged many false Writings, affixing the Pope's Seal to them, and counterfeited
his Hand, besides many other accusations of bribery, and corruption; all which
being proved against him, he was divested of his Office, and dignity of
Priesthood, and publicly executed in the face of the whole City.

It is also farther to be added in commendation of this Pope, that he restored
the Elogy, which Alexander III had inscribed in the great Hall of the Vatican
in memory of the assistances, which the Venetians had given to the Church; and
which Urban VIII. without any just cause, or reason had blotted out, and
defaced.

He was also munificent in public Buildings, and adornments of the City, and
according to the generous temper of his nature had been much more, had not his
Moneys been intercepted by Olympia. Howsoever he enlarged the common Prisons of
the City, and built others, which were before so narrow, and straight as to be
noisome, and unhealthy to the Prisoners. He also finished the Walls of the City
on the other side of the Tyber, which were begun by his Predecessor Urban
VIII. He farther repaired, and adorned the Church of St. John Lateran, being
much decayed since the time of Constantine the Great, who had built it for a
Chapel to his Palace, and had been neglected by former Popes. But more
especially munificent was he toward the great Church of St. Peter; for that a
Memorial might remain of his Beneficence amongst other Popes, to that place he
added many and various Works, and beautified those places which wanted
Ornament; but what the particulars were will best appear by this following
Inscription, which was engraven over the great Gate of this Church.

Basilicam
Principis Apostolorum
In hanc molis Amplitudinem
Multiplici Romanorum Pontificum
Aedificatione perductam
Innocentius X. Pont. Max.
Novo Caelaturae Opere
Ornatis Sacellis
Interjectis in utraque Templi Ala
Marmoreis Columnis
Strato e Vario lapide
Pavimento
Magnificentius Terminavit.
Besides all which public Works, many others are recorded of him by Ciconius,
in the life of this Pope to whom the Reader may be referred.

In the beginning of 1649. the year of Jubily approaching, he caused great
provisions to be made for entertainment of Pilgrims, and that there should be
no want of Bread, and Wine in the City, he sent Ofcers, and Purveyors into all
the neighboring Countries to buy up the Corn, and fill up the granaries of the
City; and lest in so general a concourse of people who flocked to enjoy the
Indulgences, and Pardons granted at that season, Provisions should be raised to
excessive Rates, care was taken to moderate the prices, and render every thing
cheap and commodious for Pilgrims. On the 24th. of December 1649. the year of
Jubily began, when the Pope in presence of all the Cardinals, Ambassadors, and
Magistrates of the City opened the Holy Gate, which being again shut by him at
the end of the following year, this Inscription was engraven upon a Cross of
stone over the portal of the Gate: Innocentius X. Pont. Max.
Portam Hanc Sanctam Reseratam, and Clausam
AB Vrbano VIII. Pont. Max.
Anno Jubilei MDCXXV.
Aperuit and Clausit
Anno Jubilei MD.C.L.
About this time a Book was published in France, written by an unknown Author,
which aimed to subvert the Pope's Authority, by proving that there was an
equality in Order, and Government between the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul;
or that the Authority of St. Paul was not subordinate to that of St. Peter.
This Book falling under the examination, and scrutiny of the Inquisition was
condemned as heretical; and the same Censure was passed thereupon by the Pope,
who caused a Brief against it to be affixed in all public places of Rome.

But the Opinions of Jansenius Bishop of Ypres more successfully prevailed in
France, and Flanders; for prevention whereof, and to give a stop to the farther
spreading of those Tenants which were five in number, a Congregation composed
of Cardinals, and Divines was appointed by Innocent to examine the several
Articles, and to give their Opinion upon the same. And to quicken the Pope, and
make him more zealous in the Work; both the King of France, and Queen Regent
sent their Letters to the Pope, desiring him in a matter of such importance
(the determination whereof would tend to the settlement and quiet of Men's
minds, and Consciences) to interpose with the final Sentence of his
Infallibility, and Apostolical Doctrine. In like manner most of the Bishops of
France desired the Pope's distinct determination of every one of those five
Propositions: for though Urban VIII. of happy memory had in general terms
published a Bull against the Book of Jansenius, and had confirmed the Decrees
of Pius V. and Gregory XIII. against Michael Baius, whose Doctrines concurred
with those of Jansenius; yet were not convincing to the multitude for want of a
distinct explication, and particular Sentence against every one of those five
Propositions: wherefore the Pope after discussion of all those Points by the
aforesaid Congregation, at which he was for the most part personally present;
he promulged these his determinations thereupon, and affixed these distinct
Notes, and Censures to every Proposition; which we have thought fit to deliver
in Latin in such manner, as they are set down by Ciacconius: in vita Innocentii
X.

Primam praedictarum Propositionum scilicet,

Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis volentibus and conantibus secundum
praesentes quas habent vires sunt impossibilia; deest quoque illis gratia, qua
possibilia fiant. Temerariam, impiam, blasphemam, Anathemate damnatam, and
haereticam declaramus, and uti talem damnamus.

Secundam, Interiori gratiae in statu naturae lapsae nunquam resistitur:
Haereticam declaramus, and uti talem damnamus.

Tertiam, Ad merendum, and demerendum in statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in
homine libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione: Haereticam
declaramus, and uti talem damnamus.

Quartam, Semipelagiani admittebant praevenientis gratiae interioris
necessitatem ad singulos actus, etiam ad initium fidei, and in hoc erant
haeretici, quod vellent eam gratiam talem esse, cui posset humana voluntas
resistere, vel obtemperare. Falsam and Haereticam declaramus, and uti talem
damnamus.

Quintam, Semipelagianum est dicere, Christum pro omnibus omnino mortuum esse,
aut sanguinem fudisse. Falsam, temerariam, scandalosam: and intellectam eo
sensu, ut Christus pro salute duntaxat Praedestinatorum mortuus sit; impiam,
blasphemam, contumeliosam, Divinae pietati derogantem, and Haereticam
declaramus, and uti talem damnamus.

But notwithstanding this infallible determination the Jansenists keep up their
Party in France, and will not be run down unless confuted by more convincing
Arguments.

Toward the end of this Pope's Reign Francis Piccolomini General of the
Jesuits Order signified to Innocent the intentions of Christina Queen of Sweden
to relinquish her Kingdom, and embrace the Roman Catholic Faith, which that
she might profess in greater liberty, and more to her Christian Edification,
she resolved to make the Holy City of Rome the place of her habitation, where
she resolved to spend the remainder of her days. This news was received with
great joy at Rome, but more especially by the Pope, who finding his strength
decaying and languishing, was much troubled, that his life would not last until
he could see the Queen of Sweden, and a general peace restored amongst
Christian Princes.

This Pope at ten promotions created thirty nine Cardinals according to
Livello, but Ciconius enumerates forty; of which two of them were afterward
Popes; namely Fabio Ghigi, who was Alexander VII. and Benedetto Odescalchi, who
is Innocent XI. now at present reigning.

After the month of September 1654. the Pope began to decline past all hopes of
recovery; and though he were nursed by Donna Olympia with all tenderness and
care, yet old age was such an incurable Disease, that there was no Herb, or
Medicine in Nature to cure it: and yet this good Lady did what she could to
prolong his life, she kept him from the disturbances of Business, not admitting
any Person to discourse at his Bedside, unless in her presence, and then she
would mind them of the Pope's weakness, and interrupt Ambassadors in the midst
of their Audience, desiring them to defer their Business until a time that he
might be in a more strong and able disposition of health. It is said, that the
Pope continued ten days without any use of Reason, in which time Donna Olympia
got at least half a Million; for she made use of her time setting every thing
at low and mean Rates, so that she did not want Chapmen for all vacant
Benefices, and Ecclesiastical preferments. At length on the 7th. of January
1655. Innocent died at his Palace of Monte Cavallo, which is Mons Quirinalis,
after he had governed ten years, and three months and twenty three days, being
aged eighty years and eight months. His Body was interred for some time in St.
Peter's Church, but was afterward removed by Prince Pamfilio to the Church of
St. Agnes, where he erected a stately Monument in memory of his Uncle Innocent
X.

The death of the Pope was no sooner divulged through the City, but all People
began to rejoice; the Cardinals were pleased in expectation and hope of their
own promotions: the Clergy were pleased because the Church was freed from the
Simony, and scandal of Donna Olympia; and the Commonalty rejoiced for the
enjoyment of that liberty, which is commonly indulged at the vacancy of the
Sea; and every one expected that Donna Olympia would be torn in pieces by the
multitude, who had long since threatened her, being the person whom they
perfectly hated. Howsoever nothing happened, for as they say in Rome, When the
Dog is dead, all the malice dies with him. And so it fared with Donna Olympia;
who being allied to many great Families was protected by them, none daring to
offer her any injury, lest it should be revenged by her more powerful Relations.

ALEXANDER VII.
INNOCENT X. being dead, and the eight or nine days past, which are, according
to custom, appointed, for the solemn celebration of the Funeral Rites of the
deceased Pope: The Cardinals after having sung the Mass, which they call de
Spiritu Sancto, or the Mass invoking the Divine Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
to assist them in the election of the Pope, and having heard a Sermon to that
purpose, preached by Abbat Rospigliosi, they entered the Conclave on the 18th.
of January 1655.

It would require much time to set down all the passages of this Conclave; for
indeed the Intrigues were so many, and so various, that they daily twisted and
straightened the knot of difficulties, in such manner, that little less than
three months time was required to unty it; and then also it was rather cut than
unloosed when the Cardinals were wearied with their own divisions, factions,
and contrivances. For besides the usual factions of Spain, and France, there
arose a third, called the Flying Squadron, which consisted of the new College
of such Cardinals as had been created by Innocent X. and consequently the
friends of Donna Olympia, who resolved if possible to continue an Oar in the
Boat of St. Peter, stickled very hard to have the Election fall on some of the
new College, under whom she hoped to find good quarter, and to enjoy the
ill-gotten Goods, and Riches she had amassed by Simony, and other Villainies; to
effect this, and to manage this Party to best advantage, she proposed to put
this Flying Squadron under one Head, which she nominated to be John Carlo de
Medicis, who for his Noble Birth and Seniority, having been the first Cardinal
that was created by the late Pope, might deserve to be the Chief Directour of
that Interest; but the Squadron refused that formality, saying, That each of
them had a Head of his own, and feet to walk upon; nor would Maldachini, who
was Nephew to Donna Olympia be persuaded into this Combination; but rather
declared himself openly to be her Enemy; howsoever his Power was little in the
Conclave, though he made more noise than all the rest, which his Aunt termed
the braying of an Ass, whose Voice never reached to Heaven.

To prolong the length of this Conclave, there were twenty two Pretenders, most
of them having considerable Interest, and all of them high expectations. The
wise and ancient Cardinals, such as Sachetti, Barberino, and Chigi, resolved to
suffer the fury of the Conclave to vent it self, by diverse Exclusions, before
they were offered to the Scrutiny. So Maculano and Palotta otherwise called
Cardinal of St. Clement was excluded, with Gualtieri, Cherubino, Corrado, and
others: At length Sachetti was nominated, but was excluded by the Spanish
Party, who for the sake of the Conde Duca Olivarez, with whom he had maintained
a quarrel ever since the time he had been Nuntio in Spain, bore a perfect
hatred to him: and though by means of the Flying Squadron thirty three Voices
appeared for him, yet Spain was stronger, by the addition of other Cardinals to
the Conclave, namely the Arch bishops of Naples, Prague, Genoua, and others,
all which were united to the interest of Spain: Cardinal Barberino was the next
that was put to the Scrutiny, in favor of whom appeared so great a number, as
affrighted Cardinal de Medices the inveterate Enemy of that Family. It was once
alleged against him, that his Uncle had been lately Pope, and therefore that
it was scarce practicable to have the triple Crown planted on the head of the
Uncle, and so soon after on the head of the Nephew: for though Paul II.
succeeded his Uncle Eugenius VI. yet it was after several intermediate
successions of other Popes, in like manner Alexander VI. succeeded Calixtus
III. so did Pius III. to Pius II. and Julius II. to Sixtus IV. and Clement VII.
to Leo X. But for Barberino to succeed so soon after to his Uncle Urban VIII.
only with the interposition of one single Pope, would have been an action
without Example, and unknown to former Ages. At length the Cardinals weary of a
three months imprisonment, resolved to come to a conclusion; and the rather
because that the People would not longer endure to be without a Governor:
there having been such Villainies committed during the vacancy of the Sea, that
none desired the prolongation thereof, but dissolute Persons, whilst Men of
honesty, and substance lived in danger, and without protection: wherefore, I
say, they were resolved to make an end by the Election of one, who should be
grateful and acceptable to all Parties, and this was Fabio Chigi, who
afterward called himself by the name of Alexander VII.

This Chigi was one of the new College, being created Cardinal by Innocent X.
and therefore it was not probable that he would prove an Enemy to the House of
Pamfilio, nor consequently to Donna Olympia, if he were endued with a Soul
inclined to gratitude. On the other side, the Enemies to that Lady, were so
well assured of the justice, zeal and virtue of Chigi, that he would never
suffer such Scandals and Villainies offered to the Church to remain unpunished,
that they could not apprehend he would ever favor the cause of that Woman. The
Medici fearing lest Sachetti should at last be elected, concurred in Chigi. The
Spaniards always esteemed him of their Party, and partial to their Interest;
Barberino likewise desirous to do something which might put a Complement, or an
Obligation on Spain concurred with the others: the only difficulty was that of
France, to overcome which, Cardinal Bichi, who was extremely active in this
Election undertook to deal with Sachetti, who was one of the Leaders of the
French Party, and to persuade him to a concurrence: in management of which, he
highly exalted the Wisdom, Religion, and Virtue of Chigi, to be in every
respect qualified for this eminent Dignity; that being every way fitted to do
service to God and his Church, it would be a blemish to Religion, and the
Catholic profession to have such a Person laid aside, from a mere punctilio of
distaste, or unreasonable dis-satisfaction: With these and such like Arguments
he prevailed with Sachetti to write a Letter to Cardinal Mazarine to incline
him to a good Opinion and esteem of Chigi; whom Sachetti represented so
effectually, that Mazarine gave his assent, and approbation. So that all
difficulties being overcome, Chigi was with the common Votes of the whole
Conclave elected on the 7th. of April 1655. in which they were so unanimous
that there was not one dissenting Voice found in the Scrutiny, which seldom
happens; and Rosetti himself, who once swore, that he would cut his hand off
before it should contribute to Ghigi's Election, gave his Vote also in the end.

Fabius Chigi was born at Siena in the year 1599. his Father Flavio Ghigi, and
his Mother Laura Marsilia both of Patrician Families, but by misfortunes of the
World and other accidents were much declined from their ancient splendor: his
Father dying when he was young, his education was committed to his Mother, who
took care to have him instructed by the best Masters in Grammar, Philosophy,
Divinity and studies of the Civil Law. Being arrived at the age of eighteen
years, his Brother Augustine persuaded him to try his fortune in Rome, which is
commonly the place which raises Men of parts and industry to highest
preferments: his Estate was indeed very low and mean, the Patrimony of his
Father being divided amongst a numerous issue of Brothers and Sisters:
wherefore to help his fortune Augustino procured him Letters of recommendation
to Marquis Sfortia Pallavicinio, a Gentleman of great Wit and Parts, then
living at Rome, who discovering more than ordinary ingenuity, and virtue in
Chigi, introduced him to acquaintance with Pope Urban VIII. who soon took a
great liking to him for his faculty in Poesy, and particularly for being an
Admirer of Horace; in imitation of whom he composed many Odes, which were
extremely delightful to Urban who himself was an excellent Poet, and in his
youthful days had wrote many Poems with much Elegancy. By these means Chigi
became a chief Favorite of the Pope, who discovering in him a mind capable of
higher matters than a strain of Poesy, recommended him with much affection to
his Nephew Francisco Barberino.

Chigi being of a gentle and tractable disposition, and extremely modest,
comported himself toward Barberino with a behavior free from affectation and
flattery; and yet in such a sincere and pleasing manner, that Barberino
preferred him to the Charge and Office of Inquisitor General, in which capacity
he was sent to Malta, where he so well acquitted himself to the satisfaction of
those Knights, that having finished the time allotted him by his Commission; he
returned to Rome with Letters, and testimonials from the Grand Master
applauding his actions, and comportment during the whole time of his residence;
and with this particular character, That Malta had never before been made happy
with any Person equal to him in merit. And having given this first Essay of his
abilities, the Pope constituted him his Vice-Legat in Ferrara, where he also so
well demeaned himself, that in the space of three years, there was not any who
complained against his justice; but was esteemed by all for a just, and an
impartial Judge.

Being returned to Rome, it was not long before he was dispatched to Cologn in
quality of Nuntio: which employment may serve for an evident proof of the great
esteem which the Court of Rome conceived of him; when in that conjuncture of
affairs, all the World being disunited and at variance, there required a
Minister of more than ordinary conduct, and dexterity to manage the difficulty
of Treaties then in action; for having to deal between the Catholics, and
Protestants, he could not act with due Equity toward the latter, without
giving scandal to the former, and granting that which was detrimental, and
derogatory to the Power of the Roman Church. And though the Negotiations of
Chigi for the Interest, and in favor of his Master the Pope were such, as
rather obstructed than forwarded the conclusion of the Treaty; yet the Emperor
and King of Spain, Hollanders, and French growing weary with the troubles of a
bloody War, agreed of themselves without being obliged to the Pope for his
Offices of Mediation: for on the contrary the Articles agreed were so
detrimental to the Ecclesiastical State; that the Pope was so far from having a
hand in the making of them, that he wholly disowned and protested against them,
by his Nuntio Ghigi; who in that dexterous, and discreet manner so well
represented his Master's complaints to the Imperial and Spanish Ministers, that
they could not but allow the resentments of the Pope to be just for which they
had no excuse, but the unhappy state, and urgency of their affairs: but as to
the person of Ghigi, and his conduct, every one remained satisfied, giving him
the character of a prudent, wise, and an able Minister.

These Negotiations at Cologne rendered him more capable to serve the Papal
Interest at Munster, in quality of the Pope's Legate, in which he behaved
himself with such equality of mind and good temper toward the Protestants
without offense to the opposite party, that with general satisfaction he
acquitted himself in this great charge: all which being observed and known to
Innocent X. he was in reward of his many Services promoted to the degree of
Cardinal; and afterward was made Secretary in the place of Cardinal Panzirolo
deceased, a person of that judgment, and quickness of parts fit for business;
that his equal perhaps was not again to be found in any part of the World. And
yet Ghigi pleased the Pope as well, or perhaps better than Panzirolo; for
Innocent being on his deathbed, where Men commonly put off all disguises of
dissimulation, declared, that of all the Cardinals, there was none more fit to
succeed him, than Chigi. Howsoever in the Conclave there was scarce any task,
or discourse of Chigi for the first three months; until at length being named,
the whole College concurred with unanimous Votes in his Election; the news of
which was received in the City of Rome with extraordinary joy and satisfaction
of the People.

The first ten days after his promotion he spent in ordering the state of his
public and private Affairs, giving Audience to Ambassadors, and receiving
Visits, and Complements from Cardinals and Civil Magistrates: And on the 18th.
of April he was Crowned after the manner of other Popes, in the great Portico
of St. Peter's Church; after which Ceremony was ended he was publicly heard to
use this saying, Vivo Ego, jam non Ego, vivit vero in me Christus: I live, but
not I, but Christ who lives in me, which was the Motto he commonly inscribed
over the Chambers of his private retirements.

In the next place, he wrote his Letters to the Kings of France and Spain,
acquainting them with his promotion to the Apostolical Chair; and having given
them the paternal Benediction, he persuaded them to Peace, and Concord amongst
themselves, and so turn their Forces against the Turks, for assistance of the
Venetians who were a match unequal to contend with so mighty an Emperor.

But before we proceed farther, it is to be expected that we should make an end
of the Story of Donna Olympia, who remained all this while between hope, and
fear, in what manner Alexander would deal with her. Prince Pamfilio was one of
the first who went to congratulate with him: and her Ladyship that she might
not be the last, to express her joy, sent her Maggiordomo or Steward to pay her
Respects, declaring the great joy she conceived to see one created Pope, to
whom her Kinsman had opened the way by making him Cardinal, and her joys were
consummate, in that she had always represented him to Innocent as a Person of
extraordinary Abilities, so that she could not but share with him in the
advance of his fortunes. The Pope answered little and in ambiguous terms; so
that to discover his more deep, and real thoughts, Cardinal Azzolini was
employed, who making great professions in her behalf endeavored to draw from
the Pope something of his intentions toward her. But Alexander who professed
always to do things leisurely, was not very open in declaring himself, which
gave Olympia the first occasion of distrust: and indeed she had very much
reason, for every day made new discoveries of the corruptions and abuses she
had exercised both in Civil, and Ecclesiastical matters. The Datary was wholly
corrupted by the Simonies she had introduced, all Places sold, no Treasure
left, besides a thousand other Villainies, and mischiefs she had committed.

There was not a day passed, but the Pope had his hands filled with Memorials
against her; so that his zeal for the Church could not without scandal fit
still, and let slip such horrid Crimes without Punishment.

At the report hereof the Lady trembling with fear sent Cardinal Barberino to
discourse the Pope before matters were gone too far: but the Pope was too
zealous, and wife to hearken to any smooth and eloquent Speeches in her behalf:
and therefore positive in his resolutions sent his express Commands to Olympia
to leave Rome in three days, and in eight to be at Orvieto, which is a City
about thirty miles distant from Rome, from whence she was not to remove without
new Orders from the Pope. There was no opposing these positive Commands, which
were neither to be questioned nor delayed; so that her Ladyship privately
departed the City, for fear of being affronted by the Rabble, who every where
made Songs, and Jests of her; the same day that her Ladyship quitted Rome, the
Pope began to take the examination of Witnesses for drawing up the Process, but
the work was too tedious to be speedily finished; for so many several Charges,
and Impeachments came daily against her that there was no end, nor could the
Books be shut up though swelled to incredible Volumes. Wherefore to make short
work, the Pope commanded ten of the most material Points to be filed against
her, to which she was in the first place to give answer, before a subsequent
Charge was to be formed: and in the mean time, it was the discourse of the
Town, that the Pope resolved to sequester her Estate, and imprison her Person.

But whilst Affairs went on in this manner a dreadful Visitation of Pestilence
in the year 1656. fell upon Rome, which so afflicted the City, that not only
Trade and Commerce was interrupted, but the common Courts of Justice were shut
up, so that the farther prosecution of Donna Olympia ceased: but the Justice of
God took up the Cause against her, and the divine Vengeance reached this guilty
Wretch by a stroke of the Plague, of which she died at Orvieto some few months
after her persecution.

It was computed that she left more than two millions of Crowns in ready Money,
besides Land, and movables inestimable, and what she had already bestowed on
her kindred. After her death there was nothing more done, and not much more
talked of her, for the Prince Pamfilio as Heir to her Estate quietly possessed
himself of all, taking his Habitation in her Palace in the Piazza of Navona,
which is the fairest in all Rome: only it is said, she left some few Legacies
amongst her other kindred, which did not exceed three hundred thousand Crowns.

When Alexander came first to the Papal Chair he publicly declared against
Nepotism, and with some direful asseverations that he would never rule by his
Kindred, nor enrich his Family with the spoils of the Church: whilst he
continued in this humor he prosecuted Donna Olympia with as much severity and
rigor, as the methods, and course of Law would allow; so that after her death,
it was believed, he would have confiscated all her Estate to the use of St.
Peter: but it seems, the detestation of her Crimes, and his anger for all her
evils, died, and vanished with her person; only it is said, that he drew away
about a million of Crowns from Prince Pamfilio her Heir, to bestow on his own
Kindred (robbing Peter, as we say, to pay Paul)

But this sturdy humor against his Kindred continued not long, before he
suffered himself to be overcome by the yerning of his own bowels toward them,
and by the persuasion of some Cardinals his Confidents, who observing a desire
in him to break his late protestation met his wishes with their arguments of
love toward his own Blood, and Relations; for why should he be singular, and
less kind to himself, and Family than other Popes? or why should the House of
Chigi remain only obscure, and mean? whilst the Barberini, and Pamfilii were
opulent, and exalted, and all the Princes of Rome derived their Riches, and
greatness from the favor and benefice of Popes, who had been their
Predecessors.

These considerations melted the tender heart of Alexander in such manner, that
toward the end of the first year of his Pontificate, he called his Brother Don
Mario with his Son Flavio, and Don Augustino the Son of his Brother Augusto,
unto the Court; and being now provided with a Brother, and two Nephews he used
them with as much indulgence, as other Popes had shown to their kindred; giving
the World to understand, how little Men are acquainted with their own hearts,
and how easily they change their resolutions, and affections with the
alteration of their fortunes, and increase of their honors: but lest it should
seem strange to the World, that after such solemn protestations against
Nepotism, he should without other methods introduce his Nephews into Offices,
and the principal benefits, and profits of the Church, he with much formality
in a public Consistory demanded the Opinion of the Cardinals, whether the
admittance of such faithful friends, as his Brother and Nephews might not
rather be useful, than detrimental to the Church? The Cardinals who are always
civil to the Pope and ready to concur with his desires; every one entertaning
an expectancy of being Pope himself, when it might be his own case and might
feel the like warm inclinations toward his own blood; would not be so rude as
to exclude his Family from their share in the Government; but rather encouraged
him to indulg his own Family, and be as kind to his, as his Predecessors had
been to their Relations: and lest the World should by this admittance of a new
Nepotism, imagine, or suspect that the Revenues of the Church should be
employed to the raising of the Family of Chigi, and that the times of Urban
VIII. and Innocent X. were returned; he ordered Briefs to be issued against
Simony, and other corruptions with more severe terms, and under other more
execrable maledictions than had formerly been used: He renewed also ancient
Decrees against Pensions and Gifts: and farther Ordained, that several vacant
Benefices should not be supplied, but that the Revenue of them being received
into the Apostolical Chamber, should be employed toward extinguishing the vast
Debts of the Church.

And that he might farther engage, and insinuate himself into the minds and
good will of the People, who conceived high thoughts of him, and demonstrated
unusual expressions of joy at the beginning of his Inauguration; he exercised
his paternal Love, and Charity toward them in three several calamities which
befell the people of Rome, and followed one, as it were, on the neck of the
other.

In the year 1656. the City (as we have said) was visited with such a raging
Pestilence, which continued for two years, as rendered it almost desolate;
during which time the Famine had been as destructive, and made an end of those
which the Plague had left, had not the Poor been relieved and comforted by the
generous care, and pious charity of this Pope. No sooner was the Pestilence
ceased, but the Tyber swelling with inordinate Rains, surpassed its banks with
such a deluge, as drowned all the Campaign, and lower Villages of Rome: but
those which were seated on higher elevations of Hills, were environed so with
the Waters on all sides, that for the space of fifteen days, they could have no
communication with their Neighbors for relief, and sustenance; only the Pope
taking compassion on his People, employed great numbers of flat-bottomed Boats,
laden with Provisions to pass from one Village to another, for the succor, and
sustenance of the Inhabitants; after which, he took all the courses, and
expedients possible to moderate the price of Wheat, that the People might be
supported, and not die with Famine. After two such extreme Calamities many of
those who escaped the Pestilence, and the Deluge, perished by a fatal
Earthquake, which overturned almost all the Villages in the Country of Romagne;
to repair which and rebuild their Towns, the Pope like a common Father, was
highly liberal, and bountiful in his Contributions.

Soon after the enstalment of Pope Alexander, the Christian Princes sent their
respective Ambassadors to Rome after the usual custom, to pay (as they call
it) their Acts of Obedience, and homage to the Pope. Those who were most
conspicuous, and eminent were the Duke de Crequi sent from the Crown of France,
and the Cardinal of Aragon from his Catholic Majesty: they were both received
with great honor and respect at the Court of Rome; but if either of them had
acquired a greater esteem than the other, it was the Duke of Crequi, a person
extremely handsome, and well fashioned, of a most ancient and illustrious
Family, first Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber, and in all things so well
accomplished, that the Court of Rome esteemed it self highly honored by the
presence, and administration of so noble a Personage: his only fault was, that
he was haughty, and of an humor so fierce, as became a Camp better than the
more polite, and gentle comportments of an Italian Court, or the conversation
of Ecclesiastical Persons.

Howsoever, his deportment was pleasing enough to the Pope and Cardinals, so
long as Don Mario and the Nephews comported themselves, (as they did at first)
within the limits of some reasonable modesty; but so soon as they began to pass
those terms, and become insolent, this Ambassador could not long sustain their
pride, before their resentments broke forth into outrageous violences: as we
shall have occasion to discourse when we come to the year 1662.

In the year 1655. An. 1656.
Christina Queen of Sweden renounced the Protestant Religion in which she had
been educated, and with it her Crown, which she resigned to her kinsman Charles
Gustavus, conserving to herself a Rent of one hundred thousand Crowns a year
out of the Dukedom of Pomerania: and making public profession of the Roman
Catholic Religion, she resolved to spend her days at Rome, where she might
enjoy it in the most pompous and triumphant manner; and where she might not
only delight herself in conversation with grave Cardinals, and the most
learned Men in the World, (of whom she was a great Admirer) but also being
favored by the Pope, could on all occasions have recourse to him for Pardons,
Indulgences, and his paternal Benediction. Wherefore leaving her Kingdom, she
apparrelled herself in the habit of a Man; in which disguise passing through
Denmark, and the lower Germany, she came by way of Holland to Brussels, where
in the Privy-Chamber of the Archduke Leopold at that time Governor of the
Low Countries, and in presence of him and all his Nobles on the Eve of
Christmas, she solemnly abjured the Heresies of Luther, and made profession of
the Roman Catholic Faith. The Plague raging that year at Rome, she deferred
her journey thither, until health was restored to that City, and Country; at
which time Alexander VII. being created Pope, she prosecuted her design of
settling her Habitation in Rome, which she having signified to the Pope, and
received his license, she made at his desire an other solemn abjuration of
Lutherism at Inspruck, which might dispose and prepare her more solemn
reception into Italy. When the Queen was in Germany the Pope dispatched Luke
Holsten a Hamburgher by Nation, who was keeper of the Vatican Library to make
her Majesty a Complement in his name; the which Person was the more acceptable
to her in respect of the fame, and reputation he had acquired of being the most
learned Man of that age. When she approached near unto Rome, he sent four
Nuntios to meet her, viz. the Archbishop of Thebes, the Archbishop of
Ravenna, with the Dean, and Clerk of the Apostolical Chamber, where attendance
was truly Royal and magnificent: at her entrance into the City, she was met by
two Legates a Latere, namely, Cardinal John Charles de Medices Brother to the
great Duke of Toscany, and Cardinal Frederick Brother of the Lantgrave of
Hessen, who with a pompous train conducted her to the Vatican Palace, where she
was lodged with all the Royalty appertaining to a Queen. Many and various were
the Ceremonies which passed at the reception of this great Person; after which
on Christmas day she was confirmed by the Pope in St. Peter's Church, who
superadded the name of Alexandra to that of Christina.

In the year 1657. An. 1657.
the Venetians were hardly pressed by the formidable Power of the Ottoman Arms;
and being unable by their own force to wage a War against that potent Enemy;
the Senate omitted no applications, or addresses to persuade foreign Princes to
yield them succor either by Men, or Money. But Wars raging in all parts of
Christendom administered trouble, and care sufficient for every Prince to
consult and provide for his own affairs and safety. The Czar of Moscovy, to
whom the Venetians sent their Ambassador, promised fair, and gave good words,
but with little other effect; it being difficult to concert matters, or engage
affections, or reconcile the Interest of Princes so remote. Thus the Venetians
becoming destitute of all succors from foreign Powers, addressed themselves to
the Pope, as their ultimate refuge in all their distresses, beseeching his
Holiness to grant them such sums of Money as might supply their present
occasions. But alas, Rome being but newly recovered from a languishing state of
Pestilence and from other calamities before mentioned, during which immense
sums had been issued from the public Treasury to sustain the Commonalty in
their scarcity and want; the Pope alleged just Causes to excuse the
disbursment of Money from his Treasury, which had of late years been miserably
exhausted by the Avarice of those who had had the management of it: Howsoever
though the Pope pretended himself not able to issue out Money from his own
Exchequer; yet he hearkened to some Proposals and expedients for raising it, by
the sale of certain Lands, and Rents belonging to the two Orders of the
Crociferi, and of the Santo Spirito; which the Pope's Authority, and the cause
for which they were sold, being for maintenance of a War against Infidels, and
of the Christian Cause against Turks; was sufficient to warrant and hallow the
sale, and give a lawful Title to any Purchaser. The Order of the Crociferi was
very ancient, and possessed several Monasteries dispersed in all parts of
Italy; but that of the Spirito Santo consisted of three Monasteries only, and
all within the Dominion of the Republic, by which they had been endowed under
the protection and government of the Council of Ten: howsoever the desolation
of these Monasteries could not pass without the severe Censures and reflections
of the World: and though the Friars of those Orders were much fallen from the
integrity of their ancient institution, and become corrupt and debauched in
their lives, and manners, yet their clamours could not be suppressed, nor the
calumnies which they daily uttered against the Pope, and the Republic be
quieted. Howsoever a Bull being passed, and a Decree of the Senate for sale of
the Lands, together with those of some other smaller Monasteries; the Pope's
Nuntio with three Senators were commissionated to sell, and pass the Title to
the Purchasers, whereby the Senate raised above a million of Ducats, which were
all employed to carry forward a War against the Turk. Whilst this good
correspondence passed between the Pope and the Republic, and that the
Venetians had daily need of succors, and assistances from the Church; it was
thought a convenient season in the heat of these Negotiations, for the Pope to
propose the restoration of the Jesuits to their possessions on the Dominions of
Venice, from whence they had been banished on occasion of the differences
between Paul V. and the Venetians. Carlo Carafa Bishop of Antwerp, then Nuntio
at Venice represented the Pope's desires herein at a full Senate, laying before
them the conveniences they might expect, and benefits they might reap, by
closing with the Pope's demands in this Case, which seemed to be much changed,
since the first Original Decree, and bando against them; for that those Jesuits
who had fomented the divisions, and Sedition were already dead; and that those
who were to supply their places would be more cautious, and careful for the
future in what manner they incurred the displeasure of the Republic: these
considerations being seconded by warm instances of the French Ambassador to
the same purpose, the matter was carried in the Senate for restoration of the
Jesuits, and though the ancient Decrees of the Senate in this case were
positive, and rigorous to the contrary, and that Cavalier Soranzo greatly
opposed the admission; yet the pressure of Affairs, and the necessity of
gratifying the Pope was such, that the former Decrees were repealed, and the
Laws against the Jesuits made void; and in this manner and on this occasion in
the year 1657. they again restored to their possessions within the Venetian
Dominions, the Church of the Crociferi being conferred upon them in the City of
Venice.

The whole Court of Rome being gratified by this concession; not only the
Pope, but the Cardinals also concurred in their liberal contributions toward
maintenance of the War against the Turk: of which five especially were signally
bountiful, and munificent above the others; namely, Antonio Barberino, who gave
one hundred thousand Ducats in Gold; Cardinal Mazarine gave two hundred
thousand; Francisco Barberino, and Flavio Ghigi agreed to maintain three
Galleys at their own expense; and lastly Cardinal Nicholas who was a Count of
the Bath, not having sufficient Estate in ready Money to make such a
contribution as he desired, sold his Palace and Household Stuff, and Vineyards,
that he might be registered amongst the Benefactors to this War.

At this time also the Ottoman Arms prevailed against the Emperor in the upper
parts of Hungary, so that Varadin was taken, and the Turks became very
formidable: Wherefore that Pope Alexander might not seem less sollicitous for
conservation of the Emperor than he was for the Venetians; he issued
considerable sums out of his Treasury, and laid a Decimation on the Revenue of
the Clergy over all Italy, wherewith to assist the Imperial Arms: and farther
wrote Letters to the Kings of France, and Spain then busily employed in a
Treaty at the Pyreneans, that having concluded a Peace amongst themselves, and
confirmed, and strengthened the Alliance by the ties, and Obligations of a
Marriage, they would have respect to the Wars in Hungary, which were carried on
by the Turk to the destruction, and ruin of the Christian Cause.

But we are not here to omit, that this Treaty of the Pyreneans which was held
in the Island of Pheasants, where the Marriage was concluded between the
present King Lewis XIV. and Maria Teresa Infanta of Spain, was acted and
carried on between Cardinal Mazarini, and Don Luis d' Haro, without the
mediation and concurrence of this Pope Alexander: which seems the more strange,
in regard that this very Pope was Nuntio at Munster, and once managed that
Treaty there in behalf of Innocent X. with great applause, and proof of his
abilities and integrity, and was personally known to the Cardinal; many
therefore and various were the reflections on this Point by the Politicians of
those times; and many Writers on this Subject have assigned diverse Causes, and
reasons for it. Some would have it, that during the time that Cardinal
Mazarine, and the Pope, then in quality of Nuntio were together in Germany,
several differences had arisen between them, not then reconciled; and that the
Nuntio had always shown some partiality toward the Court of Spain; for which
cause Mazarine had opposed the election of him to be Pope; and though
afterward he had been sweetened by the character, and commendations which
Sachetti had given of him; yet still some acrimony remained on the spirits of
the Pope, because he observed an aversion in the Cardinal to treat the Peace in
any part, where the Pope did reside; he also observed with what indignity to
the Papal Sea he had treated the Cardinal of Retz: and with what neglect, and
almost contempt he comported himself toward his Nuntio at Paris. Moreover, the
Pope was not a little displeased to observe what backwardness, and delay was
used by the Court of France, no only in sending the Extraordinary Embassy of
Obedience to Rome, but the Ordinary also of Residency; nor was the Pope
ignorant of those slight, and contemptible expressions, which both the
Cardinal, and his Favorite the Bishop of Omodei publicly uttered with ill
reflections on his Person. On the other side the Cardinal complained of the
Pope's Ingratitude; for that after he had so freely concurred in his Election,
he always evidenced an aversness to comply with him in the most reasonable
Demands, and ever favored that Party which interfered with the Interest of
France; so that the Cardinal would often say, that the Pope offered him
frequently injuries, that so, if at any time, he did him right, it might seem
to proceed from favor rather than from the motives of Justice. These matters,
and the like occasioning coldness of correspondence, it is no wonder, that
Writers should attribute the reason of the Pope's exclusion from this Treaty of
Peace to the preceding Causes; Whenas the most reasonable Obstacle might be,
the Pope's incapacity to moderate, and concur in the terms of this Peace: for
whereas the foundation of this Peace between the two Crowns, was established on
the Articles concluded and agreed at the Treaty of Munster; which the Pope
having condemned, disanulled, and protested against, it could not be expected,
that the Pope should be called, and made a Party to that Treaty, unless they
had resolved to raise difficulties, by that opposition, and obstructions which
would have been made by the Pope, and his Ministers.

In short, the Marriage being celebrated between the most Christian King; and
the Infanta Maria Teresa, the only cause, and Object of the Peace; was
afterward the original of many quarrels, and disorders in Christendom. For the
Spaniards not having been so strict, and wary as the importance of the matter
required, did not take care to pen the Instrument of Renuntiation which the
Infanta signed to the Dominions of her Father, and all her Paternal Inheritance
with such strict terms, but that there was still a Gate open to pretensions:
nor was the form of the Oath so strict, and expressive, but that there was
place left for evasions, as the ambition of Men, and their desire of Dominion
should govern and transport them; from whence great confusions, and bloody Wars
have arisen, as the Annals of our times are able to attest.

In the beginning of this year a quarrel arose at Rome between the Contestabile
Colonna, and the Cavalier Chiaia, An. 1660.
Captain of the Pope's Guards, caused by a Dispute they had for a Bank or Seat
at a Comedy. An other quarrel this Colonna maintained with the Ambassador of
Toscany, for not resigning to him the principal place at a Visit which they
made to the Princess Farnese: An other quarrel he created not long after at
Milan with the Prince of Avellino, on occasion of a Dispute about the Title of
Excellency; all which had proceeded farther than to words, had they been to be
managed by other measures, than those of wise and cautious Italians.

About this time the Duke of Bracciano, Father of the Cardinal of that name,
dying at Rome, the Duke of Nerula his Brother, a Person of great parts and
abilities, succeeded to the Estate, and to the Inheritance; taking on himself
the Title of Highness; which he caused his Subjects to inscribe in all the
Memorials, and Writings they made to him. Howsoever, such as were Foreiners,
and independent to the Duke, refused to give him other Title than that of
Excellency; until the Cardinal de Retz was persuaded to pass that Complement
upon him; and then the Prince Pamfilio, and all the Princes of Rome, who were
in any wise considerable for Birth, Riches, or Power, began to assume the
honor of Highness: to prevent which and the many Controversies which might
arise from these beginnings, the Pope gave Order, that Title of Highness should
be given to no Prince, who was Vassal or Feudatary of the Church, unless to the
Duke of Parma only, and as to all the Families descended from Popes, as also
to all the Roman Barons, they were not to pretend to a Title above that of
Colonna, and Orsina, which was no other than that of Excellency.

In the year 1661. An. 1661.
one Francis Borri born at Milan vented strange and unheard of Heresies and
Enthusiastical Doctrines at Rome, drawing unto himself many followers and
Disciples, by a feigned Hypocrisy and disimulation, tending to sublime
Notions, and elevations of a spiritual Life. The Doctrines he taught, which he
pretended to have received from Divine Inspiration were: That the Blessed
Virgin was really a Goddess; because she was Mother of the Word Eternal which
was God. And to express this Mystery to his Disciples, he maintained, that the
Blessed Virgin was the Holy Ghost Incarnate in the Womb of St. Anne. And for
this reason, he styled the Blessed Virgin, most Holy Goddess, and only
Daughter of the Most High.

He taught farther: That in the Holy Eucharist, there was not only the Natural
Body of Christ, but that of the Virgin Mary joined with it.

That besides Hell, and Purgatory, and Limbo, there was a fourth place
appointed for the receptacle of Infidels. That the Book of Ecclesiastes wrote
by Solomon was not Scripture, but a Treatise full of Errors composed by him,
at the time, when he remained in Original Sin. And that it was not necessary to
make confession of secret sins in the Ear of a Priest.

These, and many other wild Fancies being figments formed in the hot and
disturbed brain of Borri; the Inquisition had no sooner notice of, but they
sent out Warrants to take him, of which he having notice, fled first to
Inspruck: howsoever his Heresies were examined, and condemned by the
Inquisition, and he who was the Author of them was burnt in Effigy: of which
when Borri had notice, he went to Strasbourg, where to be revenged of the Pope,
he burned him also in Effigy. Thence passing through Holland, he vented a
thousand chimerical Opinions at Roterdam. Thence he went to Coppenhagen in
Denmark, where he made profession of Chemistry, and wherein ha was so excellent
an Operator, that he created a real belief in King Frederick III. that he had
the Philosopher's Stone, by which he was able to turn any metal into Gold: but
that King dying, his Son Christian V. was far from such a belief, and
discovering him to be an Impostor, gave him five hundred Crowns, and a
Passport, and so dismissed him from his Dominions. Borri afterward designing
to travel into Turkey, was in Moravia, on his way thither seized by the
Emperor's command, and sent to Rome, where being sentenced by the Inquisition,
he was in the year 1670. condemned to perpetual imprisonment. The which Story I
the more willingly mention, because I remember in the year 1678. to have seen
him at Rome, a Prisoner in the Castle of St. Angelo.

An. 1662.
The Duke of Crequi, who (as we have said) resided at Rome with character of
Ambassador Extraordinary from his most Christian Majesty, was at first
received, and caressed with all the ceremony, and respect, which that Court was
able to express; but afterward the Duke in the greatness of his Spirit, not
being able to support the pride, and disdain which he observed to be lodged in
the breast of Don Mario the Brother, and the Cardinal Ghigi, Nephew to the
Pope, he retired, to evidence the little esteem he had for them, by preferring
other Cardinals before them in his Visits. The Pope highly resenting this
neglect, and want of due respect, received the Ambassador at all his Audiences
with much coldness and indifferency, refusing to grant him any thing which he
demanded of favor to the King his Master, or his Subjects. The Pope also
plainly told the Ambassador, that he had deferred to make the Complement which
he owed to the Ambassadress his Lady, until first he had done him right, in
performance of that honor, which was due to his Kindred and Relations.

Whilst this ill correspondence continued between the Pope and the
Ambassador, it happened, that a quarrel arose between two French men, and
three Corsi, who were of the Pope's Guard (which had lately been recruited with
one hundred and fifty Soldiers of the same Country of Corsica.) The cause of
which was this, Two French Men to show their bravery undertook to disarm the
Night Petrol of three Corsi, which they easily effected, because the Officer
which was with them commanded them, not to fire their Carbines, or make
resistance, for which default, he was cashiered the Service, and declared
incapable of farther Office; and the Soldiers also were punished for cowardice
and neglect of their duty. It is reported also, that Don Mario upbraided the
Corsi with ignominious terms; saying, that they knew not how to make use of
their Arms; and that upon any other default of this nature, he would shave
their heads, and send them to the Galleys. The Corsi to excuse themselves laid
some fault on Cardinal Imperiale the Governor, who to acquit himself, and
recover his honor; ordered the Bailiffs, and Officers, which he had employed
to make search for some persons in a House adjoining to the Palace of Farnese
where the French Ambassador lodged, to make farther search for them into the
very House of his Excellency, during the time that he was at Mass in his
Chapel.

The Ambassador had just reason to resent this Affront, and indignity offered
to his Sanctuary, (the Houses of foreign Ministers being so esteemed at Rome)
but the quarrel was higher enflamed by a certain French Man, who that Evening,
as he passed through the quarters of the Corsi, uttered some indiscreet words
of scorn, and contempt against them, for which they pursued him as far as the
Ambassadour's Stables; who hearing a noise, sent some of his Servants to
appease the tumult: but his endeavors rather enflamed, than quieted the
disturbance, for the Corsi being gathered in great numbers began to fire their
Carbines at the Ambassador himself, whilst he looked out at his Windows,
killing some of his Lacquies with three or four more, who casually happened to
be then present with the Ambassador. And not content with this outrage put
themselves into a Body, and in Military order with their Colors flying, and
Drums beating, came and presented themselves again before the Palace Farnese;
on which appearance the Ambassador caused the Gates to be shut: During this
tumult, it happened that the Lady Ambassadress returned home, whom when the
Corsi espied, these barbarous beasts fired a Volley of shot into her Coach, and
killed a Page, who attended at the Boot; with which unexpected accident the
Lady being affrighted, fled for refuge into the Palace of Cardinal d' Este; who
soon afterward, with a Guard of two hundred Men convoyed her safe to the Duke
her Husband, though Cardinal Imperiale the Governor had ordered the Captain of
the Corsi to obstruct the passage of Cardinal d' Este; but when this Cardinal
sent Imperiale word, that he should answer the least disorder, which should
happen hereupon, with the loss of his life, he considered better upon it, and
desisted from giving farther interruption.

The Duke of Crequi passed all the Night following in consultation with the
Ambassadors of Spain, Venice, Malta; and with others whom he esteemed well
affected to the Crown of France; all which agreed that the Dignity and
Character of sacred Embassies was wounded and violated by this outrage. On the
other side, the Cardinal Imperiale, Don Mario, and others of that faction held
long conferences concerning the management of this Affair: for to justify it,
the matter was too foul, and barbarous to admit of any plea, or excuse: and
therefore it was resolved to give it the name of a Riot, and tumult raised by
insolence of the Soldiery; and that all the Family of the Ghigi both Men and
Women should make their Visits of Condolence to the Ambassador and his Lady,
expressing abundance of sorrow and trouble for the late misfortune, which they
solely attributed to the insolence and fury of Soldiers, and not to any design,
or premeditated Act of the Commanders. But this Wound was too fresh, and sore
to be salved with a remedy of such vain excuses; considering that the Gates of
Rome were by express Order left open all the Night, to afford means, and
opportunity for the Corsi to retire, and make their escape.

The news of what had passed at Rome, was brought to the King whilst he was
performing the Ceremonies of his Birthday at St. Germains; which though it
disturbed his Majesty, and took much off from the Revels and jollity of the
day; yet no sudden resolution was taken until some days after. In the mean time
Letters arrived both from the Pope, and the Queen of Sweden, representing the
matter, as a mere accident caused by a sudden, and an unreasonable outrage of
the Soldiery, for which neither the Pope, nor his Kindred, nor the Commanders
could be accountable; and with this account the King began to be so well
satisfied, that he had once thoughts to pass it by, and show no farther
resentments of it. But whilst this was meditating, Letters came from the Duke
of Crequi, advising, that by reason of the ill treatment he received from the
Court of Rome, the common provisions for the support of his House were in a
great measure restrained; so that he should be forced with his Family to leave
Rome, and to retire into the Dominions of the Duke of Toscany. This Advice and
new matter of Affront so enraged the mind of the King, that he immediately
commanded the Nuntio to depart his Dominions, which was executed so
effectually, that he was conducted by a Guard to the confines of Savoy.

In the mean time the Pope being desirous to excuse, and protect Cardinal
Imperiale, was contented to take the blame upon himself; and to manage the
matter, he constituted a select Congregation of Cardinals, viz. Rospigliosi,
Chigi, Borromeo, Imperiale, Pio, Sachetti, Corrado, and Farnese, to examine,
and discourse the matters in Dispute in a Political manner, and to give their
Opinions by what ways and means, things might best admit of an Accommodation.
The Cardinal Chigi also obtained license to be admitted to a Visit with the
French Ambassador: but it signified little, for the Ambassador appeared
sullen, and reserved; saying, that he had no quarrel with the Corsi, nor had he
reason to blame them for executing only the commands of their Masters.

On the first of September Crequi departed from Rome, in company with the Duke
of Cesarini, who having showed some concernment, and partiality for the French
Party, lay under the displeasure and indignation of the Pope. So soon as the
Ambassador was gone, discontents slew yet higher than before; for it was not
only advised to commit Cardinal d' Este into the Prison of St. Angelo, but
also to deprive both him, and Mancini of the degree and dignity of Cardinals.

But howsoever, it was thought necessary to appease the King by some pleasing
Lenitives, and by means which might pacify his just Anger and displeasure: To
which end, the Pope dispatched diverse affectionate Letters to him, full of
sorrow, and resentment for the late unhappy mischiefs: diverse Proposals were
also dispatched to the Duke of Crequi tending to an Accommodation: and Edicts
published against the Corsi, who were criminals in this Action, desiring all
Princes into whose Dominions they were fled, not to allow, or grant them
protection. And farther in detestation of this late fact, a Company of the
Corsi, which were not concerned in the Riot, were disbanded, and cashiered from
service of the Pope.

In the mean time, Crequi remained at Radocofani (which is within the Dominions
of the Great Duke) expecting Orders from the King in what manner he was to
behave and govern himself: which being come with the forms of adjustment, and
some private instructions in favor of the Dukes of Parma, and Modena; the
Abbat Rospigliosi (Nephew of the Cardinal of that name) was dispatched to the
Ambassador with Instructions, and Proposals: but this Treaty taking no effect,
Rasponi was employed: but then the Duke proposed two Alternatives, the one was
totally excluded, and the other admitted of so many exceptions; that Crequi
despairing of any reconciliation, went to Luca, and thence to Ligorne, from
whence passing into France, he added more fuel to the Fire, increasing the
differences which were as yet too fresh, and new to be reconciled. The two
Alternatives were as follow:

That Castro and Rociglione should be restored to the Duke of Parma, and the
Valley of Comachio to the Duke of Modena: the most Christian King requiring no
other satisfaction for the late injuries he received, than that he might be
able to do justice to the two Princes his Allies and Friends, who had resigned
themselves to his defense, and protection. And to the end that Ambassadors
from his Majesty and other Princes might for the future live quietly at Rome
with their Families, and enjoy the privileges and immunities which appertain
to them according to the Law of Nations; no Design should be enterprised
against them, without the consent, and knowledge of the Sacred College.

That the Processes at Law against the Duke Cesarini should be superseded; and
reparations made him for all detriment done to his Estate, and disparagement to
his Honor. And that likewise proceedings at Law, whether Civil, or criminal
against any Person on this occasion should cease, after the twentieth of
August. That all Corpse of Guard after that time, and quarters of Soldiers be
removed out of Rome; and after this, That the manner, how the Duke Cesarini is
to be received into Rome, be treated, and agreed with himself.

But in case the Pope did not judge fit to assent, and agree to these Proposals,
then this Alternative was offered:

That Don Mario be banished to Siena for five years. That Cardinal Ghigi be
sent Legate into France, to make the Pope's excuse at his first Audience, upon
the matters which lately happened in Rome. That at his second Audience, he
shall supplicate his Majesty's Pardon both for himself and his whole Family;
and that the form, and circumstances of this Address, shall be ordered and
concerted with the Ambassador Crequi. That Cardinal Imperiale be degraded, and
deprived of his Hat. That the Captain of the Guards be cashiered, and for ever
banished. That a Pyramid be erected amidst the late quarters of the Corsi at
Rome, with an Inscription specifying the Crime for which they were banished,
and for which they were rendered incapable for ever more to serve, or bear Arms
in Rome.

These were the first draughts of those Proposals which France offered in order
to an Accommodation; which being brought to Rome did greatly trouble the mind
of the Pope, with many melancholy and distracted thoughts; of which he eased
himself in a full Consistory, complaining of the hard terms exacted from him by
the King of France: For reply whereunto some of the Cardinals, and particularly
Azzolino, spoke loudly against the Proposals, encouraging the Pope to a
fortitude of mind, and to stand stiff upon his terms, rather demanding
satisfaction from the King, than yielding to terms derogatory to his Honor.
Howsoever the Pope being straightened in his thoughts, and being divided between
the apprehensions he conceived of a War against the Church, and the tenderness
he had for his Relations, his own Honor, and the reputation of the Sacred
College, which he esteemed wounded in the person of Cardinal Imperiale; he
inclined rather to the second Alternative, than to the first: and accordingly
he designed to send Cardinal Chigi his Legate into France: and Imperiale was to
be removed from his Government in Rome, and sent Legate into the Marca. But
because this change appeared to the King rather a promotion, than a punishment,
he was sent to Genoua, there to reside, until he could contrive means to
reconcile himself to the King: but because the Brief did not denote this
dismission under the term of Banishment, exceptions were made thereunto as
dissentaneous from the pleasure of his Majesty: but as to Don Mario the Pope
seemed to grant whatsoever was desired, and to sacrifice him, and all his
Relations, for the quietness and peace of the Church; but this was only a
flourish, and an excess of words as afterward appeared in the sequel, when
matters came to be put in execution. As to the Corsi, whatsoever was demanded,
was condescended unto.

But things being in this imperfect manner agreed; this year ended with fears,
and apprehensions of an ensuing War. And in the mean time Avignon revolting
from the Pope, the Inhabitants pulled down the Arms of the Church, and expelled
the Papal Officers from the City: the People crying aloud for France, and their
return to that Dominion, from whence they had been unjustly alienated by
connivance, or indulgence of former Kings: and now they erected the Arms of
France in all public places; and restored, or renewed the Ancient
Inscriptions, which vindicated, and attested the Right which the Kings of
France held unto that City.

To augment all these difficulties, Spain seemed inclining to the concernments
of France; for which reason the Venetians appeared the most proper Instruments
to be employed in the Offices of Mediation; and accordingly the Ambassador of
that Republic residing at Paris called Luigi Grimani received Instructions to
treat in favor of the Pope; and indeed the way of Treaty was the only remedy
which Rome could propose; for the King of Spain, to the great admiration of the
World, had granted leave for the French Troops to march through Milan into the
Ecclesiastical State. The Duke of Savoy adhered to the French Interest; Genoua
being weak, and unable to resist, durst not deny a compliance; the Duke of
Parma, and Modena for their own convenience, and hopes of benefit, became
parties in combination against the Pope. So that France nourishing vast Designs
by this conjuncture of Affairs, kept up their dissatisfactions in the Court of
Rome, which they pretended to have been augmented, and enflamed by that
honorable treatment and reception, which the Pope had given to Charles Duke of
Loraine, who was fled from France, and shrouded himself under the protection of
the Church.

An. 1663.
About the beginning of this year Cardinal d' Este, and the Duke of Crequi
arrived at Paris, where they gave a full relation of all matters which had
lately passed in that Outrage, committed by the Corsi; with all the particulars
of the Treaty which had been acted at St. Quirico: But they represented things
in such severe terms, as greatly exasperated the mind of h^^ Majesty, and
caused him to reject all the Briefs, Papers, and Letters which were sent from
the Pope, and Cardinals for their (...): so that nothing was now discoursed of
at Paris but War, and the manner how to carry, and manage the French Arms in
Italy; which were so feared and apprehended at Rome, that all the consultations
of the Consistory were to facilitate the Negotiations, and give such
satisfaction, as might prevent a War.

In the mean time Aloise Grimani Ambassador for the Republic of Venice, then
residing at Paris, used all means possible to bring matters to a reasonable
understanding: in which he so well succeeded, that he procured a new Deputation
for Plenipotentiaries to be nominated, and appointed by both sides, and the
place for Treaty to be Lions: So on the twentieth of February an Instrument was
signed by the Ambassador Grimani, and the Duke of Crequi, and subscribed also
by Monsieur Tellier Secretary of State, and War; whereby it was concerted, and
agreed to enter upon a Treaty at the place aforesaid, and that
Plenipotentiaries should be sent thither with Commissions from his Majesty.

Thus for some time whilst the troubles were a little appeased, and quieted;
the Court of France passed the Carneval with their usual jollity; and
entertained it self with celebration of the marriage, between Madmoiselle de
Valois, and the Duke of Savoy, the Count de Soissons representing the person of
the Duke at the ceremony of Espousals. The which few days after was followed by
the marriage of Madmoiselle Mariana Mancini Niece of Cardinal Mazarini, with
the Duke of Buglion great Chamberlain of France.

And now the Plenipotentiaries preparing for their meeting at Lions: Aloise
Sagredo arrived at Paris in quality of Ambassador for the Venetians, and to
succeed in the place of Grimani, who was to be assisting in the Office of
Mediation at Lions; Grimani, and Monsignor Rasponi Plenipotentiary from the
Pope met at the time, and place appointed; but the Duke of Crequi on pretense
of the Queen Mother's sickness, or rather because he desired to be waited, and
attended for, came not to Lions till toward the middle of May: where entering
on their Conference, matters were proceeded to a hopeful condition of
agreement; when on a sudden they were unhappily interrupted, by the Title which
the Pope sent to Rasponi to be his Nuntio Extraordinary to all Christian
Princes: for whereas the French King had absolutely determined, not to receive
any person from the Pope with Title of Nuntio until the differences were
accommodated between himself and Rome; the Treaty was by Order of the King
broken off upon that punctilio; but afterward was by Order renewed again at
Bonvicino, a place situate on the Frontiers of Savoy; the Parochial Church of
which is in the Dominions of France; and on the other side of the Bridge, (which
is the Territory of Savoy) is an ancient, and famous Monastery of Carmelite
Friars; thither as we have said the Treaty was transferred, where besides
Crequi, Rasponi, and Grimani, there were present the Agents for Modena, and
Parma, and the twelve Consuls of Avigion; Rasponi took his quarters on the side
of Savoy, and the other on that of France.

Here the particulars were again debated; and the Pope was persuaded to
condescend to all the pretensions of France, excepting only to the restitution
of Castro; on which the King peremptorily insisted, because he had engaged his
Honor and Authority therein, by the Articles of Peace made at the Pyreneans.
The Pope on the other side insisted. That it was not in his Power to pass an
Act so prejudicial to the Apostolical Chair, and contrary to the many Bulls of
his Predecessors. And thus whilst both sides insisted resolutely on this
Point with many delays and punctilios, which obstructed a conclusion, the King
dispatched an express to Rome, to know the ultimate resolution of the Pope on
that Point: and when answer was returned, that by reason of the Sentences
passed by the Tribunals of Justice, and that Castro was in the Camera annexed
to the triple Crown, and incorporated into the Dominions of the Church; he
could not assent to have it dismembered from St. Peter's Patrimony: so soon, I
say, as this news came, the Treaty broke off, every one returning to his Place
and Country.

During this Treaty at Buonvicinio, great preparations were making at Rome for
a War; and when it broke up without agreement, then contrary to all expectation
the Troops were disbanded, and the Officers Reformed; though in the mean time
the French Troops began to march into Italy, which was the occasion of a witty
saying: That at Rome they armed, when they knew not with whom they were to have
War, and disarmed, when they knew not with whom they should have Peace. And yet
it is probable, and by most believed, that there was never any real design of
Rupture by either side; but that the pretensions, and preparations for this
War, were only in appearance, and made subservient to other Projects: though
to make it appear real, the Duke of Beaufort was sent with a Fleet of Ships on
the Coast of Italy, the approach of which gave an Allarm at the very Gates of
Rome; but afterward disappeared, and stood off again into the Sea, pretending
to be driven to Calari in Sardinia by Tempests and contrary Winds.

And though neither the Pope, nor King (as was believed) were in earnest in
matter of a War; yet the ill correspondence between them was judged prejudicial
to Christendom, and obstructive to those succors which were intended against
the Turk, who had then lately made himself Master of Newhausell, and was
triumphant in Hungary. Wherefore the Venetians with more warm instances than
ever, labored to renew the Treaty; in which Office the Spaniards also judged
themselves obliged to join, because they desired to keep the Arms of France
distant from Italy: and both one and the other used their endeavors so
effectually with the Pope and the King; that they both consented to enter into
another Treaty: and accordingly the French King constituted Monsignore
Bourlemont then at Florence to be his Plenipotentiary, and the Pope ordained
Rasponi with a like Power from him; Pisa being the place appointed for the
Treaty: where after some few days of debate, all matters came to be concluded,
and agreed in form, and manner following:

That his Holiness to please the most Christian King, had assented to dismember
Castro from the Patrimony of the Church: conditionally that the Duke of Parma
within the space of eight years pay the sum of eight millions six hundred and
nineteen Crowns to the Camera: Of which sum having paid one half, he shall be
invested, and restored into one half of the Principality. And in case that any
dispute shall arise touching the division of the moiety, the same shall be
determined by two Arbitrators indifferently chosen, and they not agreeing, the
difference shall be referred to the Umpirage of a third Person. Or otherwise
the Camera making the division, the Duke shall have Power to choose; or
otherwise if the Duke makes the division, then the choice shall be in the Power
of the Camera.

That the Duke of Modena shall renounce all his pretensions to Comacchio. And
the Pope at the instance of the King shall in lieu thereof give and surrender
unto the said Duke Mount d' Este, which was valued at two hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns or thereabouts; and shall remit to him the Interest which he
owes to the Montists, which was estimated at fifty thousand Crowns; together
with a donative of forty thousand Crowns, or in lieu thereof some Palace in
Rome to the Duke's satisfaction. And that the Pope shall give a Bull of Jus
Patronatus Perpetui to the House of Este of the Abbey of Pomposa; and Bondeno,
to which the Popes shall never pretend Right or Title.

That the Cardinal Nephew shall be sent Legate into France, where at his first
public Audience with the King, he shall repeat these very words: That his
Holiness is extremely sorry for the late barbarous outrage committed against
the Person of the Duke of Crequi his Majesty's Ambassador; in which matter he
prays his Majesty to believe, that neither he, nor any of his Family was
concerned, or was culpable, the truth of which he shall Attest unto his Majesty
with all the assurances of respect, and reverence for the Person of his
Majesty. That Cardinal Imperiale be dispeeded into France to justify himself;
in regard his Majesty is pleased to grant him liberty so to do, and will accept
of his submission.

That his Holiness shall restore Cardinal Maldachino to his pristine State and
condition, and free him of all damage and interest: and for better security
shall send a Brief to the King of such Tenor.

That so soon as the Ratification of this Treaty shall arrive at Rome, Don
Mario shall immediately depart from thence, and shall by a Writing under his
hand, and upon the faith of a Gentleman declare, that he was no ways concerned
in the late Riot of the Corsi; the which shall be confirmed by a Brief of the
Pope avouching, and giving assurance of his innocence of that Fact: And that he
shall not return to Rome until such time, that his justification being carried
to the King by the hand of the Legate, his Majesty shall declare his pleasure
therein.

That Don Augustino shall upon approach of the Duke of Crequi to Rome, go forth
to meet him as far as St. Quirico in case he comes by way of Toscany: if by
Sea, then he shall meet him at Civita-vecchia; if by Romagna, then at Narni;
and shall there make known to him the great trouble, which the Pope has
conceived for the late accident.

That Donna Beronice, and the Princess Farnese, shall go and meet the Lady
Ambassadress, as far as Ponte Molle, where they shall both testify the
extraordinary sorrow they conceived for the late misfortune which caused her
departure, and the joy they have for her return, and happy understanding of all
matters.

That his Holiness shall in a most effectual manner instruct his Ministers to
make known unto the Ambassador, the high esteem he has for a personage of his
Quality who represents the Person of so great a King, who is eldest Son of the
Church.

That the Duke of Cesarini shall be restored to the possession and enjoyment of
his Goods, and Estate.

That the like shall be observed, and practiced toward all Persons who have
had any concernment in the late matter.

That the whole Nation of the Corsi shall be declared incapable to serve not
only in Rome, but in any other part of the Ecclesiastical State. And that the
Captain of the Guards in Rome shall be cashiered from his Office.

That a Pyramid shall be erected in Rome over against the place where the Corsi
held their Corpse of Guard, with an Inscription declaring the Crime for which
they were banished from the Ecclesiastical State.

That so soon as the Cardinal-Legat should arrive at Paris, and the former
particulars were accomplished, that then the King would again restore Avignon
to the Pope: It being agreed that neither any of the Inhabitants, Strangers, or
Sojourners there living, shall be troubled, or questioned for any thing they
said or acted in in the revolt of that City, which happened on the twentieth of
August 1662. or for any thing which passed on this occasion from that time,
until the day that his Majesty restored it to the Pope.

These Particulars thus agreed, and signed by the Plenipotentiaries were sent
to Rome and Paris to be ratified and confirmed; and in the mean time the Pope
labored to excuse the banishment of Don Mario, and the sending of Cardinal
Chigi in quality of his Legate into France; but neither the one nor the other
would be dispensed with. Wherefore Don Mario retired to Sora in the Kingdom of
Naples; and Cardinal Chigi began his Journey with a noble Equipage and
Attendance of Prelates and Gentlemen, amongst which was Monsignor Colonna,
appointed to reside at Avignon in quality of Legate for the Pope. The Cardinal
being entered into France, was received in all places with great honor, and
splendid entertainment; and being conducted to Fontainbleau, where the Court
then resided, he had his first Audience with the King; all things passing to
the mutual satisfaction of both Parties. Some days after, Cardinal Imperiale
arrived at Paris, to accomplish another Article of the Treaty; where having
justified himself according to agreement, the King accepted his submission, and
returned him with testimonials, signifying the entire satisfaction he received
by his Address.

The other Points in the Articles being to be executed at Rome by the Duke of
Crequi, the Cardinals d' Este and Maldachino arrived there, and were received
by the Pope, and the Court according to the formalities agreed. And the Duke
being likewise mollified by the Addresses which the Queen of Sweden made to
him, as also by the Application made to him by the Cardinals Corrado, and
Azzolino, who always spoke loud and boldly against the French; all Animosities
were appeased, and these troubles ended, which had administered great vexation
and unquietness to the spirit of the Pope, during three years that they had
continued.

The Controversies of France being thus happily composed, Don Mario had license
to return again to Rome; and the Pope had time to inspect the turbulencies in
Spain, which were growing into dangerous consequences, upon Disputes raised
concerning the Immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin. The Dominicans
violently maintained the contrary Tenent, in opposition to the Jesuits; in
which the Disciples of both sides became so concerned, that what could not be
determined by a Moderator in the Schools, was in danger to be decided in the
Fields, or Streets by the Sword. To prevent which, the King sent the Bishop of
Piacenza to the Pope, desiring his Sentence and determination of the question,
as being the Oracle to whom they were to have recourse for solution in all
difficulties of this nature. The Pope who was a great Favourer of the Jesuits
and their Doctrines, consulted the question with such, who were inclined to
that Opinion; and after some days consideration, he determined for the
Immaculate Conception: which though he would not enter, or enumerate amongst
the Doctrines of Faith; yet he published a Bull, denouncing several Penalties,
and Censures against those, who should either publicly or privately maintain
the contrary. And in the same year, he canonized Francis Sales Bishop, An. 1665.
and Prince of Geneva; who by his Treatise called an Introduction to a Holy
Life, has given sufficient testimony of a devout, and spiritual Soul.

This year also the Sorbonists at Paris undertook to censure and condemn two
Books, the one of James Vernant, who asserts the Pope's Power, and
Infallibility of the Pope in derogation of Councils, Kings, and Bishops, and
the other of Amadeus Guimenius, who defends the Morals of the Jesuits: the Pope
being displeased with this confidence of the Sorbonists, who being but a
College only, should presume to determine Cases of such high nature, complained
to the King, who in compliance with his Holiness, assembled a Congregation of
Bishops at Pontoise; the which being met, passed a Censure on the Sorbonists;
not condemning their Opinion, but their presumption for that being but a
private College, they should usurp a Power which appertained to the
Congregation, and not unto them. The Pope not satisfied with these imperfect
proceedings, amends them at Rome, and by a Bull condemns the Opinions of the
Sorbonists under penalty of Excommunication. But this Doctrine of the Pope's
could not be digested by the Parliament of Paris, who appeared Favorers of the
Sorbonists; howsoever lest these questions should engender discords, and cause
great trouble in the State, they were silenced, and by the King's Authority
suppressed, every one being under severe penalties forbidden to dispute, or
handle questions of this dangerous consequence. Wherefore these Points being
laid asleep, rather than eradicated are sometimes revived, and suffered to be
started, whenever they are seasonable, and judged commodious for the welfare
of the State.

The same year likewise the Pope condemned the five Propositions of Cornelius
Jansenius Bishop of Ypres concerning Grace, and Free Will; and confirmed the
Edict, which Innocent X. had made against them. Notwithstanding which, so
little regard was had thereunto, that those Opinions are still maintained and
defended both by words and Writings. But now to proceed to his Acts and public
Works.

That Alexander VII. might not appear less splendid in his public Monuments,
than other Popes: he repaired many Ruins, enlarged and adorned many Streets,
much to the Ornament of the City, and convenience of the Inhabitants.

The Pantheon which was a famous Temple of Old Rome, built by M. Agrippa; and
afterward by Boniface IV. dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, he repaired, and
altered with much advantage: for whereas formerly they descended unto it by
steps, he filled the low places with rubbish, so that an entrance was made
thereunto upon a level; and having raised the Pillars which were almost buried
in the Earth, he therewith erected a stately Portico, making it a magnificent
structure, which before was filled up with dirt and rubbish cast thereunto by
the neighboring Market.

The Forum or Marketplace, where the Columna Antoniana stands, he cleansed,
and removed all rubbish from it, and so beautified it on all sides, that it is
now a pleasant, and convenient part of the City.

The Archigymnasium Romanum which was begun by Leo X. he finished, and adorned
with a sumptuous Library; the Chamber for which, he erected at his own charge,
and supplied it with excellent Books, for the common use of learned Men.

He also designed to build a College, wherein to entertain the most learned and
famous Men of the Age, invited thereunto from all parts of the World. So that
where any one was esteemed excellent and famous in any Science, and especially
if he were learned, and an acute Disputant in Divinity; he might be here
entertained with a convenient subsistence: to support which, and make a Revenue
for this College, he designed the desolation of some Monasteries, which having
formerly been ordained with holy Discipline, and to a good end, were now fallen
from their original, and primary Institution: but whilst he was contemplating,
and contriving this design, he became infirm, and afflicted with a Chronical
Distemper, which abated the heat of his proceedings, which afterward ended,
and were wholly laid aside by his death.

He erected a noble, and magnificent Hall adjoining to the Vatican, which he
called an Archivium, or a place to lodge all Papers and Writings relating to
the Apostolical Sea; that is, all Papers rendering an account of the
Negotiations of Nuntios in the Courts of foreign Princes: Likewise the Letters
written to Popes from the Governors, and Ministers of Provinces belonging to
the Church; such Letters also as had been written concerning the Rights and
Privileges of the Papal Chair: for which there having formerly been no certain
place allotted, wherein to conserve them, they were dispersed, and scattered in
diverse places, and many of them in the hands of such, whose Uncles, or
Relations had been Popes.

The Vatican Library he increased with an addition of all the Books of the
Dukes of Vrbin, both Manuscripts, and Books printed; And lest whilst he was
intent to the adornment of Rome, he should seem forgetful of his own City, he
beautified the Cathedral Church of Siena, which by demolishing the Houses which
stood near it, he made a large, and open Area to it, removing all impediments
which obscured, or obstructed the Prospect. The barbarous Latin which is
written about the outside of this Church is very observable, the words are
these: Omnis centenus Romae semper est Jubilenus
Crimina laxantur, cui paenitet ista donantur,
Et confirmavit Bonifacius, and roboravit.
Whilst Alexander was employed in these, and other greater Works, he was
esteemed to have neglected those assistances which former Popes have usually
given and contributed for support of those Princes, which have been borderers,
and in War with the Turk, who is the grand Enemy of Christendom. Wherefore that
he might give some instances to the contrary, in the year 1666. An. 1666.
he equipped his Fleet of Galleys under command of Bichi, and having joined
them with the Galleys of Malta (which by their Institution are obliged to serve
under the Standard of the Church,) they entered the Archipelago, and committed
some spoils on the Maritime Towns, or places under Dominion of the Turk; in
which having passed that Summer without any action very memorable, they
returned toward the end of the year to their Winter quarters: and this year
the Pope recruited the Regiment which he maintained in Dalmatia with two
hundred Soldiers.

During the twelve years of this Pope's Reign he created thirty eight
Cardinals, of which eight were made in the last year of his life; namely
Roberti his Nuntio in France, Visconti his Nuntio in Spain, Julio Spinola his
Nuntio to the Emperor, Caracciolo Auditor of the Camera; likewise John Dolfino
Patriarch of Aquileia was made Cardinal at the instance of the Venetians,
Ghidobald de Thun Archbishop of Saltzburg at the desire of the Emperor, the
Duke of Vendosme in compliance with France, and the Duke of Montalto to please
Spain. And farther to exalt and dignifie the degree of Cardinals, he appointed
a Congregation of the Sacred College to consider, and direct some Formulary, or
Rules which might serve to augment the Prerogatives of Cardinals in opposition
to the pretenses of the Roman Barons: one amongst which was, that the little
Bell, which was carried and sounded before the Cardinals, should be no more in
use; for that the luster of their Purple was so evident, as needed no such mean
Signal to make them known.

In fine, Pope Alexander having reigned twelve years with frequent fits and
agonies of the Stone; at length being worn out with business, and extremity of
his Disease, he died on the twelfth day of May 1667. in the sixty ninth year of
his Age, having reigned twelve years, one month, and sixteen days. Some time
before his departure out of this World, he made a short Discourse to the
Cardinals concerning the frailties of humane life, from which the greatness of
Popes was not exempted: and which was more demonstrable in him, by reason of
the Chronical distemper under which he had for many years labored; concluding
at the last with exhortations to elect such a Pope, who might correct, and make
amends for those Infirmities to which he had been subject.

This Pope was naturally of a good habit of body, but much weakened by a
dissection which was made for the stone in his Bladder, when he was at Colen;
he was lean, and not very robust in his limbs, but howsoever had such strength
in the gripe of his hands, that scarce any one could quit himself from him,
whom he had seized. He was of a middle stature, of a pleasant Air in his
Countenance, and of excellent grace in Elocution, which was not much altered by
the loss of his teeth, which were loosened, and falled out by a continual
defluxion of rheum upon his gums. He was very facetious and pleasant in his
Conversation, and delighted himself very much in reading the ancient Latin
Poets: Wherefore when the Cardinals came to congratulate his Election to the
Pontificate, he made use of that Verse out of Virgil,

-- Dies, quem semper acerbum
Semper honoratum (sic vos voluistis) habebo.
This Pope was endued with natural parts in an extraordinary manner; and was
very polite in his dress, and in his way of living: howsoever in the course of
his years he gave an instance, and example to the World what difference there
is in those qualifications which are required to make up the virtues of a
Prince, and of a private Person, or of a Pope, and a Prelate. For whilst he
only wore the Purple of a Cardinal, he governed himself in such a mean between
the defects blamed in the Pope that Reigned, and the Virtues desired and
expected in a Successor, that he appeared the only desirable Person in the
World, to whom with most confidence the Keys of St. Peter might be delivered.
But being arrived at the top, and summary point of his Ambition, of his desires
and designs, he lived with much less caution and industry than before, and
giving way to that vanity of Genius, which he had formerly suppressed or
disguised; he so amused himself in the ostentation of Buildings, that he
neglected both the concernments of Princes and the care of his People: And
whilst he labored to exalt and enrich his Nephews and Kindred, he died
unlamented, and much abated in that reputation, with which he entered into the
Papal Chair.

CLEMENT IX.
THE Funeral Rites of Alexander VII. being performed according to the solemn
customs of former Popes, and the Cardinals having held several Congregations,
at which Audience was given to the Ambassadors of foreign Princes; and the
Chigi with other Officers of the Church and City being confirmed in their
several places, the Cardinals entered the Conclave on the second day of June
1667. But first, and before they entered, a great Dispute arose concerning the
place where the Conclave was to be held; for that the Vatican being seated in a
bad Air, was at that season of the year reputed almost contagious, at least so
incommodious by reason of the excessive heats of the Summer, that it was judged
pernicious to the health of all the College; and therefore Monte Cavallo was
proposed, as a situation more secure, and which with the expense of two
thousand Crowns might be rendered as commodious as the Vatican: The Persons
appointed to oversee this Work, were the Cardinals Barberino, Orsino, and Este;
who having considered thereof, made their report, that the House of Monte
Cavallo was not capable of being made convenient to receive the Conclave in
such form, as in the Vatican; where after the manner of Conclaves, the Cells of
the Cardinals are all on the same floor; the which, and many other
inconveniences rendered that, and all other places in Rome incapable to
receive the Conclave in such form, as was ever practiced at the Vatican; and
therefore it was the place chosen and appointed as formerly. Notwithstanding
the badness of the Air, and the heat of the season, which served to hasten the
Election; for though the Cardinals were divided into many Parties, and adhered
to their several Interests; yet being wise Men, they knew to prefer health, and
long life before other considerations whatsoever.

Wherefore the Cardinals entering the Vatican; the third of June was the first
day of the Conclave, which was divided into five several Parties or Factions:
the first was that of the Chigi, which was the most numerous of any, consisting
of thirty four Votes; the second was that of the Barberini, composed of
sixteen; the Spaniards of nine, and the French of seven; and lastly the Flying
Squadron made up of the Pamfilians, and other malcontents, formed a party of
about ten Voices: of which Imperiale, and Azzolini were the chief, who joining
themselves to the Spanish Cardinals opposed at the first Scrutiny the election
of Farnese in such manner, that he seemed excluded from all possibility of
being Pope: howsoever his Party had certainly prevailed, had not Barberino with
his Associates opposed the Choice: for though Farnese was a Person qualified
with all the knowledge of Political Laws, and Ecclesiastical Canons; yet the
memory of what had passed, between his Uncle Urban and the Dukes of Parma, was
too fresh to be in a few years so well reconciled, as to engage the Barberini
to that Interest.

Wherefore Barbarino casting his Eye on an other Person, assembled all the
Creatures of his Uncle Urban VIII. to favor the Election which he designed.
And having hereunto joined the Cardinals of the Flying Squadron, with several
others; he went to the Apartment of Cardinal Chigi, to whom in the name of his
Party, he gave him to understand, that they were sufficiently sensible, that
the Power of his Enemy in the Conclave was such; that none was in a possibility
of being created Pope, without his assent and concurrence; and therefore they
were come to know which of his Creatures he judged worthy of his suffrage. To
which Chigi, after having returned thanks to Barberino, made this Reply, That
all his Friends were beloved, and esteemed by him with that equality of
affection, that he knew not how to prefer one before another; or by the
nomination of one to disoblige others. Whereunto Barberino made Answer, That
since his Eminence was not pleased to name any, he would propose Rospigliosi,
which Chigi seemed readily to accept; but in reality his mind was contrary, as
appeared by the Scrutiny, in which his Vote was otherwise disposed. And indeed
Chigi had no great affection for the person of Rospigliosi; having not only
taken some disgust against him in the time that he served in quality of
Secretary to his Uncle Alexander VII. but also had discovered the bad
inclination which many others of the Chigian Party had to him: at which
Barbarino did not openly demonstrate any great resentment, hoping that by such
delays and Controversies, he might spin a Clue so fine, as would lead and
conduct him to the height of his desires; and indeed he had improved his
interest so well, that he had attained to nineteen Votes. In the mean time
endeavors were made for the Cardinals Brancacci, Spinola, Elci, and others
which prolonged the issue of Affairs, which every Cardinal by reason of the
heats, and ill Air desired to conclude, that so they might be enlarged from
their confinement, which began to be so unhealthful that many of the Cardinals
fell sick, as also their Conclavists who attended them, and Cardinal Sforsa
Palavicino died: the which gave such an allarm to the whole Conclave, that the
Cardinals resolved on a dispatch, which in all probability appeared most easy
in the Person of Rospigliosi. The interest which most opposed it, was that of
Chigi; against which the other Cardinals uniting their Power, induced Chigi to
concur, lest a Pope should be chosen in despite of his opposition, and against
his consent; wherefore Chigi and Barbarino agreeing upon the matter concerted
with the factions of France and Spain, though the Cardinal Vandorme was not
well pleased with the Choice.

In fine, all Parties agreeing, the Cardinals hastened into the Chapel; where
Barbarino and Azzolino, having procured thirty one Votes for Rospigliosi; Chigi
and his Party came in, and concurred with the rest, so that of sixty four
Cardinals then in the Conclave, Rospigliosi was elected, and created Pope by
sixty one.

Thus after eighteen days that this Conclave had continued, Rospigliosi was on
the twentieth of June proclaimed Pope by Cardinal d' Este with these words,
which are according to the usual form:

Annuncio vobis Gaudium magnum. Habemus Eminentissimum, and Reverendissimum
Dominum Cardinalem Julium Rospigliosum in Summum Pontificem, qui vocatur
Clemens Nonus. After which the usual Adoration followed which was performed by
the Cardinals, and the Pope being habited in his Pontifical Vestments, was
carried in procession with attendance of all the Cardinals to St. Peter's
Church. And on the 26th. of June he was there Crowned, according to all the
Rites and Ceremonies of Popes.

Julio Rospigliosi was born at Pistoia, a City in the Dominions of the Great
Duke of Toscany; his Family was Noble, and much more illustrated by his own
Virtues and Fortune. For being naturally of a quick and lively understanding,
he plentifully answered the expectation of his Parents, rendering abundant
fruits in return of that care, and expense they had employed in his Education:
and being arrived at some maturity of age, Urban VIII. then reigning, observed
a genius in him fit and proper for business; so that the first step he made to
preferment was by the favor of Urban, who made him Auditor to his Nephew
Cardinal Barberin, when he sent him in a solemn manner with the Character of
his Legate into France, and then into Spain with Instructions to compose the
differences about the Valteline, and establish a happy Peace between the two
Kings: in which Employment he so well discharged and acquitted himself, that
Urban made him his Nuntio in Ordinary to the Court of Spain; the which Office,
though commonly conferred but for three years, yet Rospigliosi made himself so
pleasing unto and esteemed by his Catholic Majesty, and so useful to the
Interest of Rome, that his Commission was continued for the full space of
eleven years, to the entire and plenary satisfaction both of the Pope, and the
King.

After the death of Urban VIII. those who had taken the Government into their
hands under Innocent X. beholding Rospigliosi with an Eye of envy, and
emulation, caused him to be recalled from his residence of Nuntio, to make room
for some other Favorite. After which returning to Rome, he lived in a private
manner without other preferment, than of one of the Canons of Santa Maria
Maggiore, until the death of this Pope, when during the vacancy of the Sea, he
was by the unanimous consent of the College of Cardinals constituted Governor
of Rome; which at that time is always so licentious, that it requires a sober,
severe, and vigilant Officer to restrain the abuses and outrages which are
daily committed in the City.

Afterward Alexander VII. being elected Pope, to whom the Abilities and
Virtues of Rospigliosi were sufficiently known, he chose him for his Secretary
of State; and to render him the more considerable in that Office, he conferred
on him the honor of the Cardinals Hat; in which employment he gave such
testimonies of his abilities and integrity, that Alexander would usually say,
That he was served by a Secretary after his own heart, on whom he could
confidently rely, and repose all his cares. And indeed his Services were not
only pleasing to his Master, but in such manner conspicuous to the whole
College of Cardinals, and to all Rome, as served him for a step to that high
promotion to which he succeeded.

And now Rospigliosi being Elected, Crowned, and established in the Papal Chair
(as we have said) under the name of Clement IX. he in the first place rendered
thanks to every Cardinal in particular, for the suffrage he had given him, and
then to them all in general in a full Consistory; where he delivered himself
with such eloquent expressions, and with such excellency of Speech, as gave
sufficient proof of the gift of Rhetoric, with which he was naturally endued,
and which with an admirable elocution adorned all the Speeches which he made in
public.

It has been the custom of Popes to perform some Act after their Coronation,
which may reconcile the minds of the people to them; and accordingly this Pope,
that he might give some Essay of his liberal and generous inclinations toward
the Public; he in the first place took care, that Provisions might be cheap
and plentiful at Rome, and eased the People of some Taxes with which they were
burdened; and on this occasion he caused certain Medals of Gold and Silver to
be stamped, with the impression of a Pelican, and with this Motto: Non sibi,
sed aliis Clemens.

Moreover, To give some indications of his Mind to the World concerning those
resolutions, which he had taken to govern with Prudence, Wisdom, and severe
adherence to Righteousness and Judgment, he stamped this Motto on the first
Money he coined: Constantia Silverii ad imitandum proposita. For he himself
being elected Pope on Silverius, or St. Sylvesters's day, who was a Pope firm
and steady to his resolutions, and unmovable in matters which related to the
welfare of the Church, he took this Omen for an Admonition, obliging him to
govern with the same Spirit, which animated his Predecessor Sylverius.

Wherefore, attending to the welfare of his Subjects, and to the advancement of
the Christian Cause, he eased (as we have said) his People of several Taxes,
and in lieu thereof charged himself with a Debt of a million of Crowns: to
extinguish which, and to make that provision which the Venetians required
against the Turk, who that year hardly pressed the City of Candia, he assented
to the dissolution of certain Religious Houses, which seemed superfluous and of
little benefit, or concernment to the Church; namely, the Canons of St. George
in Alga, the Gesuati, the Jeronimites of Fiesole; which being places remote,
and of no great use, were formerly under the consideration of Innocent X. and
Alexander VII. and by both marked out with design to be reduced, when the
emergent pressures of the Republic should require a supply. And now that time
being come: for the Vizier Kuperlee had for above the space of a whole year
besieged the City of Candia, had strongly entrenched himself, and being daily
re enforced with new supplies, was in a probable and fair way to gain the Town,
and therewith to become Master of all the Island of Candia. Wherefore the Pope
issued his Bull, granting license to the Venetian Republic to sell the Lands
and Revenues belonging to those places aforementioned within their Dominions,
and to make use of the Money to carry on their War, and expel the Turks from
the Kingdom of Candia. In this conjuncture the Pope intended to avail himself
of the urgencies, and necessities of the Republic; and to induce them thereby
to consent to the abolition of certain Laws, which were, and had been very
derogatory to the Power of the Court of Rome: but the wise Republic adhering
to the same principles which influenced them in the time of Paul V. declared
their unshaken constancy, and resolution to admit no innovation of such a
nature as was demanded: of which the Pope being well advised, relinquished his
pretensions; it seeming unseasonable to take an advantage on the present
emergencies of the Republic, to obtain that from them, which could not be
granted without unhinging the whole frame of the public Liberty.

And though the suppression of these Convents proceeded currently within the
Dominions of the Republic; yet on this occasion great difficulties and
Disputes arose between the Court of Rome, and the Governments of Milan and
Naples. For at Milan they pretended that these Convents being of Royal
foundation could not be dissolved without the King's consent; and at Naples
they refused to admit, that the Money arising from the dissolved Convents,
should be disposed according to the will and pleasure of the Court of Rome;
denying all Power to the Archbishop to intermeddle therein, as Delegate to the
Pope, by virtue of his Ecclesiastical Authority: and this Controversy was
maintained with that heat, that the Provost of Naples opposed the Arch bishop
with armed Bands, when he came to execute the Decrees of Rome; on which the
Pope made use of his thundering Excommunications: howsoever they availed
little; for the heats were blown into a flame, and the matters become so
intriguesom, as not to be composed, until the time of Clement X. the succeeding
Pope.

Howsoever, this Pope being in an extraordinary manner zealous for the success
of the Christian Cause against the Turk, and sollicitous for the preservation
of Candia, omitted no means which might conduce to the safety of it. And
therefore after the example of his Predecessors, he labored to engage the
Christian Princes in a holy League against the Turk: but in regard that it
could not possibly be performed, until such time as a Peace was concluded
between France and Spain: the Pope recalled his Nephew Cardinal Rospigliosi
from Bruxels, where for the space of three years he had resided in quality of
Internuntio, by Commission from Alexander VII. ordering him in his return home
to pass through Paris, and in a private manner to complement the King,
endeavoring to discover the inclinations of his Majesty to a Peace with Spain,
and how he was disposed to yield those succors, which were necessarily
required for the preservation of Candia. In pursuance hereof Rospigliosi
performed the Offices enjoined him by his Uncle so well, that he inclined the
mind of his Majesty to succor Candia, which was languishing and almost ready
to expire, and to yield itself to the prevailing Arms of the Turk: and hence it
was, that Count S. Paul, the Duke of Beaufort, and Monsieur la Fenillade, with
many other Cavaliers adventuring themselves in this generous Enterprise, at
least prolonged the fate, though not able to divert it, or rescue Candia from
the subjection of it is unchristian Enemies. Moreover, Rospigliosi made those
impressions of kindness, and good correspondence between the King and the Pope,
as continued during the whole term of his Uncle's Reign: and as an evidence of
this friendship, the Pope upon return of his Nephew at Rome, dispatched the
Archbishop of Thebes in quality of Legate in Extraordinary into France, and
Frederick Borromeo with a like Character into Spain; which Legates finding a
disposition in both Kings toward a Peace so well negotiated in behalf of the
interest of Rome, that Lewis XIV. of France, and the Queen Regent of Spain (her
Son being in his minority) appointed Aquisgrane for the place to treat a Peace,
of which the Pope was by mutual consent of both Kings ordained the sole Umpire
and Moderator. The zeal which affected the Pope for the succor, and relief of
Candia was so great, that he labored with all his Power to bring the Peace
between the two Crowns to a speedy issue; but the French King proceeding in a
prosperous course of his Arms, concluded that his successes did merit, and
require the grant of such conditions from his Catholic Majesty, as were not
consistent with the honor and welfare of that Crown, and therefore resolved to
make an entire Conquest of the Franch Compte, before he entered into farther
Treaties, or restrain himself within any narrower bounds or limits than those
he designed.

Whereupon the Prince of Conde being declared General for this Expedition, in
the beginning of the year 1668. An. 1668.
he marched to Digion in Burgundy to prepare military Affairs in a readiness to
begin early the ensuing Campaign: the King also, notwithstanding the
inconvenience of the Winter season, thought fit to be there present in Person,
which gave that life to action; that neither cold, or rains, or shortness of
the days interrupted the progress of the War; the Officers and Soldiers issuing
from their Winter quarters, with the same cheerfulness as in the Summer,
readily invested the most considerable places of the Franch Compte, which in a
few days surrendered themselves to the victorious Arms of the French; leaving
the World to wonder at those effects of fear, which a sudden surprise had
produced; for those Cities and Fortresses which in other times had valiantly
stood out for many months against the Sieges and storms of their Enemies; did
now shamefully yield so soon as they discovered the French Banners displayed
before their Walls. To this success the surprise of the action did much
contribute; for had the King deferred this enterprise until the Summer, it is
more than probable, that he might have encountered a greater opposition by the
union of the German Princes, who in a season fit for Armies to take the Field,
would scarce have suffered so considerable a part as the Franch Compte to be
lopped off, and dismembered from the Body of the Empire.

This sudden and unexpected success begat a jealousy in the neighboring
Princes; and was the first moving Cause which gave beginning to the Triple
League between England, the United Provinces, and Sweden, leaving a door open
to other Princes to be comprehended (as they should see cause) in the same
Agreement.

This Sacred Alliance became the common discourse of all Europe, and many happy
effects were expected as consequences thereof. In which conjuncture our Clement
IX. renewing his former solicitations for Peace, procured a suspension of
Arms; and though he desired that Rome, or Venice should be the places appointed
for this Treaty: yet Aquisgrane being esteemed a place more convenient for the
Electoral Princes, who were much concerned in this Accommodation, it was by
common consent ordained for the only place of Treaty.

And now France at the instant pressures of so many powerful Princes inclining
to hearken unto Propositions of Peace; and the King calling to remembrance his
Articles with the King of Portugal, not to make a Peace with Spain in exclusion
of him; he immediately sent his Advices to Lisbon, advising that King to
dispatch his Plenipotentiary to Aquisgrane which was appointed for the place of
Treaty.

This intimation being given to the Court of Portugal; the Count Olivarez Son
of the late Favorite, being then a Prisoner at Lisbon, taken at the Battle of
Canal, began to propose several Conditions in order to a Peace; for which
afterward receiving a Commission from Madrid; a Treaty was separately set on
foot without concerning France in it. At this time the Earl of Sandwich resided
at the Court of Spain in quality of Ambassador from his Majesty of Great
Britain, a Person so well affected by both Courts, that by mutual consent of
both Parties he was in the place of the King his Master, chosen Umpire of the
Peace between the two Kingdoms. This Overture being acceptable to our gracious
King, he sent his Orders and Instructions to the Earl of Sandwich to remove
from Madrid to Lisbon; there to be Arbitrator of the Peace, and in order
thereunto to perform all the good Offices of Mediation. The Plenipotentiaries
being accordingly assembled at Lisbon; after some few Conferences between the
Earl of Sandwich, and Count Olivarez a Peace was concluded, and published in
the month of March, without any respect or consideration to the agreement
contracted the year before with France, or the endeavors of the Abbat of St.
Romain to the contrary. And indeed the People were grown so weary of a War,
which had continued for the space of twenty eight years, that they were ready
to have broken out into a common mutiny, had the least interruption been given
thereunto, the Commonalty scarce tempering their rage against the French
Minister, for laboring to disappoint that happiness they had so long desired.

Some few days after the Peace was proclaimed: a Sentence of Divorce, declaring
the Marriage void between the King Alphonso and the Queen was published,
grounded on the supposed impotency of the King her Husband, whereby the
Matrimonial knot was dissolved, and both Parties freed, and stated in a lawful
separation with power to dispose of their own Persons. The confirmation of this
act of Divorce was a subject of serious consideration to the Pope, but
afterward when it was to extend so far, as to make the Prince lawful
possessour of his Brother's Wife and Dominions, it was so much the more weighty
and worthy consideration: but at length reasons of State, and conveniences of
that Kingdom overswayed the strict Rules and Canons of the Church.

But in the first place, we must understand that this Divorce was the
consequence of a general revolt of the People from their King; for they being
guided by a prevailing Party in opposition to the Conde de Cassel Meglior Chief
Minister of State, murmured against the Government, and perhaps not without
some cause; for the King himself being given to Wine, practiced such
extravagancies as were intolerable, and which did not pass without some
reflections on the Favorite, though as to himself he managed all things with
prudence and good conduct: Moreover, the Conde opposing the Peace with Castile,
on other terms, than such as were agreeable to the method, and Articles
concluded with France, became so displeasing to the People, that he was
displaced from his Office, and the Prince admitted to the sole management and
direction of Affairs. But the Conspiracy stopped not its course at this period:
for the Queen hereupon retiring into a Monastery, and declaring the
dissatisfaction she had to the King her Husband, demanded the justice of the
Country (upon the causes given) to dissolve the Matrimonial knot by a sentence
of lawful Divorce. The People at this news were stirred with great commotions,
and being naturally inclined to Novelty joined with the Prince's Party to choose
him Governor of the Kingdom, committing the Person of the King to safe
custody, until the States of Portugal should otherwise provide in cases of this
great emergency. The States being assembled about the beginning of the year,
approved the reasons for deposing the King, and confirmed the Regency on the
Prince: and upon hearing the Cause between the King and Queen. the Marriage was
found void, and null; and accordingly an Instrument of Divorce was formed and
published, and license given to the Prince to take the Queen for his Wife, on
supposition that she was still a Virgin, and unknown to his Brother. The case
though strange to scrupulous Ears, and Consciences was not yet without former
examples. For in Poland John Casimiro succeeded to the Crown, and to the Wife
of his Brother Vladislaus. And in former Histories of Portugal, it is recorded,
that the Nobility desired John III. to match with the Queen F^^^^ora, relict of
King Emanuel his Father: and therefore this case was not without a Precedent,
which after dissolution of the Marriage, and publication of the Queen's divorce
from Alfonso VI. might confirm, and make lawful the espousals with the Prince
his Brother.

A particular account of all these Occurrences being given at Paris, by the
Sicur Verius who then resided at Lisbon for the Crown of France. The Cardinal
Vandosme then Legate a Latere from the Pope to the most Christian King,
immediately dispatched a Brief of dispensation into Portugal, in the name and
by the Authority of Pope Clement IX. confirming the former Sentence given by
the States, and Justitiaries of that Kingdom; leaving this example to the
World, that there may be a Case wherein a younger Brother may lawfully usurp
the Dominion of his Elder; and righteously possess himself of his Wife, and of
his Crown. But the Prince Don Pedro not satisfied with the single dispensation
of the Cardinal Vandosme, who for the space of two months only was
commissionated to be Legate a Latere at Paris, to assist at the Baptism of the
Dolfin in behalf of the Pope: did for better assurance dispatch Father Villa a
Jesuit the Queens Confessor unto Rome to procure a more authentic
dispensation from the Pope himself. The Case being new, and strange and
difficult to find a way, how to make this matter with its present circumstances
to become legal: the Pope troubled within himself proposed the case in public
Consistory, where after long debates on both sides, the question still remained
dubious and undecided; until it was averred, that the Queen was several months
gone with Child: the which circumstance altered the case, and then the
convenience of the Marriage was not farther alleged, but the necessity thereof
urged, both for the reputation of the Queen and safety of that Kingdom, which
could not otherwise be settled but by the Pope's definitive Sentence, confirming
the legality of the Divorce; and though the Pope hereupon granted his Bull,
dispensing both with the Marriage and translation of the Power, yet the minds
of the contrary Party were not so quieted, but that several Conspiracies were
contrived against the life of the Prince; and particularly a certain Priest was
apprehended with a Dagger in his Pocket, and confessed, that he designed
therewith to stab the Prince, judging it an action meritorious and pleasing to
God, to destroy a person guilty of Rebellion, and Incest, who had usurped the
Kingdom, and ravished away the Wife of his Brother. Wherefore the Prince was in
a manner constrained for his own security, and for settlement of himself in the
Administration of Affairs to remove the King from the Eyes of the people, and
accordingly he was transported into the Islands of Teraeras.

The French (as we have said) having gained their point by the Conquest of the
Franch Comte, the Spaniards having concluded a Peace with Portugal; and the
triple League being well formed and concluded, the conjuncture of Affairs
seemed propitious, and tending toward the calm of Peace; to improve which, the
Pope labored with incessant solicitations between both Kings to commence that
Treaty which was once proposed to be held at Aquisgrana; and now more instantly
desired by him, not only in relation to his Office of Mediator between
Christian Princes: but in zeal to the Christian Cause which then suffered in
the City of Candia, which with the whole Island was then in danger, and ready
to yield to the Arms of the Turks; hoping that upon conclusion of the Peace,
the force of Christendom would be converted from itself, and employed against
the common Enemy (as we may believe.) But the Intercession and good Offices of
the Pope did not so effectually operate toward the conclusion of Peace as the
Negotiations of the triple League were available: by means of which the Peace
was projected first on the 15th. of April at St. Germans, and afterward
concluded between both Crowns on the 27th. of April at Aquisgrana, otherwise
called by the French Aux la Chappelle in form following:

That for the future, and ever hereafter, a good, firm, and inviolable Peace
and a perpetual League, and mutual friendship shall be established between the
two Kings, their Heirs, and Successors: and that as good Brothers, they shall
mutually to the utmost of their Power be assisting unto the welfare, honor and
reputation of each other; and shall faithfully, as far as is possible, avoid
every thing, which may tend to the hurt, loss, or damage of each other.

That so soon as the Articles of this Treaty shall be exchanged, and ratified,
the Peace shall be published, and then all Acts of War and hostility shall
cease; and both Parties shall attend to the performance of the Covenants, by
surrender of Towns and Fortresses, and release of Prisoners without delay,
Ransom, or any charges whatsoever.

That the most Christian King and his Successors, shall for ever hereafter
remain lawfully possessed, and Masters of Charles Stadt, Binch, Aeth, Doway,
Scarp Fort, Tornay, Audemont, Lille, Armentiers, Cotray, Berguen, Fuernes, with
all the Royalties, Guards, Castles, Territories, dependencies, and Subjects,
with all the rights, and immunities both Ecclesiastical, and secular thereunto
appertaining, in the same form, Title, and plenary possession as they were
formerly enjoyed, claimed, and possessed by his Catholic Majesty.

On the other side the most Christian King, shall speedily after publication of
the Peace, withdraw all his Forces from the French Comte, and shall really,
effectually, entirely, and faithfully restore, and surrender to his Catholic
Majesty all that Country, without delay, and without reserving any part or
parcel thereof unto himself.

That all other places taken, or to be taken, until publication of the Peace,
shall in like manner be mutually restored, and surrendered.

That the Treaty of the Pyreneans shall remain in its full force, and Virtue,
(excepting that part only, so far as concerns the Kingdom of Portugal, with
which Spain has already concluded a Peace) but as to all other matters and
things nor expressed in this Treaty, reference shall be had to the Pyrenean
Peace.

That those Kings and Princes who are desirous to enter into the Guarantie for
the Peace, may respectively give their Instruments of Promise, and Obligation
to each King, for maintenance, and execution of whatsoever is contained, and
agreed in the aforesaid Treaty.

That this Treaty agreed, and covenanted by the Plenipotentiaries, shall be
ratified by their Majesty's respectively, and registered in the Councils, and
Chambers or Courts of Justice, in such manner as was observed in the Pyrenean
Treaty: and that Orders be accordingly issued within the space of three months
after publication of this present Peace.

This was the substance of matters agreed at Aix la Chappelle, so called by the
French: but anciently Aquisgrana, from Grano (as some think) the Brother of
Nero; who for the convenience of some hot Waters, arising near thereunto, built
a Town and a Fortress; to which he gave his own name, with the adjunction of
Aqua in reference to the Waters: it is now an Imperial Town situate between the
Mosel and the Rhine, famous for being the place where the Roman Emperors were
first Crowned and Inaugurated; and where Charles the Great was interred, whose
Monument is there to be seen.

But now having touched on the Treaty concluded at this place, so far as
concerned Clement IX. who was a promoter thereof, it will be impertinent to
this History to recount the Councils, the successes, and proceedings which
issued thereupon. Nor will it be to our purpose to rehearse the Instrument by
which the Triple League was established between the King of Great Britain, the
King of Sweden, and the States of the United Provinces, with the various Acts,
and successes thereupon. Nor is it to our purpose to declare the disturbances
given to this Peace by the pretensions which the French made to the
dependencies, which were so comprehensive, as took in almost all the Dominions
belonging to the Spaniards in the Low Countries; for the better interpretation,
understanding and limitation of which word ( Dependencies) a meeting was
appointed at Lisle, at which the Commissioners for both Crowns were to be
present, and debate the Controversy. Wherefore to return now to the Affairs of
Italy, and the actions of Clement IX. we find him after the conclusion of this
Peace extremely intent and zealous for the relief of Candia, and urgent both
with France and Spain to send succors thereunto. In pursuance of which, his
endeavors in France, (as we have said) were very successful, great succors
being sent to Candia as we have related in our History of the Turks; and indeed
the correspondence was so good between his Christian Majesty and this Pope
during the whole time of his Reign; that nothing seemed to be denied which was
requested by either: for the Pope at the King's desire granted a Bull, allowing
him to nominate, and constitute such persons as he should judge fit, in all
Churches, Benefices and Monasteries, and in all Bishoprics and
Arch-bishopricks within his own Dominions. In return of which kindness, and as
a signal of this good correspondence, the French King allowed the Pope to
demolish the Pillar, which was erected at Rome in the time of Alexander VII.
for a memorial of the banishment of the Corsi, and to deface the Inscription
engraven thereon; In like manner the Pope gave license to the French to take
away and demolish the Cross which was erected at Rome over against the Church
of St. Anthony in the time of Clement VIII. in memory of the conversion of
Henry IV. to the Roman Faith. So that now the other particulars concluded at
the Treaty of Pisa not as yet executed began to wear out, and to be forgotten,
and the late warm interposition of France in behalf of the Duke of Parma, for
what related to Castro, became cold and remiss. For though in the days of
Alexander VII. the Duke had provided his Money according to the time allotted
him by the Treaty, upon payment of which Castro was to have been redeemed; yet
the Pope found out ways to avoid the receiving thereof; pretending that other
Creditors were ready to attach and sequester the Money, so soon as it should be
brought within the Walls of the City: but this being only an excuse, and an
artificial pretense of the Pope, the Duke of Parma resolved to expect the
arrival of the Duke of Chaunes at Rome, then coming in quality of Ambassador
from France, to whom making his complaint, he might most properly by his means
challenge a performance of that part of the Treaty, which was in his favor
concluded and agreed at Pisa. But this Expedient failing, and the Ambassador
taking this matter a little to heart: the Duke supplied his Money at Rome by
Letters of Credit, and Bills of Exchange, which though refused by the Court
notwithstanding the many addresses, Processes made according to the Methods and
formalities of Law; yet all proved ineffectual, and little regarded by the
Interest of France, even to the very time of this present Pope; of which
coldness, and unconcernment of his Christian Majesty in this matter, wherein he
once showed so much zeal and affection, various causes have been assigned; of
which none seems to be more probable, than the engagements of France in the Low
Countries, during the time of Alexander VII. and afterward the kind
correspondence held with this Clement IX. of which the Crown of France being
entirely satisfied, was unwilling to be importunate, or disturb the quiet of
the Church for the sake of a foreign Prince, whose interest had no influence, or
concernment at that time with the welfare and conveniences of France.

As the Pope was instant with his most Christian Majesty to send Forces into
Candia; and obtained by his solicitations a strong Fleet under the command of
the Duke of Beaufort, which carried the Banner of the Church: so also he was
not remiss, or backward to send and engage his own Fleet of Galleys, under the
conduct and command of his Nephew Vincenzo Rospigliosi, which with the Galleys
of France and Malta made up the number of twenty nine. Nor was Clement less
urgent with Spain, than with other Princes to enter, and engage in this common
cause of Christianity; so that having occasion to send the Abbat Arroldi who
was Bishop of Milan in quality of his Internuntio to Bruxels, he gave him
particular Instructions to solicit the Catholic Princes of Germany to concur
with the rest in contribution toward the relief of Candia: in which Act the
Internuntio so well succeeded, that the Electour of Bavaria, the Bishop of
Argentina, or Strasburg, and several other Princes of the Rhine administered
effectual succors to the present necessity of that languishing place. But the
successes of this War and the fate of Candia have been our Subject, and Theme
in an other History.

In the mean time whilst these Affairs were in agitation, the Cardinals
Palotta, and Farnese, two of the chief Ornaments of the College departed this
life: in place of whom the Pope promoted Prince Leopold of Toscany to the
dignity of Cardinal; a Person though of excellent qualifications of mind, and
of unblameable conversation in the days of his youth, yet reasons of State had
prevented his just advancement, and Title to the Purple, until the time of his
old Age. After which he promoted Portocarrero with seven others to the same
degree of Cardinals, viz. Altieri who was Master of the Camera, Nerli, who was
Secretary of the Briefs, Pallavicino Dean of the Clerks of the Camera, Certi
Dean of the Ruota, Bonaccorsi Treasurer General, Acciaoli Auditor General of
the Camera, and Father Buona Abbat of St. Bernard in Piedmont, besides which he
created James Rospigliosi his Brother's Son, and Emanuel Theodosio, who draws
his pedigree from the Dukes of Aquitaine, so that during his Reign at three
promotions he created twelve Cardinals, and not more.

The most important Affair during the Reign of this Pope, was the Siege of
Candia, which (as we have said) so affected him, that he employed all his
thoughts and endeavors toward the relief thereof; Nicholas the fifth was not
so much troubled for the loss of Constantinople, nor Hadrian VI. for the
subjection of Rhodes, nor Pius Quintus for the surrender of Cyprus, as our
Clement IX. for the ill success and conclusion of the Cretian War; in which the
Duke of Beaufort being lost with many French Cavaliers, and other generous
Heroes from diverse parts of Christendom, the City was delivered into the hands
of the Turks: the fatal news of which being brought to him by the Venetian
Ambassador; the Pope (as is reported) was so affected therewith, that grief
taking a deep impression in his heart, he suddenly fell into a species of
Apoplexy, from which first Fit, though he at present revived, yet melancholy
suppressed his spirits in such manner, that in the space of one month
following, he on the ninth of December 1669. expired his last breath, having
lived seventy one years or thereabouts, and governed the Pontificate two years,
five months and eighteen days. He was universally lamented, being a Man of a
public Spirit, and great generosity, so that his Family was rather
impoverished than enriched by his advancement to the Papal Authority. He was a
Person not ambitious or desirous of the vain glory of this World, of which that
he might give a testimony at his death, he forbad his Relations to raise any
magnificent Monument in recommendation of him to posterity, leaving behind him
some few words for a short Epitaph to be inscribed on the Marble, which was to
cover him; which were scarce sufficient to denote the Character by which he was
to be known and recommended to Posterity: to supply which his Successor
Clement X. at the desire of the Public, and in gratitude to the memory of his
deceased Friend and Benefactor inscribed on the pedestal of a Pillar (which
Clement IX. at the foot of the Bridge Aelius had repaired at his own charge) a
brief Narrative of his life; and having likewise erected a stately Monument
with his Statue thereupon in the Church of S. Peter, he adorned it with this
Inscription: Clementis IX.
Aeternae memoriae Pontificis
Magni Cineres
Ne absque ullo Sepulchri Honor
Sicut Ipse jusserat Humi laterent,
Clemens X. Pont. Max.
Benefactori Suo,
Et ob Spectatum Fidei Zelum,
Ob Egregiam Erga Omnes Beneficentiam
Et Charitatem
De Re Christiana Optime Merito
Grati Animi Monumentum
Posuit
Anno Domini MDCLXXI.
This Pope being dead was generally lamented by all People of what Degree, or
Nation, or Quality soever: for he was of a most gentle and easy temper,
delightful and pleasant in his Conversation, and studied sincerely the welfare
of the Church, without much regard to the advancement of his Family: in his
Diet he was very abstemious, and lived much after the fashion of the Primitive
Christians. He was ever zealous of a good correspondence with Kings and Princes
subjected to the Papal Sea, and always endeavored to reconcile them one to the
other; as appears by his endeavors at Aix la Chapelle, where a Peace was
concluded between the two Crowns of Spain and France. And when the difference
arose between the Queen Regent, and Don John of Austria, he interposed in such
manner by his Nuntio Cardinal Borromeo, that with much success he reconciled
matters, and diverted a storm which might have engaged Spain in ruinous
troubles.

Though this Pope from the humility of his Spirit, was not very forward to
raise Columns of his own praise, or engraven Inscriptions like other Popes on
every fair Marble, that was erected in the most public and conspicuous places
of the City: yet the People of Rome did voluntarily, and of their own accord
supply several Euloges to the honor of his memory, of which we shall add this
one, which is worthy to be rehearsed; for being engraven in the Area of the
Capitol on the Triumphal Arch of Septimius Severus being a comparison of this
Pope with that Emperor in these words:

Triumphale Septimii Severi Caesaris Nomen, ne quaeras Lector. Ad Orientem
Clementis IX. P.O.M. Majestatem obscuratur: Quid prodeat, Severus? Vbi Clemens
elucet, Legationem ille Gallicam sua ferocia funestavit. Hispanicam iste
munificentia beavit, sua sibi purpuram ille cruore tinxit. Hic sudore, manu
ille, hic mente firmavit Imperium, bellorum ille flammas accendit; hic conatur
extinguere Tributa, ille auxit; hic levavit; uterque rei frumentariae
Amplificandae studiosus, sed ille Ambitionis Ingenio, hic Genio Charitatis.
Supra Caesarem in cunctis Pontifex. Spectacula ille Pop. Romans dedit, hic unum
se Gentibus Omnibus adorandum Spectaculum fecit. CLEMENT X.
CLEMENT the Ninth dying, (as we have said) on the ninth of December 1669. his
Funeral Obsequies were celebrated with the usual Rites, and Ceremonies
practiced in honor to deceased Popes. After which the Cardinals entered the
Conclave to make election of an other Successor to S. Peter; but such were the
difficulties which arose thereupon, by reason of the many Candidates which
appeared to the number of no les^ than twenty two; all which both for years,
gravity, wisdom, and Au^hority seemed worthy of the Papal Dignity; that until
the end of four months and twenty days the different Interests could not agree,
and be reconciled; and at length concurred in the Election rather out of
weariness, than satisfafaction in their Choice.

Cardinal Chigi was then at Florence, when he received the first news of the
death of Clement IX. where entering into a private Cabal with the Great Duke,
and Cardinal Medici; and with some other Associates of the Spanish Interest,
they pitched upon one of these four, namely Elci, Celsi, Bonvisi, and Vidoni,
but with especial regard to the exclusion of Barberino; but as this was an
account made up without their Host, so it had a success accordingly, and they
forced to an other reckoning.

Chigi to strengthen his Party made his addresses to the French, pretending
great services for that Crown; and in the mean time despised the interest of
the Flying Squadron: but the Duke of Scion, being then arrived from France in
quality of Ambassador, made scorn of the applications of Chigi, so soon as he
discovered his practices with the Spaniards: and indeed his double dealing
abated much of his reputation in the Conclave, where he might have formed a
strong Party, had not his ambition to become sole Arbitrator weakened his
Interest, and brought all his words, and actions under a suspicion.

This Opinion of Chigi gave a beginning to a Combination between Barberino,
Rospigliosi, and the Flying Squadron; which strong Parties standing in
opposition each to other, fifty days were passed without any effect, and so
resolved were Chigi, and Barberino, that one said, He would eat Cherries, and
the other Figs in the Conclave; with which sayings, all Parties growing warm,
Cardinal Este declared openly with exclusion against Chigi, Retz against
Medici, and the French King against Elci; with which Medici growing angry
replied, that if France excluded Elci, that Spain should do the like by Vidoni.

Thus Factions daily increasing, and new difficulties arising, Chigi and Medici
the two great sticklers in the Conclave grew more calm, and less concerned for
those, whom they had once designed to promote; and to make appear how
disinterested they were, put every Person, that was qualified, into some hopes
of being chosen. Amongst the rest they complemented C^rpegna one of the Spanish
Faction, and a favorite of the Great Duke. From him they passed to Cardinal
Pio; and then to Odescalchi, against which last were not many exceptions, only
that the French Party esteemed him too much inclined to the Spanish Interest:
and though the reputation of Odescalchi was high, and his merits great, yet his
time being not yet come, all endeavors for him vanished into Air, he also
himself beseeched Chigi, as it were upon his knees, to desist from farther
actions in his favor: howsoever the Conclave being impatient of farther delay
seemed generally inclined to make choice of Odescalchi; yet some esteemed him
too young, others too morose, and austere; and Chigi himself freely discoursing
with Celsi taxed him for want of practice in business, and that having addicted
himself much to speculation and study, imagined that he would prove unpleasant
in his humor; and that Abbat Marc Antonio being his Brother, it was more than
probable he would be created Cardinal and Favorite; who also being a Person of
an austere life, and severe Virtue, might concur with the Pope in designs to
reform the Vices and luxury of the Clergy. Which considerations being weighty,
and prevalent with the Conclave, his exclusion was publicly declared.

After which every one was at a stand, and in expectation of what time and the
power of Barberino, and others would produce. Chigi had labored to the utmost
of his power to advance one of his Friends; but all proving ineffectual, he
gave them at least the satisfaction, that nothing had been wanting on his part.
Medici was well contented with the exclusion of Nerli, who was a Creature of
Rospigliosi, because Altieri, who was under the same notion of a Friend, and
dependant on that Family, was still in nomination.

In the mean time the aged Cardinals zealous for the honor, and sanctity of
the Conclave, exclaimed against the delatory proceedings, which gave scandal to
the World, and cause of complaint to the People, who by reason thereof were
impoverished by a deadness of Trade, and oppressed by the extortions of the
Mons Pietatis, which during the vacancy of the Sea, exacted four times more
from indigent Persons, than the known rates allowed by Law, and the justice of
the Popes.

The Ambassador of Spain more concerned than any other for these delays,
having Audience in the Conclave, requested the Cardinals in the name of his
Master to agree in their Election: for whereas they had an Authority free and
independent of temporal Crowns, and secular considerations, they were obliged
to proceed in the speedy choice of a Successor to St. Peter, and of a Pastor
to the Universal Church, and not suffer the same to become subservient to
Intrigues and private Interests; which as they were daily more scandalous, they
gave occasion to the World of discourse, as if the inspirations of the Holy
Ghost were banished the Conclave, the divine Illuminations damped, and eclipsed
by the interposition of Secular designs.

It was strange to observe, how on a sudden after this discourse, the humor of
the Conclave was altered: the old Cardinals weary of their restraint would
yield to the Election of any, provided, they might gain their liberty; and the
young Men were ready to give their suffrages for whomsoever the Leaders of
their Party, and Interest should direct: so that now merit, and Virtue, and
experience in Government were laid aside and a Pope chosen by those who were
most obstinate, and tenacious of their Opinion, and could hold out longest.

Thus different Interests began to agree; and Chigi and Medici to entertain
discourse with Barberino, proposing to pitch upon the Creature, or favorite of
the House of Rospigliosi, to which both these leading Factions were well
inclined: the Person nominated was Cardinal Emilio Altieri generally grateful
to the whole Conclave, for his great Age, having passed the years of eighty:
Chigi took occasion hereupon to complement Barberino, declaring, that rather by
divine Inspiration, than humane fancy, he had fixed on the sole Person of the
World, whom he had reserved in his breast as the most worthy of this Dignity,
for that he was a Man who never concerned himself in embroils, and Intrigues of
different Parties; never was a Pensioner of France, or Spain, or depended on
the favor of Italian Princes, or was obliged by any of the Roman Families.
Barberino on the other side, vowed, that the nomination he had made of Altieri,
was rather an effect of his good wishes toward Chigi, than to his own Family:
for that he was not ignorant of the great Obligations, which Cardinal Paluzzi
the Creature of Emilio Altieri had unto him, by whose means only he was first
preferred to be Auditor of the Camera, then to be a Prelate, and lastly to be a
Cardinal; all which were such good Offices, as would certainly oblige Altieri
in case that to the preceding kindnesses which he had performed toward his
Favorite he should add, that also of being an Instrument to advance himself
unto the Papacy.

In the mean time great Interests were made for Odescalchi, and his Party was
so earnest thereupon, that they designed secretly to elect him by Accession, as
a more ready way than by Treaties, or making Parties. But Barberino was zealous
for Altieri, and instant to have his Election passed without other dispute, or
consideration. Howsoever Chigi was a little wavering, because he doubted,
whither Paluzzi would prove constant to him, and bear him the same respect in
the time of his prosperity, and under the circumstances of the Pope's favor as
he had testified to him in his former condition of fortune: wherefore that he
might secure him the better, he addressed himself to Paluzzi, persuading him to
believe, that his endeavors for the promotion of Altieri, were in a great
measure founded on that friendship, and good will which he owed to him; and for
that reason before he would engage his Party and Interest in his Election, he
would be assured that Altieri should promise to adopt Paluzzi, and create him
Cardinal Nephew, than which nothing could be more just and due to a Person of
his Wisdom, and Talents, and practiced in all Affairs of the Court of Rome.
Having said thus much, Chigi conducted Paluzzi to Medici, and they together
with Buglion, and Barberino went to the lodging of Altieri; to whom the Dean
Cardinal Barberino with a loud Voice, and profound reverence made the same
Complements, as were accustomary to Popes elect: with which Altieri being
surpised, made Answer with tears in his Eyes, That he was unfit for the
performance of so great a function, which might more easily be sustained by any
of their Eminencies than by himself, and pointing to Cardinal Brancacci:
Behold, said he, the Man, whose Virtues, Godliness, and Abilities have rendered
worthy of this high Exaltation. By this time the Cell, or Lodging was filled
with Cardinals, who with one Voice, (two only excepted) proclaimed Altieri
Pope on the twenty eighth day of April, An. 1670.
and having performed the usual Ceremonies of Adoration, and other matters
practiced at the Election of Popes; he took the name of Clement X. to the great
joy and satisfaction of the People of Rome; who praised God for having given
them a Prince chosen from the number of their own Patricians, who was of a
gentle and placid nature and temper, and grateful to all the Princes of Rome
and Italy.

This Pope now Clement X. was born at Rome, in the Reign of Sixtus V. and in
the time of Paul V. was first admited into Ecclesiastical Orders. Gregory XV.
testified a high esteem for his Person, and recommending him to his Nephew
Urban VIII. dispeeded him into Poland with the charge of Auditor to the Nuntio;
and after his return constituted him Governor of Loretto, and of all the
Marca, and lastly of Ravenna, to which he added the Bishopric of Camerino.
Innocent X. sent him his Nuntio unto Naples, where he resided, at the time when
Masanello made an insurrection of the People. Whilst the Sea was vacant by the
death of Innocent X. the College of Cardinals gave him a Commission to treat
with the Duke of Parma, and with the Governor of Milan. Alexander VII. so soon
as he was promoted to the Papal Dignity, made him Secretary of the sacred
Congregation of Bishops and Regulars; and had therewith conferred on him the
dignity of Cardinal, had not some Persons who were emulous of his worth,
prevented the good intentions of the Pope toward him. But Clement IX. having
received sufficient testimony of his Abilities by a long course of Services to
the Church, made him Chief of his Bedchamber, and on the 29th. of November
1669. promoted him to the dignity of Cardinal.

The first action performed by this Pope, after his Election was to declare
Cardinal Paluzzi his Nephew by Adoption, obliging him to take the name of
Altieri, and the Arms of his Family; which were six Stars Argent in an Azure
Field; the which he performed in so much haste, that before he descended from
the stairs of the Vatican, he embraced his new Nephew, and published his Title
before all the College; he also declared Signior Carpegna a Roman to be Datario
then already Auditor of the Rota, and Frederick Borromeo to be Secretary of
State; the which are the three greatest Offices, and preferments in the Court
of Rome.

But nothing occasioned so much discourse in Rome, as the choice and adoption
of Paluzzi into the Family of Altieri; to which he had no other Relation, than
that his Nephew Don Gasparo Paluzzi was married to Donna Laura Altieri Niece to
the Pope. The Politicians, and speculative Men of Rome, who undertake to
prognosticate strange events of things from small and inconsiderable matters,
formed diverse Judgments on this new Adoption. Some reflecting on the poverty
of the House of Paluzzi, which was greatly indebted; and on the humor of the
Cardinal who had employed his whole Estate in purchasing Offices, and was
covetous in his nature; (as most Romans are) did conclude, that the Court would
be inclined to a sordid Parsimony, the Officers mercenary, and all Benefices
set to sale in a manner as scandalously Simoniacal, as they were in the time of
Innocent X. But others framing a more charitable Opinion of Paluzzi, believed,
that he considering himself no other than as an adopted Nephew, from whom the
World expects a gentle comportment, would contain himself within narrower terms
of modesty than Nephews of the natural blood to whom Men with less envy allow
more freedom, and licentiousness in their actions; and that calling to mind the
fate of Cardinal Astalli adopted into the Family of Pamfilio, would serve
himself of that Example, to govern in all the exercises of his Power. On the
other side, some reflecting on the old Age of the Pope, who was entered into a
Station of Life, which inclined to repose, and freedom from turbulent thoughts,
imagined, that the Pope would cast all his cares, and troubles into the hands
of his supposed Nephew, who considering the life of this Clement, which
according to the course of Nature could not be of long continuance, would make
use of his time and amass Riches after the Example of the Ludivisi, who were of
the Kindred of Gregory XV. and had in the space of two years so well improved
their fortunes, that besides immense sums of ready Money, which they had
accumulated and heaped up, they had also erected many sumptuous Palaces, and
purchased Lands, Manors and Seignories, by means of evil Arts well known to
the World.

Thus every one framed his Predictions of the event of matters according to his
own conceit and fancy; the truth of which was soon illustrated by the
Negotiations of Paluzzi, (whom for the future, we intend to call by the name of
Cardinal Altieri) for now to give the first Essay of his Power and management,
it was observed, that when the Pope (as is usual at the time of Coronation)
received Memorials, and granted Favors, and Benefices to several Petitioners,
such graces seemed freely given, and accepted with a thankful mind; until the
Grants coming to be executed, Altieri gave an unexpected stop to them, denying
them to pass the Seal; on pretense, that the Pope was surprised and ill
informed, or had passed them to others before for want of memory, incident to
old Age; by which Artifice this good Cardinal disposed of all Offices,
Benefices, and places of Trust, according to his own pleasure, which was always
regulated by the rules of greatest Profit. Though this early manner of
Negotiation made a noise, and caused great murmuring at Court; yet Altieri
continuing firm to his Principles, and to the method which he had chalked out
unto himself, gave express Orders to the Master of the Pope's Chamber, and to
all the Attendants near his Person, not to admit of any Addresses, or suffer
Petitions to be presented to the Pope without his knowledge and permission; so
that the Pope seemed to be (as it were) besieged in the Vatican, and serve
only for a Cipher, or a property to Altieri, and remain as a Statue without
Eyes, or Ears. This manner of dealing gave occasion to many witty Men at Rome
(according to their custom) to publish Pasquils (which we call Libels) one of
which was affixed on the Pope's Picture, hanging over the door of his
Bedchamber, and was this, Qui slo, per Insegna, that is, I am here for a Sign;
alluding to the person of the Pope, who served only for a shadow, whilst
Altieri governed all with a despotical Power. In like manner they affixed a
Paper at the door of Altieri with this Inscription: To the most Eminent
Cardinal Signor Paluzzi Altieri, by title Cardinal Patron, but in reality Pope
himself. Another of like nature was affixed at the Pope's Chamber door: To His
Holiness Clement X. our Lord, and Prince, living under the tuition of Cardinal
Altieri.

On the eleventh of May after his Election, he was Crowned in S. Peter's Church
with the usual Ceremonies; three days after which, he held a private
Consistory, whereat he returned thanks individually to every Cardinal for his
good will, and suffrage at his Election: and according to the Politics of
former Popes, he made some Laws, and Orders for regulation of the Markets, and
for supplies of the City with Victuals, and Provisions, that the People might
at the beginning of his Government, find Peace and plenty.

But these plausible, and specious appearances which cost little to the Pope,
great discontents arose in the Court of Rome, by reason of the exorbitant Power
of the Cardinal Nephew; who assuming all matters into his own hands, suffered
no applications to be made unto the Pope but by his means, and intercession:
nor would he suffer the Seals to pass for any Livings, or Benefices without a
payment of Money for and in consideration thereof unto himself, in which he was
so strict, that a Living of ten Crowns a year did not escape him without some
acknowledgment. And for better management of this Simonaical Traffic, he
appointed Brokers in the Palace to set up an Office, and there publicly to
profess and without shame, to bargain, and contract for Offices and Benefices.
This scandalous manner of dealing discouraged all Men of Virtue and Merit, from
hopes of obtaining Employments, for since Money, and not Desert, was the step
to all preferments, good Men for the greatest part were excluded, and none but
a sort of progging, and traffiquing Clergymen advanced to Benefices and Places
of Trust.

Thus did this adopted Nephew play his part, when a great swarm of Kindred
appeared at Court, pretending to be allied either by blood, or alliance to the
Pope: for though when he was only a simple Prelat, and had no great matter to
dispose of, few or none would own his Relation; but being now advanced to the
Pontifical Chair every Citizen of Rome would be his Kinsman, and frame a
Scheme, or Tree of his Pedigree, deducing their lineage by one Branch, or other
from the Family of Altieri: all which finding an adopted Nephew surreptitiously
crept into the favor of their Kinsman, and themselves excluded, openly
murmured against Paluzzi, and complained of the injustice and ill fortune: but
he little regarded their clamours, suffering none of them to approach the Pope,
or challenge kindred, unless the Family of the Massimi, of which he advanced
some to Places of Trust and Profit.

The College of Cardinals, though much divided in their inclinations, yet the
greatest part of them could not support the despotical Government of Altieri;
who though he could not absolutely restrain the Cardinals from access to the
Pope; yet he made their Audiences difficult to be obtained, and often caused
them (upon I know not what excuses) to be deferred until other days, and times,
when he contrived to be always present, that he might be a witness of their
discourses, and prevent that freedom, which they designed with the Pope.

This design of Cardinal Altieri was greatly promoted by the retirement of
Persons powerful for their Riches and Interest from Rome: for soon after the
Election of the Pope; the Ambassador of the most Christian King, and the
Cardinals of Retz and Boglion were returned into France, and Cardinal de Este,
whose Power was sufficient to shake the mightiest Favorite, was gone into his
own Country: Cardinal Antonio was sick, and languishing in his Bed; and the
Flying Squadron whose pretenses were only pure zeal for the universal good of
the Church, were contented to let matters pass according to the humor of
Altieri, hoping that the Pope by reason of his age could not hold out long; and
that therefore it were better to employ their time in forming Parties against
the next Conclave, than to contrive means and Artifices to defeat and ruin the
Power of Altieri; but they were much deceived in their measures, for the good
old Man was so lusty and hearty, living without much care, that he was likely
to outlive the youngest of the Squadron. Nor was the Marquis of Astorgas
Ambassador for Spain much more concerned than others, for he having other
designs of gaining the good will and favor of the Citizens of Rome, little
cared in what nanner the Intrigues and Affairs of the Court succeeded.

Wherefore the only dangerous, and formidable Enemy was the Dean Cardinal
Barberino, a person of that Reputation, and Wit as was only capable to stand in
competition with the Power of Altieri. But neither his Policy, Art, nor
Interest could be available against this Cardinal Nephew, who exercised a more
absolute Power than any other Favorite had enjoyed in the Place before him;
the continuance of which being very uncertain, he cast about him diverse ways,
whereby to advance and establish the greatness of his Family, which under the
happy circumstances of his present flourishing condition, was not difficult to
procure. For in Rome there are many Noble and rich Families, which aspire to an
alliance with the kindred of the Pope's Regnant; which though it be an honor
of no long continuance, yet they have commonly had the opportunity to
accumulate Riches during the life of the Pope, and afterward remained with the
privilege of being numbered amongst the Princes after his death.

The Prince Carbognano, who was a principal branch of the House of Colonna
(which for its Power, Riches, and Nobility yields to none in Rome) had two
Sons, the eldest of which was called the Duke of Basanello, and the second Duke
of Anticoli, the first was married to the Sister of the Contestable Colonna;
but having no Children, or Heirs, the Riches, and opulency of all that Family
was to devolve by right of Inheritance to the Duke of Anticoli; of which
Cardinal Altieri having well considered, treated of a marriage between him, and
Donna Tarquinia Great Niece to the Pope, esteeming it the best and most
advantageous Match in all Rome. Prince Carbognano, the Father, who was of an
open and easy temper, gave ear to the Proposal with much satisfaction; but the
Duke of Basanello, not suffering his younger Brother to be advanced by these
means to a degree above himself, refused to give his assent unto the Match,
unless he also might be received into en equal rank with his Brother, and enjoy
the honor of those prerogatives, which appertain to Nephews, and Princes
allied to the Papal Throne. Altieri declining all rubs, and difficulties which
might obstruct the Match entertained Basanello with hopes and expectations of
the conditions he desired: but so soon as the Marriage was celebrated and
consummated; he then excused himself, saying, that upon better thoughts, he
found, that such an instance could not be given without drawing many ill
consequences with it; howsoever, that the Pope would think upon it, and do what
was possible; but in reality such words gave no satisfaction, being interpreted
for a flat and format denial.

Hence at first arose some coldness, which afterward proceeded to an open
quarrel, and defiance between Basanello on the one side, and Altieri, and
Anticoli on the other: so that both parties exercised their thoughts in ways of
revenge upon each other. The genius of Italians, which is naturally ready in
such contrivances, prompted Basanello to a matter wherein he might most
sensibly wound Altieri; for knowing that the expectation of Riches was the sole
aim and desire of the Cardinal; he labored to disappoint his hopes, by
defeating his Brother Anticoli of all that Estate which descended to him by the
death of the Prince Gallicano, which amounted unto three thousand Pistols a
year besides Plate, Jewels and other Riches; and were bequeathed to Basanello,
and at his absolute disposal, without regard to any descendency: but that so
much Riches might not be lost, or be alienated from the Family of Colonna, he
settled them upon the Duke of Sonnino Brother of his Wife, and of the Constable
Colonna.

This unexpected defeat to the prejudice of Anticoli, touched Altieri in the
most sensible part, which was his own interest and honor; in return of which
he contrived a Revenge spun with a like thread, and of the same nature with the
former; in which because most of the Roman Princes, and foreign Ministers were
concerned, it may not be impertinent to this History to make a short relation
thereof.

Prince Cesarini lately deceased, had left immense Riches to his Family; but
wanting Heirs male, and leaving only two Daughters, the Inheritance descended
to Monsignor Cesarini Brother to the Prince, who was Clerk of the Camera; which
to enjoy with so many Seignories, Baronies, and Lordships thereunto belonging
this good Prelat made no scruple to abandon his Offices, and the expectations
of a Cardinals Cap to enter into a fair Revenue of above sixteen thousand
Pistols per annum; but having wasted his body by the sins of his youth, he
found himself not fit to marry and consequently without hopes of legitimate
Heirs: for which reason, these Riches descending to the two Daughters, the
Prince their Father left in his Will and Testament, that such, as should have
the fortune to marry his Daughters, should be persons devoted, and sincerely
adhering to the party, and interest of France.

The Duke of Sonnino formerly called Abbat of Colonna, and Brother of the
Constable had forsaken his Ecclesiastical preferment to marry with the second
Daughter, on condition that the eldest, engaging herself by promise to be a
Nun, should renounce all right and title to the moiety of the Estate with her
younger Sister.

The condition of this Affair being known to Altieri, he took his advantage to
reek his revenge on the House of Colonna, judging it a proper means to pay them
off in the same coin; for as the Duke of Bassanello had formerly defeated
Anticoli of the Estate of Prince Gallicano; so now he contrived to deprive
Sonnino of the Inheritance belonging to the Princess Cesarini, and which should
inevitably have devolved unto him, in case the Princess had remained constant
to her resolution, and had renounced the World, within the enclosures of a
Nunnery. But Altieri suggesting to the young Lady the pleasures, and
conveniences of marriage made easy impression into her frail heart, causing
her to waver and stagger in her late resolutions: and whereas the Vow she had
made of perpetual chastity, was the chief scruple which obstructed the change
of her Will; that knot was easily untied by the solution of her spiritual
Father and Confessor, and other Priests, and Friars, who were made the
Instruments of this design; and in case there should still remain any scruple
of Conscience, the infallible power of the Pope himself was at hand to clear
the doubts, and dispense with all the Engagements, Vows and Promises to God, or
Man, by which she supposed herself bound and obliged, and to make all this
good, the Pope proffered to take her into his protection.

The Princess Cesarini being thus overcome, and resolved to marry, the Cardinal
provided her with a Husband, giving her the opportunity to see Don Frederico
Sforza his Nephew, who was a brisk young Gallant, and capable to make
impression in the tender heart of a Lady disposed toward the thoughts of
marriage. The Constable of Colonna on the other side despairing of all hopes to
persuade the Princess to the continuance of her Vow, concurred with the other
party in his assent to her marriage, provided she would accept of Don Lelio
Orsini. This Proposal much alarmed the Cardinal, as also the Duke of Gravina,
who though he was one branch of the House of Orsini, yet having married one of
the Pope's Nieces with a considerable Portion in ready Money, and with
assurances of a Cardinal's Cap for his Brother, (who was a Dominican Friar) was
easily persuaded to concur with Altieri in the advancement of the Pope's
Family. The Intrigues of this Affair were various, and admitted of more
particulars than are required in this History; but in short, the power of
Altieri was not only superior to that of Colonna, and his plots more subtle,
and his labors more indefatigable; (for he was the most assiduous Man in the
World to promote his own interest) but also he had a greater Ascendant over the
affections of the Princess, in the person of Sforza, who was young, gentle, and
of good address, whereas Don Lelio was a Man in years, and of a weak and infirm
complexion, and so given over and inclined to devotion, that they gave him the
name of Mangia Santi, or the Saint-Eater, wholly and entirely applying his mind
to gain Indulgences, and Jubilies, and Pardons: howsoever upon the proposals of
this Marriage, he strained his humor into the Mode of a Gallant, feigning a
brisk and aerie behavior, which being forced, and affected became him so ill,
that it seemed almost ridiculous, and could stand in no competition with the
more natural garb and comeliness of Don Frederico.

Howsoever the Interest which was made in behalf of Don Lelio by importunity of
the Mother, and the persuasion of other Friends, was so prevalent that the
young Lady remained in a doubtful condition, which of the offers she should
embrace. This indifferency much troubled Altieri; and therefore to secure his
point against all attempts and affaults of the Mother, and others; he removed
the Princess from the Monastery of St. Katharine of Siena, wherein she resided,
to that of S. Anne on the other side of the Tiber, where Sforza had an Aunt
that lived a professed Nun: and for better security from secret practices,
Guards were set by express Order from the Pope to hinder all communication with
the Princess. But not only was it thought necessary to prevent all private
suggestions; but the affection of the Lady toward Sforza was to be kept up by
some lively representations of Love, which were constantly to be instilled into
her mind by some able and proper Instrument: to perform this Office, none
seemed more able, nor better qualified than Monsignor Altoviti the Patriarch of
Alexandria; who was highly esteemed in the City, and of great reputation for
the devotion and sanctity of his life, and for the experience he had in the
affairs of the Court of Rome: moreover, he was superintendent over this Convent
of St. Anne, and lived in hopes of being a Cardinal, and of other promotions in
the Ecclesiastical State, so that no person could be more proper for this
Employment, than this good Prelat.

Whilst the Princess thus remained closely watched, and besieged within the
Convent; the Family of Colonna murmured, and talked loud against the Cardinal,
complaining of his injustice and insolent violence which was intolerable to
Princes of Rome: but say what they could, Altieri was resolved to hold his prey
fast, and improve his Interest with her by means of the good Prelat Altoviti;
who having the care and protection of that Convent committed to his care and
Trust, had the opportunity without much suspicion to make frequent Visits to
the Lady, and to carry Billiets from her to the Cardinal, declaring her
resolution to be entirely governed by him and his Holiness. But this daily
correspondence, and intercourse of Letters had not long continued, before the
Spies of Colonna had discovered the Intrigues, which were managed by this
Prelat, and the Aunt of Don Frederico, who also was as subtle as any Woman, and
the more cunning for being a Nun. The Constable of Colonna and others of that
Family being well informed of these proceedings and of all these affairs,
dissembled them by a more than ordinary respect to the person of Altoviti,
whom, whenever they met, they saluted with such profound reverence, as if he
had been Pope, professing more than ordinary respect to his person, and
sanctity of his life.

The good Prelat believing these demonstrations of kindness to be all real,
openly passed over the Bridge of Saint Sisto without fear, or suspicion, in the
sight and view of the Lords of Colonna; when some bold Ruffians, or
Assassinates assaulted him in his Coach firing two Carbines upon him, one of
which shot him with a Bullet, which passed his Neck, and came out under his
shoulder: the poor Prelat finding himself thus mortally wounded cried out for
help; at which lamentable Voice many Priests and Friars came about him, to
prepare him for death; but Chirurgions coming in, and finding that the wound
was not mortal, he took courage, and in a few weeks his wound was perfectly
cured. This accident afforded matter of discourse to the whole Town, and Libels
or Pasquils were scattered, and affixed in all public places: others wrote
Verses and Elegies on Altoviti, as if he had been already dead; of which we
shall only repeat this Distick: Barbare! quid violas violento tingere tentas
Sanguine? quas tingi Murice Roma dabat.

This violent attempt on the sacred person of a Prelat was scandalous to all
the World; and every one believed that the Pope would have so highly resented
it, as in despite of the Family of Colonna, and of their greatness, have
revenged an Act so infamous, as this, by just punishment of the Offenders: but
contrary to all expectation, when the Governor of Rome went to the Pope's
Palace to receive Orders, in what manner to govern himself in this important
Affair; the Cardinal Altieri seemed very cold and remiss, giving little or no
encouragement, or direction to the Magistrates to examine, or enquire into the
matter, saying, That Officers of Justice ought as well to be Politicians, as
Judges. In the mean time the Constable Colonna seemed little concerned, and
neither gave outward demonstrations of joy, nor affected a dissembled sorrow;
but reserving himself in a moderate mean, appeared publicly at Exercises,
Operaes, and other divertisements, as usual; nourishing a secret contentment,
that he had revenged himself on his Adversary, and that his power, and
greatness had seated him above the reach of the Cardinal. On the other side,
the Cardinal rejoiced to hear Colonna evil spoken of, and that he had incurred
the Odium, or hatred of all the good and virtuous Men of Rome, and especially
of the Clergy; and farther to dilate and heap an infamy of this detestable Act
on a Family which he abhorred; he caused a Narrative thereof to be wrote and
sent unto all Courts, and Countries, by such Pens as he had chosen and caused
to be dipped in the most bitter Ink of Invectives.

This was all the satisfaction that Altoviti could obtain, notwithstanding the
sacredness of his Person, being a Prelat, and Patriarch, and one that had
sacrificed his reputation and life for service of the Court. And though the
Nephews of other Popes have on occasions less injurious and dishonorable to
the Papal Sea, hazarded the quiet and safety of the Ecclesiastical State; yet
Aliteri, scorning to insist on such low, and trivial punctillios delighted
himself with the thoughts, that in despite of all the power and contrivances
of Colonna, he should gain his point and sufficiently mortify that Family by
the marriage of Sforza with the Princess Cesarini.

And indeed the matter succeeded accordingly; for after all these, and many
other particulars, which caused disturbance; the French Ambassador who was the
Duke de Estree, and the Duke Cesarini Uncle of the two Ladies interposed
between both parties, and in fine made this agreement: That both Sisters with
their Husbands should live under the protection of France (as determined by the
Will of their Father) and ever more profess and adhere to that Interest. That
their Uncle Cesarini who was infirm, and impotent in his Bed without hopes of
posterity, should leave the Inheritance of his Estate to his two Nieces, to be
equally divided between them; Which terms of Accommodation being indented and
subscribed reciprocally by both Parties: the Cardinal obtained his ends, and
the rage of Colonna appeased, and Prince Sonnino satisfied, who had married the
younger Sister upon the Promises, and Vows which the Elder had given to
renounce the World, and the Inheritance, and live within the retirement of a
Convent.

Thus ended the embroils of this Intrigue, injurious to none, but poor
Altoviti; which having been acted in other parts, might have produced many
Tragical Effects; but in regard the Scene was at Rome, where love and justice
give way to Policy, and to designs for conservation of Families; Arms and
passion were overcome by Plots and subtle Contrivances.

Whatsoever matter occurred in the time of this Pope, we must attribute to the
person, passion and conduct of Altieri; for Clement being an old Dotard, and
not desirous to be troubled with business, was served by a Nephew, which fitted
his humor, and only made use of his name and Authority to govern with an
absolute, and despotical Will. The first movement which regulated all his
Actions was a passion, and an exorbitant desire to agrandize his own Name and
Family; and in order thereunto, as he was naturally partial to the Spanish
Faction, so he believed a constant adherence to that Interest to be most
corresponding to those designs.

In the year 1671. four Cardinals died at Rome, of which Antonio Barberino was
one. At Genoua new differences arose concerning the Inquisition, which were
afterward composed to the mutual satisfaction both of the Pope, and that
Republic. This year being the year following after the Inauguration of the
Pope, Don Pedro d' Aragon Vice-King of Naples appeared at Rome with a splendid
Retinue, to perform the Embassy of Obedience (as they call it) which is done by
the yearly present of a white Genet; this Ceremony was at other times performed
by the Ambassador of Spain residing at Rome, but to show a greater honor
perhaps to the Pope, the Vice-King was qualified with the Title of Ambassador
Extraordinary; after whose return into Spain the Marquis of Astorgas was
constituted Vice King of Naples, and Father Nitardo Inquisitor-General of Spain
was dignified with the Character of Ambassador; and because that honor is
inconsistent with the simple condition of a religious person, the Pope adorned
him with the Title of Archbishop of Edessa: who the year following with several
others was promoted to the dignity of Cardinal.

An. 1672.
This year also Pope Pius Quintus who was a Dominican, or of the Order of
Preachers, was canonized, being a hundred years after his decease. There also
happened a dispute concerning Precedence, between Don Gasparo Altieri one of
the Pope's Nephews, and General of the Pope's Forces, and commandator Bichi
Ambassador of Tuscany, which difference was determined in favor of the latter.

In the mean time violent disturbances arose in Poland, on occasion, that King
Michael had removed the Primate of that Kingdom, and the Great General Sobieski
from their places, and Offices of Trust, which afterward were accommodated by
the Pope's Nuntio Monsignor Bonvisi on terms more necessary than convenient, or
rather by the approach of the Turks who with a formidable force had taken the
strong fortress of Keminiec, and were entered into the bowels of Poland as far
as Leopolis; the news hereof made a great noise at Rome, but little disturbed
Cardinal Altieri, who being intent to other designs, did not much trouble his
head with the thoughts of sending Nuntio's to the Christian Princes, whose
business was to incite them to administer help and succor to the afflicted
Poland, oppressed, and almost over run with Mohammedan Arms; for his Opinion was
(as they say) that the intercession of the Pope's Ministers in matters of that
nature, were only formalities, and such as conduced little to real effects, for
that Princes well disposed, and zealous for the Christian Cause, or such as
were united in the same common Interest, which was to expel and drive an Enemy
so powerful and dangerous far from them, would move on the principles of their
own safety, without any other incitements, or motives from their common Father
the Pope: and indeed Altieri searching for the nature of mankind within
himself, did conclude, that not Religion, but interest of State only governed
the World. Howsoever that he might afford some testimonies of his care, and
affection toward Poland; he raised the sum of three hundred thousand Crowns,
by impositions on Ecclesiastical Benefices in Italy, of which he sent fifty
thousand into Poland, and the remainder he invested in buildings, furniture and
movables for his own service. Soon after which King Michael dying, the
confusions of that Kingdom increased, and so other Seditions and Controversies
amongst them, was added that grand point of dispute concerning a Successor to
the Crown; for conservation of which, though Altieri was not so liberal as to
contribute great sums of Money; yet to please and gratify the Spaniards, he
was desirous to have a hand in the preferment of a King to them, naming Prince
Charles of Lorain as a person qualified with all Royal abilities, and
endowments required in a King: and indeed though none was more worthy of a
Crown, than that generous Prince: yet the Nobles of that Kingdom informed of
the Pope's endeavors, reflected thereon, as prejudicial to their right of
Election, having never received Kings at the nomination, or recommendation of
Rome; and therefore proceeded to the election of John Sobieski, a person
capable to sustain a Crown to the benefit and glory of that Kingdom, which
being invaded by the formidable Arms of the Turk, could never be rescued from
ruin, and destruction, but by the valor and fortune of Sobieski, whom God
raised not only for the protection of Poland, but for the defense of Germany;
having by his Heroic march from his own Country in the year 1683. to raise the
Siege of Vienna, signalized his Valor and prowess, to such a degree as
Romances describe Heroes, and the generous Actions and achievements of mighty
Princes.

It has been a privilege granted by the Sea of Rome to the Kings of Poland;
immediately after their Election to bestow a Cardinal's Cap on any Person whom
they should propose; according to which Power, the new King nominated the
Bishop of Marseglia for that Person, to whom he designed that honor. It was
indifferent to Altieri whether the Scarlet were bestowed on him, or any other,
had not the Spaniards, to whose Interest he was extremely partial, suggested
the contrary; pretending that the King ought to nominate a Subject of his own,
and not of a foreign and stranger Prince; for that in regard the French King was
able to insinuate into all Courts, by flattery and bribery he might easily
obtain a nomination for one, or other, who should either by Nation, or Interest
be engaged in that Faction; and so in time the whole Conclave become French,
and entirely dedicated to the devotion of that King. And whereas it might be
objected, that the refusal of the King of Polands desire, would much disoblige
him and the whole Nation, which stood much on their points and Prerogatives:
The Spaniards answered, That the Election of the Great Marshal Sobieski to the
Crown of Poland, having not been performed according to the usual Rules and
Methods observed in that Kingdom, could not continue, or be confirmed; for that
the Nobles of Lituania had not given their Votes, or suffrages thereunto: that
the greatest part of that Republic desired an unmarried Prince, who might
espouse the Widow of the deceased King; and in fine, that all the Nobility of
Poland remained unsatisfied with this Election; and being greatly divided in
their Opinions, some alteration might speedily be expected. Altieri suffering
himself to be thus misguided with these suggestions of the Spaniards, wrote to
the King of Poland in the name of the Pope, desiring ^his Majesty to fix on
some other person of a more indifferent temper, and who was a Neuter, and less
engaged to either of the Crowns: by which he would perform so signal a kindness
to his Holiness, as would ever oblige him to prefer the Interest of his Kingdom
in matters of greater moment.

The King highly resented this manner of proceeding of the Court of Rome, being
astonished to find, that those, who had used all endeavors to disappoint him
of his Election, should now have the boldness to demand such a favor from him,
as he could not grant without dishonor to the Crown which he had lately
received, and therefore testified his resolutions to persist in the nomination
he had made; to which Altieri not judging fit to condescend remained firm in
his denial; and therein being resolved until the death of this Pope, an ill
correspondence passed between Poland and Rome during the Reign of this Clement
X.

An. 1673.
Though all these difficulties were made in exception to the person of the
Bishop of Marseille, yet Altieri was more easy, and favorable to the Family
of the late Pope; and accordingly about the beginning of the year 1673. Felice
Rospigliosi was advanced to the degree of Cardinal, whereby the Pope in
gratitude to Clement IX. returned the Hat he had received from him, to a person
of the same name and Family: at the same time also, he promoted Peter Basadonna
Knight, and Procurator of St. Mark for the Republic of Venice to the same
degree, together with Monsignor Nerli a Florentine, and then Nuntio at Paris:
this year also the College of Cardinals lost four of their number, three of
which were principal Members, and Persons great in their worth, and Offices,
viz. Frederick Borromeo Secretary of State, Imperiali a bury, and an active
Cardinal, as also Cualtieri and Roberti.

In this year the most Christian King designed to reform the Order of St.
Lazarus, and cast it into some other model; for that this Order being almost
worn out, and the constitutions of it, either abrogated or out of use; his
Majesty judged it more convenient to renew it again, and establish it upon some
other foundation; and in pursuance of this resolution a new Chief, or General
was appointed for this Order. This right of Regalia or Jus Patronatus which his
Majesty had on this occasion exercised in the Gallican Church greatly offended
Cardinal Altieri, who to vindicate the Papal Authority, in opposition to the
King's usurped pretenses, persuaded a certain Gascon, who was come to seek
preferment at Rome, to accept the honor of Abbat of the Order of St. Lazarus,
and to qualify him for this dignity, the Title of Abbat of Colombiere was
conferred upon him. This simple Gascon, for no other would be so vain, as to
accept of an Employment so intriguesom and difficult as this, not having the
Talent, or capacity to manage an Affair of this weight and moment, signed and
dispatched away the Orders requisite for regulation of his Abbey; and though his
friends and acquaintance dissuaded him from an Enterprise so offensive to the
King; yet this bold Gascon persisted in his folly, being therein encouraged by
the Creatures of Altieri.

The Duke d' Estree then Ambassador for France at Rome highly resented this
pretense of the Pope in derogation to the Right of his Master, but more
especially was offended with the Gascon who had conspired with the Cardinal to
deprive the King of his Right and Prerogative. Wherefore the Duke being highly
incensed, seized the Scrivener who had drawn up the Abbat's Memorial to the
Pope, and after severe words, and Reproofs caused him to be imprisoned: the
Abbat in the mean time fearing the like treatment, retired into a privileged
place within the jurisdiction of the Pope's Palace, and under the protection of
the Cardinal, who allowed him a Pension for his necessary maintenance. At
length the Abbat instigated by his Friends, and encouraged by Altieri departed
from Rome, and passed the Alps into France, where so soon as he was arrived, he
was seized by the King's command, and committed to Prison, where we shall leave
him to the Law, and the disposal of the Order of St. Lazarus to the pleasure of
his Majesty.

This, and other discontents increased the ill correspondence between the Duke
d' Estree Ambassador of France, and the Cardinal; which Altieri though an
Italian could not conceal, or dissemble; for being passionately affected to the
Interest of Spain, received the news of the French Conquests, and successes
against Holland with regret, and displeasure; either disapproving the
intelligence as false, or otherwise relating it with such circumstances, as
much abated, and eclipsed the glory of those Victories: all which served to
inflame the differences between the Duke and the Cardinal.

But none was of greater consequence, than that which intervened between the
Cardinal, and all the Ambassadors and Representatives for foreign Princes
residing in the Court of Rome: the occasion and matter whereof was this.

It being now the year 1674. An. 1674.
immediately preceding the year of Jubily, when more than ordinary provisions
are made for entertainment and sustenance of Pilgrims, who crowd in great
numbers to obtain the Indulgences, Pardons, and Dispensations which are granted
at that holy time: It happened, that the Farmers and Collectors of the Customs,
and Impositions which are laid on all sorts of Victuals and Provisions, made
complaints of the great damage which the Pope suffered in that branch of his
Revenue from the abuses and frauds of foreign Ministers; who having all
provisions for their Families allowed to them free from Taxes, and Impost, did
under that pretense, color the goods, and provisions of others, and thereby
raised considerable sums of Money to their own advantage, which belonged and
appertained to the Apostolical Chamber. The Farmers had often complained of
these abuses in the times of other Popes, and though many remedies, and
expedients were proposed for prevention of the Cheat; yet they produced nothing
besides Affronts, and blows to the Officers.

At length Altieri who esteemed himself more politic, and powerful than all
the Nephews of preceding Popes; resolved on occasion of the approaching Jubily
to raise the Farm on provisions to a more exorbitant price, than ever was
known: and to obviate the complaints of the Customers; he published an Edict,
That all Ambassadors and Cardidinals should for the future pay the Taxes, and
Impositions on their Domestic provisions, in such manner as all other persons,
not exempted by privileges were obliged to pay.

This Edict being published, greatly surprised, not only the Ministers from
foreign Princes, but the whole College of Cardinals, who finding themselves
hereby deprived of their chief benefit and privilege, murmured, and talked loud
against the arbitrary and irregular Government of Cardinal Altieri; who little
regarding the empty air of words, returned no other answer: than that the Pope
was Master of his own Family, and Dominions.

The Ambassadors then residing at Rome were the Cardinal Landgrave of Hesse
for the Emperor, the Duke d' Estree for France, Cardinal Nitardo for Spain,
besides the Representatives of Venice, the Grand Duke, Genoua, and other lesser
Princes, all these being disobliged, and sensibly touched by the loss, or
suspension of their privilege, entered into consultation together of the
method, whereby to proceed; when after some debate they agreed to go together
to the Palace of Monte Cavallo, where the Pope was then lodged; and there
without any previous Ceremony, or notice taken of the Cardinal Nephew to demand
Audience immediately of the Pope. Accordingly these foreign Ministers being on
their way thither, which made a great noise, and combustion in the City of
Rome; the Cardinal at the alarm roused up himself, and instantly commanded the
Chains of the City to be drawn, the Gates of the Palace to be shut, and Guards
placed at all Avenues, to hinder and obstruct the passage of the Ambassadors:
who being in this manner disappointed of their Audience returned home full of
anger and indignation, resolving in revenge of this Affront never more to
acknowledge the Cardinal for Nephew of the Pope or treat with him under those
circumstances, or give him the name of Altieri, but of Paluzzi; and in the mean
time they caused a relation and state of the whole matter to be drawn up in
writing, subscribed by the hands of all the Ambassadors and foreign Ministers,
the which was dispatched by every one of them to his respective Prince.

Notwithstanding the late Obstructions given them by Altieri, the Ambassadors
found a way to obtain Audience of the Pope, to whom having gained admittance,
they represented, That the cause and subject of their discontent was the
exorbitant and irregular Government of his Nephew, who to the prejudice of
their honor had laid those impositions upon them, from which they were
exempted by the privilege of their Character; and though both their Masters,
and themselves were well-affected and zealous toward the Apostolical Sea, yet
they could not but make a great difference between the duty they owed to his
Holiness, and their submission to the Cardinal Altieri in all his indirect
proceedings. For Answer hereunto, the Pope, who was of a mild and gentle temper
replied with his usual softness, in justification of his Edict, that the Debts
which lay on the Apostolical Chamber were vast, amounting to many Millions of
Gold; for ease of which, he was enforced to entrench for a short time on their
privileges; which should not longer continue, than until the end of the
Jubily, which would be terminated at the expiration of the following year;
during which, the Chamber being obliged to more than ordinary charges, and
expense, was enforced to exercise unusual means for its reimbursments: and
therefore he hoped, that they would become such charitable Benefactors to the
Church, as for its better support, and subsistence to part with something of
their own rights for advancement of so great a good; especially considering,
that during the time of his Pontificate, the Ecclesiastical State had not been
charged with any new Taxes, or Impositions.

These and the like discourses used by the Pope in favor of his Nephew, and
his proceedings, gave no satisfaction to the foreign Ministers; who therewith
displeased, returned immediately from their Audience to their own dwellings,
without the least notice taken of the Cardinal Nephew; which neglect was
intended as an affront to him, it being the custom for Ambassadors after they
came from Audience with the Pope, to visit the Nephew, and communicate their
Affairs to him, craving his assistance and furtherance in their business; but
now the Ambassadors to evidence their farther resentments, judged it not only
fit to disown Altieri by omission of this Ceremony, but even (as far as they
were able) to divest him of his Adoption, vouchsafing no other name to him,
than that of Paluzzi.

This neglect, and ill correspondence with Altieri, continued for the space of
several months, which much abated the respect of the people toward the
Cardinal, and caused him to fall low in the esteem of the Court; and as a
consequence thereof Kings and Princes returned no Answer to his Letters, though
accompanied with the Pope's Briefs, and worded with all the terms of
submission, and humility, that could be expressed. Altieri considering the
circumstances of his condition, and the age of the Pope, (who according to the
course of Nature could not last long) endeavored by all means possible to
procure a good understanding between himself, and the Ambassadors, and
especially to set himself right with France: in order hereunto a Congregation
of Cardinals was deputed, consisting (as was believed) of Men disinteressed,
and unbiassed by any faction, whose incumbence it was to propose, and contrive
middle, and indifferent terms toward an accommodation. In like cases, as well
as in this, it has been the practice, to ordain a Congregation of this nature;
which being composed for the most part of aged, and unactive Men, such as had
given over the World, moved slowly in all their determinations, and with that
phlegm, that their Consults, and Proposals commonly concluded in nothing: the
like success this Deputation found, the meeting, and debates of the Cardinals
being delayed from day to day without other issue, or effect, and in the mean
time the execution of the Edict seemed to be suspended, or to die of it self;
the Customers, and Collectors of the Taxes not daring to exercise their power
in virtue of this Edict. Altieri also had given them some intimation not to
insist with too much resolution and rigor thereupon, with promises of
abatements on their Farm, supposing that time would compose the differences,
and allay the indignation which the Ambassadors had conceived against him: but
finding to the contrary, that their anger was kept alive with scorn, and
disrespect to his Person and Office: and that though the Kings of France and
Spain were engaged in Wars one against the other, and that their Ambassadors
at Rome were on that score at odds and unfriendly one with the other: yet they
agreed, and entertained a good understanding together in what concerned the
quadruple knot which they had sealed against him. Altieri fearing the
consequences of these matters, resolved to cast himself into the hands of
France, but the Duke d' Estree refused to accept of any terms, or Conditions
with him; wherefore he applied himself to the other Ambassadors with design to
break the Combination; but encountering the same difficulties he applied himself
to the Court of Spain, where the Counsels and considerations being of a
different nature, regarding the quiet of Italy, rather than animosity to the
person of Altieri, Orders were dispatched to Cardinal Nitardi to close with
him, and to enter again into a good correspondence with the Court of Rome.

The Emperor taking the same measures, gave Orders to the Cardinal Landgrave
to acknowledge Altieri as formerly for the Pope's Nephew, and to retain a good
correspondence with him: the Senate of Venice following the example of these
two great Monarchs, ordered their Minister also to accept terms of
reconciliation; by which means Altieri stood fair again with all the
Ambassadors excepting only the Duke d' Estree, who had other scores to reckon
with him.

When the news came to Rome, that the Court of Spain had given Order to their
Ambassador to reconcile himself with Altieri: those who in that City have
little more to do, than to discourse of the Politics, and make their
reflections on the Acts of Princes; were of Opinion, that Altieri had made some
offers to assist the Spaniards in regaining the City of Messina from the
French; which the Duke d' Estree having discovered, adjoined that quarrel to
other matters of discontent: but such conjectures as these could have no
foundation, nor gain belief amongst those, who understand the constitution of
Rome, and the nature of the Cardinal, who was more inclined to heap up for
himself, than sow for others. But the more probable Opinion was, that Spain was
desirous to stand fair with the Pope, because France was at odds with him,
giving thereby a testimony to the World of the unquietness of that Nation,
which is contentedy with nothing of moderation; and in fine, that their
behavior toward all is insolent, and insupportable.

The year 1675. An. 1675.
which was the Jubily, or holy year, being entered, the City of Rome was after
the usual manner filled with multitudes of Pilgrims and Strangers, who crowded
to obtain the benefit of Pardons and Indulgences which are plentifully issued,
and bestowed at that time. That year six Cardinals were created, namely,
Alexander Crescentio a Roman, Marescotti of Bologna, Rocci a Roman, Albritii a
Neapolitan, Spada a Roman, and Philip Howard of the Illustrious Family of
Norfolk, who was a Dominican, having been Great Almoner to the Queen of
England; this advancement was much facilitated by her Majesty's recommendations
The which promotions the French King would not own, because the Bishop of
Marseglia whom the King of Poland had recommended, (as we have related at the
beginning of this Pope's Reign) was rejected to please the humor of the
Spaniards. And indeed herein his most Christian Majesty seemed to have just
cause of discontent: for though in the year 1671. Caesar d' Estree Brother of
the Duke of that name and called Bishop of Laon was created Cardinal; yet that
honor being conferredat the nomination of the King of Portugal, in recompense
of some services rendered to that Crown; and united only to the bare
recommendations of France; it was not esteemed as a favor done to that King,
but to Portugal only, of which Kingdom d' Estree was made Protector.
Howsoever Altieri would not understand it for other, than a favor done to
France, without which and the interest of the Duke d' Estree his Brother, then
Ambassador at Rome, it had scarce been obtained: for that Duke amongst other
Commissions brought from Rome, had particular instructions to demand of the
Pope the restitution of Castro and Ronciglione to the Duke of Parma, according
to the Treaty of Pisa; but that being a morsel not easily digested by the Pope,
Monsieur d' Estree made his way thereupon to gain the Cardinal's Cap for his
Brother, by a relaxation of that demand.

About the beginning of the year 1676. An. 1676.
there arose a Controversy between the Pope and the Vice-King of Naples
concerning the seizure of certain Banditi within the jurisdiction of the
Ecclesiastical State, by Officers from the Vice-King; upon which Dispute the
Son of the Duke of Sora was banished from Rome, upon pain of death in case he
should return.

This Pope Canonized Cajetan Tienne founder of the Order of Regular Clarks,
Francis Borgia General of the Jesuits, Philip Beniti restorer of the Order of
the Servillians, Lewis Bertran, and Rose of St. Mary both of the Dominican
Order.

Under these Circumstances Altieri remained with France, when Pope Clement the
10th. died; some few hours before whose death Altieri pressed him to fill up
the four vacant places of Cardinals, and though the Queen of Sweden, and
Cardinal Barbarino joined with him in the same request; yet the Pope would not
hearken to them, nor grant their desire. And when at last, Altieri became more
importunate with him than before, designing to supply the four vacant places
with Creatures of his own, who might be able to fortify his Interest against
the next Conclave: the good Pope turned to him, and with some Anger said: You
may well content your self, that you have been Pope for six years, Suffer me
now to follow my own inclinations, and be Pope for six hours only.

It was now generally concluded, and believed, that Altieri was so fallen into
disreputation with the whole College of Cardinals, and with the People of Rome,
and so hated by all the Prelates, that immediately after the Pope's death, he
would be removed from all his Offices, and deprived of his Suffrage in the
ensuing Conclave. But Altieri had so well feathered his Nest during his Reign
under his reputed Uncle, that his Riches procured him Friends, and reconciled
the minds of those who were most estranged from him; so that he conserved his
Office of Chamberlain with other honorable Charges; and obtained a
confirmation for his Nephew Don Gasparo in his place of General, and afterward
entered triumphant into the Conclave: only his main task was in what manner to
reconcile himself to the favor of the most Christian King; in regard the
Cardinals of that Party declared, that they would neither act nor treat with
Altieri, until he had first given satisfaction to his Majesty.

INNOCENT XI.
SO soon as Clement X. had expired his last breath, Altieri who was Cardinal
Chamberlain gave notice thereof to all the Officers of the Household; upon which
news, all the Prelates and Grooms of the Bedchamber in decent, and mourning
Habits repaired to the Palace of Monte-Cavallo, where they found the Body of
the Pope laid out on a Pallet covered with Crimson Velvet; and there in
presence of them all, Altieri, whose Office it was, brake the Sigillum
Piscatorium, or the Pope's Seal in pieces; and the Notaries of the Camera took
an Inventory of all the Goods found in the Palace. After which the body of the
Pope was dedivered to those who were to embalm it, and then the Bell of the
Capitol was rung out, to give notice of the death of the Pope to all the City.
And now Cardinal Altieri, having nothing more to do at Monte-Cavallo, repaired
to his own new Palace near the Jesu, attended with a numerous train, where he
received the Visits of Cardinals, Princes, Ambassadors, Prelates, and Nobles
who came to condole with him for the death of his Uncle.

During the time that the Funeral Obsequies were solemnizing, the Cardinals
were busied in forming Parties against the time of Election: the first day of
which was the second of August, when a considerable number of Cardinals being
assembled in St. Peter's, entered in form of Procession two by two with gravity
and Order into the Conclave; the next day some others were added to them, in
all to the number of fifty two; so on the third day of August the Conclave was
shut and Guards set by the Prince Savelli, to whose Office it appertained, as
Marshal of the Conclave. On the 4th instant the Mass of Veni Creator, being
sung, the Cardinals began the Choice by way of Scrutiny. The Persons nominated
were Vidone, Barberigo, Odescalchi, Spinola, and Cerri, all which had almost an
equality of Votes: Odescalchi had eleven; but proceeding toward the Evening by
way of Accession, seven Votes only appeared for him.

On the sixth day in the Morning, Scrutiny being made, twenty seven Votes were
given for Cardinal Corsini; but in the Evening fourteen only appeared at the
Accession. Howsoever things were so promising and favorable, that Chigi who
chiefly managed this Affair in the behalf of Corsini, certainly believed, that
he had gained his point, but Cardinal Nitardo Ambassador for Spain opposing
the Election drew off all the Spanish party, which being followed by the
faction of the Grand Duke Corsini was wholly abandoned, and but one Vote left
him at the Evening when Accession was made.

Chigi not discouraged with this ill success was still plotting to bring in the
French party to his assistance; but was countermined by Altieri and the Flying
Squadron. During which, another party was set up called the New Squadron
consisting of certain Cardinals, who pretended great Zeal, and to be solely
moved from a sincere and godly principle to promote a Person to the Chair of
St. Peter, who was eminent for his Religion, and Wisdom without any regard to
worldly or secular interest. The Chief, or Head of these Professors was
Cardinal Gravina, who having from his first entrance into the Conclave fixed
his Eyes on Cardinal Odescalchi, could never by any opposition, or difficulty
to the contrary be removed from his design of promoting (as he judged) the most
worthy person of all the Conclave. On this occasion Gravina exercising all his
interest and art, Scrutiny was again made, and then thirty six Votes appeared
in favor of Odescalchi; which number being great, and sufficient to secure the
Pope's Election; a rumor was immediately spread, that the Pope was chosen,
which drew such a concourse of people to the gates of the Vatican, that the
Guards were doubled, to keep off the throng from crowding into the precincts of
the Conclave. Notwithstanding which, at the Accession some of the aforesaid
number sell off; for Altieri, and Chigi had labored under hand, seducing
several with vain hopes to promote some Creature of their respective Parties;
and the Spaniards on farther considerations span out the time with delays,
expecting first to receive directions from the Court of Spain, before they
proceeded to a final resolution.

The French Cardinals inclined chiefly to the election of Rospigliosi, but in
case his interest should fail, they approved of none so well as of Odescalchi;
for though he was a subject of Spain, yet his Virtues, and the sincere
intentions of his mind toward the welfare of the Church, reconciled him to all
Parties, and Interests. The Cardinals which composed this New Squadron were
sixteen in number, the Chief of which was Gravina, who ever remained
immovable, and would never nominate, or propose other than Odescalchi; the
other Cardinals were Cibo, Barberigo, Litta, Buonvisi, Caraffa, Howard of
Norfolk, Rospigliosi, Acciaioli, Homodei, Albici, Nitardo, Rosetti, Pio,
Vidone, and Odescalchi: the which Party with their Adherents was so strong, as
to balance at any time the Election, and to exclude any whom they were pleased
to reject.

Howsoever the party of Odescalchi was not so strong, but that it admitted of
another balance; for Barberino, and Chigi began a negotiation in favor of
Fachenetti, which was in so probable a way to succeed that Srutiny being made
in the Morning, twenty two Votes appeared for him, and at the Evening eleven
only upon the Accession.

Whereupon Gravina and the zealous Cardinals renewed the Scrutiny again for
Odescalchi, by which twenty nine were given in his favor; which number with
the former favorable Scrutinies did clearly manifest, that the Conclave was
generally inclined to this Person: which occasioned a common rumor through all
the Town that the Pope was made and that Odescalchi was chosen; which was so
confidently reported, that the people began to assemble, with intention to
rifle and plunder the Palace of that Cardinal, had it not been defended by a
Guard of Soldiers. And indeed the Conclave had then really proceeded to have
completed their Choice, and by Accession created him Pope, had not Cardinal d'
Estree suspended the proceedings, by a Request he made; that their Eminencies
would be pleased for some short time to defer the ultimate point which
determines their Election, until the arrival of some French Cardinals, who by
order of the King were now on their journey toward the Conclave: which he
proposed (as he said) not to thwart, or alter the Choice they had made of so
worthy a Person, in which he also concurred; but that his most Christian
Majesty might have opporunity thereby to join with them in such a sacred
Election by the consent and approbation which he was ready to yield thereunto.

In the mean time not to remain idle, several Designs were put in practice in
behalf of diverse Cardinals: Conti was one that was set up, and his interest
promoted by Cardinal Azzolino; but this person failing, the next in nomination
was Piccolomini supported by Chigi and Azzolino, and founded on the interest of
Spain, and the Great Duke; who to allure Altieri to a concurrence with them,
they engaged that Piccolomini being elected Pope, he should advance Bichi (who
was the intimate Friend of Altieri) to the degree, and dignity of Cardinal
Nephew: but this offer prevailed not upon Altieri, who had other designs and
intentions in his prospect. Chigi failing herein resolved to try the fortune of
Cardinal Spinola, who though a Genoese, was yet a person of great worth, and
learning, and well practiced in public Affairs, having resided for some time
with the Emperor in Germany, in quality of Nuntio from the Pope; but this
would not do neither, for being put to the Scrutiny, no more than seven Votes
were presented for him. Then Cardinal Crescentio was proposed, and offered to
the Spaniards, and to the Faction of Pamfilio: but this interest being
manifestly opposite to the Crown of France, and to the Duke d' Estree
Ambassador for that King, and by consequence to all the French party; there
remained little hopes of success for him, or his Promoters. Then new Scrutinies
being again made: Odescalchi had fourteen Votes, Alberici nine, old Carpegna
had seven, Albici five, Gastaldi nine, and Crescentio three.

Thus did the Conclave trifle away their time until the thirtieth of August,
when the Cardinals Retz, Buglion, Bonsi, and Maldachino, arrived at Rome; so
that it was expected, that very speedily an Election would follow, and that
according to common Opinion, the person would be no other than Odescalchi,
though at the same time Albritio by the dexterous management of Altieri,
Carpegna, and Colonna, was put into a fair course of promotion: but his hopes
were soon dashed by opposite parties, and the different interests became so
embroiled, and intriguesome, that in all probability the Election was not
likely to succeed in several months.

On the first of September the Cardinals Retz, Buglion, Bonsi, and Muldachino
entered the Conclave, accompanied with a numerous train, and a concourse of
people, crying out after them for a speedy Election, and for a Rospigliosi, or
an Odescalchi. Thus were the people as well without, as the Cardinals within
inclined generally to the election of Odescalchi; with whom also the French
Cardinals agreed, and by additional Votes strengthened his Party: but in regard
his most Christian Majesty carried at that time a mighty stroke in the
Conclave, as he did in all the Councils of Europe, it was judged convenient not
to conclude on this important matter without the assent, and approbation of his
Majesty. To this end Corriers or Posts were expressly dispatched with advices,
and informations from the French Cardinals; and in the mean time, (as is very
observable, and never before practiced) the whole Conclave fixed their Eyes on
Odescalchi as the person designed, and marked out for this eminent employment;
and from that very time paid him the same honor, duty and reverence, as if he
had been already promoted to the Papal Throne.

And now the Cardinals had little more to do than to quarrel amongst
themselves; Colonna and Maldachino had a Dispute with very sharp words,
reviling each other, with Fool, and Beast; but the most considerable was that
between Cardinal Howard of Norfolk, and the Cardinal Buglion; for that the
latter had not returned the Visit, which the former had made to him; in excuse
for which Buglion freely declared, that it was his King's positive Command to
him, not to acknowledge the Cardinals of the last promotion, either by Ceremony,
or Complement, or any Treaty, or Negotiation whatsoever. But the Cardinal of
Norfolk would not allow of this Excuse, insisting on the King's good will, and
gracious favors toward his Person; when in his journey, and passage through
France from London to Rome, he was pleased to honor him with his own Coaches,
and to give Orders to the Governors of all Cities, through which he was to
pass to treat him with a respect due to the Character of a Cardinal, and to the
dignity of his Illustrious Family; the which favors his Majesty would never
have bestowed in that gracious manner had his intentions been different, and
not incliclined to allow him for a Cardinal, under which notion he was treated,
and received in all parts of France. But this was not the private, or single
case of the Cardinal of Norfolk, for all that promotion was concerned in the
quarrel, which the Conclave considering as dangerous, and such, as might cause
great disorder and confusion, they immediately dispatched a Letter to his
Majesty subscribed also by the French Cardinals, beseeching his Majesty that he
would be pleased to order his Ambassador the Duke de Estree, the French
Cardinals, and all his other Officers and Ministers at Rome, to own, and visit
the six Cardinals of the last promotion, created by the late Pope Clement X.
which would avoid many inconveniences, and disturbances in the Conclave to the
great prejudice, and hindrance of that important Affair now incumbent upon them
until answers were returned to the foregoing dispatches. The Conclave not to be
idle, employed themselves upon several Scrutinies, in favor of Massimi, Cerri,
Fachinetti, and others, but none of them arising to that number of Votes, which
on all occasions appeared for Odescalchi, all other trials became faint, and
insignificant. So that the general inclination of the Conclave seemed in
despite of Altieri, and the endeavors of his Adherents to the contrary, to be
entirely fixed, and settled on the person of Odescalchi; to whose promotion
nothing was now wanting, but the concurrence and approbation of his most
Christian Majesty.

In short, on the 19th of September the Corrier returned from France, of which
secret intelligence was given to the French Cardinals in the Conclave, and that
the answers were highly in favor of Odescalchi, as a Person grateful, and in
every kind acceptable to his Majesty. On the twentieth the Duke d' Estree
Ambassador of France was introduced into the Conclave, where he presented the
Letters from his most Christian Majesty to the College of Cardinals in answer
to those lately sent by them: and then in a most eloquent Speech he represented
unto them the necessity there was to proceed to the speedy election of a Pope,
whose Government was now more than necessary to the Christian World. That in
the College of Cardinals there was so many persons of Virtue, that they had an
ample Field for their Election; yet considering, that the Vicar of Christ was
to be of the number of those, who did transcend in all the Virtues, and Graces
of Religion, and such as would reform the abuses, and corruptions, which to the
scandal of the Christian Church, were crept into the Court of Rome: he would
recommend unto them one who was of a public Spirit, sincere, and
disinterested, deciphering unto them thereby, though without naming, the very
person of Odescalchi: and having praised and applauded Cardinal Barberino, and
giving God thanks for the great piety and zeal of that Man, he retired, leaving
the Conclave to their free Election, in which now there appeared no farther
difficulty, in regard the major part had received a plenary inspiration from
France.

And here on this occasion it would be no impertinent Query, whether the Court
at Paris was not as much concerned in the choice of a Pope, as the Conclave was
at Rome. But this will not be strange, or new; for Hadrian the first, and Leo
the 3d. gave a power to approve, or disallow the election of the Pope unto
Charles the Great; and Leo the 8th, confirmed the same privilege to Otho: And
when the Church has been powerful it has made Emperors; and when Emperors
have been victorious, and prosperous, they have made Popes.

But to proceed, that Evening a great number of Cardinals went to the Cell of
Odescalchi, and kissed his hand, which was the irretractable assurance, and
engagement of their Votes for him: but the good man showed some unwillingness
and reluctance thereunto, desiring them with tears in his Eyes to choose some
other Subject more able to support the great load and burden of so mighty a
weight. Howsoever being at length overcome by the Arguments, and persuasions of
his Friends, he consented thereunto, upon condition, that they would assent
unto, and subscribe certain Articles for reformation of the Ecclesiastical
Government which he then proposed to them; which the Cardinals approving, a
great part of them subscribed that Night and swore to maintain them, as did the
others in like manner the day following. And now Altieri finding that it was to
no purpose to struggle, and contend longer; and fearing lest the Election
should be made without him, he became the most forward of any to make the
Scrutiny, being followed by all his Creatures, who were nineteen in number; so
then the Choice was immediately determined by the Access; and on the 21th. of
September 1676. the whole Conclave with one Voice and Mind declared Odescalchi
to be the Pope of Rome, the Vicar of Christ, and the true and undoubted
Successor of St. Peter: and then Cardinal Barberino who was Dean of the
College, was the first by the duty of his place to lead the others to
Adoration; and was afterward followed by all one after the other according to
their Offices, and Seniority.

The Adoration being performed, he was vested in his Pontifical Habit, taking
the name of Innocent XI. in remembrance of his Benefactor, who had assumed him
into the Degree, and Order of Cardinals; after which he was conducted into the
Chapel with the accustomed Ceremonies, and being placed by the Altar, he there
received the second Adoration, which being finished the Master of Ceremonies
demanded, whether it was the pleasure of His Holiness that the Nobility then
attending without, desirous to kiss his feet, should be admitted in, to pay the
duty, and devotion which they owed to the Successor of St. Peter, which being
granted the Queen of Sweden was the first introduced to perform that
Complement; after her followed the Ambassadors and Ministers of the crowned
Heads, after whom came the Princes, Prelates and Nobles, all which having
kissed the feet of the Pope, testified the excess of joy they conceived for the
promotion of a Person so worthy of all honor unto the Papal Chair.

After which a Door was opened over the Great Portico of St. Peter's Church,
into which the Master of the Ceremonies led the way carrying a Cross before the
Pope and Cardinals, which the people with great reverence adored at a distance,
and the Cardinal Maldachino, who was first Deacon, presenting the Pope before
them, pronounced with a loud Voice these following words after the accustomed
manner, Annuncio Vobis gaudium magnum: habemus Pontificem Eminentissimum, and
Reverendissimum Dominum, Cardinalem Benedictum Odescalcum, qui sibi Nomen
imposuit Innocentius XI. It is not to be expressed with what joy the common
people, and the City entertained the news of this Pope's advancement; the Bells
were rung, and all the Cannon of the City were fired, and the Soldiers
discharged many Vollies of their Muskets with sounds of Drums and Trumpets;
and seized on the Coach and Horses, and the very Coachman's Cloak, which they
challenged to themselves for their fees. During which Solemnity, and whilst Te
Deum was sung, no alteration appeared in the countenance of the Pope, unless it
were a more than usual pensiveness and mortification, not discovering the least
vanity, or loftiness in his looks which other Popes were never able to conceal;
but blessed, and crossed the People with a flood of tears which fell from his
Eyes. Some persons may weep for joy, but tears from what passion soever they
proceed are always the Indications of a soft, and gentle temper, when men of a
more hardy nature, evidence the swellings, and elations of their Heart by a
proud and a supercilious countenance.

Benedictus Odescalchi was born at Como a City in the Dukedom of Milan in the
year of our Lord 1611. hi Father was called Livio, and his Mother Paula
Castella, and both of Noble, and Patrician Families in Como, with a Revenue of
thirty thousand Crowns a year, belonging to the House of Odescalchi. In his
youth he was educated by the Jesuits, and by them instructed in Grammar, and
humane learning. He aftewards studied the Civil and the Canon Laws, partly at
Rome, and partly at Naples; and though he was never esteemed for a Polemical
Divine, yet he had the reputation of one who knew the World well, and practiced
in the nature of Mankind, and the Art of Government. In the time of Urban VIII.
he was made one of the Prothonotaries of the Apostolical Chamber, and
afterward was created President of the same: he was also made Chief Commissary
for gathering the Taxes, and Duties arising in the Province of Marchio which
were laid on the people at the time of Wars in Italy. After this business was
over, he was constituted Governor of Macerata, and the Province thereunto
adjoining. By Innocent X. he was made one of the Clarks of his Chamber, and not
long after in the year 1645. he was assumed into the College of Cardinals
having the Deaconry bestowed on him of the Saints Cosma, and Damianus: and
being afterward translated into the Order of Priests, he had the Title
conferred on him of St. Onuphrius, and by the same Innocent sent to Ferrara
with the Title of Legate: in which Office having acquitted himself with great
honor, he was made Bishop of Novarese, where he resided for some years, but
afterward was removed from thence at his own desire, by reason of the
heaviness of the Air in that place, which did not well agree with the
constitution of his body. Being at Rome he was employed in many Affairs of the
Church, and called to serve in diverse Congregations of Cardinals: on which
occasion he was made Protector of several Colleges and Monasteries; and in all
he behaved himself with singular prudence, modesty and virtue, until he was
assumed into the Supreme degree of the Papal Throne: to which having (as we
have said) been elected on the 21th of September, he was Crowned with the usual
Ceremonies on the 4th of October following.

After the Election and Coronation of the Pope were finished, the French
Cardinals prepared for their return to France; but before their departure they
paid their Visits to the Cardinals of the last promotion, who had not hitherto
been acknowledged by the King, for the reasons before mentioned. But those
quarrels being now vanished by the change of Affairs in the Court of Rome, the
Visits were returned, and a good correspondence again renewed, and established.

So soon as this Pope had taken the Government of Affairs into his own hands,
he began a reformation in several particulars: and in the first place
considering that Nepotism, or the advancement of Nephews both in Riches, and
Power was odious to the People, and of great damage to the Church; of which
examples had been given by those Popes, who having been over tender, and
indulgent to their own Families, had suffered their Nephews to blemish the
honor of the Church by Simoniacal corruptions, and by their Avarice and
Ambition to exhaust the Treasure of the Apostolical Chamber; this Pope
therefore (as we say) considering these matters, resolved to give the first
Example hereof in his own Family; and accordingly refused to receive his Nephew
Don Livio into any part of the Government, forbidding him to receive, or return
Visits under the Notion of Nephew to the Pope. But that this Nephew might not
complain of the severity of his Uncle, or judge his Estate nothing improved by
this fortune of his Family, he relinquished unto him all his Temporal Estate
amounting unto thirty thousand Crowns of yearly Revenue.

But in regard that Princes are not able to support the whole burden of their
Government on their own shoulders: the Pope not having respect to his own
Relations, but to such as were fit, and adequate to these great undertakings;
made choice of Cardinal Cibo for his Secretary of State, being a person endued
with a great and generous Soul, and a clear understanding, zealous for the
welfare of the Church, and dexterous in the management of politic Affairs.
This beginning gave encouragement to good and wise Men who conceived hopes by
an instance of this nature that Virtue and wisdom would return again into use,
and fashion: and the Court of Rome in general rejoiced to find themselves freed
from the pride, insolence, and covetousness of Nephews. Howsoever the Family of
Altieri was continued in their Military Employments, and others confirmed in
their respective Offices: but because War was extrinsecal and not the Trade, or
profession of the Church which was now in peace with all the World, he
retrenched the pay, or Pension belonging to the Officers of the Papal Army;
causing them to remain satisfied with the Name, and Dignity, without the
benefit, or profits of their respective Commands; which proved of great ease to
the Apostolical Chamber. Howsoever knowing that Authority is not to be
maintained without Power, and force; and resolving to become Master of Rome, he
increased the number of his Archers; in the listing of which, he took not every
fellow that came to offer his service, but such only as were sober Men, not
given to quarrels, or to commit such insolences as the Corsi, who were the
cause of great disturbance to Alexander VII. Howsoever on the other side not to
receive insults from Ambassadors or other Representatives of Kings, or Nobles
and Princes of Rome: in prejudice to Justice, and the rules of severe
Government, he absolutely denied to them the privilege to protect Miscreants,
and Criminals within the Precincts, or certain limits assigned by themselves to
be Sanctuaries for all Villains and Murderers, that should fly for refuge to
those quarters: and in pursuance of this resolution, he seized a certain famous
Bandito at Riccia, where the Prince, and Princess Chigi have a Seat, and
possession; the which was admitted without any opposition made thereunto.

Farther, the Pope confirmed the seventeen Articles which were signed (as we
have said) in the Conclave by all the Cardinals; being such as for the most
part tended to a Reformation of manners, and to an amendment of those abuses
which were crept into the Church. And farther, to demonstrate his great zeal
for the welfare and reputation of the Papal See, he openly reproved the vanity
of those Cardinals, who pleased themselves with fine Coaches, and rich
Liveries, giving them to understand the incongruity there was between those
worldly Gayeties, and the profession of those, who had devoted themselves to
that sober, and serious life which becomes the gravity of a good and a holy
Prelat. And in regard that in times of preceding Popes, many unworthy persons
by the force of Money, and Simonaical dealings were arisen to Episcopal
Dignities: the Pope appointed four Cardinals, and four other Clergymen, to
examine the lives, and manners of such, who aspired to the degree of Bishops;
ordering them to admit none thereunto, suspected, or in the least blemished
with an ill fame, or taxed of ignorance, as well as of a debauched
conversation. And in order to a thorough reformation the Pope drove out all the
Courtesans, and Strumpets from Rome, and persons openly scandalous and
dissolute in their manners; and amongst others he banished a Gentleman of
quality into Germany, for having made a violent attempt on the chastity of a
Lady of approved modesty: All Houses of Play, or gaming for Money were put
down, and all lewd and unlawful Assemblies were fobridden. And in regard the
Barons of Rome had by the privilege of their Nobility, raised themselves above
the reach of their Creditors. The Pope ordered Cardinal Cibo to make a narrow
inspection thereinto, and to pay the Debts of the Barons out of the Money of
the Chamber; by which means these Debts being assigned over to the Chamber, a
payment of the same might more easily be forced by vigor of that Law, which
enforces the proceedings of the Exchequer.

To these Acts of Justice the Pope added one of great generosity toward
Christina Queen of Sweden, who having by the late Wars lost the greatest part
of her Revenue in Sweden; in recompense thereof he allowed unto her a Pension
of twelve thousand Crowns a year. And having laid these first foundations, and
beginnings of good Government: the Pope's next work was to labor in the
promotion of a Peace between the two Crowns, and all other Christian Princes;
that laying aside all differences, and quarrels amongst themselves they might
unite their forces for the good and welfare of Christendom against the common
Enemy the Turk: to this effect he wrote Letters to the Emperor, and to the
Kings of France, and Spain, exhorting them to Peace and Concord, of which he
offered himself to be the Mediator, and to be assistant thereunto in Person,
provided that the place appointed for the Treaty, were assigned in some City of
the Catholic Religion: On the other side he animated the King of Poland to
continue his War against the Turk, and not to lay down his Arms until he had
recovered Kaminiec, and revenged himself of the Affront put upon him by the
late Vizier Kuperlee, who had taken Contribution under the notion of Tribute
from his City of Leopolis; and to enable and encourage him thereunto, he
remitted to him the sum of fifty thousand Crowns.

An. 1677.
But whilst the Pope labored for Peace abroad, he was not able to keep himself,
nor his Court free from disturbances at home: for the Marquis del Carpio who
resided at Rome in quality of Ambassador for his Catholic Majesty, being
informed of the great want his Master had of Soldiers to send into Sicily,
adventured to make some levies of men in Rome, pretending that the French on
some occasions had practiced the like; but the People not being ignorant of the
bad pay, and ill treatment of the Spaniards came very slowly to enroll their
names: and moreover a report was rumoured abroad, that many people were
wanting, who were hid in Cellars by the Spaniards, till an opportunity
presented to transport them into Sicily. This report, whether it were true, or
false, yet served the turn of such who delighted in troubles and Seditions; for
being entertained with some malice in the minds of the people, they conceived
such an abhorrence of the Spanish Nation, that they affronted them in all
places, which sometimes proceeded to fightings, and scuffles, in which several
were killed and wounded; but the Spaniards being few in number and the weaker
side, were at last forced to keep within their quarters, for fear of the
multitude. The Pope to suppress these tumults, and prevent disorders, punished
several persons, who were guilty of the Riots, with just severity; but the
Spanish Ambassador not contented herewith pretended some higher and more
exemplary satisfaction; at which the Pope grew angry, declaring that the
Ambassador was in arrear to him, and obliged rather to give than to demand
satisfaction: upon which the Ambassador to show his resentment, refused to
appear at Court, and at the same time the Vice-King of Naples without any
cause, or reason denied Audience to the Pope's Nuntio at that City. This manner
of proceeding was highly displeasing to Innocent, whose anger was the more
increased on the score of other abuses introduced into Rome by pretended
privileges of foreign Ministers; who assumed to themselves a jurisdiction, (as
we have said) within certain limits, which they chalked out to themselves, to
make a Sanctuary, or place of refuge for Criminals, and outlawed persons. And
considering by how much more the Franchises, and privileges of public
Representatives increased in Rome, by so much was the Pope's Authority
diminished and abated, he therefore grievously took occasion to complain in the
Consistory of the ill use, which Ambassadors and other Ministers made of their
privileges to the great scandal and reproach of the Government; that he had
long expected that the Princes themselves should have renounced such irregular
pretenses, and out of love to justice have become instrumental to bring wicked
men to punishment, rather than to be Protectours of Assassinates and outlawed
persons; but seeing that his expectations, and patience was all in vain; he was
now resolved for discharge of his Duty and Conscience to provide for the
security of his own People. Howsoever he could not without some sad reflections
on the indiscreet, and unreasonable importunities of some foreign Ministers,
find himself constrained to take such measures in his Affairs, as would prove
displeasing to them; for that it was unreasonable, whilst his mind was employed
in cares and contrivances for the propagation of the faith, for reformation of
the Ecclesiastical Discipline, for the establishment of Peace and Concord
between Christian Princes, and other matters conducing to the good and benefit
of the Commonweal of all Christendom; he should be disturbed and interrupted in
these proceedings by the very Ministers of those Princes, for whose welfare,
and for the peace of whose People, he was in continual care and labor;
wherefore not being able longer to support such impertinences; he was resolved
to become Master in Rome, as other Princes were in their own Dominions; and in
pursuance thereof he published an Edict, forbidding all persons whatsoever to
affix the Arms of any great personage over his Shop; it being a mark, that that
Family had renounced the Authority of their Prince the Pope, and put themselves
under the protection of that Ambassador, or Prince, or Nobleman, whose Arms
they had affixed over the Portal of the House, or entrance to the Shop. This
resolute Act much surprised the minds of those whom it concerned, and
especially the Spaniards, who made a false judgment of the temper of
Odescalchi; conceiving him to be so wary and cautious in his actions, that he
would never engulf himself in the same circumstances of Affairs, which had
given a disturbance to his Predecessor, during the whole course of his
Pontificate. Howsoever the Pope continuing firm and constant in his resolution,
the Spaniards remitted something of the stiffness of their pride; for
considering that the circumstances of their present Affairs would not admit of
a disunion with Rome, the Ambassador desired to have Audience of the Pope; the
which was refused to him, until the Nuntio had received Audience at Naples; and
that the King of Spain by special Letters under his own hand, had desired that
his Ambassador might be heard on some emergencies, and urgent occasions; upon
which, and at the persuasions of the Cardinals Barberino, and Cibo, the
Ambassador was admitted to Audience; which having produced a true and right
understanding between both Parties, the Ambassador departed with ample
satisfaction acquiescing in the late proceedings of the Court.

The Thorns which have ever been most prickly and pungent in the sides of
Popes, were their Contests with Kings, or crowned Heads, or when the Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Authority contended with the Temporal, as may appear by that
notable Controversy between Paul V. and the Republic of Venice, and in other
matters of smaller moment between Kings, and Popes, both before and since that
time. The point of the Regalia has been an ancient Dispute for many Ages in
France; the which was in some sort determined in the year 1431. by the Council
of Basil, where it was ordained that Cathedral Churches and others should have
a freedom of Elections: This afterward was confirmed by a great Assembly of
French Clergy gathered at Bourges, and addressed to the King Charles the 7th.
desiring him to undertake the protection of that Council: At that time, the
Council of Basil sent to the King an abstract of their Decrees consisting of
thirty seven Articles, by which Decennial Councils, and the Authority of
Councils above the Pope was established, etc. together with an abstract of the
Decree they had made concerning Elections. All which were considered at that
Assembly, where the Dauphin and the chief Nobility of France were present, and
by their advice the famous Pragmatick Sanction was made in confirmation of
those Articles; which was observed during the Reign of Charles the 7th. but
Lewis the eleventh esteeming it the Interest of France to maintain a good
correspondence with the Papacy, was inclinable to wave the advantage of this
Sanction.

An. 1478.
In the beginning of the Reign of Charles the 8th. an Assembly of States being
called at Tours, the third Estate petitioned, that the Pragmatick Sanction
might be again renewed, and confirmed; calling those who were preferred by the
Court to be Court-Bishops; so it was again put into force and practice, much to
the displeasure of the Pope; notwithstanding which, Lewis the 12th. made a
perpetual Edict in confirmation of it. Francis the first succeeding to the
Crown, and having vast designs in Italy, thought it not his interest to stand
at a distance with the Pope; An. 1515.
and therefore was willing to treat with him about the abolition of the
Pragmatick Sanction on such terms, as might reconcile his own prerogative with
the Pope's Authority. This design occasioned an Interview between the King and
the Pope at Bologna, and thence the Concordat was produced, which was
afterward put into the form of a Bull, and confirmed by the Council at
Lateran. The sum of which was this: the King and the Pope agreed to divide the
Promotions to all Prelacies between them; for the King was to nominate the
Person within six months after a vacancy, and the Pope was to confirm him if no
lawful exception did lie against him. All which is so fully and learnedly
treated by Dr. Burnet in his History of the Regale or Rights of Princes in
disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices, and Church Lands, and deduced down to
this present time; that there is no place left for our enlargement thereupon,
unless we add some few, and short remarks on the behavior of this Innocent XI.
toward his most Christian Majesty on this occasion. It is manifest by History,
that when the Emperors flourished with great Power, and Riches, they created
Popes, or at least they had the confirmation of them: and when Emperors were
low, and were oppressed by adverse Fortune, the Popes forced them to be
beholding to the extensive reach of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which by
some side-wind, or far-fetched notion of Spiritual Concernment, reduced almost
every thing under cognizance of the Church.

According to this natural course of worldly affairs: Lewis the 14th. the most
Christian King being high, Dr. Burnet.
and prosperous in his fortune, resolved to put a period to the process for the
Regale which had continued near thirty years, and at last in the year 1673.
came to a conclusion, and Declaration was made: That the King had Right of
Regale in all his Dominions without distinction, except only in those Sees,
that had purchased their exemption from it: And therefore all Bishops who had
not yet registered their Oaths of Fidelity in the Chambers of Accounts, were
required to do it, and to take out a Writ upon it for closing the Regale,
otherwise rheir Bishoprics were still to be looked on, as under it. All the
Bishops of France unwilling to incurr the displeasure of their successful
Monarch, submitted; excepting the Bishops of Alet, and Pamiers.

It was now under the Reign of Clement X. an old doting Pope, who having his
parts and understanding enfeebled by old Age, he committed the management of
the Pontificate to the sole direction of Cardinal Paluzzi, afterward adopted
by the Pope, and called Altieri; a Person, who from his first beginning was
distastful to the Court of France, and not until this time well reconciled unto
it, as we have at large declared in the foregoing Life. This was the time, I
say, when open Claim to the Regale was renewed in favor of the King, and when
the Pope himself was scarce able to distinguish his Interest; and Altieri was
so thwarted and opposed by the Court of France, that he had enough to do to
conserve his own personal Interest, much less to vindicate, and contend for the
Rights of the Church in a case so litigious as this.

In January 1676. the King's Right was claimed in disposal of the Deanery of
Alet; the Dispute of which was left unto the Bishop to maintain, for the Pope
being under the foregoing Circumstances, took little cognizance thereof either
by himself or his Cardinal. But this good Pope dying in the month of August
next following, the Controversy fell to the lot of Innocent the 11th. to
maintain, and to dispute in opposition to the eldest Son of the Church. This
quarrel was increased by a Contest at Pamiers; where one Paucet was provided in
Right of the Regale to be Archdeacon of Pamiers, but was rejected by the
Bishop and Chapter: howsoever the Regale prevailed, for the Archbishop of
Toulouse was on their side, and gave judgment in favor of the Regalist. But on
the contrary, the Bishop of Pamiers acquiesced not with this Sentence, but made
his appeal to the Pope, who was now engaged in the Controversy, and the matter
lodged in his hands.

Wherefore the Pope in the year 1678, wrote his Brief to the French King, and
in soft and yet pressing terms complained of the Innovasions made on the
Liberties of the Church, and the Authority of the Council of Lions: and after
several Arguments to persuade him to desist from this Enterprise; he concludes,
that he cannot forget those Popes his Predecessors, who upon the like
occasions had endured long, and great afflictions.

But these Allegations satisfied not the King, who pretended that the Rights of
the Regale were inherent in the Crown, and had been enjoyed by his Ancestors,
and by them derived down to himself. The Pope on the other side affirmed, that
the Secular Powers had no right to things sacred, but as it was derived to them
by the Authority of the Church; and that the Church had not granted any such
Right, having expressly limited it by the Council of Lions, which has now been
observed four hundred years.

This Controversy seemed to lie dormant from September 1678. to December 1679.
until it was again revived, and stirred in the Sea of Pamiers, in that point
which concerned the vacant Benefices and the mean Profits; for the King's
Officers seized on them likewise, so that the good old Bishop had nothing to
live on the last twenty months of his life, but the Oblations and Charities of
his People. On this occasion the Pope wrote to the Cardinal d' Estree to
interpose in this Affair, as being a Person more than ordinarily concerned in
the dignity of the Apostolical See. To which the Cardinal made answer in the
style of a Court-Bishop, extolling the King's merit, his zeal for the Faith,
and respect for the Apostolical Chair; what he had done for the suppression of
Calvinism, and Heresy within his Dominions, and how bravely he had defended
the Christian Cause against the Turks: and in fine, he laid down the dangers
which would follow, if any dissension should arise between the King and the
Church.

At length Cardinal d' Estree was dispatched to Rome with a Letter of Credence,
and Orders to treat immediately with the Pope himself; but it seems, his
Negotiations produced little alteration; for the Pope continued steady and
constant to his Principles. And on the other side, the Parliament of Paris
became as zealous for the King's Right and Authority; for which the King's
Attorney General pleading, made little esteem of the Pope's Censures which were
passed for Obedience to the King's Orders. The Church, said he, may indeed have
an Authority to punish Men for Heresy, and an ill life: but the World was now
too well enlightened, not to discern that the Thunders of Rome had been for
several Ages vainly employed for extending its Authority beyond all due bounds;
the limits of which were to be found in the Canons of the Church, by which the
Pope, as well as others ought to govern himself. And therefore desired that the
last Brief sent by the Pope might be suppressed, which was accordingly done by
a Judgment of the Court of Parliament on the last of March, 1681.

And to give a farther Authority to this Judgment, an Extraordinary Assembly
was called of all the Bishops, then residing at Paris; where were present six
Archbishops, twenty six Bishops, and six that were named to Bishoprics, to
whom the Agents of the Clergy represented the Invasions made on the Liberties
of the Gallican Church by the Pope's Briefs, both in general concerning the
Regale, and in particular in the Affair at Pamiers, and the Nunneries, and
concerning a Book of Gerbais a Dr. of Sorbonne, De causis Majoribus, which were
equally contrary both to Church and State, to the Canons, and the Concordate,
by which the Pope upon a simple Complaint without any Appeal, did by the
plenitude of his Power, judge at Rome concerning the validity of Elections, and
the Authority of Archbishops, and Primats, etc. The issue of which Assembly
was this: They asserted the Authority of National Churches for judging of all
matters both of Faith and Manners: and in the conclusion agreed to make an
Address to the King, praying him to give leave either for a National Council,
or an Assembly General: the latter of which was consented unto by his Majesty,
and summoned to meet the first of October following. Thus far concerning the
Regale we have extracted in short by way of Epitome from the Treatise of Dr.
Burnet on that Subject. Now as to what followed. The Assembly met at the time
appinted; at the opening of which, the Bishop of Meaux preached a most Eloquent
Sermon, with much applause: After which the point of the Regale was put to the
question, and argued learnedly on both sides; and in conclusion the greatest
part were of Opinion, that the Right unto the Regalia were inherent in the
Crown, and that the pretensions thereunto were Usurpations by the Church, as
appears by this following Declaration.

The Declaration of the Clergy of the Gallican Church concerning the
Ecclesiastical Power.
We the Archbishops and Bishops Representatives of the Gallican Church, being
by command of his Majesty assembled at Paris, together with others of the
Clergy in the same manner delegated with us, after long debate, and mature
consideration have thought fit to declare, and determine these several
particulars following:

1. First, That a Power is given by God to St. Peter and his Successors who
are the Vicars of Christ, and to the Church to order, and regulate all
Spiritual matters; but not to intermeddle in Civil or Temporal matters,
according to that saying of our Lord, My Kingdom is not of this World. And
again, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things
which are Gods. And agreeable hereunto is that of the Apostle, Let every Soul
be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers
which are, are ordained of God, and whosoever resists the power, resists
the Ordinance of God: Wherefore Kings and Princes by the Law of God are not
liable in Temporal matters to the Ecclesiastical Power, nor by the Power of the
Keys can they be Deposed either directly or indirectly, or can their Subjects
be absolved from their Fealty and Obedience to them, or from their Oaths of
Allegiance; the which we confirm, and determine, as principles not only
necessary for conservation of the public peace and tranquillity, but for the
better government of the Church; and as truths agreeable to the Word of God,
the tradition of the Fathers, and to the example and practice of Saints and
Holy Men. 2. Secondly, That the Apostolical See, and the Successors of St.
Peter, who are the Vicars of Christ, have a full and plenary power in all
Spiritual matters; in such manner as is given to them by the Holy Ecumenical
Synod of Constance, which is received by the Apostolical See; and in such
manner as has been confirmed by the constant use and practice of the Popes of
Rome, and the whole Church, and observed by the Religion of the Gallican
Church, and decreed by the Authority of the General Councils, in the fourth and
fifth Sessions. And the Gallican Church does condemn the Opinions of those, who
esteeming those Decrees of doubtful Authority, do endeavor to restrain them to
certain times of Schism, and to invalidate the present power thereof. 3.
Thirdly, Hence it is, that the 3d exercise of the Apostolical power is to be
regulated by Canons established by the Spirit of God, and thereunto all the
World is to bear respect and Reverence. Likewise the Rules, Manners, and
Institutions received by the Kingdom and Church of France, as also the customs
of our Forefathers are to remain unalterable: the which is a clear
demonstration of the greatness of the Apostolical See, that the Statutes and
Ordinances thereof are established and confirmed by and with the consent of the
Churches. 4. Fourthly, In questions of Faith the Pope is Chief Judge, and his
Decrees extend themselves to the Churches in general, and to every one in
particular; nor can his judgment be repealed, unless by the consent and
determination of the Universal Church. 5. Fifthly, These particulars received
from the Doctrine of our Forefathers, we have by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost Decreed to send unto all the Gallican Churches, and the Bishops presiding
over them. And we do all concur in the same sense and meaning of them.
Subscribed by Archbishops, and Bishops and Clergy as before related and
registered, as required by the King's Attorney General, March 23. 1682.

An. 1681.
The Pope, who during his Reign had not as yet assumed any to the degree of
Cardinal to supply the places of those who were dead: the College was
diminished twenty six in their number; which when the Pope considered, and that
old Men were every day dying, and falling off, he was inspired to replenish the
places with a supply of sixteen new Cardinals, which were these that follow.

1. John Baptista Spinola of sixty seven years of Age, a Genoese, who was
Governor of Rome, and Secretary of the Congregation of Regulars.

2. Anthony Pignatelli, a Napolitan of sixty six years of age, Bishop of Lecca,
and Master of the Pope's Chamber.

3. Stephen Brancaccio, a Napolitan of sixty four years of age.

4. Stephen Agostini, of sixty five years of age, Archbishop of Heraclea, and
Datary to the Pope.

5. Francis Bonvisi, of Luca, aged sixty three years, Archbishop of
Thessalonica, and Nuntio residing at Vienna.

6. Savo Mellini, a Roman, aged thirty seven years, Archbishop of Cesarea, and
Nuntio in Spain.

7. Frederick Visconti, of Milan, aged sixty three, Auditor of the Rota, and
Archbishop of Milan.

8. Marco Gallio, of Como, aged sixty nine years, Bishop of Rimini, and
Vicegerent of Rome.

9. Flaminio del Tayo, of Siena, aged eighty years, Auditor of the Rota, and
Chief Penitentiary.

10. Raymond Capizucchi, a Roman, aged sixty nine years, Master of the Palace.

11. John Baptista de Luca, a Napolitan, aged sixty four years, Auditor to the
Pope.

12. Laurentio Brancati, of Laurea in Calabria, aged sixty four years,
Library Keeper of the Vatican.

13. Vrbano Lacchetti, of Florence, aged forty four years, Auditor of the
Apostolical Chamber.

14. John Francisco Ginetti, a Roman, aged sixty years, Treasurer of the
Apostolical Chamber.

15. Benedict* Pamfilio, aged twenty eight years, Grand Prior of Rome.

16. Michael Angelo Ricci, aged sixty five years, Secretary of the Congregation
of Indulgences.

The other ten Hats remaining were kept in the hand of the Pope for a reserve
wherewith to gratify Kings and Princes, whenever they should desire to have
some of their own Creatures preferred to that Dignity. All the sixteen
preceding Cardinals took their promotion very patiently, and without much
reluctance; excepting Tayo who was eighty years of age, and Ricci: both which
made some modest refusals, as unworthy of that great honor, but the Pope
instantly constraining them, they with humility submitted. And here it is
observable, that this Pope is not very forward to create Cardinals, but rather
inclinable to lessen, and reduce their number, which of late years has
increased to that degree, as to become a burden to the Church.

But to return unto the Assembly at Paris, which after many Debates and
deliberate Consultations held upon the point of the Regale: At length by the
Archbishop of Paris they offered these several Proposals by way of
accommodation between his Majesty and the Pope.

That those on whom the King in Right of his Regality bestows any
Ecclesiastical Benefices, shall in the vacancy of the Sees have their
approbation, and Mission from the Vicars General.

That the Chapters which are in possession of bestowing Prebends, and other
Dignities, shall continue to dispose of them, whilst the Sea is vacant.

That in the Churches where the collation is alternative between the Bishops,
and the Chapters, the same shall be observed during the vacancy of the Sees
that are under the Regality, the King having the turn which the Bishop should
have had.

That where the Bishops dispose of the Prebends jointly with the Chapter; the
King shall in the vacancy of the Sea appoint a Commissioner, who shall have the
same power, and place in the Chapter, as the Bishop had.

Howsoever, no farther proceedings were made in this matter because the Pope
appeared resolute to maintain his privilege and jurisdiction: and the Cardinal
d' Estree who had ever since the beginning of this year been at Rome to try,
and bend the mind of the Pope, gave little hopes to prevail with him: wherefore
it was thought fit that the Controversy should remain in suspense, rather than
be farther pressed to the breach of that amity, which interceded between the
common Father, and the eldest Son of his Church: so the King holds his Right,
and the Pope has not relinquished his Claim, but remains still in a capacity
to reassume the same, when either he, or his Successors are strengthened with
circumstances of time, and force to make good their Demands.

It is known to all the World, that in the Church of Rome, vain and
superstitious Opinions have been ever growing for diverse Centuries of years;
some of the most wild and extravagant of which, certain Popes have been weeding
out; but with that negligence and inattention, that where one has been
destroyed, twenty have arisen. Hereof the present Pope Innocent the XI. being
sensible, (who is certainly one of the most understanding, and most worthy of
those that ever sat in the Papal Chair) has suppressed an Office called The
Office of the Immaculate conception of the most Holy Virgin, approved by Paul
V. who granted, unto whosoever should devoutly recite the same an hundred days
Indulgence, as may appear by his Bull of July 10th. 1615. printed at Milan.
This Office he entirely abolished, Decreeing, That no person of what Order,
Degree, or Condition soever, should dare to keep, read, print, or cause to be
printed the said Book: and requiring that whosoever should have the said Office
in his keeping, should forthwith deliver the same to the Ordinary, or to the
Inquisitors of the place. The which Decree was published, Feb. 19. 1678.

Moreover, this Pope in his Wisdom has suppressed a multitude of idle, and
foolish Indulgences, which many cheating Priests carried into remote Countries,
and raised Money thereupon from the ignorant people. Of which kind were those
Indulgences granted by John II. and Sixtus IV. to those, who should recite the
Prayer of Charity of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By Eugenius the 3d. to the Revelation made to St. Bernard, of a blow or stroke
on the shoulder of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By John the 22th. to those, who kiss the measure of the Soal of the foot of
the Blessed Virgin.

By Leo the 10th. to those, who wear the Cord of St. Francis, printted first at
Rome, and then at Milan, Anno 1665.

To them that shall say the Angelical Prayer, when the Clock strikes, to the
Image of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, printed in a Circle with
the Moon under her feet.

By Paul V. and Gregory XV. to those who say, Blessed be the Holy Sacrament.

Likewise those Indulgences for fourscore thousand years, copied out of the
Ancient Table, which is said to be kept in the Lateran Church, to those, who
say this truly pious Prayer, O God, who for the Redemption of the World, etc.

Besides which, this Pope suppressed a multitude of other Indulgences as vain
and idle as the foregoing: and declared, that though according to the Doctrine
of the Council of Trent, the use of Indulgences may be useful to the people,
and does Anathematize such as shall deny, that there is not a power in the
Church to grant them, yet he is desirous that the Doctrine thereof be rightly
understood, and a moderation used in the granting of them, lest by a too great
facility or easiness, the discipline of the Church be corrupted and enfeebled.

This Doctrine of Indulgences has been a prickly and a contentious point, and
the Original cause of the present divisions, and separations amongst
Christians; for from thence Luther began his quarrel, and took the first rise
and ground for a Reformation; and indeed the matter on the part of the Church
of Rome was so scandalous, and abusive, that the very common people in all
their ignorance were able to discover the fraud and Cheat that was in them: so
that the wise and Learned Men at the Council of Trent knowing that this
Doctrine was not solid and would not hold water, they slightly touched
thereupon; and though it was the chief matter, for which that Council was
assembled; yet nothing was farther determined therein, than only that
Indulgences be used with such moderation, as was approved by the Ancient Custom
of the Church of God.

Now it is a most certain, and an undeniable truth, that Indulgences were never
in use with any Nation of the Eastern Churches either in the Primitive times,
or afterward. And indeed neither were they in practice in the Western
Churches, from times of Ancient date, that is, from before the time of Urban
II, which was about the year of Christ, 1095. and then also they were not very
common, and granted only to remit the rigor, and severity of Penance enjoined
by the Confessor: which reasons this Pope Innocent XI. wisely considering, and
the many abuses of this Doctrine, did attempt the means to regulate the
extravagance thereof.

Besides the suppression of these Indulgences, this Pope condemned sixty five
Propositions about Cases of Morality, which were scandalous, and diverse of them
maintained by the subtle distinctions of the Jesuits, the preamble to which
condemnation says, that this present Innocent XI. in pursuance of the same
work commenced by his Predecessor Alexander VII. did by and with the advice,
concurrence and assistance of the most Reverend, and Eminent, the Cardinals, as
also of the Inquisitors General, and many other Divines, gather, and weed out
from several Books, Theses, and other Papers lately written, a great number of
scandalous, and pernicious Doctrines in Morality, tending to the debauchery of
Manners, and to the encouragement of a loose, and a dissolute life in Mankind.

But in nothing more has the Virtue, Piety, and care of this Pope been
conspicuous, than in those large Assistances, and Contributions he made to the
Emperor, whereby to enable him to carry forward his War against the Turk, who
is the formidable Enemy of all Christendom. Nor did he only furnish him with
great sums of Money at diverse times, but invited and instantly exhorted the
King of Poland to undertake that Heroic Act, whereby the City of Vienna was
delivered, and all Austria rescued from desolation, and from being a prey to
the Mohammedan Arms: And farther, his Negotiations prevailed to engage the
Venetians in the same War, and to complicate a triple League between these
Princes.

Thus have we seen, that during the Reign of this Pope, nothing has been acted
by him, but what was designed to the common Good of his Church and State: for
having laid aside all the private considerations of his Nephews, and Family,
his cares have been diverted toward the Common Good, so that being freed from
the importunities of a Cardinal Patron, and the unsatiable Avarice of
Favorites, and other dependencies; his Government is much less subject to
Pasquils, or libellous Censures; but on the contrary applauded, and honored by
all wise, and good Men: so that continuing in this steady course through the
whole remainder of his Reign, he may be esteemed, and numbered in the rank and
degree of the good Popes.

FINIS.
AN INDEX Of the principal matters in the Lives of the POPES: written by B.
Platina.
For the Names of the Popes themselves, see the Table at the beginning of the
Book.

A.
ABimelech, Chieftain of the Saracens, 121, 124. Abraxas of Basilides the
Heretic, 16. Acephali Heretics, 77. Adauctus a pious Roman, 45. Adelphonsus,
King of Asturia and Gallicia, 149. Adrian, Emperor, his qualities and works,
15, 16, 17, 19. S. Aegidius, a Grecian, 133. Aelius Pertinax, Emperor, 25.
Aemilianus Emperor, 37. Aeneas Sylvius, created Pope, 389. Aetius, a Roman
General, 75. Agarens, who they are, 108. Agrippa Castor, a learned Christian,
16. Aisprandus gets the Kingdom of Lombardy, 129. Aistulphus King of the
Lombards, 137, 139, his death, 140. Alalchis Duke of Trent, 120. Alaric King of
the Goths takes Rome, 70. Albericus, Marquess of Tuscany, 180. Albert Duke of
Austria chosen Emperor, 363. Alboinus, 94. Aldeprandus King of the Lombards,
137. Alexander Severus Emperor, 31. Alexander Bishop of Cappadocia, 35.
Alexius Emperor of Constantinople, his treachery to the Christian Forces, 217.
Allocephalis, a nickname for Ravenna, 116. Almeric King of Jerusalem, 242.
Amadeus Duke of Savoy set up for an Antipope, submits, 377. Amalasunta, Queen
of Italy, 87. S. Ambrose chosen Bishop of Milan, 66. appears to the Emperor
Conrade, 198. Amoreus, a King of the Saracens, 135. Anastasius gets the Empire
of Constantinople, 130. Anastasius a Heretic, 133. Anastasius the
Library Keeper, 171. Anatolius Bishop of Laodicea, 42. Andrew Earl of Bremen,
251. Andrew King of Hungary, 258. Angelot, a Cardinal murdered, 369. Antioch
besieged by the Christians, 219. taken, 220. Antipope; See Schism. Antoninus
Pius, Emperor, his Virtues, 18. Ant. Verus Emperor, 20, 21. Antoninus
Heliogabalus, his vicious life, 30. Antony the Hermit, 54. S. Antony Canonized,
262. Apelles, a Heretic, 23. Apollinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis, 21. Another
Bishop of Laodicea, his heretical Opinion, 69. Apollonius a learned Christian
martyred, 24. Aquila translated the Old Testament, 17. Aquileia destroyed, 76.
Arator, a Christian Poet, 88. Arcadius Emperor, 70. Arioaldus (...) of the
Lombards, 106. Aristides a Philosopher, converted to Christianity, 15.
Arithpertus King of the Lombards, 127. loses his Kingdom and life, 129. Arius
the Heretic, 51, 56, his death, 57. Arnulphus Emperor, 173. Another of that
name, Patriarch of Jerusalem, 221. Another, a great Preacher, murdered by the
procurement of some Priests, 234. Asterius, an Arian Philosopher, 59.
Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, 56. Athaulphus King of the Goths, 71.
Athimus, a King of the Saracens, 134. Attila King of the Hunns invades
Illyricum, 73, fights the joint Forces of the Romans, Goths, etc. 75. Audoenus,
Bishop of Roan, 122. S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, 71, his body translated, 135.
Avignon taken by the Saracens, 134. re-taken, 135. Aurelianus Emperor, 41.
Aurelius Commodus Emperor, 20, 23, 24.
B
Babylas the Martyr, his Body removed, 62. Baianus Prince of the Bulgarians,
188. Balahac a King of the Persians, 232. Baldequan King of Damascus, 233.
Baldus a great Lawyer, 320. Baldwin of Bulloign, 217. gets a Signiory in Asia,
218. made King of Jerusalem, 224. taken Prisoner, 232. Baldwin, Emperor of
Constantinople, 265. Baltasar Cossa, Anti Pope, reconciled to the Pope, 352.
Banderesii, what, 320. Bardesanes a Christian Writer, 25. S. Barnabas the
Apostle, 5. S. Bartholomew, his body translated, 158, 190. Baruti, taken by the
Turks and rased, 291. Basil the learned Bishop of Caesarea, 67. Basilides the
Heretic, his death, 16. Bassianus, See Caracalla. Bid, the Venerable, when he
lived, 126. Belisarius, 88. comes into Italy, 91. beats Vitiges from Rome, and
takes him Prisoner, 92. S. Benedict, 87. his body translated, 137. Berengarius
I. King of Italy, 173. made Emperor, 178. the second of that name, 181. the
third, 184. Berengarius of Tours, a learned Man, 190. condemned for a Heretic,
203. recants 205. Bernard, Abbat of Clairvaux, 227. Bernardus King of Italy,
154. Beryllus, a Heretic, 32. Bishop not to be ordained by fewer than three
Bishops, 13, 22. to be attended by seven Deacons when Preaching, 14. the
accusation of a Layman not to be admitted against him, ibid. when cited by the Sea Apostolic to be received again by his Flock without a Certificate, 17. not
to be censured by the Metropolitan without consent of his fellow-Bishops, 19.
Bishops of Rome allowed to wear a golden Diadem, 51. Blastus, a Heretic, 25.
Blood of Christ, a Relic at Mantua, 151. Bocca di Porco, a name not fit for a
Pope, 160. Bodies of Saints translated, 163. Boemund, a great General, engaged
in the Holy War, 217. wounded, 220, dies, 225. Constantine, Son of Heraclius,
110. routed by the Bulgarians, 117. Another of the same name Leprous, 148
Constantine an Antipope, 142 Constantius Caesar, 44. Emperor, 47. Another of
the same name, 58, 59. Another, who spoils Rome, 114 Constitutions, See
Decrees. Corporal to be made of fine Linen only, 17 Council of Nice, 51. Of
Constantinople, 117, 169. Of Lions, 280. Of Constance, 345. Of Basil, 362.
General Councils where and when holden, 118 Court of Rome when removed to
France, 300. returns to Rome, 322 Crescentius Consul of Rome, 192 Holy Cross
found by Helena Constantine's Mother, 48. brought from Jerusalem to
Constantinople, 108 Cunigunda Empress, 197 Cup in the Holy Sacrament, Orders of
Pius I. if any be spilt, 20, 21 S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, 36. martyred, 37
S. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, 69
D
J. Damascenus, a learned Divine, 81 Damrata besieged by the Christians and
retaken, 258. delivered, 259 Dantes Aligerius a learned Man, 297 Deacons
appointed to attend a Bishop when he Preaches, 14 Decius Emperor, 35 Decrees
of Anacletus, 13. Euaristus, 14. Alexander I. 16. Sixtus I. 17. Telesphorus,
18. Hyginus, 19. Pius I. 20. Anicetus, 22. Soter, 23. Eleutherius 24. Victor I.
28. Zephyrinus, 27. Calistus I. 28. Anterus, 33. Stephen I. 38. Felix, 41.
Eutychianus, 42. Caius, 43. Miltiades, 50. Of the Nicene Council, 52. Of
Sylvester, ibid. Of Damasus, 63. Siricius, 65. Anastasius, 67. Zosimus, 71.
Boniface I. 72. Stephen III. 144. Gregory III. 136. Nicolas I. 168 Desiderius
King of the Lombards, 140. takes several Cities in Italy, 145. is overthrown by
Charlemagne, 146 Devil in the shape of Moses beguiles the Jews, 74 Didymus a
learned Christian, 65 Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, 23 Dioscorus the Heretic,
77 Disciples of Christ, their several Provinces, 1. Dominic, 256. Founder of
the Order of Preaching Friars, 257. Canonized, 262 Domitian the Emperor, his
Character, 11 Donation of Charlemagne to the Church. 147. Of Maude the
Countess, 226 Donatus, a Sectary, 59 Dorothea, a Virgin, her Chastity, 50
Dorotheus, a learned Christian, 42 Dulcinus and Margaret, Heretics put to
death, 300
E
Easter observed always on a Sunday, upon what occasion, 20, 25 Ebionites,
Heretics, 52 Ecelino, Tyrant of Padua, 270 Edessa taken by the Turks, 236
Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, Canonized, 268 Edward, Prince of England, his
Voyage to the Holy Land, 278 stabbed, ibid. being King, he mediates between the
Kings of France and Aragon, 289. War between him and the French King, 291.
obtains a great Sea Victory over 'em, 311. Another by Land, 315. besieges
Paris, 318 Egesippus, a learned Christian Writer, 22.83. Elizabeth Daughter to
the King of Hungary Canonized, 262 Elisha's Body found, 80 Ember-Weeks, when
first instituted, 28, 31 Emmanuel II. Emperor of Constantinople, his treachery
to the Christians, 237 Encratitae, Heretics, 21 English first make themselves
Masters of Great Britain, 73 Ephrem Syrus, a learned Writer, 67 Epiphanius
Bishop of Salamine, ib. Epiphanius, Bishop of Pavia, p. 82 Este, the Family,
Lords of Ferrara and Modena, 300. 28 of that House hanged at once, 302. drive
the Church Forces out of Ferrara, 307 Ethelwolph King of England, 164 Evagrius,
a learned Christian, 71 Eudocia the Catholic, p. 80 Eunomius a Heretic, 61
Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus, and why, 48 Eusebius Emissenus, 58 Eusebius of
Cremona, 76 Eutropius, Epitomizer of the Roman History, 73 Eutyches, the
Heretic, p. 76 Exarchate of Ravenna extinguished, 140
F
Fast not to be observed on a Sunday, 50 Faustus Bishop, 83 Flavianus Bishop,
77 Florence made a free City, 289 Florianus, Emperor, 42 Florinus, a Heretic,
25 Forlimpopoli sacked and ruined, 114 S. Francis, Founder of the Order of
Friars Minors, 257. Canonized, 262 Frangipani, a Roman Family, 229 Fratricelli,
a holy Brotherhood, 297 Frederic Emperor, engaged in the Holy War, 251
Frederic II. his Contests with the Pope, 260. Frederic III. comes to Rome. 378
Friscus, of the House of Este murders his Father, 301 Fucinus, the Lake,
drein'd, 3 Fulgentius Bishop, 83 Fulk, Earl of Anjou, King of Jerusalem, 236
G
Galba Emperor; his good and bad qualities, 7 Galerius Emperor, 47 Gallienus
Emperor, 37 Gallus Emperor, 37 Gascons subdued by Charlemagne, 148 Gemblours,
the Monastery, when, and by whom built, 182 Gennadius Bishop, 78 Genoeses
routed by the Venetians, 271. a mortal hatred between 'em, 281, 326. defeat the
Pisans 289. invade Cyprus, 321 Genseric King of the Vandals, 74. routed, 78
Germanus Bishop, 82 Geta Emperor slain, 28 Gibellines and Guelphs, 264 Gildo,
a General of the Empire sets up for himself, 70 Gisulphus D. of Benevent, 125.
Another, 202 Gloria Patri when added to the ends of Psalms, 63 Godfathers and
Godmothers, a Decree concerning them, 19 Godfrey King of Jerusalem, 221.
defeats the Army of the King of Babylon, ibid. Gordianus Emperor, 34 Goths
driven from Rome, 91 Granada in Spain seized by the Saracens, 126 Gratianus
Emperor, 66 Gratian, who compiled the Decrees, 257 Gregorius Baeticus, a
learned Bishop, 65 Gregory Nazianzen, 67 Gregory, Patriarch of Constantinople,
a Monothelite, 117 S. Gregory, his body translated, 159 Grimoaldus, D. of
Beneventum, 112, 114. makes himself King of the Lombards, 115. his death, ibid.
Another, 150 Guelphs and Gibellines, when first so distinguished, 264 Guido
Bonatus, an Astrologer, 286 Guy of Lusignan King of Jerusalem, 248. taken
Prisoner, 249
H
Hannibali and Vrsini two factions at Rome, 285 Hawkwood, an Englishman,
319.319. the Pope's General, 320. in several Services, 321, 331, 332 Haydo
Governor of Aquitain rebels, 155 Haymo Brother to Venerable Bede, 126
Helchesaites Heretics, 35 Helena, Mother to the Emperor Constantine, finds
the Holy Cross, 48 Henry D. of Bavaria, Emperor, 196 Henry II. Son of Conrade,
Emperor, 199 Henry III. Emperor, 206. deprived by Pope Gregory, 209 Henry IV.
Emperor, 225 Henry of Luxemburg invades Italy, 302. is Crowned at Rome, 303
Henry King of England meets the Pope, 235. satisfies him about the murder of
Thomas Becket, 245 Henry, Son of Richard of Cornwall murdered, 279 Heraclea
taken by the Christians, 218 Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, 248 Heraclius, a
learned Christian, 27 Heraclius Emperor, 104. his Actions, 105 Hermes a
Christian Writer, 20 Hilarious Bishop of Poictiers, 65 Hilarious Bishop of Arles,
76 Hildebrand, a Monk, 202. made Pope, 207 Hilminoline a Saracen General, 256
Holy Water. See Water. Holy-War. See War. Honorius Emperor, 70 Host ordered to
be made of Unleavened Bread only, 16 Hubert, a Bishop in Bretagne, 122 Hugo de
Sancto Victore, 233 Hungari, a Scythian People, 173 come into Italy, 180, 181
Hunns, a Scythian Nation, 173, 179 John Hus burnt for a Heretic, 346 Hymns
added to the Divine Service, 17, 18, 125
I
James, surnamed Justus, his Acts and martyrdom, 4 S. Januarius his Body
translated, 156 Iconium taken by the Christians, 218 S. Jerome the learned
Presbyter, 69. his death, 72 Jerome of Prague burnt for a Heretic, 346
Jerusalem taken by Titus, 9. permitted by Julian the Apostate to be rebuilt,
62. taken by the Saracens, 108. recovered by the Christians, 221. retaken by
the Saracens, 250. dismantled, 258 S. Ignatius his martyrdom, 13 Images in
Churches ordered by the Emperor to be pulled down, 132, 141. Decrees thereupon
at Rome, 144. at Nice, 148 Inventio Crucis, 48 Inundations of the Tiber, 131,
149, 167 Joan Queen of Naples kills her Husband, 313 Pope Joan, 165 S. John the
Apostle banished into Patmos, 12 John Bishop of Bergamo, 121 John Arch Bishop
of Ravenna submits to the Pope, 168 John King of Jerusalem, 258 Joppa taken by
the Christians, 222 Josephus, when he lived, 8 Jovinian Emperor 63 Irene
Empress of Constantinople, 149 Isidore Bishop of Sevil, 105 Jubilee first kept
every fiftieth year, 296 Julian, surnamed the Apostate, 59.61. his death, 62
Julianus Emperor, 65 Julius Africanus, an eminent Writer, 33 Justin Martyr,
when he lived, and his Works, 18 Justin Emperor, 86 Justinian I. Emperor, 88.
his Actions, 89 Justinian II. terrifies the Saracens into submission, 121.
breaks faith with them, 123. is deposed and his Nose cut off, 124. restored,
126. his severity upon his Enemies, 127. and ingratitude to his Friend, 128.
slain, 129 Juvencus, a noble Christian, 56
L
Lactantius Firmianus, when he lived, 48 Lambert a holy Martyr, 125 Latinianus
a Bishop, 102 Lent first Instituted, 18 Leo Emperor, 78.79. his Edict against
Images, 132 S. Leo his body translated. 125 Leodegarius Bishop of Autun, 122
Leontius makes himself Emperor, 124. deposed, ibid. Lewis surnamed the Godly,
Emperor, 153 Lewis King of Bavaria, 154 Lewis Son of Lotharius, 100. Crowned
King of Italy, 161. being Emperor, he comes to Rome, 167 Lewis King of France,
engages in the holy War, 267 Lewis of the French Blood Royal, canonized, 295
Libanius the Orator, 71 Licinius Emperor, 49 Lions, a Council there, 280
Lombards, their coming into Italy, 96 Lotharingia [Lorain] why so called, 160
Lotharius Emperor, 154.160 Lucca made a free City, 289. taken by the Germans
and sold, 308 Lucifer Bishop of Cagliari, 59 Lucina, a Roman Lady leaves the
Church her Heir, 47 Lucius King of Britain, 24 Lucius an Heretical Bishop
violent against the Orthodox, 64 Luithprandus King of the Lombards, 129. takes
Ravenna, 131. besieges Rome, 134. his character, 136 Luke the Evangelist, 10
Lupus Duke of Friuli, 114
M
Macarius Bishop of Antioch, a Monothelite. 117 Macedonius a Heretic, 61
Mahomet the Impostor, 105 Malchion, an eloquent Presbyter, 38 Manes a Persian
Impostor, 41 Manfred, Prince of Tarento, 267. made King of Sicily, 270. is
killed, 275 Manichees their Heresy, 42 Marcion the Heretic, 19 S. Mark
employed by S. Peter to write his Gospel. 4. his Body translated to Venice, 158
Marriages, a Decree concerning them, 23 S. Martin's body works a Miracle, 172
Martyrs, their Acts ordained to be written and preserved, 33, 34. Masses yearly
to be celebrated upon their account, 41 Mathild or Maud, a noble Countess, 204.
her death, 206 Mauritius Emperor, 98 Maxentius Emperor, 48, 49 Maximian
Herculeus Emperor, 44.48. Maximian Galerius Caesar, 44. Emperor, 47 Maximine
Emperor, 33.49 Maximus the Tyrant, 77. a learned Christian of that name, 127
Melito Bishop of Sardis, 20 Merlin the British Prophet, 79 Messalina Wife to
the Emperor Claudius put to death for Adultery, 3 Mezelindis a Woman of
incomparable chastity, 116 Milain taken by Sforza, 377 Minutius Felix, when he
lived, 31 Modestus a Christian Writer, 25 Monothelites, a Council held
concerning them, 117 Montanists, Heretics, 21 Guido Montfort murders Henry
Son of Richard of Cornwall, 273 Simon Montfort, 256 Moors invade Calabria, 176
N
Names of Popes when first changed, 160 Naples taken by Belisarius, 91.
besieged, 253 Narses the Eunuch, 94 Nepos, a Heretic, 39 Nero Emperor, his
Vices, 6. kills himself, 7 Nerva Cocceius Emperor, his character, 12 Nectorius
his Heresy, 74 Nice in Bithynia, a Council there. 51 Nicetas an Eunuch,
Patriarch of Constantinople, 141 S. Nicolas his Body translated, 216 Nicopolis
taken by the Christians, 218 Nogaret a French Cavalier, 298 Normans have a part
of France allowed them to inhabit, 172 Novatianus his Heresy, 34. opposed, by
whom, 36
O
Odoacer King of the Heruli invades Italy, 79 Olympius the Exarch, 111 Optatus
Milevitanus, when he lived, 66 Holy Orders not to be conferred at once 65. not
upon maimed or infirm persons, 67. nor Foreiners without Testimonials, ibid.
nor on Servants, 71. nor Debtors, 72 Organs introduced first into the Church,
114 Origin a learned Christian, 27.29.32 Ostia the Harbor there, by whom made,
3 Otho Emperor, an Account of his life, 7 Otho II. Emperor, 184, conquers
Boleslaus King of Bohemia, 183 comes to Rome, 185 Otho Abbat of Clugny, 207
Otho Duke of Burgundy engaged in the Holy War. 251
P
Palaeologus [Michael] assumes the Empire of Constantinople, 272 Pallavicino, a
powerful Gibelline, 270.273 Pamphilus a learned Presbyter, 43 Pantheon given to
the Christians, 103 Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, 14 Papias the Lombard
Glossographer, 257 Paris, when and by whom made an University, 152 Parishes,
Rome when first so divided, 14 Paschal an Archdeacon, endeavors to make
himself Pope, 123. convict of Sorcery, ibid. S. Paul the Apostle, 5. beheaded,
6 Paulus Samosatenus, a Heretic, 26.40 Paulus Diaconus, when he lived, 147
Pelagius his Heresy condemned, 69 Pepin Duke of Austrasia, 124. King of
France, 137.141. his death, 142 Pepin Son of Charlemagne, 149.150. dies at
Milan, 151 Pepin Son of Lewis the Godly, King of Aquitain, 154 Perinus King of
Cyprus, 321 Pertheris, King of the Lombards, 120 Peter an Hermit, excites the
Christian Princes to the Holy War, 217 Peter Abelardus, a learned Men, 238
Peter of Verona canonized, 268 Peter King of Aragon, 287. his Kingdom given
away by the Pope, 288 Peter Luna, Antipope, 338. his death, 356 Petrarcha a
learned Man, 311 S. Petronilla, S. Peter's Daughter, her body translated, 141
S. Philip the Apostle, 10 Philip the Emperor, 34 Philip King of France,
engaged in the Holy War, 251. returns home, 253 Philippicus Emperor of
Constantinople, 129. deposed, and his Eyes put out, 130 Philo Judaeus, when he
lived, 8 Phocas Emperor, 101 Photinus a learned Bishop, 18. Another of that
name, an Ebionite, 65 Photinians, Heretics, condemned 52 Picenninus, a great
Commander, 361 Pisans overthrown by the Venetians, 253. by the Genoeses, 289.
their City taken by the Florentines, 339 Pistoia taken and rased, 301 Plague
through Europe, 98 Platina, the Author of this History imprisoned by Pope Paul
II. 403. and tortured, 410 Pliny the second, occasions a persecution of the
Christians to be stayed, 13 Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, 19 Polycrates, Bishop
of Ephesus, 26 Posthumus, an Usurper in Gallia, 38 Pragmatic Sanction, 396
Presbyters, not to be ordained but by a Bishop, 65 Primates, who are to bear
that Title, 22 Priscian, the Grammarian, 88 Priscilla, a Roman Matron, builds a
Cemetery, 47 Priscillian, his Heresy condemned, 69 Probus Emperor, 43
Projectus a Bishop martyred, 116 Ptolemais besieged by the Christians, 251.
taken, 253. retaken by the Infidels, 292
Q
Quadragesimal Fast, See Lent. Quadratus, a learned Disciple, 14 Quintilian's
Works, when and by whom found out, 382 Quintillus Emperor, 40 Quotiliani,
Heretics, 25
R
Rabanus, a learned Monk, 159 Racherius, Bishop of Verona, 182 Rachis King of
the Lombards, 137 Ravenna, the Church there reconciled to that of Rome, 116.
the pride of their Bishops repressed by the Pope, 119. the City taken by the
Lombards, 131. the Exarchate extinguished, 140 Raymund a Commander in the holy
War, 217. a Debate between him and Boemund, 220 Reggio surprizsed by treachery,
320 Remigius Bishop of Rhemes, 80 Rhodes taken by the Turks, 111 Rhomoaldus
Duke of Beneventum, 119 Richard King of England engaged in the holy War, 251.
strikes up a Peace with Saladine, 253. is taken Prisoner, 254 Robert Guiscardi,
a great General, 202. defeats the Saracens, 203. and Greeks, 204 Rodulphus King
of Burgundy, 181. of Habspurg, Emperor, 280. sells to several Cities of Italy
their freedom, 289 Rome sacked by the Vandals, 77. besieged by the Lombards, 96
Rothifredus King of the Normans, 171 Ruffinus a Roman General, 70
S
Sabellius, Author of the Sabellian Heresy, 39. his Heresy condemned, 52
Sabinus King of the Bulgarians, 141 Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, various
Decrees about it, 16.17.20.27.125 Saladine King of Egypt, 246. defeats the
Christians, 249. takes Jerusalem, 250. his death and Character, 254 Sanctuaries
in Churches first ordained, 106 Saracens, why so called, 107. their insult upon
Libya and Africa, 121.124. and Spain, 126. and France, 131. defeated, 132.
enter France again, 134. and are again overthrown, 135. Shipwrack'd, 162.
routed by Pope Leo, 163. driven out of Italy, 171. returning again they are
vanquished by Pope John XI. 180. driven out of Sicily, 196. besiege Toledo,
256. are allowed a City in Italy to inhabit, 264.276. take Sardinia, 300 Saxons
converted to Christianity, 125.147 Scaligeri, Lords of Verona, 300 Schisms in
the Church,
36.58.72.84.89.91.121.122.141.143.166.177.186.190.192.199.206.209.229.233.234.242.308.325.365. Sclavi receive the Christian faith, 187 Scotus the learned Schoolman, 164 S. Sebastian his body translated, 159 Seeds stercoraria, the reason of it, 165 Serapion, surnamed Scholiastes, 59 Severians Heretics, 21 Severus the Emperor, his Character, 26 Sforza defeats the Venetians, 376. takes Milan, 377 Sicardus Duke of Beneventum, 157 Sicily delivered from the Moors, 158 Siconolfus Prince of Beneventum, 161 Sigebert of Gemblours, 226 Sigismund King of Bohemia and Hungary chosen Emperor, 343. comes to Rome, 359 Simeon, a Disciple, crucified, 13 Simon Magus, an account of him, 3.4 Sophronia, a chaste Virgin, 50 Spaniards forced to receive the faith, 147 Stanislaus Bishop of Cracow Canonized, 268 Stilico a Roman General, 70 Stone upon which Christ sat brought to Venice* 232 Strabo, Brother to Venerable Bede, 126 Sueropylus Prince of Dalmatia, 187 Syracuse, a Church there falling down kills many, 216
T
Tacitus Emperor of Rome, 42 Tamberlane vanquishes the Turks, 338 Tarsus taken
by the Christians, 218 Tartars ravage as far as Europe, 259.267. some of their
Noblemen receive the faith, 280 Tatianus a learned Christian, 21 Taxillo Duke
of the Boiarians, 141.148 Tertullian the famous Christian Writer, 29 Theoderick
King of the Goths, 75. invades Italy, 79. his Actions. 81. imprisons Pope John,
87 Theodolinda, Queen of the Lombards, 99 Theodore Bishop of Ravenna, 116
Theodorus, a Heretic, 92 Theodosius Emperor, 66.68. Another of the same name,
73. Another, 130 Theodotion, a learned Christian, 23 Theophilus Bishop of
Antioch, 20 Thomas Becket Canonized, 245 Thomas Cantilupe, Bishop of Hereford
Canonized 306 Thomas Aquinas Canonized, ibid. Tiberias taken by the Christians,
222 Tiberius Emperor, 1. Another, 97. Another, 124 Titus the Emperor takes
Jerusalem, 9. his Character, 10 Toledo besieged by the Saracens, 256 Totilas
King of the Goths, his Actions, 94 Toto Duke of Nepi, 142 Trajan Emperor, his
Character, 13.14 Transamundus Duke of Spoleto, 136 Translation of the Bible of
S. Jerome, 64 Treasure how found by a Saracen, 202 Trebellius Prince of the
Bulgarians, 126.128 Tripoli taken by the Turks and rased, 291 Tryphon, a
learned Christian, 31 Turks, their first successes, 139. take Edessa, 236.
Baruti and Tripoli, 291. routed by the Christians at Belgrade, 386 Turriani, a
powerful Family in Lombardy, 286.302
U
Valens a Roman Emperor, 94. overthrown by the Goths, 65 Valentinian the
Emperor, 64.74 Valentinian Heretics, 18 Valerianus Emperor, 37 Vandals
ravage as far as Africa, 73 Venetians forbidden to sell Christian Slaves, 138.
the first Increase of that Commonwealth, 157. they take Comachio and burn it,
184. fight successfully against the Saracens, 232. ravage the borders of
Greece, ibid. defeat the Pisans, 253. seize several Islands in the
Archipelague, 256. rout the Genoeses, 271. a mortal hatred between 'em,
281.326. put to flight by the Anconeses, 2^^. set under an Interdict by the
Pope, 301. defeated by Francis Sforza, 376 Veramundus Patriarch of
Constantinople, 232 Vespasian Emperor, 9 S. Vgibert, a Nobleman of Lorain, 182
Vgutio Fagiolano Governor of Pisa and Lucca, 304 Viconti a powerful Family in
Lombardy, 286.302. make themselves Masters of Milan, 307 Victorinus an Usurper
in Gallia, 38. Another of that name Bishop of Poictiers, 43. Another, 65 S.
Vincent his body translated, 165 Vinigisius Duke of Spoleto, 150 Vitellius
Emperor, a short account of his Life, 8 Viterbo made a Bishop's Sea, 254
Vitiges, a Gothish King in Italy, 91. besieges Rome, ibid. Vldericus King of
Bohemia, 199 Vrsini and Hannibali, two factions at Rome, 285 Vsun-Cassan King
of Persia, his Message to the Pope, 388
W
Holy War, several Expeditions to it, 217.251.254.255.258.262.267 Holy Water,
when first ordered, 16. Water to be mixed with the Wine in the Sacrament, ibid.
Wenceslaus King of Bohemia murdered by his Brother, 183 Whites and Blacks, two
Factions in Italy, 297. a History of the Whites, 335 Wickliff, his Opinions
condemned, 346 William, Earl of Angoulesm, surnamed Sector-ferri, 176. Count of
Calabria, 231. King of Sicily, 243 William, surnamed Longsword, 247 Women
ordered not to touch the Elements or Vessels of the Altar, 17.23. not the
consecrated Pall or Incense, 72
Z
Zara taken by the Venetians, 355.
AN INDEX Of the Principal matter contained in the Continuation of the Lives of
the POPES.
A
AColti, a Conspirator against Pius IV. 156 Adrian Schoolmaster to Charles V.
chosen Pope, 41 Aldebrandino, Cardinal, created Pope and named Clement VIII.
211 Alexandra superadded by the Pope to the name of Christina Queen of Sweden,
327 Alfonso Cardinal of Siena strangled, 33 Alphonsus King of Naples, 13.
surrenders his Crown to his Son, 14 Altieri (Cardinal) chosen Pope, and named
Clement X. 360 Armada of the Spaniards against England destroyed, 198 Articles
of Peace between the Emperor and Pope, 54.55. between the Spaniards and
French, 353 Aurange, the Prince thereof, General of the Imperial Army, 57
B
Bajazet Emperor of the Turks, his Present to the Pope, 11 Banditi their
insolence, 172. severely punished by Sixtus V. 179 Barberino (Cardinal Maffeo)
chosen Pope, and called Urban VIII. 272. his Family how preferred, 276. the
animosities of Innocent, X. against them, 296. to 311 Barbarossa overthrown by
Charles V. 70. appears upon the coast of Italy, 81 Battle of Ravenna, 26. of
Pavia, 48 of Lepanto, 161 Battory (Stephen) K. of Poland, 194 Belvedere at
Rome, by whom built, 11 Bessarion (Cardinal) an Intimado of Sixtus IV. 1. Legate
to the King of France, 2 Bologna taken by the French, 24 Borghese (Camillo)
chosen Pope, and called Paul V. 227 Borgia (Caesar) the Pope's Bastard, made a
Cardinal, 13.14. spoils the Country of the Orsini, 15. procures the
assassination of his Brother, ibid. his abominable cruelty and rapine, 16.17.
made Duke Valentino, 17. his Cup bearer mistakes his bottles, 18. imprisoned,
20. enlarged, 21. is cut in pieces, 22 Borri, an Enthusiastical Heret. 331
Borromeo (Charles) a holy man, a Confident of Pius IV. 121. Canonized, 203
Bourbon, ( Charles, Duke thereof) slain before the Walls of Rome, 56 Buda taken
by the Turks, 52 Buoncompagno (Hugh) chosen Pope with the name of Gregory XIII.
163
C
Camilla, a poor Sister of Sixtus V. how received by him, 176. a Pasquil upon
her, 161 Candia much pressed by the Turks, 349.355. relief for it attempted in
vain, 356 Caraffa ( John) made Pope by the name of Paul IV. 109. the Family
hated by the People, 118. and punished by the Pope, 121 Cardinals exiled by
Julius II. how received by Leo X. 30. some under that Character very young,
29.68.90.107.204. number of Cardinals limited, 205. dignified with the Title of
Eminence, 278 Casimir King of Poland, 3 Castagna (John Battista) created Pope
by the name of Urban VII. 205 Castro utterly demolished, with an Inscription,
315 Charles King of Spain, 33. Emperor, 39. Crowned, 61. renounces his
Imperial Dignity, 116 Charles VIII. of France assists the Pope, 10. claims the
Kingdom of Naples and enters Italy, 13. gains and loses Naples, 14. dies, ibid.
Charles IX. King of France, 126 Chigi (Fabio) created Pope under the name of
Alexander VII. 321 Christina Queen of Sweden, 319. abjures the Reformed
Religion and comes to Rome, 327 Cibo (John Battista) made Pope with the name of
Innocent VIII. 8 Colonneses and Vrsini, a fewd between 'em, 9. reconciled, 10.
both suffer much from Caesar Borgia, 16. Colonneses vigorous Imperialists, 52
Congo, an Embassy from thence to the Pope, 262 Conventus, the word gives
offense at the Council of Trent, 94 Congregation for propagating the faith
instituted, 270 Cortesans used unkindly by Pius V. 158 Council against the
Pope's mind appointed at Pisa, 25. Another called at the L^teran, 25. that at
Pisa declared a Conventicle, 27. its acts and decrees abjured, 31 General
Council indicted at Mantua, 7^. then at Vicenza, ibid. after all at Trent, 78.
begun there, 80. prorogued to Bologna, 85. transferred to Trent, 90.93. debates
there, 94, to 103. prorogued for two years, 104. renewed, 125.127. transactions
there, from 128, to 156. Cranmer Arch bishop of Canterbury deprived, 111 Duke
of Crequi the French Ambassador affronted at Rome, 332. a quarrel thereupon,
333, to 340 Cyprus demanded by the Turks of the Venetians, 160. invaded and
taken by them, 161
D
Dalmatia invaded by the Turks, 75 D'aubusson Master of Rhodes, 6 Denmark, the
Pope's Nuntio denied admittance there by the King, 126 Diet at Regenspurg, 77.
at Noremberg, 80. at Worms, 82. at Auspurg, 85 Divorce of Henry VIII. and Queen
Katharine debated, 59. Of Henry IV. of France and Margaret Duchess of Valois,
221. Of Alphonso of Portugal and his Queen, 351
E
Elizabeth Queen of England denies admittance to the Pope's Nuntio, 126.
Excommunicated, 159, and deposed by the Pope, 162. well esteemed by Sixtus V.
182. yet much hated, 197 Eminence, the Title bestowed on Cardinals, when, 278
England, the States of Affairs there upon throwing off subjection to the Pope,
74. returning to its Obedience, how ordered by the Pope, 111
F
Fachinetti, Cardinal, chosen Pope and named Innocent IX. 210 Faenza taken by
the Venetians, 22 Farnese ( Alexander) Pope under the name of Paul III. 67
Farnese (Prince Alexander) a Commander against the Turks, 165. Governor of
Flanders, 197 Ferdinand I. King of Naples defeated by the Pope's Forces, 6.
makes War again, 9. violates his faith, 10. his death, 13. Ferdinand II. quits
his Kingdom, 14 Ferdinand of Spain honored with the Title of Catholic King, 13
Ferrara the Dukedom devolves to the Church, 215 Fisher Bishop of Rochester made
a Cardinal, 68 Florence surrendered to the Imperialists, 62 Florentines favor
the House of Medici against the Pope, 5. join with the King of Naples, 9
Franche Compte seized upon by the French King, 349 Francis I. King of France,
31. taken Prisoner, 48. maintains unchristian correspondences with the Turks,
63 Francis II. K. of France, 118. dies, 126 Friars Mendicant and Secular
Priests, a Dispute between 'em determined, 4
G
Gaston de Foix, a French Commander slain, 26 Geneva, the City hated by the
Pope, 124 Genoa taken by the French, 88. the Magistracy there give offense to
Paul V. 229 Ghisler ( Anthony) made Pope by the name of Pius V, 157 Gonsalvo a
brave Commander recovers Naples from the French, 15 Gregorian Account, when
begun, 169 Guise, the Duke thereof assassinated, 199. and the Cardinal put to
death, ibid. Gunpowder. Treason in England, 261
H
Hats red granted to be worn by Cardinals Friars, 209 Henry VIII. King of
England, 25, 28. writes a Book against Martin Luther, 37. his Divorce debated,
59. throws off all subjection to the Sea of Rome, 64. Excommunicated, 66 Henry
II. King of France slain, 118 Henry III. of France assassinated, 202 Henry King
of Navarre excommunicated by the Pope, 181. acknowledged King of France, 202.
professes the Catholic Fath, 214. marries Mary de Medicis, 222. murdered by
Ravillac, 203
I
James I. King of Great Britain, 223 Jansenius his Opinions, 318.
determinations of the Pope upon them, 318.341 Japannese Ambassadors to Gregory
XIII. 171. kindly received by Sixtus V. 176 Jesuits College at Rome, by whom
built, 170. their Services to the Church, 171. not openly favored by Sixtus V.
148 Jew at Rome, converted by Pius V. 159 Ignatius Loyola canonized, 262.270
Index expurgatorius by whom published, 116 Indulgences restrained by the Pope,
214.384 Inquisition by whom contrived, 110 Interim of Charles, V. what, 87
Interview of the King of England and French King of Boloign, 64. of the Pope
and French King at Marseilles, 65 Inundation of the Tiber, 218.326 Don John of
Austria General of the Fleet against the Turks, 161.165 Italy divided into
Factions, 6. embroiled in War, 9. invaded by the French and their Confederates,
23, cleared of them, 27 Jubilee celebrated by Sixtus IV. 3. by Paul III. 83. by
Julius III. 90. by Gregory XIII. 166. by Urban VIII. 275
K
Key of the H. Sepulcher presented to the Pope by Bajazet Emperor of the
Turks, 11 Kindred, unreasonably preferred by Pope Sixtus IV. 2.3. and by
Alexander VI. 12. not much regarded by Adrian VI. 45. nor Paul III. at first,
68. indulged by Paul IV. 110.114. disregarded by Pius V. 159. too much indulged
by Urban VIII. 293. the present Pope Innocent XI. not fond of 'em, 382
Knighthood, a new Order instituted by Paul V. 266
L
Lance which pierced Christ's side presented to the Pope by the Grand Signior,
11 Lautrec, General of the French in Italy, 57. successful, 56. dies, 59 League
of several Princes and States against the K. of Naples and D. of Milan, 14. Of
many Italian Lords against Borgia, 16. League of Cambray against the Venetians,
22. Of the Pope and King of Spain with the Venetians, 25. Of the King of
England and the French King, 57. the Triple League, 350 Lepanto, the Battle
there, 161 Letter Apostolical publishing the Jubilee, 218 Lewis XI. of France
favors the Medici against the Pope, 5 Lewis XII. enters Italy, and possesses
himself of Milan, 15. gains and loses Naples, ibid. is excommunicated, 25.
dies, 31 Lucca, the Magistracy there give offense to Paul V. 229 Lucretia the
Pope's Bastard, how bestowed by him, 15 Ludovisio ( Alexander) chosen Pope, and
named Gregory XV. 267 Luther his first appearance in Germany, 36.37. his
Sectators increase, 62
M
Mahomet the Great dies, 6 Malatesta ( Robert) General of the Pope.s Forces, 6
Malta, a Controversy there between the Master and the Knights, 169 Mantua, the
troubles there, 279.280 Marignano General for the Emperor retakes Siena, 105
Marriages of several Princes of the same name, 217. Of Lewis XIV. and Maria
Teresa Infanta of Spain, 330 Mary Queen of England, her acknowledgment of the
Papal Power, 106. her Ambassadors how received at Rome, ibid. and 111.
Matthias King of Hungary, 3 Maurice Duke of Saxony, 104 Medicis, the Family
disobliged by Sixtus IV. 4. a Plot against 'em, 4.5. one of 'em murdered,
ibid. John of that House made Pope with the name of Leo X. 29. Julio another
Pope with the name of Clement VII. 46. the Family driven out of Florence, 57.
Alexander made first Hereditary Duke of Florence, 62. John Angelo de Medicis
Pope by the name of Pius IV. 119. Cosmo de Medicis made Great Duke of Tuscany,
159. Alexander chosen Pope, and called Leo XI. 205 Messina seized by the
French, 374 Milan, its various fortune, 15.27.30.31.39.49.52.71 Modena taken by
the Pope's Forces, 24 Monasteries suppressed by the Pope's permission, 328.348
Montalto (Cardinal) chosen Pope with the name of Sixtus V. 172 Monti (Cardinal)
chosen Pope by the name of Julius III. 90 Munster, the Treaty of Peace there,
307
N
Naples besieged by the French, 59 Nepotism declared against by Alexander VII.
325. but practiced, ib. Nerius (Philip) Canonized, 263.270 Nitardo Inquisitor
General of Spain made a Cardinal, 368 Novaro, its stout resistance of the
French, 30 Nuntio's from the Popes denied admittance by several Princes,
126.180
O
Obelisc raised by Sixtus V. 186 Odescalchi (Cardinal) chosen Pope, and called
Innocent XI. 380 Donna Olympia, her Character, 298. and managements,
299.300.301.310.311.312.313.319. confined to Orvieto, 324. dies of the Plague,
ibid. Orsini, see Vrsini. Osnaburg, a Peace concluded there, 308 Otranto seized
by the Turks, 6
P
Palace of the Farnese, 68 Palatine of the Rhine despoiled of his Dominions,
269 Pamfilio (Cardinal) made Pope, and called Innocent X. 594 Paris made an
Archbishopric, 270 Parma, Edward Duke thereof his Contest with Urban VIII.
284, to 292. Pasquil upon Sixtus V. 191 Pavia, the Cardinal thereof
assassinated, 24. the City besieged by French King, 48. taken by Lautrec, 56.
Persia, an Embassy from thence to the Pope, 262 Pescara the Marquess a noble
Commander, 48 Peter Pence, the paying of 'em a great Duty, 111 Philip de
Comines sent with succors to the Florentines, 5 Piccolomini (Francis) chosen
Pope, with the name of Pius III. 20 Pinarolo Tutor to Sixtus IV. 1 Pius V.
Canonized, 368 Plague in Italy, 168.324.326 Plot of Sixtus IV. against the
lives of the Medici, 4.5. Of some Villains against Pius IV. 156 Poland, great
Contests there about choosing a King, 167.195.369 Pool (Reginald) made a
Cardinal, 68. sent Legate to the Council at Trent, 80. almost chosen Pope, 89.
recalled from his Office of Legate in England, 116 Portugal, great troubles
there, 168 Priests Secular and Mendicant Friars, a long Dispute between 'em
determined by the Pope, 4 Progress of Clement VIII. from Rome to Ferrara, 216
Protest of the King of France to the Pope, 94 Protestants routed by the
Imperialists, 84
Q
Queens of Cyprus and Bosna entertained by the Pope, 7
R
Ravenna taken by the French, 26 Ravillac murders Henry IV. of France, 263
Reformation designed by Adrian VI. 44. by Marcellus II. 108. by Marcellus II.
108. by Paul IV. 117. by Pius V. 158 Relations, See Kindred. Rhodes taken by the
Turks, 42 Rome taken and sacked by the Imperial Army, 56. and spoiled by the
Vrsins, 59 Rospigliosi (Cardinal) created Pope with the name of Clement IX. 346
Rovere ( Francis) created Pope, with the name of Sixtus IV. 1 Rovere ( Julian)
made Cardinal, 2. and Pope, with the name of Julius II. 20
S
Salvian, Archbishop of Pisa in a Plot with the Pope against the lives of the
Medici, 5. hanged, ib. Saraceno, Prebendary of Vicenza occasion of the quarrel
of Paul V. with the Venetians. 230 Saxony, the Duke excommunicated, 38
Sebastian K. of Portugal slain, 168 Sfondrati ( Nicolas) created Pope, and
called Gregory XIV. 207 Sforza D. of Milan, taken and sent into France, 31. his
Heir restored to his Dukedom, 52. dies, 71 Shoemaker of Macerata, a Story of
him, 183 Siena revolts from the Emperor, 104. recovered, 105 Simony practiced
and punished by the Pope, 12. Debate about its qualifications, 117 Sobietzki (
John) chosen King of Poland, 369 Soliman the Magnificent, 42.52.61 Spalato (A.
de Dominis) the Archbishop thereof, 270 Spain, the Kings thereof when first
honored with the Title of Catholic, 13 Statue of Paul IV. ignominiously used
by the People, 119 Strozzi General for the French in Tuscany defeated, 105
Stuart ( John) D. of Albany, of the Scotch Bloud-Royal, General of the French
in Naples, 48 Swiss-Cantons, their Embassy to the Pope, 187 Switzers, their
actions in the Pope's Cause, 27.30.31
T
Teresa the Virgin, Canonized, 203.270 Theatines, the Order when first
instituted, 110 Title of Catholic given to the King of Spain, 13. of Defender
of the Faith to the King of England, 37 Treaty at Munster, 307. at Osnaburg,
308. of the Pyreneans, 329. at Aix la Chappelle, 352 Trent, a General Council
appointed there, 78. begun, 80 Trivulse General of the French takes Bologna, 24
Tunis taken by Charles V. 71 Turks seize Otranto, 6. alarm Christendom, 35.
take Rhodes, 42. and Buda, 52. besiege Vienna, 61. invade Dalmatia, 75.160.
demand Cyprus of the Venetians, 160, take it, 161. receive a great overthrow at
Lepanto, 161. successful in Hungary, 214. invading Poland, are defeated, 270
U
Vanoccia Harlot to Alexander IV. 16 Vatican Library much improved by Sixtus
IV. 7. much more by Sixtus V. 186. by Paul V. 265. by the addition of the
Palatine Library, 269. by Alexander VII. 344 Venetians bandy against the Pope,
5. are excommunicated by him, 7. absolved, 9. a formidable League against them,
22. stripped of all their Acquisitions in Italy, 23. regain some Towns, 27.
their Victory at Lepanto, 162. make Peace with the Turks, 166. kind to the
Nuntio of Sixtus V. 190. they are quarreled with by Paul V. 230, to 261.
disobliged by Urban VIII. 283 Vienna besieged by the Turks, 61 Vitelli Count of
Tiferno against the Pope, 4 Vladislaus King of Bohemia excommunicated, 4 Vrbin
the Duchy seized into the Pope's hands, 32.35. restored, 42. devolves to the
Church, 281 Vrsini and Colonneses, a Discord between the two Families, 9. are
reconciled, 10. both spoiled by Caesar Borgia, 16. Vrsini cause a great tumult
at Rome, 170
W
Wednesdays auspicious to Sixtus V 137.
X
Xaverius ( Francis) a Jesuit, Canonized, 270
Z
Zizime, Brother to the Grand Signior brought to Rome, 11. dies, 14 Zuinglius
opposes the Pope, 37
FINIS.

