SOCRATES TRIUMPHANS.
Nostra hinc ad Deum transmi^rali^ felix faustaque sit. Socrates is offered
poison R: White Sculy.



LONDON Printed for J: Magnes and R: Bently.

PLATO his APOLOGY of SOCRATES, AND PHAEDO or Dialogue concerning the
Immortality of Man's SOUL, AND Manner of SOCRATES his Death: Carefully
translated from the Greek, AND Illustrated by Reflections upon both the
Athenian Laws, and ancient Rites and Traditions concerning the Soul, therein
mentioned.

Quintilianus ^^stitut. Orator. lib. 10 cap. 5. Vertere Graeca in Latinum
veteres nostri Oratores optimum judicabant. Id se L. Crassus in illis Cicero
^^de Oratore libris dicit factitasse. Id Cicero su^^ ^ersona frequentissime
praecipit: quin etiam libros Platonis [Timaeum nempe, quem inscripsit de
Universitate] atque Xenophontis edidit hoc genere translatos.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for James Magnes and Richard Bentley at the
Post Office in Bussel-street in Covent Garden, 1675.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the EARL of ANGLESEY, Lord Privy Seal, etc.
My LORD,
THE Manuscript now herewith delivered to your Servant, had two days since been
brought to Your Lordship, had I not so long disputed with my self, Whether it
were more decent for me to send it single, or to give it an Epistle for a
companion. Nor was it so easy a matter for me to determine this my doubt; the
contrary reasons that offered themselves to my perpension, seeming to me to be
of equal weight

When, on one side, I considered how immense a multiplicity of affairs, and
those of great importance too, come hourly crowding into your thoughts,
expecting from you to be at once both judged and dispatched with highest
Prudence; and how few minutes you have to spare from cares of State: I was
inclined to conclude, that the perusal of the Book alone, without the
importunity of a Letter, might too much interrupt your repose, and the public
felicity. To this was added, that neither Socrates nor Plato could need Letters
of recommendation to a man so well acquainted with the Heroic Virtues of the
one, and the Divine Doctrine of the other. Nay I thought it a kind of Sacrilege
against their Merits, as well as against your Judgment, but to imagine, that
any thing I could write to introduce them, might increase your esteem of them.

When, on the other, I remembered that the Book contains, not an Original, but
a Copy; not the entire Images of those two so justly renowned Philosophers, but
only two select pieces of them, namely the upright and invincible Heart of the
one, and the perspicacious Eye of the other (I mean the Defense of Socrates,
and the discourse of the Immortality of Man's Soul) and that I owed Your
Lordship, not only the free use thereof, but also an account of the reasons I
had to allege in excuse (I must not say, justification) of the little art shown
by me in the Transcript: remembering this, I say, I could not but think it
convenient, to draw a few lines more, in order to your satisfaction concerning
that particular. Besides this, gratefully re-calling to mind, that you had long
before honored me, not only with license, but with express Command also, to
write to you, and that frequently too, especialy concerning matters
Philosophical; and being of opinion, that this Book contains one of the noblest
Disquisitions any where to be found among the monuments of even the Ancient
Grecian Philosophers: I was apt to conceive it to be more probable (your
extraordinary Candor together considered) that my omission to do it, upon this
inviting occasion, might carry the face of Disobedience; than that my doing it
would be looked upon as importune or indecent.

And this last reason, in weight exceeding all the moments put into the
opposite Scale, at length turned the balance of my suspense; and made me
conclude, that certainly I should less offend by a fault for which I might
plead the authority of Your Lordships Command, than by one that could not be
otherwise excused, but by confessing my distrust of your Benignity, and
diffidence of your Favor, wherein chiefly I esteem my self to be happy.

Notwithstanding this, I still found my self obliged, so far at least to give
ear to the former arguments that would have dissuaded me from writing, as to
resolve to make my fault as little and venial as was possible, by writing no
more than should seem necessary to the defens of the Plainness, and familiar
Style used by me, in the version of these two so excellent Discourses of Plato
into our Language. For that seems chiefly to require an Apology: the admirable
Wisdom, great Vtility, and charming sweetness of the Discourses themselves,
being already perfectly known to Your Lordship, and acknowledged by universal
consent of the Learned in all ages, since it became a doubt, whether Athens
were more to be honored for the birth of Socrates, or to be branded with
infamy and hatred for the cruel murder of him. And as for the Occasion of my
translating them; you are so far from needing to be advertised thereof, that
you made it my Province: that is, from your just admiration of the
incorruptible Justice of Socrates, expressed in a Colloquy at your Table (where
the Minds, no less than the bodies of your Guests are always feasted) I took
the first hint of the design, and proceeded therein by your approbation; which
with me, is equivalent to an injunction.

Suffer me then, my Lord, briefly to acquaint you, that if in this diversion of
my pen, I have not only confined it, as strictly as my weak judgment would
permit me to do it, within the bounds of the Authors sense; but caused it also
wheresoever I could, to trace out his very Expressions, and render them even
word for word: it was not that I imagined that way to be either more facil, or
more elegant; but because I judged it to be the more faithful, and I had
designed, not a Paraphrase, but a Translation. By comparing the Latin version
of Marsilius Ficinus with that of Serranus, I had found these two great men not
seldom various, sometimes dubious, and sometimes irreconciliable in their
interpretations: so that both could not be in the right; and to me who had not
been sufficiently versed in the dialect and style of Plato, nor competently
skilled in the Criticisms of the Greek, it was extremely difficult to discern,
which of the two came nearest to the true and genuine sense of the Author; more
especialy where it was probable they had followed different Exemplars, and
certain that even their best Editions of Plato were not sufficiently correct.
To extricate my self from this perplexity, I was constrained to take this
course. Where the Greek Text appeared to me to be of it self plain and
perspicuous, I seldom consulted any other Oracle. Where the same seemed obscure
by words of ambiguous signification, and used Metaphoricaly: first I sought to
let in light upon the place, by opening the casements both of the antecedent
and subsequent Context; and if thereby I could discern the mind of those words,
I had recourse to the Interpreters also, though merely for confirmation. Where
I found my self entangled both in the abstruseness of the Text, and in the
discrepancy of its interpretations; I chose to adhere to the more
consentaneous, which most frequently was that of Serranus; and where the
interpretations were not only different, but incapable of consistency and
reconciliation: there I was forced to grope out my way by probable Conjecture,
as being destitute of other help. Here to expatiate into a particular Catalogue
of these Difficulties, and adfer instances of each sort of them; is neither to
my present scope necessary, nor consistent with the module of an Epistle: and
after this general account, it seems more decent for me to render a reason, why
I so far mentioned them. Be pleased therefore to know, that I have done it, not
to derogate from the glory and authority of those two so deservedly celebrated
names of Ficinus and Serranus, from whose immortal Works I hold my self
scarcely worthy to wipe the dust, and without whose conduct and manuduction I
could not have been able to proceed without stumbling at almost every step: but
only to make your Wonder the less, when you shall find me, not only stumbling,
but Erring also from the direct path of Plato's sentiments and intention; which
I fear I have more than once done. For, if such men as they were, met sometimes
with Knots they could not unty: what wonder is it, that I who am so much their
inferior both in learning and judgment, should be often embroiled in doubts I
cannot solve? if They who have shown themselves both exquisitely Critical in
the Greek of the Ancients, and intimately conversant even in the most
mysterious notions, and profound recesses of the Platonic Philosophy, openly
dissent from, and clash one with the other, about the genuin sense of many
hundreds of places therein occurring: how much of favor is due to this weak
Essay of one, who is neither good Grecian, nor so much as a mean Platonist? I
may therefore expect from Your Lordship, rather reprhension for attempting
above my strength, than blame for performing below my hopes. Now, my Lord, that
I may draw all the lines of this long Paragraph to a point; this very Reason
here brought to excuse my Deviations (if I be found guilty of any such) from
the sense, may well serve also to justify my strict adhesion to the Words of
my Author, wheresoever the vast disparity betwixt the most significant Idioms
of Plato's Greek, and those of our Babel of Languages, the English, would
permit. For, as a Novice in the Art of Painting, though he come short of the
life, will yet more certainly represent the true dimensions of the thing he
designs to paint, and the becoming Symmetry of all its parts; if he transgress
not the lines drawn to his hand by a Master, to circumscribe the image, and
confine his pencill to the due proportions thereof: so I being to copy the
Sentiments of Another, believed I should be the less prone to err, by how much
the less I receded from the Marks he had left of them: and hereupon I resolved
to do my best devoir, first to understand those Marks distinctly, and then to
represent their Significations faithfully: preferring plain imitation to more
artificial ornament. Not that I had then forgot, there are intruth certain
Modes of speaking, and graceful Phrases proper and peculiar to every Language,
so as to be incapable of alienation or traduction; and certain Subjects also
that are, as by natural congruity, much more agreeably and patheticaly
expressed by one Tongue, than by any other: and that therefore a Translator
ought to be allowed competent liberty to use such words, phrases and figures of
speech, as he shall judge most fit, as well to conserve the beauty and elegance
of the original conception, as to symbolize and suit with the argument; and
this lest his style become pedantique and flat, and the Matter it self be
debased, as the best Wines lose their Spirit by transfusion from vessel to
vessel. But that I well remembered, that an Eminent Wit of Your Lordships
acquaintance, who had with severity enough declamed against verbal
Translations, was yet at the same time so ingenuous, as to grant some Books to
be of so great and universal importance, as that not only their Sense, but even
their Words too ought to be reputed Sacred: and that I conceived these two
pieces of Plato, more especialy that of the Soul, whereof the Speculations are
for the most part Metaphysical or Theological, deserved to be of that number.
Hereunto was conjoined a Second consideration, viz. That by keeping close to
the Words of the Text, even in the Ornamental parts of the Discourse, I might
not only the better avoid the danger of either enervating the Expressions, or
offering such violence to the Sense of it, as might make it appear rather mine
than my Authors; but also retain some impressions of the civil manner and way
used by those Ancient Sages in their frank Conferences, and impassionate
Disputations concerning matters Philosophical: a thing not unworthy the serious
notice of those who are strangers to the Atticism and admirable Civility of
Plato; and, the Morosity and obstinacy of our Modern Disputants considered, to
all Exemplary. These, my good Lord, are the Reasons that induced me to labor
to show my self, in this diverting Essay, rather fidum Metaphrasten, than
disertum Paraphrasten; rather just than polite. And as for the plainness of my
style (if that be a fault) though it be the natural consequent of my fidelity;
yet I have this further to plead in defense thereof, that the gravity of the
Subject exacted it: for, as the Prince of Roman Stoics most judiciously
observes ( Epist. 40.) quae veritati operam dat oration, incomposita debet esse
and simplex.

Hitherto, my Lord, I have offended against your patience, by forcing you to
hear my Apology: be pleased now to let me expiate that offens, by exercising
the same a minute or two longer, while I recall into your memory some of those
many Heroic Virtues of Socrates, whereof his grateful Disciple, Plato, has
left to us such remarkable instances, both in his Apology, and in the accurate
narration of the manner and circumstances of his Death.

This poor Philosopher, my Lord, seems to be the man upon whom the bounty of
Heaven accumulated all the various Gifts, it uses to distribute but singly and
with a sparing hand to other Mortals: and the least of his divine Endowments
has often sufficed to render even private persons illustrous, and Sceptres
themselves more august.

Had you beheld him in arms, with his Sword rescuing Xenophon, and standing
alone confronting a victorious army, when the Athenian forces fled from the
battle of Delium: you would have seen Wisdom reconciled to War, Judgment
moving hand in hand with Fury, and the Rational faculty of the Soul concurring
in the same action with the Irascible; and thereupon concluded, that true
Valor arises, not from heat of blood, nor from excess of Choler, but from
strength and resolution of Mind; and that a good Philosopher may make an
excellent Captain. Had you seen him in another Expedition, returning a
Conqueror from Potidaea, and transferring all the honors and rewards due to
so signal a victory, upon his beloved Alcibiades, reserving to himself no other
place in the Triumph but among the followers of his Friend: You might have
sworn, he had fought so bravely rather for Conscience, than for either Glory or
Spoil; and that he desired no greater name than that of a good Patriot and
sincere Friend.

When you reflect upon his fearless refusal to execute the Command he had
received from the supreme Council of Athens, to fetch Leo Salaminius from
Salamine, to be put to death, according to the Sentence given against him by
the Usurper Critias and his Adherents: you will (I presume) acknowledge, that
he feared nothing but to do ill, that he disdained to assert any power that was
not just, that Athens it self might with more ease have been removed to
Salamine, than he brought to relinquish Right and Equity; and that he was more
ready to accompany the oppressed in their Sufferings under Tyranny, than to be
a sharer in the administration of it. Had some Roman been a witness of this
virtuous obstinacy, he would have cried out perhaps, that the Capitol itself
was not more immovable than the integrity of Socrates; and envied Greece the
glory of so rare an Example. What then would he have said. my Lord, had he been
present at the dispute betwixt the same Socrates and his most faithful Scholar
Crito, wherein he being with no weak arguments urged, to evade the execution of
that most unjust Sentence lately passed upon him, and deliver himself from
violent death by an escape plotted and prepared to his hand; nevertheless not
only rejected that affectionate advice, but by demonstration convinced the
Author of it, that the auctority of Law, and Decrees of Courts of Judicature,
are things in their sanction so venerable and sacred, as to oblige men to
submission, even when they are manifestly unjust; and brought him at length to
acquiesce in this Conclusion, nefas sibi esse e carcere egredi, injussu
Magistratus, and contra legum autoritatem? Herein whether Socrates were in the
right or not, let our Civilians determine: I, for my part, verily believe, he
thought he was; and this is most evident, that he could never be either
overcome by terrors, or won by allurements, to recede so much as a hairs breadth
from what he had once defined to be just. This very Monosyllable doubtless was
his whole Decalogue, equivalent to the Laws of the twelve Tables among the
Romans, the basis of his Religion, the Center of his Counsels, and rule to his
actions: nor can I be easily persuaded, that Astrea left to dwell among men
until after his death. Of his obedience to the Laws and constitutions of his
City, he gave this further testimony; that when the Athenian Republic, to
repair their people much exhausted by war and pestilence, had made an Edict,
that every man of fit years should be obliged to espouse one woman, as
principal wife, and have liberty to take another, for procreation: he,
notwithstanding he had his hands full of unquiet Xantippe (whose peevishness
and morosity was grown to be the daily exercise of his patience at home, and
his reproach abroad) yet in conformity to the Edict, feared not to receive into
his little house and narrow bed, another Consort also, one Myrto, daughter of
that Aristides surnamed the Just, but equaly poor with himself. This certainly
could not but be somewhat harsh and disagreeable to a man already entered into
the confines of old age, and understanding the pleasures of serenity and
repose: and yet I must not imagine it to have been at all difficult to the
wisdom of our Socrates, whose tranquillity appears to have been elevated, like
the head of mount Athos, above the tempest of feminin contentions, jealousies
and impertinences, and his Mind incapable of pe^turbations. However, he put not
private cares into the balance against a duty to the Public: but chose to be a
good Citisen, by increasing Posterity, though he were sure thereby to multiply
his own domestic incommodities.

Acting by this infallible principle of Justice (which is, as Plato calls it,
(...), the greatest of human goods, and Mother of all other virtues) and fully
persuaded of the divinity and immortality of the Soul (which is the fundament
of all Religion) and of future rewards and punishments: the wonder is the less,
that this admirable man was able, both to trample upon all the splendid and
precious things of this momentany life, and to bid defiance to all the
terrible: for, secure in his own innocence, and confident of happiness to come;
'twas less difficult to him either to contemn dangers, or resist temptations.
Nay, to do him right, neither could this Temperance, nor that Fortitude be at
all difficult to him, who by long use, and continual practice, had exalted them
from Virtues into Habits.

In the first, he appeared to be so perfect, that tho as a man he could not but
feel the motions and solicitations of Corporeal Appetites, yet none of them
dared to rebel against the Sovereignty of Reason, by whose power he always
both ruled and bounded them: nor could even a good Soul separated from its
body, and delivered from all encumbrances of Matter, have acted more sedately,
or been less incommodated with Passions. In a word, in his whole life, he
seemed not only unconcerned in, but insensible of the vain appearance of human
things.

Being thus impenetrable to Cupidities, it may be worth our labor to enquire
also, how strong he was against Fear. That we may therefore take the true hight
of his Courage, let us (if it please Your Lordship) observe his deportment at
the bar, in the prison, and at his death.

At the Tribunal, we hear his Constancy no less than his Innocence triumphing
over the power and malice of his combined Accusers: the greatest hurt they can
do to me, says he, is to think it possible to hurt me; since God takes care of
Good men, and they therefore can never be violated by wicked men. To a friend
whispering in his ear, that his Judges had before resolved to doom him to
death: he answers softly and with a smile (but such a smile as retained an air
of Gravity and Dignity) and has not Nature passed the same doom upon them?
Retiring after his condemnation, Adieu my friends, says he, I am now going to
suffer death, ye to enjoy life: God alone knows, which of the two is better.

In the Prison, we find him despoiled of whatever Fortune could take from him,
his body covered with rags and laden with chains, his legs galled and
cramped with fetters, his eyes entertained with no objects but a wife and
Infant weeping: and yet for all this, we hear no complaints, no lamentations,
no groans, no not so much as one sigh come from him; but discourses consolatory
and divine. Good God, how great is the power of Wisdom! how invincible the
courage of a Soul armed with virtue! If this man's condition be Happy (as
certainly it is) how much are Mortals generaly mistaken in the notion of
Happiness! Here we behold a show of Misery in extremity: but realy there is no
such thing. For if you look more intently upon Socrates, you shall discern in
him all the signs of alacrity, all the characters of Joy. To see him so
unconcerned, a man would think, he were not a Sufferer, but a Comforter. There
is (Your Lordship well knows) a sort of natural Authority inherent in the very
Persons of some men, resulting perhaps from certain characters of a great Mind,
which heroic virtue imprints upon their countenance: and this as it corrects
the imperfections of nature, where it meets with any; so does it likewise adorn
the nakedness of its owner exposed to the outrages of fortune, illuminate his
dungeon, and strike fear and reverence into the heart of even Executioners; as
you may remember it did into his, who came to kill that noble Roman, Caius
Marius. Now this indelible Character of true Greatness, do I clearly perceive
in the face of our Hero's, with its rays enlightening the obscurity of his
prison, consecrating his disgraces, chains and rags, and rendering his
afflictions holy and venerable. Nor can his Executioner endure the flashes of
it, without astonishment, veneration and tears: and you may hear him, after a
little recollection of himself, sobbing forth this acknowledgement. Farewell
Socrates, says he, The most generous and best of Men that ever came into this
place. Which words being imperfectly pronounced, he instantly retires; and
unable to perform the duty of his place, he sends in another with the poison.

Which being presented to Socrates, behold with what calmness of Spirit, what
gravity of aspect, and how steady a hand he receives it, and drinks, as if that
draught were to extinguish, not his life, but thirst. Nor did his Fortitude
grow cold with his blood, or sink with his vital powers; for even in the
extreme agony of death, in the last pulse of his heart, when the vital flame
ceased to warm him: then did the flame of his Courage still continue, and
animated him to breath forth words that signify, his dissolution was most
grateful to him, as a deliverance from the Sickness of Mortality, and passage
to immortal Happiness. Which I am verily persuaded, he now enjoys: his whole
life seeming to me, as Erasmus (in (...)) ingenuously declared it did to him,
nothing but a great Example of justice, temperance and patience; so that if
ever any among the Ethnics came near to the perfection of a Christian life, it
cannot be denied but Socrates was the man. It is not (I profess) my custom to
address my prayers to any but God alone, who (I am most certain) both hears,
and has power to grant my petitions: and yet I blush not to confess, that
whenever I read what Plato, Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius, Eunapius Sardianus
among the Greeks, and Cicero and Seneca among the Latins, have written in
commemoration of the admirable virtues of this righteous man; I find my self
strongly inclined to exclame, O sancte Socrates ora pro nobis! an ejaculation
expressly owned even by Erasmus himself, whom Your Lordship well knows to have
been free enough from Superstition: nor rashly to be condemned; nam fortasse
latius se diffundit Spiritus Christi, quam nos interpretamur; and multi sunt in
consortio Sanctorum, qui non sunt apud nos in catalogo.

As the actions of our Socrates in the theater of life were a wonder of virtue
to even the best and wisest Philosophers, so was his Exit truly glorious. But
how infinitely more glorious ought we to esteem it, if we assent to the
judgment of those many pious and learned men, who conceive him to have died a
Martyr of the Unity of God? Whether he did so, or not; I have neither place
here, nor will to dispute. Leaving therefore that nice question to be decided
by Your Lordship after you have revolved his Apology; and in the mean time
humbly deprecating your displeasure at my prolixity: I shall add only toward
the excuse of it, this brief remark; that the very ashes of things soveraignly
excellent are for ever august and venerable.

I am, my good Lord, Your Lordships infinitely obliged and equaly devote
Servant.
January 8. 1673.
L. Annaei Senecae de Socrate testimonium.
SI exemplum desideratis, accipite Socratem, perpessicium senem, per omnia
aspera jactatum, invictum tamen and panpertate, quam graviorem illi domestica
onera faciebant; and laboribus, quos militares quoque pertulit, and quibus ille
domi exercitus, five uxorem ejus spectes moribus feram, lingua petulantem; sive
liberos indociles, and matri quam patri similiores. Sic fere aut in bello fuit,
aut in tyrannide, aut in liberate, bellis ac tyrannis saeviore. Viginti and
septem annis pugnatum est: post finita arma, triginta tyrannis noxae dedita est
civitas, ex quibus plerique inimici erant. Novissima damnatio est, sub
gravissimis hominibus impleta. Objecta est and religionum violatio, and
juventatis corruptela: quam immittere in Deos, in patres, in remp. dictus est.
Post haec carcer, and venenum. Haec usque eo animum Socratis non moverunt, ut
ne vultum quidem moverint. Illam mirabilem laudem, and singularem, usque ad
extremum servavit: non hilariorem quisquam, non tristiorem Socratem vidit:
aequalis fuit in tanta inaequalitate fortunae. Epistol. 104.

Marc. Antoninus Imperator, (...), lib. 7. Sect. 66. Ex versione Gatakeri
nostrat.
UNde constat nobis Socratem clara fuisse reliquisque praestantiore indole?
neque enim hoc sufficit, quod mortem gloriosissime oppetebat; aut quod cum
Sophistis acutissime disserebat; aut quod in frigore summo patientissime sub
dio pernoctabat: aut quod Saliminium illum sistere jussus, resistere
generosissime malebat; aut quod per compita fastuose incedebat (quod tamen an
verum fuerit, merito dubitaveris) verum illud considerare oportet, quomodo
affectam animam habuerit Socrates; utrum hoc contentus agere poterat, quod in
rebus humanis justus, in divinis pius existeret, nec malitiae cujusquam frustra
indignatus, nec cujusquam inscitiae assentatus, nec ab universo assi^natum
quicquam, aut tanquam peregrinum quid excipiens, aut tanquam intolerandum
sustinens, nec carunculae affectionibus mentem passus coaffici.

Quintiliani de Socratis Apologia judicium, Institut. Orator. lib. XI. cap. 1.
QVis nescit nihil magis profuturum ad absolutionem Socrati fuisse, quam si
esset usus illo judiciali genere defensionis, and oratione summissa
conciliasset judicum animos sibi, crimenque ipsum solicit redarguisset? Verum
id eum minime decebat: ideoque sic egit, ut qui poenam suam honoribus summis
esset aestimaturus. Maluit enim vir Sapientissimus, quod superesset ex vita,
sibi perire, quam quod praeterisset. Et quando ab hominibus sui temporis parum
intelligebatur, posterorum se judicijs reservavit; brevi detrimento jam ultimae
senectutis, aevum seculorum omnium consecutus. Itaque quamvis Lysias, qui tum
in dicendo praestantissimus habebatur, defensionem illi scriptam attulisset,
uti ea noluit: cum bonam quidem, sed parum sibi convenientem judicasset.

Advertisement Of the Printer to the READER.
THo it has so happened, that the Errors of this impression be for the most part
only Litteral, such as every Judicious man may as easily correct as find: yet
because the Book perhaps may come into the hands of some whose Understandeng is
not incapable to be retarded or seduced by even the smallest Pseudographical
rubs cast in their way by the incurious Compositor; I therefore think it one
part of my duty, so far to prevent the offens, and assist the apprehension of
Readers of this sort, as to entreat them, first to pardon the faults that shall
occur to them in reading, and then to amend them (so many at least, as I have
in a hasty review observed) in this manner.

Page 12. line 23. read Prodicus Ceus, p. 15. l. 22. r. how vehement, p 19. l.
1. r. Dithyrambics, p. 22. l. 11. r. delighted, p. 24. l. 24. r youth, p. 44.
l. 14. r. recalls, p. 46. l. 10. r. assenting, p. 56. l. 9. of the margin r.
(...), p. 76. l. 2. r soon leads them, p. 109 l. 58. r. nearer to sapience, p.
135. l. 6 r train of his thoughts, p 135. l. 6. r. train of his thoughts, p.
139. l. 20. r. is it not clearly evinced, p. 151. l. 3. r. q^^ quoniam c^^ss
sunt, p. 157. l. 1. r. conjuncture of, p. 168. l. 12. r. d^scens^^^s, p. 193.
l. 19. r. relating, p. 199. l. 4. r. came thereby, and l. 6. r broad
kneading-tubb, p 213. l 15. r. the ration of even, and l. 26. r. the number
Three, p. 235. l. 21. r. good omens and gratulation, p. 254. l. 9. r.
Sanctiones, and l. 13. r. Deos, p. 259. l. 17. r. Epoch Marmorea, p. 263. l.
6. r. (...), p 265. l. 4. r. praefatus Deum p. 266. l. 9. r. Signification and
Efficacy, p. 280. l. 12. r. umbrage of irreverence. p 290. l. 18. r.
volitantque haec littora circum, p. 296. l. ult. r. Elpenor.

As for the more venial Errors committed in either omission or misplacing of
Interpunctions and other signs of Pauses; having found them to be neither very
numer^us, nor much injurious to the Authors Sense, I leave them to the candid
Correction of the competent Reader.

SOCRATES HIS APOLOGY.
The ARGUMENT Out of SERRANVS.
SOCRATES being accused of Impiety by Melitus, Anitus, and Lycon, before the
People of Athens, by this Oration defends his Cause: And he so pleads, that he
not only evinceth this their accusation to be false and malicious; but also
clearly shows, that on the contrary, he deserved well of the Republic, and
was therefore worthy not of punishment, but reward. He moreover declares, that
it was a Duty divinely imposed upon him, to reprove and convince Men; more
particularly such, who being puffed up with a vain Opinion of their own Wisdom,
were highly conceited of themselves. The infection of which ambitious folly he
affirms to be diffused amongst Men of all Orders: But that alone is true
Wisdom, when men acknowledge their Ignorance, (that is, as he in most proper
words defines, that Humane wisdom is of small value, or none at all;) and
firmly hold, that God alone is wise. Hereupon he declares, that himself had
been judged by the Oracle wiser than all other men, for no other reason but
this, That he differently from the custom of all others, had no esteem of
himself, and thought he knew nothing certainly, but that he knew nothing. Then
he makes the Author of that his Office or Duty of reprehending and informing
Men, to be God: by whose certain command he avows he did whatsoever he had done
in that kind. And this Command of God he calls [(...),] a Spiritual
Intelligence, a Voice, a Sign: By those words, in way of excellency, designing
not any power of Human Wit, but a certain Divine and extraordinary
signification; and (as we commonly call it) Inspiration, whereby he was
secretly admonished, what he ought to do, and what not. He calls it Daemonium,
a spiritual Intelligence; Because he conceived that Power to come, not from
Man, but from God: and otherwise terms the same, Vocem and Signum, in respect
of that private admonition, which he affirms has been given to him by a
perspicuous Voice, by manifest and true Dreams, and by other ways of
Intimation. Thus much we briefly and plainly (according to what we could
collect from the words of Plato) observe concerning the Daemonium of Socrates;
That we might not be obliged to amuse our selves with the Mysterious Comments
of various Interpreters. By the auspice therefore, and suggestions of this his
Divine Dictator, Socrates avers, that even from his Childhood he had ordered
and governed his whole life, and made it his grand business to convince of
Ignorance, Men inflated with the ambitious confidence of Science. From this
contagious Fountain he derives that torrent of hatred with which very many of
his Fellow-Citizens now sought to overwhelm him; And from thence he deduces his
present accusation. Nevertheless, he professes to be immovably fixed in this
resolution, always to obey the Counsel of God, nor ever to leave any part of
that his principal duty unperformed, though it should be conjoined with
manifest danger of his life: The loss whereof he feared not, nor any thing
else, except this, lest he should be found not to have conformed himself to the
Dictamen of God. Resting upon this resolve, he denies that he would by Prayers
and Entreaties (as was the manner of the Athenians) beg favor and pardon from
his Judges: But commending the issue of his Cause to God, and to the will of
his Judges, would constantly persevere in his own determinate course. Therefore
when it was left to his own option, whether he would go into exile, or die; he
chose rather to die: testifying, that even in Death it self, he should not fail
of certain Felicity; being fully persuaded that God took care of him and his
concernments. This was the Condemnation of Socrates; from whence Plato
endeavors to demonstrate, that he was undeservedly accused of Impiety. Thus
then Socrates suffered Death, for that he refuted the false Doctrines of Men
concerning Religion: Though it be not to be doubted, but that he was ignorant
of the true Religion taught by the sacred word of God. Yet among Ethnics there
was this clear testimony extant of an Ethnic Philosopher, to take from them all
excuse of Ignorance: Since besides that natural knowledge, which God has
engraven upon the minds of all men, there appeared in a most populous City, and
the noblest School of Learning, this eminent witness, endowed with this
peculiar Gift, that he would rowz up men, sleeping profoundly in vain opinion
of themselves, and show them their ignorance, wherein they were shamefully
involved: the knowledge of this matter also being at length disseminated not
only through all Greece, but through the whole world, by this writing of Plato.
This therefore is the Theme, and this the Economy or Method of this Oration.

THE ORATION.
HOw your minds, His Exordium; wherein he weakneth the credit of his Accusers,
by charging them with manifold falsehoods.
Athenians, are affected and inclined by the harangue of my Accusers, I know
not: but I my self am so sensibly touched with it, that I have almost forgot my
self. So fitly and advantagiously for the gaining of belief and persuasion have
they spoken: tho (to comprehend all in one word) they have spoken nothing of
truth. But among many falsehoods they alleged, I chiefly admire this one, that
they have admonished you, diligently to beware lest you be seduced by me; as if
I were singularly powerful in the faculty of speaking: and that they have not
blushed to urge that, wherein they will soon be found guilty of palpable lying,
when first I shall be found unfit to speak to you: this seems to me the most
impudent of all. Unless perhaps their meaning be, He renounces all eloquence
but truth: to engage the benevolence and attention of the Judges.
that he is powerful in the art of speaking, who speaks truly. For if this be
their sense, I profess my self to be an Orator, but not according to their
opinion. But they (as I said) have delivered nothing of truth; from me on the
contrary you shall receive nothing of falsehood. And yet I swear by Jove, you
shall not from me hear a formal Oration composed of the elegances of words, and
Ornaments of sentences, (as theirs was,) but plain truths expressed in
unstudied language and vulgar phrases. But the things I am going to speak, I
believe to be equitable and just: nor let any among you expect other from me.
For it is not fit that I should at these years, come to you, like a boy, with
fiction and Romances.

This one thing I earnestly beg and require of you, (...), or Pre-ocupation;
where in he excuses his plain and familiar way of pleading, by his being
inconversant in Forensian controversies, and by his custom, which is equivalent
to Law: as also by this, that a Judge ought to consider, not the elegancy, but
truth of a defense.
that if you, O Athenians, hear me making my defense in the same way of speech,
and manner of reasoning I have used both in the Forum, and at the Tables of the
Bankers, (in which, and other places most of you have seen me) you neither
wonder thereat, nor raise a tumult thereupon. For the truth of the matter is,
this is the first time I appear at your Tribunal, being now more than 60 years
of age: so that I may well be a stranger in this way of pleading causes. Allow
me therefore the same favor as if I really were a stranger; seeing I shall use
both the same words, and the same form of speech, wherein I have been educated.
This also I beg of you (and it seems most equitable you should grant it to me)
that you consider not the manner of my pleading, whether it be rude or
convenient: but diligently examine, and with all possible attention of mind
perpend, whether the matter or substance of it be just or unjust. For this is
the virtue of a Judge; as the virtue of an Orator is, to deliver truths.

The Partition of his plea, according to the diversity of his accusations.
First then, O ye Athenians, I am obliged to answer to those lies, that are in
the first place objected to me; and so to my first Accusers: then to my last
accusations, and my last Adversaries. For many have accused me to you, and long
since in the space of many years; yet have they never delivered a word of truth
in all their charges: and these indeed I more fear, than I do Anitus and his
fellows, though they likewise press me with the weight of their enmity and
malicious combination. Yet the others truly are more pressing and more
powerful, who have even from your tender age, O men, persuaded you, that the
accusations are true, which they objected against me falsely; namely, that there
is one Socrates, a wise man forsooth, and one who searches into the nature of
sublime things, and enquireth into all things under the earth; who can by his
Sophistical way of speaking, make a bad speech pass current with the hearers
for a good one. These men, O Athenians, having spread abroad this rumor
concerning me, these (I say) are vehement and prevalent accusers. For they who
give ear to these scandals, presently entertain a belief, that such persons as
they represent me to be, conversant and curious in the study of Natural Causes,
hold that there are no Gods. Besides this, the number of my accusers of this
sort is great; and their accusations are of a long date, insinuated and
ingraffed into your minds, in that age which is credulous and easy to admit
any persuasions, when most of you were boys, or rather little children: so that
they accused me behind my back, and while I had no compurgator, no advocate to
vindicate me; and (what is extremely unjust, and unreasonable) I was not
permitted either to know, or to produce the names of my accusers. Only there
was a confused whisper, a darksom muttering in the general, that it was a
certain Comical Poet. And they who by envy and calumny traduce me to you, and
breed in your minds an odium against me; have so strongly possessed themselves
with the crimes objected to me, that they draw others also into the same
persuasion: but those no where appear in the light. For I can by no means
obtain, that any one of them should be brought hither to confront me, that I
might have the liberty and opportunity to confute him: but am forced, while I
make my defense against them, and endeavor to convince them of forgery; to
combat as it were in the dark, no man appearing in the Lists to answer me.
Know this therefore, and consider with your selves, that I have two sorts of
accusers: some who have but even now accused me; others again who have been
long versed in this clandestine practice, of whom I speak: and think that I am
obliged to make answer to those in the first place. Let it be so then, that I
must form a defense for my self, and do my utmost devoir, in this short time
allowed me, to remove and extirpate that sinister opinion, which has for a
long time remained deeply rooted in your minds to my prejudice. This I would
wish might be effected, to your and my own benefit: for in this my defense, I
should desire to effect somewhat more. But that I conceive to be weighty and
difficult: nor am I ignorant what will be the event of my Trial. Yet let the
issue be such, as may be grateful to God; I must obey the Law, and answer.

Fetching then the first rise of my wrongs from their Original, let us see in
good earnest what is that accusation, from whence this Indictment drawn against
me, has proceeded; whereupon Melitus relying thus charge me. Let it be so.
What did my adversaries charge me with? for their [(...), i. e.] their Libel of
accusation ratified on both sides by mutual oath, is to be thoroughly read.

SOCRATES, The State, and several heads of his first accusation.
Contrary to right and equity, does more curiously investigate those things
that are under the Earth and in Heaven: and makes a bad speech, by delivering
it, good: and teaches others also the same.

This forsooth is the Libel of the Action, and form of the Indictment. The like
unto which you may see in a Comedy of Aristophanes, (...).
where is brought in the person of one Socrates, who pretends to walk in the
air, and plays the Droll in a Farce of many other extravagances. Wherein I am,
He disavows that sublime science imputed to him.
Athenians, neither little nor much skilled. Which I speak not out of design to
condemn that Art, or any man conversant therein; that I be not by Melitus
involved in that crime, and made to undergo his punishment. But true it is,
Athenians, I had never any converse with things of this kind; whereof I am able
to produce many witnesses: and I would entreat you, that you inform each other,
and enquire among your selves, who have ever heard me discoursing of any such
matters; and there are many present, who have frequently heard me in free and
familiar conferences. Declare therefore openly, whether any of you have ever
heard me speaking little or much of these things: and from thence you shall
understand, that the like credit is due to other fictions that very many
scatter abroad concerning me.

But certainly of these nothing is true.

And denies that he ever either usurped the Authority of a public Teacher, or
exacted reward for his private instruction of youth.
Enquire also, whether you have heard from any man, that I ever endeavored to
teach men, and exact money: neither is this true. Forasmuch as I ever held it a
thing highly meritorious and honorable for a man to teach and instruct others
in Learning and Virtue, as Gorgias the Leontine, and Prodicus, Ceus, and
Hippias the Elean have done. For each of these are able, to what Cities soever
they travel, to persuade young men, (and yet it was lawful for them frankly to
converse with whomsoever they liked best of their own Citizens,) that quitting
the converse of all others, they would entirely give up themselves to their
instructions, and moreover give them money, in acknowledgment of the benefit
received from their discipline, and to requite the favor. There is here
present also another certain man, a Parian, and wise, whose residence in this
City was grateful to me. For I by chance lighted upon a certain person, who
gave more money to Sophists, than all others; namely Gallias the Son of
Hipponichus; and of him I asked this question. Thou have two Sons, Gallias. If
those thy two Sons were Calves or Colts, doubtless we should have some one set
to be their Tutor, and a reward given to him, to teach them, each according to
his particular Genius and capacity; (for he should be skilful in Horsmanship,
or in Agriculture) whereas now tho they be men, thou yet take no care to
provide them a Teacher and Governor. Who is there knowing and expert in this
art of Humanity and Civility? I suppose, that being a Father of Sons, thou have
considered of this matter. Is there (said I) any man fit for this charge, or
not? and for how much does he teach? Evenus (answers he) the Parian, O
Socrates; and his demand is five Attic Minae. And I presently commended Evenus,
as a happy man, if he were really endowed with this most useful art, and
taught so studiously and dexterously. Truly I should glory, and boast my self,
were I knowing in these things: but I profess my self, Athenians, altogether
unacquainted with them. Here perhaps some one of you may object; He derives the
popular hate oppressing him, from his frequent reprehension of men; as if he
thought himself wiser than all the rest of mankind.
but, Socrates, what is the matter then, from whence these criminations have
been produced against thee? For unless thou did often do something very
remarkable, singular and very different from the custom of others; so great a
rumor would not have flown abroad concerning thee. For why should this ignominy
have fallen upon thee, if thou had done nothing strange and unvulgar? Tell
therefore what it is, lest we, not understanding the matter, give a rash
judgment of thee. Who urges this, may seem to have reason for it. And I
therefore will endeavor to lay before you what it is, that has procured to me
both a name and blame. Hear ye then, and tho to some of you I may seem to jest
and droll; yet be most confident of this, that I will declare to you the whole
truth. For I Athenians, have upon no other ground, but that of some certain
Wisdom, acquired this name. But what Wisdom? that perhaps, which is humane
wisdom. For with that I seem really to be endowed. These perchance, whom I
lately named, may be enriched with some greater wisdom than that which is
incident to man. To this I can oppose nothing; for such wisdom I understand
not. But whosoever says this, does lie, and say it on purpose to raise an
odium against me by calumny. Nor be ye Athenians discomposed, if I shall seem
to declare to you something that is great and remarkable. For I will deliver
nothing from my self, but refer to him who is above all exception, who will
himself communicate the same things to you. For of my wisdom, if I have any,
such as it is, He justifies his practice of reprehending others, by alleging
the express command of God, whom he ought to obey.
I will give you for a witness that Delphic God. Cherephon ye all well know. He
was my familiar companion even from the time when we were boys together; and
also your Countryman: who both fled, and returned with you: and you cannot
but remember of what humor and disposition he was; who vehement, whatsoever he
undertok. And indeed when on a time he came to Delphos, he had the boldness to
consult the Oracle about this matter. Be not (I beseech you) Athenians, moved
to a tumult by what I shall speak. He inquired of the God, if there were any
man wiser than my self: and Pythia answered, none was wiser. The truth hereof,
the Brother of that Cherephon will attest: for he is dead. Now seriously
consider, I pray, why I recount this to you. For I am coming to explain the
cause, whence this calumny against me first arose. When I had heard of
Cherephons adventure, I thus thought in my mind. What does the God say? or what
does he signify by these words? For I esteem not my self to be wise neither
little nor much. What then can be his meaning, when he affirms that I am the
wisest of men? Lie he does not, for that is to a God impossible. And long did I
remain in doubt, profoundly considering his words: then not without difficulty
I converted my self to a certain disposition of this kind. I came to one of
those who seemed to be wise, in hope I might here convince the saying of the
Oracle, and so commonstrate that he, not I (as the God had said) was the wiser.
When therefore I had together with him examined the matter, (I need not name
the man: he is one of those who are employed in Governing the Commonwealth,
and managing Affairs of State) when (I say) I had conferred with him, somewhat
of the like nature, Athenians, happened to me. He seemed to me indeed to be
accounted wise, both by others, and those many, and by himself chiefly; but was
not really so. Then I endeavored to demonstrate to him, that though he thought
himself wise, yet he was not so in reality. Hereby I fell into the displeasure
and ill will of him, and of very many others who were present: But retiring
thence, I thought with my self, that I was wiser than that man, because neither
of us seemed to know anything Noble or Excellent: only he (thought I to my
self) believes he knows something, when he knows nothing; but I, as I know
nothing, so I think I know nothing. Herein therefore I took my self to be a
little wiser of the two: in that I deceived not my self with an Opinion that I
knew that, whereof really I was ignorant. After this I addressed to another,
who seemed yet wiser than the first: but found no difference betwixt them, as
to wisdom. Whereupon I incurred his hatred also, and that of many of his
Admirers. Then I went likewise to others; being sensible of my ill success, and
grieved sufficiently therewith, as much fearing lest I might stir up hatred and
envy against my self: Nevertheless I conceived my self under an absolute
necessity of highly valuing the voice of God, and turning my self to all parts,
by going to all those who thought they knew something, that in the end I might
explore the true sense of the Oracle. But I Swear to you Athenians, (...); per
Canem, by the Doggstarr; An Oath used by some Grecians, even Philosophers, but
probably derived from the old Egyptians, among whom the Doggstar, the brightest
of all fixed stars was adored as a Divine Numen; as well because the Exundation
of their Nile began at the rising of that Star, as because they believed their
Isis to have been stellified into (...), this Celestial Dog.
(for I must declare the Truth) that while I persued my scrutiny according to
the voice of God, I met with the like Fortune; discovering, that such who
attained to the greatest name and glory, seemed to come vastly short of wisdom:
but others, accounted inferior to them, were more disposed to, and better
qualified for the acquisition of it. It Is fit and pertinent, that I show you my
Errors, what great pains I took, to render the Faith and Authority of the
Oracle Sacred and indubitate with me. After these Statesmen and Grandees, I
addressed my self to Poets, and Writers of Tragedies and Dithyrambios, and
others of the same Tribe: as if here I should perspicuously, and by Surprise
(as they say) discover, that I was more unskilful, more ignorant than they.
Taking therefore their Poems into my hands, and noting those things they seemed
to have written with greater subtilty, and higher strains of Wit; I diligently
asked them, what they could say, that I might at the same time learn something
from them? I blush to tell you the truth, Athenians: but do it I must, though
very briefly: all that were present almost spoke more favorably of those
Poems, than they who had made them. So I soon found concerning Poets, that they
perform what they do, not by the power of Wisdom, but by a certain impetus of
Nature, and fury of Divine incitement; as Prophets foretell things by Divine
instinct or Enthusiasm, prophesying many Noble and Notable things, but not
understanding so much as one word of what they deliver. With the same affection
Poets appeared to me to be inspired and incited: and I discovered likewise,
that they, upon the account of their faculty in Poetry, think themselves the
wisest of all men, even in other things; whereof notwithstanding they are
utterly ignorant. From these therefore I departed, as from the former, and with
the same reason too: thinking my self to excel, as the Politicians, so likewise
the Poets. At length I betook my self to Artificers of Mechanic Works:
conscious to my self, that in those I knew nothing at all, ( I comprehend all
in a word) and well understanding, that I should find those plain People to
have knowledge of many and excellent things. Nor did my opinion deceive me, for
they knew things that I understood not, and were so far wiser than I. Yet even
the most eminent Artificers seemed involved in the very same Fault with the
Poets; in that they also, because they had shown themselves great Masters in
their Mechanics, would every one be accounted most skilful also in other even
the greatest matters; and this Fault of theirs wholly darkens the lights of
their skill. Wherefore I interrogated my self also, about the sense of the
Oracle, whether I had rather be as I was; neither wise with their wisdom, nor
unskilful with their unskilfulness: or be, as they are, comparated or disposed
both ways; and I answered my self and the Oracle, that it was more commodious
and profitable to me, to be as I am. From this Disquisition, Athenians, many
offenses, and those most difficult too, and grievous, have come against me; and
thence as many imputations, scandals, and criminations, and calumnies: and so
it came to pass, that I was named the wise man. For they who are in my company,
daily suppose me to be singularly knowing in those matters, wherein I reprehend
and evince other men's errors. His Explanation of the sense of the Oracle.
But it seems, Athenians, that God alone is wise: and the sense of the Oracle
this, that Humane wisdom is to be very little or nothing esteemed. And the
Oracle expressly nominated Socrates for no other reason but this, that by
misusing my name, it might propose me as an example: as if it would say, this
man, O Mortals, is the wisest of ye all, who, as Socrates, well knows, that as
to wisdom, he is not to be valued at all. Being then of this temper of mind, I
to this very day enquire strictly every where, and according to the words of
that Divine Oracle, seek both among my Fellow-Citizens, and Strangers, if I can
find a man worthy to be reputed wise: but when I discern any not to be really
wise, truly out of Conformity to God, I clearly demonstrate him to be not wise.
And being wholly Devoted to this good Work, I have no leisure allowed me,
neither to Transact any public affair of moment, nor to regulate my own
Domestic concerns; but am cast into the streights of profound poverty, by
reason of that my obedience to God. Besides this, Another cause of the vulgar
Odium cast upon him, viz. that many Noble youths were delighted with his
convincing discourses, and imitated him in reproving others, who taking Offense
thereat, reflected upon him, as the corruptor of Youth.
some Youths born of most Wealthy Families, and having leisure enough,
following me of their own Free Will, are highly deighted when they hear men
reproved and convicted by me; and they also, in imitation of me, do themselves
often endeavor to refute others: nor is it to be doubted, but they find a very
great multitude of such, who believe themselves to understand and know many
things, when yet in truth they know few or none at all. Hereupon these who are
refuted, grow angry, not with them, but me: and say, there is one Socrates, a
man of most impure and dangerous manners, who corrupts young men: and if any
ask them, whether it be by teaching or doing any thing unjustifiable, that I
corrupt youth; they can alledg nothing in particular, because indeed they know
not wherein to instance: nevertheless that they may not seem to be at a loss,
they charge me with those imputations that are laid upon almost all
Philosophers, and in every man's mouth, that forsooth I am excessively curious
in searching into the nature of things both sublime and under the earth, that I
think there are no Gods, and that I can by my Sophistical arguments turn an ill
Speech into a good one. They will not ( I believe) declare the Truth, because
they manifestly appear to pretend to know things, whereof notwithstanding they
are altogether ignorant. For they who traduce me, being men ambitious and
vehement, many in number, and furnished with Harangues artificially composed to
gain belief; they have filled your Ear, both heretofore and now, with a charge
designed against me. Among these, Melitus, Anytus, and Lycon have assaulted me:
Melitus on behalf of Poets; Anytus in the name of Artificers and Politicians;
Lycon as Champion of Orators, enraged against me. I should wonder then (as I
said in the beginning) if I should be able in so short a time to dissolve such
a charge, which made up of so great calumnies, is grown inveterate and hard.
These are truths, Athenians; so that I have concealed nothing from you, nor
detracted or evaded any the least point, though I well knew I should incur
their hatred. Which is an Argument, that I speak Truths, and that that is my
Crimination, and those the causes of it: and whether now or hereafter you
inquire into these things, you shall certainly find them to be as I have
represented them to you. Thus far then let this be taken for a full answer
before you, against the Crimes charged upon me by my first Accusers.

To Melitus, a good man, and (as he says himself) a lover of his City, Having
answered the Articles of his first charge, he now converts to the Second; which
he Recites.
and to my last Adversaries, I will endeavor to Answer anon. Meanwhile let us
resume the Libel of Accusation plotted against me, and ratified by an Oath
mutually given and taken by all of the Combination (for some Accusers there
are, distinct from the former) which speaks thus.

Socrates, contrary to Right and Equity, does corrupt Touth; the Gods which the
City judges to be Gods, he thinks to be no Gods; and introduces new Powers
Divine. This is my Accusation; the Heads whereof let us examine singly.

He says first, that I do contrary to Right and Equity, in that I corrupt
Youth: The first Article thereof; which he dissolves: demonstrating it to be
objected to him by Miletus merely out of malice, not of respect to the virtuous
Education of Youth, which Melitus neither understood, nor studied.
and I affirm that Miletus himself dotth contrary to Right and Equity, in that
he Jesteth in a serious mattter: while he brings another into peril of losing
his life, pretending himself to be highly solicitous, and to labor exceedingly
about these matters, which have never been any part of his care [perhaps never
(unless upon this occasion) in his thoughts:] and that this is so, I will try
to demonstrate to you. Come hither, O Melitus, and tell me, do thou take care
of nothing else, but that young men may become virtuous to the highest degree?
Very well. Now tell these, who may make these young men better: for this thou
must needs know, since thou have so long and deeply considered the matter. For
me thou have (as thou say) taken already corrupting them: and upon that
account now violently bring me, by a studied and formal Accusation, to be
judged by these. Tell us then, who may instruct and improve youth in Virtue?
inform us, and show these men who it is. Thou see, Melitus, thou art silent,
and have not a word to reply: Nor does it seem to misbecome thee; and so is a
just Argument thou never troubledst thy Head with this care: yet tell me, in
good earnest, who may make these better? The Laws. Of that I enquire not: but
what man, who first has known also this very thing, namely the Laws. These
Judges, Socrates. How say thou Melitus? can these teach young men, and
refine them? yes. Can all these, or some of them do that work, and others not?
All. Thou say well, by Juno; and do commemorate good store of those who
are able to help. But what? can these Auditors also reform men? They can. And
the Senators too? The Senators also. Well then, Melitus; we must now see
whether they who make Speeches to the people, corrupt young men, or reform
them. And these too. It seems then, Athenians, that all render young men good
and honest, except my self, who alone debauch them. Say thou so? I again and
again affirm it. Thou imprintest upon me a brand of great infelicity indeed:
but answer me, have thou the same Opinion of Horses also? do all men make them
better, one only excepted, who corrupts them? or the contrary to this, is there
any one who can do it: or few skilful in Horsemanship, but on the contrary
many, who while they dress, manage and use Horses, wholly spoil them? is it not
so of both Horses, and all other Animals? Certainly it is, whether thou and
Anytus affirm or deny it. Since young men would attain to a certain very high
felicity, if there were only one to corrupt them, and all besides would improve
them, But thou, Melitus have sufficiently demonstrated, that thou take no
care of young men: and clearly show thy negligence, that thou have never
labored in these matters, whereof thou accusest me. The falsitie of the same
Article evinced also by this; that if Socrates had corrupted Youth, Melitus
ought, according to the prescript of the Law, first to have privately admonished
him, before he had accused him thereof to the Magistrates: but this he had
never done: Ergo.
Furthermore Melitus, resolve us this question also by Jove; whether it is
better to dwell among good and sober Citizens, or among evil and debauch?
Answer me, prithee; for I ask nothing difficult. Do not evil men always bring
some Evil upon those who live near them: and on the contrary, good Neighbors
bring good? most certainly. Is there any who had rather receive damage from
those with whom he converseth, than benefit? Answer, prithee; for the Law
commands thee to Answer: Is any willing to suffer Detriment? By no means. Go
too then; seeing thou have hurried me into Judgment, as a corrupter of youth,
and Patron of Vice; do I this willingly, or unwillingly? Willingly, as I
conceive. What then, Melitus? art thou so much Wiser than I? thou a young man,
do thou? so far excel me an old one, as to understand, that evil men bring
evil upon those who chiefly converse with them; but good men bring good? and am
I so great a Fool, as not to understand this, that if I debauch any Familiar, I
shall be in danger of suffering some Evil from him: and so shall be willing to
pull this so great Evil upon my self, as thou say? Herein, Melitus, I believe
thee not, nor (I think) does any man else. Wherefore either I do not corrupt
youth, or I do it against my will: so that thou lie in both. If I corrupt
unwillingly, the Law forbids all such to be brought hither into Judgment, who
have offended unwillingly; but commands they be privately both instructed and
admonished. For manifest it is, that upon instruction, I should cease to do
what I did against my will: but thou have avoided and declined to converse with
me, and to admonish me; and instead of that, forcest me to this place of
Judgment, whither the Law requires only such incorrigible Offenders to be
brought, who need rather Coercion then admonition. But Athenians, this is
evident, what I said before, that Melitus never had any the least care of this
matter.

Yet tell us, Melitus, how thou can prove that I corrupt Youth: A soft and
smooth Transition to the Second Article; viz. that Socrates held there were no
Gods, and introduced others than those the Athenians worshipped; and a
demonstration thereof to be absurd, and repugnant to it self.
is it from the form of the indictment thou have drawn against me; as if I
thought those not to be Gods, whom the City holds to be Gods; and introduced
new Divinities, and by teaching this, corrupt Youth? all this I strongly averr.
By those very Gods then, whereof we now speak, explain thy self more clearly to
me, and to these here present, for I cannot understand, whether thou meanest,
that I teach there are no Gods, (and I hold there are some Gods, nor am I truly
without God, nor do I in that offend) or that I hold not those to be Gods, that
the City believes to be such, but some others. is this that whereof thou
accusest me, that I hold there are others? or this, that I hold there are none.

Prithee, Melitus, why say thou this? do I hold neither the Sun, nor Moon to
be Gods, It Is worthy to be observed, that here Socrates does not plainly deny
the Sun and Moon and other Deities of the Ethnics to be Gods; for that had made
him guilty; but wisely Eludes the danger, by Transferring that Doctrine upon
Anaxagoras; and by reducing his accuser to the point of proving, that he held
there was no God, which is impossible.
as other men think them to be? Not by Jove, Judges: for the Sun he affirms to
be a Stone, and the Moon Earth. Thou think thou accusest Anaxagoras, my
Melitus; and so contemnest these here, and supposest them unlearned, and
ignorant that the Books of Anaxagoras Clazomenius are full of such matters. Now
would Young men learn from me these Doctrines, which they might sometimes pick
up from the Music-room of the Playhouse, for not much more than a dragm? I
allow thee to laugh at Socrates, if he feigned these Opinions to be his, when
they are wholly absurd and foolish. But tell me, by Jove, Melitus,; think
thou that I hold there is no God? I think so. Thou speak things incredible,
Melitus; such as neither thy self do, nor can believe. This man, Athenians,
shows himself injurious and petulant; and to have brought this accusation
merely for Reproach, and from impotency of Youthful Malepartness, and distemper
of Brain. He seems to have proposed a kind of Riddle, or darksom saying, out of
design to tempt me; whether forsooth that Wise man Socrates (says he) will
perceive that I jest, and contradict my self: or I can deceive both him and
those who hear me? For, this man appears to speak things repugnant each to
other, in his very Libel of Accusation: as if he said, Socrates offends in that
he thinks there are no Gods. This truly is the part of a mocker.

Consider with me, how he seems to speak this contradiction; and do thou
Melitus, answer us: and ye remember (as I besought you before) not to be
disordered to a Tumult, Another answer from the Hypothesis of his Adversaries.
They Object, he pretended to Divine inspiration; and yet charge him with
denying Divine poweis; which is a manifest contradiction.
if I speak to you after my usual manner. Is there among Mortals any one man,
Melitus, who thinking there are Humane things, can at the same time not think
there are Men? Let him answer, Athenians; and let there be no disturbance. Is
there any man, Melitus, who holding there is such a thing as Horsemanship, can
hold there are no Horses? can he think there are Ministries of Pipers, and
Modes and Tunes, but no Pipers? certainly there is no man so void of all sense
and reason. If thou refusest to answer, I will answer for thee and others. But
answer me this further; is there any who confesses there are things Divine,
and can yet deny the being of Gods? No man. How slow thou art? thou have hardly
afforded an answer, though forced thereunto by these. But do thou say, that I
hold and teach there are Daemoniae [i. certain Divine Powers] whether New or
Old? if then, as thou confessest, I hold there are Divine Powers, and I Swear
the same in the Bill of my Answer, it is of undeniable necessity, that I hold
also there are Daemones, i. e. Gods. Is not this necessary? It Is so, for I take
thy silence for Confession. But these Daemones, An amplification of the same
Argument from hence, that all Relatives imply the Existence each of other.
do We conceive them to be Gods, or the Sons of Gods. Do thou affirm, or deny
this? I affirm it. If then I hold there are Daemones, as thou affirmest, if
some Gods be Daemones; this is the very thing, wherein I affirm thou do Jest
in obscure Words: when thou say, I think not that there are Gods, and on the
contrary think there are Gods: seeing thou grantest, that I think there are
Daemones.

And if these Daemones be the Sons of Gods, Bastards begotten upon either
Nymphs, or some others, such as are vulgarly talked of; what man can hold them
to be the Sons of Gods, and yet hold that the Gods themselves are not? for it
would be equally absurd, as if a man should affirm there are Sons of Horses, or
of Asses, Mules; but deny Horses and Asses themselves to be in rerum natura.
But Melitus, thou have formed this Accusation against me, either that thou
might Experiment my skill in Reasoning, or certainly because thou had
nothing to object to me as a true crime. Could thou persuade any man who has
but a spark of sense and understanding, that the same man can hold there are
[(...), and (...)] Divine things, and yet at the same time deny there are
either Daemones, or Gods, or Heroes? this cannot be possible. And so,
Athenians, it is not necessary for me further to demonstrate, that I am not in
the least point guilty of the charge contrived by Melitus against me: seeing
these particulars seem abundantly cleared and proved.

Having refuted Melitus in all parts of his Indictment, so that he need not
doubt of Absolution from impartial Judges: he yet shows his danger from the
prejudice and inveterate hatred of the people, always insense to good men.
Now ye may take it for an evident Truth, that (as I said before) among the
multitude also there was raised up very great hatred against me: and that is it
which if any thing do, will take away my life; not Melitus, nor Anitus, but the
very Crimination and Odium of the people; which has destroyed many other good
men, and will likewise destroy many in times to come; for there is nothing of
incommodity, if this plague ended in me. But some one may here ask, Art not
thou ashamed, Socrates, to undertake this so great an Enterprise, which may
bring thee into present danger of Death? and I think I may return him this just
Answer. Thou art grossly mistaken whoever thou art, That a virtuous and valiant
man is not, even by death it self, deterred from doing his duty; which he
confirms by Examples.
if thou think that a brave and valiant man makes any difference betwixt, or
is at all concerned in life or death, where any, though but little Utility may
from thence result: and that he does not, when he undertakes any Enterprise,
thoroughly consider this, whether he therein performs Things just or unjust,
whether he does the work of a Good or Ill man. For according to that thy
reason, all the Heroes, or Half-Gods who dyed at Troy, were wicked and
profligate; as well others, as the Son of Thetis, who that he might suffer
nothing of dishonor, so far contemned death, that after his Mother, the Goddess
her self, opposing his desire of killing Hector, had assured him that if he to
Revenge the slaughter of his Friend and Kinsman Patroclus, should kill Hector,
he should himself be slain; in these very words (if I be not mistaken.)

Hector once killed, thou too shall surely die: He nevertheless persisted in
his Resolution, despising death and danger; he rather feared, lest Surviving,
he should be held dishonest and unfaithful, if he vindicated not the injuries
of his Friends; and thereupon instantly retorts. Let me dye punishing an
injurious man, lest here exposed to the Laughter and scorn of the Greeks, I sit
on Shipboard an unprofitable Burden of the Earth. Think thou that he was
concerned in death, or any other danger. Thus it is, Athenians: in what place
soever any man is set, either by his own Judgment that it will be best, for
most commodious for him, or by command of the Magistrate, he is obliged
therein constantly to persist, whatever danger threatens him; nor is he to
consider any other thing so much as this, how he may avoid Dishonor. Truly
Athenians, I should involve my self in a very great Wickedness, if having
hitherto, even to the Hazard of my Life, constantly maintained my station in
that place, n which they whom you had constituted my Generals, have set me,
whether in Potidaea, or in Amphipolis, or in Delium: He argues a mi^ori ad
wajus, if the Authority of a mortal General, be so great, as to oblige all
under his Command, to maintain their stations with invincible constancy, what
ought we to think, of the authority of God.
I should now at length when God has ordered and constituted me in that degree
[as I have hitherto conceived, and with full persuasion of mind entertained
that Judgment] that it behooves me to spend my life in Philosophizing; and so to
search and thoroughly examine both my self and others: commit a very heinous
sin, if for fear of death, or any other terror, I should abandon my station,
and desert my office. And then certainly any man might drag me to judgment
without injustice, for that I, from fear of death, disobeying the command of
the Oracle, held there are no Gods; and for that I thought my self to be wise,
when I am not so. For to fear Death, O ye men, is nothing else but for a man to
think himself wise, who is far from being so, for he thinks he knows what he
does not know. For no mortal knows, whether Death be not man's greatest good:
and yet they fear death, as if they certainly knew it to be of all Evils the
greatest. And who sees not, that it is an infamous and shameful ignorance, to
think ones self to know that, whereof he is utterly ignorant? But I, Athenians,
herein very much differ from many men: and if I durst affirm my self wiser than
any other in any one thing, it should be in this, that I understand nothing
concerning the state and condition of those below; nor think I know it. This
one thing I certainly know; that to do injury to any man, or to rebel against
our Superiors, whether God or Men, is sinful and shameful. But as for those
things, which I know not whether they be good or evil; certainly I never will
either fear or avoid them, rather than those which I certainly know to be evil.
If therefore repudiating the Since it would be a crime equivalent to Atheism or
^^piety, for him to relinquish his office of reproving men; he declares his
firm resolution to persist in the execution thereof, in contempt of all danger,
yea of death it self.
Counsel of Anytus, who says, that either I ought not to have been brought to
this judgment at all; or that since I am come hither, you are in prudence
obliged to adjudg me to capital punishment: and subjoyns this reason, that if I
escape condemnation, it will come to pass, that your Sons eagerly, and with
zeal pursuing the Lessons I teach them, will all be wholly corrupted: if (I
say) ye should acquit and dismiss me, and say to me, Socrates, at this time we
give no credit at all to Anytus, but acquit and discharge thee; yet on this
condition that henceforth thou never again meddle with this Disquisition, that
is, never more Philosophize; and if thou art found to do it, thou shall
certainly be punished with death: if (as I said) ye would acquit me upon these
conditions; I should tell ye, that indeed I acknowledge and thank ye for your
good will and favor, but choose rather to obey God than you, and that while I
live, and am able to do it, I will never cease to Philosophize, and to teach
and exhort every one of you whom I shall meet, and after my manner to inculcate
thus. And thou, who also art a Citizen (...), sive (ut Ciceroni vocatur)
Conformatio, qua Socrates sibi personam, quae non adest, adesse consingit.
of Athens, a City both exceeding great, and most renowned, as well for wisdom
as power; fear thou not to undertake the menage and conduct of an affair of
importance, and to acquire Honor; that those [advantages] may be accumulated
upon thee; and yet take no care, no consideration of prudence and verity, i.
e. of thy own mind, to render it most accomplished and noble? If any man should
desire contentiously to oppugn this my admonition, and affirm, that he does
take care also of those [most excellent] things, [prudence and truth:] I would
not presently dismiss him, and go my way; but would interrogate, and by strict
examination sift him, and so convince him. If I conceived him to be unfurnished
with virtue, though he should never so confidently own himself to be therewith
adorned; I would rebuke him, and severely tell him, that he has no esteem for
things of greatest moment, but puts too great value upon things vile and
contemptible. And this will I do to every man, young or old, Citizen or
stranger, whomsoever I shall meet: but more studiously to Citizens, as you are
more nearly related to me. For so (believe me) God commands me to do. Nor do I
think a greater good can come to your City, After the divine authority of his
commission to reform men; he here asserts the excellent utility of it.
than that I perform this service to God, For, addicting my self entirely to
this work, and pretermitting all other affairs, I walk up and down with no
other design but to persuade you, young and old, to esteem neither bodies, nor
riches, nor any thing else, before, nor so much as your mind, that it be with
all possible speed refined to the last degree of goodness. And I give this
reason: that Virtue has not its being from riches; but from Virtue flow both
riches, and all other goods, as well privately as publicly to men. Now if I
corrupt youth by saying these things, let them be hurtful: but if any one
avouches, that I say other things besides these, he says nothing. In fine, I
shall answer to these things, do ye, Athenians, believe Anytus, or not;
discharge me, or not; do according to your pleasure: I will never do any thing
but this, though I were to suffer many deaths. Be not disturbed, Athenians, but
continue the calm attention I begged of ye; lest you excite a tumult by reason
of what I shall speak: but hear me patiently. Which if ye shall do ye will (I
think) receive from thence no little emolument. Other things besides I shall
speak, that perhaps will move ye to exclame: but pray, forbear to do so. For be
well assured, that if ye shall put me to death, me, such a man as I describe
myself to be: ye will bring greater loss to your City, to your selves, than to
me: for neither shall Melitus, nor Anytus hurt me in the least, nor could they.
Since I think it impossible, that a good man should be violated by a wicked
man. He will murder me perhaps, or expel, or disgrace me; and he, and some
others will account those to be great evils: but I think them not to be such.
Nay I rather hold, that to do the actions that he does, is a great evil indeed:
for he attempts to inflict punishment unjustly upon an innocent man. Now
therefore Athenians, I am so far from making a Defense for my self (as some may
expect) that I will speak rather for your sakes; lest by giving sentence
against me, ye hainously sin against the gift of God that is in me: (...). Que
verba ipsemet Sa^ctas Apostolus Paulus alicubi emphatice reciuit.
for if ye kill me, ye shall not easily find such another, one who (that I may
speak truly and heartily, though bluntly and ridiculously) being by God
appointed to the care and oversight of this your City, am constituted
supervisor thereof, and Moderator; that I might sit upon it, as upon a Horse
great and generous indeed, but by reason of his huge bulk, dull and slow, and
to be excited by sharp pricks. Exactly so God seems to me, to have placed me
over the City, that I may incite ye, and persuade ye, end reprove every Mothers
Son of ye, ceasing not daily to sit by [and admonish] every one in every place.
Such another [monitor] Athenians, will not easily come to ye: and therefore (if
ye believe me, spare me. Though ye perhaps, filled with indignation, as men
rouzed up from profound sleep, and following the Counsel of Anytus, rejecting
mine, shall without remorse put me to death: yet be most confident, you shall
spend the remainder of your life in drowsiness, unless God, taking care of ye,
shall send some other [to excite ye.] And that I am such a man, by the special
favor and bounty of God given to the City, ye may collect from hence. It seems
not consentaneous A farther proof of the Divine authority of his Office, from
his neglect of all his private and Domestic affairs, only that he might
execute that with diligence, for the Public good.
to Humane reason, that I, casting away all care of my own private affairs,
have so tempered my self, as to endure so many years together in that contempt
of my domestic concernments; and wholly apply my self to the administration of
yours, by catching hold of, and going unto every one, and as a Father, or elder
Brother, inculcating to ye, that ye should studiously addict your selves to
Virtue. If from these advises of mine I received any emolument, or any reward,
to my own private uses, and gave them to that end; that would seem to rely upon
some probable reason; but ye see, that my very Adversaries themselves, who have
impudently forged so many lies against me, could not yet to their highest
improbity adjoyn that shameless boldness, either to accuse me, or oppose any
witness to me, as if I had exacted or asked a reward from any one at any time.
And of this truth, I might bring my poverty as a competent, and (I think) a
convincing witness.

Now it may perhaps seem absurd, that I running to and fro to several men, and
with extreme diligence busying my self, should give counsel to each one apart;
but not dare to address my self in public to the people, to give the same
advises to the City.

The reason why he had not addressed his Counsels to the City in general, but
only to particular men, viz. that he was forbidden to meddle with the public,
by his Daemonium; (vide Apuleium de Socratis Daemonio.)
The cause of this, is what most of ye have heard from me, oftentimes, in
various places. I have something Divine, and a Daemonium, a certain Voice: at
which Melitus indeed in his accusation railed expressly. This began with me from
a Boy, namely a certain voice, which when it has been perceptible, always
recals me from that thing I was going to do; but never impells me to undertake
any thing; this is that which forbids me to interest my self in matters of the
State, or of public concernment to the City. And indeed it seems with admirable
prudence to oppose me [therein.] For Athenians, That he might decline the
danger impendent over all good men, who interest themselves in the
administration of State affairs; and so the longer perform his duty, in
reprehending men.
if in times past I had taken upon me the administration of Civil affairs,
truly I had long since perished; so that I could not have been any way useful
either to you, or to my self. Be not inflamed with indignation against me
speaking the truth; for there is no man, who if he shall ingeniously and boldly
oppose either you, or any other people, and hinder the doing of many acts of
injustice and impiety in a City, can ever be preserved in safety: and whoever
sincerely contends for the maintenance of Justice, must be obliged, if he
desire to live any the least time in peace and safety, to lead a private life,
without interessing himself in the administration of public businesses. Hereof
I will give you very strong arguments, not words, but (what ye more value)
realities and matters of fact. He artesteth his constant adherence to Equity
and Justice, even when he thereby incurred present danger of death; and that by
many instances yet fresh in the memory of some of his Judges.
Hear therefore what happened to me, that ye may understand, that I have in no
respect yielded to any in the defense of what is just, for fear of death; no
not when I seemed to incur present danger of destruction, by refusing to yield.
I will tell ye things Offensive, and pertinent to this way of pleading causes
in Court, yet true. For, I, Athenians, never bore Office in the Commonwealth,
yet attained to the dignity of Senator; and our Tribe Antiochis obtained the
Lieutenancy of the Supreme power, when ye censured ten Military Officers to be
condemned to death, for not burying the slain in a Naval fight, and this
against Law, as ye after judged. Then I being one of the Council of Athens
opposed you, that ye might not give a judgment contrary to Law; and made a
decree contrary to yours, the Orators then ready to call me to the Bar, and
appoint a day for my Trial, ye also senting, and by acclamations approving
their Indictment: yet I chose rather to be in danger with Law and Justice, than
assent to your unjust votes, notwithstanding the terror of imprisonment or
death. And these things fell out at that time, when the City was governed by
equal Democracy: but when it afterward fell under the domination of a Few, the
thirty Tyrants sent me the fifth man to Tholus, that we should bring from
Salomine, Leontes, Salaminius, to be put to death, as they commanded many
others also, to the end they might derive the envy of their [own] many crimes
upon the heads of many others. Then I not by words, but actions, demonstrated,
that the fear of death (that I may speak a little roughly and clownishly)
touched me not: and that my grand care and concernment was, that I might commit
nothing unjust and impious. Nor truly did the command and government of those
Tyrants, however violent and cruel, so terrify me, as to make me do any unjust
act. But after we departed from Tholus, four [of the Embassadors] went on to
Salamine, and brought away Leontes; and I went home: and perhaps I should for
this cause have been put to death, had not that Tyranny been soon after
subverted and destroyed: and of these traverses I have many witnesses. Now
whether do ye think, that I could have continued safe so many years together,
if I had employed my self in matters belonging to the State: and so deporting
my self, as became a good man, had vindicated and maintained just causes, and
thereunto seriously and studiously devoted all my devoirs? It had been
impossible, Athenians; nor any men else. But truly through the whole course of
my life, both publicly if I acted any thing, and privately, I still have kept
to the same rule, never to yield to any man, neither to other, nor to any one
of these, whom my accusers individuously call my Disciples, in any thing
contrary to right and equity. Nor have I ever been Preceptor to any man: but if
any were desirous to hear my discourses, whether he were young or old, I never
denied him this; nor do I dispute to get money, or if money be wanting, less:
but with equal freedom offer my self to be interrogated, to the rich and to the
poor, and whosoever pleases, hears my answers. If by these my answers and
conferences, any man has become either sober, and of good and honest
conversation, or debaucht and vicious; it is not just, that I should bear the
blame thereof; seeing I neither taught, nor promised to teach any man. And if
any shall say, he has learned, or heard from me in private, any thing, that
all might not with equal freedom hear: be ye most assured, he speaks most
untruly. But the reason why some are delighted with frequent and long
conversation, ye have heard Athenians. It Is wholly this, as I declared; that
those who are admitted to my conferences, are much pleased to hear such who
think themselves to be wise, but are not so, examined and refuted; for this is
not unpleasant. And that I should thus confute such, I affirm to be a duty
imposed upon me by God, both by Vaticinations, and by Dreams, and all other
ways, whereby Oracles are wont to deliver commands. These things, Athenians,
are both true, and such as may be easily proved. For if I now of late corrupt
some young men, and have long since corrupted others; He appeals to the
testimony of some present, who had often heard his moral discourses, whether he
had ever endeavored to corrupt their minds, or not.
it would be probable, that some of those who have arrived at years of more
maturity, and the borders of old age, when they come to understand me to have
been to them author and adviser of some certain evil, would now rise up against
me, and accuse me, and require me to be delivered up to punishment: and if they
would not, yet it were fit that some of their Kinsmen, Fathers, or Brothers, or
others, whether by Affinity or Alliance nearly related to them, should in case
their Kinsmen had suffered any thing of detriment from me, remember the injury,
and demand punishment to be inflicted upon me; but here are many whom I see.
First this Crito here, my equal in years, and my Countryman, the Father of
this Critobulus: then Lysanias the Sphettensian, the Father of this Aeschines:
and Antiphon the Cephisensian, Father of Epigenes. These others then, whose
Brethren lived with me in this way of conversation familiarly, Nicostratus Son
of Zotidas, Brother of Theodotus (but Theodotus is dead, so that he cannot now
ask his Brother to impeach me) and this Paralus, Son of Demodicus, whose
Brother is Theages; and Adimantus of Ariston, whose Brother here is Plato; and
Aeantidorus, whose Brother is Apollodorus, and many others I could show, of
whom it was fit some one at least should have been named as witness by Melitus
in his accusation; and if he forgot to do it then, let him produce any one of
them now, I will give him leave freely; let him declare whether he has any
matter of this kind. But ye shall find the contrary, Athenians; namely that all
these are ready to help and vindicate me, who (say Melitus and Anytus) corrupt
and wrong their Kinsmen. Truly, if those whom I have corrupted and infected,
should endeavor to assist and vindicate me, that would carry a plausible face
of reason: but if those who have felt no contagion of my corruptions, ancient
men, and by consanguinity nearly related to those whom I have corrupted, stand
for and defend me; they can seem to be impelled to that defense, by no other
reason but what is right and just; that is, because they are conscious that
Melitus lies, and I speak truth. Let therefore what I have hitherto said,
Athenians, and other the like reasons be sufficient for my defense.

But now some one may be offended at me, He professes not to court the favor,
nor to excite the commiseration of his Judges, by the usual arts of
pusillanimous men, when standing at the Bar to receive their sentence.
if he call to mind, that he being brought into less danger than this of mine
is, petitioned and courted the Judges with many tears, and brought his children
hither, to excite pity and commiseration to the height, and brought also to the
same purpose many of his Kindred and Friends; but observes me to do no such
thing, tho brought into extreme peril of my life: and considering this with
himself, become the more enraged and more embittered against me, and so in
anger give his vote or sentence for my condemnation. If any of you be thus
affected, I will not address to him with prayers and supplications, to mitigate
his displeasure; yet think I may with equity and fair reason speak thus to him.
I also, O thou very good man, have some Kinsmen; for (as Homer says) I am not
born from an Oak, nor of a stone, but from men. I then have Kinsmen too,
Athenians, and three Sons; one a young Lad; two little Boys; yet I have
brought neither of them hither, to beg of ye for their sakes to be favorable
to me, and absolve me. What then? will I do none of those [submissive] things?
Not of pertinacious arrogance, Athenians, Yet not out of obstinate arrogance,
nor of contempt of his Judges; but only to conserve his own and their honor and
dignity.
or in contempt of you (and whether I have courage and constancy to suffer
death, or not, I shall elsewhere declare) but to assert both my own and your
honor and reputation, and so that also of the whole City. It seems to me
indecent and dishonest, that I should do any of those [ungenerous] things; I
who am of this age, and have acquired (whether deservedly or not) so great a
name [for wisdom.] This then I most firmly resolve upon, to do my devoir that
Socrates may differ from other men Were those who among you seem to excel,
whether in sapience, or in fortitude, or in any other virtue whatsoever, such
as ye would have me to be, [afraid of death;] certainly no small disgrace would
be thereby fixed upon your City. Some such I have beheld, when they stood here
expecting the sentence of death to pass upon them: who though they thought
themselves brave fellows, yet brought into those streights, committed things
dishonorable, even to admiration, as thinking they should suffer some grievous
misery if they dyed; as if (forsooth) they should be immortal, if ye put them
not to death. These seem to me to bring a shameful mark of ignominy and
reproach upon your City: forasmuch as any stranger will hence take occasion of
thinking basely of us, namely that among the Athenians, even those who as more
excellent in virtue, are preferred to places of highest dignity and power in
the State, nothing differ from [timorous] Women. These things, Athenians, it is
not fit ye should do your selves, who have acquired honor and renown, and are
highly esteemed [both at home and abroad:] nor ought ye to permit them to be
done by us; but rather to make it appear by effect, that ye will rather condemn
him who shall introduce those Theatrical fopperies, and devices to raise
commiseration, into your judgments, and so expose your City to scorn and
derision; than him who calmly expects the event of your judgment. Now besides
this care we ought to have of the Honor of our City, And because it is
inconsistent with the duty and oath of a Judge, to admit of supplications for
mercy.
there is this also adjoined, that to me it seems not equal and just, that we
should with supplications court the Judge, and by the force and efficacy of
those prayers, decline the rigor of his sentence, and so be absolved: I think,
he is only to be rightly informed, and by certain arguments persuaded. For the
Judge sits not here, to confer grace and favor, and to show indulgence; but to
judge righteously. To this he is bound by solemn Oath, that according to the
best of his understanding, he shall not by grace and favor pervert right, but
judge according to the prescript and form of the Laws. It Is not therefore fit,
that either ye should accustom your selves, or we be accustomed to perjury: for
neither could do it without violation of piety and religion. Do not then,
Athenians, require this from me, that I should in your presence perform things
which I take to be neither honest, nor just, nor pious; and the rather because
I stand here accused by this Melitus of impiety; for should I by begging and
entreating endeavor to induce ye to absolve me, and by [fawning] words as it
were compel ye so strictly bound by Oath; truly I should convince you to be of
opinion, that there are no Gods; and while I defend my self from that false
accusation, effectually accuse my self to be guilty thereof, as if I thought
there are no Gods. Whereas truly I am far from being of that [absurd] opinion;
for I hold Athenians, more certainly than any of my accusers, that there are
Gods: and to you, and to God I freely leave the issue of my judgment, that he
may determine of me as may be both for my good, and yours.

A new Speech after his Condemnation.
That I may with the less regret and disquiet of mind bear this my disaster, He
comforts himself, both with his prevision of the event of his judgment, and
with the paucity of Votes condemning him.
namely that I am by your Votes condemned; very many things concur to afford me
help and consolation; among the rest this chiefly, that this has not happened to
me otherwise than I believed and expected; but the number of Votes given on
both sides, I more admire. For, I thought I should have been condemned, not by
so small, but a much greater excess of Balls: now it appears, that if only
thirty Balls had been otherwise cast, I should have been absolved. From the
accusation of Melitus therefore (if I be not mistaken) I am free and clear: nor
only that, but this likewise is evident to all, that if Anytus and Lycon had
not risen up with a new supplement to accuse me, he had been fined in the sum
of a thousand dragms, By the Athenian law a man condemned to capital
punishment, might chose either exile, or perpetual imprisonment, or a pecuniary
mulct; which was called (...), a substitution, or commutation of punishment.
This Socrates refuses, and resolves rather to die; as Xenophon also records
of him. Yet briefly recounting his own merits, he affirms himself to deserve
from the Athenians, not punishment, but some ample reward answerable to his age
and office; in particular a pension for his life from the State.
for that he had not on his side so much as a fifth part of the Votes. He then
has my life for a Mulct. Let it be so. And with what punishment shall I on the
other side think it equal to be mulct'd my self, Athenians? it is clear, with
that whereof I am worthy. What then? what have I deserved to suffer, or pay,
because in my whole life, I have not by idle silence concealed what I knew; but
contemned the pursuit of those things that others with all possible contention
of mind covet and hunt after, riches and great estates, military commands,
public assemblies, and other dignities and sodalities confirmed by oaths,
factions also and parties which are frequently made in the City: conceiving my
self destined to nobler studies, than that flying to the helps and defenses of
those [uncertain] things, I should from hence draw the hopes of conserving my
self: in fine, I applied not my self to the attainment of such things, which if
I had attained, I should have reaped from them nothing of utility either to my
self, or to you; but made it my chief business, and constant labor, by
addressing to every one, to oblige all, by the greatest and noblest of
benefits; namely by persuading everyman of you to make it his first care to
become virtuous and prudent to the last degree; nor to take greater care about
affairs belonging to the City, than the City it self; and that by the same
reason, care was to be taken of other matters in the same manner. What
therefore is it, that I, being such a man, have deserved to suffer? Some great
good certainly, Athenians, if ye estimate things according to the dignity,
verity, and nature of them, and return a just reward. And in truth there is due
to me such a good, as may be suitable and convenient to my person. And what is
convenient to a man poor and benefic, who gives himself wholly up to
admonishing and urging you on to virtue, and therefore has need to be exempted
from other businesses, that he may freely and without distractions attend that
good work? Nothing doubtless is more convenient, Athenians, than that he be
nourished in the The public Granary or Storehouse of Corn in Athens.
Prytaneum: and this certainly with greater reason, than if any of ye had in
the Olympic games brought home Victory either from the Horse-race, or Chariots,
whether of two or four Horses apiece. For he can but make ye to appear happy;
but I, to be really so: and he wants not a relief of aliments or food, but I
do. If then, as equity and justice require, a due reward be to be defined and
assignd to me; this truly will be my reward, to be fed at the charge of the
State in the Prytaneum.

For this his freedom of claiming a maintenance from the City, he gives this
reason; that he cannot assent to an act of injustice, though done against
himself.
While I say this, perhaps I seem to speak as vainly, as I was thought to speak
arrogantly and obstinately before, when I declared against that way of moving
Judges to commiseration by prayers and supplications. But this, Athenians, is
not so: but rather thus. My constant persuasion and resolve is, not to do
injury willingly and knowingly to any man living; but I prevail not upon ye to
believe this my profession, for the time we speak together, is but short. When
if ye had among ye a Law, such as is in force among other Nations, concerning
giving sentence of death, that the space of not only one, but very many days,
should intercede betwixt the hearing of the cause, and pronouncing of Judgment
in causes capital: doubtless ye would approve of my reasons and plea: but now
in so short a time it is not possible to wash off the accusations of so great
crimes.

Now being fixed in this resolution, Reasons why he chooses neither exile, nor
imprisonment, nor fine; but death.
not to do injury to any, I am very far from doing it to my self; that is, from
pronouncing my self guilty of this evil, and assigning to my self some other
punishment in lieu thereof. What? shall I, as if I feared to suffer the
punishment to which Melitus adjudgeth me, (which I profess not to know whether
it be good or evil) choose instead thereof that which I certainly know to be
evil, and adjudg and condemn my self to suffer it? Imprisonment? To what end
should I live in prison, perpetually in slavery to the will and command of the
Eleven? A pecuniary mulct? and remain in prison until I have paid it? But, as I
even now told ye, I have not money wherewith to pay a fine. Shall I suffer
Exile? for to this punishment ye will perhaps addict me. Certainly I were much
in love with life, Athenians, were I so inconsiderate, as not to be able to
see, that if ye my Fellow-Citizens cannot endure the way of my conversation and
discourses, but think them so offensive and hateful to ye, that now ye seek to
be freed from them; others will less patiently endure them. I am far from this,
Athenians. Wisely should I order my life indeed, if at this age departing from
my City, and wandering to and fro in banishment through various Countries, I
should prolong a miserable life. So certainly the case stands; wheresoever I
shall come, young men will hear me discoursing, as here they do. If I repel
them, they will on the other side expel me, and bring their Elders to do so
too: if I not repel them, their Parents and Kindred will for their sakes expel
me. Some man will say perhaps, what? Socrates; being expulsed the City, can
thou not live silent and quiet? What I shall say, is of that nature, as hardly
to be insinuated into the belief of some of ye; for if I tell ye, that for me
to be silent, is to resist God, and therefore it is not possible I should live
in quiet; ye will not believe me, as if dissembling the matter in jest. But if
I say this also; that it is the supreme happiness of mankind, daily to
discourse of virtue, and of those other [excellent] things, concerning which ye
hear me disputing, and examining both my self and others, (for without such
scrutiny and examination, life is not life) ye will not give credit to me; and
yet these are most certain truths, Athenians; though such as cannot easily be
wrought into your belief. And with the same difficulty truly am I persuaded to
pronounce my self worthy of any punishment. For if I had moneys by me, I would
condemn my self in such a fine, as I should be able to pay (for that I should
account no detriment to me) but I have no money: unless ye should proportion my
fine to my ability; perhaps I should make a shift to pay down a mina The Mina
Attica of silver, contained 25 sicles; and the sicle contained half an ounce;
so that 12 ounces and half make a mina: a sum equal to 25 staters, or Belgic
Florens, each of 20 stufers.
of silver; and therefore I fine my self at that rate. Plato here, Athenians,
and Crito, and Critobulus, and Apollodorus bid me offer the price of thirty
minae; and promise to be sureties for the payment thereof. This sum therefore I
propose for my redemption, and they will be assiduous and competent sureties
for the payment of it.

But now, Athenians, ye shall ere-long suffer ignominy and reproach, brought
upon your City by those who desire to defame it; He freely reproaches the
Athenians with their ingratitude, and inhumanity toward him.
namely that ye have murdered Socrates, a wise man. For tho I be far from a
wise man, yet they who seek to cast this disgrace upon ye, will say I am one.
Would ye have expected but a little time, I should have prevented this your
infamy, by dying of my self by the course of nature; for ye see my age, how far
it is from [possibility of long] life, how nearly approaching to death. These
things I say, not to all of ye, but to those only who have by their Suffrages
doomed me to death: and to those I again and again proclaim the same. Ye think
perhaps, Atheninians, that I have lost my cause for want of words, And
rejoices in the Justice of his cause, and of his defense.
by which I might have inclined you to approve of my defense, had I resolved to
leave nothing in this matter unalledged, that I might escape punishment; but
it is not so. I have lost my cause indeed for want, not of words, but of
boldness and impudence, and that I was unwilling to speak things that would
have been most grateful and pleasant to your ears: in particular, that ye might
hear me wailing, and howling, and doing and speaking what I think highly
unworthy of me; such as ye are accustomed to hear from others. But I even then
thought, I was obliged to do nothing indecent and dishonest, in order to my
evasion from danger: nor does it now repent me, that I made my defense in that
manner. Nay I had rather die, having made my defense in this manner, than live
by making it in that, [abjectly and poorly.] For neither in Judgment, nor in
War, An honorable death is to be preferred to a dishonorable life.
ought any man to endeavor to avoid death by any way or means whatsoever; for
in many Battles this is clearly evident, that death may be easily avoided, if a
man, throwing away his arms, cast himself a suppliant at the feet of the
victorious and pursuing enemy, and beg his life. There are also very many
other arts and shifts of declining danger in all occurrents, and of avoiding of
death; if a man will adventure to say and do any thing, [however indecent and
dishonorable.] To avoid death, is not difficult, Athenians: but it is very
difficult indeed, to avoid improbity, which runs on swifter than death. And now
truly I, old and slow, am caught by one that is slower [by death:] but my
accusers, who are vehement and fierce, are overtaken by that which is swifter,
by improbity. And now I go away, by your command to suffer the penalty of
death: but these men are by truth it self condemned in the mulct of improbity
and injustice. I stand to the punishment appointed for me: and they stand to
theirs. And these things ought so to be; and they have, in my opion, succeeded
conveniently and opportunely.

Now ye who have condemned me, Converting his Speech to those who had condemned
him, he predicts the evils to come upon them, for their putting an innocent man
to death. Concerning the event of which prediction, read Diogen. Laertius, in
vita Socratis.
I desire to fore-tel you, as by Oracle, the calamities that shall come upon
ye: for I am now arrived at that [critical] time, wherein men are most able in
the faculty of Divining things to come; namely when they are dying. I say then,
O ye men, whosoever shall put me to death, that soon after my death,
punishments shall overtake ye, much more grievous than the death ye inflict
upon me: for thereby ye now design to free your selves from the labor of
giving an account of your life: but the event shall be altogether contrary to
your expectation, as I affirm. There shall rise up to reprove ye, many, whom
hitherto I have repressed, nor have ye felt them: and they shall so much the
more severely rebuke ye, by how much the younger ye are; and ye shall be
vehemently offended even to indignation. For if ye think, by killing men, to
restrain and keep under those, who are minded to upbraid and convince ye, that
ye take a wrong course to prevent that trouble; and to reproach ye for your
dishonest life: ye are grossly mistaken. For that way of freeing your selves, is
neither sufficiently efficacious, nor honest: but the best, most honorable, and
easiest way is this; not to hinder others, but to render your selves virtuous
to the highest degree. Having then thus prophesied to those who have condemned
me, I leave them.

But to ye who have absolved me, To his Friends, he avows his confidence of
happiness in his death, and the presignification th reof by his Daemonium.
I shall gladly speak of what has just now happened; while the Magistrates stay
here employed in other affairs, and I have a short respit, before I depart to
the place where I must die; and for so short a time do ye, Athenians, expect
me; for nothing hinders but we may speak together, while we have the liberty.
To you who are my Friends, I will declare, what is the signification of this my
disaster. For, Judges, (and in calling ye Judges, I do ye but right) there has
happened to me an accident well worthy admiration. That presaging and prophetie
Voice of my Daemonium, frequent to me at several times of my life past, was
wont to check and countermand me, even in things of the least moment, if I were
about to enterprise any affair imprudently: but now these Occurrents, which ye
see, have happened unto me, which any one might imagine to be evils in extremity:
and yet that sign of God has not contradicted me, neither in the morning when
I came forth, nor when I ascended into the Pulpit [or pleading chair] nor in my
speech, whatsoever I was delivering. In other speeches, it did often interrupt
me: but now in this action, it no ways opposed me in any thing I said or did.
And what do I conceive to be the reason of this? I will explain it to ye. This
event [of my condemnation] is very happy to me. We are not just Estimators of
things, whoever of us think death to be an evil. Hereof, this has been to me a
great argument; for doubtless that usual sign would have resisted me, if I had
gone about any thing but what was truly good. Thus we may with certain judgment
determine of the matter. That to good men, there can be nothing of evil in
death; he proves by this Dilemma. Either all sense is extinguished by death; or
men's Souls remain after death. If there be no sense, there must be eternal
quiet; if the Soul survive, then there must be a state of extreme felicity to
the Souls of good men, in the society of the Blessed. Hence Seneca seems to
have borrowed that two edged argument against fear of death: Mors nos aut
consumit, aut emittit; emissis meliora restant, onere detracto; consamptis
nihil restat. Epist. 24.
A strong hope possesses me, it is happy for me, that I am sent to death; for
one of these two is absolutely necessary; Either death utterly deprives us of
all sense, or by death we pass from hence to another place. Wherefore, whether
all sense be extinguished, and death be like that sleep, which sometimes brings
most calm quiet, without the [deluding] phantasms of Dreams; good Gods, what
advantage it is to die! for I think, if any man were obliged to take particular
notice of, and set apart that night, in which he slept so profoundly and
quietly, as not to be sensible of any the least disturbance from dreams; and
then comparing it with all other nights, yea and days too, of his whole life
past, would observe, which of all those nights or days he had passed more
sweetly and pleasantly; I am of opinion, that not only a man of private and
humble condition, but even the greatest of Kings, would find such nights to be
easily numerable, in comparison of other whether days or nights. If then death
be but like such a sound and undisturbed sleep, I call it gain or advantage:
for all time seems to be nothing more than one night. But if it be true (as
[wise] men have affirmed and taught) that death is a passing hence into those
places or regions, which the deceased inhabit: it is more happy for thee, when
thou shall have escaped from those who will have themselves to be accounted
Judges, to come to those who are rightly called Judges, and who are said there
to sit in judgment, Minos, and Radamanthus, and Aeacus, and Triptolemus, and
all other Demigods, who lived justly and with faith. Is such a change, such a
migration as this, to be valued at nothing? Then to converse with Orpheus, and
Musaeus, and Hesiod and Homer; who of us would not prefer such a state of life
to that of this? For my part, I would die, if it were possible, many times
over, to find the satisfactions I speak of. How much shall I be delighted, when
I shall meet with Palamedes, with Ajax the Son of Telamon, and others
circumvented by judgment of unjust men, and compare their cases with my own?
This, I think, will not be unpleasant: but this will be most pleasant, there
also to find one who examines and tries every one who is wise; and who thinks
himself wise, but is not so: how much rather, Judges, will a man find out him,
who brought a numerous Army against Troy, or Ulysses, or Sysiphus, or very many
others both men and Women? with whom freely to talk and converse, to compare
opinions, and make inquiries, is a thing of vast and infinite wisdom. And yet
they who are there, are not put to death for so doing; and are in many other
respects far happier than these our Citizens, and for ever after immortal: if
at least those things that are said [of the state of the Soul after death] be
true.

But it becomes you also, This he says, not from doubt, but from the
supposition of the people with whom he had then to do. For, as to his own
persuasion, he held nothing so firm and certain, as the immortality of men's
minds or souls. With the same caution Seneca also says; and fortasse (simodo
sapient on vera sama est, recipita; nos locus aliquis) quem putamne perisse,
premissas est. Epist. 63.
O ye Judges, to conceive noble hopes of death, and to be fully persuaded in
your minds of the verity of this, that nothing of evil can ever come to a good
man, neither living nor dead: and that his concerns are never neglected by the
Gods. Nor have these things happened to me by chance: but certain and evident it
is to me, that to die, and to be freed from businesses, is better and more
conducible to me. And for this reason, that Divine sign has not at all averted
me: Nor am I angry either with my Judges who condemned me, or with my Accusers;
though they condemned and accused me not with design to render my condition
more happy and tranquil; but thinking thereby to bring some great incommodity
or calamity upon me; wherein I have just cause to complain of them. But this
only I beg of them, In fine he recommends to his Judges the tuition of his
Sons; with this request, that they might be instructed rather to seek after
virtue, than to accumulate riches.
that if my Sons, when they are grown up, be troublesome to them in the same
matters wherein I have disquieted and offended them, they would severely punish
them: chiefly if they seem to take more care either of riches, or the like
[transitory] thing, than of virtues they seem to be something, when they are
nothing; I would have ye reprehend and convince them, as I have reprehended
you: if they neglect things necessary, to be solicitous about things
unnecessary, and pretend to be what they are not; sharply reprove them. Which
if ye shall do, both I and my Sons shall obtain from you a just and lawful
benefit. But it is now time to depart; I to my death, ye to life; and whether of
the two is better, I think is known only to God.

The End of Socrates his Apology.
AXIOMS MORAL. Collected out of Socrates his Apology.
1. A Judge is to consider, not the Elegancy, but Truth of what is said before
him.

2. The good Education of Youth, is of very great Importance to the
Commonwealth.

3. Humane wisdom is not to be much valued* because God alone is truly wise;
and among men, he only deserves to be reputed wise, who conscious of his own
ignorance, professes to know nothing certainly, but that he knows nothing.

4. The Station and Office that God has assigned to us in this Life, we are to
defend and maintain, tho we thereby incur the greatest incommodities and
dangers: and we ought to have no consideration either of death, or any other
terror, when Shame and Dishonor is to be avoided. Nor are those things to be
feared, which we do not certainly know to be Evil: but only those which we do
certainly know to be Evil, namely not to obey the Commands of God, and to do
unjustly.

5. To be conversant in Affairs of State, A precept delivered also by Epicurus,
(...), non ad rem publicam accessurum Sapientem, and inculcated even by Cicero
himself; Omnia sua causa facere sapientes; Remp. capessere hominem non
oportere, etc. Orat. pro Sext.
is full of danger.

6. It is both indecent and unjust, for Judges to be moved and seduced by the
Charms of Eloquence or Tears: for they ought to be [(...) and (...)] no
respecters of persons, and without passion: and so to give judgment, not from
their own affections, but from the merit of the Cause, and according to Law.

7. An honorable Death is always to be preferred to a dishonorable Life.

8. Since God takes care of human Affairs, and chiefly of Good men: no Evil can
come to Good men, neither living nor dead.

9. We are not to be immoderately angry with our Enemies, nor to hate them,
although guilty of Crimes against us, and certainly to suffer the punishments
reserved for them.

A DIALOGUE Concerning the Immortality of Man's Rational Soul. AND Admirable
Constancy of SOCRATES at his Death.
The ARGUMENT Out of SERRANVS.
PLATO here introduces Phedo, recounting to Echecrates, the Philosophical
Discourses delivered by Socrates, the very day wherein he suffered death by a
draught of poison: wherein he showed both his invincible magnanimity in
embracing death with perfect tranquillity of mind; and his most certain
persuasion of the immortality of the Rational Soul. By this eminent Example
then, and from the mouth of that true Hero at that time encountering that Giant
of Terrors, death (when the judgment and sayings of men much inferior to
Socrates, in point of wisdom, are commonly reputed Oraculous) Plato proves the
Humane Soul to be immortal, and declares his opinion concerning the state and
condition thereof, after its separation from the body.

The Thesis therefore, or capital design of this Dialogue, seems to be
twofold: first to evince, that death ought to be contemned; and then that the
Soul is, by the prerogative of its nature exempt from the power of death. And
from the latter, as the more noble and august part, the whole Dialogue borrows
its Title [(...)] de Animo, of the Soul.

The Contents thereof are partly moral; in that it teaches the contempt of
death, and constant adherence to virtue; partly Metaphysical, or Theological;
for that it treats of the excellency of the Soul, and of God. To these are
added also Ornamental parts, viz. a decent Introduction, and accurate Narration
of the remarkable manner and circumstances of Socrates his death.

Of these so various parts, the Economy or Order is concisely this. Some
Philosophers, Friends to Socrates, visiting him in the prison, the last day of
his life, and talking familiarly together: the clue of their conference oon
leads them to this useful question; Whether a wise man ought to fear death? Of
this, Socrates first disputing with less cogent Reasons, and transiently
determining that other doubt, Whether it be lawful for a man to kill himself?
opportunely, and after his grave way of arguing, resumes and proceeds in the
former enquiry about despising death. Concerning which the sum of his
reasoning is this. Since the principal duty of a Philosopher is, daily to
meditate upon Death, i. e. to withdraw and divide his Mind or Soul from his
body, and the exorbitant desires thereof, (and death is defined to be only a
separation of the Soul from the Body) and that after this frail and mortal life
is at an end, there remains a full and solid felicity to be enjoyed by those
who have here truly and sincerly embraced the study of Wisdom: there is no
reason why he should fear death, but good cause rather why he should wish and
long for it: because being thereby freed and secured from all importune and
insatiable lusts of the body, wherewith the Soul is here entangled and
fettered; he should instantly pass to a second and better life, and therein
attain to a full and perfect knowledge of Wisdom. Which he now remonstrates, he
most assuredly expected to enjoy immediately after his death, and so, his body
being dissolved, to become consummately happy: So from the consequence of this
conclusion, there naturally arises a new dispute, about the Souls surviving
the Body. For, if the Soul exist not after death, all dissertation concerning
future felicity or infelicity, must be vain and absurd.

Of this most important conference about the immortality of the Soul, there are
three parts: One positively asserts the Soul to be essentially immortal: the
Second refutes the contrary opinions: the Third teaches the use and advantages
of the belief of the Souls immortality.

The FIRST part then of this excellent Doctrine of Plato (and of Socrates too,
from whom he seems to have learned it) concerning the Souls immortality, is
Apodictical or Demonstrative. And yet he so prudently and circumspectly manages
his forces, as to begin the combat with a Forlorn of lighter Reasons; and then
bring up as it were a phalanx of stronger and more pressing arguments, to
assure the Victory: which indeed is his proper and peculiar method of
convincing. His lighter Reasons he advances, partly from the Doctrine of the
Pythagoreans, of the transmigration of Souls into new bodies, which they called
[(...)] Transanimation, and [(...)] Transcorporation: partly from his private
conceit, that knowledge is but memory, and to learn only to remember. From
these opinions (I say) conjoined into one complex argument, he concludes, first
that the Soul was existent by it self, before it came to be guest or inmate to
the body; and then that the same will exist also apart, when separated from
that its Lodging or Inn, and is therefore immortal. His more solid and Nervous
arguments, by which he more accurately and convincingly demonstrates the Souls
eternal subsistence, are drawn from the very essence of the Soul it self, viz.
that being simple or void of composition, it must by necessary consequence be
also indissoluble or incapable of destruction. For, presuming it to be made
after the Exemplar or Image of God, who is Simple, Pure, Immutable, Invisible:
he thence infers, that the Soul is [(...)] congenial and homogenial to God, i.
e. likewise uncompound, invisible, immortal: in fine, that it is (suo tamen
modo) of the same nature with the Supreme Being, which he calls (...), that is
God. Hence he concludes, that though the Soul, while obliged to sojourn in the
Body, be necessitated to use the ministry and service of its various Organs;
and so be nearly affected with the passions and other alterations incident
thereunto, by reason of the close conjunction betwixt them: yet
notwithstanding, upon the dissolution of that ligue or conjunction, it does
instantly fly away, and return to that its primary and cognate Idea, God: in
the mean time still conserving its own simple, incorruptible nature. And this
is the substance of the first part of this sublime dispute.

The SECOND is a Refutation of Opinions impugning the immortality of the Soul:
which are chiefly two; One, that affirms the Soul to be an Harmony, that is
originally composed, and resulting from the conformation and system of the
corporeal senses: and therefore as it has its beginning from, so it must also
perish together with the body. Another, which allows the Soul to be indeed more
lasting than the Body, and so to survive it; yet will not have it to be
indissoluble, but to decay by degrees, and at length utterly to perish, from
its own natural weakness. This last Error Plato, in the person of Socrates,
solidly refutes; further alleging, that the Immortality of the Soul is clearly
manifest even from the true notion of Causes, i. e. of a Primary cause, namely
God; and of Second or proxim causes, by right reason duly investigated. Where
he opportunely evinceth it to be highly unreasonable, so to acquiesce in the
re-search of second causes, as to relinquish the first and principal: and then
proceeds to teach, that there are two kinds of Causes; one, principal, or
Supreme, and in truth cause of all Causes, which gave both being and efficacy
to all others; Others, Secondary, which are not truly [(...)] Causes, but only
[(...)] Adjuvants, empowered, disposed, and regulated by the first, all such as
God has made subordinate to himself, to the end that the virtue and energy of
his power might extend even to us. From the Reasons therefore of these
different Causes, Plato infers the Soul to be immortal. Whence by a genuine
transition, he proceeds to the

THIRD part of the Disputation or Conference, which concerns the state or
condition of the Soul, after this shadow of life is vanished, or (as he says)
apud inferos; thereby understanding [(...)] a second Life, whereof he treats
more amply in Timaeo; in this arguing thus. Seeing that in this tumultuous
Life, there every day arise infinite disorders in Humane affairs, and events
apparently inconsistent with Equity and Justice; so that good and pious men
suffer various afflictions and oppressions; and on the contrary, unrighteous
and impious men flourish in delights and prosperity: reason requires, that
after this scene of Inequality is withdrawn, after this Life (the use whereof
is in common to all men, both good and evil) is expired, there should succeed
another, wherein is to be made a just distinction of the good from the bad,
that so these may be adjudged to condign punishment, and those rewarded with
felicity, according to their deserts. And hence he collects, that there are but
two paths wherein all Mortals walk: One leading to eternal happiness, the other
to endless misery. Thus much this our wise Ethnic plainly discerned by the mere
light of nature, by right reason: more he could not perceive without rays of
light supernatural. We are not therefore to arraign him of ignorance, but
rather to applaud his singular modesty, in that in the close of his discourse
about rewards and punishments after death, he adventures upon no conjectural
descriptions of the places, qualities, degrees, etc. of either: but leaving all
such to Poets, ingeniously professes, he thought it not to be the part of a
man endowed with sound Judgment, to affirm any thing concerning those
inscrutable secrets, and reserves of Divine Justice. Only he held it necessary,
that the minds of men be deeply imbued with established and certain persuasions
of rewards and punishments to come: that so they may be inflamed with love of
Virtue, which he defines to be the true and only way to future felicity; and
reclaimed from Vice, the high way to future infelicity. And this he declares to
be the use and advantage of his Doctrine of the Souls immortality: namely, that
we may be induced to learn, and assiduously fellow the way that leads to that
happy life; and carefully avoid that of misery. The former he defines to be
true and solid knowledge of Wisdom: the Noblest part whereof is this, that
Divorcing and Alienating our mind from all commerce with corporeal affections,
and sensual pleasures; we fix it entirely upon the contemplation of God, and
hold it perpetually exercised in that Divine Meditation.

This being the great duty of man, and most satisfactory employment of a
Reasonable Soul; he opportunely admonishes every one, to make it also his
principal care and study, to be diligently conversant therein: always
animating himself with this noblest of hopes, that after the short and anxious
race of this life is finished, he shall infallibly attain unto that immortal
Happiness, of which he has now discoursed. And to fringe this his long Web of
Speculations Philosophical, with a grateful reflection upon the Heroic Virtues
of his martyred Master, Socrates; after a concise Historical Narration of the
manner and circumstances of his Death; he concludes with this glorious
Character of him; that notwithstanding he had been Oppressed and Condemned by
the envy and inhumanity of the Athenians, he was in truth the Wisest, and most
Virtuous of all Mankind.

PHEDON. Persons of the Dialogue; Echecrates, Phedon, Apollodorus, Socrates,
Cebes, Simmias, Crito, Executioner.
EChecrat. The Proem, wherein Plato, observing the Decorum proper to Dialogues,
and by natural consequence of the discourse, lerding the mind to his grand
argument here discussed. first recounts the circumstances that are pertinent
thereunto, viz. when Socrates was put to death, who were then present, and upon
what occasion this Dispute concerning the Soul arose.
Were you, Phedon, present with Socrates, that very day wherein he drank the
poison in the Prison? or have you heard it from some other?


Phe. I was then present, Echecrates.


Each. And what said that [brave] man before his death? what end made he? for
that I would willingly hear. But yet none of the Phliasians has of late gone
to Athens, nor any stranger come from thence to us, who could relate any thing
of certainty concerning these matters; only they report him to be dead by a
draught of poison; but nothing more.


Phe. Have ye not heard what men said of his Judgment, how that was ordered
and managed?


Each. That we have indeed heard; for a certain man gave us a narration thereof:
But this seemed wonderfully strange to us, that his arraignment and
condemnation being past a good while since, he should be reported to suffer
death after so long a respit. What was the reason of this, Phedo?


Phe. A certain accident intervened, Echecrates; it happened, that the very next
day after Judgment had been given upon him, the stern of the sacred ship, which
the Athenians annually send to Delos, was with usual pomp and solemnity Crowned.


Each. What Ship is that?


Phe. That wherein (as the Athenians say) Theseus long ago brought those
fourteen young men into Crete, and saved both them and himself: and they then
made a Vow (as the tradition goes) that if they returned in safety, they would
yearly celebrate a Feast, and offer Sacrifice to Apollo in Delos, in memory of
their preservation, which they call (...), the Sacrifice of Inspection, and
every year Solemnize, by sending that ship thither. Now when they have begun
the celebration of this Feast of Inspection, it is by law provided, that the
City be in the mean time expiated, and no man put to death by public decree,
until the Ship has been at Delos, and is returned home again: in which Voyage
sometimes long time is spent, especially when they meet with contrary Winds.
The beginning of this Inspection is, when the Priest of Apollo crowns the stern
of the ship: and this fell out to be performed upon the very day wherein (as I
said) Judgment was given upon Socrates. Which is the reason why so long a time
intervened betwixt his condemnation and death; he being all that while kept in
prison.


Each. But what of his death, Phedon? what were his speeches and actions? were
any of his Kindred and Friends with him? did the Magistrates permit them to be
present, or died he alone, deprived of their company?


Phe. They did permit them: and there were with him some, yea many of his
Friends.


Each. Well then, I pray, do your devoir to recount us the whole matter fully
and plainly; if at least your leisure will permit.


Phe. I have leisure, and will endeavor to give ye the best account I can, of
all passages. For to remember Socrates, and to speak my self, or hear another
speak of him, is the most delightful entertainment in the world.


Each. And you shall find us also, Phedon, in the same manner affected and
disposed to hear you. Wherefore go on, and do your best to relate the whole
story.


Phe. Truly being then present, I was affected in a very strange manner: For
commiseration moved me not at all, as being present at the death of a man
nearly Related to me: For to me he seemed happy, Echecrates, both by his
deportment, and by his serene conformity, and also by his discourses: so
undauntedly and bravely he submitted to death, that it then came into my mind
that he descended not to the shades below, without some Divine power, and
therefore would when he came thither, live in happiness, if ever any man else
did. I did not then much pity him, as became one that was spectator of so sad
and doleful a Tragedy: nor was I on the other side sensible of that pleasure,
wherewith we were wont to be affected, when we were seriously employed in
Philosophical conferences, though at that very time also we were earnestly
occupied in such: but was variously agitated by a disagreeable and contrary
passion. A certain unusual pleasure mixed with grief, surprised me, thinking he
was so soon to die. And all we who were present, felt the same confusion of
opposite affections, now smiling, now weeping, especially Apollodorus: you know
the man, and his manners.


Esch. I know him well.


Phe. In this manner was he then disposed: but truly I and others were
perturbed.


Elch. Who were there, Phedon?


Phe. Of our Citizens, there were this Apollodorus, and Critobulus, and his
Father Crito: Hermogenes also, and Epigenes, and Aeschines, and Antisthenes,
with Ctesippus the Paeanian, and Menexenus, and some other of the Natives: but
Plato, I think, was sick.


Each. Were there any strangers with him?


Phe. There were. Simmias the Theban, and Cebes, and Phaedonides: and Euclid,
and Terpsion, Megarensians.


Each. What? was not Aristippus there, and Cleombrotus?


Phe. No; 'twas said, they were in Aegina.


Each. Was any other there?


Phe. Those whom I have named, were all.


Each. Well, what discourses passed among them?


Phe. I will endeavor to recount to ye all that passed from first to last. In
the days precedent, I and some others were wont to visit Socrates frequently:
meeting together early in the morning, in the Judgment Hall, where his cause
had been tried, for it stood next to the prison. There we daily expected, until
the prison doors were opened; passing the time in walking and talking together
the while, for 'twas pretty late before the prison was opened. When the doors
were unlocked, we went in to Socrates, and many times passed the whole day with
him. On the day of his Suffering, we came to visit him earlier than we used:
for the day before, when we retired from the prison in the evening, we had
heard, that the sacred ship was arrived from Delos: and thereupon agreed among
our selves to come to Socrates sooner than our custom was, and indeed we did
so: but the Doorkeeper, who formerly used to obey us, came forth, and bid us
have patience a while, nor to enter till he called us. For now (says he) the
Eleven Officers are taking off Socrates his Fetters, having commanded that he
Die this day. So after a short stay, he returned, and gave us admittance: Being
entered, we found Socrates unfettered, and Xantippe (whom you know) holding an
Infant in her arms, and sitting by Socrates. Having seen, and saluted us, and
said some such things as Women use to speak [out of civility] now Socrates,
says she, this is the last time your Friends shall speak to you, and you to
them: and he turning his eyes upon Crito, I desire Crito, said he, that one of
you would lead away this Woman into some other place. Her therefore weeping and
lamenting, the Servants of Crito led away. But Socrates sitting upon a little
Bed, with one leg resting upon his other thigh, rubbed his leg, saying the
while; how absurd dos that seem, which men call pleasant! Socrates, upon
occasion of the pleasure he felt in his legs, soon after his Fetters had been
taken off, reflects upon the affinity betwixt pleasure and pain, and their
vicissitude; intimating, that the condition of human life is such, as to be led
in a round of pleasure and pain alternately succeeding.
and how wonderfully strange is the nature of what is unpleasant, so as to be
perceived contrary to what is pleasant! so that nature would not have a man
affected with both at once; but if any man pursue, and take one of them, he is
compelled for the most part to take the other also; as if they were both fitly
contained in one head; and I believe that Aesop, if he had taken notice of the
thing, would have composed a Fable of it, namely, that God, when he attempted
to reconcile these two Enemies, Pleasure and Pain, making War each against
other, but could not effect it, bound their heads together, so that where
either comes, the other also must follow, as seemed to me even now; for while
my Fetters were upon my legs, I had pain there, and the pain vanishing away
upon the remove of my Fetters, pleasure seems immediately to succeed it. And you
have opportunely put me in mind of this, answered Cebes, by Jove, Socrates; for
a good while since many have asked me, and Evenus lately, concerning the Poems
you have of late made, particularly the Fables of Aesop, you have turned into
Verses, and a Hymn to Apollo: for what reason you composed those Poems, since
you came into this place, when you never before addicted your self to Poetry.
If therefore you will have me give an answer to Evenus, when he shall again
interrogate me (as I am confident he will) tell me, I pray, what answer I shall
make to him. Tell him, replies Socrates, Another occasional reflection touching
some poetical Essaies made by Socrates, during the time of his imprisonment;
whereof he gives this reason, that having been by Dreams frequently admonished,
to learn Music; and being doubtful, whether the music of philosophy, to which
he had always studiously addicted himself, or that of poetry were thereby
meant, he thought it his duty, before his departure, to compose Verses, lest he
might offend, by omitting to fulfill that Divine command in this sense also.
the truth, Cebes: that I have done this, not out of design to emulate him and
his Writings, (for that I know would be extremely difficult) but to make trial,
what might be the sense of some Dreams, and to know if they enjoined me this
kind of Music. For very often heretofore in my life, the same Dream occurred to
me; when appearing to me sometimes in this, sometimes in that figure or
representation, it still inculcated to me the same thing: always saying, study
Music Socrates, and practice it. And I thought what I did in the past time of
my life, to be the very thing that my Dream commanded, and by reiterated
Injunctions urged: and as they who by repeated shouts incite men running a
race, so I thought my Dream did the same to me, by frequent admonitions
inculcating its command, that I should apply my self to Music; for as much as
Philosophy is the noblest and most excellent Music. While I did this, and
sentence of death had now been pronounced against me, and the Feast of Apollo
forbad me to die: I thought fit by no means to disobey the injunction of my
Dream, even though I interpreted it to concern the vulgar Music: but to do
according to the prescript thereof. For I thought it safer, not to depart from
hence, before I had in that manner also, to some degree performed my Vow;
obeying my Dream, by making Verses. The first Poem I made therefore, was to
that God whose Feast this was. The beginning of this Hymn. Diogen. Laertius
recites, in vita Socrat.
After that devout care of God, conceiving it decent for a Poet, if he ought to
be reputed worthy of that name, to compose Fables, not Orations; and being my
self unskilful in the art of inventing Fables: I therefore made an Essay upon
the Fables of Aesop, which I had by me, and knew, of those that first came to
hand.

This, Cebes, The occasion of the following dispute, deduced naturally from the
clue of the conference. Let Evenus folfow me (says Socrates) in death; for
being he is a philosopher, he ought neither to kill himself, nor to fear death.
Hence are started two Questionr; Whether Self-murder be a crime? and how a
philosopher stands obliged not to fear death? Now this Evenus was a Sophist,
fond of the pleasures of this life, and an adversary to the Doctrine of
Socrates; and therefore fit to be answered by him thus ironically, after the
usual manner of Socrates.
I would have you report to Evenus: and wish him health, bidding him, if he be
wise, to follow me; for I go hence, as I think, this very day, the Athenians so
commanding. Here Simmias interrupts him, saying, what advice is that, Socrates,
you give to Evenus? I have had conversation with him a long time; but as much
as I can foresee, he will not be very forward to follow your counsel in this
particular. What, says Socrates, is not Evenus a Philosopher? He seems to be
one, replies Simmias: and therefore says Socrates, he and whoever else
embraces the study of Philosophy, as he ought, will not decline death, and yet
will not think himself obliged to lay violent hands upon himself; for this they
say, is no ways lawful. And saying this, he let down his legs from the little
Bed to the ground, and sitting in that posture, pursued the remainder of his
discourse. Cebes asked him then, what say you, Socrates? that it is a crime for
a man to lay violent hands upon himself; and yet that a Philosopher is willing
to follow him who dies? To whom Socrates; what, Cebes? have ye, you and
Simmias, heard nothing concerning these matters, after so familiar conversation
with Philolaus? Nothing, Socrates, I assure you. What I have heard, it will not
be ungrateful to me to recount, seeing nothing seems more agreeable to him who
is ready to set forth toward some place, than to meditate upon, and speak of
what concerns either his Journey, or the condition he expects to be in at the
end of it, such as we are able to conceive beforehand: and of what Subject can
we more usefully discourse, until the setting of the Sun? Now as for what they
say, that it is criminal to kill ones self; that indeed I have long since
heard, not only from Philolaus (as you asked me) when he lived among us, but
from some others also, that it is a nefarious act: but why it should be such, I
have understood nothing of certainty from any. The first question, Whether
self-murder be criminal, or not; argued Socratically, that is pro and con; and
then determined by these two fundamental reasons; God takes care of us; and we
are his by right of possession; therefore it is double impiety to lay violent
hands upon our selves.
But be of good courage [replies Socrates] perhaps you shall hear the reason by
and by. Mean while this perchance may seem strange, that this among other
things should be universally true, without exception; that no calamity can
befall a man so great and intolerable, as that it may be better for him to die,
than to live: and to men in such a case, is it inconvenient to affirm, that it
is impiety in them, rather to confer this benefit upon themselves, than to
expect it from the hand of another? And Cebes gently smiling, be it known to
Jove, said he in his own Dialect, (...), pro (...).
you have said well. So it seems, says Socrates, to be inconsistent with
reason. That darksom and abstruse speech which is carried about concerning this
matter, viz. that we men are placed in a certain station and guard, from which
we ought not upon any pretext whatever to free our selves, nor to abandon our
charge, seems to me to be truly great, and such as cannot easily be understood
and comprehended: and yet notwithstanding I conceive it to be very truly said,
Cebes, that both God takes care of us, and that we are his possession. Do not
you conceive so too, Cebes? I do indeed, says Cebes. But, says he, if any one
of your slaves should kill himself, without your command, would you be angry
with him, and if it were in your power, revenge it? I would, says Socrates:
and therefore this also seems grounded upon no less reason; that no man ought
to be author of his own death, before God has brought some absolute necessity
upon him, such as he has now imposed upon us.

This also seems consentanious, says Cebes. Coming here to the second Query,
viz. Whether a Philosopher ought to desire death? First, he shows reasons for
the Negative, viz. that the Gods are both Despots, or Lords of men, and
gracious or good Lords to good men; ergo, good men ought not to desire death;
it being evident and confessed, that all are to desire to continue in the
fruition of good things; and he assuming that we remain with the Gods, so long
as we remain in this life. Wherein lies concealed a parasyllogism; for in
truth, while we live here, we are as it were pilgrims from God, as Socrates
will in due place remonstrate.
But in good truth, what you said even now, that Philosophers are easily
inclined to die, seems next to absurd: if what we have here said, be said
consentaneously, namely, that God takes care of us, and we belong to him, as a
Freehold and certain possession. For to affirm, that even the wisest of men
are not displeased and troubled in the least, when they depart from this
procuration and trust which the best Lords and Guardians of things, the Gods,
committed unto them; seems in no measure agreeable to reason. For that Wise man
thinks not, that if he should be at his own liberty and dispose, he can provide
better for himself than God does: but a fool will think, that he is to fly from
his Lord; nor will he think he ought to fly from a good thing, but constantly
to continue therein; and so he flies away, without any foregoing knowledge of
reason. But a prudent and circumspect man will rather desire to continue still
in that which is more advantageous and profitable to him; which certainly,
Socrates, seems plainly repugnant to those things that have been by us just now
explicated; and yet it appears to be more like truth, that wise men when they
die, ought to be troubled; and fools to rejoice. This Socrates hearing, seemed
to me to be highly pleased with that subtle disquisition of Cebes; and turning
his eyes upon us, Cebes, says he, always hunts after some [amusing] reasons;
nor will he presently give assent to what is said by any man. But I also, says
Simmias, am in this point of the same opinion with Cebes. For when Wise men
desire death, what else do they propose to themselves, than to fly from Lords
better than themselves, and to be freed from them? And Cebes seems to me to aim
his discourse at you, who can so easily relinquish both us, and the Gods, (as
your self confesses) the best Lords. Ye have reason, says Socrates; for I
think ye require me to make my defense before ye, as in the Judgment-hall. We
do so, says Simmias. Well then, says he, I will endeavor to defend my self
with more convenient and more probable Arguments before ye, than before my
Judges. For I Socrates going to prove, that death is not only not to be feared,
but also wished by a Philosopher; lays down the fundamentals of his future
probation, applying the matter to himself; namely, that he was sustained by a
steadfast hope, that after death, he should go, not from the Gods, but to them:
because there remains something after death, and it will be well with good men.
Which are the two Heads of the subsequent disputation, viz. that our Souls are
immortal, and that felicity is reserv d for good Souls after death.
says he, Simmias and Cebes, if I did not think I should come, first to other
Gods wise and good, and then to men deceased, better than those who are here:
truly I should do very ill, not to be offended and troubled at my death: but
now (believe me) I am confident I shall come to good men. This (I confess) I
will not positively affirm: but if I affirm any thing for certain, it shall be
this, that I shall come to Gods, the best Lords. And this is the true reason
why I am not at all discomposed or troubled, but sustain my self with a strong
hope, that something remains in reserve for the dead after death; and as they
long ago said, that it will be much better with good men, than with wicked.
What then, says Simmias? since relying upon this cogitation, you have a mind
to depart, will you not communicate to us the cause of it? for that seems to be
a good common to us also, and if you shall convince us of the truth of what you
say, that will be also your full defense. I will endeavor it, says Socrates:
but first let us see what Crito here would have. What else should I desire to
say to you, Socrates, answered Crito, but this, that a good while since, the
man who is to give the poison to you, bad us advertise you, that you ought to
speak very sparingly; because much speaking puts men into a heat, and therefore
ought not to precede the poison: for tha from thence it may come to pass, that
the draught of poison must be repeated twice or thrice. Wish him good health,
says Socrates; let him take care only of what belongs to his own duty [and
provide enough] as if he were to give the dose twice, and if need be, thrice.
This I knew before, answers Crito; but the Fellow has been troublesome to me a
good while: suffer him says he. But I will render an account to ye, my Judges,
by what right I became possessed of that my opinion, that he who truly and
seriously addicts himself to Philosophy, or the love of wisdom, does die with
undaunted courage, and steadfast resolution, furnished with that noble hope,
that immediately after his death, he shall certainly attain unto the greatest
Goods, [or supreme felicity.] How this is, Simmias and Cebes, I will endeavor
to explain to ye.

They who have rightly embraced the study of Philosophy, First argument; the
great duty and business of a Philosopher, is continually to meditate upon
death; therefore he ought not to dread it when it comes.
seem to excel in this one thing; that living in obscurity and retirement from
vulgar conversation, they entirely and with all possible contentation of mind,
devote themselves to the meditation of death. If this be true, it will be
absurd, to addict our study and devoirs to the consideration of this one thing,
all our life long; and at last when death it self comes, to be offended and
preturbed at it, after so long and familiar a converse therewith in our
thoughts. The popular scoff against Philosophers, that they have death always
in their thoughts, because they are conscious to themselves, they deserve to
die, in respect of their nesarious lives; urged to Socrates.
Here Simmias smiling, Socrates says he, by Jove you have forced me to smile,
who was nothing inclined to such gayety of humor; for the vulgar if they had
heard this, would (I believe) be of opinion, that it is extremely suitable to
Philosophers: and the greatest part of our men would consequently assent, that
all Philosophers ought in good earnest to die; and that themselves are not
ignorant they very well deserve to die. Whereunto he gravely replies, that it
is no wonder if the ignorant vulgar give a rash and importune judgment of what
they understand not.
This (replies Socrates) they might say, Simmias; and truly too; this one thing
excepted, that they themselves are not ignorant how far those who are truly
Philosophers, both meditate upon death, and are worthy of it: [for the vulgar
are really ignorant thereof, and cannot judge of what they understand not.]
Wherefore securely pretermitting those vulgar [Scoffers] let us seriously
pursue our discourse.

A Second, and indeed an artificial argument drawn from the nature of death it
self, which he defines to be a deliverance of the Soul from the Body; and puts
that for the first proposition of a Syllogysm.
Do ye think, that death is any thing? Yes, answers Simmias. Do ye think death
to be any thing else but a freeing of the Soul from the body: and that to die,
is this, when the Body being freed from the Soul, remains by it self; and the
Soul likewise freed from the Body, has existence apart by it self? or is death
any other thing besides this? Nothing but that, answers Simmias. Consider then,
I beseech ye, whether your judgment be not the same with mine: for thence I
conceive light will be derived to the argument now under our consideration.
Assumption; but the main care of a Philosopher is, to alienate and divorce his
Soul from his Body, and the cupidities thereof.
Do ye take them to be Philosophers, who employ themselves in pursuit of those
pleasures (as they call them) of the body, as of eating and drinking, and other
the like sensual delights? By no means, Socrates, says Simmias. What then? in
Venerial pleasures? Neither. Has a Philosopher any care or value for other
things that appertain to the delicacy and ornament of the body? as of rich
clothes, fine shoes, and other gaudy ornaments; does he desire to be furnished
with store of these toys? Whether do ye think he esteems, or contemns those
things, unless so far as there may be great necessity of using them? My opinion
is, a true Philosopher contemns them all. Then your opinion is, that the whole
study, care and labor of such a Philosopher is, not in pampering and adorning
his body, but in withdrawing (as much as he can) his thoughts from his body,
and converting them entirely upon his mind. I confess it. Does it not then
evidently follow from thence, that the Office of a Philosopher does chiefly
appear in this, that he renders his Mind free and absolute from community of
his body? It does so. But yet, Simmias, most men think, that he who takes no
pleasure from those [sensual] things, deserves not the use of this life, but
comes nearer to death, being insensible and careless of those delights that
belong to the body. You are in the right. The first circumstance of his
probation, from the effects of the corporeal senses; that they being not
sufficiently pure and perfect, cause the Soul, by contagion and sympathy, to be
dull and pore-blind in the disquisition and discernment of truth.
What then? when wisdom it self is to be acquired, will the body prove an
impediment, if a man take it along as a companion in that disquisition? for
example, the sight it self, or hearing, have they any truth in men? or do Poets
speak truth, when they say, that we neither see nor hear any thing clearly and
entirely? and if these senses of the body be not perfect, or sufficiently quick
and perspicuous; certainly the others, which are all weaker and duller than the
sight and hearing, must needs be less perfect and sincere. Do you not think so?
I do, says he. When then does the Soul attain truth? for when it endeavors to
discern any thing clearly and distinctly, by the help of the body; it is
apparent, that then it is seduced and circumvented by the body it self. You are
in the right. Does not the Soul, by reasoning, or some other way of discerning,
comprehend this perspicuously? Certainly it does. And then it reasons best,
when no sense of the body offends it, whether hearing, or seeing, or pain, or
pleasure; but it converseth entirely and undisturbdly with it self alone,
contemning and repudiating the body, and (as much as lies in its power)
retiring from all community and commerce therewith, with certain premeditation
and counsel desires things, and pursues them. No doubt on it. Does not therefore
the Soul of a Philosopher even in this also highly contemn the body, and
retreat from it: and by its self inquire into the nature of things, satisfied
only with its own conversation? So it seems. Now this Operation, or work of the
Soul, Another proof, from the proper and peculiar operation of the Soul;
wherein withdrawing it self from commerce with the Senses, it is exercised in
pure and abstracted Reasoning.
shall we say it is just, or not? Just, without doubt. Is it fair and good? Why
not? But have you ever beheld with your eyes any thing of those? None, says
he. Have you with any other of your corporal senses attained to these things,
(I speak of all, as of magnitude, health, strength; and in a word, the like,
which are of such a nature, as they have all a real being) is their most true
and certain nature considered, and fully discovered by the body? Or is it thus,
that he who is most fitly and exquisitely comparated or disposed to comprehend
by cogitation, the nature of that very thing, in the disquisition whereof he is
versed; shall come nearest to the knowledge and understanding of the nature
thereof? No doubt of it. He then will perform this most purely and clearly, who
by that edge of his Wit, by that accuteness of Spirit, pierces into
everything, neither making use of his sight while he thinks, nor drawing any
other sense into counsel together with his reasoning: but employing only his
pure and simple faculty of reasoning, endeavors thereby to investigate and
discover the naked and true nature of the things themselves: free and separated
from his ears, and eyes; and in a word, from his whole body; as that which may
perturb the Soul it self, and hinder it from acquiring to it self verity and
wisdom, when it is employed in conversation and commerce therewith. Will this
man, think you, if any other does, attain to understand the true nature of
things? you speak truth, Socrates, over and over, says Simmias: Is it not then
consequently necessary, that to those who are truly Philosophers, there be a
constant and established Opinion, that they may confer among themselves about
these things? there seems to be a plain way as it were paved to our hands,
which leads us with reason to the consideration of things; but while we carry
about this body, and our Soul is immersed in so dark and incommodious a sink of
evil, we shall never attain to what we desire. This we affirm to be truth. For
this body creates to us an infinity of businesses, troubles, and disquiets,
merely for the nourishment and necessary supplies of it. Besides, if diseases
chance to invade us, they likewise hinder us from the investigation of various
things: and that fills us with loves, desires, fears, various imaginations and
Chimera's, and many foolish whimsies; so that it is a very true saying, that
the body will never permit us to be wise. For nothing but the body raises
wars, seditions, combats, and the like mischiefs, by its inordinate lusts: and
we are forced to provide moneys for maintenance of the body, being slaves and
drudges to the necessary services of it. Now while we are thus employed in
these meaner Offices, we have no leisure to apply our selves to the study and
search of wisdom. And what is the greatest of all incommodities, if we do by
chance get any thing of leisure and vacancy from the cares of the body, and
address our minds to the serious consideration of any thing; presently the body
intrudes, and while we are busied in that inquiry, raises commotions and
tumult, and so disturbs and confounds the mind, that it cannot possibly discern
truth. But we have already demonstrated, The former assumption repeated, and
illustrated by a Dilemma. Whence flows a certain conclusion; since the grand
design of a Philosopher is, to discern truth, his duty is to separate his Soul
from his Body; and so as it were to anticipate death in this life.
that if we desire to perceive any thing purely and clearly, we must withdraw
from the body, and employ only our mind, which alone is capable to discern the
nature and properties of Objects, in the contemplation thereof: for then at
length, as appears, we shall attain to the fruition of what we desire, and with
love and diligence seek after, namely wisdom; when we have passed through the
[refinement] of death, as our precedent discourse intimates: but not whilst we
remain in this life. For if it be impossible for us to perceive any thing pure
and entire, in conjunction with the body, one of these two [propositions] must
of necessity follow: either we shall never attain to sapience; or not until we
have passed out of this life. For then will the Soul be entirely divorced and
separate from the Body, but not before. While we live here, we approach indeed
never to sapience, if we have as little commerce and conversation with the
body, and be as little infected with the lusts thereof, as the condition and
necessities of our frail nature will permit: but preserve our selves pure from
the contagion of the same, until God himself shall discharge and free us wholly
from it. And being once thus delivered, and pure from the madness and
seducements of the body; as is reasonable to believe, we shall both be
associated to the like pure beings, and by our selves know all purity and
integrity; which perhaps is truth it self. For it is not possible for him who
is himself impure, to touch what is pure. These things, Simmias, I conceive it
necessary for all, who are possessed with a right desire of understanding
things, both to hold, and to discourse of among themselves. Are not you also of
the same opinion? Altogether, Socrates. If then these be true proceeds
Socrates; there is truly great hope, The second conclusion from the premises,
viz. if we then only live well, i. e. exercise our faculty of reasoning, when
we abdicate our senses: it necessarily follows, that we shall then be happy,
and perceive truth plainly, when we shall be wholly separated from the body, i.
e. after death.
that who shall arrive at the place whither I am now going, will there, if any
where, abundantly attain to the enjoyment of that, for which we have in the
whole course of our life past, been seeking with extreme labor and study. This
peregrination therefore now appointed to me, is finished with good hope; and so
it will to any other, who shall have once persuaded himself, to prepare his
mind, by rendering it pure and clean. No doubt of it, says Simmias. Is
therefore what we said even now, to be held a purification and purging of the
Mind; viz. as much as is possible, to divorce it from the Body, and to accustom
it to be by it self congregated and retired from the same, and to dwell as it
were by it self: both in this, and in the future life, single by it self, and
freed as from the chains of the body? Yea certainly, says Simmias; Is death
then rightly called a solution and separation of the Soul from the Body? It is
so, says he. And do they only, who study Philosophy rightly, most endeavor to
divorce their Souls from their Bodies, as we have said? is not this the
constant meditation of Philosophers? It seems to be so. What therefore we said
in the beginning, A third conclusion. Since the principal design of a
Philosopher, is to attain unto truth; and that he cannot attain unto it, until
after death: it is inconsistent for him to fear death. So the whole question is
determined, that to a wise man, death is not only not formidable, but also
desirable.
would it not be ridiculous, if a man who has all his life long made it his
constant study, and principal care, to anticipate death by rendering his life as
nearly like to it, as is possible; should yet when death really comes, be
afraid of, and troubled at it? Why not? In truth then, says he, they who
Philosophize seriously and rightly, meditate most upon death, and to them of
all men living, death is least formidable; which is evident from this argument.

Funera non metuit sapiens suprema; nec illi,
Qui contemplando toties super astra levavit
Carnoso abstractam penitus de carcere mentem,
Corporis atque Animi faciens divortia tanta;
Quanta homini licuit, mors formidanda venire
Aut ignota potest. Nam mors divortia tantum
Plena haec, quae sapiens toties optasse videtur,
Et toties tentasse, facit, Superosque petenti
Libertatem animae claustris concedit apertis.
Majus noster, in Supplemento, Lucani, lib. 4. For if at all times they contemn
and vilify the Body, and strive to have their Soul apart by it self; and when
the hour of their real and final separation comes, fear and be disquieted: what
could be more alien or remote from reason, unless they willingly and freely
come thither, where there is hope they shall, at their arrival, obtain whatever
they in this life desired? and they desired Wisdom, and to be delivered from
all commerce of the body, with which they are offended. Have many been willing,
out of ardent affection to their Friends, Wives, and Children deceased, to
descend to the shades below, led by this hope, that there they should see, and
converse with those whom they loved: and shall he who is really in love with
Wisdom, and has conceived a strong and certain hope, that he shall no where
obtain and enjoy it, but in the other world, as is decent and consentaneous;
when he is at the instant of death, be vexed and grieved, and not rather
voluntarily and freely meet and embrace it? for so we are to hold, that a
genuine Philosopher will conceive; that he shall never meet with true wisdom,
but only apud inferos, among the dead. Which if true, how inconsistent with
reason were it, for such a man to fear death? Highly inconsistent, says he, by
Jove. It Is then a fit argument, that he whom you shall see dying with reluctance
and fear, is not [(...), sed (...),] a lover of Wisdom, but a lover of his
Body; not a lover of verity, but of Riches, and the Pleasures of this life. It
is just so as you say. To those therefore who are in this manner disposed and
inclined, A new Theorem, resulting from the precedents; that those who
neglecting the study of philosophy, pursue not truth, as politicians and the
vulgar, have not true Virtue, but only the shadow and resemblance of it.
is not that [Virtue] which is named Fortitude, most agreeable and proper? It
is, says he. Is not Temperance, which many define to be this, not to be
disquieted or afflicted With lusts, but to despise them, and to regulate ones
life by moderation: does not this properly and peculiarly belong to those who
both contemn the Body, and continually exercise themselves in the study of
Philosophy? Of necessity. For, says he, if you consider the Fortitude and
Temperance of other men, you will discover them to be nothing but an importune
and absurd ostentation of Virtue. How so, Socrates? You know says he, that all
other men account death to be one of the greatest Evils. They do so indeed,
replies he. Do then men of courage and fortitude endure death bravely, for fear
of greater Evils? They do, answers he. Then are all, except Philosophers, said
to be Valiant only from fear; though it be truly somewhat absurd [and a kind of
contradiction] to call any man valiant upon the account of fear and cowardice.
I grant it to be so. What? as for those of the vulgar who are reputed to be
Temperate, are not they so out of some intemperance? Tho we have declared that
to be impossible: yet the like affection falls upon them, in that their
senseless and foolish temperance; for while they fear to be deprived of some
pleasures, and still coveting them, abstain from others; they are carried away
by those they covet, without restraint. Now they call it Intemperance, to be
governed by the tyranny of pleasures: and it is their case, to be overcome by
some pleasures, whilst they conquer others. So that what we said even now of
vulgar Fortitude, holds true also of these men, that they are Temperate from
some Intemperance. But, my Simmias, That the firmament of true Virtue, is
wisdom; without which the politic virtues are vizards and disguizes. So that to
Plato, true Virtue, is wisdom; Wisdom truth; and Truth, Expurgation.
this is not the right way to Virtue, to exchange pleasures for pleasures,
pains for pains, one fear for another, greater for less, as we do money. That
is at last the true money, for which all things else are to be exchanged;
Wisdom, for the sake whereof, and for which alone, all things are to be sold
and bought: that fortitude, and temperance, and (in sum) every true and
genuine Virtue may exist with wisdom; while pleasures, and fears, and all of
the same Tribe come and go. But if they be separated from prudence, and
exchanged one for another by turns; such Virtue will not amount to the shadow
of Virtue, but be merely servile and base; it will have nothing of true,
nothing of sound and solid in it. Now Truth it self is the expurgation and
refinement of all these: not temperance, nor justice, nor fortitude, no nor
Wisdom it self can be the expurgation. And indeed those who first ordained our
Ceremonies, seem not to have been silly and vile men; but to have prudently
designed that wrapped up in the veyls of words, when they said, that he who
should descend to those below, not being initiated, and expiated according to
the use of Sacrifices; Hence that of Virgil. (Aeneid lib 6, ea. prima piacula
sunto, Sic demum lucos stygios, regna invia vivis aspicies, etc. Concerning
which Expiation, derived from the ancient Egyptians, consult Servius Honoratus
upon the place.
should be rolled in mudd: but he who descended to the shades, being first
ritely expiated, and admitted to the Sacrifices, should have his habitation
with the Gods. For in the Ceremonies themselves (as they say) you may see
(...). Multos Thyrsigeros, paucos est cernere Bacchos, an old Greek a dage.
many that bear Lances covered with leaves, but few Bacchuses. The importance
of all the precedent Arguments, accomodated by Socrates to his own
justification, for that rejecting the counsel and aid of his Friends, who
strove to persuade him to avoid death, (as Plato has left upon Record, in a
precedent Dialogue, entitled Crito) he still remained fixed in his judgment,
that he sought rather to embrace it.
These are, in my opinion, no other but they who study Philosophy rightly. From
which institute I for my part have never in my whole life departed: but have
with all possible contention of mind labored to be one of them. But if we have
done our devoirs rightly, and profited any thing in that study, when we come
thither, we shall certainly understand, if God be so pleased, a little after,
as I think. These then Simmias and Cebes, are the reasons I bring for my
defense, that I leave you and these Lords who are here, not only upon just
motives, but without trouble or regret: being fully persuaded within my self,
that I shall there find as good Lords and Friends as here. The things I have
said, are indeed of that [abstruse] nature, that they may be by very many
esteemed incredible: but if I shall appear to you to have made now a more
pertinent and decent defense, to engage your assent, than I did before those
Athenians who were my Judges; it is very well.

When Socrates had said this, A new disputation of the Immortality of the Soul;
but the basis of the former. For if the Soul survive not the body, all dispute
concerning future felicity or infelicity, must be vain and idle.
Cebes taking up the discourse; some things, says he, seem indeed to be
excellently well said by you: but what you have delivered concerning man's Mind
or Soul, seems wholly abhorrent from Humane belief: nay they believe rather, To
make way for this dispute, first is proposed the contrary opinion of those who
held, that the Soul dies with the Body; but so proposed, that in the words of
this opinion, lie conceled the seeds as it were of more solid Arguments. For
things compounded are said to be dissipated. He therefore being about to
demonstrate the Soul to be a things, not compound, but most simple; makes it
most evident, that a Soul is incapable of destruction by dissipation; as will
appear from the dispute it self.
that the Soul, so soon as it goes out of the Body, does no longer exist; but
in the very day wherein a man dies, utterly perish; more plainly, that
departing from the Body, as a breath or smoke, it is dispersed, and flies away,
nothing of it afterward remaining. Now if it continued entire, and had a being
apart by it self, delivered and freed from the evils you recounted; then I
confess, there would be a noble hope [beyond death] if the things you have
said, Socrates, be true. But this wants no little probation of Arguments to
prevail upon belief: The state of the Question, Whether after the d ssolution
of the Body, the Soul be likewise dissolved, and has no longer a being.
namely that the Soul existeth after a man is dead; and what faculty it has of
perceiving and understanding. You are in the right, Cebes, replies Socrates.
But what do we? Will you that we discourse further of this matter, whether it
be reasonable, or not? I would gladly hear, says Cebes, your opinion
concerning these [abstruse] things. Nor do I think, says Socrates again, there
is any man living, though he be a Comedian, when he shall hear me disputing
about them, will say, I trifle and speak of things impertinent and undecent. If
you please therefore, that this matter be fully debated among us; let us
consider it in this manner, namely whether the Souls of men deceased, be in the
infernal habitations, or not. The first reason, drawn from the Pythagorean
opinion, of the transmigration of souls. For if souls go from bodies into
another life, and return thence hither to animate other bodies; it follows both
that they do and will exist hereafter; because they are supposed (...) pass
through many bodies.
For this is a very ancient Tradition, which we here commemorate, that the
Souls of the dead go from hence thither, and return from thence hither, and are
made of the dead. Now if it be so, that the living are made out of the dead;
our Souls truly can be no where but there: for if they were not, men could not
be made again of them. And this would be a strong Argument, that the thing is
so, in case it were manifest, that the living are not otherwise animated than
by the Souls of the dead. But if this be not evident and certain, other reasons
are to be sought for, that may be more convincing. They are so, says Cebes.
Proof of this Pythagorean Hypothesis; that this circulation is performed, not
only in the bodies of men, so that the living are made out of the dead; but in
all other creatures; namely that contraries are made out of their contraries,
as he teaches by various examples.
Do not then, says he, consider this in men only, if you would easily
understand it; but in Animals and Plants also; in sum, in all that have being
by Generation: that we may enquire whether they be all produced from no other
original than as contraries from contraries, (whatsoever have their contraries)
as Beautiful or Honorable is contrary to ugly or shameful, just to unjust, and
infinite others in the same manner. Let us see therefore if it be necessary
that any contrary can have no being in nature, unless from its contrary: for
example, that when a greater thing is made, it be necessary it should be made
of a less first, and then greater. Let us examine this. If a less thing be made
out of that which was greater before, will it afterward be made less? Yes,
says he. And of a stronger, a weaker; o^ a slower a swifter? It will so. What?
if any thing worse be made, is it out of a better? if any thing more just, is
it out of what is more unjust? Why not? This then is clear, says he, that all
things are thus made, contraries out of contraries. It Is so. What more? Is
there any medium betwixt two contraries; so that where there are two
contraries, there must be also two generations or originals of being produced,
first from one to the other, and then from that to this again? for betwixt a
less thing and a greater, there is augmentation and diminution, of which one we
call to increase, the other to decrease. Right. Therefore to separate, and
compound; to grow cold, and to grow hot, and all in the same manner; though we
use not names sometimes, yet in reality it is necessary, that some things be
made out of others, and that there be a mutual generation and beginning of some
to others. I grant it, says he. Is any thing contrary to life, as sleep is
contrary to waking? Yes. What? Death, says he. Are these then made mutually
each out of other, seeing they are contraries, and their generations made by
some thing intermediate betwixt two contraries? Why not? One therefore of the
two pairs I just now mentioned to you, I will explain, and their generations:
do you show me the other. To sleep, and to awake: for out of sleep comes
waking, and out of waking, sleep. The origins or generatipns of these are, of
sleep, to be in a deep sleep, of waking, to be raised up from sleep. Is this
sufficiently explained, or not? Sufficiently. That death is contrary to life,
and life to death; whence is collected, that the dead are out of the living,
and the living out of the dead; and therefore the souls thus passing from body
to body, still are in Being; for otherwise they could not transmigrate.
Do you then tell me with equal plainess, of life and death: whether is life
contrary to death? It is so. And are some things generated out of others. They
are. What then is made out of one living? A dead one, says he; and what out of
a dead? A living, I must confess. Of the dead therefore, Cebes, are made the
living. Clearly so, says he. Are then our Souls in the Mansions below? It
seems so. Of the two generations or orgins therefore, which we have
demonstrated to be in these things, is not one at least perspicuous? For to
die, is manifest to all: is it not? yes, says he. The same conclusion further
explicated, thus; tho this new life appear not to us, yet since no man can
doubt of death, which is known to all; from the nature of contraries, that
cannot be understood one without the other, it is necessary that [(...)] or
reviving, or [(...)] second generation to life, be.
What then shall we do? shall we compose some other contrary to this, or will
this nature rather be maimed and imperfect? or shall we determine, that some
other generation is to be rendered contrary to death? yes, says he. What shall
that be? Even to revive [that is a new life. If then there be a new life, will
that be a certain generation out of the dead to the living? Doubtless. That
therefore shall be confessed and established betwixt us, that the living have
existence out of the dead, no less than the dead out of the living. Which being
so, is a convenient argument, that it is plainly necessary, the Souls of the
dead be somewhere, from whence they may again exist. This indeed, Socrates,
seems to me to be proved from [Propositions] granted and given. Observe this
also, Cebes, that we have not confessed that without good cause. Another
Argument, ab incommodo; if contraries were not thus produced out of contraries,
all Generations would inevitably cease; which being absurd, he thence collects
and evinces, that out of the living, are made the dead, and out of the dead the
living. Which is the first conclusion.
For unless those things that are made, were composed some of others by turns;
so as they come round again as in a circle; but there were only a generation in
a right line from one to its opposite, not reflecting again to the first, nor
making a return or regress: assure your self, it would come to pass, that at
length all things would have the same figure, be in the same manner affected,
and consequently would cease to be made. How Is that? says he. It Is not
difficult, answers Socrates, to comprehend what I say. For Example; if this
very thing, to sleep (if I may so speak) that is sleep, were existent; but to
awake, were not, on the reverse, composed of the man sleeping: we were obliged
to conclude, that all would at length represent the Fable of Endymion, and
appear no where; because the same would happen to all, that happened to that
Endymion, namely to sleep. And if all things were mixed and compounded into
one, without discretion or distinction; then that of the Anaxagoreans would
come to pass, all things would be at once. In the same manner, my Cebes, if all
things that now participate of life, should die, and then remain dead in that
figure, nor revive again; is it not clearly necessary, that at length all must
die, and nothing be left alive? for if the living have existence out of others,
and the living should die; how could it be possible but all would be consumed
by death? By no means, Socrates, quoth he; for all you say, appears to me to
be true. It Is even so, Cebes, says he. Nor do we seem to confess things, as
being imposed upon, and circumvented by error: but this is really demonstrated
by us, that there is a return and restoration of a certain new life; that the
living are made out of the dead; that the Souls of the dead exist; and that
good Souls are in a better condition, and wicked ones in a worse.

Here Cebes answering, A second Reason to prove the Immortality of the Soul,
drawn from that Hypothesis, that to learn, is only to remember. For if in this
body, the Soul remember the things it knew before it came into it, it has had
a Being before it was married to the same.
Socrates, says he, what you now said, arises from the reason of that opinion
which you frequently have in your mouth (if at least it be true) that to learn,
is only to remember. And from this opinion indeed it seems to be necessarily
concluded, that we some time heretofore learned, what we now recall into our
memory. But this could not be, unless our Soul were in being, before it came
into this human form. So by this reason also, the Soul seems to be a thing
immortal. But Cebes, says Simmias taking up the Discourse; pray, recall to our
memory those your demonstrations: for I do not well remember them at present.
The thing may be demonstrated by one, and that a remarkable Reason; A proof of
that Platonic Hypothesis, that science is Reminiscense, from the effects
themselves; viz. that men being asked rightly, answer fitly of things otherwise
(than by reminiscense) unknown to them, yea and of such as are indeed obscure
and abstruse, as in Mathematics. This Plato more copiously explicates in his
Dialogue called Menon: here touching it only en passant.
namely, because men being asked, they deliver the whole matter as it is: but
this certainly they could not do, if there were not Science and right reason in
them. Again if a man bring a matter to Geometrical Figures, or Diagrams, or the
like evidences: this most manifestly proves and demonstrates the same to be
true. But if by this way, says Socrates, that be not proved to you; consider
well, whether when you by this reason seriously examine the matter, it seem to
you so clear, as that you ought to assent thereunto. Do you not believe, how
that which is called to learn, is really nothing but to remember? I do not
indeed refuse to believe it: but desire to have recalled into my memory, that
of which we began to discourse: and from those reasons Cebes has endeavored to
allege, I almost remember and believe it already. Nevertheless I would now
gladly hear, by what way you are provided to demonstrate it. By this, says he.
Upon this we are already agreed, that if a man record and recall to his memory
any thing whatsoever, he must have known it before. True, says he. A further
proof of the same supposition, whereof this is the sum: that from the parity
or imparity of the thing we have known, we come to understand other things,
while we mark what is like, what unlike; which he asserts by many Examples.
Do we then confess this also, that when there is knowledge by this way, that
knowledge is reminiscence? I say, by this way [by this example] as if a man had
perceived a thing either by sight, or by hearing, or any other sense, he has
not only known that thing, but thought upon some other thing also, whereof that
very knowledge is not, but of another: might we not say, that he has remembered
the thing, the understanding and knowledge whereof he has perceived? How say
you this? Let this be an example; is not the knowledge of a Man, one; and the
knowledge of a Harp, another? Why not? Know you not that it is usual to Lovers,
when they behold either the Harp, or Garment, or any other thing, which their
Paramours or Mistresses are wont to use; to know that Harp, and to have in
their mind the image of the Youth whose the Harp is? Now this [their Knowledg]
is Remembrance: as a man having seen Simmias, often remembers Cebes; and there
are found infinite other examples of the same kind. There are so, says
Simmias, by Jove. And is not that, says he, Remembrance? and most of all, when
the same happens to us in those things, which when we have not lately seen
them, through length of time, and discontinuance of use, we have forgot? yes,
says he. Does it not happen, that if one see the Picture of a Horse, or Harp,
he presently remembers a Man: and if he see the picture of Simmias, he
instantly remembers Cebes? It does. And if he see Simmias his picture, does he
not remember Simmias himself? It does so happen, says he. Whence it follows,
that Reminiscense is from the parity or disparity of things compared among
themselves.
Does it not then come to pass, that in all these instances Remembrance is
exercised; partly from things alike, partly from things unlike? It does.
Another supposition, that from this Reminiscence we do not only perceive
wherein the resemblance consists, but also what is wanting to make the
resemblance perfect, with respect to the thing already known. Which also he
remonstrates by Examples.
But now, when a man remembers a thing upon sight of the like, ought he not to
be so qualified or disposed, as to understand whether there be any defect of
resemblance in what he so remembers? Of necessity, says he. Consider then,
says he, if these things be so. Do we say, that there is any thing Equal? not
wood to wood, nor stone to stone, nor any thing of that kind: but besides all
these, some other thing, viz. Equality it self? shall we hold, there is any
such thing in nature, or not? yes, by Jove, says Simmias; but exceedingly
admirable. Do we know what that thing, Equal, is? We do, says he. Whence shall
we derive the knowledge of it? shall we not from those things we just now
mentioned, when we behold woods or stones, or any other the like Bodies equal;
from these (I say) shall we not in our thoughts comprehend that, which is quite
another thing, different from them? or does it not seem to you to be quite
another thing? Now consider this also. Do not those very equal woods, and equal
stones, which are the same still, seem to you sometimes to be equal, sometimes
unequal. They do so. What? Do they sometimes seem to you equal or unequal: or
the very Equality it self seem Inequality? Not at all, Socrates. Are not then,
says he, Equals, and Equality the same thing. Not, as I conceive, Socrates.
But says he, Another Supposition, to the support whereof the rest are applied,
viz. that we come to know things Equal and Unequal, by a certain Divine power
(which Plato here calls [(...)] the Equal) from the reason of the comparison
made, understanding this simply, that in our Soul is a Divine virtue or
faculty, by which the operations of both Memory and Science, and other the
like, are performed.
tho the Equals be different from the Equality, yet you have both understood
and perceived the knowledge thereof. You speak most truly, says he. Is it not
the same thing, whether the object understood be like or unlike to that which
occasioned the thoughts of it? It is. That truly makes no difference, for
having seen one thing, and from that very sight conceiving in your mind
another, whether like or unlike: necessary it is, says he, that [Conception]
be Remembrance. Very well. What then, says he? are we to hold the same
concerning those things of which we newly spoke, woods, stones, and the like?
Do the Equals seem to be so among themselves, as the Equal it self is? or does
something seem to be wanting therein so as they are not such as that equal is,
or nothing? Much is wanting. Do we not admit this also, as certain and
perspicuous; when a man having beheld something, From these suppositions given
and granted, he infers (toward the explication of the question under debate)
that the Soul understands both like and unlike things, wherein the parity or
disparity consists; which is Science, and from Remembrance; as being from
comparison of par and impar.
comprehends the same in his mind, and will have it (for example, what I now
look upon) to be exactly such as some other thing: but yet it fails, i. e. it
cannot be such, but comes short of the other to which he likened it: is it not
of absolute necessity, that he who so reasons, has before seen that, to
which he said the other is like, but yet there is wanting therein somewhat to
complete the similitude or resemblance? It is necessary. What? are we in the
same manner affected, in the consideration both of the things that seem equal,
and of the equality it self? Altogether. Necessary it is therefore, that we
have first seen that Equal, before that time wherein having first beheld the
Equals, we comprehend them in our mind, and conceive, that all things affect to
be such as that Equal, but cannot reach to a full and perfect similitude or
resemblance thereof. So it is. And that although our Soul does in this life,
act by means of the corporeal Senses, and so is obliged to make use of them as
her instruments; yet that very faculty of perceiving by them, is to be deducted
from a higher and nobler principle, namely that Divine power essential to the
Soul, which he calls [(...)] the Equal, so that by that name he seems to
intimate God himself, to the end he might conclude, that the Soul also is
Divine.
But let us grant this also; that no man could comprehend in his mind that
Equal it self, from any other [intimation:] and that it is not possible, that
any should comprehend it, otherwise than from the sight, or touch, or some
other of the Senses. For I hold the same of all: the case being one and the
same in all, Socrates; as to what concerns the explication of this Discourse.
But from the information of the Senses themselves we are to understand that all
things that are subject to their preception, continually affect, and desire to
be referred unto that which is Equal, and to yield thereunto; as being in
themselves less perfect. Shall we grant this? Yes. The Reason of that
assertion. Unless that Divine power were in us, whereby we perceive; certainly
we could discern nothing by the help of our Senses. Divine then is that Faculty
whereby the Soul understands by benefit of the senses, remembers, and reasons;
yea and has a knowledge even of God himself, of Good, Beautiful, Holy, Just.
For before we began to see, or hear, or have any faculty of Sense, 'twas
necessary for us to be endowed with knowledge of that Equal, what it was: if we
would refer to that Equal, the Equals that occur to our senses; as if all
things were by a certain potent instinct inclined to aspire to be such as that
is, tho they be much, yea infinitely inferior thereunto. This, Socrates, is
evidently necessary from the things mentioned by us before. When we were newly
born, did we not See and Hear; had we not all our Senses? We had. It must be
therefore, that before that, we were endowed with knowledge of the Equal.
Certainly. Before we were born therefore (it seems) it is necessary we should
have the knowledge thereof. It seems so. Conclusion; seeing that from the
example of things most known to us, it has been proved, that we know that
which by comparing like and unlike, or equal and unequal, we remember; and
seeing that the soul does even now it is in the body, know so great things; it
follows of necessity, that the soul long before knew the same things, which it
now, by the ministry of the senses, knows and understands, as it were by
certain degrees. Yet that knowledge is to be attributed, not to the ministry of
the senses, but to that efficacious seed of Reason and Science which is
inherent in the Soul it self; and only excited by the suggestions of the senses.
If we were endowed therewith, before we had existence; did we not understand
even before we were Born? and when first we were born, did we not know, not
only Equal, and Greater, and Less, but all other the like [Respects?] for the
design of our discourse is no more concerning the Equal, than concerning the
Beautiful, the Good, Just, and Holy; in sum, concerning all, by which both in
our interrogations, when we interrogate our selves, and in our answers, when we
answer, we sign and seal the Being of a thing: so that of necessity, we were
endowed with the knowledge of all these things, before we were born. It is of
necessity. Now if there had never been induced upon us an Oblivion of these
Knowledges perceived, we must certainly have still been skilful in them, and
through our whole life always endowed with Science. For, to know, is
constantly to retain the knowledge of that thing we have perceived, and never
to lose it. Do we not call Oblivion, a loss of Knowledge? We do, Socrates. What
if being endowed with that Knowledge, before we were born; we have lost it,
since we were born: and afterward being conversant in those things by the help
and service of our Senses, retrive those Sciences we had before: do not we then
call to Learn, to recover our own Science? and if we call it, to Remember; do
we call it rightly, or not? Rightly. For by experience it has been
demonstrated to be possible, that he who has perceived a thing by sense, i. e.
seen, or heard, or by any other sense perceived it, may in his mind comprehend
some other thing different from that which he had forgot, namely that to which
the other, like or unlike, should succeed [in the brain of his thoughts.]
Wherefore of the two, one (as we have said) is a necessary consequent; for
either we were born knowing these things, and all know them through the whole
course of our life; or certainly those whom we call Learners, do nothing else
but Remember: and so, to Learn, will be only to remember. And without all
doubt, Socrates, this is even so. Whether of the two will you choose, Simmias?
That we are born knowing; or that we afterward recall to mind the things we knew
before. I know not at present, Socrates, which to choose. What? in this example
have you not judgment to choose, and to determine certainly of it? A prudent
and knowing man, cannot he give a reason of the things he knows? He can,
Socrates. Do you think that all are able to give an account of those whereof we
just now treated? I wish they could, says Simmias; but fear lest to morrow no
man may be left alive able to do it. Do not all, think you, know these things,
Simmias says he? No. Therefore they remember those they have sometimes known.
How the soul is said to have formerly known the things which being in the body;
it recalls to memory. Where we may ^o save, that according to this Socratic
Hypothesis, the soul is created long before the body is formed, and as a Ghest
infused into it, by God. Which is his first position.
Certainly. And when did our Minds receive their knowledge? Not from the time
we were born men. No doubtless. Before therefore. So it seems. Our Souls then
were, before they put on the shape of man; and they obtained the power of
understanding, while they yet had existence apart by themselves. Unless
perhaps, Socrates, we receive these Sciences at the time of our birth: for that
time yet remains. When then do we lose them? for we have them not when we are
newly born, as was before agreed upon betwixt us. Do we lose them at the same
time when we receive them? or can you assign any other time? No. But I
perceived not that I say nothing. Then, Simmias, the thing is clearly so. A
second position, that our soul is Divine, not by decision from Divinity it
self, nor by issuing, or propagation, or generation of substance, or any other
gross manner of production from Divinity; yet divine; so that the Divine energy
of perceiving and knowing, is essential to it, which distingueshes it from all
other Animals.
If at least there be those things which we have always in our mouths,
Beautiful, and Good, and every such essence; and we thereunto refer all things
that come from our Senses: for that by investigating our own Essence, we find
to be, namely existent, and we compare these things to the exemplar thereof; So
it is necessary, that as these also are, so our Soul too be, before we were
Born, and came into the light of this life. If these were not, truly this
discourse would seem to be made in vain: but they are so, and there is an equal
necessity, both that they be, and that our Souls were existent, before we were
Born. If those be not, neither are these. Conclusion; that this created and
divine Soul has had prae-existence with God, then knowing more things, than
since it came a Pilgrim into the darksom lodging of the body. So that this
Doctrine about Remembrance, may be reduced to this one Syllogism. That is
learned which is perceived from remembrance of the like: the Soul, before it
came into the Body, could not but know many things, by that Divine power
wherewith it was endowed; therefore what it learneth in the body, it
understands from remembrance of the like; and so Learning is nothing but
Reminiscense; which was the thing to be demonstrated.
Truly, Socrates, says Simmias, absolute necessity seems to urge these things
beyond all dispute: and reason seems excellently to conduct us to this
conclusion, that as well our Soul, as that Essence whereof we speak, have been
existent, before we were born. For I hold nothing so certain and evident, as
that all these are, and chiefly both Beautiful and Good, and the rest of which
you now treated: and I am abundantly convinced of their verity. What? and is
Cebes so too? for he also ought to be persuaded. I conceive, says Simmias, the
whole matter has been sufficiently proved to him too, tho he be a man of most
hard and most slow belief, beyond all others; yet I think, it has been clearly
enough demonstrated to him, that our Souls were pre-existent to our Nativity.
But whether they also survive our death, and continue their Being after the
dissolution of our Bodies; this I think has not been yet demonstrated: and
that vulgar opinion, which Cebes mentioned, yet remains unrefuted; namely that
so soon as a man is dead, his Mind or Soul is dispersed, and destroyed, so that
it can no longer exist. For what should hinder, but it may derive its origin
and creation from some other principle, and have Being long before it enter
into a human body: but when it departs, and is freed again from the body, then
it both die, and be utterly abolished? You say well; Simmias, quoth Cebes: for
only the half of what was required, seems to be demonstrated, viz. that our
Souls were, before we were born. There remains to be remonstrated the other
part, that the demonstration may be full and perfect; namely that after our
death, our Souls will be, no less than they were before our birth. This part of
the Demonstration, The second part of the former Thesis, of the immortality of
Souls; where Socrates, after lighter arguments, comes to allege more solid and
cogent Reasons, to evince, that the Soul being perfectly simple, or void of all
composition, is therefore naturally incapable of dissolution or dissipation; as
Cebes had objected.
Simmias and Cebes, says Socrates, is now finished; and if ye please to
conjoyn and compose this reason, with that upon which we all agreed before,
namely, that whatever lives, has its existence out of the dead. For if the
Soul be pre-existent, necessary it is, that when it comes to life, and is truly
in Being, it derive that existence only from death. How therefore is not
clearly evinced, that it does exist so soon as a man is deceased: seeing it is
necessary that it exist again? This also then is already demonstrated, as is
apparent.

And yet notwithstanding both you and Simmias seem willing to be again
exercised more accuratly in this argument, and to be astonished with that
childish fear, lest the wind blow out and dissipate the Soul going out of the
Body; and the more, if a man die, not in a close room secured from winds, but
in an open place where winds blow strongly. And when Cebes had smiled;
endeavor not, Socrates, says he, to encourage us, as if we were astonished
with fear; but endeavor rather to demonstrate the thing to us, as free from
all fear. Yet perhaps there is here among us some Boy, who is afraid at the
mention of this. Let us therefore do our devoir to persuade him not to dread
death, as a Goblin. It Is fit, says Socrates, to mitigate and animate him daily
with Verses, Alluding to the Magic of Inhcantation, first used by the
Egyptians, and from them derived to the Grecians by Orpheus, who thereby having
cured his Wife Eorydice of the venomous bite of a Serpent, was thereupon
feigned to have reduced her from Hell. Of the antiquity of this kind of Magic,
and the traduction of it, consult Sir John Mar^ham in Chronic. Canon. page 142.
till he be perfectly restored. But where, says he, shall we find a man
skilful enough in the Art of Enchanting: since you say, you desire to leave us?
Greece is wide, Cebes, says he; and in it are good and skilful men, and many
Barbarous Nations, which are all to be surveyed, that there may be found out a
man powerful in that Art of Charming; neither money nor labor ought to be
spared: for ye can expend your money in nothing that is more necessary. And now
he is to be sought after among your selves: for perhaps ye will not easily find
any man more able than your selves to perform it. This shall be done, says
Cebes; but in the mean time let us, if you please, return to our argument, from
which we have digressed. With all my heart; why not? You say well quoth he. The
beginning of the grand dispute about the Souls immortality; the fundament
whereof is this proposition; that the soul is most pure and simple, and
therefore indissoluble.
Ought we not then, says Socrates, to ask of our selves, and with the best of
our understanding to enquire, to what thing this affection [of Dissipation] may
be convenient and incident; and for what we ought to fear, lest it suffer
Dissipation, and by what reason, and in what part thereof: then to consider
diligently whether that thing be a Soul, or not: and in fine, matters being
thus stated, either to hope comfortably of the Soul, or to fear for it,
accordingly? You say well, quoth he. First position; whatsoever is composed, is
obnoxious to dissolution.
Is it agreeable to a thing which is either actually mixed, or compounded, or by
nature so constituted, as to be capable of mixture or composition: is it
agreeable, I say; to such a thing, in as much as it is compounded, to be
dissolved? But if there be such a thing, of whose nature it is, to be wholly
simple or uncompounded, is it convenient to this thing, to suffer no
dissolution? It seems to me to be so, says Cebes. Second Position; Things that
are always the same (that is Eternal) are void of Composition; things not
always the same, (that is, moral^) are compounded.
Those things therefore, which are always in one manner, and equally
comparated, it is highly consentaneous, that they be simple or void of
composition: but those that are sometimes in one manner, sometimes in another
affected, that is subject to alterations; it is consentaneous, that they be
compounded. I think so. Let us then return to those we noted in our precedent
discourse. That very Essence, which by the force of questions and answers we
have defined to be really existent [namely God] is that equally the same at all
times [without alteration] or not? Third Position; God who gives Being to all
creatures, and is not only Good, but Goodness it self; not only wise, but
wisdom it self, etc.) is neither compounded, nor subject to any mutation, but
[(...)] uniform, knowing no [(...)] shadow of change.
namely the Equal it self, the Beautiful, the Single, (that is, what really
existeth) does it never receive any the least alteration? That Essence, says
Cebes, must of necessity be ever the same, without alteration. What shall we
determine of many Beautifuls, as men, or horses, or garments, or others however
the like, equal and beautiful, or all that are comprehended under the
signification of the same name: are these always the same, or is any thing
contrary to them, nor they to themselves, nor among themselves, that I may so
speak, are they always the same? These truly, says Cebes, are never exactly
the same. These therefore you may perceive either by your touch, or sight, or
any other sense: but those that are always the same, you cannot by any other
way, but by reasoning of your Mind, comprehend; for they are invisible, and
fall not under the power of sense. You speak truly, says he, in every point.
Fourth position; there are two kinds of things or (as he speaks) (...), two
forms of Beings. Those that are always the same, which are invisible: and those
that are mutable, which are visible.
Will you therefore, that we make two Kinds of things; one, visible; the other,
invisible? Let us lay down these two Kinds [for a foundation] says he. Let us
also put the invisible to be that which is always the same: the visible, that
which is never perfectly the same. And that too, says he. Now, says he, do we
consist of any other things but Body and Soul? Of no other, says he.
Application of all these four positions to the present argument. There are in
Man, two distinct things. One, visible, not always the same, but obnoxious to
various mutations, and so compound and mortal: the other, invisible, always
the same, and so incompound and immortal, namely the Soul; whence it is
evinced, that the Soul is [(...)] indissoluble, and consequently immortal.
To which of the two Kinds shall we decree the Body to be more like, and more
allied? It Is evident to every man, says he, that the body is more of Kin to
the Visible. But the Soul, is that visible or invisible? Invisible, to men,
says he, certainly. But those things that fall under sense, and those that do
not; did we not refer them to the nature of men, or are they to be referred to
any other nature, think you? To Human nature. And what is to be concluded of
the Soul, that it is visible, or that it is invisible? Invisible. This
therefore is to be fixed, that the Soul can by no means be perceived by the
sight. Right. Therefore the Soul is more like to that Invisible Kind, than the
Body is: and the Body more like to the Visible. Of necessity, Socrates.
Impediments of the Soul from its so close conjunction with the body.
We said a while since this also, that the Soul, when it uses the service of
the Body to consider any thing, either by seeing, or hearing, or any other
sense (for, to consider a thing by the body, is to consider it by sense) is
then drawn by the body to those things that are never the same; and that it
errs, and is amused, and giddy, as a Drunkard is giddy by a vertigo in his
brain. Altogether so. But when the Soul does contemplate by it self, it aspires
to what is pure, to what always existeth and is immortal, to what is ever the
same: and as being of Kin thereunto, is always conversant therewith, after it
is of its self and by it self, and has power, and cease from error, and is
wholly in those things that are always the same, so far forth as they occur to
it. And this affection of the Soul is called, Wisdom. You speak rightly,
Socrates, in every word. To which Kind therefore, both of these we mentioned
above, and those we now describe, is the Soul more like, and more allied?
Conclusion that the soul is Divine and Immortal; the Body, gross and mortal.
Any man (in my opinion, says he) even the most ignorant, will from this way
and method of reasoning, grant, that the Soul is more alike, and more cognate
to the All and Whole, that is, to what is ever the same; than to what is never
exactly the same. And what the Body? To that which is never the same. Thus
observe also, after the Soul and Body have come together into the same [man]
that nature commands the body to be servant thereunto, The Affections and
Offices consigned by the institute or law of Nature, that is, of God acting by
his servant Nature, to both soul and body; that the Soul is to rule, the Body
to obey.
and to obey the dictates of its superior, the Soul; and appoints the Soul to
rule and give law to the Body. From the reason of these things, which of the
two seems to you to be like unto the Divine; and which to the Mortal [being?]
or is that Divine by nature qualified and made to command and govern: but the
Mortal, to be subject, and to serve? I conceive so. To which is the Soul like?
Truly, Socrates, the Soul is like to the Divine; the Body, to the Mortal.
Observe, I pray, says he, whether from all we have already alleged, it be
certainly evinced, that the Soul is most like unto the Divine, and Immortal,
and Intelligent, and Uniform, and Unalterable: but the Body is most like unto
the Human, and Mortal, and Non-intelligent, and Multiform, and Dissoluble, and
Alterable. Can we oppose any thing to these, as if they were not right and
convincing? We cannot. These things then being thus established, Grand
Conclusion; that the Soul being indissoluble by death, survives eternally.
is it not proper and peculiar to the body, to be capable of Dissolution: and
to the Soul, to continue indissoluble; or somewhat next to this? Why not? You
clearly see therefore, says he, that when a man is dead, the visible body,
(which we call dead, and to which it belongs to be dissolved, and to fall
asunder, and be blown out) does not incontinently suffer any of these, but
remain some considerable time, if a man has by pleasantness and moderation
treated his Body to the time of his death. For when the dead Body is fallen,
and enbalmed, ^^s they who are enbalmed in Egypt, it continues almost entire,
for a very long and indeterminable time; and though some members thereof shall
have suffered corruption, yet the bones, nerves, and all of the more compact
sort, endure (if I may so say) for ever. Do they not? Certainly. Here he
explains the Emigration of the Soul out of the Body, at the instant of death;
subjoyning, that Souls after death, go thither, whither the similitudes of
their cogitations, affect^ons, and habits le^d them.
But here the Soul; ^n invisible thing, goes away into another place, a place
noble, pure, not to be seen by the eyes of Mortals, among the infernal shades,
really to a good and provident God; whither indeed (if God be so pleased) my
Soul is presently to go. For the Soul it self being in this manner qualified
and freed from the Body; will it, think you, presently vanish into air, and
perish? as many men say. No, Cebes and Simmias; it is very far from all
possibility of being dissolved. But truly, in that manner we have explained,
the matter is rather dispar aged than illustrated; for the nature of it is more
noble: if at least the Soul depart pure, carrying along with it nothing from
the contagion of the body: as that which did, whilst it remained in this life,
willingly and of choice hold no communication with the Body, but declined and
avoided it; and retired into it self, employed all its powers by cogitation to
avoid it. Which is nothing else but to Philosophize rightly, and in good
earnest to anticipate death by familiar conversation of thoughts. Is not this a
meditation of death? Wholly. From which principle he infers, that a good Soul,
free from the cont^gion and delusion of the corporeal senses, goes immediately
after death, to a certain invisible and most blisful place, where it is again
conjoined to God, to whom it is of ^in and like.
Does not therefore [Felices posthac Animae, quas corpora nullis
Faedarunt vitiis, nullaque libidine morsas
Detinuere olim, quae, dum sub carne latebant,
Contemplatrices abstracte a carne volarant
Saepius ad Caelos, Caelis post fata, quibuscum
Faedera sanxerunt viventes sacra, locantur,
Eternaque illic Laetantes luce fruuntur.]
the Soul being so comparated, go to that Divine Being like unto it self?
Divine, I say, and Immortal, and Wise? To which when it comes, it becomes
perfectly happy, being freed and exempted from error, from ignorance, from
terrors, wild Loves, and all other Human Evils; and as men are accustomed to
speak of such as have been by solemn expiations purged, and initiated to Sacred
Rites, living eternally with the Gods. Shall we speak thus, Cebes, or
otherwise? Thus in all points, by Jove, says Cebes. But if the Soul depart out
of the Body polluted and impure, as having hitherto conversed wholly with the
Body, and slavishly served it, and being both by its own errors, and by the
lusts of the Body fascinated, esteemed nothing true but what is corporeal,
namely that gross matter hat is touched, seen, drunk, and used to Venereal
pleasures: and on the contrary, that which is to the eyes dark and invisible,
but may by the power of understanding be perceived, and by the institutes and
discipline of Philosophy be comprehended: this, I say, having been accustomed
to hate, and abhor, and dread; can we imagine that a Soul thus disposed and
vitiated, shall depart pure, and entirely collected into it self? By no means,
says he. From the popular Opinion of Ghosts, and Spirits, he adds that Souls
laden with gross and earthy affections, wander in grief about monuments and
Sepulchers; for a certain time only; that is, (according to the Pyth^gorean
Dream) they light upon other Bodies suitable to their former affections,
inclinations, and manners.
I think, we ought rather to decree, that such a Soul departs involved in, and
contaminate with the stains and infection of the corporeal mass, which the very
conversation and familiarity of the Body, because that Soul has so continually
and entirely conversed therewith, and with much [At tenebrosae animae, nimium
quae carnibus olim
Demerjae jae ueresuis, quos tetra libido
Atque voluptates, solum quas sensus alebat,
In terris notae, posthac de carne solutae,
Aspectum Caeli, cum quo commercia nulla
Viventes habuere, timent, nec luce fruuntur:
Sed tenebris dilecta nimis prope corpora semper
Ferales errant Vmbrae, maestaeque Sepulchra
Bustaque faedacolunt: Hinc noctu spectra videntur,
Quae terrent homines; animae sunt ista malorum,
Quae quaeniam crassae sunt, corporeaque videntur.
Majus noster, in Supplem. Lucani lib. 4.]
care and cogitation employed it self in pursuit of such things, has as it
were ingrafted into it, and made a part of its nature. Certainly. This we are
to hold, to be with a kind of burden, gross, heavy, terrene, visible: wherewith
when such a Soul is inveloped, it is weighed down and carried to a visible
place, by fear of that invisible one, and (as it is vulgarly said) it wanders
about Monuments and Sepulchers; where have been seen certain darksom Images of
Souls; which Apparitions such Souls represent, that have not departed pure, but
yet retain something of that gross and visible matter, and are therefore
beheld. It Is very probable, Socrates. Nor is it less probable, Cebes, that
those are not the Souls of good men, but of Wicked and Impious, that are
compelled to hover and flagg about those places, suffering the punishment of
their former vicious Education; and restlesly wandering until by desire of that
corporeal following, they are again entangled in, and bound to a Body. And
bound they are (as is probable) to one of such inclinations and manners, as
they in life had employed their thoughts upon. What are these things you speak,
Socrates? How it is probable, that those who have minded gluttony, railing,
wantonness, etc. nor cautiously abstained from them; p^^on the forms of Asses,
and of other wild Beasts. Do not you think it probable? You speak with great
probability. And that they who highly valued and honored injustice oppression,
tyranny, rapine; are turned into the Kinds of Wolves, Hawks, Kites, and other
Beasts of Prey? or shall we say* that their Souls go to some other place?
Truly, says Cebes, to no other. We are therefore to hold, that all Souls
strive to go, whither the similitudes of their cogitations and inclinations
carry them. It Is very perspicuous truly; A consectary of the former Doctrine;
that the arm way to that conjunction with God, is not by Politic and
Theatrical virtues, which are but shadows, but by the serious study of wisdom.
and why not? Are then they the happiest of men, who upon deliberate purpose
exercise civil prudence in a popular way of life, which they call temperance,
and justice, contracted merely from conversation and cogitation, without the
precepts and discipline of Philosophy? and do they go to the best place? How
can these be most happy? Because it is likely, that they come again into some
civil and tame kind of Animals, as Bees, Drones, Pismires; or return into men,
and become moderate. Very likely. But to pass into the kind of Gods, is
possible to none but who has duly exercised himself in the study of wisdom:
for he having been all his life possessed with desire of learning, departs out
of this world pure and undefiled. And it is upon this account, that Cebes and
Simmias, that good and genuin Philosophers; abstain from all pleasures of the
Body, and constantly and firmly contain themselves, not permitting their
appetites and passions to carry them away in pursuit of sensual delights; nor
fearing the subversion of their private Estates, and the invasion of poverty,
as the vulgar and avaricious do; nor dreading the ignominy and reproach of mean
spirited men, as the ambitious and lovers of great Honors do: but abstracting
and alienating their minds from all such [splendid trifles.] Nor would it be
consentaneous to them to do otherwise, Socrates, says Cebes. No, by Jove would
it not, says he. Therefore Cebes, says he again, A lively and remarkable
description of that Philosophical life, the ground whereof is the contemplation
of God, and its work, to instruct men to renounce all exorbitant affections of
the body, etc.
all who take care of their Souls, and employ not their life in pampering and
adorning the body; neglecting and repudiating all those things, they walked not
in the way of those we mentioned before, who are wholly ignorant whither they
are to go. But Philosophers being persuaded, they ought to do nothing contrary
to the precepts of Philosophy, or to the solution and expiation thereof; [leave
the common road of the multitude] and proceed in the way that [Wisdom] has
shown to them, and follow the conduct thereof, as of their Leader. How?
Socrates. I will tell you says he: Men studious of Discipline know, that
Philosophy, when it undertakes their Soul really bound and glewed to the body,
(which Soul is constrained to contemplate things themselves through the body,
as through a Bride-well, and not single by it self able to contemplate it self:
and when it wallows in all ignorance, and perceives the power and efficacy of
that bond, which exserts it self even by lusts themselves; namely that the Soul
thus bound and imprisoned does employ all its force and powers to be by lusts
and desires more closely enchained) I say, men studious of Discipline know that
Philosophy, when it has found their Mind or Soul so disposed, is versed
chiefly in this, by degrees to mitigate and compose [the Soul] and to deliver
it [from those Fetters;] teaching, that that consideration which is performed
by the service of the eyes, is full of error; and that the information of the
Ears and all other senses, is likewise full of error, persuading it to retire
from them, and not to use them, unless when necessity compels: and declaring
and exhorting it, to recollect and congregate it self; and to give credit to
none but it self, seeing that it self alone can by ^^self understand and
comprehend that which existeth by it self; and that what it considers by other
things, because subject to alteration, it ought not to account true, but only
such as the Senses represent it; but that what it self clearly perceives, is
intelligible, and unperceivable by Sense. Description of a profane and vicious
life. Whereof the greatest Evil is, that such men are insensible both of their
sins, and misery.
When therefore the Soul of a man truly a Philosopher conceives, that it ought
not to oppose this deliverance and infranchisment, comes thus to abstain from
pleasures and lusts, and as much as it is able, from griefs also and errors:
thus casting up its account; When a man is possessed, and even transported with
great joy, or astonished with excessive grief, or enraged by the stings of
Lusts, he does not by those [passions] suffer so much of evil, as one would by
common and vulgar judgment think: whether (for example) that he should pursue
those Lusts, feel those Diseases, and undergo loss of his Estate in vain: but,
what is the highest of all Evils, he suffers this, that he perceives not, nor
takes notice that he suffers. What mean you, Socrates? says Cebes. Because
every man's Mind is constrained to rejoice and delight vehemently up-an occasion
of some things, and to esteem that wherein he suffers that [affection] to be
most manifest and most true; though the same be not such. Now are these things
discernable by the sense, or are they not? Wholly. But in this affection, is
not the Soul obliged to sympathize with the Body? In what manner? Because every
pleasure, and every grief, as if armed with a nail, affixeth, and as it were
with a buckle fastneth the Soul to the Body, and makes it corporeal, thinking
all things to be true, that the body dictateth. For, that it is constrained to
agree with the Body in opinions, and to be delighted at the same time with it
(as I conceive) comes from the conjecture of the one with the other: and thence
the Soul is carried about by the common force of education and customs, so as
it cannot go to the shades below, i. e. to a second life, pure and undefiled,
but departs polluted with stains and infection derived from the body, and then
presently falls into another body, and as if sowed therein, grows to it,
remaining void of that divine, pure, and uniform conversation. You speak great
truths, Socrates, says Cebes. Conclusion monitory. With what care and
circumspection a Philosopher ought to beware, lest he be entangled in the
snares of Lusts and Corporeal pleasures, against which by his profession he
proclaims open War.
By reason of these things, Cebes, they who are truly studious, are modest and
valiant; but not by reason of those that are in the opinion of the vulgar. What
think you? Not by reason of vulgar things, certainly. For the Soul of a
Philosopher will not hold it self obliged to free it self from the institutes
of Philosophy, and letting loose the bridle of its precepts, give it self up to
the desires either of pleasures or pains, and permit it self to be again
chained to the body, and so render its work imperfect; weaving and unravelling
its web, like Penelope (as they say) but will resolve it to be most decent, to
compose all those desires, and follow the conduct and mandates of reason, and
to be always conversant herein, to contemplate things true and divine, and
such as may not be carried about by temerity of opinions; and being bred up and
nourished with them, conclude, it ought in this manner to live, while life
lasts: and when death comes, to go to a place agreeable and cognate to its
nature, and be delivered from human evils. From this Education, it can fear
nothing grievous, by its own institution studiously laboring in this matter,
Simmias and Cebes; not fearing, to be, in the moment of its departure from the
body, dissipated, and blown out by winds, and so to vanish, as to have no
longer existence any where else.

The second part of the disputation; wherein Plato proposes the chief Opinions
impugning the Immortality of the Soul; observing the circumstances conducing to
the grace of the Dialogue.
Socrates having thus spoken, there succeeded a long silence. And he was
plainly observed profoundly to revolve in his mind the discourse he had
delivered; and thereupon many of us appeared to meditate upon this matter. But
Cebes and Simmias conferred a little betwixt themselves. Whom Socrates
beholding, what, says he, is the subject of your conference? Does any thing
seem to be deficient in my discourse? There remain truly many doubts and
exceptions, if one would with due strictness examine and pursue things more
particularly. If your private talk be of any other matter, I ask nothing; but
if ye doubt of the verity of ought delivered in my discourse, delay not either
to declare your scruples, if ye think they may be more commodiously and
satisfactorily solved; or to admit me to bear a share in the conference, in
case ye believe any thing of light or utility may arise from my assistance. And
I, says Simmias, will ingeniously confess the truth. Each of us remaining in
suspense, have been urging one the other, out of desire of satisfaction, to
propose our Queries to you: but fear restrains us, lest we might give you
trouble, and our interrogations prove importune and unpleasant, in this your
calamity. At this Socrates mildly smiling, O strange! says he: how hard a task
shall I have, to persuade others that I am far from esteeming this my present
case a calamity, since I cannot prevail upon you to believe I am so: but ye
fear, lest my condition be now more afflicted, and sad, than at any time
heretofore in my whole life. Truly ye seem to think me to be inferior to Swans,
in the way and faculty of divining. Socrates, in way of preface, first
positively professes his own steadfast belief of the Souls immortality;
alluding to the vulgar tradition of the singing of Swans (concerning which he
shows himself somewhat superstitious;) and then declares the disquisition to be
of so high moment, that we ought not to be exercised therein without due
attention of mind, and caution, lest we admit error instead of truth.
They, when they first perceive they are to die, as they sang before, so they
sing most at that time, rejoicing that they shall forthwith come to that God,
whose servants they are. But men, being themselves afraid of death, feign lies
in disparagement of Swans, and report, that they lamenting their own death, for
very grief strain their voice more vehemently at the approach of it; not
observing, that no Bird ever sings when he is displeased or pinched with cold,
or affected with any pain whatever; no not the Nightingal, nor Swallow, nor the
Hooper, which they say, are wont to sing for sorrow: but neither these, nor
Swans seem to sing for grief; but, as I think, because they are Sacred to
Apollo, and so being endowed with some instinct of divining, when they foresee
the Goods that are reserved apud inferos, they chant forth their joy, and are
more delighted that day, than in their whole life before. And for my part,
seriously I conceive my self to be conjoined with these Swans in consort of the
same ministry, and consecrated likewise to the same Deity: and that I have
received from that my Lord and Master, no less power of Divining; and that I
depart out of this life with equal quiet, and calm submission. Wherefore
nothing remains to hinder you from speaking and interrogating whatsoever ye
please, concerning our former argument, whilst the Eleven [Officers] of the
Athenians permit. Socrates, says well, replied Simmias. I will freely declare
my doubt: and Cebes here will likewise let you know how far he does not embrace
what you have delivered. For I think my self to have as certain and confirmed
knowledge of these things, as you Socrates; that either they are in the number
of impossibilities, or extremely difficult. But as for what things are said
concerning them, not to examine them with every reason, and all moments of
arguments alleged, or wholly to reject them, and to leap back from them,
before you have endeavored with all possible contention and equity of mind,
even to the last effort, and to weariness, to perpend them: this I think to be
the part of an effeminate and incurious spirit. And herein, this one thing is
to be studiously endeavored, that either we may learn, or find out how these
things are; or if that cannot be done, choosing and fixing upon such a reason,
among those that occur to humane understanding, as may be more firm and
convincing, i. e. as may be less subject to refutation; set up our rest
therein: that being thereby, as by a ship, carried safely along, we may escape
the dangers and difficulties of this life; unless any can be wafted and
transmitted over in some firmer vehicle, i. e. some Divine Word. Truly I shall
not be ashamed to ask, since you say this: nor will be a cause of accusing my
self hereafter, that I had not ingeniously explained to you what my opinion is
concerning this matter. For, Socrates, when I both by my self, and with
another, by comparing reasons, enquire into it: I do not find your arguments to
be perspicuous and convincing. Perhaps, says Socrates, this is your opinion:
but tell me freely, how far, and wherein my discourse fails of being
persuasive. Thus far, says he: The first contrary Opinion, that the Soul is
Harmony and Concent; and so both results from, and perishes with the Body.
that any man may say the same, with equal reason, both of Harmony, and of a
Harp, and of other instruments of Music: namely that Harmony is a something
invisible, and incorporeal, and most beautiful, and divine, in a well tuned and
concordant Harp or Lute: but the Harp it self, and the strings, are bodies
compound, and terrene, and of Kin to that Mortal [nature.] And when any one
has broken the Harp, or cut the strings; if another should assert, and by the
same reason you urged, that of necessity that Harmony does still exist, and is
not destroyed, (for it would be no difficulty at all, that the Harp is still in
being, and that the strings being broken, are mortal; but that the Harmony,
which was by community of nature, and by cognation conjoined with that Divine
and Immortal [Being] died and vanished, before the Mortal,) but continue in
Being some where; and that the wood and strings would rot and fall to dust
sooner than the Harmony decay, or suffer any thing of destruction. For truly,
Socrates, I conceive that you also have thought our Soul to be something like
this [Harmony:] as if our body being extense, were hold together by hot and
cold, dry and moist; and from the mixture of these, results a certain
temperature and consent, which is the Soul; and this, after those Elements or
Ingredients have been exactly and in due proportions mixed and tempered
together. If therefore the Soul be a kind of Harmony, namely when our Body
shall be infinitely extended, and so freed from diseases and other evils: that
then it is absolutely necessary, the Soul (how Divine soever) should perish, as
other Harmonies, that 'are either in Sounds, or in all the works of Artificers:
and there the relics of every body endure a long time, until it be burned, or
dissolved by putrefafaction. Observe then what we should answer to this
discourse, if any should affirm, that the Soul is a certain temperament arising
from the ingredients of the body; and that in that dissolution which is called
death, it first perishes. Here Socrates, after he had, as he used often to do,
cast his eye round about, and smiled; Simmias has reason, says he. If
therefore any of ye be more copious, and better furnished with arguments, than
my self, why does he not answer? for Simmias seems not lightly or rashly to
have touched that discourse. Yet before I answer, I hold it convenient, we
first hear Cebes, what he also reprehends in my discourse, that gaining time
for thoughts, we may well consider what to reply; then, that having fully
understood their objections, we may either yield to them, or by observing their
impertinency, so defend and make good our own Doctrine. But go to, Cebes, says
he; declare to us what troubles you in this argument, so that you cannot assent
and give credit to my words.

I will tell you, The Second contrary opinion; that the Soul, tho more firm and
lasting than the Body; because more excellent: does yet at length, after it
has animated and worm out many bodies successively, decay, and through
weakness perish; which Cebes illustrates by an example.
says Cebes: To me your discourse seems to be involved in the incommodity, and
to be guilty of the same fault I observed before. For, that our Soul existed
before it came into our Body, I deny not: for that has been fairly, and (if it
may be said without offense) abundantly demonstrated. But that any thing
remains to us after death, seems to me not sufficiently proved: For, that the
Soul is stronger and more lasting than the Body; I so hold, that I shall not
grant that Exception of Simmias to be true; because the Soul seems to be far
more noble and excellent than all these. Why therefore (says Reason it self
speaking to me) do you yet doubt and refuse to believe? since you see, that
when a man is dead, what of him was more infirm and weak, yet remains: do you
not conceive it to be necessary, that what is more firm and lasting, must at
the same time remain conserved? But now do you perpend and consider this also,
if I shall say any thing considerable: for I want as much as Simmias did (it
seems) some Image or similitude. For, to me these things seem to be spoken,
just as if one should, an old Weaver being dead, say thus of him; the man is
not destroyed, but remains safe somewhere: and should bring this argument for
it, the garment of his own weaving wherewith he was clothed, which is yet
extant. And if another should, after refusal of assent to that argument, ask,
whether of the two is more lasting, man or a garment, which may indeed be
consumed by the very use of wearing: and a third should answer, that man is
much more lasting; and so should think it demonstrated, that that man does by
so much the rather remain safe, because what is less lasting, has not
perished. This I conceive not to be so. Observe also what I say; for any one
may think it to be said foolishly and impertinently. For this Weaver having
worn out and woven many such garments, died the last of these many, but before
the last: and yet man is notwithstanding neither worse, nor more infirm, as for
what concerns that matter. This very Image (I think) the Soul shall receive by
reason of the Body. And he who shall say the same of them, may seem to me to
speak soberly and moderately, if he conclude the Soul to be of long duration;
but the Body less firm, and of shorter duration. But I would say rather, that
the Soul consumes and wears but many Bodies, though they all live many years.
For if the Body be dissolved and perish, the man yet surviving, and the Soul
always weaves a new what is worn out: it will be wholly necessary, that the
Soul at that time when it shall die, have the garment it last wove; and that it
perish before that last garment only. But when the Soul once dies, the Body
then soon demonstrates the imbecility of its nature, and quickly rotting
vanishes. Wherefore according to this reason, it would be highly extravagant
for us to grow proud upon this persuasion, and to be confident, that after we
are dead, our Soul does still remain some where. For if a man shall grant more
than what you affirm; namely, that our Soul was pre-existent before it entered
into the Body; yea that nothing hinders but the Souls of some may, after they
are dead, survive and continue; and that they are often born, and die again,
that is, they often come and go (for that such is the virtue and power of the
Soul, as that it conserves it self through the various moments of its birth)
though, I say, a man shall grant all this, he would yet be forced to confess
this, that the Soul does not only endure vast labor in all those many
accessions, or approaches of generations; but also at length is by one of those
decensions or dislodgings, that is by some one death, wholly destroyed and
abolished. But this death, and this dissolution of the Body, which brings
destruction at last to the Soul, let no man say he understands. For it is
impossible, any of us should comprehend it by sense. This being thus, it is
absurd for any man living, who cannot prove it, with a certain foolish and
ignorant security to be confident, that his Soul is immortal, and exempt from
destruction. Besides, it is necessary for a man drawing near to his death, to
fear for his Soul, lest in that very present disjunction of his Body, it
utterly perish, and be abolished.

When we had heard them speak thus, Here Phaedo pauseth a little; opportunely
intimating, that the immortality of the Soul is a thing both so important, and
so abstruse, as that it ought not to be by an empty and unadvised credulity
embraced, but steadfastly rooted in the mind, upon the conviction of solid and
convincing arguments.
we were all cast into very great perplexity of thought, as afterward some
confessed to others; for that having been strongly persuaded by the precedent
discourse of Socrates, they seemed to trouble us, by destroying that belief,
and by raising scruples in our minds; so that we not only doubted of what we
had embraced, but inclined also to deny our assent to the like arguments in the
future: as if either we were not competent judges of these things, or the
things themselves were of that improbable nature, as not to admit belief.


Each. I excuse you, Phedo, by the immortal Gods: for it came into my head to
revolve the very same thing in my thoughts, whilst I heard your recital of
their [uncomfortable] exceptions and scruples. To which reason therefore shall
I give assent? for that discourse of Socrates, which to me seemed the more
probable, has now lost its title to my belief. For that opinion, that holds
the Soul to be an Harmony, has always wonderfully prevailed, and does now
prevail with me: and the present rehearsal recalls to my memory, that the
reasons thereof have heretofore pleased me. And I again stand in need of some
other discourse (as a repetition from the very beginning) to persuade me, that
when the Body dies, the Soul does not die too. Tell me therefore, by Jove, how
Socrates pursued that discourse; whether he, as you have confessed, were
observed to be more offended at the opposition; or whether with a mild and
composed mind, he brought relief to his distressed assertion: and whether that
relief were effectually strong and prevalent, or weak and destitute of
solidity: all which (I pray) recount to us as particularly and plainly as you
can.


Phe. An opportune reflection upon the admirable modesty, and exemplary
humanity of Socrates, shown in Disputation.
Truly, Echecrates, I have always much admired Socrates; but never so much as
at that time. It was no wonder, he was provided of an answer: but well worthy
the highest admiration, that he first received and solved those Objections of
the Young men pleasantly, benignly, and sweetly; and then showed himself
sensible of, and concerned in our dissatisfaction and perplexity. Afterward he
administered Physic most opportunely to our doubting minds, recalled us as
overcome and flying away, and made us turn our faces again [with courage and
hope] that we might follow him, and with recollected thoughts more attentively
consider his Discourse.


Each. How effected he that?


Phe. I will acquaint you how; for I sat at his right hand, near the little
Bed, on a low stool, so that he was much above me. When therefore he had rubbed
his head a little, and pressed down his hair, (for he used sometimes in that
manner to play with his hair) to morrow, says he, Phedo, you will perhaps cut
off these fine locks. That, Socrates, is convenient. No, says he, if you
believe me. Why? quoth I. This very day, says he again, both I will cut off
mine, and you shall cut off yours, if our discourse be dead, and we not able to
revive it. Were I you, and had lost my discourse, I would make a vow, as the
Argives did, I would never let my hair grow, till I had vanquished and subdued
the Harangue of Simmias and Cebes. But, quoth I, Hercules himself is said not
to be sufficient to encounter with two at once. But says he, encourage me as
Jolaus, while the day lasts. I do encourage you, said I, not as if I were
Hercules, and you Jolaus: but as if I were Joalus, and you Hercules. No matter
which says he; but first let us beware lest we be circumvented by some chance.
By what? said I. That we be not, says he, A previous caution, that we
entertain no prejudice against words, as some do against particular persons:
because Human reason may invent various exceptions in this sublime Argument, to
elude the force of verity.
haters of words, as they who pursue men with peculiar and personal hatred: for
a greater evil cannot fall upon any man, than to be involved in that kind of
Odium and Aversion. And both sorts of hatred, of men and of discourses, flow
from the same Fountain. For hate toward men's persons flows, and as it were
steals in from hence; that if a man has without due circumspection given full
credit to another, taking him to be perfectly veracious, and upright, and
faithful: and afterward find him to be a knave, faithless, a turn-coat and
time-server; and this happen often to the same man, and from those whom he took
for his most loving and most familiar friends; at length he feeling the shock
of his wrongs, and as it were bruised, grows to hate all, and to conclude
within himself, that there is nothing of integrity or sincerity in any man. You
are in the right, say I. Is not that therefore shameful and odious? and
manifest it is, this man would, without skill in Human occurrents, and the
practice of the World, hold a commerce with men. For if he made use of men with
discretion and art, and estimated things according to their nature; he would
find, that there are some men good, and others bad: not many very good, nor
very bad; but every man of a middle order betwixt both. How say you that? said
I. As of things, replied he, that are great or little in extremes; do you think
any thing more rare, then a man extremely great, or extremely little; or a
Dog, or any thing else? or than one that is swift, or slow, or beautiful, or
deformed, or white, or black to the last degree? Do you not observe, that all
extremes are very rare: and that middle-rate things are frequent and numerous?
They are so, said I. Do you then think, that if there were appointed a combat
of improbity, that men of the highest rank therein would be found to be but
few? It Is likely they would, said I. It is so, said he. But in this manner
discourses are not like to men (for you going before me, I tread in your
footsteps, and follow you (but thus far the resemblance and cognation betwixt
them is to be observed, when a man has firmly assented to a discourse as true,
without any arguments of that art whereby belief is usually obtained; and
afterward the same discourse seem to some to be false, and to others to be
true: Against the Skeptics, who disputed of things problematically, concluding
of nothing, but this, that nothing should be certainly known. By this very
place they may be undeceived, who having not read, or at least not understood
Plato, have yet been so bold as to accuse him of Skepticism, as if he taught
nothing of certainty.
and this come to pass chiefly from those men who are versed in that kind of
discourse which is called [(...)] an account of Causes, (i. e. when upon
examination of the causes of things, what arguments can be alleged on either
part, are urged and debated) they forsooth at length think themselves to be the
wisest, and alone to have understood, that there is nothing of truth and
certainty in things or words; but that all are carried and tumbled up and down
tumultuously, as by some Euripus, never continuing in the same state and
posture. You speak truth, said I. Were it not then (says he) a deplorable
calamity, if when a discourse is true and certain, and such as may be
commodiously comprehended and understood: yet afterward any man should fall
from the truth of it, and waver in uncertainty, because in those very reasons,
which being alleged on both parts, may seem one while true, and another while
false, he has been curiously versed? Would not he, I say, accuse himself? He
would not confess his own dullness, but growing at length discontented, would
transfer his fault upon the discourses themselves, and during the remainder of
his life, pursue them with perpetual hatred and detestation: because it had by
their fault happened, that he had been deprived of the just power of Verity and
Science. By Jove, answered I, it would be very sad and deplorable. Socrates
adds, that when in a Philosophical inquisition, we come to that point, that
we cannot understand why a thing is so or so constituted: we ought to accuse,
not the Reasons themselves, but our selves and our [own infirmity; and so in
this] very Argument.
First therefore, continued he, let us avoid this danger, and not persuade our
selves of the wrong through prejudice, as if we thought there were nothing of
solidity or soundness in discourses themselves: but this rather let us believe,
that we our selves are not of sound and upright judgment; and that we are to
endeavor with courage and resolution to render our selves more discerning and
judicious: you and others, for the remainder of your lives, and I, for my
death. But methink, I am not now treating of this Subject, as becomes a
Philosopher, but rather contentiously and obstinately, as the grossly ignorant
are wont to argue. For they, when they doubt of any thing, take little care of
what properly belongs to the nature and investigation thereof: but apply their
whole study and diligence only to this, to persuade others to think as
themselves think. And I seem to differ from them only in this. I am not
solicitous to convince others of the truth of what I say (unless so far forth
as it comes in my way occasionally and by the by, to do it) but rather that the
same things may appear to my self to be really such as I represented them to
be. Thus, my Phedo, I reason: and do you look with how great accession of
profit and emolument [to others.] For if the things I say, be true; it is happy
for me that I believe them: but if nothing remain to me after death, yet at
this time that intercedes before it, I shall be the less unpleasant to those
who are present, than otherwise I might be, in case I lamented and deplored my
death. But the ignorance of this matter will now no longer pursue me (for that
would be evil) but be soon blotted out. And thus prepared, Simmias* and Cebes,
I address my self to speak. Do ye the while so govern your assent, as to have
little consideration of Socrates; and all you can of truth. If I seem to speak
truth, give me your assent: if not, oppose me with all your power of reason;
being chiefly intent upon this, that I may not through this my vehement study
and ardor of thoughts, lead both my self and you into error, and depart, like a
Be, leaving my sting behind me.


To come therefore to the thing in dispute; Coming now to the Refutation of the
contrary opinions objected; for more perpiscuity sake, he first rehearses them
faithfully.
first do ye recall into my memory what things ye have said, unless I shall
appear to you to remember them of my self. Simmias, as I think, diffident of of
what I alleged, doubts and fears, that the Soul, though more divine and
excellent than the Body, may yet perish before it, as arising from, and
depending upon a kind of Harmony or consent [of the organs of the Body.] But
Cebes seems to grant this, that the Soul is indeed more lasting than the Body:
uand yet holds it to remain uncertain, whether the Soul after it has passed
through, and worn out many Bodies by use, does not at a certain time, it self
also, leaving its last body, perish and vanish away; and whether that death be
not the destruction and abolition of the Soul, for as much as the body never
cease to perish. Are not these your Opinions, Simmias and Cebes? Both
assented that they were. Refutation of the first contrary Opinion, that the
Soul being only Harmony, as it arises from the Body, so it perishes with it.
But, says he, whether do ye reject all my precedent discourses: or do ye
repudiate only some, and admit others? Some, say they, we reject, some we
approve. What do ye resolve concerning that part of my discourse wherein I
affirmed, that Discipline or Learning is Reminiscence? which being established,
it would necessarily follow, that our Soul has existence some where, before it
is conjoined to the Body. I confess, says Cebes, both that when you delivered
that Doctrine, I suffered my self to be persuaded: and that now I wholly adhere
to it, if to any other opinion. But you must be or another judgment, replies
Socrates, if you yet continue in that persuasion of yours, that Harmony is a
thing compounded; and the Soul a certain Harmony, constituted of those things
that are extended and diffused through the Body. For otherwise you would
contradict your self, as having said, that this Harmony was made before those
parts and organs of the Body, of which it ought to be composed, were in being.
Will you admit this? By no means, Socrates, says he. An Argument from an
Absurdity, thus. If the Soul were Harmony, then would it be necessarily
consequent, that the Soul was not prae-existent to the Body, which yet was
before granted and proved. And this Argument is indeed firm, as to its form;
but infirm as to its ground, namely the supposition of the prae-existence of
Souls.
Do you conceive then, says he, that these two affirmations can stand
together: namely, that the Soul has existence even before it takes possession
of a Human Body; and that the same Soul consists of two things that are not
yet in being? For you have no such Harmony to which you liken it: but first the
Harp, and the strings, and the sounds, and so the consonances and tunes by
certain Musical modes composed, are made: and the Harmony as it is last formed,
so it first perishes. And how can this Opinion of yours agree with your other?
By no means, says Simmias. And yet notwithstanding, says he, it is highly
reasonable, that if it consist and agree with any tenent, it must be chiefly
with this concerning Harmony. It is so, says Simmias. That discourse therefore
is disagreeable to you: but see which of the two you will take; this, that
Discipline is Remembrance; or this, that the Soul is Harmony. Rather the first,
says he, Socrates. For this has pleased me, without any firm demonstration,
only by indication of a probable and elegant example: whence it has been
approved by many others also. Because this Opinion deserded by Simmias, relieth
only upon a probable Example; therefore Socrates occasionally admonishes, that
we are not easily to resign up our belief to Examples.
And I, out of conscience of my own experience, says Socrates, am of opinion,
that those discourses which endeavor to teach by things only like unto truth,
are fitted merely to ostentation: and that if a man be not very considerate and
circumspect, they are highly fallacious, both in Geometry, and in all other
Arts and Sciences. But that Doctrine concerning Reminiscence and Discipline is
propt up by the solid firmament of an Hypothesis certain and worthy of belief.
For it has been said, that the Soul is somewhere so existent, before it comes
into the Body, as that the Essence of it is qualified to obtain the true
appellation of what it is, [ i. e. of a Human Soul.] And this position, as I
first admitted it into my thoughts, and persuaded my self of the verity
thereof, so have I rightly and fully embraced it. For from the force of these
arguments, it seems to me clearly necessary, that neither my self, nor any man
else ought to give credit to him who holds the Soul to be Harmony. A second
Argument, strong and cogent, from a double Absurdity.
What? says Simmias, does it not seem consentaneous both to this Harmony, and
to ny another composition, to be of some other nature, than the things are
whereof they are composed, or from which they result? By no means. First
position; that compounds always are the same, in their affections, or actions
and passions, with the things whereof they are compounded.
Nor can any other thing, I think, do or suffer ought, but what the principles
of it do or suffer. To this he assented. For it is absurd, the Harmony shoul go
before the things out of which it is made or composed, but necessary it should
come after them. To this also he yielded. Very far then it is from possible,
Second position; that the nature of a compound wholly depending upon the nature
of its principles, cannot be contrary to them.
that Harmony should by a contrary resistance be moved, or a sound, or by any
other way be repugnant to its own parts. Very far indeed, says he. From these
two positions, arises a Theorem; that Harmony cannot be more or less Harmony.
What? is it not of the Essence of Harmony, that it be so for a Harmony, as it
consents? I understand you not, says he. If that Harmony be more and more
adjusted and composed, will it then be more and more a Harmony? and on the
contrary, if it be less and less adjusted and composed, will it be less and
more scarcely a Harmony? Yes doubtless. Is it then incident to the Soul, to be
more and more, and less and less a Soul, from the most minute parts of it self
[increased or diminished? Not at all, says he. Go to then by Jove. That
Theorem accomodated to the Soul.
Is one Soul said to be good, and to be endowed with understanding and virtue:
and another, to be evil, and polluted with folly and improbity? and are they
truly said to be so? Truly without doubt. But of those who hold the Soul to be
an Harmony, who has affirmed, that these things, Virtue and Vice, are in Souls
themselves? Has any said, that in them are also Concord and Discord? and that
the Good is composed of a certain concordant consent, and in the concord it
self, contains another concord: but the Bad is both discordant, and
contains not another discord in it self? This in truth, says Simmias, I
cannot affirm: but manifest (...) be who has laid down this opinion for truth,
will affirm it. But that, replies Socrates, has been already granted, that one
Soul cannot possibly be more or less a Soul, than another: and this was the
grand article of our common assent, that one Harmony cannot by any means be
more or less a Harmony than another. Was it not? I confess it. And that this is
nor more nor less a Harmony, nor more nor less fitted and adjusted to the
ration of Harmony. Is this so? It is Now that which is nor more nor less
adjusted, has that at sometimes more or less of Concent: or equally? Equally.
Therefore one Soul, as it is a Soul, is not more or less a Soul, than another
Soul* and consequently cannot be, by a certain concent, more or less conformed.
Right. Being thus affected or constituted, can it be no otherwise participant
of concord and discord? No truly. Being thus affected, can one Soul receive
more or less of Virtue or Vice, than another: seeing that Vice will be Discord,
and Virtue Concord? Nothing more one than another. Nay rather, Simmias, from
the rule of right reason, no Soul will be participant of Vice, if it be
Harmony; for Harmony excludes all Discord. That Virtue is the Harmony, and Vice
the Discord of the Soul. From whence he collects, if the Soul be Harmony; since
Virtue and Vice in the Soul undergo the ration of Concord and Discord; it must
follow, that no Vice can have place in the Soul, and so no soul be vicious;
that is, the difference of Good and Evil would be wholly taken away; than which
there cannot be a greater absurdity.
Nor can a Soul, perfectly a Soul, receive Vice. How can this be evinced from
our former concessions? for by this reason also the Souls of all living
creatures will be equally good; if at least they be all equally comparated. It
seems to me, says he, they are so, Socrates. And does that, says he, seem to
be rightly said; and that these Reasons are pertinent to this discourse, and
consentaneously demonstrated, if this be a true Hypothesis, that the Soul is
Harmony? Not at all, says he. What then? says he; of all the parts of man,
does any bear rule, and possess an Empire over the rest, besides the Soul,
especially if it be prudent? No truly. Whether does it rule, if it indulge and
favor the affections of the Body, or oppose and contremand them? for Example:
If when the Body suffers heat or thirst, the Soul incline it to abstain from
drink; and when hunger presses the Body, the Soul divert it from eating; and
in infinite other occasions we observe the Soul resisting and giving law to the
senses and appetites of the Body. Does it not? Yes doubtless. A second
abs^rdity; seeing it is evident, that both virtue and vice are incident to the
Soul, (as appear^ from the ra^ional and irrational cupidities thereof) if the
Soul were Harmony, it would inevit^bly follow, that the Soul is not a Soul,
that is, the [(...)] things plainly inconsistent woul^d be compounded; as if a
man should absurdly imagine to mix Discord with Harmony.
And have we not in our precedent enquiry granted, that the Soul, supposing it
to be an Harmony, cannot possibly have affections contrary to the organs of the
Body by which its presumed to be strained up to a higher, or let down to a
lower pitch; or repugnant to the passions of the instruments of which it is
composed: but must inevitably obey their dictates and commands, not prescribe
and give law to them? This we have granted, says he; why should we not? Now
then, does not the Soul appear to do quite contrary, when it exercises
Dominion over, and dispenses commands to the various members and organs of the
body, out of whose combination and system you suppose it to result; and when
for the most part during life, it strives to control all their inclinations and
appetites, with absolute Sovereignty ruling and moderating them: more severely
chastising some, by the rules of strict Diet and Medicine, and more gently and
mildly correcting others; with menaces and advices composing the lusts, anger,
and fears of the Body; as if in man himself there were two distinct natures, or
as it were persons, one speaking to the other [as Prince and Subject? as Homer
also imagined in his Odysses, where he says of Ulysses, Knocking his breast,
to's Heart he thus did speak.
Be not thou, Heart, in these afflictions weak:
But bear them bravely, in thy self secured.
Thou heretofore have greater ills endured.


Think you that the Poet feigned this out of opinion, that the Soul it self was
an Harmony, and such a frail thing, as to be at the will and conduct of the
corporeal affections, and unable to lead and rule them: or rather out of a full
persuasion, that the Soul was a thing much more noble and divine, than a
Harmony? He seems to me, by Jove, Socrates, to have signified, that the Soul
is, not a Harmony, but something incomparably more Noble and more excellent.
Conclusion; that the opinion of the Souls being Harmony, is to be exploded, as
many ways absurd.
We cannot therefore (believe me) hold the Soul to be an Harmony: for manifest
it is, that if we do, we shall both dissent from that Divine Poet, and
contradict even our selves. You are in the right, says Simmias.

Well then, says Socrates; we have commodiously (I think) appeased and
silenced the reasons of the Theban Harmony: but, Cebes, how shall we, in the
next place, solve those of the Both Simmias and Cebes being Thebans* it seems
that Socrates here facetely alluded to the fable of Cadmus the Thehan, of armed
men growing out of the earth; because Cebes had many times contradicted and
opposed him with fresh forces.
Cadmean? You, says Cebes, are most likely to find out that: for you have
admirably, and beyond our expectation, discoursed against that Harmony [which
Simmias defended.] For when I heard him proposing his doubts, I thought it
strange even to wonder, if it were possible for any man living to find a
reasonable solution of them: and it seemed admirable to me, that he was not
able to sustain the very first charge of your speech. 'Twil therefore be less
admirable, if the Cadmean opinion [proposed by me] meet with the same fate.
Good Cebes, says Socrates, speak not those magnific things of me, I beseech
you; lest envy rise up, and disturb our following discourse. But let God alone
with that care also; while we encountering (as Homer says) hand to hand, try
the force of what you can allege.

He first recites, and sta e the second contrary opinion.
Of all your Enquiries, this is the grand and capital one. You judge it fit to
be demonstrated, that the Soul of man is free and exempt from destruction and
death: and this, lest a Philosopher, when at the near approach of death, he is
of a resolved and undaunted courage, and believes that after death, he shall be
far happier than in the short race of this life; should out of an ignorant and
foolish confidence, triumph and exsult. Now to affirm, both that the Soul is a
thing firm and divine, and that it existeth of it self, before we are born:
this, I say, hinders not but all your arguments may come short of the main
question in hand: they may serve to evince indeed, not the immortality of the
Soul, but only the duration of it: for that an immense time before its entrance
into the Body, it has existed; and then both knew and did many things: and yet
notwithstanding all this, we are under no necessity of concluding from thence,
that it is immortal: nay rather on the contrary, it seems reasonable, that its
very entrance into, and conjunction with the Body, is the beginning of its
destruction, and a kind of sickness; so that it lives a sad and miserable life
here, tormenting it self with the sense of [various] calamities; and at last
perishes by that end which is called death. But you say, that as to our
security from fear of death, it makes no difference, whether the Soul come only
once into one Body, or into many successively. For in truth, no just cause of
fear is given to any, unless he be very silly, and unable to give a reason why
the Soul is immortal. And (this I take it) is the sum of what you said, Cebes:
which I industriously recite, and more than once inculcate, that nothing may
escape us, and you may add and detract what you please. But I, says Cebes, at
present demand neither to detract, nor to add any thing: and you have
faithfully recounted what I said.

Then Socrates, after he had a pretty while recollected himself from intent and
fixed thoughts: the thing you seek, says he, is not to be contemned, Cebes: as
being that, for the sake whereof it may concern us, exquisitely to enquire into
the causes of Generation and Corruption. I will therefore, if you please,
pursue my discourse, declaring what are my sentiments concerning the same. Let
it be so, says Cebes. Attend you then diligently, while I explain my thoughts.
Accomodating his Answer to the order and method of the opinion he designs to
refute; he first removes the prejudices upon which it was grounded; and then
teaches, that the true cause of the Souls immortality, is to be sought in God,
who is [(...)] the very form and fountain of life.
I have says he, even from my Youth, been strangely enamored and inflamed
with the study of that part of Wisdom which they call the History of Nature. It
seemed a magnific and noble thing, to understand the causes of all things, why
this or that particular was made, why it should be again destroyed, and by what
reason it had existence: and I very often turned my self up and down, first
revolving these things in my mind. Why Animals, after hot and cold have
undergone a certain sort of putrefaction (as some say) are nourished: and
whether the Blood be that by which we have the power of Understanding and
growing Wise; or Air, or Fire, or none of all these; but rather the Brain.
which gives us the senses of hearing, seeing, smelling, etc. Whether out of
these, Memory be made, and Opinion; and from memory and opinion settled by
quiet, Knowledge be made, in the same manner. Perceiving clearly the corruptions
of these, and observing the contingents both in the Heavens, and on the Earth:
I at length thought my self to be so unfit for these contemplations, that
nothing can be more unfit. Whereof I will bring a just and convenient argument.
So far was I amused and blinded by this way of considering, that what things I
had before clearly and certainly (as I my self, and others also thought) known;
that was I obliged to unlearn and forget, and to doubt of very many others
also, and chiefly of this, why a man grows and increases in stature and
strength: for this I before thought to be evident to every one, that he was
nourished, because he eat and drank: and that so he came to be increased in
bulk and stature: and when from meats, particularly from flesh, there comes an
addition of flesh, and bones are added to bones, and so in the same manner to
all other parts their own proper nourishment is brought and assimilated: I
thought that by this means a man was increased, from a little tiny infant; to
his full stature. These were my thoughts then; and do you think them reasonable
and satisfactory? To me, says Cebes, they seem to be so. Now consider also
what remains: I also thought the matter to be sufficiently evident, when a
great man stood by a little man, that he was greater by the head; and one Horse
greater than another, and what is yet more evident, that ten were more than
eight, because two had been added to eight, and that two cubits were more than
one, because of double the length. And now, says Cebes, what think you of
these things? Far, by Jove, says he, very far I am from thinking, that I
understood the cause of them: so that now I cannot satisfy my self, whether if
one be added to one, the first one be two; or whether that which has been
added, and that to which it is added, be made two, by the addition of one to
the other: for I wonder, if when each of them was single and apart, both were
one, and not two; but after their growing nearer one to the other, that very
coming together has been the cause why they were made one. Nor if a man by
cutting divide one into two, can I yet understand, how this cutting asunder of
one thing, has been the cause why they are two: for that cause is then
contrary to their being two: for then when they were placed nearer together,
and one was put to the other: and now when they are removed and separated one
from the other; I cannot persuade my self, that I know, that one is made. Nor
do I know any thing else (to speak all in a word) why it is, or why it cease
to be, or whether things be made in that manner and order [that Natural History
has delivered:] but I lightly mix therewith some other mode; and this I in no
sort embrace. Here accomodating his last discourse concerning the
unreasonablenes of acquiessing in secondary and remote Causes, to his present
subject, he reprehends Anaxagoras; first for that putting a certain Universal
Mind (as he called it) for the First Cause of all things, he had
notwithstanding by searching more curiously into second Causes, and ascribing
more to them, than was fit, destroyed that First Cause or Mind, by himself
supposed; then for that in assigning second Causes, he had sixed upon Remote
ones, such as could not show, what was Best; that is, what is proper and
peculiar to every things*
But when on a time I heard one reading and relaving out of a certain Book (as
he said) of Anaxagoras, that there is a certain [(...)] Mind that disposes and
governs all things in order, and is the cause of all things: I was much
delighted with the Universal Cause, and thought it to be in some degree rightly
comparated, namely that a Mind is the cause of all things; and I thus
determined with my self, that if there be such a Mind that governs and disposes
all things, then certainly it does dispose all things to the best advantage,
and place every thing where it is most convenient it should be placed. I added,
that if any man would desire to investigate the causes of singular things, how
they are made, and how they perish; he would be obliged to enquire also, by
what reason, and in what manner it has been best for them to be, or to suffer
or act any thing; and that from this reason, nothing is to be understood by
man, both concerning himself, and of other things, but what is best and most
excellent; and in fine, that it is necessary also that he understand what is
Worst: (...) There is the same Science of them.
for that of contrary things there is the same Knowledge, When I considered this
Doctrine, I with very great pleasure thought, that now I had found a Master,
who would according to my own hearts desire, teach me the causes of things,
Anaxagoras; and that he would explain to me first whether the Earth were flat
and broad, or round; and then would adjoyn also a more copious explication of
that first Cause, and of Necessity; that is, what is Best [for every singular
nature] and why that should be best. Wherefore if he should affirm the Earth to
be placed in the middle, he would more-over give Reasons why it was best for it
to have that position. And if he should have sufficiently explained these
things to me, I had resolved with my self to lay down no other Theory, or Form
of Causes. And now I had prepared my self to enquire of him concerning both the
Sun, and the Moon, and the rest of the Planets and Stars; namely of their
celerity and conversions, and mutual respects, and other Affections and
Apparences; how far it was most commodious for every one of them, to do and to
suffer, what they did and suffered. For I did not think, that he who taught,
that all things are composed and governed by a Mind, would allege any other
cause of them, than this, that it was Best for them to be as they are. And so
when he attributed and assigned a cause to every thing in particular, and in
common to all things; I conceived he would not assign that for a cause to every
thing in particular, namely what was properly and peculiarly best for each
particular thing; and to all in general, what was their common and universal
Good. Thus my hopes were great, and I pleased my self with mighty expectations,
such as I would not have parted with for a very great sum of money; and with
earnest study I took those Books into my hands, and with as much speed as I
could, I read them quite through; that I might quickly understand the Best and
the Worst. But (believe me) I soon fell from that lofty hope: for when I had
made some progress in reading those Books, I perceived the man to use neither
mind nor judgment, nor to assign any Causes to the composition and order of
things with convenience: but putting certain Aerial and Ethererial [influences]
and many other absurd [Chimera's] for the true Causes of things. An Example
fitly remonstrating the folly of assigning Second Causes.
And me thinks, the same fortune befalls him, that belongs to any other who
should say, Whatsoever Socrates does, he does with a Mind, and with judgment:
and then designing to explicate the causes of the particular actions I do,
should further say, first that I sit here, because my Body consists of bones
and nerves; and that my bones are solid and firm, and have their differences
and intervals of joints betwixt them; and that my nerves are so contrived and
formed, that they may be extended and relaxed again, and environ and bind the
bones together with the flesh and skin, which contains and invests them. When
therefore the bones are raised up in their joints, the sinews which are one
while upon the stretch, and by and by relaxed, cause me to have the faculty of
moving, bowing, and extending my limbs: and that by this cause I come to sit
bowed forwards in this posture. And that he might explicate the causes of this
my conference with you, should affirm them to be certain words or voices formed
of air, and hearing, and infinite others equally remote, but should neglect
the true and certain cause; namely that the Athenians having been pleased by
giving their suffrages to condemn me: I am likewise pleased to sit here; and it
seems more just, that I should suffer the punishment they have doomed me to
suffer. Since, by the This Oath was familiar not only to Socrates, but to Zeno
also. Witness Diogen. Laertius in vit. Soc. and Serranus in his Annotations on
this place.
Dogg-starr, those bones of mine had long ago been carried (as I think) among
the Megarensians or Baeotians, Here Socrates is made to reflect upon, and
occasionally justify his refusal to fly to the Megarensians, or to the
Beotians, when Crito would have persuaded him to escape, and assisted him
therein; as at large is recorded by Plato in his Dialogue entitled Crito.
by order of that Best; if I had not judged it more just and honorable to
undergo, and patiently endure the punishment which the City has decreed for
me; than to live a fugitive or exile in another Country. But to call these
things, Causes, is extremely impertinent. Whereas if one should say, that
unless I had both bones and sinews, I could not do what actions I had a mind to
do, he would indeed speak truth. And yet notwithstanding if any man should
affirm, that by reason of my bones and nerves, I do the actions I do, and that
I so far do them with understanding and a Mind, but not upon choice of the
Best; truly he would reason but negligently and supinely. For this in truth, is
not to be able to distinguish and discern, that really there is another cause;
and another something, without which a cause is not a cause. In which error
they seem to me to be involved and amused, who groping as it were in the dark,
and abusing the propriety of that name, call that Second a Cause. Some
therefore, while they place about the Earth a great gulf of Waters beneath the
Heavens, will have it that the Earth come thereby to consist and remain firm:
others prop up the Air, its fundament, as with a b^^d Kneading-tubb. But that
virtue or power which has been able to constitute things themselves in the
best manner, what it is, and how it does consist; this (I say) they enquire
not, nor conceive it to have a Divine force and Energy: but imagine they have
found a new Atlas stronger than the first, and by a kind of immortality much
more lasting, and more comprehensive of all things; and think that that Good
and Beautiful [Being] does bind together, and contain [and support] nothing.
For my part, I would gladly learn from any man, the nature and proprieties of
that Cause, whatsoever they be. But since I have not been able, either of my
self to find it, or to understand from any other, what it is: are you, Cebes,
willing I should give you an account of the Second Voyage I with exquisite
study designed and attempted, for the finding of that Cause? I vehemently
desire to hear it, says he.

When my mind was grown weary and faint with considering things intently, I
perceived my self obliged to beware, lest that might befall me, which usually
happens to those who gaze upon the Sun in an Eclipse. For their faculty of
seeing would be taken from them, unless they beheld the image of the Sun in
Water, or in some other the like [Diaphanous and Specular] body. Something like
this came into my mind, and I feared lest my understanding might be wholly
blinded, if I looked upon things themselves with my eyes, and attempted to
touch them with my senses. What way Socrates took in his re-searches of the
First cause; coming to knowledge thereof by certain degrees; viz. by Reasons and
Discourses; which yet he says were efficacious and powerful, lest we might
conceive some imaginary knowledge to be thereby signified, Plato therefore
affirms, that as God is the most potent cause of all things, so he is also the
sole and most certain Cause of the Soul. Which fundament is to be laid down as
necessary to this disquisition, before we come to other reasons nearer to us.
I held it therefore very well worth my labor, to have recourse to Reason, or
at least to that discourse which retains the prints of reason; and therein to
contemplate the nature and verity of things. But perhaps this Simile or Example
whereby I have endeavored to represent this matter, will not be exactly fit
and consentaneous. For I do not fully grant, that he who contemplates things in
the [mirror of] reason or discourse, does contemplate them rather in images
than in works Nevertheless I took this course, and laying for a foundation,
that reason which I judge to be most valid and most firm; what things appear to
me to have congruity therewith, those I put for true, both as to Causes, and to
all others: and on the contrary, what have no congruity therewith, those I
conclude to be untrue. Which having thus noted in general, I will explain it
more fully to you: for yet, I conceive you understand it not. Not very well, by
Jove, says Cebes. Yet replies he, I here speak nothing a new; but the very
same I have, both at other times, and in my precedent disputation perpetually
declared. For I am going to show to you the image of that Cause, in the
re-search whereof I have thus long been versed: and I again return to those
[(...)] renowned [Excellencies] and from them deduce my beginning; laying this
down for a principle, That there is a something Beautiful, Good and Great, and
every way perfect in and by it self. Which if you grant, I hope I shall, from
those attributes of perfection, first show you an image of that Supreme Cause,
and then convince you, that the Soul is immortal. But says Cebes, supposing I
grant this [your Fundamental] there is no need of a longer preface to support
your conclusion. Consider then, says he, what are the consequences of those
Perfections? if at least your opinion be the same with mine. For thus I think,
if there be any other Beautiful besides that self-beautiful, that it is
Beautiful no otherwise, than as it is participant of the same self-beautiful;
and the same I affirm of all. Do you embrace this Cause? I embrace it, says
he. I therefore, says he again, understand no more; nor can I comprehend those
wise Causes: but if any enquire of me, why any thing is beautiful, or why it
has a florid color, or elegant figure, or any other the like fair quality; I
securely pass by and neglect all other Causes, (with all which truly I am
amused and perplexed) and simply, and genuinely without any Sophistry, and
perhaps also foolishly, determine with my self, that nothing makes that thing
beautiful, but either the presence, or communication of that self-beautiful, by
what reason or way soever that has come to it. For that I do not yet affirm:
but this above all things I maintain, An Axiom, certain and evident, that
whatsoever is in the University of Nature, has both its existence and form
from God alone, who is the first and true Cause of all things. And that is the
first fundament of the Souls immortality, viz. that God has endowed man with
an immortal Soul; which was before demonstrated by Socrates, who therefore in
this place, only brings Examples for illustration.
that by the sole virtue and efficacy of that Beautiful, all things are made
beautiful: for this I take to be the safest answer I can give both to my self,
and to others: and firmly adhering to this truth, I believe I shall never be
divorced from it; and think it safe to answer both to my self and others, that
by that Beautiful alone all things that are beautiful, are made so. Do you
think so too? I do. Likewise by Magnitude, that those things that are great,
are made great; and those that are greater, are made greater; and those that
are less, are made less by smalness. Certainly. Neither would you admit, if any
should say that some other is greater by the head, and another less by the
head: but profess that you say* nothing else but this, that whatever one thing
is greater than another, comes to be so by no other cause but magnitude: and
whatever is less, comes to be so only by smalness, and therefore is less by
reason of smalness it self. Fearing, I think, lest, if you should have said,
that such or such a man is greater or less by the head; another might
contradict you, opposing this, that a man otherwise little, is bigger in the
head than another otherwise bigger. Besides, that you say, the greater is
greater by t e head, (which is but a small thing) that is some Monstre, that
you should affirm a thing to be great by that which is little. Are you not
afraid of this answer? Yes, says Cebes smiling. Are you then afraid, says he,
to say that ten are more than eight by two, and exceed two by that ration, but
not by reason of multitude: and that two Cubits are greater than one Cubit by
the half, but not by magnitude? for there is the same fear. There is, says he.
And what? if one be put to one, will you say that that putting or accession is
the cause why they are made two: or if one be divided, are you not afraid to
affirm that division to be the cause why one is made two? may you not cry out
aloud, that you are ignorant by what other reason things exist, unless so far
as every thing is participant of its own proper nature: and so you have no
other reason, why two are made, than (that I may so speak) the participation of
Duity or Twoness. So that it is necessary, that those things which are to
become two, participate of that Duity: and those that are to be one, partake of
Unity? But as for those cuttings asunder, those puttings together, and other
the like witty trifles; you may very well omit them all; and leave the honor of
answering them, to those that are wiser than your self. But you fearing your
own shadow (as they say) and diffident of your own ignorance, would you,
certainly adhering to the firmness of that Position, in good earnest answer so?
and if any man should rely upon that same position, would you neglect him, and
not answer, until you had considered the consequents, whether in your judgment
some of them agreed or disagreed with others. And when you should be obliged to
render a reason thereof, would you in like manner, laying down another
Hypothesis, grant those of the premises that seemed best, until you should
arrive at what is just and fit? At the same time you would not confound things
themselves (as the Contentious use to do) disputing both of the principle
resolved upon, and of the consequents arising naturally from that principle: at
least if you desired to find out some of those things which truly are; for
those perhaps have no consideration, no care of these things: but are endowed
with so singular a faculty, that they are able by their wisdom to commix and
confound all things, and yet please themselves at the same time. And as for
you, if you be one of those Philosophers, you will (I think) do what I say. You
speak very great truths, answer Cebes and Simmias.

Each. They answered rightly, by Jove, Phedo; for it seems to me, that he spoke
admirably well, and perspicuously to the sense and capacity of a man, even of a
vulgar wit.


Phe. He did, Echecrates; and so all that were present, judged.


Each. We who were not present, are of the same judgment, hearing only the
rehearsal. But what were his Discourses afterward.


Phe. Another Socratic Argument of the Souls immortaiity, taken from the proxim
reasons of Second Causes, from whence follows the same Conclusion; after
requisite Positions.
These, as near as I can remember: When these things were granted, and it was
agreed upon among us, that single Species or Images are something, and that
other things which communicate with them, do challenge to themselves their
Surname: he then proceeds to interrogations. Seeing you say so, says he; do
you not in saying that Simmias is greater than Socrates, but less than Phedo;
imply, that in Simmias are both Greatness and Smalness at once? I do so. But
says he, you confess in that that Simmias exceeds Soerates, it is not in
reality so, as it is expressed in words. First Position; that in the collation
of things, the things themselves are not to be considered simply, but their
Relations or respects one to another.
For you think not that Simmias is so comparated by nature, as he is Simmias;
but only in respect of the magnitude wherewith he is endowed: nor that he
exceeds Socrates, as he is Socrates, but that Socrates has smalness, being
compared to Simmias his greatness. Right. Nor that Simmias is exceeded by
Phedo, as he is Phedo; but because compared to the smalness of Simmias, Phedo
is endowed with greatness. Right again. Thus then Simmias has the appellation
of both great and little, since placed in the middle of them, he exceeds the
one in greatness, and by reason of his smalness, yields to the others
greatness. And at the same time smiling, I seem, says he, to be delighted with
words like an Historian. Is it not as I say? He assented. This I say out of
desire, that you may be of the same opinion with my self. Second Position; that
contraries, as contraries, are neither made, nor capable of existing together;
but either give place each to other, or perish, when one comes upon another.
For I conceive, that Magnitude it self is not only never willing to be both
great and small at once; but also that the magnitude which is in us, never
receives smalness, nor wills to be exceeded: but of the two, one either
vanishes and gives place, when its contrary, namely smalness, approaches; or is
destroyed, when the other appears: for when it has once received and put on
smalness, it can be no longer greatness, nor is it willing to be other than
what it then is. As I, when I have received and put on smalness, and am yet the
same that I am; or am this same little I. But that has not dared, since it is
great, to be little. In the same manner also that little that is in us, would
not be made great: nor will one of two contraries, while it is what it is,
become what the other is; but either it gives place, or perishes in this
passion. Very right, says Cebes, as I conceive. Objection from the Doctrine
above demonstrated, which seems repugnant to this Position; for it was before
affirmed, that Contraries are produced out of Contraries; but here he says,
that Contraries cannot be together.
Then one of those who were present (who it was, I do not well remember) by the
Gods, says he, was it not granted in the precedent disputation, that one
contrary may have being out of the other, viz. that a greater has existence
out of a less, and a less out of a greater: and that this is the generation of
Contraries out of Contraries? and now it seems tome to be said, that that never
is done. Here Socrates having inclined his ear to the speaker, you have, says
he, manfully remembered what was delivered: but you understand not the
difference betwixt what is now said, and what was said before. That Objection
solved, by reconciliation of the two Positions seemingly repugnant. Where he
also distinguishes betwixt the form of a contrary, and the Subject that is
susceptible of a contrary; making good his Thesis by various examples.
In the precedent dispute it was said, that out of one contrary is made
another: but here it is said, that a contrary cannot be contrary to it self;
neither that which is in us, nor that which is in nature. Then we spoke of
those things that have contraries, giving these the Surname of those: Now we
speak of Contraries themselves, whose Surname those things wherein they are,
obtain. And these contraries we could never affirm to be willing to receive
mutual generation one from the other. And converting his eyes upon Cebes, he
said, does any of these things trouble you, Cebes? Neither am I discomposed,
says Cebes, nor does what you say trouble me. He returns to his Second
Position; and both proves and illustrates it by Examples.
We are then agreed says he, that a contrary can never be contrary to it self.
We are so, says Cebes. Consider this therefore with me, says he; whether you
can assent to it. Do you call any thing hot and cold? yes. What? as Snow and
Fire? No. Is any other thing hot, but fire: any thing cold, but Snow? yes
certainly. But this you conceive (I think) that Snow, while it continues Snow,
will never receive heat (as we said above) but at the accession of it, either
yield to it, or be abolished. Right. And that fire, at the accession of Cold,
will likewise go out, or be destroyed; but never dare, after the admission of
Cold, to be what it was, namely fire and cold. You say true, says Cebes. To In
Numbers, and their various forms.
some of this sort also it usually happens, that they not only perpetually
account and design the same Species by the same name, but some other thing too,
which indeed is not that, though it always has the form thereof, when it
existeth. But now perhaps what I say, will be more easily explained in this
manner. Ought an Odd number to have this name wherewith we now mark it, or not?
Yes doubtless. This alone of all things (for this I ask) or somewhat else,
which though different from Odd, ought nevertheless always to call it by its
own name; because the nature of it is such as never to defect from Odd? This I
say, is that very thing, as the number of three, and many other numbers suffer.
Now consider this in the number Three; are Three to be called both by their own
name, Three, and by that of Odd also, though Odd be not the same with a Triad,
or Ternary? But thus comparated is also a Ternary, and Five, and every half of
a number; so that though it be not the same as Odd, yet always every one of
them is Odd. Two likewise, and Four, and again every other Series of number,
though it be not the same as Even; yet must always be Even. Do you grant this,
or not? Why should I not? says he. Observe then says he, what I design to
demonstrate; it is this. A Third Thesis dependent on the precedents. That what
admits a contrary quality, is One thing; and the contrary quality admitted
another, The Contrary Subject therefore remains, while contrary qualities are
variously induced; but so, that contrary qualities cannot be in the same mode.
But so long as a contrary quality is present, it communicates its nature and
name to the subject; as while an Odd number shall be present, that number will
be, and be called Odd* while Heat shall be in a body, the body will be, and be
called hot, etc.
It seems, that not only those Contraries are incapable of mutually receiving
each other, but all other things whatsoever, which though they be not contrary
among themselves, yet always have contraries: nor do they seem capable to put
on that form which is contrary to the Species wherein they are: but when that
contrary form once intervenes, they presently either perish, or give place.
Shall we not say, that Three will sooner perish, or suffer any thing else, than
endure to be made Even? Yes, says Cebes. And yet, says he again, the number
Two is not contrary to the number Three. It is not, truly. Therefore not only
contrary Species admit not the accession of one to another mutually; but some
other contraries also abhor, and are incapable to suffer that mutual accession.
You speak with great probability, says Cebes. Will you then, says he, that,
if we be able, we define of what quality these things are? With all my heart,
says he. Will they not be such, Cebes, which so conform whatsoever they
possess, as not only to force it to retain its own Species of form, but also
suffer it not to admit and put on the Species or form of any Contrary
whatsoever? How say you to this, says Cebes? As we said a little before: for
you know it to be necessary, that that which contains the Species of Three, is
not only Three, but also Odd. Right. For this reason we said, that the Species
contrary to that form which makes this, can never be induced. By no means. Has
the Species of Odd perfected that form? Certainly. And is the Species of Even
contrary to the Species of Odd. It is. Therefore the species of Even shall
never force it self upon Three. Never. Are Three then free from she ration of
Even? Free. Therefore tste number Three is odd. Certainly. What therefore I
undertook to define, I have now defined; namely, He repeateth what he had above
distinctly applicated, viz. that contrary qualities cannot be together in the
same subject; but one of necessity expels the other. But the subjects
themselves admit contraries successively.
that of what sort those things are, which being contrary to none, yet admit
not a Contrary; as now the number Three is not at all contrary to Even, and yet
is nevertheless incapable thereof. For the number Two always infers a contrary
to Odd, and Fire a Contrary to Cold; and the like of very many others But
consider whether you agree that the matter ought to be defined thus; That a
Contrary does not only not receive its contrary; but that also which may adfer
any contrary to that, to which it self may come, namely that which adfers it,
does never admit a form contrary to the form of that which is adferred. But
again rub up your memory; for it is no incommodity to hear the same again. The
number Five never admits the ration of Even; nor the number of Ten (the duple
of five) the ration of Odd. This therefore, being it self contrary to another,
will yet never admit the ration of Odd. Nor will that number and half that
number, or half a number admit the ration of the whole, nor a third part, etc.
at least if you comprehend my meaning, and assent unto me. I both understand
your sense, says he, and assent without the least doubt or scruple.

Here recomodating his precedent Suppositions; and treating of second Causes;
he first evinceth this, that we are to seek, not remote, but proxime causes;
not (as his Interpreters speak) Accidentary, but substantial ones; as he
teaches by the Examples alleged.
But tell me again, reflecting upon our precedent positions; (yet I would not
have you answer to the questions I ask, expressly and in the same prints of
words [as before.] For besides that certain way of answering, of which I have
treated before, I find another naturally arising from the things said by us
just now, and this certain and firm; for example, if you ask me what that is,
which if it be in a body, the body will be hot; I will not give that gross and
ignorant answer, that it is Heat; but a more elegant and polite one, from our
last conclusions, namely that it is fire. Nor, if you ask, what that is, which
if it invade the body, the body will be sick: will I answer, that it is a
disease, but more precisely, that it is a Fever: and if you ask me what is
that, which if it intervene to a number, the number will be Odd: I will not
say, it is imparity or Oddness, but Unity: and of others in the same manner.
But look if you sufficiently understand me. Very clearly, says he. Answer me
then, what is that which if it be in the body, First Theorem, the Soul is the
proxim cause of life in man.
the body will be alive. The Soul, says he. And is not that always so? Why
not, says he? The Soul therefore always brings life to the Body it embraces,
whatsoever the Body be? It does always bring life, says he. Is any thing
contrary to Life, or not? Yes, says he. Second Theorem; death is contrary to
life, and therefore contrary to the Soul, which is the cause of life: and
conclusion; therefore the Soul admits not death; from the conceded supposition,
that one Contrary never admits of another.
What? Death. The Soul therefore shall never receive the contrary to that which
it self always induces, as has been granted from our late conclusions. True,
says Cebes. What then? That which admits not the Species or ration of Even, by
what name do we now call it? Odd, says he. And what do we call that which
admits not Justice, or Music? That we call Unjust; this Immusical. Consummation
of that Conclusion, from adjuncts: the Soul receives not death; therefore it is
immortal.
What do we call that which is incapable of Death? Immortal, says he. Is not
the Soul capable of Death? No. Therefore the Soul is a thing immortal. It is
immortal. Well then, says he, shall we acknowledge this to be thus
demonstrated? or what think you of it? Demonstrated perfectly, Socrates, says
he. Another Theorem of the same Conclusion, If what is Immortal, be (...),
exempt from destruction; then certainly the Soul is also (...), exempt from
destruction, because proved to be Immortal.
What therefore, says he, if it were necessary, that Odd be free and exempt
from all destruction, would not Three also be free and exempt from all
destruction? Why not? Therefore, if it were necessary, that that which is
wholly void of Heat, be likewise free and exempt from all destruction; when a
man should induce Hot upon Snow, would the Snow go out safe and unmelted? for
it would not then perish, when it had once admitted and received heat. You say
true, quoth he. In the same manner, I opine, if that which is void of Cold,
were free from all destruction; when any cold thing should be brought to fire,
it would not be destroyed or perish, but go away safe and entire. Of necessity,
says he. We are therefore by necessity obliged to conclude the same of an
Immortal. For if what is immortal, be free and exempt from all destruction,
it is impossible the Soul should perish, when death comes to it. For from our
late Positions, it will not suffer or undergo death, and so not dye: as a
Ternary will never (as we have said) be Even; nor will Odd be by any means
Even; nor Fire be Cold, nor the Heat which is in fire, be coldness. But some
may Object, What hinders that Odd may not be made Even, if Even be added, as
has been granted: and Odd being extinct, Even succeed into the room thereof?
To him that should thus argue, we could not (I confess) deny, but that Odd may
perish; for Odd it self is not exempt from all destruction: Since, if that were
not agreed upon among us, we might easily evince, that when Even comes in
place, Odd and the Ternary instantly fly away; and so we might firmly determine
of fire and hot, and the rest. Might we not? Yes. Last conclusion; that the
Soul is both immortal, and free from all destruction, which is certainly
demonstrated from the given and proved Hypothesis of proxim and cognate causes.
Now therefore of an immortal also; since we are now agreed, that an Immortal
is absolutely free and exempt from all destruction; it is demonstrated beyond
all doubt or dispute, that the Soul, since it is immortal, is free and immune
from all destruction: but if that be not granted, it will require another
disputation. But, says he, in good truth there is no need of further dispute,
as to that point. For it is impossible, that any thing whatever should escape
death, if this immortal and sempiternal undergo corruption and destruction.

A confirmation of the Immortality and indissolubility of the Soul, from the
first and principal Cause [God] which being (...), the very form of life, the
Soul also must be sempiternal; because Divine? and made after the Exemplar of
that primary Idea, which is confessed in the former disputation.
That God, says Socrates, the very form of life (as I conceive) and if there be
any other Immortal, can never dye; is confessed by all men. By all, by Jove,
says Cebes, not only men, but Gods too I believe An Immortal therefore, being
incapable of Corruption; what else ought we to conclude, than that the Soul,
since it is certainly immortal, must be also free and exempt from all
destruction? It is absolutely necessary. When therefore death comes to a man,
what is in him mortal, does (as is manifest) die: but what is immortal, departs
safe and free from all corruption, giving place to death. It seems so. Then
without all doubt, Cebes, the Soul is a thing immortal, and free from
destruction: and certainly our Souls will eternally survive apud inferos. I can
say no more to this, says Cebes; nor any way deny my assent to your Reasons.
But if Simmias, or any other has any new matter to object, he shall do well
not to conceal it: since I do not see to what more convenient time he can
differ the handling of these things, if he desire either to speak, or to hear
any thing concerning them. I also, says Simmias, have nothing that detains me
from submitting my faith to all you have explained in your former discourse.
And yet by reason of the Grandeur and Excellency of the things commemorated,
while I think Human infirmity not at all worthy of so great Endowments and
Prerogatives, I find my self constrained, not yet entirely to resign up my
belief to your later conclusisions. You speak with good reason, Simmias, says
Socrates, and modestly: for those our first Suppositions, though we be
persuaded of their verity, are yet more diligently and accuratly to be
considered: But if ye shall, after they have been decently and with just reason
examined and explicacated, once receive them: ye will understand the whole
matter, as far as man's intellect is capable to comprehend things of that
[abstruse] nature: and if that be once made clear and evident, ye will require
no more. You have reason, says he.

The Third part of the discourse, arising from the conclusision of the Souls
immortality, and concerning the state of it after death; which Socrates blindly
describes, from the opinion of the vulgar and superstitious fictions of Poets.
But my Friends, says he, it is fit we make diligent inquisition into this also;
that if the Soul be immortal, we are highly concerned to take care of it, not
only in respect of this short time, which we define by the name of life, but of
Eternity that remains after this life: and the danger now seems to be great, if
any man shall neglect his Soul. For if Death be a separation and dissolution of
the whole, it were to be reputed an advantage and emolument to dissolute and
wicked men, that when they are dead, they might be freed from their Body and
Soul, and improbity all at once: Whereas now it is manifest, that the Soul is
immortal; a man has no other way to avoid Evils, and acquire security from
future dangers, but to become as wise and virtuous as is possible. For the Soul
departing hence to the Mansions of Ghosts, carries along with it nothing but
its former manners and education, which are said to be of very great moment,
either to the importance of Utility, or aggravation of loss to him who is dead,
when he first arrives there. And Tradition tells us, that every one of the dead
is by that very Demon that attended on him living, purposely led into a certain
place, where it is ordained, all Ghosts assembled together, must receive their
Doom, and according to the form of Judgment ratified and constituted, go to the
Infernal Mansions, with that Guide, to whom command is given to conduct those
who are at those places. But when they have obtained those things they ought to
obtain, and remained there the time appointed; another Leader brings them back
again, after many and long periods of time. But this Journey is not such as
Telephus in Aeschylus describes to be; for he affirms, there is but one way,
and that Uniform too, that leads to the Infernal Mansions: whereas to me it
seems more probable, the way is neither Uniform, nor Single: for if there were
but one way, neither would there be any need of Guides, nor could any Soul go
out of it. But now this seems to have many bywayes, diversions, and intricate
windings: whereof I make a conjecture from Sacrifices, and other Rites and
Ceremonies belonging to Religion, which are here performed. Further, a moderate
and prudent Soul, both follows his Guide willingly and cheerfully, and knows
things present: but a Soul fettered with sense of Lusts, and commerce with the
Body (as we formerly declared] still hankering after the Body with an
affrighting and tumultuary error, and striving much, and suffering much about a
visible-place; is not without extreme difficulty at length led away by that
Demon, to whom the care of it was committed. And when it comes to that place
where other Souls are; from this impure Soul, which has either committed
Murder, or polluted it self with some other crime; or perpretrated some other
villainous act of kin to that wickedness, such as are the works of impious
Souls: from this Soul, I say, every Soul flies away with detestation, and will
be neither Companion, nor Guide unto it; while it self wanders up and down,
hardly pressed and hemmed in with the greatest streights immaginable, until
certain prefixed moments of time arrive; which being elapsed, it is then by a
certain necessity hurried to that place which has been destined for its
habitation. But the Soul that has led a life of purity and moderation, having
obtained the Gods for both companions and Guides, inhabits that place, which
has been peculiarly and properly assigned unto it.

There are many and wonderful places of the Earth: Coments of men concerning
the mansions of departed souls, vain and uncertain.
which yet is neither such, nor so great as it is thought to be by some, who
are wont to speak of it, as I have heard from one. And here Simmias
interrupting him, says, how say you this, Socrates? for I also have heard many
things concerning the Earth: but not the same perhaps that that man has
persuaded you to believe; and therefore I desire to hear from you his opinion.
But Simmias, says Socrates, the art of Glaucus it self seems insufficient to
explain those so great and abstruse things; and to prove by convincing
arguments, that they are true, appears to me more difficult, than that Glaucus
should be able by all his skill to perform. To render so great and reserved
mysteries intelligible by discourse, I perhaps may be unable: and if I
understood them, yet would not the short remainder of my life suffice to so
prolix and copious an Argument. Yet nothing hinders but I may adventure briefly
to describe to you the form of the Earth, and its places, such as I have
received them to be. And this, says Simmias, will be enough, the narrowness of
our capacity considered. This then, says he, I have fixed and established in
my belief; first, if the Earth be placed in the middle of the Universe, on all
sides encompassed by Heaven equally distant from it; then it needs not the
defense or guard of any thing, either of the Air, or of any other prop or
support, to secure it from falling; but is able to sustain it self, since
Heaven that environs it, is in all its parts the same, and the Earth it self
equally balanced, and placed in the middle of another thing whose parts are
all the same and equidistant; can neither more nor less swerve or decline to
any side: and what is always in the same manner disposed, is constantly
permanent in the same place, without the least or tendency or inclination to
any other. This (I say) is my first persuasion, And a right one it is, says
Simmias. My next is, that the face of the Earth is broad and large: and that we
inhabit the places from the River Phasis to Hercules his pillars, in a very
small spot, as Pismires about the extended plain of some wide field, or as
Froggs about the Sea: and various other Nations dwell in other places. For,
that there are through the whole Earth, many and various Concavities, from both
the form it self, and bulk of its magnitude, into which both Air, and
Darkness, and Water have followed together. But that the pure Earth it self is
seated in a pure Heaven, wherein are the Stars, and what very many of those who
are wont to speak of these matters, call Ether: the dreggs and sediment
whereof these things are, and flow together into the hollows of the earth. Yet
that we who inhabit in these Hollows, know not that we do so, but imagine that
we dwell upon the higher parts of the Earth; as if a man dwelling at the bottom
of the Sea, should think he dwelt above upon the Surface, and beholding the Sun
and other Stars through the Water, conceive the Sea it self to be Heaven: and
by reason of the slowness and infirmity of his understanding, having never come
up to the top of the Sea, nor beheld it, nor risen up, and put his head above
Water into this our place, could not know how much more beautiful and pleasant
this lightsom Region is, than that obscure and deep one is, where he resides:
nor heard from any other who had seen our place. This (I say) is exactly our
case: For, inhabiting in some Hollow of the Earth, we conceive, that we are
seated upon the eminent places thereof, and call the Air, Heaven: as if the
Stars really moved through the Air, as Heaven; and we beheld their motions and
ways. And that herein we are so amused and confounded, that by reason of our
slowness and infirmity, we cannot penetrate to the highest air. Since, if any
should arrive at the top of it, and as with wings fly up thither, when he had
gotten his head once above it, he would behold all these things clearly: just
as if Fishes mounting up out of the Sea, should behold our places, so would he.
And if he were by nature qualified for contemplation, he would soon know, that
it is the true Heaven, and true Light, and true Earth; for both the Earth, and
the Stones, and all this place are corrupted and eaten away; as things in the
Sea are, by the saltness thereof. Nor is any thing of value, any thing perfect
bred commonly in the Sea; but Caverns, and Sand, and an infinite quantity of
mud and filth are in it, and where Earth is: which are in no respect to be
compared to our Beauties. But those Above seem to excel ours. Now to describe
what kind of Countries there are in the Earth, I shall think it no trouble to
relate to you a Fable pleasant, and worthy your attention. That, says Simmias,
would we fain hear. In the beginning therefore, they say the face of the Earth
appeared to the sight such, as (if a man looked down from on high, and surveyed
it) our little Balls made up of twelve square pieces of Leather put together,
various indeed, and distinguished by several colors; not unlike the colors
Painters use, as samples, here with us: That there all the Earth does consist
of these various colors, much more splendid, bright and pure then ours are:
one, purple, exceedingly fair and deep; another, shining like Gold; but that
which is white, is whiter than Chalk or Snow, and composed of other colors
also, both more and more beautiful than have ever been seen by our eyes. Then
that those very Cavities of the Earth, being full of Water and Air, represent a
certain kind of color, shining through in a variety of other colors, so that
the form thereof may be perceived both simple and various at once. That herein
thus constituted, the same things are in the same manner produced, Trees,
Flowers, Fruits: and Mountains and Stones have the same forms and qualities, in
perfection, in perspicuity, and in colors, far more beautiful than our
precious Stones are, which are but thin particles of those; Sardonixes, and
Jaspers, and Emeralds, and all others of great price: and that there is nothing
there, but what vastly excells all our finest Rarities of the same sort. That
the cause of this vast difference is, because the Stones there are pure, not
(as ours are) fretted and eaten by putrefaction and saltness, from the things
that flow in together hither, and that produce diseases and decays in Stones,
in Plants, and in Animals of our Earth. That the Earth it self is every where
adorned with such fine productions, and moreover with Gold and Silver, and
other Metals: which naturally shine in a wonderful manner, as being both very
many, very great, and dispersed through the whole Earth: so that to behold it,
is a most delightful sight to the happy Spectators. That there are in that
Earth, living Creatures also of very many Kinds, and Men too: of whom some live
in Mediterranean places, others about the Air, as we about the Sea; others in
Islands, which the Air invirons, as situate in the very Continent. In sum,
in those places, the Air is to them, what the Sea is to us, and serves them for
the same uses: only this, their Air is our Ether. And the seasons of the year
are with them so admirably constituted in point of temper, that the men there
live both free from Diseases, and much longer than ours: and in seeing,
hearing, understanding, and other the like faculties, they as far excel us, as
Air excels Water, and the Ether, Air, in purity. That there are likewise
Groves and Temples of Gods, who reside in them, and give Answers and Prophesies
from Oracles; and the men hold familiar conversation and commerce with Gods
themselves. That the Sun, and Moon, and other Stars are behe d by them clearly
and distinctly as they are, and that they have this one felicity more to
accompany them. That this is the form and constitution of the Earth, and the
things that are about it. That there are places therein, and in the Hollows,
and in the circumference thereof, many, some deeper and wider, in which we
dwell; others deeper indeed, but of narrower mouths than that wherein we dwell:
others again less profound than ours, but wider. That all these Cavities every
where perforated one into another, and communicating by underground passages,
have both by turnings and diversions, as well in narrower as in broader places;
so that a vast plenty of Water flows out of some into others, as into Cisterns:
and very great currents of Rivers, and perpetual springs of Waters, both cold
and hot. Much fire also, whole Rivers of fire, and many streams of Water,
Muddy, and Pure, and Dirty: as those Rivers in Sicily, which flow from the
Torrent called [(...)] the muddy River; and the Torrent it self. That every one
of those places are filled, according to the quantity of Water every day
brought in; and that all these are moved up and down, like some hanging Vessel
upon the Earth. But this Pensil Vessel, by reason of some such nature, is some
one of the Gapings or Chasms of the Earth; and the very biggest of all,
piercing from side to side through the whole Earth; which Homer himself
intimated in that Verse, Far hence in the Earth there gapes a pit immense:
Which both he elsewhere, and other Poets call Tartarus; and into which all
Rivers have their confluence, re-flowing out of it by turns: But all Rivers are
of the same nature as the Region is through which they run: and this is the
cause why all both issue from thence, and return thither again: because that
Humid has neither bottom nor foundation; but is lifted up, and wavers upward
and downward; and the air and breath about it, does the same: but follows it,
both when it ascends, and when it descends to us. And as in living Creatures
endowed with Respiration, the Spirit or Breath is inspired and expired
alternately: so here the Breath being raised up with moisture, yields winds,
strong, and in ungoverned force almost infinite, while it rusheth in and out.
But the Water, when stirred up by some impulse, it runs to that place, which is
called Below; both flows into those gushing Lakes, and fills them; as those who
drink full bowls: and when it runs out from thence, in its circulation tending
thither again, it replenishes the places here. They thus replete, it flows on
through passages and channels of the Earth. When all Fountains and Streams
arrive at those places, whither Seas have more expeditely and opportunely
flowed: they produce Lakes, Rivers, and Fountains. Thence going under ground
again, some when they have traveled and compassed greater and more places,
precipitate themselves again into Tartarus, or the bottomless Gulf. some more
deeply than whence they were exhausted; others less deeply: but all flow in
more deeply, than whence they flowed out. Some pour in themselves through a
part contrary to, and disparate from that out of which they had their efflux;
others through the same. Some wheeled about in a circle, and once or often, in
serpentine windings, Sires and spiral Meanders, enfolding the Earth, as much as
was possible; bowing downwards, impel themselves forward, to descend where way
is given them, to the very middle on each side, and no farther: for at each
extreme Confluence, each part is impervious. There are besides these, many
other Confluents of Waters great and various: among all which are four, whereof
the greatest and deepest flowing in a round, is called the Ocean. By a motion
contrary to this, flows Acheron; which comes in through other desert places,
and indeed running under ground, passes on to the Acherusiad Marish, where
crowds of departed Souls have their common rendezvous; and whence, after
certain periods of time predestined by Fate, to some longer, to others shorter,
they are remitted hither again to the generation of Animals. Betwixt these two
runs the third River, and not far from its Sours, disembogues it self into a
certain great place, that burns with much fire, and there stagnating, makes a
Mere or Lake greater than the Sea with us, and perpetually boiling with water
and mudd: hence it gusheth forth with violence, running into a round, troubled
and full of filth; and having often fetched a compass under ground, pours it
self into the deepest part of Tartarus; passing to the Extremes of the
Acherusiad Marish, but not mixing with the Waters thereof. This is that River
which they yet call Pyriphlegethon, the Burning River of Hell; whose Rivulets
with violent force making way through the broaken Earth, rise up wheresoever
they can drill themselves a vent. Opposite to this, the Fourth River falls
first into a place horrid with mouldiness and stinking damps, wild and savage
(as they say) of a blew color, which they call the Stygian place, that is the
dismal seat of hate, fear, and grief; and the River flowing into it, makes the
Stygian Lake; and falling in there, with mighty strength re-inforcing its
Torrent, and thrusting it self under ground, with a contrary flood, and various
eddies, it throws it self against the Burning River, and goes forward till it
meets it in the Acherusiad Marish: but mixes streams with no other Waters, and
here revolved in a circle, discharges it self into Tartarus, just opposite to
the Burning River; and the name of it is (as Poets say) Cocytus, The Purgatory
of the ancient Heathens described, with their Repentance in Hell, and three
parts thereof, Contrition, Confession, Satisfaction,; all which they saw to be
necessary, by the light of Nature.
i. e. Sorrow. These things being thus constituted, when Ghosts have arrived
whither the tutelar Demon of every one conducts them, first they are examined,
tried, and judged, both they who have lived well, righteously, and justly, and
they who have lived in vice, injustice and impiety; they also who have lived in
a middle way, going on to Acheron, and mounting into Wagons prepared for them,
are therein carried to the Marish: where they both remain, and suffer
punishments appointed for the expiation and expurgation of their sins. After
they are thus expiated, they are absolved and quitted: and every one receives
rewards for their good deeds, according to their merits. But if for the
greatness of their Crimes, they be found incurable, having committed either
many or great Sacriledges, or unjust and unlawful Homicides, or such execrable
Wickednesses; a just lot casts them into Tartarus, from whence they never
get out. Whereas they who stand convicted of, and obnoxious to sins great
indeed, but not inexpiable; as they who have, in heat of anger committed any
violence against Father or Mother, and truly repented of it all their life
after; or who have been Homicides through immoderate passion: upon these is
imposed a necessity of falling into Hell. But when they have been there a year
in Torments, the Waves cast them forth: Homicides, by Cocytus; Killers of
Father or Mother, by the Burning River. And when they come to the Acherusiad
Marish, then with a loud voice they by name call, some those whom they have
killed, others, those whom they have wronged, and beg and beseech them to be
satisfied with their unfeigned penitence, and grievous sufferings, and to give
them leave to depart out of that Marish. If they prevail, they retire thence,
and are freed from those miseries: if not, they are carried back again into
Tartarus, and so returned to the other rivers, not ceasing to suffer their
renewed torments, until they have obtained pardon from those to whom they have
been injurious; for this punishment is appointed for them by the decree of the
Judges. Now they who have been rightly purged by Philosophy, live ever after
without bodies, and come into other habitations fair and delightful; which to
describe, is too difficult for my understanding, and too long for the short
remainder of my life.

Commodious admonitions, concluding the description of Hell; that we are not
obliged to give credit to those Poetic fictions; and yet it is useful to
reflect upon them, that we may be incited to aim at felicity after death, and
to follow the only path that leads to it, viz. Wisdom and Virtue.
But as for the concernment and importance of what we have here related,
Simmias; we ought to labor with all possible study and care, that we may
follow the conduct of Virtue and Wisdom, in this life. For the reward is great,
and the hope good. That the descriptions I have recounted to you of the places
and conditions of Souls after death, are true; becomes not a wise man to
affirm. But that there are some such, or the like, as for what concerns the
state and condition of our Souls, and the places whither they are to go for
habitation; seeing it is evident that our Souls are immortal, this also seems
both consentaneous, and worthy the danger, to believe they are such. For the
danger is honorable and glorious; and we are obliged to inculcate, and as it
were inchant these things into our minds; wherefore I have been the more prolix
in commemorating that Fable. But yet, as to what concerns a man's own Soul, he
ought to be with full confidence persuaded of these things, who while he has
lived, has repudiated corporeal pleasures, and outward Ornaments, as alien and
unnecessary, and so has resolved to addict himself to any thing rather than to
lusts of the body: and has made it the grand business of his life, to furnish
his mind with learning, and to render it polite and brave, not with strange,
but its own proper ornaments; namely with Temperance, Justice, Fortitude,
Liberty, Truth. Thus armed, let him expect the time, when he is to take his
Journey ad inferos, to the Mansions of Souls departed, and let him so prepare
and address himself, as to set forward redily and cheerfully, whenever Fate
shall call him. And for your parts, Simmias and Cebes, and the rest that are
here, ye shall all go this Journey, each in his appointed time: Fate (as the
Tragedian says) calls me now. But perhaps it is time for me to go and wash my
self; for I think it more decent to be washed, before I drink the poison, that
I may give the Women no trouble in washing my Body, after death.

Be it so then, says Crito to him. An Historical Narration of the manner of
Socrates his death, which was perfectly agreeable to his Life and Doctrine.
But do you, Soorates, give to those here, or to me, any command, either
concerning your Children, or about any other matter, wherein we may chiefly
gatifie you? No truly, says he, Crito, I leave no new command with you,
besides what I have always told you, namely, that if ye take due care of your
selves, you will perform your duty to me, and to mine, and to your selves also,
whatever ye do, though now ye make no promises, nor enter into new engagements:
but if ye neglect your selves, and will not order your life according to the
prints as it were, of what I now remonstrate to you, and what I have heretofore
enjoined ye; though ye should even with vehement asseveration promise to do
many, and great things, for my sake, ye will do (I am sure) nothing more. This,
says Crito, we will with courage and alacrity of mind endeavor to perform. But
in what manner shall we Bury you? Even how ye please, says he; at least if ye
can catch me, and I not fly out of your reach. And when he had sweetly smiled,
and turned his eyes upon us; my Friends, says he, I cannot persuade Crito
here, that I am that Socrates who just now disputed, and pursued all parts of
the discourse in order: but he thinks me to be the same whom after a few hours
ye shall behold dead; and asks me how I desire to be Buried: not remembering,
that a good while since, I made a long discourse to this very purpose, that
after I have drank the poison, I shall be no longer with you, but go away to
the Felicities of the Blessed. This seems to have been spoken by me in vain,
while yet I endeavored to consolate both you and my self. Do ye therefore
undertake for me to Crito, in an obligation quite contrary to what he entered
into on my behalf, before my Judges. He was surety for me, that I should
remain: but be ye my sureties to him, that I shall not remain after I am dead,
but fly away; to the end that Crito may more easily bear my departure, and
seeing my Body to be burned or committed to the ground, he may not be troubled
or grieved for me, as if I had suffered any great calamity; nor say at my
Funeral, that Socrates is exposed to sight, or carried forth, or put into the
Grave. But be assured of this, my Crito, that to speak of these [important]
matters without due circumspection, is not only a great offense, but brings
detriment also to men's Minds. It becomes us rather to be of good courage and
resolution: and I will command that my Body be buried, and buried so as shall
be grateful to you, and you shall judge to be most consentaneous to the Laws.

Other Circumstances conducing to the says of the History.
Having said this, he arose and went into an inner room to wash himself: and
Crito following him; enjoined us to stay and expect his return. We therefore
expected, discoursing among our selves of the things that had been commemorated
by him, and conferring our judgments concerning them. And we frequently spoke
of the calamity that seemed to impend on us by his death: concluding, it would
certainly come to pass, that as Sonns deprived of their Father, so should we
disconsolately spend the remainder of our life. After he had been washed, and
his Children were brought to him (for he had two Sonns very young, and a third,
almost a Youth) and his That Socrates had indeed Two Wives, is plainly
delivered by Diogen. Laertius, who says, the first was Xantippe, upon whom he
begat Lamprocles; the other Myrto, the Daughter of Aristides the just, who
brought him Sophroniscus and Meneximus.
Wives also were come; he spoke to them before Crito, and gave them his last
commands: so he gave order to his Wives and Children to retire. Then he came
back to us. By this time, the day had declined almost to the setting of the
Sun; for he had staid long in the room where he washed himself. Which done, he
returned, and sat to repose himself, not speaking much after that. Then came
the Minister of the Eleven, the Executioner; and addressing himself to him, I
do not believe, Socrates, said he, that I shall reprehend that in you, which I
am wont to reprehend in others; that they are angry with me, and curse me, when
by command of the Magistrates (whom I am by my Office obliged to obey) I come
and give notice to them, that they must now drink the poison; but I know you to
be, at all times, and chiefly at this, a man both generous, and most mild and
civil, the best of all men that ever came into this place: so that I may be
assured you will not be displeased with me, but (you know the Authors) with
them rather. Now therefore (for you know what Message I come to bring)
Farewell, and endeavor to suffer as patiently and calmly as you can, what
cannot be avoided: Then breaking forth into tears, he departed. And Socrates
converting his eyes upon him, and Farewell thou too, says he: we will perform
all things. Then turning to us again, How civil this man is, says he! all this
time of my mprisonment, he came to me willingly, and sometimes talked with me
respectfully, and has been the best of all that belong to the Prison; and now
how generously does he weep for me! But Crito, let us spare him; and let some
other bring hither the deadly Draught, if it be already bruised: if not, let
him bruise it. Then Crito, I think, says he, the Sun shines upon the tops of
the Mountains, and is not yet quite gone down; * and I have seen some delay the
drinking of the poison much longer: nay more, By the Athenian Law, no man was
to be put to death, until after Sunset; lest the Sun, for which they had a
singular veneration, might be displeased at the sight.
after notice had been given them that they ought to dispatch, they have
Supped, and drank largely too, and talked a good while with their Friends: be
not then so so hasty; you have yet time enough. Those men of whom you speak,
Crito, says he, did well; for they thought, they gained so much more of life;
but I will not follow their example: for I conceive, I shall gain nothing by
deferring my draught till it be later in the night; unless it be to expose my
self to be derided, for being desirous, out of too great love of life, to
prolong the short remander of it. But well; get the Poison prepared quickiy,
and do nothing else till that be dispatched. Crito hearing this, beckned to a
Boy that was present; and the Boy going forth, and employing himself a while in
bruising the Poison, returned with him who was to give it, and who brought it
ready bruised in a cup: Upon whom Socrates casting his eye, be it so, good man,
said he; tell me, (for thou art well skilled in these matters) what is to be
done? Nothing, says he, but after you have drank, to walk, until a heaviness
comes upon your legs and thighs; and then to sit: and this you shall do. And
with that he held forth the Cup to Socrates, Socrates, with admirable
constancy, receives and drinks off the Poison. Which appears to have been the
Juice of Hemlock, both from the auctority of Diog. Laertius in vita Socrat.
where he expressly names it (...), i. e. Cicura; and from the manner of its
operation, whereof consult Dioscorides; As also from that of Seneca, Epist. 13.
Cicuta magnum Socratem fecit.
which he readily receiving, and being perfectly sedate, O Echecrates, without
trembling, without change either in the color, or in the air of his face, but
with the same aspect, and countenance intent and stern, (as was usual to him)
looking upon the man: what say thou, says he? may not a man offer some of
this Liquor in Sacrifice? We have bruised but so much, Socrates, says he, as
we thought would be sufficient. I understand you, says he: but yet it is both
lawful, and our duty to pray to the Gods, that our transmigration from hence to
them, may be happy and fortunate. Having spoke those words, and remaining
silent [for a minute or two] he easily and expeditely drank all that was in the
Cup. Then many of us endeavored what we could, to contain our tears: but when we
beheld him drinking the Poison, and immediately after; no man was able lon-her
to refrain from weeping: and while I put force upon my self to suppress my
tears, they flowed down my cheeks drop after drop. So covering my face, I wept
in secret: deploring not his, but my own hard fortune, in the loss of so great
a Friend, and so near a Kins-man. But Crito no longer able to contend with his
grief, and to forbid his tears, rose up before me. And Apollodorus first
breaking forth into showers of tears, and then into cries, howlings, and
lamentations, left no man from whom he extorted not tears in abundance;
Socrates himself only excepted: Who said, what do ye, my Friends? truly I sent
away the Women for no other reason, but lest they should in this kind offend.
For I have heard, that we ought to die with good men's and gratulation: But
recompose your selves, and resume your courage and resolution. Hearing this, we
blushed with shame, and suppressed our tears. But when he had walked awhile,
and told us that his thighs were grown heavy and stupid; he lay down upon his
back: for so he who had given him the poison, had directed him to do. Who a
little time after, returns, and feeling him, looked upon his legs and feet:
then pinching his foot vehemently, he asked him, if he felt it? and when he
said no, he again pinched his legs; and turning to us, told us, that now
Socrates was stiff with cold: and touching him, said he would die so soon as
the Poison came up to his heart; for the parts about his heart were already
grown stiff. Then Socrates, putting aside the Garment wherewith he was covered;
we ow, says he, a Cock to Intimating, that death was most grateful to him; for
which, and for his deliverance now granted to him, he would have a Sacrifice
offered to Aesculapius. See Erasmus, Chiliad. 3. cent. 3. page 1.
Aesculapius: but do ye pay him, and neglect not to do it. And these were his
last words. It shall be done, says Crito: but see if you have any other
Command for us To whom he gave no answer: but soon after fainting, he moved
himself often [as if suffering Convulsions.] Then the Servant uncovered him:
and his eyes stood wide open; which Crito perceiving, he closed both his mouth
and his eyes. A most august testimony given by Plato, of his Master Socrates,
to vindicate both his person and Doctrine from the prejudice of an ignominious
death.
This, Echecrates, was the end of our Friend and Familiar, a man as we in truth
affirm, of all whom we have by use and experience known, the Wisest, and most
Just.

Quid dicam de Socrate? cujus morti illachrimari soleo, Platonem legens. Cicero
de natura Deor. lib. 3.

Quidni ego narrem, ultima illa nocte Catonem Platonis librum legentem, posito
ad caput gladio? Duo haec in rebus extremis inst umenta prospexerat, alterum ut
vellet mori, alterum ut posset, etc. Seneca Epist. 24.

Sic longa virtute fuit men's sancta Catonis
Purgata; atque illi vitae immortalis honorem
Jam contemplanti, divini fata Platonis
Phaedonem tradunt. Cum laetus talia fatur.
Salve sancte liber, superis demisse Catoni:
Dirige tu cursum, vitaeque extrema meantis
Instrue: non alium moriturus quaero magistrum;
Nec restare alias voluerunt Numina curas, etc.
Tho. Maius, in Supplemento Lucani, lib. 4. Quid Ambraciotes ille (Cleombrotus
videlicet) qui cum Platonis illum Phaedonem perlegasset, praecipitem se dedit,
nullam aliam ob causam, nisi quod Platoni credidit? Lactantius.


Certain General AXIOMS Collected out of the Precedent Dialogue concerning the
Soul.
1. Axioms Moral.
1. PAin and Pleasure are of Kin, and so linked together, that they closely
succeed each other by turns.

2. No man ought, upon what account soever, to desert the station wherein God
has placed him: but to persist in the duties thereof, contemning all
opposition.

3. Self-murder is a great Crime. [* -- Ac donec Deus ille Creator
Qui terrena Animam primo statione locavit,
Evocat, haud illa statione excedere fas est.]



4. A Wise man ought not only not to fear Death, but also to desire it; with
submission to to the Divine Will.

5. Philosophy is the perpetual meditation of Death; that is, to recall and
divorce the Soul from commerce with the Senses, and alienate it from Corporeal
lusts and pleasures. Which is an anticipatton of Death, that is defined to be,
a solution and separation of the Soul from the Body.

6. The Virtues of Politicians are not true Virtues, but only faint
resemblances of the true.

7. Philosophy is the way to true Felicity: and the two grand Duties of it are
(1) To contemplate the perfections of God, and (2) to alienate the Soul from
the allurements of the Senses, and from indulgence to the Body.

8. Hope of future Felicity, is a very great Reward; that is, the best way of
passing through both the Temptations and Adversities of this Life, with
satisfaction of Mind.

9. Decent Burial, such as is ordained and prescribed by good Laws of the
Country, ought not to be neglected by a Wise man: nor Funeral Pomp, affected.
So Epicurus in his last Will and Testament; Sepeliunto nos qua videbitur in
hortis commodissimum, nihilq, interim sumptuosius, quod sivo ad sepulturam,
sive ad monumentum pertineat, agunto. Diog. Laert. lib. 80.


II. Axioms Natural.
1. COntraries are produced out of Contraries: but cannot possibly subsist the
same in one subject, at the same time.

2. To learn, is to remember what the Soul knew, before it came into the Body:
or there are naturally and congenially in the Soul, the seeds of all Sciences;
which are only cultivated and matured by method of Discipline, not implanted or
ingraffed at first, as Aristotle taught.

III. Axioms Theological.
1. GOd takes care of Men, for that they are his own Possession.

2. God, according to Plato's definition here, is not only the Cause of his own
Being, but gives both Being and Well-being to all things else.

3. The Soul of Man is the Offspring of God, in a peculiar manner participant
of the Divine Nature, incompound, without figure or shape, Incorruptible,
immortal, as God.

4. The Soul in this Life, does indeed use the service of the Body: yet is not
composed organically of the Senses, and other Faculties thereof; but simple,
and existeth apart by it self, after separation by Death* whereby the Body,
being compound, is dissolved; but the Soul goes away untouched and void of all
Corruption, into another Life, and there lasts Eternally.

5. Of our Souls departed, there is a Twofold state: some are happy, others
unhappy.

6. Seeing that in this Life things are carried on intemperately, and in
confusion; there must be in the next Life [(...)] a certain and just Judgment
of God the Supreme and Universal Judge, whereby Good men may be distinguished
from Wicked: this being an Axiom evident by the very Light of Nature, that God
will reward every man according to his works in this life. [* -- Deus ipse
sequendam
Proposuit Virtutem, and praemia debita justis.
Haec, quoniam justos injusta potentia fraudat
Saepius in terris, and gens humanu rebellat,
Solvere post mortem justissimus ipse tenetur.]



7. Positively and with confidence to describe the places whither the Souls of
the Dead go, and to define what are the Rewards and Punishments they there
receive; is the part of a man extremely ignorant and superstitious: though it
be most certain, there are Rewards and Punishments appointed, and absolutely
necessary for every man here to have his cogitations seriously exercised in the
contemplation of them.

8. True it is also, that the Souls of Good men, by Death delivered from the
chains of the Body and its Senses, go immediately to a place, invisible indeed
by Human eyes, but of complete felicity, where they are conjoined to God for
ever: while on the contrary, the Souls of Wicked men suffer the punishments
justly due to their crimes, in places convenient.

9. Unreasonable it is, and unworthy a Philosopher, to pretermit the Principal
and Primary Cause, God, who is in truth not only the most Potent Cause, but
Cause of all secondary Causes: to acquiesce in Second Causes, which really are
no more but concurrent and instrumental: and in second causes themselves, to
omit the Proxime, while he rambles in search of remote, namely Constellations
and Etherial influences, and such like Chimera's; as do those injudicious
Professors of Judicial Astrology, and as did Anaxagoras, who held the great
Mind of the Universe to be utterly void of understanding and judgment; as Plato
affirms.

10. The use of this most excellent Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul, is
to induce us to put our selves into the way of Virtue, as that which alone
leads to Eternal Happiness: and to abhor Vice, as the direct Road to endless
Misery.

REFLECTIONS Upon the Athenian Laws mentioned in the Apoligie and Dialogue
Precedent.
I.
THe Law which Socrates was accused to have Violated, and by which he was
Condemned, yet extant under the first Title of Athenian Laws collected and
explained by the Learned Monsieur Petit; seems to be this: Lex esto
antiquissima, aeteruaeque auctoritatis in Attica, venerandos esse Deos, atque
Heroas patrios and indigenas, public secundum patrias sanctionos, privatim
vero bonis verhis, frugumque primitiis, libis annuis; pro facultatum modulo.

By this Law was provided, ne quis novos habessit Deo., that no man should
introduce new Gods; and the Transgressor was called into question before the
Areopagites; whereof we have two eminent Examples: one in St. Paul, who was
hurried to the most severe Tribunal of the Areopagites, (...), quod
peregrinorum Deornm videretur annunciator. esse (Act. Apostol. cap. 17. verse.
18.) the other in Diodorus surnamed the Atheist, whose Indictment upon the same
Statute, and convention before the same High Court of Justice, are recorded by
Diogenes Laertins.

How came it then that Socrates, accused to have both denied the Divinity of
the Old Gods of the Athenians, and endeavored the insinuation of new; was not
likewise tried by the Areopagites, but by other Judges, contrary to the tenor
of this Law?

I answer with Monsieur Petit, (Commentar. in leges Atticas, page 3.) that
perhaps the jurisdiction of the Arcopagites extended not to the Citizens of the
Attick Republic, such as Socrates was; but was limited only to Strangers, such
as was that ill-conjoyn'd pair, St. Paul and Diodorus.

II.
Socpates (you may remember) in his defense dissolving that part of his Charge
which concerned the Corruption of Youth, puts his Adversary Melitus in mind of
a certain Law, whereby he was obliged, not to have brought an Impeachment
against him to the Magistrates, but privately and in a friendly manner
admonished him of that his error, supposing him to be really guilty thereof,
not out of malice, but incogitancy. Now the Law it self where to he then had
respect, was this; Peccantes invite in jus ne rapiuntor, sed privatim officii
admonentor: and the reason of it is obvious, Talibus enim non poena opus est,
sed institutione. Which is to be understood of Errors of no great moment, nor
likely to bring detriment to the Commonwealth; such as those objected to
Socrates, in that article of his Indictment, (...); Socrates does contrary to
right and equity, in that he curiously enquires into things both subterranean
and sublime, and by his sophistry turns falsehood into truth, and teaches the
same to others. For granting him to be guilty hereof, the fault was but light
and venial: In his enim neque sitae erant opes Greciae, neque ex iis detrimenti
quicquam Respublica capere potuit. Wherefore he had right to the favor and
indulgence of this Law, which his malicious Adversary had, by omitting the
private admonition thereby required, violated.

III.
By the Religion of the Athenians, no Deity was held more potent and venerable
than Apollo; none had so many sacred Buildings erected in their City to his
Worship, none so many solemn Sacrifices, and public Feasts instituted to his
Honor, as he had: and among their Festivals, none were celebrated with more
ceremonious Joy, than that of Inspection mentioned by Plato in Phaedon.
Concerning which they had this peculiar Law; Deliornm festos dies, dum Delum
itur, reditur, damnatorum suppliciis ne funestato. And the observance of this
Law has been noted both by Xenophon and Plato, as the reason why Socrates was
detained in Prison thirty days after his Condemnation, before he was put to
death: the Athenians esteeming it piacular, to darken the public rejoicing and
solemnity of that Feast, by the death of any condemned, however notorious a
Malefactor. So much was given to the Honor of Apollo Delius, whom not only the
Grecians, but even Foreiners from the remotest parts of the Earth, while in
Greece, were obliged to Worship with Oblations of their First Fruits; as
appears from the History of Abaris, a Scythian, who is said to have lived in
Greece about the 52 Olympiad, and wrote de Oraculis; and from the example of
the Tyrians alleged by Euripides (in Phoenissis) whose Verses in the Chorus
are worthy the serious remark of Antiquaries, as giving much of light to what
has been obscurely delivered by Geographers and Historians, concerning the
Colonies of the Tyrians in Africa, and the neighboring Islands.

X.
From the same religious respect to Apollo it seems deducible, that within the
Attic Territories, no condemned person suffered death until after the Sun was
gone down: The Law it self, I confess, I have not yet found among all those
with such vast labor collected by Monsieur Petit: but that they had such a
Law, may be inferred from the Example of Socrates, and from what we read in
Stobaeus (Sermon 1. who says expressly enough; (...).

Mythological Reflections UPON Some Ancient Rites and Traditions concerning the
Soul, mentioned by Plato in the precedent Dialogue.
1. Of Lustration.
AMong the ancient Grecians who traveled into Egypt, on purpose to pry into
and learn the Sacred Rites, and mysterious Ceremonies used by the Priests of
that Superstitious Nation; Orpheus is celebrated as the first, by Diodorus
Siculus: who ( Lib. 4. page 162.) says thus of him; Orpheus in Aegyptum
profectus, multa ibi didicit; ita ut tam Initiationibus and Theologia, quam
Poesi and Melodia esset Graecorum praestantissimus, etc. Now this Poet
returning into Greece, brought with him [(...)] most of the mysterious Rites
used by the Egyptians, and the Orgies of Bacchus, and the Mythology of the
Infernal Mansions: and recommending them to his Countrymen, so far prevailed,
that not long after, the very same were introduced as religious institutes
among them also, and by most with devote observance embraced.

Of all these thus transplanted Rites, none were held more grateful to their
Deities, or of more sacred importance to the Votaries, than those of Initiation
or admittance, more espececially the [(...)] Lustration: which according to the
computation of our Second Seldom, Sir John Marsham, from the authority of the
Epicha Marmorea cited in his lately published Chronic. Canon (a work of
profound Learning, and vast labor) was first instituted in Greece, when
Pandion the Son of Cecrops ruled at Athens, about the year 257. of the Attic
Era.

This Lustration was double: either an Expiation from Humane blood spilt by
slaughter, or a Preparation to Sacrifice, and other religious worship. Of
Expiation, we have illustrious Examples in Apollo himself, who, as Pausanias
relates ( Lib. 10. page 620.) was thereby solemnly purged from the stain of
blood by Carnanor: in Hercules, whom Diodorus Siculus reports to have been in
like manner purified by Musaeus the Son of Orpheus, both at his initiation to
the Eleusinian Sacrifices, and before his descent into Hell, thence to fetch
the only Hel-hound Cerberus: and in Theseus, who, as Plutarch in his life has
left upon Record, required the same Expiation after the Homicides he had
committed.

To the other kind of Lustration, among the Egyptians, and old Hebrews, were
required Washing, Fasting, and Abstinence from Women. Of Washing, let Moses be
a witness, who when he was to receive the Decalogue from Almighty God,
sanctified the people, and commanded them to purge themselves by washing, and
not to come near their Wives. Of Fasting, we are certified from the very form
of the solemn Respons and Profession to be made by the Votary; which Clemens
Alexandrinus (Protreptic. page 13.) delivers to be this; (...), Jejunavi, ebibi
cyceonem. And as for Castimony; we have an authentic testimony from Arrianus
(in Epictetum lib. 3. cap. 21.) Hominem ad sacra rite accessurum, [(...), post
sacrificium, and post preces, and premissa castitate. The High Priest therefore
always abstained from Matrimony: and those of Ceres Eleusina were anointed
with the juice of Hemlock, to extinguish the heat of Concupiscence, as the old
Scholiast upon the 5th. Satyr of Persius observes; and St. Hierome (contra
Jovian. lib. 1.) remembers, that the Hierophantae among the Athenians were
castrated by frequently sipping the same juice of Hemlock, losing their
virility to obtain the Pontificate. A custom repugnant to the Mosaic Law, by
which none but perfect men are capable of Priesthood: and to the Constitutions
also of the Papacy, none having been (as they say) for many Ages together
heretofore admitted to sit in St. Peter's Chair, until he had undergone the
Scrutiny of the Sella Perforata, now laid aside as unnecessary; whereof a witty
Poet made this Tetrastich.

Non poterat quisquam reserantes aethera claves
Non exploratis sumere testiculis.
Cur igitur nostro mos hic jam tempore cessat?
Ante probat sese quilibet esse Marem.
In ancient times, none was Elected Pope,
Till he had passed the Sex-discerning grope.
Why is that scrutiny now used no more?
Now Priests approve their Manhood long before.
But not further to digress, evident it is, that this inaugural Lustration with
its Ceremonies, was common to all Religions; though perhaps not without some
difference in the instruments, or outward means: it being a remark of the most
learned Sir John Marsham, out of Procopius Gazaeus, (in Deuteronom.) that the
purifications ordained in the Levitical Canons, differed from those of the
Grecians in this, that these were performed usually with incantations, salt,
bay leaves, barley, seawater, and passing through fire; but those not.

Of these three parts of Lustration inaugural, that accounted most efficacious,
seems to have been Baptism or Washing: a thing of sacred esteem in all ages,
and in all religions; and among the Hebrews, strictly enjoined by their wise
Lawgiver Moses. For we read ( Exodus 19. v. 14.) that when the Israelites were
to be initiated to the holy Disciplines by him instituted, he came down to the
people, and sanctified them, and they washed their Garments: and by this
ablution of their clothes, Interpreters unanimously understand the washing of
their bodies also; according to the very letter of that precept given, ( Levit.
15. ver. 11. (...), Lavabit vestimenta, and lavabit corpus aqua. Hence the Jews
at this day deduce the origin of their Baptism; which that Nation has ever
since used with solemn Reverence, not only to the purgation of their external
impurities, or to the ablution of their sins; but also to the Regeneration of
their Proselytes, when they give up their names to Judaism; of whom Jethro, the
Father-in-law of Moses, is accounted the first. For, the three rites of
initiation to be observed by a Gentil converted, at his admission into the
Hebrew Church or Congregation, are well known to be Circumcision, Baptism, and
Oblation. Concerning which our Prince of Antiquaries, Mr. Seldom professedly
discoursing, proves by many credible testimonies, that the Baptism of a
Proselyte was celebrated in the presence of at least three Elders, so soon as
the wound of Circumcision was healed, and in some river or fountain of living
water, not in any vessel or artificial Bath, and never but once (on that
occasion) either by the Proselyt himself, or by any of his posterity. Hereof
the Effect was this, that a Proselyt thus inaugurated, was held perfectly
regenerate, and a new man, as an infant born of a new Mother, and inspired with
a new Soul from Heaven: so that being utterly divested of all former cognation,
he was thenceforth reputed to have no kindred, no affinity, either in right of
Espousal, or succession to the goods of the deceased, besides those who
likewise had the character of Baptism. Upon which distinguishing character it
was, that Arrianus reflected, when (in Epictetum, lib. 2. cap. 9. he said; quum
quispiam induerit sibi affectum Baptizati and inter sectatores asciti, tunc and
est revera, and appellatur Judaeus.

Now though the Hebrews may have derided this Lustration by Baptism, from the
institute of Moses: yet it is not improbable, but he might first derive it from
the example of the Egyptians, among whom he had so long lived, and in whose
Learning as well sacred as civil, he had been from his childhood educated. For,
Apuleius Metamorphos, Lib. 9.) being himself to be initiated to the Mysteries
of Isis, expressly declares, that washing was in use among the Egyptians, in all
their sacred Admissions: and describing the ceremonies of his own admission,
Sacerdos (says he) stipatum me religiosa cohorte deducit ad proximas balneas;
and prius sueto lavacro traditum praefarus Deum veniam, purissime circumrorans
abluit, etc. Nor is it to be doubted, but this was then done to him, de more
antiquo, according to the most ancient use of that Nation. Which while the
Israelites remained in bondage among them, were much more likely to give
Examples to them, than to receive any from them: it being seldom observed, that
Lords imitate their Slaves. But this is confirmed by Tertullian (de Baptismo
cap. 5.) where he writes,; Nationes sacris quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur,
Isidis alicujus, aut Mithrae [summi apud Persas numinis] ipsos etiam Deos suos
lavationibus efferunt, etc. And whencesoever Moses borrowed this rite, we have
it under the hand of Diodorus Siculus (lib. 1.) that it was traduced from
Egypt to Athens by King Erechtheus.

Nor is there just cause, why the traduction of the like Baptism from the Jews
to Christians, should be urged to the disparagement of our Mystical Ablution at
the font, when by the Church we are admitted to Christianism: as well because
ours was changed from a mere rite to a blessed Sacrament, by Christ himself,
the Author of our faith, honored by his Example, and sanctified by his
Benediction, and the Divinity of its constitution confirmed by the miraculous
descent of the most Holy Spirit, in form of a Dove; as because, tho the
External act of washing continue still the same, yet the Signification and
Effiacy thereof is become infinitely more noble and excellent. Again, if it be
true (as some very learned men have held) that those Articles of faith, and
those religious Rites and Ceremonies, that are embraced by men of all
Religions, and as it were sealed by universal consent of Mankind, in all Ages,
be less obnoxious to exceptions and dispute, than others that are proper and
peculiar only to some one Religion, Age, or Nation. then certainly by how much
more antique and common to various Religions and Nations, this Rite of
Expurgation by Water has been; by so much more sacred ought it to be esteemed.
But this is only a Digression from my Theme, the Lustration of Ethnics, and
more particularly of the Grecians.

Whereby those who were legitimately initiated, were esteemed not only more
honorable then others in this life, but more happy after death. For, their Wise
men taught, and the Vulgar therefore believed, that by virtue of such
Lustrations, the Souls of men were rendered more defecate and pure from the
contagion of the body, refined as it were from the dross of sensual affections,
and made more fit and expedite for contemplation of Divine things. Whence
Sophocles the Tragedian, writing of Mysteries, is said by Plutarch (de
audiendis Poetis) to have composed these verses. -- (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
-- Felices nimis
Initia quotquot ista cum conspexerint,
Eunt ad Orcum. Namque eos solos manet
Ibi vita: reliquos, miserias praeter, nihil.
and the Chorus in Aristophanes's Comedy named the Froggs, was made to sing
these; Solis nobis Sol
Et lux hilaris est,
Qui initiamur, and
Piam degimus vitam, etc.


This persuasion therefore being so universally diffused among the Grecians,
and rendered so plausible by Superstition; no wonder if Plato, in this Dialogue,
put this as an Axiom into the mouth of Socrates: Whoever not expiated, nor with
due rites initiated, shall descend to the Mansions of Souls departed; shall
there lie rolling in mudd: but who shall after expurgation and initiation, come
thither, shall for ever dwell with Gods. Nor this altogether without reason,
because the Initiati were both obliged to newness of life, and reformation of
manners; and instructed in Philosophy as well Natural as Moral.

II. The Antiquity and Traduction of the opinion of the Souls Immortality.
THough Strabo (Geograph. lib. 15. page 713:) speaking of the Indian Brachmans,
be so rash to say of them [(...)] that they, as Plato, compose fables of the
incorruptibility of the Soul, and of judgments in the infernal shades: yet to
me it seems not to be doubted, but the belief of the Immortality of man's
Rational Soul, is fully as ancient as Mankind it self. For, methinks, the
Excellency of its own Faculties and Operations, above all Material Agents,
should be alone sufficient to afford to every contemplative man, certain
glimpses of both the divine Original, and Immortality thereof: and the desire
of posthume glory, an affection congenial and natural ( Arist. 2. de Anima,
calls it (...), most natural) to all noble minds, together with a secret fear
of future unhappiness, common to all; to give pregnant hints of its sempiternal
Existence after death.

And yet notwithstanding, such has been the cruelty of Time, in the destruction
of Books and other Monuments; and so far has Oblivion swallowed up the Tenants
and Doctrines of the younger World: that of this so reasonable and comfortable
an opinion, we can find no prints remaining, but what the Grecian Sages
observed among the Egyptians, and from them transmitted down to posterity.
From them alone therefore, we are to trace the tradition thereof.

Consentaneous it is, that the Eleusinian Mysteries and other sacred Rites so
solemnly observed and celebrated by the ancient Egyptians, more particularly
that of Lustration just now explicated, were grounded upon a belief of, and had
their chief respect unto a future life, and the different state of good and bad
Souls therein. For, to what end could that religious Ablution and Expurgation
serve, but (as they were persuaded) to rinse away the stains of guilt from the
Soul, or (as Tertullian de Baptismo cap. 5. expresses it) in regenerationem,
and impunitatem perjuriorum suorum: if they were not possessed with a belief
even to confidence, of the Eternal Duration of the Soul after death; and that
in a condition of Felicity or Misery, according to its virtuous or vicious
Affections and Actions in this life? Had they admitted the extinction thereof
by death, vain certainly, and absurd had been all their care and solicitude
about the purification of it from the pollutions of Sin, and from the dreggs of
sensual inclinations, before death. The same may be by like genuine consequence
inferred from their most magnificent Sepulchers, their exquisite Embalmings of
the dead, and their Amenthes or subterraneous place into which they held the
Souls of the Defunct to be received. But what need we range into their
Mythologies in search after evidence of their being strongly possessed with
this opinion; when we have proofs from Authority unquestionable, that their
Priests and other Learned men expressly taught it?

Hear then Herodotus (lib. 2. cap. 123.) saying, Aegyptij primi sunt, qui
Animam hominis immortalem esse dicerent, (...): ejus transmigrationem in alia
animalia terrestria, marina, volueria, rursumque in corpus humanum, docuerunt:
hunc circuitum ab ea fieri intra 3000 annos, etc Upon which he elsewhere
reflecting, has this pertinent remark: Hinc tantum condiendi cadaveris
studium, tantae in struendis repositorijs impensae.

This Doctrine being brought from the Egyptian Schools by Orpheus, and from him
descended to Homer; he thence taught, that Eternal Souls are from Heaven
conveyed into human bodies, and that after death they return to the Gods; for a
Symbol of this region of Corruption, feigning his Antrum Nympharum, wherein --
-- (...), etc.
Janua duplex:
Haec Boream spectans homines demittit: Odyss. 13. v. 109:
at illa
Respiciens Austrum divinior, invia prorsus
Est homini, praebetque viam immortalibus unis.
Of which Poetical fiction Porphyrius giving the Mythology, wrote an excellent
Book, published by Holstenius, de Antro Homerico: wherein he tells us, that the
Cave it self carries [(...)] an image and symbol of the world: that the
Naiades. or Nymphs, are Souls [(...)] entered into bodies newly generated: that
one Gate is for the admittance of Souls descending into bodies; the other for,
not Gods, but Souls ascending from bodies to the Gods again. Wherefore he
called it the road or way, not of the Gods, but [(...)] of Souls, which are by
their very Essence Immortal.

From this commonly embraced Existence of Souls departed, arose the (...) or
Image-making of the Ancient Ethnics; whereby they attributed to Souls separated
from their bodies, Effigies quasi Corporeas: whereunto Virgil seems learnedly
to allude, where he makes Dido, as she was dying, say, Et nunc magna mei sub
terras ibit imago: and Lucretius (lib. 1.) in these verses;
-- Esse Acherusia templa;
Quo neque permanent Animae, neque corpora nostra;
Sed quaedam Simulacra, modis pallentia miris.
From the same fountain, and at the same time also, were derived into Greece the
Comments concerning the Mansions of Souls delivered from their bodies, and the
Rewards and Punishments to come. For Diodorus Siculus (lib. 1. page 61.) has
left this record thereof: Dicunt Orpheum, dum impiorum palmas apud inferos, and
piorum prata, and pervulgatas spectrorum fictiones introduxit, funebres
Aegyptiorum ritus imitatum fuisse: adding, that from the old institute of the
Egyptians, Mercury was made [(...)] the Conductor of Souls ad inferos. Wherein
Homer long after carrying on the tradition of Orpheus, promotes the credit of
the fiction, by inserting it into his immortal Poem ( in initio Odyss..) (...)
(...), etc.
The Souls of Hero's, Mercury the God
Calls forth [and guides to Elysium] with his rod.


But leaving the most ancient Grecian Poets, who yet were then the only
Theologues, let us pursue this tradition of the Souls Immortality, among their
most eminent Philosophers, as men less prone to Credulity, and therefore more
worthy of credit.

Of these, the eldest we can find, is Thales Milesius, who (as Plutarch. de
placitis lib. 4. cap. 2. attesteth) first defined the Soul to be [(...)] a
nature perpetually moving, and self-moving. Which argument Cicero indeed
afterward borrowing from Plato's Phaedrus, most judiciously explained, in the
first book of his Tusculan Questions: but fathers the opinion it self upon
Pherecydes Syrius, in these words. Credo equidem etiam alios, sed (quod literis
exstet) Pherecydes Syrus (Syrius rather, from Syros, an Island of the Aegean
Sea, the place of his birth) primum dixit, Animos hominum esse sempiternos:
hanc opinionem discipulns ejus Pythagoras maxim confirmavit.

But (by Cicero's favor) Pythagoras, who seems to have been younger then Homer
by almost 400 years, (for he was among the Egyptians carried away captive by
Cambyses, as appears from that place in Apuleius Florid. lib. 2. Pythagoram
aiunt, inter captivos Cambysae Regis, doctores habuisse Persarum Magos; ac
praecipue Zoroastrem, omnis divini arcani antistitem) drew this Doctrine, not
out of the streams of either Orpheus, or Homer, or Phercydes, but from the very
springhead of Egypt. And he taught, that the Soul was [(...)] a self-moving
Number, and [(...)] incapable of destruction, returning after its departure
from the body, to its original the Universal Soul of the world: as we find in
the records of Plutarch, de placit. lib. 4. cap. 2.

Next comes Heraclitus the Ephesian, whom Porphyrius (de Antro page 257.) makes
the Author of that memorable sentence concerning our Souls [(...)] that this
our life is the Souls death, and our death the Souls life; that the Soul
descended from Heaven to animate the body, suffers Exile in this lowest and
darksom region, and remains as it were dead, during its imprisonment in flesh.

Then Empedocles Agrigentinus, a Pythagorean; who (as Plutarch de Exilio
commemorates) speaking likewise of the descent of his Soul, as a Banishment
from its Celestial home; Ego jamdudum (says he) eo exul a Deo, and vagus: and
of the Eternal Society of the just, that they should be after death,
immortalium aliorum contubernales, and convivae, expertes humanarum miseriarum,
incorruptibiles, immortales. Whence it may be with good probability
conjectured, that Pindar took the main argument of his 2d. Olympic ode; wherein
he sings, that the Just enjoy eternal light, and life exempt from cares and
labor among the Gods: whereupon Plutarch excellently descanteth, de facie in
luna.

And at length our Plato, whom our best Antiquaries and Chronologists agree to
have flourished about the 100 Olympiad, in the reign of Artaxerxes Mnemon over
the Persians. This Father of the Academics, though he would have Homer ejected
out of his Commonwealth, as a Poet; yet both embraced his doctrine of the
immortal Existence of the Soul, and added no little authority to his
description of the Infernal Mansions; especialy in this Dialogue, where he
introduces Socrates discoursing most profoundly of the Immortality of the
Soul. Whereupon Cicero perhaps reflecting ( in lib. 1. Tusculan.) says;
Platonem ferunt, ut Pythagoraeos cognosceret, in Italiam venisse; and in ea cum
alios multos, tum Architam Timaeumque cognovisse, and didicisse Pythagorae
omnia; primumque de Animorum aeternitate, non solum sensisse idem quod
Pythagoras, sed rationem etiam attulisse.

From Plato down to his Disciples and Successors the Academics, we need not
further deduce this constant Doctrine: it being of it self sufficiently manifest
to all men not inconversant in the writings of the ancient Philosophers
devolved to our late hands, that whatsoever either the Author of that laudable
Dialogue entitled Axiochus (vulgarly adscribed to Plato, and inserted into his
works) or Cicero in his noble Dialogue de Senectute, and Contemnenda morte; or
Seneca in his Epistles, and elsewhere; or indeed St. Augustine and Tertullian,
or any other has written of this Subject, either ex professo, or only in
transitu; has been borrowed from him. And yet notwithstanding, it may not be
thought impertinent, nor vulgar, if we observe; that among the Jews, the
Pharisees (whose original our universally learned Sir John Marsham has most
plainly traced out, in page 151. of his Chronic. Canon) imposing only new terms
upon the Philosophy of the Academics, consented to the common opinion of the
Greeks concerning the Soul; as Josephus himself attesteth ( Belli Judaici lib.
2. cap. 7.) who there delivers the belief of the Essens, concerning the happy
state of Good Souls separated from their bodies, in the very words of Homer.
Nor is it obscure, that the Jews themselves believed the (...), or
Transmigration of Souls from one human body into another: when some thought our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ to be St. John the Baptist, some Elias, others
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets ( Math. 16: v. 14.)

DIGRESSION. How far the Souls Immortality may be proved by human Reason.
BUT is it not of more importance to know, how strong and reasonable this
Opinion of the perpetual duration of separate Souls appears to be, than to
investigate the age and tradition of it? Certainly yes, and should my Reader
here require my estimate of the force and validity of the various Arguments or
pretended Demonstrations brought by Plato in the precedent Dialogue, to
evidence the verity thereof: I might justly enough make use of the license
thereby given me, to examine what I designed only to translate. But because it
may be thought an indecency, if not ingratitude in a mere Interpreter, to
censure the power and extent of the reasonings used, and the conclusions thence
drawn by his Author, and because this laudable curiosity of the Reader (whom I
presume to be possessed with such) may perhaps be more fully gratified, by a
frank communication of my sentiments concerning that more general Enquiry, viz.
How far the Immortality of the Soul may be proved by simple reason, or the sole
light of Nature, without the illumination of sacred Writ, or revelation Divine:
I shall therefore with the freedom belonging to a Philosopher, and due
submission to more elevated Wits, adventure to acquaint him briefly with those
my thoughts; choosing rather to expose them to his severest scrutiny, than by
animadversions upon the arguments of Plato in particular, to show the least
umbrage or irreverence toward his memory.

I confess then, that tho I have read, and with due attention of mind
considered the utmost rigor of many Discourses professedly composed for, and
speciously promising a sufficient eviction of the sempiternal Existence of the
Rational Soul after death, by reasons drawn only from her own excellent nature,
faculties, affections, operations, etc. yet I could not perceive, that any one
of them taken single, or all put together, had the force of a perfect
Demonstration; so that were not the Light of the Holy Scriptures infinitely
more clear and convincing, as to that among many other important truths
concerning the Soul, I should still remain unassured of the endless Duration of
my noblest part. For

First, as to the Origin of this excellent Being; the Doctrines of Natural
Philosophers concerning this, are no less various then their Sects; and all but
darksom opinions, or precarious conjectures. Nay even those few among them, who
held it to be of Divine Original, tho therein they hit the very white of truth,
appear notwithstanding to have shot wide, when they conceived it to have been
Eternal ex part ante, a particle of the Divine Essence it self, and
pre-existent to its conjunction with the body. Whereas that sacred Oracle, the
Word of God plainly teaches, that the Soul of the first man was created
immediately by God himself, and united to the body then already perfectly
formed and prepared to receive it.

Secondly, As to the grand Difficulty, the natural Exemption of it from the
power of Death, when thereby divorced from the body; the Arguments brought from
Physical Mediums for probation hereof, do indeed suffice to convince us of the
Spirituality and Seperability of the Soul: but suffice not (in my judgment at
least) to demonstrate the impossibility of its destruction, or that absolutely
it shall survive the dissolution of the body for ever the same.

I grant, that some, and chiefly that most rigid of Physico-Mathematicians, Des
Carts (in meditat. Metaphysic. de Anima, and respon. ad object. secund.) have
gone so far, as fairly to convince any man of competent understanding, that the
Soul, tho in this life obliged to act for the most part, by the Organs of the
Senses, does yet discover its excellency, by actions proper and peculiar to her
spiritual nature, wholly independent upon, and distinct from the Senses: and
thence by genuine consequence inferred, that the same Soul, tho by a strict and
intimate conjunction with the body, united into one Compositum therewith, is
yet nevertheless a thing or substance distinct from the body. I grant also,
that by this very Argument the Immortality of the Soul may be sufficiently
proved against Epicureans and Atheists. For these men taking the Soul to be,
not formally and truly a Substance, but only a certain Modisication of body;
thereupon concluded, that it must of necessity perish, or cease to be the same,
when the fabrique or frame of the body, from whence it resulted, is destroyed
by Death. If therefore from some intellectual operations of this Soul, such to
which matter or body, however modified, or organized, cannot possibly reach; it
be made appear (and Des Carts seems to have done it) that she is a Substance
distinct from, and independent upon the body: there will remain no reason, much
less an absolute necessity, why the dissolution of the body should infer the
destruction of the Soul, as they imagine; more especially if the latter be
conceived to be (what most certainly it is) a simple and spiritual substance,
as incapable of destruction, as themselves hold matter to be.

But I dare not grant, that this Cartesian Demonstration holds good, as against
Epicureans and Atheists, who exclude God from having any hand in the creation
and conservation of the Soul; so likewise against those who acknowledge God to
be the sole Creator and preserver of all things. For, admitting the Soul to be
both a substance distinct from the body, and immediately created, and
continualy conserved by God: yet can we not lawfully infer from thence, that it
is not possible for such a Soul ever to cease to be. For what assurance can
simple reason give us, that God has not ordained, that this Soul, as it had a
beginning when it was created to be infused into the body, so at the time of
its separation from the body, shall lose its being, and vanish into its
primitive nothing? That the duration thereof necessarily depends upon Gods
conserving power and influence, is undeniable: and it seems consentaneous, that
as the Union or Association of the Soul to the Body was at first made, not by
any Agents merely Natural, but upon conditions depending solely upon Gods free
and arbitrary institution* so (for ought we can learn from the weak light of
Nature to the contrary) one of the Conditions may be, that at the dissolution
of that Union, both Body and Soul should cease to be. Especially since to the
Souls relapsing into its first nothing, no more is required, but Gods
withdrawing his conserving influence, by which alone all his Creatures are
supported, and their Being is preserved. Here then we find our selves left in
the dark by human reason; so that were it not for the brighter beams of
Revelation Divine, how fair soever our hopes might be of Immortality, we should
want a full assurance of it. To conclude therefore this Parergon, with the
concordant judgment, and in the most elegant words of that most excellent
Philosopher and Christian, the noble Mr. Boil; In Page 30. of his Book
concerning the Excellency of Theology.
all that mere Reason can demonstrate concering this Subject, may be reduced to
these two things: One, That the Rational Soul being an Incorporeal substance,
there is no necessity that it should perish with the body; so that if God has
not otherwise appointed, the Soul may survive the body, and last for ever: The
Other, That the Nature of the Soul, according to Des Carts, consisting in its
being a Substance that thinks; we may conclude, that tho it be by death
separated from the body, it will nevertheless retain the power of thinking. To
more then this Des Carts was both too circumspect, and too conscious of the
dimness of human reason to pretend, tho some of his Sectators, mistaking the
design and scope of that his discourse, have conceived it to extend even to an
eviction also of the Souls absolute Immortality. For ( in artic. 7. respon. ad
object. 2.) he makes this ingenuous profession. Cur de immortalitate animae
nihil scripserim, jam dixi in Synopsi mearum meditationum; quod ejus ab omni
corpore distinctionem satis probaverim, supra ostendi. Quod vero additis, ex
distinctione animae a corpore non sequi ejus immortalitatem; quia nihilominus
dici potest, illam a Deo talis naturae factam esse, ut ejus Duratio simul cum
duratione vitae corporeae finiatur; fateor a me refelli non posse. Neque enim
tantum mihi assumo, ut quicquam de ijs quae a libera Dei voluntate dependent,
humanae rationis vi determinare aggrediar. Docet quidem naturalis cognitio,
mentem a corpore esse diversam, ipsamque esse substantiam, etc. Sed si de
absoluta Dei potestate quaeratur, an forte decreverit ut animae humanae iisdem
temporibus esse desiuant, quibus corpor a quae illis adjunxit, destruuntur;
solius est Dei respondere. Cumque jam ipse nobis revelaverit, id non futurum;
nulla plane, vel minima est occasio dubitandi.

III. Of the Comments of the ancient Ethnics, concerning the infernal Mansions
of Souls departed.
THo the description of Tartarus and Elysium here in the latter part of this
grave Dialogue made by Plato, be by himself declared to have been borrowed for
the most part from the Fictions of others, chiefly Poets; and that he expressly
affirms, that to deliver any thing positively concerning the future state of
Souls, and the qualities of Rewards and Punishments in the next life, is the
part of a rash, not a wise man: yet forasmuch as the design and utility of
those fictions, is not more conspicuous, than the first invention of them is to
men inconversant in the monuments of Antiquity, obscure; and because there are,
even at this day, not a few who entertain and promote as gross, and in many
things the like superstitious conceits of Hell: I think it worth the expense
of a few vacant minutes, to deduce them briefly from their original, as high at
least as my little reading reaches.

The first Natural Philosophy, whereof the envy of Time has spared some little
fragments to be handed down by tradition to this our so distant age; seems to
be that which supposed two Contrary Principles of all things that had
beginning. Of these, one was God the Maker, in the Grecian Theology named (...)
(concerning the Etymology of which name, it will be no lost labor, nor
impertinent, to consult the most learned Vossius, in Etymologico Linguae
Latinae, in verbo, Juvo) and the Author of Life: The other, Matter, called
(...), which has the power of Dissolution or Death. To the First was ascribed
Light and Day; to the Latter, Darkness and (...), Non-apparence: for (...)
signifies privation of Light. Under the Empire of Zeus or Jove, was placed the
upper part of the World: the inferior was assigned to the dominion of Pluto:
the middle betwixt these two contrary Principles, was imagined to be agitated
by perpetual reciprocations, or alternate changes; so that Life and Death,
Light and Darkness, Good and Evil rule by turns. Congruous whereunto is that
assertion of the Prince of Physicians, Hippocrates (lib. de Diaeta) nihil
gigni, neque prorsus interire, That as to Matter, nothing is either generated
or destroyed: and that to be generated, is to grow out of Hade into light; men
thinking that to perish, which from light decreased into Hade or darkness
again. For, it has been an universal Axiom of ancient Philosophers, nihil ex
nihilo fieri, aut in nihilum redigi: and therefore they who allowed the World
to have had a beginning, held the Matter of it to have been pre-existent from
all Eternity.

Now this which the Grecians named Hades, the Egyptians called Amenthes, which
signifies a place giving and receiving, viz. Souls; as Plutarch (de Iside)
interprets it. Which notion, together with the opinion of the Souls
Immortality, and future rewards and punishments, being by the Egyptian Priests
communicated to Orpheus: he from thence, after his return into Greece, feigned
a Hell, in imitation of the Funeral Rites he had observed among them, as is
expressly averred by Diodorus Siculus (lib. 1. page 71.) formerly quoted: who
adds, that the other Comments of the Grecians de inferis, were in most things
conformable to the manner and place of Obsequies performed by the Egyptians,
even in his own time. For (says he) the boat wherein dead bodies are usually
carried to burial, is called (...), and a halfpenny is given for a fare to the
Boatman, who in the tongue of that Nation is called Charon: not far from the
Ferry, there stands (they say) a Temple of Hecate the Darksom; and the gates of
Cocytus and Lethe, made fast with brazen bars; and other gates of Verity, by
which stands an image or statue of Justice, without a head, etc.

And Servius (in Virgil. lib. 6. ad hunc versum; sic demum lucos Stygios, regna
invia vivis, aspicies) delivers, that Seneca in a certain book he wrote de ritu
and sacris Aegyptiorum, reports, that about Sienes, an extreme part of Egypt,
is a certain place which they call Philas, that is, the Female Friends; because
there Isis was appeased and attoned by the Egyptians, after her displeasure
conceived for that she had not found the limbs of her husband Osiris, whom his
brother Typhon had slain. Which being afterward found, when she desired to bury
them, she chose the safest place of a near Marish, whereunto the access was
extremely difficult, and embarrass'd; the Marish being full of Mudd and
Papyr-flaggs. Beyond this is a short Island, inaccessible to men: whence it was
called Abatos, and mentioned by Lucan; Hinc Abatos, quam nostra vocat veneranda
vetustas. This Mere is named Styx, because it raises Sadness and Sorrow in all
that pass over it: and hither on certain days, come such who have been
initiated to the sacred Rites; and that it had been written, that the
neighboring people carry over their dead to the other side of the Lake: but if
any chance to perish in the difficult passage, and his body be not found; his
Funeral Obsequies are to be deferred until a hundred years be expired. Whence
that dream, Centum errant annos, volitanque haec littora circum.

Farther, well known it is, even to young Students of Homer, that his (...) is
divided into Tartarus (described at the 13th. Iliad v. th) and Elysium
(described Odyss. v. 563.) and both according to the doctrine of the Egyptians,
who placed both the Bridewell of the wicked and the Mulberry Gardens of the
Just' (...), in a subterraneous place or region' But where to fix his (...),
has puzzled all his Commentators. Strabo (Geograph. lib. 3. page 150.) thereby
understands the remotest part of Spain, and contends for the placing his
Elysium there. More recent Poets take the [(...)] Islands of the Fortunate, for
the seats of the blessed: whereof see Hesychius, ad verbum (...), where you
shall read this also. Some say, Elysium lies in Egypt, some in Lesbos, others
in a place guarded with thunder and lightning, and not to be approached by
Mortals. So that a man would think, Eden to be turned into Elysium, nor does it
seem to be either more or less than what Diodorus just now related from the
Egyptians, that the gates of Cocytus and Lethe were secured by brazen bars.
But Plutarch removes this Paradise from the Hollows of the Earth, into the
globe of the Moon (lib. de facie in Luna.) So various are the conjectures of
men, so uncertain their imaginations, so easy their credulity; especialy when
they are blinded by superstition. What pleasure other^ may find in reading
these various Comments upon Fictions, I cannot divine: but this I will
adventure to confess, that to me they appear as idle and extravagant, as the
works of Didymus a Grammarian did to Seneca, Who ( in Epist. 88.) derides him
for writing 4000 Volumes, wherein he chiefly enquires about the native Country
of Homer, the true Mother of Aeneas, whether Anacreon were more addicted to
wine or women; whether Sappho were a common prostitute, and other the like
ridiculous impertinences, which were to be forgotten, if you knew them.
Wherefore leaving these dissenting Expositors, let us resume our clue, and
follow the trace of the Fiction it self.

Though Homer constituted Rhadamanthus and his brother Minos Judges in the
infernal Arches ( Odyss. 4. v. 567.) and fetched those names from Crete: yet
the ground or example was derived from Egypt, as appears from this relation of
Diodorus Siculus (lib. 1. p. 58.) Among the Egyptians (says he) when a dead
body is to be interred, the Kindred of the deceased give notice of the day to
the Judges, and to the friends and acquaintance of the defunct; and proclam
that he is at that time to be wafted over the Lake. At the day prefixed, more
then 40 Judges assembled together, seat themselves in a Semicircle or
Half Moon, on the brink of the Lake: and a Boat ready prepared for that use, is
lanched, with a man therein to row it, whom they in the Egyptian language call
Charon. Then, before the body is put aboard, it is permitted to every man
present, to bring in what accusations he thinks just, against the party
deceased. If any prove, that he lived an evil life, the Judges immediately give
sentence upon him according to the nature and quality of his transgressions:
and the body is forbidden to be buried. But a false and malicious accuser is
obnoxious to to great penalties. When no just impeachment is brought in, the
kindred laying aside the mourning and laments, praise the defunct, in their
laudatory harangues, not mentioning the nobility of his blood and extraction
(as the the Grecians use to do) because they hold, that all in Egypt are
equaly nonoble; but his good Education in youth, and the piety, justice,
continency, and other virtues of his maturer age, all which they particularly
recount and celebrate. This funeral Oration ended, they address their Oraisons
to the infernal Deities, beseeching them to receive him into the Society of the
Pious: with no small devotion making this prayer, the form whereof has been
preserved and transmitted down to us by Porphyrius (de Abstinentia lib. 4.
Sect. 10.)

O Lord Sun, and all ye Gods who give life to men, receive me, and deliver me a
companion to the immortal Gods. For while I lived here in this age, I piously
worshipped the Gods whom my Parents taught me to worship: and honored those
who begat me: nor have I killed any man: nor defrauded any that trusted me: nor
committed any inexpiable evil. But if at any time of my life, I have offended
by eating or dtinking any thing forbidden; I offended not by my self, but by
those bowels of mine there (pointing to a little Coffin wherein the stomach
and gutts are reposed apart.)

Which said, the speaker throws the little Coffin into the water, as containing
the offending parts; and the whole assembly with loud and ingeminated applauses
recommending the defunct (that is, him who had performed all the duties of
life) as one that shall enjoy the everlasting conversation of pious Souls apud
inferos; the body is put into the Boat, and ferried over the Lake to be inhumed.

Here reflecting upon this Egyptian prayer, or Apology rather, made in the
name of the dead, we may en passant observe, both a touch of Pharisaical
arrogance and self-justification; and precepts exactly concordant with those
given, first (as the tradition of the Talmudical Rabbines teaches) to the Sons
of Noah, and afterward by Moses to the Hebrews, in the second Table of the
Decalogue, and from them descended down to us. So that that saying of Solomon,
that nothing is new under the Sun, was true many hundred of years before his
days, yea and before Moses's too. But I have made a digression of a prayer;
and must return into the little remainder of my way.

From these Egyptian obsequies it was (as the same Diodorus in the same place
observes) that Orpheus having, while he sojourned among their Priests,
curiously remarked them, first invented his fiction of Hell; in some things
keeping close to the original he copied, and adding others from the mint of his
own Poetical fancy: and so divulging the same to his admirers in Greece,
transmitted it to posterity, as matter of Faith.

From their belief, that Good Souls were after death advanced to the honor and
felicity of conversing with the Gods, first arose the (...) of the Ancients:
and first of all Hercules was, for his Heroic virtues, accordingly Deified.
Whence Homer describing the transcendent happiness of his condition, says,
apud Deos immortales oblectatur in convivijs, and habet pulchris talis Hebem:
by assigning him Hebe or Youth for a Wife, intimating his Immortality.

And from the Egyptian custom of interdicting sepulture to the bodies of men
convicted of great crimes, came the opinion of the Grecians, that the Souls of
men whose bodies want interrment, are repulsed by Charon. Whence in Homer, the
Ghost of Elpinor appearing to Ulysses, complains of his repulse, because his
body yet remained unburied. So does that of Patroclus to Achilles, begging the
human office of inhumation: sepeli me quam citissime; ut intrem portas Plutonis.

To these remarkable instances of Similitude betwixt the old Egyptian rites of
burial, and the Grecian fictions de inferis; I might, were not my pen already
blunted with the drudgery of transcription, add many others collected by
Diodorus Siculus. But from what I have alleged, it seems clearly evident, that
the original of the Grecian traditions and doctrine concerning Hell, was fetched
from Egypt: and that the grand pipe through which they were transmitted and
diffused, was the pen of Homer, who flourished about the year 676 of the Attic
Era.

Nor is it less manifest, that some Philosophers also, and those too of great
name and authority in their times, labored by their Writings to propagate the
belief of the same Fantastical comments in the minds of the superstitious
vulgar. For, Diogenes Laertius, in the lives of Democritus and his Scholar
Protagoras, of Antisthenes and Heraclides Ponticus, expressly delivers, that
each of them wrote whole Volumes [(...)] of the regiment and judicial
proceedings apud inferos: the loss whereof, the Commonwealth of Letters has
no great reason to lament. And as for Plato, we have already perused his ample
Chorography and description of the same infernal regions, in this Dialogue of
Phoedo; wherein whoever is not sat^sfied, let him at his leisure have recourse
to the sixth book of Virgil's Aeneids; where he shall find even the Topography
of Hell and Elysium most accurately painted, according to the patterns of Homer
and Plato. More particularly, at verse 327. he shall find Charon refusing to
transport the Souls of bodies unburied: at verse 426. he shall behold the
Limbus or apartment or Infants: at verse 430. the receptacle of men condemned
unjustly: at verse 434. the Newgate of Self-murderers: at verse 440. the
melancholy walks of unfortunate Lovers: at verse 540. the Campus Martius of
Warriors: at verse 548. the burning river and other torments of the impious:
at verse 638. the Paradise of Mahomet, at verse 738. a most cruel Purgatory,
wherein polluted Souls being cleansed and whitened, by air, fire and water,
are after a long tract of time, removed into Elysium, there with impatience to
expect [(...)] Regeneration. All which being compared with the descriptions of
the same places, extant in Homer and Plato: he will at length be convinced,
that Virgil therein imitated them most exactly; and that Purgatory is no such
modern invention as the unlearned take it to be. The Sandy foundation whereof
lying so exposed to all eyes not blinded with the mist of Bigotism: I cannot
but applaud the Wisdom of our Divines assembled in the Convocation house by K.
Henry VIII. in the year 1536. Who among some Ecclesiastical Constitutions then
made, delivered their judgment concerning Purgatory, in these memorable words.

Forasmuch as according to due order of Charity, and the book of Macchabees,
and diverse ancient Writers, it is a very good and charitable deed to pray for
Souls departed: and forasmuch as such uses have continued in the Church even
from the beginning, that all Bishops and Preachers should instruct and teach
the people not to be grieved with the continuance of the same: But forasmuch as
the place where those departed Souls be, the name thereof, and the kind of
pains there also, be to us uncertain by Scripture, that therefore this and all
other such things were to be remitted to God Almighty, unto whose mercy it is
meet and convenient to commend them, trusting that God accepts our prayers
for them; referring the rest wholly to God, to whom is known their state and
condition. And therefore that it was necessary that such abuses should be
clearly put away, which under the name of Purgatory have been advanced, etc. As
is recited by the Lord Herbert, in the life of K. Henry VIII. page 468.

FINIS.

