MEMORIALS OF Godliness and Christianity.

In Three Parts.

PART. I. CONTAINING MEDITATIONS 1. Of making Religion ones Business. 2, An
Appendix Applied to the Calling of a Minister. With a Brief Account of the
Authors LIFE.

The Tenth Edition Corrected and Enlarged.

By Herbert Palmer, B. D. late Master of Queens Col. Camb.

London, Printed for Henry Million at the Bible near White-Fryers in
Fleetstreet, 1670.

I Conceive this Letter, with the Appendix following it, to be very well worthy
the Printing.

Chapter Herle.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader
THis ensuing Meditation upon making Religion ones business, having first
affected my own heart, and afterward some friends to whom it has been
communicated, I have been so far made to believe, that by Gods blessing it may
be some advancement to the business of Religion, now in this season when
Religion has Retainers enough, but not Servants enough; that at last my
thoughts told me, The very expressions herein would upbraid me as not true to
them, if I had denied, or longer delayed their publication. I have no doubt but
sundry passages in them will meet with some Scoffs and some Cavils, as being
over-nice, and precise, and I shall meet with some Reproaches, as not answering
my own strict rules. But in hopes there will yet be found those that will both
be glad to see such a piece of a Pattern for their Hearts and Lives, and also
strive to make it their own in affection and practice; I have resolved to
adventure the one and the other: and do trust also that by Gods grace, it will
somewhat help to make me the more watchful over my own self and my behavior,
that I may not only not shame my self and my so public professions, but also
may set a real Copy in some proportion suitable to this verbal one, for thy
double benefit. Herein if thou will help me still with thy prayers (as I am
confident thou will, if thou reap any benefit by it) I again tell thee, thou
may be the better for it thy self, while I am thereby through Gods mercy to
us both, helped to do thee yet some further spiritual Sevice, which while I
live I must now always profess my self ambititious of, as being ever,

Thine and the Churches Servant in Christ altogether Herbert Palmer.
October. 13. 1644.
A Brief Account of the Life of Mr. Herbert Palmer.
THE Reverend Author of this ensuing Treatise, was (whilst living) prized by
good men for his Piety, and loved by all wise men (that knew him) for his
Learning: And now he is dead, let not the Reader in this short Epitome of his
life, expect any more than a brief Narrative or Account of his most eminent,
peculiar, public, passages and transactions in the world.

He was the Son of Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham near Canterbury in East-Kent,
where he was born about March 1601. he was prudently and piously educated, and
in his Infancy made great proficiency in the serious study of Religion and
Learning, so that when he was 4 or 5 years of age, he would often cry to go his
Mother, To hear somewhat of God.

From a Child he was acquainted with the Scripture, and earnestly desired to be
A Minister of Jesus Christ.

He had excellent natural parts, both intellectual and moral; his excellency
and exactness in the French Tongue, (which he could speak almost as soon as
English) and the great knowledge he had, as well of the persons places and
affairs of the French Nation, as in the propriety of the pronunciation of the
Language, made many strangers (to his Nativity) believe he was a Frenchman
born; and after his call to the Ministry, he Preached to the French Church at
Canterbury on two several solemn days to the great edification and approbation
of the hearers.

His Industry also in learning the Latin Tongue, was manifested by his great
proficiency therein whilst young.

His dutifulness and obedience toward his Parents, as well when grown to years
of maturity, as whilst young, spoke his great reverence and esteem of them; and
as he was a great Example of Filial obedience in his Conversation, so he was a
great Asserter of Parental authority in his Doctrine.

At the age of about 14 years, (to wit) in the year of our Lord 1615. he was
admittod as Fellow-Commoner in St. John's College in Cambridge.

And according to his standing, and desert, took the degree of Master of Arts
in the year 1622.

And in the following year was constituted Fellow of Queens College in the
same University; and whilst he so continued, he took on him the great care of
many Pupils, who (by his prudent and painful instruction and care over them)
made great proficiency in Learning whilst they continued with him.

And in the year 1624. he was called, and ordained to the work of the Ministry,
by a License from the then Archbishop of Canterbury. In the year 1626. he was
called to the public exercise of his Ministry at Alphage Church in Canterbury,
where by his laborious Industry, sound Doctrine, and exemplary conversation, he
proved himself to be a burning and shining light.

In the year 1632. he removed to Ashwell in Hartfordshire by the presentment of
Laud Archbishop of Canterbury.

The plainness of his Preaching did manifest his great desire to be understood
by his Auditors for their Edification.

His pains in Catechizing the ignorant, his charity in providing Bibles for the
poor, and his humility in admitting persons of all ranks and degrees to
discourse with him for their Souls edification, got him love, respect, and
honor, from all acquainted with him, and was a great means of reformation
amongst the people to whom he was a Pastor, obliging them to several excellent
resolutions against drunkenness, swearing, or other open debaucheries.

He made and printed an excellent Catechism entitled, An endeavor of making
the Principles of Christian Religion plain and easy.

His Domestic or Family Government was as pious, as his Ecclesiastic or
Church care was painful; he would not permit any of his household for (frivolous
excuses) to be absent from family duties, neither would he entertain any in his
family, that either were not truly Godly and Religious, or willing to be
instructed in the ways of God. He read the Scriptures, and prayed, twice every
day in his family, Catechized twice every week; and after every meal he caused
to be read, as at his own, so at his servants Table, a portion of Gods word;
requiring also on the Friday and Saturday, an account, from those under his
Tuition, of what they remembered of the Sermon I reached the Sabbath day before.
He would not suffer any of his servants to sit up late (about their weeks work)
upon Saturday at nights; neither on the Sabbath would he eat of any dish, if he
understood it kept any of his servants from the public ordinance, by providing
of it.

And as he was painful in his Ecclesiastic, and exemplar in the Domestic
Government, so also was he pious in his more private retired closet duties,
being a great admirer of, and having great knowledge in, the Scriptures, which
he took great delight in when young, and highly honored whilst he lived.

He kept a perfect Diery of all (or most of) the passages of his Life.

He often set whole days apart, to humble himself, (in private) by Fasting and
Prayer.

He took the degree of Bachelor of Arts, in the year 1630. and in 1632. he was
taken in by the the University, as a University Preacher.

In the year 1643. he was called to be one of the Assembly of Divines, and some
time after, elected as Pastor in Dukes-Place, from whence he removed to
New-Church in Westminster, (where he was the first Minister that preached
there) in both, which places, he was highly and greatly esteemed of, and by all
his Auditors (that were professors of piety.) During also his Ministry at
New-Church, he was a Lecturer at the Abbey Church in Westminster, and so
painful was he (in the service of God,) that he never declined any Ministerial
exercise that he was requested to perform, whether in public or in private.

He was of a loving, friendly disposition, courteous, and affable in his
carriage toward men of the lowest rank or degree.

April 1644. he was constituted Master of Queens-Colledge, by the Earl of
Manchester, where he caused the exercise of Sermons, to be continued in the
College Chapel weekly, all the year; where also he endeavored to promote
Learning, by his constant exhortation of the Scholars to sedulity in their
studies; purchasing also (by his own moneys) many Authors, which he gave to the
Library, and maintained at his own charge, diverse poor and necessitous Scholars.

He was a man of a public spirit, laying out himself, for God: greatly
self-denying, and very Zealous for and in the things of God.

His freedom, and faithfulness, in reference to the public affairs, may
appear by the Sermons he preached before the Parliament at Westminster; Diverse
of which are now in Print.

His Temperance and Sobriety were great, as well in his Apparel, as in his Diet.

The good works he did, (while living) commands us to praise his liberal
charity, and charitable liberality.

The time of his sickness was not long, his distemper having little to feed on;
he (whilst in health) spending himself so much in the service and work of God.

His humility, his patience in sickness, his faith upon God, and submission to
Gods will, did most eminently discover themselves while sick.

His deportment therein being holy and heavenly, and his discourse full of such
expressions, that discovered where his heart was.

One exhorting him, to cast the burden of his sickness upon God, he made this
reply, I should do very unworthily, if when I have Preached to others, that
they should cast their burden upon God, I should not do so my self.

Anno Christi 1647, in the 46 year of his age, he returned his Soul into the
hands of God; And for his body, it lies buried in the New-Church at
Westminster; and thus he lived, and so he dyed, and now he is dead, his works do
live, Vivitur post funera virtus.


ANd thus (kind Reader) you have a brief Epitome, of the Life of that Reverend,
Learned, Laborious, Pious, and Painful Divine, who is the Author of this
small, (yet sweet and precious) Treatise; from the perusal of which, I Will not
detain thee, by long or tedious digressions, of my own, begging only,
acceptance of what may be well, and pardon for what is ill done, from all; but
carping Momuses, (whose favor not expecting,) I plainly declare, I no more
value, or care, for their censures, than I prize or esteem the flatteries of
fond, and foolish Parasites.

HE that desires to see a larger Account of the Life of this Reverend Divine,
let them peruse it as Written by the Learned Mr. Clark in his Book of Lives.

Of making Religion ones Business.
MY true Friend, It has been an usual saying with me, (would God I could ever
have the feeling of it in my self,) That the Character of a godly man, is to
make Religion his business.

I will now a little descant upon it, so as to set down what I should and would
do in this kind. I shall set a copy, at least to teach my self, and provide a
remembrancer to quicken my frequent dullness.

1. I desire to have my Affections all molded by Religion and toward it; my
thoughts, and words, and deeds, to be all exercises of Religion, and my very
cessation from works commanded by Religion, and limited and circumstantiated by
Religion, my eating, drinking, sleeping, journeying, visiting, entertaining of
friends, to be all directed by Religion: And that above all, I may be serious
and busy in the acts of Religion about the Word, Prayer, Praises, Singing,
Sacraments; not only that the duties in each kind be performed, but religiously
performed, with life and vigor, with Faith, Humility and Charity.

2. To these ends, I desire my heart may be possessed with these two
fundamental principles:

1. That Religion is the end of my Creation, and of all the benefits, not only
spiritual, but temporal, which God bestows upon me.

2. That Religion is my felicity, even for the present, though derived from
that eternal felicity, which is now laid up for me, and to be hereafter
possessed by me in Heaven: So glorious is that felicity; that from the first
moment of our interest in it, it casts a lightsome, gladsome brightness upon
the soul, even many years sometimes before the enjoyment of the fullness of it:
like to the Sun shedding forth his fore-running beams to enlighten all our
part of the world, many minutes before his full light offers it self to our eye.

3. When I speak thus of Religion to be Felicity, I mean it of God and Christ,
the object of Religion: without whom, Religion is but an empty Name, a
pernicious error. But as Religion is to know God and him whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ, it is eternal life, begun now here below: but never to end in any
time or place.

4. I wish these thoughts may meet me first in the morning, as worldly-minded
men's businesses do them: that I may count all things but interruptions till my
mind be settled in its course for that day, and that my mind be so settled and
habituated in these purposes, that it may be readily in order ordinarily and
only need time for solemn performance of religious duties, and for
extraordinary projects.

5. Specially I wish as I am bound by millions of eternal obligations, That I
may love the Lord my God, Christ Jesus my Redeemer, with all my heart, with all
my soul, with all my mind with all my strength, to the utmost extent of all
these phrases; and that to make my mind more apprehensive of them, I may not
profane any of them by using to say in slight matters, ( I love such a thing
with all my heart, or, I will do such a thing with all my heart) It may seem a
nicety to check such a phrase: But I read this morning, Pro. 7.2. Keep my
Commandments, and live, and my Law as the apple of thine eye. (Which sentence
by Gods blessing has occasioned this whole Meditation whatever it is.) The
Apple of the Eye is the tenderest, thing in the World of Natural things, the
Law of God no less (infinitely more) in Spirittuals. As I therefore like not
the word ( infinite) but when we speak of God: so those forenamed phrases seem
to be Gods peculiar: and that one main cause, why common men so readily say,
They love God with all their heart, (I mean, why they so easily deceive
themselves in so saying) is, because they have adulterated the phrase [ with
all my heart] and prostituted to every base trifle. Say, if it be not so. And
then as Saint James blames for not saying. [ If the Lord will, etc.] though
every one will grant such words necessary, and pretended to suppose them: so is
it not blameworthy to say in petty matters, what should make a sacred sound in
our ears, and to our spirits?

6. I wish I could loose my self in a holy trance of meditation, every time I
think of God and Christ, as the Author, Fountain, Life, Substance of all my
happiness; (All-sufficient, (alone sufficient) only-sufficient for my soul, and
all comfort and good. Nothing wanting in God and Christ to Eternity. No need of
any creature: No accession by any creature: no one creature, not all of them
comparable to him, or any thing without him. Time, lost happiness lost, while
converse with any creature, further than according to his Ordinance: as his
instruments and servants.

7. I wish, I could forget all respcts to my self, carnal, natural, while I
have any service to perform to God, as I have every moment [though I cannot
ever think so] that I might show I love God with strength; My God with all my
strength, and never be weary: of his immediate services especially: or if
naturally, yet not spiritually* Lusts are vigorous, when the body languishes,
being spent. Oh why is not grace more strong.

8. I wish my heart may never recoil upon me, with saying, Thou might now or
such a time have done thy God, thy Savior more service than thou did; even
when thou did somewhat, thy body and spirits would have held out longer time,
and endured a geater stress of zeal. And much less, Thou did wholly lose such
an opportunity of doing or receiving good, (though scarce can any one do good,
who receives not some present payment, at least in soul, the enlargement of
Grace and holy affections) and least of all, Thou did wholly employ thy
strength to sin, or thou have weakened thy strength by intemperance, or any
other foolish or sinful practice.

9. I wish that every day among my first thoughts, one may be, What special
business have I within doors? within my soul, What sin to mortify? Whether
lately raging, and even but last day or night prevailing over me? Or which I
have had (at least some late) victories over, that I may allot time to pursue
it, and by no means forget it in my paryer, and arm my self against the
encounter, if there be any possibility of my being assaulted that day. And what
grace to strengthen? wherein I have been exceeding feeble of late? or even
begun to obtain some vigor? which it may easily be lost, and will be, if not
with all care and means, and prayers fomented and cherished; that so I may
prepare for it. These are a Christians main businesses within himself always.

Withal, I wish to die daily. I mean not, that I daily wish for death; but
that I may foresee it more than possible, and may prepare for it, resolvedly,
contentedly: that I may look at it, as at a means of happiness, and take such
order as it may not cut me off from any main necessary employment: But each
hour and minute to dispatch the substantials of my business, and refer
circumstances and event to the All-wise, Powerful, and gracious Providence of
the great Ruler, and King of the whole world, and of every creature.

11. I wish to improve every relation I stand in toward any of mankind, to the
advancement of Religion: that Glory may redound to Christ, by my being a child
to one, a brother to another, a neighbor to a third, a kinsman, a friend, an
acquaintance to any one; That as well for the credit of Religion (which
commands to give to all their due honor, and to love them as my self) as for
the Propagation of Religion, I may be ambitious to approve my self the best
Child, or Subject, or Friend, etc. in the world: I and careful also, to
insinuate my self as much as may be, into the favor of every one I converse
withal in the world, of Superiors by submission and diligence: of Equals, by
courtesy and fredom: of Inferiors, by affibility mixed with gravity, and
gentleness, with necessary strictness. And that I may not fail to entitle God
to whatever ground I gain upon the affections of any, that is, to engage them
thereby the more forwardly in his service, in their own persons, and toward
all others, and that I my self also may reap some spiritual benefit by them,
that so I may bless God for them, and they him for me, and others for them and
me together.

12. Particularly, I wish, that toward Inferiors, I may never put less, but
rather more weight upon Gods Comandements than mine own, and upon religious
than civil observances: and that because the best are not Angels, I may bear
with more patience, failings in mere worldly, than spiritual matters.

13. I wish never to be one of those that feed themselves without fear; but
that, whether I eat or drink, I may do all to the glory of my God, that is
Seasonably, Sparingly, and with Choice; for Health and Strength: Not Gluttony,
Drunkenness, or Riotous Curiosity. That I may daily remember [ my business not
to be, to live to eat, but eat to live, that I may follow my business, that is,
Christianity:] that I may not forget how slippery a place the throat is, and
how easily that glides down, which after works disease: that because the
craving of the sensual appetite, seeming but reasonable, being but for ones
self, is of the betraying of Reason it self, besides the quelling of Grace:
both Grace and Reason may combine together in the practice of this difficultest
piece of self-denial: And that I may ever consider, not only what a shame, what
an unthankfulness it is in the least degree to disable my self for the service
of Him, who allows me liberally so much as can be fit for me, how-much soever
that be, but also what pity to wast good Creatures to so vile a purpose, as to
weaken my body, or overcharge my spirits, with what was meant to strengthen and
quicken them. That from the observation of the untowardnesse of my mind; when
it is in the best temper, I may tremble at the thoughts of the least
intemperance, which if it fetter not my body, so as it cannot do its duty, will
at least hamper my wits, and many times take away from me the will to go about
it aright. That therefore I may count all inordination, or immoderation in meat
or drink, Poison at least to my Soul, and in a degree also to my body, as is
confessed by all, some meats and drinks to be in themselves, to some, and others,
if taken to such a quantity.

14. I wish to be watchful over my self always, that I may be thus sober; and
sober that I may be watchful; and watchful that I may withstand enemies and
have time and spirits to do all the works my heavenly Master sets me about.

15. I wish to redeem all time I can from sleep, and so to order my sleep, as I
may redeem most time. To redeem all time I can from sports, and so to order my
employments, as that the varieties of them may commonly be recreation enough
without using any sports at all for my minds sake: And that if my body seem
necessarily to require any, I may remember [ that Nature is content with a
little, and Grace never asks more.] That if courtesy. require me to bear
friends company in their sports, I may not only refuse such as are unlawful in
themselves, but in others, consider whether they are not for the present
unseasonable, or vitiated with some other ill Circumstances; being specially
shie of those that are apt to lead astray, either by affording provocations to
impatience, or threatening to swallow up too much time, of which friends not
seldom robbing us, do it no way more than by exacting of us to hold out with
them in their sports; which they by an evil though significant name, usualy
call Pastimes.

16. I wish to redeem all time from vain thoughts, and unprofitable musings,
upon my bed night or morning, in my walking or riding upon the way, in my
attendances where neither my Eye nor my Tongue can be profitably set on work:
and to take those Advantages greedily to advance the businesses of God and my
soul. My thoughts are her eldest and noblest offspring, and so too worthy to
be cast away upon base objects.

17. I wish to redeem all time from idle words and frivolous discourses; to
avoid what I can the hearing of such pratlings; to shun all light, and frothy,
and amorous Books. My Tongue is my Glory, and my best Instrument to advance the
Glory of God and Religion toward others; It were pity to profane it with such
words, as to be upon my contrary score at the day of accounts: and so much I
have to learn of God and of Religion; as without slighting them, I can find no
leisure to give heed to trifles, besides the danger of poison to be conveyed in
these. If I were confined to the society of Pagans, I might from thence expect
some profitable Discourse, though altogether of the world; and even toward
them I were bound to offer at least sometimes mention of God: How much more
among such as call themselves Christians! Specially, who profess Christianity
to be their business as well as mine.

18. I desire to redeem all time I can from curiosity in dressing my body, as
that which besides the vanity and unprofitableness endangers the leaving off
(the best clothing) Humility, and so doubly sets my business back.

19. I wish to redeem what time I can, even from worldly business, whatever
they are; so as at least I may never want room to exercise my self unto
Godliness; to perform my daily solemn services to God, both personal and
domestic, and for extraordinary Projects to the honor of God.

20. I desire to take no journey, or make no visit, which falls not into the
road of Religion. Courtesy [which to allow, and in a sort, even command, is
Religious Honour] will carry me a little way, sometimes: But specially,
Purposes, accompanied with Hopes, of making all my correspondences pay tribute
to Relegion, whilst in the mean time, I am careful to lose no opportunity of
trafficking for Religions gain, and resolutely to stay no longer time any where
than while I may do my self or others, more good there, than in another place.

21. I wish specially to make all my medlings in worldly businesses serviceable
to Religion: Whilst I employ whatever Talent I have received, and do receive,
to strengthen, encourage, and secure my Self, Family, Friends, Neighbors, and
all Fellow Christians, in the ways of Godliness, and to exercise and
demonstrate Faith, Humility, Patience, Contentedness, Liberality, Justice,
Heavenly mindedness in the midst of worldly employments, and thereby to draw
even strangers to admire and approve of that Religion, which teaches and
effectually persuades so much good.

22. Particularly I wish, that I may never grasp so much of the world as to
distract my head with cares, or engage my heart in sins, and that in the rust
that cleaves to my fingers in telling of money, though each piece seem clean
enough) I may see the emblem of the defilement, gotten insensibly by the use
even of lawful things, that therefore I may constantly afterward wash my heart
by prayers and meditations.

23. I wish to account nothing a cross to me, but what crosses Religion in some
respect, either to my own Soul or others; to reckon by that Rule, my losses and
gains; my thrivings and goings back, and for this reason, to esteem scandal the
worst of evils; and to give or do, or suffer any thing to prevent or take them
away: and next to these the want of Gods Ordinances.

24. I wish to have my heart and conversation always in heaven, as counting my
treasure to be laid up there; and though I must trade with worldly commodities,
yet to reckon Grace my chief stock: and that as foreseeing losses, I may trade
much in the Assurance-Office, and study daily the Art of Christian Alchymy,
which can extract advantage out of losses, gold out of every thing, even do^ng
it self; that is Grace not only out of every gracious act of Gods providence
within sight or hearing; but even out of afflictions and very sins.

25. Particularly, I wish to improve the time of sickness, which disables from
most worldly businesses, to set forward greatly the businesses of God and my
soul: and wholly to bestow that leisure upon them, further than the necessity
of my body calls me* partly to attend it: and that because I am then debarred
from public means of thriving, I may beg of every Visitant, to help me with
somewhat; which yet will not impoverish, but help to enrich them also, by
mutual trading in spiritual matters: and to count this covetousness only
lawful, Never to think I have enough of Grace, but the less time I have to
live, the more greedy to be to heap up of these riches.

26. I desire to count the Sabbath, the Lords day, mine; made for me for mine
advantage, the Market Day for my soul, a spiritual harvest-day, wherein I may
all day long make provision, and lay up in store for afterward, and to bless
God continually for it, as without which my soul might be in danger to starve,
either through want of public provisions, or leisure to provide for my self
what might be had: and therefore by no means to overslip the opportunity, even
for my own sake, besides the Commandment; and to take to the utmost minute that
I can, my spiritual liberty to serve God, and get Grace, not allowing any thing
by my good will to interrupt me therein.

27. I desire to account the Sacrament of the Lords Supper a singular Fair,
wherein the Bread that came down from Heaven, the water of life, spiritual wine
and milk, and whatsoever else is nourishing and comfortable to the soul, is
freely offered, and to be had without money, and without price: That therefore
I may be sure not to miss, when I may go to it: And yet, because all that come
thither make not so happy a bargain, but rather purchase to themselves wrath
and judgment, I may be careful to prepare my self so by Examination, that my
soul be not sent away fasting, or which is worse, poisoned, while my body is
entertained.

28. I desire to account all other Ordinances of God. (in their degree and
manner likewise) the means of my Souls enriching, nourishing physic: So that
if I should slight or trifle away these blessed opportunities, I could not but
die a beggar, die and starve, die a miserable diseased Leper, die and perish
eternally. That therefore I may not be so much a fool, as to have these put as
prizes into my hand to get wisdom withal, and I to have no heart to them: or
that pretending no other errand to the place where they are, nor other business
at that time, but to receive them, I should be so wickedly mad as to sleep away
the offers of Grace then tendered unto me, nor suffer my mind to be diverted to
any other thing, ^or to look that God should hear me where I scarce hear my
self in my prayers, or refuse to hear him in his Word.

29. I desire to account those my best friends that most help me in my business
of Christianity; And to esteem a watchful consideration and faithful
admonitions the most necessary and best expressions of friendship, and best
helps to my feeble and frail mind.

30. I desire if ever I marry, to account that one of the greatest businesses
even of Religion, that I can undertake any time in my whole life; which if I
speed well in, will incomparably (beyond that other men or creatures can)
Advance my spiritual projects and advantages; and contrarily disappoint and
overthrow them if I make an ill match: that therefore being truly sensible of
my own natural sinful inclination, which may betray me as soon as any other,
into some one (at least) of those many untoward courses, which persons of all
qualities and conditions usually take on this occasion; as also Apprehensive of
Gods punishing no sin more frequently or sharply in this world; I may from the
first moment of my entertaining any such thoughts, make my most ardent and
faithful Prayers keep pace with them, first to implore to be directed in a
perfect way, and then to be blessed with a true helper every way meet for me.

31. Particularly, I desire that the phrases of Marrying in the Lord, and not
being unequally yoaked, etc. (not corrupted by the worlds false glosses, but
truly interpreted by a serious conscience) may ever have an absolute negative
voice in all Propositions, that is, that I may never marry with any whom I have
reason to judge not to be truly religious; whilst yet I conclude, That
Religion alone is not sufficient to make any match. That I may never dare to
cross the Rules of nature in too much disparity of age, or in robbing Parents
of their right, at least of Approbation and Consent; nor those of Civility, by
aspiring too eminently above my degree, or debasing my self too much below it;
withal counting it a necessary qualification in one whom I may match my self
unto, To have no predominant humor which I cannot bear, but to be able to bear
any infirmity of mine, and to be (at least) some help to my spirit in those
things wherein I specially need help.

32. I desire (for my security in all these Resolutions) that I may never be in
have, but make a leisurable, and sufficient enquiry by my self and friends,
answerable to the necessity which the worlds deceitfulness enforces in a
business of such lasting importance; but specially that I may never be in love
(with the estate or comeliness of person) which would hinder any full enquiry,
and stop my ears to any (though never so true an) information, and blind my
eyes from a right discerning, Whether there be indeed that which in others I
was wont to make the Character of Piety: and even in a visible observation of
defects, make me wickedly run to Gods Decree for my excuse, and say, Marriages
are made in Heaven, or presumptuously promise my self that I shall make them
better, when once married, and headlong run on, notwithstanding all the
contrary advice of friends, or even the commands of Parents, and be in danger
to have my heart broke with discontent, if the Providence of God shall any way
break the Match; which last consideration forbids also too much engagement of
affection upon the most worthy and fit person in the world, while there remains
any possibility of dissolving the Treaty.

33. I desire to enforce the undervaluing of wealth or beauty, upon my spirit;
from the scarecity of these who have all the other more necessary
Qualifications: and that remembering among all the Ends of Marriage mentioned in
Scripture, none of them to be to make one rich; I may never consent to set my
Liberty, my Comfort, my Self, for. so long a term as during life, to make never
so great a purchase of worldly Estate: As also, though I must never match my
self to any, till I can love their person; I may yet count it a sin to refuse
one otherwise every way fit for me, upon the mere exception, that I cannot
love, when there is no remarkable deformity to breed a loathing; and to reckon
it a duty to pray earnestly to God to rectify such untowardness of my mind, as
makes me, without just cause, reject a gracious offer of his Providence toward
me: and that to prevent the mischief of an unexpected continual jarre all our
lives long, I may be willing to be inquired into my self, as well as to enquire
after others, and may not dissemblingly disguise for a fit, that which will
afterward come certainly to be known; expecting, That that love cannot be
firm, whose foundation is laid upon a lie; But that I may, by my self or
friends' fully and freely, before engagement be past, Express what I expect,
both for Piety, and all other matters, of habitation, manner of living, order
of Family, and the like: and what may be expected from me in each respect; not
fearing that this faithfulness to my self and them should make a breach; but
resolving that if this would break the Match, being unconcluded, there would be
no less danger that it would break the peace afterward, when the unfaithfulness
should be discovered: and that that breaking of the Match were so much to be
preferred before this breach of Peace, by how much a cross is to be preferred
before a sin, and I cannot be a Christian if I believe not that God can provide
better for me, and will, if I yield up my will, and all my affections wholly to
him.

34. I desire to let no day pass without (once at least) solemn casting up my
account, how my soul has sped that day, and my business gone forward or
backward; and to allot special times for a more full reckoning of many days,
and summing up my whole stock of Grace: so shall I be sure never to become a
Bankrupt, but compound for my debts in time, before I be sued, or pursued to
extremity.

Lastly, I desire to account my Sureties Satisfaction my best Riches: and to
treasure up charily in my heart my Acquittances sealed with his blood: and to
fetch from his store all needful Grace from time to time: His All sufficiency
alone on all occasions must furnish me with Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, Redemption, he is and must be All in all to me. To him, with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost be all Glory, and Love, and Faith, and Obedience
rendered for ever. Amen.

An Appendix applied to the Calling of a Minister.
1. I Desire specially to improve my Calling of a Minister to the advancement
of Religion both in my own and others hearts. Whatever Calling I had, I were
bound so to direct it: but this was erected to that purpose immediately, and no
other [ to found men in Religion, and build them up in it.] As therefore I must
first account, that of me is required a greater forwardness in Religion, and
higher degree of heavenly mindedness, and being to the glory of Christ, then of
ordinary Christians; because while their calling often distracts and disturbs
them from thinking of God and Christ, mine leads me directly to it; and those
notions which they through ignorance or disuse are strangers to, I am happily
necessitated to make familiar to me: so though I may yet have imperfection, I
pretend Religion in vain, if I allow my self in carelesseness or
unprofitableness in that Profession of mine, the very exercise whereof is among
the mainest Businesses of Religion, and which therefore in the Pr^parations for
it, and exercise of it, challenges all my strength of affections and spirits.
If God should have given me my choice of all the employment the world knows, I
could not wish any other, to do at once most good to my soul; and express what
good I get, to do others souls good also, and most show my love to Christ and
Christians, in thankfulness for all that good I have and look for, both to my
soul and body.

2. I desire therefore to esteem it among the highest favors, among the
greatest honors, so to be set on work, specially with success: and to make it
appear that I do so esteem it, by putting forth all my abilities, that there
may be no want in me, if success follow not toward others. All the time my
Savior lived his first life upon earth, after his Baptism (till he was to
prepare himself for the Sacrifice of his Death) he undertook no other Calling
than this, and after his Resurrection again practiced it, so long as he
conversed with men here below. O let my heart therefore be so possessed with his
Spirit; that though my body must needs have its natural supplies in due season,
yet I may ever (as he did) count it my meat and drink to fulfill and finish
this work; and my recreation to go about, doing good. And therefore though his
Sabbath, the Lords day, be according to nature the day of my greatest toil; yet
because that day I most advance the business of his Kingdom, and my own soul
together, I may with more affections than others can, call the Sabbath a
delight, and triumph in it, not only as a day of Liberty, but of conquest and
victory.

3. I desire to extend the labors of my Function beyond the expectation of
those to whom they are to be directed. I mean, not ever (yet sometimes)
specially for length, but frequency, to be instant in season, and out of season
[ volentibus, nolentibus.] And to rejoice therefore, and only therefore, in the
multitude of hearers, because among many there is more hope of doing some good,
whilst yet I never suffer my self to be discouraged by their paucity, since
Gods grace is not tied to expect the help of a crowd, and one soul gained or
confirmed, is worth an age of pains.

4. I desire in all the public exercises of my Ministry, to suit my matter,
method, phrase, repetition, and all other circumstances, so as I may be best
understood and remembered, and may best convince and persuade every man's
conscience, and not to own one tittle or syllable that might hinder this in
any: remembering herein my business to be, not to break for my own credit: but
to deliver the messages of him who is no respecter of persons, but esteems the
meanest soul worth shedding his blood for, as well as the greatest.

5. I desire therefore no more to neglect the instruction of the poorest child,
or the visiting of the most contemptible creature within my charge, than of the
richest and noblest, rather those of the eminenter sort may better spare me;
because they may for themselves and theirs have more means and comforts than
others can.

6. Specially, I desire not to omit the advantage of any ones being sick:
Because, 1. then they may have more leisure to ponder on any good counsel, than
the world at other times will give them leave. 2. Then also perhaps they may be
straight going out of the world, and I may never again have any more
opportunity of offering, them good; and then too (probably) they may be more
sensible of the reality of those things which concern another world, when they
see nothing in this world will do them good, or keep them here: And when I come
to any, never to omit the mention of death, which will neither stay our
leisure, nor be hastened by talking of it: And herein to regard the good of a
soul, rather than the pleasing of any ones fancy.

7. I desire in all things men should rather be pleased with what I must do,
then for me to do any thing merely to please men, unless in things otherwise
indifferent every way, and in them indeed to be willing to please all men in
all things; taking counsel, in things of that sort, of men's infirmities; but in
substantials only of Gods Word; except that even in such men's weakness or
waywardness may sometimes so vary the case, as that one while they may
necessitate a present enforcement of a Doctrine, and another time the
forbearance for that season. And because the forbearance of this is often times a
great business of importance, I may bend all the strength of my prayers and
wits about it; and where I can, call also for the help of other men, more
experienced in the Divine Mystery of gaining and feeding souls, being ready
also to lend my best help to others as well, as being all fellow-workmen in the
same spiritual husbandry and building, though our lots lie in several quarters.

8. I desire ever to have a special care of laying the foundation aright, first
by constant catechizing of all, from very children to the eldest that will
admit it; misdoubting still the ignorance of the common sort, when I come to
visit them. And however they only call for comfort, yet to be most large in
urging those things, which they appear to be most defective in, as in the
knowledge of sin, and the nature of repentance, and even of faith it self.

9. I desire by all just means possible, to prevent all quarrels between me and
any other, and so all prejudices, as that which would much hinder my work: And
to be willing to redeem their good opinion with any thing which is my own, and
that I can well spare.

10. I desire to reserve my heat, my anger, to encounter sin; and yet so to
temper it with the meekness of wisdom, as it may appear I mean no hurt, but
altogether good to the sinner, and not to be wearied either out of my zeal or
meekness, either with the stupidity or fierceness of any.

11. I desire to acquaint my self so with the tempers and spirits of every one,
as I may speak most directly to their consciences, without any decyphering of
their persons; yet not to forbear the public reproof of any sin, because the
impudence of any person has made their guilt notorious.

12. I desire to account the commandment of not suffering sin to lie upon my
neighbor, (who is my brother) to lie principally upon me: and therefore if
public reproof of all, in the presence of the offender will not affect him; to
reckon a wise and particular reproof in private to be a debt of love I owe him,
and to defer the payment of it no longer than till the providence of God (by
some special act of giving or taking away somewhat of worth and esteem) has
made him fit to receive it. But especially not to let slip the season of
sickness or remorse for sin upon any other ground; because then he has both
more need of it, and it is like to do him most good.

13. I desire in all places, companies, and entercourses, to remember my
Calling. And not only to take heed that my example (or any one that depends
upon me) pull not down at any time, what my work is to build, or build what I
am to pull down; but also to know my self authorized, wherever I come, to
profess my self a Projector, an Architest for my heavenly Master: and therefore
not only to be ready to undertake the edification (satisfaction) of any soul
that calls for my help, but likewise where I shall neither take any other man's
work out of his hand; nor hinder that which is more properly mine own work; to
be forward and offer my self upon the least probability of doing good.

14. I desire to renew my Commission from my great Lord and Master, every time
I go about any of his work; by supplicating his grace to go forth and along
with me to the end: and to look with contentedness and patience of faith for my
reward from him alone: even the more, rather than the less, when being not
guilty in my self of any willing fault to disappoint it, I see not the work
prosper in my hands: because he proportions our reward according to our work,
which is endeavor; not success, which is his work: and we have wrought most
hard, toiled most many times, when we have least success, the want of it
greatly increasing our toil; besides that for the most part it is not merely
negative, but positive, through the opposition of those we would do good to,
but cannot; and this to endure is persecution, to which is promised a great
recompense of reward; but all only from his alone grace, who first works in us
mightily, to make us do and suffer all things for him; and then rewards us
mercifully and bountifully, through Jesus Christ. To whom therefore be all
service, and thanksgiving, and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
MEMORIALS OF Godliness and Christianity.

PART. II. CONTAINING 1. The Character of a Christian in Paradoxes and seeming
Contradictions. 2. A Proof or Character of visible Godliness. 3. Some general
Considerations to excite to watchfulness, and to shake off spiritual
drousiness. 4. Remedies against Carefulness. 5. The Soul of Fasting.

The Tenth Edition Corrected.

By Herbert Palmer, B. D. late Master of Queens Col. Camb.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Million at the Bible near White-Fryers in
Fleetstreet, 1670.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian Reader,
HEre is offered thee a second Part of Memorials of Godliness and Christianity:
Small indeed for bulk, but the more suitable for that to the title, and the
less burdensome to thee withal I must needs say, I meant thee somewhat more:
but whilst (in the midst of many Employments) I was getting it ready, a
strange hand was like to have robbed me of the greatest part of this, by
putting to the Press (unknown to me) an imperfect Copy of the Paradoxes. This
made me hasten to tender a true one, and to content my self for the present
with the Addition of the other lesser Pieces, which here accompany them. In
which, if thou find any spiritual savor, I shall be willing to own my self
thy Debtour for the remainder of my Thoughts of this kind, as God upon thy
Prayers, (which I must continually beg) shall vouchsafe to afford Leisure and
Assistance: Only entreating thee to remember, That as I count my self the more
engaged by every of these public Expressions, to a more exact walking in all
the ways of Godliness and Christianity; so wilt not thou be able to answer it
to God, if thou content thy self with commending any, or all of that which thou
read, and thy Heart and thy Life be not the better. Not Notions, but
Affections and Actions, are matters of true Honor and solid Comfort. So I
leave thee to the Lord, in whom I am ever,

Thine and the Churches Servant together Herbert Palmer.
July 25. 1645.
The Character of a Christian in Paradoxes and seeming Contradictions.
1. A Christian is one who believes things which his reason connot comprehend.

2. Who hopes for that which neither he, nor any man alive ever saw.

3. Who labors for that he knows he can never attain.

4. Yet in the issue, his Belief appears not to have been false. Hope makes him
not ashamed. Labor is not in vain.


5. He believes Three to be One, and One to be Three; A Father not to be elder
than his Son, and the Son to be equal with his Father, and one proceeding from
both to be fully equal to both.

6. He believes in one Nature three Persons, and in one Person two Natures.

7. He believes a Virgin to have been a Mother, and her Son to be her Maker.

8. He believes him to be born in time, who was from everlasting, and him to be
shut up in a narrow room, whom Heaven and Earth could never contain.

9. He believes him to have been a weak child carried in arms, who is the
Almighty, and him to have died, who only has life and immortality in himself.

10. He believes the God af all Grace, to have been angry with one who never
offended him: and the God that hates all sin, to be reconciled to himself,
though sinning con-continually, and never making, or being able to make him
satisfaction.

11. He believes the most just God to have punished a most innocent person, and
to have justified himself, though a most ungodly sinner.

12. He believes himself freely pardoned, and yet that a sufficient
Satisfaction is paid for him.

13. He believes himself to be precious in Gods sight, yet he loathes himself in
his own sight.

14. He dares not justify himself, even in those things wherein he knows no
fault in himself; yet he believes God accepts even those services, wherein
himself is able to find many faults.

15. He praises God for his Justice, and fears him for his mercies.

16. He is so ashamed, as he dares not open his mouth before God; yet comes
with boldness to God, and asks any thing he needs.

17. He is so humble as to acknowledge himself to deserve nothing but evil; yet
so confident, as to believe God means him all good.

18. He is one that fears always, and yet is bold as a Lion.

19. He is often sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: often complaining, yet
always giving of thanks.

20. He is most lowly minded, yet the greatest aspirer; most contented, yet
ever craving.

21. He bears a lofty spirit in a mean condition; and when he is aloft, thinks
meanly of himself.

22. He is rich in poverty, and poor in the midst of riches.

23. He believes all the world to be his, yet dares take nothing without
special leave.

24. He covenants with God for nothing, yet looks for the greatest reward.

25. He loses his life and gains by it, and even whiles he loses it, he saves
it.

26. He lives not to himself, yet of all others is most wise for himself.

27. He denies himself often, yet no man that most pleases himself, loves
himself so well.

28. He is the most reproached, and most honored.

29. He has the most afflictions and the most comforts.

30. The more injury his enemies do to him, the more advantage he gets by them.

31. The more he himself forsakes of worldly things, the more he enjoys of them.

32. He is most temperate of all men, yet fares most deliciously.

33. He lends and gives most freely, yet is the greater Usurer.

34. He is meek toward all men, yet inexorable by men.

35. He is the best child, brother, husband, friend, yet hates father, and
mother, and wife, and brethren, etc.

36. He loves all men as himself, yet hates some men with perfect hatred.

37. He desires to have more grace than any has in the world, yet he is truly
sorry when he sees any man have less than himself.

38. He knows no man after the flesh, yet gives to all men their due respects.

39. He knows, if he please men, he is not the servant of Christ, yet for
Christ's sake he pleases all men in all things.

40. He is a peacemaker, yet continually fighting, and an irreconcilable enemy.

41. He believes him to be worse than an Infidel that provides not for his
family, yet he himself lives and dies without care.

42. He is severe to his children, because he loves them; and being favorable
to his enemies, revenges himself upon them.

43. He accounts all his inferiors his fellows, yet stands strictly upon his
authority.

44. He believes the Angels to be more excellent creatures than himself, and
yet counts them his servants.

45. He believes he receives many good turns by their means, yet he never prays
their assistance, nor craves their prayers, nor offers them thanks, which yet
he does not disdain to do to the meanest Christian.

46. He believes himself a King, how mean soever he be, and how great soever he
be, that he is not too good* to be servant to the poorest Saint.

47. He is often in prison, yet always at liberty, and a freeman though a
servant.

48. He receives not honor from men, yet highly prizes a good name.

49. He believes God has bidden evey man that does him any good to do so; yet
he of any man is the most thankful to them that do ought for him.

50. He would lay down his life to save the soul of his enemy; yet will not
venture upon one sin to save his life that has saved his.

51. He swears to his own hinderance and changes not; yet knows, that his mouth
cannot tie him to sin.

52. He believes Christ to have no need of any thing he does, yet makes account
he relieves Christ in all his deeds of charity.

53. He knows he can do nothing of himself, yet labors to work out his own
salvation.

54. He confesses he can do nothing; yet as truly professes he can do all
things.

55. He knows that flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God: yet
believes he shall go to heaven body and soul.

56. He trembles at Gods Word, yet counts it sweeter to him than the honey and
the honey comb, and dearer than thousands of gold and silver.

57. He believes that God will never damn him; and yet he fears him for being
able to cast him into hell.

58. He knows he shall not be saved by his works, and yet does all the good
works he can, and believes he shall not be saved without them.

59. He knows Gods providence orders all things; yet is he so diligent in his
business, as if he were to cut out his own fortune.

60. He believes beforehand God has purposed what shall be, and that nothing
can make him alter his purpose: yet prays and endeavors as if he would force
God to satisfy him however.

61. He prays and labors for what he believes God means to give him, and the
more assured he is, the more earnest.

62. He prays for that he knows he shall not obtain, and yet gives not over.

63. He prays and labors for that, which he knows he may be no less happy
without.

64. He prays with all his heart not to be led into temptation, yet rejoices
when he is fallen into it.

65. He believes his prayers to be heard, even when they are denied, and gives
thanks for that which he prayed against.

66. He has within him the flesh and the spirit; yet is not a double-minded
man.

67. He is often led away captive by the law of sin, yet it never gets the
dominion over him.

68. He cannot sin, yet he can do nothing without sin.

69. He can do nothing against his will; yet he does what he would not.

70. He wavers and doubts, and yet obtains; he is often tossed and shaken, and
yet like Mount Zion.

71. He is a Serpent and a Dove, a Lamb and a Lion, a Reed and a Cedar.

72. He is sometimes so troubled, that he thinks nothing is true in Religion;
and yet if he did think so, he could not be at all troubled.

73. He thinks sometimes God has no mercy for him, and yet resolves to die in
the pursuit of it.

74. He believes like Abraham, in hope and against hope, and though he can
never answer Gods Logic, yet with the woman of Canaan, he hopes to prevail
with the rhetoric of importunity.

75. He wrestles with God and prevails; and though yielding himself unworthy
the least blessing he enjoyes already: yet Jacob-like, will not let God go
without a new blessing.

76. He sometimes thinks himself to have no grace at all; and yet how poor and
afflicted soever he be besides, he would not change conditions with the most
prosperous upon earth that is a manifest worldling.

77. He thinks sometimes the Ordinances of God do him no good at all, and yet
he would rather part with his life than be deprived of them.

78. He was born dead, and yet so, as it had been murder to have taken his
life away.

79. When life was first put into him, is commonly unknown; and with some, not
until they had learned to speak, and were even grown up to the stature of a
man; and with others, not till they were ready to drop into their graves for
age.

80. After he begins to live is ever dying; and though he have an eternal life
begun in him, yet he makes account he has a death to pass through.

81. He counts self-murder a most heinous sin, yet he is continually busied in
crucifying his flesh, and putting to death his earthly members.

82. He believes that his soul and body shall be as full of glory as theirs
that have more, and not more full than theirs that have less.

83. He lives invisibly to those that see him, and those that know him best, do
but guess at him; yet they somitimes see further into him, and judge more
truly of him than himself does.

84. The world did sometimes count him a Saint, when God counted him an
hypocrite; and after, when the world branded him for an hypocrite, God owned
him for a Saint.

85. In fine, his death makes not an end of him: his soul, which was created
for his body, and is not to be perfected without his body, is more happy when
it is separated from it, then it was all the while it was united to it: and his
body, though torn in pieces, burnt to ashes, ground to powder, turned into
rottenness, shall be no loser: His Advocate, his Surety, shall be his Judge;
his mortal part shall become immortal; and what was sown in corruption, shall
be raised in incorruption and glory; and his spiritual part, though it had a
beginning, shall have no end; and himself a finite creature, shall be possessed
of an infinite happiness. Amen.

A Character of visible Godliness.
A Godly man is one, who being not ignorant of the ways and Doctrine of God,
lives not only without scandal, but approves and practices the general Duties
of Christianity, and those that are special to his condition.

More particularly:

A godly man is one that loves the word in the power of it, and at least
despises it not in the plainness of it; that comes to the World not to censure
and cavil, but to be taught and ruled; that professes not to allow himself in
any known sin, but resolves and practices self-denial, so far as it is made
plain to him, that Christ denies his desires. He is one that loves those that
seem religious and conscionable, until they prove scandalous and be manifestly
discovered for Hypocrites, and then esteems never the worse of the Profession
it self, and of those others whom he knows no harm by. He is unwilling to
believe all of such, and though he see them faulty, does not straight condemn
them to be altogether void of sincerity. Mean time he is so far from rejoicing
at their miscarriages, that even particular scandals are amongst his greatest
griefs. But especially he is afraid to give any ill example himself, as knowing
himself made and redeemed to no other end, than that he should live to Gods
glory: Therefore also he professes and resolves to do what good he can in his
place; and particularly to have his family know. and fear God, and believe in
Christ. He is one that accounts sin worse than shame, or loss, or any other
misery; and resolves to suffer rather than offend. He esteems Godliness the
greatest gain, and contentment a necessary piece of godliness, and that honor,
pleasure, wealth, to be sufficient to contentment, which casts upon him, while
he first seeks his Kingdom and Righteousness.

And lastly, who has so much wisdom, as to take more thought how to redeem
time, than to pass it away, having somewhat setledly to do besides following
his pleasures, which he uses as his recreation, and makes not his business.

General Considerations to excite to Watchfulness, and to shake of spiritual
drousiness.
1. THe glorious and dreadful Majesty of God, with whom at all times we have
to do, who is a consuming fire, and therefore his service and obedience to him
is not to be slighted, but to be performed with watchfulness, reverence and
godly fear.

2. Our sins in number exceeding the hairs of our heads; in weight the measure
of the sand; The vileness of sin generally, and the unreasonable odiousness of
ones own sins, in many respects worse than any others we know.

3. The fearful curses and punishments due to sin (to our sins) on earth, and
torments inconceivable and eternal in hell.

4. The abominableness of sin, demonstrated specially in that nothing could
expiate it, but the blood and death of Christ, not only man, but God.

5. The infinite love of God and Christ to sinful mankind in those sufferings
of Christ for sin.

6. The certainty of damnation still, to those that carelessly despise or
wilfully abuse the grace of Christ to carnal security, or willing customary
sin.

7. The manifest expressions of Scripture, that multitudes, even of those that
live within the visible Church, shall yet go to Hell.

8. The Devils unwearied malice, violence, cunning; going up and down like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, unto whom they that watch not, must
needs become a prey.

9. The prodigious and desperate corruption that is in every ones heart ready
to betray us, even to the basest lust and most horrid wickedness.

10. The fearful frights of Conscience, that God may awaken us withal out of
our drowsy dreams.

11. The sharp and stinging scourges even in worldly respects, wherewith God
may rouse us out of our carnal security: and must and will, with one or other,
if other means will not prevail.

12. The wretched unthankfulness of despising his Commandments, or lazily
performing any service to him, whose mercies have been and are so abundant and
free toward us, as we have found them; and yet hope for infinitely more
hereafter.

13. The Watchfulness and diligence of worldly men, and their heat for the
Devil, and their own lusts.

14. The danger that may be to us, not only from worldly men, alluring or
opposing; but even from those who are godly, and may yet prove tempters and
snares to us, and so we never walk but in the midst of snares and temptations.

15. The certain shortness and uncertain continuance of our lives, subject to a
thousand casualties, and nothing to be done for God, or our selves after death.

16. The nobleness and excellency of our immortal souls, born to higher
employment and honor, than a brutish service of the body, or Paganish
pursuing of this present world.

17. The certainty of the hope whereunto they are called, who seek the Kingdom
of God above all other things.

18. The infinite glory of Heaven, and eternal happiness, there kept in store
for them that fight a good fight and finish their course, and keep the faith,
and love and watch for the appearance of Christ.

19. The exceeding greatness of the mighty power of God, working for and in
them that believe, and live by faith.

20. The exceeding great and precious promises of all kinds, even for comfort
in this life to them that love God, and walk uprightly, and forsake any thing
for Christ, That all things shall work together for good to them, and no good
thing shall be withholden from them; and for any thing they have forsaken, they
shall receive in this world, even in the midst of persecutions, an hundredfold
more, an eternal life in the world to come.

21. The experience of that sweet peace of conscience, and blessed
contentation, and spiritual rejoicing, even in the midst of Tribulations and
Persecutions, that is to be seen in many of the servants of God; and which all
profess to be certainly attainable, by those that watch and pray, and are
sober, and exercise their Faith and Grace.

A Remedy against Carefulness.
Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing.


1. CArefulness forbidden is taking overmuch thought, disquieting the mind,
rending the heart in pieces with doubts and fears. for worldly things good, to
be missed, lost.
ill, to befall, continue.



2. The causes are Doting too much upon the thing or comfort in danger,
Distrust of Men. Means. Gods blessing.



3. The Effects are diverse, and not the same in all: But it appears, --

1. When it provokes to use indirect means.

2. When the means which are used, though commonly sufficient, are not counted
sufficient.

3. When the thoughts are chiefly upon it first and last, contrary to the
express charge, Mat. 6.33.

4. When it breeds interruption in holy duties, Neglected. Untowardly done.


5. When it hinders from enjoying natural comforts.

6. When it makes unfit for ones calling.

7. When it hinders freedom of spirit, and makes unfit for civil society.

4. Hence the Reasons against it are many, showing the sinfullness of it, and
directing to Remedies against it.

1. It is an idolatrous sin; if we doted not too much on such a creature or
comfort, we could not be overcareful about it, See Ps. 73.25. compared with the
former part.

The Remedy is, to apply Gods All sufficiency, who can certainly make us happy
without that creature or comfort.

2. It is a Paganish sin, an Infidels sin, if we did believe Gods Providence,
Attributes and Promises, we could not be so out of quiet, Mat. 6.

The Remedy is, to lay to heart these Doctrines, as becomes a Christian.

3. It is an unthankful sin, we deserved Hell and escape that, and are promised
Heaven instead of it, are we not bound to refer other things to God?

The remedy is, to ponder well our sins, and Gods great mercy in Christ.

4. It is a fruitless sin, no man gets any thing by vexing himself, Gods will
shall stand.

The Remedy is, to weigh how great a piece of wisdom it is to make a virtue of
necessity.

5. It is a multiplying sin, it endangers to make one do any thing, to secure
themselves from what they fear.

The Remedy is, to consider the least sin worse than any evil, to a Christians
heart.

6. It is a pernicious sin, it provokes God often to cross us in the very
thing, even for our over-carefulness about it, disappointing hopes, or bringing
fears, according to our perplexed apprehensions, besides worse mischief, if one
obtain their desire.

The Remedy is, to consider the promises made to meekness, and the comforts of
a good Conscience.

7. It is a profane sin, hindering religious duties.

The Remedy is, to remember Gods service, the end of our life, and nothing
should hinder us in it.

8. It is an inhumane sin, it hurts 1. The Soul, in the forenamed neglect of
duties to God. 2. The Body, by hindering the enjoying of comforts.

The Remedy is, to love our selves wisely, and our whole selves rather than our
fancy in any thing, or than any one particular thing for our selves, how
seeming unnecessary soever.

9. It is an unsociable sin, and inhumane in respect of others, it makes unfit
for all converse, and so neglectful of friends, and even be discomforts to them.

The remedy is, to consider our selves not born for our selves only: others
afford us comfort, and we owe the like to them.

10. It is an unnecessary sin; we have vexation enough for each day, we need
not vex our selves with thought for to morrow.

The remedy is, to consider that we may die, before that we misdoubt comes: and
then (as we say) the thought is taken.

11. It is a self condemned sin: There are none but trust men in something or
other, as great as that they are now over-carefull about, or must do God with a
greater matter, the eternal estate of their souls.

The remedy is, to reason the like in one thing we do in another, and not
disparage God while we trust men.

12. It is a sin against experience, 1. Of the bruit and even senseless
creatures, God feeds the fowls, and clothes the grass. 2. Our own, is not the
life more than meat? and the body than raiment? specially the soul than either.

The Remedy is, to consider God our Father, who will not be kind or to a kite
than to a child, or prefer a flower before a son, nor withhold the less (being
good: and who is so mad as to say, I would have what God sees not good?) having
given the greater, Romans 8.32.

The Lord of Earth and Heaven, of Grace and Glory, teach us ever to love him
with Faith and thankfulness, that we may enjoy all good from him through Jesus
Christ, Amen.

The Soul of Fasting.
Nehem. 6.5, etc.
1. AN awful Regard and Reverence of the Glorious Majesty of the Great God;
with whom we have to do, by a through Apprehension of his infinite and
incomprehensible perfection, in all his Attributes, and of his absolute
Sovereignty, as Creator, Preserver, and Ruler of us and all things in the
world, v. 6.

2. Thankfulness for all the goodness of God vouchsafed to us, by a large
apprehension of all his manifold Favor, General to His Church, to our Nation,
Particular to Us and our Friends, Temporal, Spiritual; illustrated marvelously
by our deservings, not only of no good, but of extreme ill, ver. 7, etc.

3. Sorrow for our sins, and our Nations and forefathers sins, by a deep
apprehension of the cursed Nature of sin in general, and vileness of such sins
in particular: aggravated by all circumstances that may be* Specially by Gods
Mercies and Chastisements, verse. 16. etc.

4. Sense of our misery, Felt and Feared, all proceeding from GODS hand, from
his displeasure, provoked by our sins, and impossible to be avoided, but by his
Favor, which is not to be presumed upon, if we continue in our sins, ver. 32,
etc.

5. Faith is the Covenant, Truth, Goodness, and power of God, for all times and
purposes, ver 32.

6 A Covenant renewed with GOD of all observance and Fidelity, specially to
amend what we have acknowledged amiss in our selves, and professed sorrow for,
and fear of, before God or men, or both, ver. 39. and Chap. 10. throughout.

Directions about these.
1. IN the Word read or preached, those things are to be most carefully
observed, which may quicken and confirm any of these.

2. All these are to be presented in prayer, summarily in every solemn
supplication such a day, private or public: but the enlargements may be
varied, and one while more of one, and another while of another.

3. Beforehand it would be greatly helpful to have written by us: 1.
Amplifications upon Gods Attributes. 2. Catalogues of choicer mercies. 3.
Catalogues of sins. 4. Aggravations of sins.

4. The day is to be begun with those thoughts specially which relate to our
selves, though taking in others also.

5. And it is not to be ended without some secret, yet solemn review of the
souls behavior, from first to last: and an earnest laboring to fasten all the
good thoughts it has had upon it, and to reinforce the suit to God, to settle
them upon it firmly and lastingly.

The God of all Wisdom and Grace, teach us to practice and improve these
Remembrances to his Glory and our Eternal Good by Jesus Christ.
FINIS.
MEMORIALS OF Godliness and Christianity.

PART. III. A DAILY DIRECTION, OR BRIEF RULES for daily Conversation. AS Also a
Particular Direction for the LORD'S DAY.

Written by Herbert Palmer a little before his Death.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Million at the Bible near White-Fryers in
Fleetstreet, 1670.

TO THE Christian READER.
Christian Reader,
HEre is another parcel of thoughts for thee, [Some brief Rules for thy daily
conversation] Thou will perhaps say [They are strict, at least some of them.]
Rules should be so: Men's lives will be loose enough for all that But [some of
them (it may be thou think) are not of necessity] Think again sadly and
conscientiously, between God and thine own self: and thou may possibly be of
another mind. Looking God in the face, makes some things appear to be sins, and
some things to be duties, after a confident out-facing men, that it was
otherwise. But suppose they are not all of necessity: yet think once more,
whether there is not some wisdom in them, and an Advantage, if a man can bring
himsef to such a temper? And if they be but so much (as some of them are
offered thee, under no further notion) will thou deliberate, whether thou will
strive to be so wise, or not? and whether thou will endeavor to have thy mind
in the perfectest temper or not? I will pray for thee, through Gods grace, that
thou may profit by this, and all other Helps, who am still

Thine and the Churches Servant in Christ altogather Herbert Palmer.

A Daily Direction.
AWake with God, and lift up thy heart to him, in thanksgiving, and petition.

2. Lose no time unnecessarily, but rise as soon as thou can.

3. However keep thy bed, thy heart, undefiled with wicked thoughts.

4. Let not worldly matters take up thy mind, or words, unnecessarily at the
first of the day.

5. Squander not away precious time, in being too long in dressing thy body.

6. Defert not thy solemn prayers, upon any unwillingness, or slight pretense.

7. If thou foreseest any inevitable disturbance (as particularly abroad in
some places) pray rather than fail, in thy bed, before thou risest.

8. When thou find any unwillingness or indisposedness to pray, consider, I.
The Necessity of Prayer. 1. Gods Commandment. 2. Good is not else to be
expected, either 1. Not the thing desired. 2. Not the blessing.
3. Leave is to be asked to use Benefits. 4. Help special wanted; against 1.
Temptations dangerous to fight alone. 2. Snares, dangerous to travel alone.
5. Duties to be performed; we of our selves not having 1. Any heart to them.
2. Any skill for them. 3. Any strength in them.

II. The Privileges of prayer. 1. Esteemed, in friends and great men. 2.
Purchased by Christ's blood. 3. No man can hinder it. 4. No unfitness of time or
place. 5. To power out our whole heart, for self and friends. 6. Not
necessitated, to method, manner, proportion. 7. But speak as to a Father, or
Friend. 8. Of all life, heavenly employment, noblest exercise of soul. 9.
Special curse, not to be heard.
III. Promises of all kinds. 1. General and particular. 2. For good, and
against evil. 3. For our selves and others.
IV. Experiences, in Scripture, Story, Memory, of 1. Prayers answered. 2.
Comfort by praying. 3. Grace answerable to praying.



9. Awaken, as much as thou can possibly, thy spirit, that thou may pray,
with all 1. Reverence and apprehsion of the glorious Majesty, Persons,
Attributes of the Godhead. 2. Faith and holy confidence in Christ thy Mediator,
and in the promises general or particular. 3. Fervency, from a deep sense of
wants, weaknesses, importance of thy suites. 4. Humility, by reason of sin;
corruption, impotency. 5. Thankfusness, for mercies and promises, abundant,
all-sufficient. 6. Charity, for others welfare; the Church, the Magistrate,
the, Minister; thy friends, those that have begged thy prayers or have thy
promise to pray for them; and for the afflicted. 7. Care to put away the throng
of worldly thoughts before thou beginnest, lest they distract thy mind. 8.
Watchfulness, how thou praiest, or have prayed, never resting in the outward
work done, without thou feel some inward affection and fruit of thy prayers.


10. If it be possible, let the next thing be to read somewhat of Gods Word.

11. Ever begin, and end it, with lifting up thy heart to God for his blessing,
upon thy 1. Understanding, that thou may see his truth and will. 2. Memory,
that thou may retain, what thou understandest. 3. Affections, that thou may
1. Receive the Truth, in the love of it. 2. Be careful to practice it, without
delay.



12. Be not in have, but read to learn, that thou may be the wiser, holier,
happier, for that particular Word, and reading of it, therefore think of it a
while with all seriousness.

13. Usually read from the beginning of a book to the end.

14. Strive not to read much at once: yet in stories (unless called away
necessarily) break not off, till seen some issue of it.

15. Choose to read those Books and Chapters most frequently, that are most
easy to be understood, and most readily applied to practice; As the Psalms and
Epistles, specially the latter part of them.

16. Special difficulties, as soon as thou have time enquire of, from books,
friends Ministers especially.

17. If indispenssible interruption put thee from the usual time of prayer or
reading, take the next free time, with all diligence and watchfulness.

18. However do not dine, till thou have prayed solemnly alone, longer or
shorter: and read at least some portion of Scripture every day.

19. Unless on unavoidable necessity, be not absent from family-Prayers.

20. Quicken thy self to like zeal and faithfulness, as if thou were alone, and
call thy self to some account, for the Word then read.

21. Having attended upon God, address thy self to the business of the day.

22. Allot for extraordinry business, the fittest time, and then be diligent to
dispatch it.

23. Having a special calling or outward imploiment, do somewhat at it every
day (if possible) or take a strict account of thy self, why not.

24. Think thou do not well, if the bulk of thy time be not taken up in thy
special calling, from one end of the year to another.

25. Thy calling, consisting of diverse employments, look that one encroch not
upon the other. And prefer the most important for the time present, and for the
principal end.

26. Be watchful of thy diet, that thou neither eat nor drink out of season,
things hurtful, excessively, that so thou prejudice not thy self, by what was
given thee for good; and so be 1. Hindered in Gods services, or thy own
businesses. 2. Hurt, in thy mind, through temptations; in thy body, by
diseases, pains present or future.


27. Let not thy mind be earnestly bent, presently before, at, or too soon
after meals.

28. Yet take heed of the breaches of time, and interruption of thy business,
by meals, etc. that they put thee not too far out of the way. But have a care
to return again to thy employments, as soon as is convenient. And particularly,
if it may be, within an hour or less.

29. Once a day read over, and recollect in thy mind, these rules.

30. Whoever thou art look to thy thoughts, that they be, 1. Free from 1.
Wicked Atheism, and denials of Fundamental Truths. 2. Pride, Arrogance,
Self-Applause, though praised. 3. Lasciviousness, Covetousness, malice, envy,
matters of provocation. 4. Impatience, grudging, discontent. 5. Lightness and
^^ity, froth and emptiness.
2. Filled with apprehensions, of God, Christ, Eternity, thy Calling, the
Church; and thy own last account.


31. When thou come into company, make account thou treadest among snares,
which the Devil has set to take thee. Look to thy self first, and then to thy
company. 1. That thou be not the worse for them, but better for them. 2. That
others be the better specially not the worse any way, by thy speech, silence,
actions, forbearance.


32. Bridle thy tongue so with consideration, before thou speak, that thou
afterward wish not any thing unsaid, in reference to what may befall, temporally
or spiritually

33. Take heed of 1. All ungodly words. 1. Athestical. 2. Slighting or scorning
Religion, Devotion. 3. Taking Gods name in vain in the least. 4. Swearing
falsely, unnecessarily. 5. Mentioning God without Reverence. 6. Making jests of
Scripture-phrases. 7. Using them sportingly. 8. Repeating others oaths.
2. All slanderous words. 1. Untruths. 2. Truths spoken maliciously,
sportingly, unnecessarily, concerning others faults or imperfections. 3. Bitter
provoking jests. 4. Railing speeches, though provoked.
3. All scurrilous and lascivious talk, one of the worst signs of a rotten
filthy heart. 4. All kind of lies, notwithstanding any pretense. 5. All idle
and vain words, not profiting thy self or hearers. 6. All peremptory affirming
news, unless infallibly assured of it. 7. All words of heat and anger,
peremptory and provoking, in disputing, though persuaded, and even assured thou
art in the right, unless in matters fundamental for says or practice: yet even
then, let thy passion not be unbridled; as serving to gain the hearers. 8. In
thy promises to men (and much more in vows to God) be not overhasty till thou
have thoroughly weighed the possibility, and convenience, lest thou be either 1.
Ensnared in keeping of it. 2. Incur the blame of rash or false, in breaking it.
9. In any disputable Question be moderate in asserting or denying, lest an
unexpected Argument put thee to shame, by forcing thee to alter thy sentence,
or contradiction without reason. 10. Boast not thy self (neither speak much)
unnecessarily of any thing already done by thee, or of any ability, specially
spiritual, or any future action, or undertaking. 11. Yet deny not the grace of
God in thee, or toward thee for others, or by resolutions of faithfulness to
God or men.


34. Take a time (the first free season when thy mind is in any fitness) to
pray always solemnly be tween dinner and supper, and let nothing hinder thee
in it being at home, and neglect it not through unwillingness.

35. Wherever thou art, inure thy self to short, frequent and fervent
ejaculations to God, both of requests and thanksgivings, which will be a
blessed preservative to thy soul, and gain more blessing than thou can
imagine.

36. Particularly neglect not this upon any sentible failing of thine, even in
a sinful thought, or any unexpected accident or news of importance.

37. Give not any one (specially a stranger) power to undo thee, if he will be
false.

38. Have not many friends, nor count them so, till thou have good trial of
their faithfulness to God (being truly religious) and of their wisdom.

39. To no friend impart another friends secret, without leave.

40. And whenever thou tellest a secret, tell it as a secret, lest they take it
otherwise, and so reveal it.

41. Have now and then, that saying in thy mind (amici sunt fures temporis)
Friends are thieves of time.

42. Yet count the Communion of Saints, redeeming of time.

43. Remember that some time must be dedicated to preparation, to make way, 1.
For favor in others minds. 2. For introducing a discourse advantagiously; and
that sometimes it will seem lost, through disappointment of hope; which yet is
to be counted wisely and necessarily employed, and the benefit perhaps will
appear afterward.

44. Do nothing to another, which thou would not have done to thee or thine.

45. Do that to another, thou would have done to thy self or thine.

46. Be sure to take head of giving any scandal by thy behavior, better thy
hand or thy eye were cut off, etc.

47. Rejoice with them that rejoice (after the Apostles rule) and weep with
them that weep.

48. If they require thy company, in any of their recreations, be sure they be,
1. lawful, 2. reasonable, 3. moderate, 4. of good report, therefore forbear
games of lottery, gaming for gain, lest thou or thy company, be 1. impatient,
through loss, at least inwardly, 2. want what is so lavisht, 3. break into
quarrels or oaths. Remember Recreation is no man's occupation.

49. Let thy company (if thou can) be ever such as may either teach thee
somewhat, or learn something of thee.

50. Be sure thou admit not any wicked or profane man to be thy familiar.

51. Let not thy presence imbolden any in their sin.

52. Allot some time for Meditation, and that of some divine thing.

33. Particularly, each day, think of thy last, whether thou art ready for it,
which will not tarry for thee when it comes.

54. When thou hear any worthy saying, trust not to thy brittle memory with
it, but write it down, so have thou a double record of it

55. Willingly let no day pass without writing some good note, of the
Scripture, some Meditation etc. distinguishing the day.

56. Avoid study after Supper, unless on urgent occasions, and dedicate that
time to refresh thy self with the comfortable society of thy friends and
acquaintance.

57. Remember to break up company in time, lest sitting up late make thee
either sleep in the concluding duties, or lose time the next morning.

58. Be^wen Supper and going to bed, read again somewhat of the Word, after the
former prescripts, as near as thou can.

59. Sleep not till thou have examined thy self in all this, and in all thy
actions, the day past to fit thee for prayer, petitioning for pardon and grace,
etc. presenting thanks, as in the morning.

60. Count that day lost, wherein thou have not done and received some good,
specially spiritual.

61. Lay thy self down and sleep, as in Gods arms, commending thy soul to him;
and compose thy self to rest, with the thought of some promise or heavenly
thing.

62. Do every thing in the Name of Jesus Christ, looking for strength and
assistance in and through him, and presenting to him, with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, all honor and glory, obedience, love, trust, and reverence, for
ever, Amen.

Particular Directions for the LORDS DAY.
1. REmember it before it comes for thy self and family, that none of the
sacred time be lost, through worldly business occasioned by putting it off
carelessly, wilfully, or sleepiness, by too much tiring out the spirits
overnight, overwatching or overworking.

2. Count it a day of spiritual liberty, wherein thou and thine, may without
interruption converse with God, and benefit your souls.

3. Unless upon true necessity, make it not shorter than other days by late
rising, or early going to bed.

4. Rather, as much as thy body and spirit will give leave enlarge it, as a
delightful opportunity of Good, by rising earlier, and sitting up as long as
thou can.

5. Count the public Assemblies, the solemnest service of the day, and let no
pretense (ordinarily) hinder thee, or thine, from being present, from the first
(continuing to the last) both moring and afternoon.

6. Let all private and Family Duties, tend to fit thee for, or to improve the
pubilck.

7. Neglect not to take a through account of thy self, of every main parcel of
the Word, publicly read; namely of the several parts, one by one, the several
Psalms and Chapters, and learn somewhat from every one of them.

8. The better to do this, discourse with those that are willing to hear and
answer, or such as may not refuse (as thy Inferiors) concerning each of these;
this will help to remember, and quicken spiritual attention, of profitable
things to be learned, above that which one would imagine. We lose much benefit
of the Word, because we do not bend our minds to it.

9. As the mainest Rule of wisdom, in the ordering of time this day, to the
best advantage, bethink thy self overnight, or in the morning early (or both)
what the present frame and temper of thy mind is, and what thou want, that
thou may study for a remedy to supply, and watch what God will speak to thee
in his Word, or by his Minister about it, that day.

10. Pray that thou may be attentive to what specially concerns thee, and
particularly the matters so thought upon; and that without mistake, and
specially without repugnance of spirit.

11. Admit not, as much as lies in thee, any unnecessary worldly discourse, no
not at meals: rather than look most to it, as being the time of greatest danger
ordinarily.

12. Much less begin any worldly discourse, whether among other Christians, or
other persons.

13. Rather than squander away those precious hours, or even minutes upon the
world or vanity, if thou can with any convenience, retire thy self, and sit
alone in thy chamber.

14. By thy good will, admit not of any worldly thoughts being alone, or silent
in company.

15. But pray, read, meditate, go in to good company (if any be near) sleep
were better, if any need of it, than when God and thy conscience call for thy
thoughts (which are the preciousest thing thou have) to bestow them upon the
world or vanity

16. Neglect not thy usual personal devotions, but rather enlarge them.

17. Take special care to improve to the uttermost, the Word preached that day,
by prayer, discourse, meditation.

18. Take heed of the least excess in thy diet, that thy soul lose not of her
nourishment, by that means.

19. Yet afflict not thy body ordinarily by fasting or overspare diet, least
that also interrupt thee somewhat, besides that it suites not so properly with
a day of rejoicing, as this is.

20. Before thou go to rest, fail not to consider what this day thou have
gained or lost, that thou may give thanks to pray.

The God of all wisdom and peace teach us to know his will, and practice what
we know more and more to his glory, and our everlasting comfort, through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

