A PLEASANT CONFERENCE UPON THE OBSERVATOR, AND Heraclitus: TOGETHER With a
brief RELATION OF THE PRESENT POSTURE OF THE French Affairs.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones. MDCLXXXII.

A Pleasant Conference UPON THE OBSERVATOR and HERACLITVS.
ABout the time that the third Head of Cerberus had set the Watch for the other
two that were fallen asleep, in came a Spirit Booted and Spurred, and commanded
the Gates of the Infernal Palace to be opened: which was immediately done,
without a word of Pray Sir remember the Porter.

Who should this be, but one of Lucifers Emissaries, that he had sent into this
world to Eves-drop for Intelligence, to keep Company, to counterfeit sometimes
Tory, and sometimes Whigg, and make what Discoveries he could.

Lucifer had been Gaming most part of the night, and was very drowsy, when
they brought him word that such a one was attending below: but understanding
his business, he ordered him present admittance.

May it please your most Illustrious Highness, said Belfagor, for that was the
Name of the Plutonian Emissary, You sent me into the other world to make
Discoveries; and it was upon this ground, for that you believed your two
Brorhers, Jupiter and Neptune, had been injurious to you, in giving you the
worst share of the Universe, and therefore you were resolved upon new
pretensions, to make an Exchange or an Invasion, and not be confined any longer
to Shades or Tenebrosity. And to this purpose you sent me to discover the
Genius of your intended Subjects. Sir, take my advice, and stay where you are.
For as for your Brother Jupiter, I have made some inquiry after him, but find
him to be althogether worn out of date; so far from being Adored and
Worshipped, that you shall hardly hear him named, unless it be now and then in
a Thunder-thumping Tragedy. And for your Brother Neptune, it is said that the
French King has bought him out of all his Dominions, and intends to be Lord of
the whole Ocean that flows between both the Poles himself. And for the Earth, I
mean that part of the Universe where those Creatures called Mortals live, the
forementioned French King, no more dreaming of Mortality, than you of dying,
is resolved to make himself the Universal Monarch of it. To which purpose, he
daily goes on, vexing, tormenting, and incroaching upon his Neighbors, that no
body can live in quiet for him. No Leagues will hold him, no Faith will bind
him up; so that altough your most Serene Sootiness wel^ know how much you are
bound up, if you only Swear by Styx, yet is he so regardless of those things,
that i^ you mind him of his Treatie-Attestations, he presently shrugs up his
shoulders and laughs at ye, -- as much as to say, -- he knows better things. --
He buys Towns by wholesale, and I wish you yourself may be safe from his
Treasure.

Pluto. Let him be never so rich, and never so great a Ruffler, I think I am
able to match him both in number and wealth.


Belfagor. I grant it, Sir, you excel him in number, but then, alas, Sir, what
signify your Millions of Skeletons, shadows only of Men, that live merely upon
the Air, to encounter with so many thousands of well-disciplined Sa, Sa's,
whose bones are covered with hard flesh, and outwardly ^ortified with ^loaths
and Armor, within with Beef, Pudding, Strong-beer, and Canary, which they will
have if it be upon earth. -- Then for your wealth, Sir, -- It Is true, you may
make these Mortals, especially the most active, they will do even what you please
for your Money; but then again, they are so Quarrel-some, so Mutinous, so
Seditious, so Turbulent, so restless, that you who have reigned always in
peace, and in perfect Unity with your own Natural Subjects, and with so much aw
and Arbitrary Dominion over Foreigners, will never endure to be pestred,
harrased, worryed, hampered, and perplexed, by these humane Terrestrials, as
you must expect to be.


Pluto. But how if I can get in by Conquest?


Belfagor. Ah, Sir, I would not have you attempt it, for they will be too hard for
you in two things; the one side will out-pray ye, and the other will out-swear
ye; and then pray tell me, what will become of all your Millions? all the vast
Army, and all the numerous Captains that Miltons Paradise lost musters up for
ye, they will all do you not a pins worth of good.


Pluto. This seems somewhat strange, I thought I could have dealt well enough
with Mankind; I am sure I find the proude^t of 'em all tame enough here.


Belfagor. That Is nothing, Sir, when they are incarnate they are quite another
thing; and therefore if your Sootiness will not believe me, you had best go
incognito, and try your self. Nay, Sir, to tell you more, there is in one
little spot of the Terrestrial Globe, a place called Plotter^ Island, which you
may easily cover with one of your Princely Black Thumbs, where they are in the
strangest confusion imaginable; and all about a business that I am sure you
would never trouble your head with; much less would endure to have your rest
disturbed, your repose disordered, and your pleasures interrupted for it.


Pluto. Prithee what is that?


Belfagor. Religion, Sir, or, at least, that is the grand pretense.


Pluto. I believe that which you call Plotters Island, is Sicilie; for that
Island is monstrous hot, as they say, as having a continual burning Mountain in
it, fancied to be the vent of my Kitchen Chimney, and therefore it may be
rationally thought to have some more than ordinary influence upon the heads of
the people.


Belfagor. No, no, Sir, it is called Plotters Island, where all the Inhabitants
are under Disguises, Jealousies, Fears, and Misconstructions; one man calls his
Neighbor Whigg, and his Neighbor calls him Tory; another man calls his
Neighbor Fanatic, and his Neighbor calls him Tantivie-man.


Pluto. By the Mass, I never heard of such feat Names before.


Belfagor. No, Sir, I believe you did not; but it is come to that pass now, that
all the Goosequillers are got into the field, skirmishing continually, without
any thoughts of Winter Quarters.


Pluto. The Goosequillers, prithee what are those? who commands them?


Belfagor. Why, may it please your most Serene Sootiness, they are for the most
conversed with in the shapes of Men, but I rather look on them with a party
per pale prospect, half Devil, half Man. The great Generals of the Parties are,
General Observator, General Heraclitus, General Advice from Rome, with several
Brigadeers of lesser fame, as Col. Fetterlanio, etc.


Pluto. What sort of Weapons do they use?


Belfagor. Pamphlets* Sir: You may go into a Coffee-house, and see a Table of
an Acre long covered with nothing but Tobacco-pipes* and Pamphlets, and all the
se^ts full of Mort^^^ leaning upon their Elbowes, licking in Tobacco, Lies, and
Laced Coffee, and studying for Arguments to revile one another.


Pluto. How comes all this to pass?


Belfagor. By virtue of a certain Devilish Engine, Sir, of your own inventing,
called a Printing-press.


Pluto. Ay, but all this while these are only Tools; who are the Artists that
manage and handle these Tools?


Belfagor. Sir, the Inhabitants of the Island told me, those Artists were great
friends of yours; that is to say, the Pope, and certain Viperous Animals of his
fostering, called Priests and Jesuits.


Pluto. O hang 'em, they would embroyl my Kingdoms too, if they could; but thou
know what massy Bolts and Locks I have been forced to keep 'em under, ever
since I smelt 'em out, and what extraordinary corrections I give to keep them
low and quiet. Well, but what pranks had these fellows been playing in Plotters
Island?


Belfagor. Why, Sir, they have been playing the Devil with two sticks. They had
set up a most cruel and dangerous Plot to destroy the Prince of the Island, and
the greatest part of his best Subjects, which they call Heretics; but it being
in time discovered, the design seemed so execrable, so detestable, so
abominable, so pernicious and destructive to the very Being and Welfare of
Mankind, that the Pope, his Priests and Jesuits, have been laboring all the
ways imaginable to throw off the shame and ignominy of the thing from
themselves* and fix it upon the Heretics. To this purpose they laid down this
for a Maxim, That if the Prince of the Island were once set against that part
of his Subjects which they most dreaded, and by them lately called Whiggs, and
they provoked against the Government, he would not only be alienated from them,
but be in a manner compelled, for his own security, to join with them against
his new displayed Enemies. The design being thus laid, to imbitter the Prince
against the Subject, and the Subject against the Prince, the Pope and the
Jesuits embodyed themselves with the Tories, among whom credulity and heat of
the brains reign very powerfully, and made them believe strange stories and
Romances of the Whiggs, as if they were Machinating against Regal Government,
setting up Republics, building Castles in the Air for Garrisons, and lastly,
that they intended to have seized upon the Person of the King; Tales all as
false as improbable, and such as have ridiculously, it seems, suffered since by
the unsuccessful choice of the Witnesses and Proofs. Then the Observator and
Heraclitus were left loose to bawl out Forty One, Forty One, Oh, Forty One,
have a care of Forty One, beware of Forty One, Bow, wow, wow, wow, Forty One.
Don't you remember, Sir, what a dreadful noise our Dog Cerberus made one night,
when Theseus came Hectoring down hither, and broke your Highnesses
Palace-Windows?


Pluto. Very well, for which Theseus gave the Cur such a confounded palt, after
his manner, that his Tripple pate was forced to be noynted with butter and beer
for six Months after.


Belfagor. Well, Sir, even such a wicked noise do these two wide-mouthed
Melampus's make. And all this while the Tantivie-men spit in their Mouths,
collect silver sops for 'em among the rest of the Tribe; and when they have
reduced them into Aurum Potabile, present it ^or their farther encouragement.

Having by these ways endeavored to render the Subject suspected to the
Prince, their next game was to render the Prince odious to the Subject, by
advising him to recall his gracious Dispensation of severe Laws, and to cause
penalties to be put in execution for the enforcement of their Conscience, of
which the Whiggs are said to be extremely nice and tender. A thing which the
Whiggs lament very much, as knowing how little they vary in points of
Controversy from the Tories. And the better to color this design, they seized
and imprisoned several of the Whiggs, and were so fortunate to hang a poor
intruder; by which means they thought to have struck at the whole Party; but
the ruin being circumscribed to his only Microcosme, the Intreague was buried
with his Quarters.


Pluto. So, then you say the Jesuits are they, that set the Tories and Whiggs
together by the ears.


Belfagor. You have it right, Sir, and they still continue the fewd.


Pluto. All this while, good Belfagor what is a Tory? what is a Whigg? what are
these Tantivie-men, these Observators, and these Heraclitus?


Belfagor. May it please your most Serene Tenebrositie, When I first came to
hear of these uncooth Names, I was as much a gast as your Highness seems now to
be; I nere was so fraid i'my life, but that they had been some new inventions
of the men of Schemes, to send us trotting about the world upon their Fools
Errands; but long it was not ere they began to make Characters one of another,
or some body for them; and that puts us out of those fears, all which I
presently bought up, as well to inform my own ignorance, as your Highnesses
curiosity. The first I met with was that of a Tory.


Pluto. And where is it?


Belfagor. It Is here in my paw, I intend if your Sootiness will give me leave,
to read it.


Pluto. Do so.


Belfagor. A Tory is a Monster with an English Face, a French Heart, and an
Irish Conscience. A Creature of a large Forehead, prodigious Mouth, supple
Hams, and no Brains* The Country-mans Description of him, was both Rhyme and
Reason* Roary, Whorey, Sworey, Scorey, That Is a Tory; for Noise and De^^^chery,
Oaths and Beggary, are the Four Elements that compose him: His Arms are those
of Istacher, an Ass Cou^hant; and his Mark is a Red Ribbon in his Cap, to show,
That he belongs to the Scarlet Whore, by her Bloody Lvery; or else, you may
take it for a Wedding Favor, That whenever Popery and Tyranny shall make a
Match, he would fain be a Bride man. He seems descended from Esau, since he is
so ready to Truck away an Invalluable Birthright for a French Kick shaw, and a
Naus^ous Mess of Italian Pottage. Or if you will run his Pedigree higher, you
may call him a Noddite, one of the Race of Cain the Murderer, that would fain
be Persecuting his Brother, merely because he is more Righteous than himself.

Take our Tories in the State, and they are Caterpilers that Devour every green
thing in a flourishing Kingdom, and would Stab Liberty and Property to the
Heart, that they themselves like Beasts of Prey, might live wholly upon Sport
and Rapine, ^it only to be Subjects to Neb^chadnezzar, when bereaved of Humane
sense, he hearded with the Wild Asses of the Desert. Though they boast
themselves Englishmen, yet they act in all things as Antipodes to their Native
Country, and seem rather Bogg-trotters Transplanted, the Spawn of some
Redshanks, or the By-blows of the old lazy Lord-Danes, that once Domineered
over our Ancestors. They are a sort of Wild Boars, that would root out the
Constitution, and break the Balance of our happy Government; and render that
Despotick, which hitherto has been both Established and bounded by Law. Fauxes
in Masquerade, that with Dark-lanthorn Policies, would at once blow up the two
Bulwarks of our Freedom, Parliaments and Iuries; making the first only a
Parliament of Paris: and the latter, but mere Tools, to Echo back the pleasure
of a Judge. They are so certain, that Monarchy is Iure Divino, that they look
upon all people living under Aristocracies, or Democracies, to be in a state of
Damnation; and fancy, That the Grand Seignior, the Czar of Moscovy, and the
French King, dropped down from Heaven with Crowns on their Heads, and that all
their Subjects were born with Saddles on their backs. Your true Tory is as fond
of Slavery* as others are of Liberty, and will be at as much pains and charge
to obtain it; for he envies the happiness of Canvas Breeches and Wooden Shoes;
and extremely admires the Mercy of the Inquisition. He rails at Magna Charta,
as the Seed-plot of Sedition; swears, that it was first obtain^d by Rebellion,
and that all our Forefathers were Rogues and Fools, and did not understand
Prerogative. He wonders why people should squander away their time at the Inns
of Court, or what need there is either of the Common Law or the Statute-book,
since the King might at any time, with quicker dispatch declare his pleasure in
any Point or Controversy, and each Loyal Subject were bound to acquiesce, on
pain of Damnation. Yet after all, his boasted Loyalty extends no further than a
Drunken Health; he Roars and Swaggers, but does not Serve the King; he promises
Mountains, and by Lies and Misrepresentations, gives false Measures, but
performs nothing; nor is it the Cause, but the Crust that he Barks for.

Then in relation to the Church; Tory is either a Crab-Protestant, that crawls
backwards as fast as he can to Rome; or at best, but the Cats foot wherewith
the Romish Monkeys Claw the Protestant Religion till the Blood comes; one that
does their Drudgery, though he has not always the Wit to see it, and all the
Wages he must expect, is Polyphemus's C^rtesie, to be Devoured last. He is a
Flambeau kindled by the Jesuits, and flung in to make a Combustion amongst us.
Whilst we were Hunting down their Plot with a full Cry, they slipped in their
Deep mouth'd-Hound, who spending on a false Seent, diverted the Chase, and so
the Popish Puss squats safe in her Form; and now quitting the pursuit of the
Foxes, he begins to worry the Sheep. He pretends high for the Church of
England; but as he understands not her Doctrine, so he dishonours her by his
lewd Conversation. What a pretty pious Confession of Faith is it, to hear a
Bully Cry, God-Dam-Mee, I am of the Church of England, and all the
Presbyterians are Sons of Whores.) Indeed, the only proof both of his Religion
and Courage, is, that he swears most frequently by that Tremendous Name, at
which, lesser Devils Tremble, and his Christianity consists in Cursing all
those that he is pleased to call Phanaticks; and Phanaticks he calls all those,
that are not content to be either Papists or Atheists. His Tongue is always
tipped with Dam-mee, and Forty One; and so hot, (being set on Fire of Hell) that
he is fain to drink Healths, (sometimes to the Pope, and sometimes to the
Devil,) Sixty times an hour to quench it; and then belches out Huzza's as fast,
as Mount Strombulo does Fire and Brimstone.

Whilst he clamours at Dissenters for not coming to Church, he thinks it is
Canonical enough to sleep over the Lord's Day, to digest the Fumes of Saturdays
Debauch, or take a walk in Guild-hall-yard, peep in at the Preacher, and
presently retire to the Tavern for a whet to Dinner, or else to meet the Club
of Witty good-mockers by Fleet-ditch side, and Droll away the day in Blasphemy,
Ridiculing Religious Duties, or inventing Jack pudding Lies of some pretended
Nonconformists Preaching. If he be somewhat of a more serious Temper, he is as
very a superstitious Bigot, as any in the Papacy, he would rather have no
Preaching, than that the Surplice should be left off, and thinks his Child not
Christened, fit be not done with the sign of the Cross; he counts Opus operatum
sufficient, and if he have but been at Common Prayer, and made his Responses
loud enough to drown the Clark, and had the Parsons Blessing, his Task is done
and all is safe. Flesh on a Friday is more abomination to him, than his
Neighbors Bed, and he abhors more not to bow at the Syllables of the word
Jesus, than to swear by the Name of God.

He has got a New English Dictionary, framed by the Indefatigable skill of
Heraclitus, and the Observator, whereby the Traversties the most Loyal honest
sense into Blasphemy and Treason. Talk soberly of Religion, and he flaps you
over the face with Heresy, Schism, Fanaticism, and Faction, or roundly calls
you confounded Whigg, and so you are confuted. Urge never so modestly, Legal
Fundamental Rights, and mention Irregularities, though in a place appointed to
remedy them, he cries out Rebellion! Treason! you Depose the King! you Arraign
the Government, etc. Mention the Commons of England, and the general sense of
the Nation, and he exclaims, Dam the Mobile and your Appeals to the Rabble; and
yet at the same time Courts and Applauds Tag-Rag and Long-tail, the Cooks and
Chandlers of New-Sarum, and such other Worshipful Patriots, for declaring their
three halfpenny Judgments of the highest Affairs of State, in their Addresses.
And as for the two last Parliaments, every petty Chap-man or Apprentice-boy,
takes upon him to Censure the grave Proceedings of those Venerable Senates, as
malepartly as if they had been but a Company of Fiddlers.

Yet still he fears not God so much as a Parliament, but the reason why he
Blasphemes the one, and Rails at the other, is, because as he really believes
not a Future Judgment in the other world, so he puts far off the other (to
him) evil day in this, and hopes to escape the Justice of both by the Mediation
of Saint Noli prosequi.


Pluto. Well, what is the next? for I like this so well, I must hear all the
rest.


Belfagor. Why, Sir, the next is the Character of a Whigg, but a thing so
scurralously and weakly penned, that it cannot afford your Highness matter
enough for one smile; and therefore if you please, we'll hang that by on the
Jesuits file.


Pluto. Do so, but what is the next?


Belfagor. Why the Character of a Tantivie-man.


Pluto. Come read that then.


Belfagor. He is a jolly brisk young huff in Crape, Reperteeing, Railing,
Diolling, and Drinking; his Library besides Comedies and Novels, are Grotius on
the Canticles, his Votum propapacia, Ovid de act a Mandi, Cassander, Piece
Maimbourg, Sham History of Lutherism, and Bennets Spinoza, which you must know
he reads for Confutation and direction only. As for his Religion, it is an
Aristocracie, he can burlesque our little Discenting slaves at whom, while like
a true Spiritual Venetian, he opposes the Privileges of his Enthusiastic
Parliament, to the Royalties of Holy Daddy; and this under the specious
pretense of their Liberties and Immunities, of the Gallicane and other Iure
Divino Grandees, though he cannot for all that easily brook the Infallible
Cheat; yet should at this time of day go by the Elsabeth name of Antichrist.
He is a Man-Midwife, and has been for some years an Apprentice to Mother
Celliers, yet affects a singularity in the Mystery; he would deliver the
Monster with the heels foremost, all Systems in Theology he dislikes, as
savouring of Wittemberg and the Lake Lemaune, excepting this one concise and
pithy one of his own compiling, which as being a lover of the art of climbing,
he has made in a Climax or Ladder, fashion thus; No Christnings, no Salvation,
no Salvation, no Grace, no Grace, no Bishops, no Bishop, no Salvation; whence
as clear as day light, Damnation to all Geneva men. His Church is much to large
for a British-head; for of late it reaches from the Isles of Orcades, to the
Grand Seigniors Seraglio, and better fits the term of Fifth Monarchy Monsieur,
then of a Protestant English Prince. He has taken an Oath that his most Sacred
Majesty, (whom God for ever preserve from him and all false Traitors) is in all
causes and over all persons, in these his Dominions, supreme Head and
Governor; and yet would perfidiously advance into his place, a Juncto of
Foreign Mitre-men, wherein the very Pope if he will but for once disclaim
Arbitrary power, and give his word to be Civil, may preside in pontificalibus.
In a word, he is a servile Parasite, a proud Hector, the Cats foot to the
Jesuit, an underminer of Civil power, a Monopolizer of base Spirits, a
Disbeliever of Popish Plots, turns Faith into Policy, Religion into
Intreague, and Devotion into Hypocrasie, Banters Heaven, abuses the World, and
betrays his Country.


Pluto. Belfagor, thou art a Rogue, I never laughed so heartily before;
specious pretenses, and Bantring of Heaven, with a Rope to 'em. Well, the next.


Belfagor. Why, Sir, the next, for the sake of dearly beloved Brotherhood, have
so wrapped themselves up in one another, that I cannot read them distinctly.


Pluto. Why then let us have them as they are.


Belfagor. The Character of the Observator and Heraeclitus Ridens. The one is a
mere Fiddler in Dialogues, the other plays the Treble to his Base. They skin and
skarifie the Act of Oblivion, and teize about Forty One, till they loose it, to
get Twenty shillings a week. After all their deep Contemplations, and delving
in the Rubbish of the late times, the Observator keeps a great bustle in the
world, to prove there is as much pleasure in borrowing discourse, as in
stealing the affections of a young Lady against the consent of her Parents. He
is one that tugs at the Labor Oar of Mischief, to turn the head of Conscience
with his Tide. He and Heraclitus are the men, for whose sake College may be in
some measure pitied, for lying under the lash and sweet revenge of their
Nonsensical and inhumane Triumphs. The Observator is one that Strange le
thirsts and pants after Adoration in Coffee-houses, and is the very Adonis of
Sam's in Ludgate Street; where because he takes no Tobacco, he talks nothing
but smoke. He and Heraclitus have reason to shake hands, in regard their Tails
are so close tied together, like Samsons Foxes, to fire the Nation. Neither
Truth, Honesty, Reason, nor right Maxim of State do they consider, nor how to
temper the various mixtures in the variety of Opinions; suffering themselves to
be carried away with the stream of present Transactions, and forgetting the
rules of that profession, to which they both aspire, that there is Harmony in
Discord; which since it cannot be avoided, is to be well and artificially bound
and sweetened, not exasperated. It may be questioned whether the Observator and
Heraclitus may not more truly be said to be the Iack-puddings of the Nation,
that play the Fool during the Fair-time, for the private advantage of them that
set 'em at work; or the Ignes Fatui, that endeavor to lead the people astray
with their false lights, appearances of Reason only, and the evening-flashes
and dazlings of unpondred truth. They are the common Receptacles of
Contribution Drollery. Were every Man's Name to his Conceit, their Pamphlets
would look like the Roll of Benefactors in Paul's, the true experiment of the
Proverb, Tot homines, quot sententiae. It may be thought, that like Castor and
Pollux, they were hatched out of a Leda's Egg, while they make such havoc of
Goosequils, and act the parts of officious Ganders over the rest of the vulgar
flock: though it is not to be imagined, that the Capitol of the Commonweal
should ever be saved by their clamorous impertinences, yet they may be said to
be like Mongrels, that bark at Sowgelders. They are afraid of something by a
sympathetick Compunction, yet know not what to call it. Tory and Whigg are the
groundwork upon which they lay the Purle and Embroidery of their fictitious
contrivances. With these implements, and other sheepmarks of distinction, they
endeavor to raise a Civil War in every private Family, to break and dissolve
the harmless bonds of honest Society and Conversation, and Guelph and
Ghibelline the Nation into confusion. Sometimes they are so confident as to
name particular persons, and barbarously let loose the detested custom of the
Vetus Comoedia, so long ago exploded by the Civil Greeks, to worry the
Reputation of those that will not feed their humors. The Jesuit is now got a
the other side, and frisks it in his wanton conceits, like a fat Heifer in a rich
pasture; and chuckles again to see those that confounded his Real presence, and
other shams of his profane Idolatry, now reviling and tongue-persecuting
those that hope for the joys of Eternity by a better Sacrament.

It Is true, they are very merry, but still they play like Melancholy
Gamesters, the right hand against the left; so that it is no wonder they should
win all they throw at. Only sometimes they get a Rub from Ludgate Hill, and
then they cry, Hoop, here is work for another week. But as one passionate word
in scoulding draws on another, and the feud will never abate, while the heat
and Fury of the animosities is continued; therefore it were to be wished, that
care might be taken for the suppression of all those Goosequil Pickerers. They
are base and inconsiderate, more swayed by Pence, G^inies, and Irish
Consciences, than by true Loyalty or Reason. They make no distinction between
Dissenters out of Faction, and Dissenters out of pure and Immaculate
Consciences; but run tempestuously upon a most undoubted Body of the Protestant
Religion without exception. Masqueraded Champions, and it seems well paid for
their Tilting. They consider not, that though Reflections upon Sovereign Princes
are abominable, yet the sober and temperate discourse of Liberty was always
allowed.

Besides, they can never be said to write well, who are not able to justify
themselves to all the Inquisitions of the Government wherein they live;
therefore neither the Observator nor Hera^litus can be said to write well,
because the very noise of a Parliament terrifies them, more than the rattling of
Thunder did Caligula; it drives the one again to his Batavian Sanctuary, and
without blast founders the Sailing Vessel with all its Cargo.


Pluto. Why these are fine fellows indeed! Well, but how Belfagor did you find
these Characters to agree with the persons?


Belfagor. All the observation I could make was this, that they agreed well
enough with some, but very ill with others. They hit the humors of the vain
and looser sort of the one, and the more designing and turbulent of the other
party, but never touched the rest, who are of all the far greater number. So
that all this paperscuffling seemed to me, to be only to amuse the Vulgar and
the Ignorant, and to raise a general combustion in the Nation, to the end the
State-Salamanders might secure themselves in the flames. And for the Scriblers
themselves, those great Generals of so many Battalions of Wast-paper, I leave
to your Highnesses judgment, for I am sure it will one day come to that,
whether or no they would not write for your Sootiness upon occasion, being such
as only for the present farm out their extravagant fancies, and lowly surrender
themselves to be the Tools of Mischief and Disorder for a little immediate
gain; wherein they are yet so unsuccessful, as not to gain the least conquest
upon men of Reason or Discretion. Sir, did you ever hear of Forty One?


Pluto. Yes, and was my self a great actor too at that time.


Belfagor. And what does your Highness think of an old, cunning, weather-beaten
Statesman, that should go about to recover an Intreague in which he had once
lost himself, by the same measures, by the same beaten road, and by the same
trite and common artifices, still so fresh in memory, that every ordinary
Politician in power would easily know how to obviate.


Pluto. I should think him a fool, a mere fisher for Frogs, that thinks to
catch the Multitude again with a bait, which they had swallowed already, so
much to their prejudice.


Belfagor. Wherefore then so much noise with Forty One? the stale, over-worn,
threadbare pretenses of which, are now known to every Apprentice; which makes
me think, that the Whiggs, men of deep profound consideration, and that have
much to loose upon (...), must have newe^ studied and ^esined intreagues, if
any at all, than those of Forty One, or else it is impossible that they should
be guilty of those practices which are laid to their charge; from whence it is
as impossible they should ever dream for the least success, while there is but
two pennyworth of vigilance over 'em.

Besides, Sir, one thing more I observed in my Travels, that before the Grand
Plot, the Whiggs were accounted good Subjects, had all the Gracious Compliance,
Loyal hearts, and open Purses, that could be wished for; so* that all things
past seemed to be buried in the grave of oblivion. But no sooner was the Grand
Plot of your Hignesses Nephew the Pope discovered, but up starts Forty One in a
Winding Sheet, and made such a noise in the ^treets, that nothing could stand in
competition with it. Then it was that the Popish-landers, countenanced by some
of the greatest personages in Plotters-Island, like the Hare, that never makes
more doublings and turnings, than when she hears the full cry of fields ring
the peal of Death in her ears, finding the Whiggs in chase of their Plot, and
still tracing it upon the hot scent of fresh discovery, were resolved, if they
could, to spoil their noses, by strewing good store of pepper all along upon
the trail. To this purpose they set up one of their Minions to thwart the first
Discoverer, to contradict him, teaze him, vex him, discountenance, discourage
and render him fallacious, an Impostor, and consequently ridiculous to the
people. Nay, he was so venturous, though he durst not absolutely deny the Plot,
in the Infancy of its Discovery, as to fix it so for a time by his Libelling
Charms, that it seemed to hang in an airy doubt between Truth and Untruth; like
your Highnesses Brother Mahomets Tomb between Heaven and Earth. But his Magic
spells being broken by the Grand Senate of ^lotters Island, it rested again
upon the Terra firma of the so much upbraided discovery, and then the Maggot
was forced to creep into a Holland-Cheese, for fear of being brought to condign
punishment. For the Grand Senate of the Island, notwithstanding all his little
potions of Intoxication, found, and adjudged it to be a Plot, caressed the
Discoverers, and prosecuted the Criminals with that Noble Zeal, that your
Highness well knows the Harvest you have reaped thereby.


Pluto. Ah Belfagor, Belfagor, a poor Wheatsheaf to what I should have had,
could the design have been complicated, and I have had but my due!


Belfagor. I confess it, most Fuscous Lu^ifer; I have always had that
experience of your Justice, that you love not to be named with the Innocent.


Pluto. I cannot say so Belfagor, for the Nocent and Innocent are all one to
me. But I must needs say, when the Innocent come in shoals, I have a far worse
opinion of them that send, than of those that are sent, as verily believing
there must be most devilish foul play in the case.


Belfagor. Thus far, Sir, as I have hinted before, all the Treason, all the
Ignominy, all the Shame, all the Villainy of the design, all the blame that
your Highness could have had, had you been guilty of it your self, lay upon the
necks and shoulders of the Popish-landers. All which rendered them so abnoxious
all over the world, and made the burden so heavy, which otherwise they would
have made no more of, than of a Larks feather, that they resolved to rid
themselves of it* if it were possible to be done by the art of Jesuits; and I
was informed, that they had sent a most splendid Embassy of Thirty, thousand
Masses and Ora pro Nobis's, and that your Nephew the Pope had offered you the
Restitution of Purgatory, to give your assistance.


Pluto. It Is very true, Belfagor, what you say, and thereupon we advised with
our Chief Justice Rhadamanthus about it, who told us, they were a company of
Villains and Poltrons, and had so much craft and cunning already, that if we
lent them any more, we might chance to rue the fatal effects of our kindness;
and desired us to beware the sad example of our Father Saturn. Thereupon we
excused our selves, by telling 'em, that neither we nor our Royal Consort had
ever been bred to Church-Musick, and therefore had no kindness for it; and that
for their Exorcisms, we had now learnt more wit than to fear 'em.


Belfagor. Then I believe that it was upon the return of their Embassy, that
they set up to work for themselves, for presently they raised a hugeous high
Mountain which they called Forty One, out of the Mines of an old Garrison long
ago dismantled; from the top of which they daily discharged whole Volleys of
Invectives, Libels, Tales, Stories, Shams, Surmises, Calumnies, and several
other such kind of paper-Squibs against the Whiggs, to make a breach in the
Reputation of the whole Party. This was diligenrly carried on by their two
principal Generals of the Artillery, Don Observatore, and Don Heraclitus, who
have labored at the Battery day and night for some time. Truly, Sir, it
behoov'd the Papists so to do, for their necessities pressed hard upon 'em at
first, for the principal Provinces of Plotters Island, that is to say,
Tory-land, Whigg-land, and Tantivie-shire, were against 'em, and the chief
Governor of Iusticia was a Whigg-lander, by whose admirable Courage and
Conduct the Plotters were every where overthrown, defeated, and cut off; which
the Popish-landers seeing, resolved, if possible, to gain him to their side;
and at length so far prevailed, that for a good round sum he being very poor
and in debt, surrendered up the Garrison of Iusticia, into the hands of the
Popish-landers, by which means the Seer W. the Princess of Mealtubia, and
several other most Notorious Plotters made their escapes, to the incredible joy
and advantage of the whole party; who animated with this success, with a very
numerous army of specious pretenses, large promises, sly insinuations, cunning
persuasions, false Oaths, crafty protestations, and Masqueraded counterfeits,
soon reduced a great part of Tory-land under their subjection, and are now
endeavoring the utter ruin and devastation of Whigg-land, not doubting but to
undermine the whole Plot, and so blow it upon Whigg-land; to which purpose
these Tory-land Pamphleteers, like Moles, lie delving and digging unwarily in
the dark and obscure Mines of Jesuitism, little dreaming that the Mines will at
length fall upon 'emselves; nor considering that whatever Interests or
Prerogatives of Princes the Popish-landers may pretend, Perae il mondo, e ruina
il cielo, is their Motto; they care not though all the Interests and
Prerogatives of all the Princes in the world were utterly ranverst, so they may
uphold their own. And all this proceeds from the enormous pride of the Clergy,
who not enduring any Equals, much less Superiors, would have all the world
under their girdles. And thus having given your most Illustrious Sootiness the
best account I can, of the hazards and encumbrances you will meet with in
attempting upon the Globe of the Earth, I again advise you to keep your old
station, where you live at ease, with full Command and Dominion.


Pluto. Well, but is there no appearance of Reconciliation?


Belfagor. Truly, Sir, by what I observe, my opinion is, there is little
probability for it, so long as these Swarms of Pamphleteers are suffered. For
though Impeachments and Accusations upon just ground are always to be allowed
of, yet Calumnies are never to be endured among a Free people; they only
irritate, never chastize, but are often made use of to justify the effects of
provocation.


Pluto. Well then, if it be so, I Will keep where I am. But are they all so
sullen and morose? is there no mirth among 'em?


Belfagor. Why, truly Sir, I Will tell ye, not long since, I met with two merry
Relations, the one among the Tory-landers, the other among the Whigg-landers;
the first concerned a Whigg-lander, who had been poisoned with the blast of an
Irish Conscience, flown from the breath of a randan Tantivie-man; that among
the Whigg-landers concerned a certain stripling in the Law, son, as they said,
to the late Governor of the Fortress of Iustici^, who so publicly was
degraded for his Misdemeanors, and commonly called the Catholic Lawyer; I was
showed him once in the street in a Coach, hung about with loose rattling Irons,
which made a noise like little Bells, which made me look to see what Coaches
followed him; because I had observed, that the foremost of your Carriers Horses
always travail with a Collar of Bells about their necks; whether it were his
pride or his ambition, I cannot tell; however, he got a name by it, and is like
to keep it, for they call him Gingling Will; he pretends, they say, to be a
second Mercury for swiftness of heels, and swears he would have undertaken to
have kept pace with the Eagle that carried Ganymed to your Brother Jupiter.
Insomuch, that he had like to have got on of the best places in the
Penny-post-Office, had he not spoiled his preferment by the loss of a Match
which he made to run with a Tinker, both naked, for Three Guineys, all the
length of the Pall Mall in St. James's Park.


Pluto. And you say Gingling Will, as you call him, did run this Match.


Belfagor. Yes, a'nt like your Highness, and the Tinker won it too for the
Tinker put the sham upon him, by disguising another more nimble of foot to run
it for him.


Pluto. By Styx, when he comes into my clutches, I Will make him run't over
again, rather than I Will have a Catholic Councellor so baffled by a Tinker.


Belfagor. The same Relation informed me likewise, that as he was a great Racer
himself, so he thought it also convenient to keep a running Nag. To which
purpose when the Carter brought the Money to pay his Father for the surrender
of the Garrison of Iusticia, the young Squire knocks off the hoops of one of
the Firkins, crammed his pockets, and presently tript it away to the chief City
of Plotters ^^land; thither being come, his Money burning in his breeches, he
repaired for a Cooler to a Reverend old Matron, whom your Highness well knows,
as having been long famous for sin and iniquity, called Betty Buly. Oh, Sir, I
cannot pass her by without an Encomium; she has sent many a restless piece of
young Kid, and Barren Do to your Royal Consorts Table; and for Sauce, many a
small Barrel of Gentlemen's Pallats, and Tips of Noses, instead of champignions,
pickled in Decoctions of Guiacum and Sarsaperi^^a. To this good Lady the
virtuous Squire, full of his Fathers temptatation, Gold, goes and proffers her
five Guinies to procure him a Virgin Intact.


Pluto. Five Guineys, Belfagor? why, are Maidenheads so flush i'that place,
that the price is fallen so low? I have known the time when a Mortal could
hardly get one for love or money.


Belfagor. Oh, Sir, the case is altered now, for old Mother Shiptons Proph^sie
has almost ^rought it self about, with five or six Women to one man. But she
presently took the measure of his narrow Soul, and fitted him accordingly; for
instead of a Virgin, she brought him an old, cunnings, Gilting Whore, that
infused such a Pabylonish Contagion into him, that what between the Tinker and
the Harlot, he is unrecovered to this day, and finds enough to do to keep
himself upon his l^gs. And which was worse, the story^ breaking forth with the
Dis^^^per, it was carried to his Clyents the Imprisoned Lords, in the chief
Castle upon Pl^tters Island, which gave occasion to the Ladies in company, not
only to laugh heartily, but also to make Re^lections upon his dole^ul
condition. While one of them could not refrain from discovering the intended
gratitude of the whole part to the fools that serve them, saving, Though (...)
So that i^ is much to be (...), your Highness will loose your old acquaintance,
(...); it being the vogue of all Plotters Island, that she des^rv^s a
Canoni^ation* for b^ing thus instrumental in the Mor^ifi^^tion of this little
(...).


Pluto. I should have disowned the old I^de for my Scholar, as thou well know
she was, had she done otherwise. Al^s five pound and a Crown!


Belfagor. After this, Sir, and the swallowing of many a bitter Potion, and
many a long Quicksilver spit, the young Squire being a little recruited, would
needs go a swan-hopping after a young G^ntlewoman in the Country, whom under
the pretense of Matrimony he had formerly made love to, and obtained her
promise. But that not being his design, he inveigled her up to the Chief City
of the Island, where at a penurious Treat, he took occasion to drench her with
such an Opiate Dose, that the young Damsel fell into a sound sleep, in which
condition she was put to bed.


Plut^. By Styx; a most ^xcellent way to take a Maid^nhead napping. But now I
think on it, my Cousin Hecate played her beloved Endymion just such another
trick, and enjoyed him in a dream. But I Will tell thee Belfagor, there must be
great care taken of this Spark when he comes here; for he that will lie with a
Maid in a dead sleep, will not spare to lie with the dead themselves. And if my
Subjects should once get the trick on it, what a new generation of Devils should
we have? I tell thee the cons^quences of th^se things are evil.


Belfagor. Now, Sir, when the virtue of the Potion was spent, the unvirgined
Gentlewoman awaked; but when she ^ound how the Gingling Squire had used her,
grief and Despair threw her into those desperate fits, that brought a most
violent Fever upon her; and such a dis^raction seized her for the loss of her
Honor, that she could scarcely recover her former temper in Nine Months; at
the end of which she made a worse Discoverry, and there was no concealing the
business, for she was with Child. And now your Sootiness, according to your
wonted justice, expects to hear that Gingling Will should have made her amends
by Marrying her. But he took the more gentle and modish way; he only kept her
for a year or two; then that she might partake with him as well in his
adversity, as prosperity, for he gave her a bountiful proportion of those marks
of affection which he had received at Betty Buly's, and so dismissed her. And
these, Sir, are your Tory ways of courting and consummating their Amors. Then,
Sir, for their valor, they are very quarrelsome, especially upon the refusal
of a Health.


Pluto. Oh Belfagor, I have always observed, that Love and Honor go together.


Belfagor. No, not too much of Honor neither, for, may it please your
Highness, there are various tempers of men. Some valiant men cannot endure to
see a Cat; others will never stand ye with a Custard at the Swords point. And
thus it fares with our man o^ Honor; for he cannot endure an Oaken plant in a
Countrymans hand, called Dorathey, but if he sees it, sneaks into an Alley, and
if pursued, surrenders up his silver-hilted Sword to be pawned at discretion,
and redeem it if he think it worth his labor. But upon the refusal of a Health
he takes another course; for then he proceeds gradually, first he star^s ye
in the face, and cries Zounds, what not drink the D's Health? then he throws a
glass of Wine i'you^ face; and if this be not taken well, he takes up a glass
Bottle, beats a point of War upon your face, and presently breaks out two or
three of your Teeth. And, Sir, let me tell you, there is nothing so frequent as
these squabbles in Plotters Island; but they are very advantageous to your
Highnesses Quarter-ma^^er-generals my L. Satan, and my L. Beelzebub. As for
example, if any person denies to drink the D. de P. Health, presently another
cries Damme, what not drink the health? Damme* he shall drink it. So by the
refusal of one Health* they g^^ ten or twenty swinging assurances of Body and
Soul to ^ll up the^ Chinks of Hell. And all this proceeds from the A^imo^ties
which are daily blown up and cherished by the Pamphlet^^^s, those Tools of the
Jesuits, the Observator and Heraclitus.


Pluto. Well, here is enough concerning the Son; but what is now become of the
Father?


Belfagor. Your Highness means the Governor of the fortress of Justice.


Pluto. Yes, I do so.


Belfagor. Then I Am right: Why, Sir, no sooner had he surrendered up that
Fortress, (which he did for such a sum of money as would have tempted your
Highness your self,) but he was reentrusted to look after the utter demolishing
of that Fort; wherein he showed himself so active, as if he had had a Spleen
against that lovely Palace. Against the detectors of the Plot, no man more
malicious and inveterate; nay, a person could not appear to give Evidence
against a Popish-la^der, but 'twas presently, Whipstaff, Tip^^aff, take that
Rog^e, and cast him into the Dung^on of Banco prisoni^; which was no sooner
said but done. But to the ^opish-landers, no man more condescending, more soft,
patient, and more indulgent: to the Princes of Mealetubia, like Pyramus to
Thisbe; to the Baron of Astonaria, like Pylades to Orestes: And so a great part
of the Walls of the Fortress fell down: And doubtless it had been totally
ruined, had not the great Senate of Plotters Island opposed his p^oceedings. So
that he was at length sent into the Country with a thing called a Quietus e^t,
to enjoy what he has so bas^ly got, with the Curses of the Islanders.


Pluto. I hope he does not now lie quiet, and study R^p^ntance; 'sfoot he is a
fat gobbet, I would not miss him for any thing.


Belfagor. Yes, and deserves to be severely handled for certain Treasonable
words, which I am informed he spoke against your Highness, not long since.


Pluto. What words?


Belfagor. Why, Sir, he said, Dam me. --


Pluto. Well, what hurt in that?


Belfagor. None, Sir; but he said further, I demolished the (...) Colemannia in
spite of the Court; I delivered up the Fort of Wak^mannia in spite of the
City, and I will be Governou^ of the Fortr^s^ (...) Iusticia still, in spite
of the Devil.


Pluto. Bid our Attorney General take particular notice of this.


Belfagor. The sooner the better, Sir, for he begins to droop.


Pluto. How know you that?


Belfagor. By his own confession, Sir, for quoth he at the same time, Though I
am an Old fellow, and cannot drink, swear, fight and wh^re so well as formerly
I could, yet I have a Son that is Castor and ^ollux, two in one skin, that can
and shall do all together, to s^rve the (...)-landers. And then straining the
point a little fa^ther, he th^s proceeded: I have two Daughters also that shall
perform their parts at all th^se accomplishments of M^dish Galla^^ry.


Pluto. A my word Belfagor, this Governor understands trap; thou know it is
our way to have our Temp^a ions ready for a brisk opportunity. But if he don't
being himself into play, both his Sons and his Daughters too will be soon
forgot. For the Sons of such persons, ^ou know, like the Sons of Parsons,
seldom come to good, and their Daughters are as little, regarded after their
Fathers are laid aside, and are consequently dead either in their authority, or
dec^ased to us.


Belfagor. Oh, Sir, he has been endeavoring to glister in the world again. And
to that purpose, believing a Privy-Councellors place might have been bought,
offered some of his Popish-landers Gold for the Employment; but the impudent
and impolitick offer rendered him so despicable and unfit for so high a dignity
among Mortals, that they say ^he bit off both his Thumb-nails for madness that
he had committed such an Error.


Pluto. And well he might: he a Privy-Councellor* by Styx, that Prince would be
well served that makes use of him; he a Privy-Councellor! he a Wine-Porter.


Belfagor. Oh, Sir, but this is not all; I was informed by my Brother
Ramballat, who was either your Agent that conducted the person that carried the
Cordial Mass, or else Tempter-General to the Governor in your behalf, who was
present at a discourse that happened between a certain M^^sieur, Mons^^ur
Fran^^is, who was Agent in Plotters Island for the Sovereign of Francia, and
the Popish-landers. It was in the Summertime, when the decl^^ing Sun had
spread the ^erth with the long shades of several tall Elms, that were guarded
from the brousing Cattle with s^ndry sweet smelling brakes. Then I say it was,
when Monsi^ur Fr^n^^is, and the Governor of the Fortr^ss of Iu^ticia, wearied
with Travail, or else to rec^^ate their tired cogitations, had lain themselves
down undiscovered from each other; when on a sudden, Monsieur Francois
disburth^ning, his mind to himself, uttered these words: By my Arbitrary power
I^^e make him Absolute ere I return. Arbitrary? Absolute, quoth the Governor,
why that is the thing I have been driving at; and presently, spying Monsieur
Fran^^is, made up to him, and with his broadbrimm'd Hat, and bended brows,
accosted him. Who art thou, quoth Monsieur Fran^ois? Why, I am that late famous
Knight, the Governor of the Fortress of Iusticia. To which Monsieur Francois
replied, O, ho, Bon jour, bon jour, Monsieur le Governur. Pray speak English,
Sir, quoth the Governor, for I have burnt my Tongue already with learning to
speak French. Thereupon my Brother Ramballat was chosen to be Interpreter
between them, so they began and went on as follows.


Monsieur Francois. Why, man, what is the matter, are all things turned topsie
turvie?


Governor. So it seems, Monsieur: But did not you talk of Arbitrary, and
Absolute, just now?


Monsieur. Yes I did, and what then?


Governor. Why because I was an Aslertor of the disquieted Title to Plotters
Island, which the Whigglanders called Crime, and an Endeavoring to set up
Arbitrary and Absolute Power.


Monsieur. En bien, was that all your crime? that may be mine too for ought I
know; for such is my business, and I am not to stir, until it be effectually
done: But I have the Cash, the Cash, man, and that alone will do the work at
long run.


Governor. Cash, what Money?


Monsieur. Yes Money, the very Life and Nerves of Intrigue and Design, the very
weapon by which my Master has made all those great Conquests which he now
enjoys; and by which, if he lives but a few years longer, he will subdue the
whole World.


Governor. How unhappy have I been, that could not be sooner accquainted with
you; perhaps I might have been serviceable, and I Am sure his Coin would have
been acceptable enough to me.


Monsieur. No matter, it is not too late yet; though you are out of Power, yet
your advice may be serviceable, and i^ you will come in for your share at that,
I Will take care to procure you a Pension.


Governor. Agreed, Monsieur Francois, with all my heart, and bring my Son in
too; for of Idleness comes nothing, it is the moving hand gets the pence.


Monsieur. Your Son, I know him, he is a thick-s^ul'd, hotheaded, sottish
Clown, that can do us little good, unless it be to go now and then to
Coffee-houses, and Huff, Swear, Ram and Dam against the Whigglanders, and that
will scarce do neither, for they are grave, sober, serious, wary Sophisters,
that must be handled gently, by men of Parts, learned, affable, and obliging,
not by the heats and feuds of Ninnies and Fools.


Governor* However, you see my good will to your Cause. But what sort of
employment must mine be, and what my Pension?


Monsieur. Your employment must be at all, and your Pension according as you
deserve.


Governor. By my troth this is very hard, though 'twas once in my power to
have made my own terms, but now it seems I must, be forced to come in upon
yours.


Monsieur. Ay, and a good shift too. But in short I Will tell you the design,
provided you will be sworn to secrecy, and then you will be able to guess
whether or no you can do us any service.


Governor. It Is agreed, I am sworn, now go on.


M^nsieur. Why, I suppose you have heard of my Masters pretentions to the
Dukedom of Burgundy, Luxemburg, etc. All which is as good as his own al^eady;
you cannot but have heard likewise, that he has broke the Nimmeghen League by
the taking of Strasburgh, why now he ^esolves to fall upon Flanders, which he
has reason to think himself pretty secure of: For though we have been
seemingly asleep, under a Notion of Peace, yet our powerful Coin has been
moving in all parts of the World, but particularly in Flanders, where we have
made so many of the Spanish Officers our own, that whenever my Master pleases
to draw his Sword. --


Governor. Draw his Sword, why must there be fighting again?


M^nsieur. Yes, a little for the color of the thing.


Governor. Your Master is the devil of a man, he Conquers more in the times of
Peace, than all the European Princes besides can do, by the greatest face of
War they are able to make.


Monsieur. And therefore he is so much the more to be commended.


Governor. No, pardon me for that, Sir, pray where are the brave and
Heroe-like Feats of War? I find nothing but what is done by ^^eachery, and
Princes gul'd out of their Countries under the Notion of Peace; which sort of
Actions among Princes and Kings, are of all others most base and mean.


Monsieur. But if you prate at this rate, Monsieur le Governor, ^are well, for
I cannot endure. --


Governor. Nay, hold Sir, if you will not hear what I can say against, as well
as for, the Interest of your Master, how can you think that I shall understand
my business, or ever be able to serve him?


Monsieur. That Is true.


Governor. Then pray go on, but you must give me leave to interrupt you
sometimes.


Monsieur. Why, when we are once in possession of Flanders, you know what
Inroads and other great advantages we have upon the United Provinces, so that
they shall be constrained for their own safety, either to put themselves under
my Masters protection, or else be liable to have their whole Country Marched
over when frozen, and burnt, or set under water and ruined in a short time.


Governor. What then? what have I to do with all this? you know that I am an
old ^ellow, and cannot go abroad.


^onsieur. I thought you a more judicious man, that is not required of you, you
must hear this and a great deal more, or else you will never understand any thing.
This is the Scheme of my Masters Affairs all over the world, and will you not
hear it?


Governor. Yes, yes, pray go on, Sir.


Monsieur. Why, when we are secured from the danger of Holland, have taken in
Savona, Geneva, and some other as considerable Garrisons in those parts, which
my Master has now entitled himself to, by taking in Casal, when he has
procured his Son to be Crowned King of the Romans, the thing he has so long
desired, and either secured his Alliances with the Dane, Swede, Brandenburgh,
and some other of the Palatinate Princes, or put them into a state of
N^utrality: When he shall have brought the Malcontents of Hungaria under the
protection of the Turk, and secured him by an Offensive and Defensive League,
by that time my Master hopes his Interest here may be so considerably
increased, that it may be worth while to bring a considerable Fleet of men of
War into the narrow Seas, to block up the Mouth of the River of Thames, and
turn the whole Trade into Holland, the East Country, or ^lsewhere, and so
having sufficiently weakened you, at once to pour into the bowels of your
Country an Army of Eighty or a hundred thousand men.


Governor. But if your Master do all this, what occasion is there for such an
interest to be made here, as you seem to desire?


Monsieur. Oh, very material, for my Master never strikes till he be secured
every way, and therefore a (...) well-insinuated interest here, would be of
great moment at such a juncto, when my Master should Invade you; and in order
thereunto, I am sent over to promote a right understanding amongst all our
Friends, and to see that such as can be serviceable may have Pensions settled
upon 'em. But as for those that only pretend, and do us no service, as there
are many such, they must even pack off; for my Master has spent vast sums of
Money about this Affair already, and resolves to be bubbl'd out of no more.


Governor. Why now you're come to the point: But how are those Pensions to be
paid? have you a Fund here?


Monsieur. Yes, and have had one for several years past.


Governor. Well then, pray tell me wherein I can contribute to the advancing
your Masters Interest here, how the posture of your Affairs stands, and who are
your principal Friends. Unless I know this, I can do you but little service. I
find you are no stranger to my Affairs; and therefore you well knowing how
much I have been exposed already, I hope you will allow me instruments to work
at a distance with.


Monsieur. We expect from you nothing so much as Advice in points of Law, and
in which we must be concerned sometimes. As for our Interest here, it is totally
wrapped up in the-so-much-disputed Succession; and what that does, gives life
and being to our designs. The immediate posture of our Affairs, seems to be
very secure, nothing having more largely contributed thereto, than the late
Transactions in Scotland; which to our best view has brought all things to a
Crisis: so that all depends now upon a Senate here, that may be as fit for our
purpose as that in Scotland has been.


Governor. And how to procure that, is the great thing of all.


Monsieur. You're in the right on it, Monsieur le Governor, and that I believe
will be your Task; which if you can but obtain, will not only give you the
whip-hand of all your Whigland Antagonists, but make your name great and famous
to Posterity: for the time is coming, according to the common Proverb in
France, Un Dieu, un Roy, un Religion, over all the World; and if you can
conttribue any thing to this, happy will be the hour you were born in.


Governor. I Will do what I can. But I did desire to know your Masters principal
Friends that are concerned in this great Affair.


Monsieur. All that will follow of course by and by.


Governor. Well then, what is it you would expect from a Senate here, if it
were possible to get one for your Masters purpose?


Monsieur. Oh, I Will tell you. We should be modest enough: for all our desire at
present is, only to procure a Bill for fixing the Succession on D. de P.
another for Liberty of Conscience, or Toleration as some term it; a third, an
Act of Oblivion or Indemnity; to make room for which, we are endeavoring to
render the Whig-landers as criminal to the Senate, as the (...) have been^ and
fourth, to prohibit all our Country-Commodities.


Governor. As for the three first, I understand 'em well enough; but what can
you get by the last?


Monsieur. Why if a general Prohibition should pass upon all ou^ Country-goods,
and my Master have at the same time the command of the Sea^, it would be an
excellent color to block up your River, as I told you before, and turn your
Trade another way; nay, it might be a Shooi^g-horn to draw on a War between the
two Crowns.


Governor. But how do you think we shall be able to bring this matter to pass,
so as to have a Senate for our purpose?


Monsieur. Oh, for that I Will tell you, Monsieur le Governor, you have many
Drinking Corporations; and some of 'em being well ^ly'd with good Beef,
Bag-pudding, Wine, Beer, Brandy, and Tobacco, cannot fail for some of our
Friends, more especially if we take but the least care to make the more
mercenary part of 'em ours. We are no niggards of our Money in those cases.
This being done according to our usual way of doing business, warily, will so
enhance the Expenses of the Competitors, that i^ a Senate be called but once in
every year, according to our expectation, we shall so win upon the Multitude by
our Generosity, that it will be impossible to fail of carrying all before us.


Governor. And then what fine sport will it be to find the Electors swindg'd
off by Laws of their own making and consent^


Monsieur. Nay, that is not all; for we have this advantage besides; There are
many Gentlemen who serve for such Drinking Corporations, whose Estates are not
worth above five of six hundred pounds per Annum, and out of that they have
great Families to maintain; so that the spending of a years Rent (as some of
'em must do, if we take any care) once a year about their Elections, for four
or five years together, will so tire 'em, that they shall be glad to lay down
the Cudgels.


Governor. In that, I believe you're right, Sir: but perhaps all of 'em may
not quit the point so.


Monsieur. No matter: As for those that will not, they must be accoasted with
great Offers and Advantages, and some considerable Pensions for the time
present; and these Offers with Necessities, are great Temptations.


Governor. I know it full well.


Monsieur. And that person who has but five hundred pounds per Annum, and has
been forced to spend it all about his Election, perhaps may be glad to snap at
a Crust of 1000 l. per Annum, either to decline the thing, or else to stand
bound by promise to serve our turn, and have all his Election-charges born
besides.


Governor. Aye sure, a man would think so; but how long shall such a Pension
be made to continue payable?


Monsieur. Till the Senate have done our business.


Governor. No longer?


Monsieur. No longer, no: Why do you think, Monsie^r le Governor, that my
Master intends to keep 'em in pay as long as they live?


Governor. Yes, and reason good too, I think, where a man must hazard his All
to serve him.


Monsieur. Perhaps some few may be so paid, as your self, and, etc. but my life
for yours, my Master knows better, than to continue his Bribes to all of 'em:
He loves the Treason, but hates the Traitor after he has served him; as his
usage to the Governor of Messina does demonstrate.


Governor. What a fine condition had our last Pensionary- Senate then been in,
according to this account! But, Sir, do you think that any Gentleman will be
prevailed with to betray his King and Country, his Life and Fortune, his
Religion, his Liberty and Property, for a Song?


Monsieur. Yes, believe it, yes: for you your self have made an observation on
the late Pensionary- Senate, and that is true enough: for those Pensioners would
have done all that, and a great deal more, and yet they were very honest
Gentlemen.


Governor. Gentlemen, do you call 'em! what and so qualified! Pray where is
their Honor?


Monsieur. Pish; that you of all men living should ask such a question! Why
Honor's laid aside then: for such a man must have no Fortune, no Religion, no
Honesty, no value for his own Life; and such Qualifications as these, goes far
in our business.


Governor. You may expect from 'em long enough, I doubt, before you will find
your business done by such men in these parts: Perhaps more Northernly such a
thing might take; but here --


Monsieur. Why now I find you are totally against me.


Governor. No, no, Sir; it is only my unhappiness, that I cannot be rightly,
understood; I only make Objections for my own satisfaction: I am yours fast
enough; but you must allow me to scruple Niceties sometimes*


Monsieur. Any reasonable thing, for your better information, is allowable.


Governor. Why then suppose the Pretensions of your Maste^ (which you told me
of just now) to Luxemburg, Burgundy etc. should prove a Fallacy, his interest
in Flanders thrown out of doors* and by that means be put by those Inroads and
great Advantages which he expects to have into the United, Provinces: Suppose
they should have no regard to, but rather slight his Protection: Suppose he
should, instead of taking in Savona, Genoa, and those other considerable places
in them parts, which he now seems to have such a vigilant eye upon, and
pretends such great right to, meet the Lati^ Princes united, and in a
considerable posture of defense, ready to oppose him: And suppose the Dane,
Swede, Brandenburg, etc. should Ally with the Emperor, the King of Spain, the
States General, etc. And suppose you find the Malcontents of Hungaria
reconciled to, and under the protection of the Emperor. What would his
invading of England be worth then?


Monsieur. O fie, Monsieur le Governor, you talk at ^ strange rate now, and of
such impossibilities, --


Governor. Why suppose the Hollanders, should send out a Fleet of Men of War,
some to examine your Masters power concerning the Mountain which he is raising
in the Sea before Dunkirk; others to batter down the Castle which he is
building in the Air at Marselles, and to burn the Ships both there and at
Tholose?


Monsieur. These are more improbable, and but your own wandering surmises,
without the least ground. ^ut allowing all those Alliances, and much more, yet
if they have not England in with 'em, we remain still s^cure.


Governor. How so?


Monsieur. By our League; which I am of opinion they will not adventure to
break. Then as for the Emperor, though he should in heat strike up an
Agreement with the Malcontents, still we can call the Turk into his
Territories, as we use to do.


Governor. Why, has your Master such an interest in the Turk?


Monsieur. Yes, yes, an entire League: Did you never hear of that?


Governor. Surely the Devil is in him. Well, go on, pray, Sir.


Monsieur. Why the Turk will be able enough to divert the Emperor, having our
Country to friend for all manner of Provisions for War; and as for those his
Allies* my Master will undertake himself. As for the Latin Princes, have we not
the Assistance of our Holy Father the Pope, when my Master pleases to require
it? and^s not Casal our own? and are not the Latins most grievously vexed with
the Plague? and is it not known to all the World, how various and different
their interests are, like the Princes Palatine? Therefore I say, all these
things well considered, any reasonable Politician would think that an Army of
20000 Horse and Foot that are experienced, and well disciplined men, some for
burning, others for pillage and plundring, being in the very bowels of an
Enemies Country, should in a short time make such havoc, and bring such an awe
upon the spirits of the people, that they should be glad to take a Protection,
or a Peace upon any terms.


Governor. Why, but still there is the Spaniard, and --


Monsieur. The Spaniard, all the world knows his poverty, and how unfit he is
to d^fend either by Sea or Land; and then his late Match with Madam, and some
other as prevailing Checks, which his Necessities make him liable to, will
divert him another way. But notwithstanding all that, let him strike up his
Alliance with the Hollander, Dane, Swede, etc. which before they can bring to
perfection, my Master will have fetched in Flanders in spite of their teeth.


Governor. Nevertheless, I doubt your Master has licked a Bur into the Throat
of his Policks, by having to do with so much Potency at once, whose whole
Countries are at stake. And again, have they not at least two Millions of
Friends (the Hugonots) in the very heart of your Masters Country; besides vast
stores of Men, Money, Shipping, and all other Necessaries for War? Pray, Sir,
do you but state this to any reasonable Politician, and I Will undertake he shall
tell you, Your Masters Affairs stand but in a bad posture; and nothing less
than, his total Ruin can follow, if England be prevailed with to ally.


Monsieur. Pish, why that can never be done.


Governor. No truly, I fear it very much: for I Am sure if they do but consult
Policy and their common Safe^y, it must bring 'em in, more especially at such a
time as this is, when the greatness of your Master threatens all the World with
nothing but Vassalage and Destruction.


Monsieur. Policy! Why pray when do you find Englishmen consulting of
Politics, till it be upon the matter too late, or some great trouble or
misfortune threaten them? But besides, if they should enter upon such Consults,
perhaps it is now too late: for D. de P. has so much gained the ascenda^r, that
if he please, there is but few things can miss his party.


Governor. That Is in the North only: but take my word for it, the Whiglanders
are too numerous and stubborn, to be swayed by his interest, which runs so
counter to their being.


Monsieur. However, his interest in the North joined to that which is here, and
the Irish joined to both those, will do the Trick still, if well managed.


Governor. Why I hope you don't intend all this during the Kings Life?


Monsieur. Yes but I do though, if my Master should have occasion to invade
England, as he had to take in Strasburg: But if not, D. de P. does the thing
himself of course, if he survive. And as for your Observation just now, that my
Master has two Millions of Hugonots in the heart of his Country, I object
against that as not true: for above the half of them are run away into other
Countries to shun the Persecution, as they term it. And as for those which
remain behind, my Master is taking care they shall do him no hurt. But when I
have said all this, and much more, how do you know but D. de P. has as great a
number of Dark-lanthorn Roman Catholics here in the hearts of these Kingdoms?


Governor. Truly all I can say, if it be so, is bad enough; for according to
that account, whenever your Master pleases to invade us, the Whiglanders, and
Torylanders too, may have their Throats very decently cut by their own
Countrymen. But you were saying, more than half the Hugonots were ran away; and
as for the rest, your Master intends to take care they shall do him no hurt:
pray what does he intend to do with 'em?


Monsieur. Burn 'em, cut their Throats by way of Massacre, as they call it;
it is all for the good of the Catholic cause, man.


Governor. Oh, Sir, it is a bad cause which must be served by inu^dations of
Blood; and your Master must be a Devil incarnate, that can endure to wallow in
the Blood of so many innocent Subjects. For my part, ^ cannot understand any
reasonable excuse that can be made for him; or why so many hundred thousands of
Souls should be made a Sacrifice to his insatiate Tyranny.


Monsieur. You Will never leave, Monsieur le Governor, till you spoil all; you
are very much mistaken: it is sore against the will and Conscience of my Master,
that such cruel Edicts should be published against the Hugonots, but --


Governor. How? sore against his Conscience? that is still worse, why does he
know it to be so, and yet persist? pray who p^ts him upon it then?


Mons^eur. Why the Jesuits, to be revenged for the persecution which has been
here against the Roman Catholics.


Governor. Say ye so? Blood! Revenge! by the Jesuits! and does their Religion
teach 'em that?


Monsieur. Now you come with your Querks and Queries again; why you know it
does, as well as I do; and that the thing which they call Religion, is a
constitution Politic only of their own, which desires and delights in having
the ascendant over, and influencing all the Kings and Princes in the world.


Governor. Why our Savior Christ taught no such Doctrine, and yet they
pretend to be his Followers, and assume the Name of Jesus; but do they
influence your Master?


Monsieur. Yes, and he moves now, and has done so ever since the death of
Mazarine, that is, only by the wheel of their Politics. They are, and have
been a considerable time, persuading of my Master to quarrel with the Pope.


Governor. What will they get by that?


Monsieur. Why they have had a great itching at the Chair* ever* Ignatius
Loyola's time; and because they cannot come to it regularly, they hope to
prevail with my Master to set up a Patriarc^ate in his own Country, and to
choose the Patriarch out of their Society; but he sees into the bottom of this
design, and will take better measures than to give them the upper hand of him,
as they will be sure to have, should he comply with 'em in that Affair.


Governor. How? why is this the design? this clearly alters the Popes
Ecclesiastical Government, and sets up a new Model. These men's Politics will
not only destroy both your Master and themselves, but all that have to do with
'em. For according to their Morals, no Prince in the world can ever be safe
that corresponds with 'em.


Monsieur. No, no, now you're as much out again the the other ways* pray let us
hold to our business.


Governor. Then pray satisfy me in this point; if England should break the
Leagne with your Master, and Ally with Holland, etc.


Monsieur. I Will tell ye, we have a reserve for that; for if we find England
that way inclined, we have those which will u^dertake upon forfeiture of their
Heads, to throw a bone between them, and soon set them together by the ears.


Governor. How, what that way too? that would be fine work indeed, and i'^^
Conscience feazable enough!


Monsieur. It Is very certain, 'twill be done if we find our League with England
strained; and I Will engage they shall be continued so too, till my Masters
work's done.


Governor. How, will you engage for the continuance of a War? how can that be?


Monsieur. Why there is a certain Bannocklander, who is said to have engaged
himself in the most sacred ties imaginable to serve my Master; and we are well
assured of his care about Officers, and State-Ministers, so that in a short
time, --


Governor. In a short time, the Turk and your Master will subdue the whole
world, and divide it between 'emselves.


Monsieur. No, no, that is your mistake again.


Governor. How then?


Monsieur. Why my Master will have all or none: for though he may be
constrained to use the Turk, yet you may be sure he will give him Polyphemus's
Law, devour him last, for he hates Compet^tors.


Governor. But allowing a War between England and Holland, and all your
Masters designs to take effect upon that, so as to give him the Conquest upon
both, pray what must D. de P. be?


Monsieur. My Masters Viceroy.


Governor. Where?


Monsieur. Here in these Kingdoms. --


Governor. And is that all he makes this bustle for? for my part I cannot
understand his politics, for methinks it should be much better to be King,
though of a limited Monarchy, then to be Viceroy to a King Absolute and
Arbitrary.


Monsieur. That Is true, but D. de P. has so over-acted his part, that he cannot
arrive at neither, without my Masters help.


Governor. So that now it seems he must be contented with what your Master
will give him.


Monsieur. Give him! no no, it is supposed to be his own choice, as having
declared, He would rather become a Viceroy to a Foreign power, though the
greatest Tyrant on Earth, than truckle to such who ought to be his Slaves and
Vassals.


Governor. My thinks, it is impossible he should speak such words.


Monsieur. It Is so reported, by those that pretend to know much.


Governor. Then I have been doing fine things indeed, who have ^ct^d as for my
own life to advance his Interest, which as you say, now proves to be your
Masters.


Monsieur. Ay, but it is now too late to be sorry for that.


Governor. Is it so? well then over boots over shoes; I Will rather choose to
die honorably, than live basely.


Monsieur. Why that is well resolved; it is Meritorious, and you dye in the
Service of the Church.


Governor. Then it is a bargain, but you told me I should have an account of
your Masters principal friend.


Monsieur. You shall know those in due time; I have better considered of that,
and therefore desire to be excused till our next Meeting. Adieu Monsieur le
Governor, Adieu.


FINIS.

