A Pleasant TREATISE OF Witches.

Their Imps, and Meetings, Persons bewitched, Magicians, Necromancers, Incubus,
and Succubus's, Familiar Spirits, Goblings, Pharys, Specters, Phantasms, Places
Haunted, and Devilish Impostures.

WITH The difference between Good and Bad Angels, and a true Relation of a good
GENIUS.

By a Pen near the Covent of ELUTHERY.

LONDON, Printed by H. B. for C. Wilkinson at the Black Boy in Fleetstreet, and
Tho. Archer and Tho. Burrell under St. Dunstans-Church, 1673.

TO THE READER.
THere is an inward Inclination and desire of Knowledge (gentle Reader) which
has moved many grave and Learned Authors, amongst the rest of their inquiries,
to search into the Nature of those things; which because they are beyond the
reach of common capacity, seem to the vulgar, Fables only, and Poetical
Fictions. Amongst the rest of those things, there is nothing has been more
cried down by some, and upheld by others; nothing has had more Defendants on
either side, than the possibility of man's having familiarity with Demons. This
general Curiosity drew me in among the rest, that were ignorant of such
matters, and caused me, for my own Recreation as well as Satisfaction, to allot
some spare hours, to a stricter inquiry into these things; but their scope
being so large, and so far extended, so many Arguments stand on the one side,
so many on the other, that I fell short of any just determination:
Nevertheless, like that Merchant that misses sometimes his designs, yet always
comes home well laden, I have found many things by the way, and filled this
small Treatise with the Pith and Marrow of above a hundred Ancient and Modern
Authors, whose pleasant Relations have not only been delightful to my self in
their Collection, but have wrought so effectually on the Ears of some that have
heard but two or three of them; that not through any desire of mine, but by
their frequent and earnest entreaties, I have used these means to satisfy
them, and to present thee with this compendious Treatise; and that thy
Acceptance of it may be kind according to my desires; you shall find nothing
here, of those Vulgar, Fabulous, and Idle Tales that are not worth the lending
an ear to, nor of those hideous, Sawcer-eyed and Cloven-Footed Devils, that
Grandams affright their children withal; but only the pleasant and
well-grounded discourses of the Learned, as an object adequate to thy wise
understanding.

Farewell.
Index.
CHAP. I. The manner of the Witches Profession. CHAP. II. Their Imps and
Meetings. CHAP. III. Persons Bewitched. CHAP. IV. Magicians and Negromancers.
CHAP. V. Incubus and Succubus. CHAP. VI. Familiar Spirits, Goblings, and
Pharies. CHAP. VII. Specters and Phantasms. CHAP. VIII, Places Haunted. CHAP.
IX. Divellish Impostures. CHAP. X. An admirable and true Process of a Woman
that wrought Miracles by the help of the Devil. CHAP. XI. The horrid end of
witches and Negromancers. CHAP. XII. The difference between good and bad
Spirits, and the true Relation of a good Genius.
A Pleasant Treatise of WITCHES, etc.
CHAP. I. The manner of the Witches Profession.
INcoherent, various, and deceitful will all the Institutions of Satan appear,
whether we consider him in his ambiguous Oracles deceiving the Heathen World,
in his subtilty to create himself a worship, and followers so obedient, as to
sacrifice their of-springs to him; but more especially, in his seducing some
poor miscreants, so far as to contract a bargain with them for their bodies and
souls for ever. Such are persons ( St. Chrisost. lib. de provid. ad Stag.
Monac.) perversely instituted in Religion, envious, malicious, and distrusting
Gods mercyes, who to satisfy their unreasonable desires, in those things they
could not otherwise perform, have hearkened to his flatteries, renounced their
Faith, and made themselves his slaves, and subjects. Nevertheless to make his
worship become more solemn, and his servants tie the greater, many horrible and
detestable ceremonies are performed at their first reception; the sum of all
is this. The Wizards and Witches being met in a place and time appointed, where
the Devil appears to them in humane shape, admonishes them to be faithful, and
promises them success, and length of life; they that are present recommend the
Novice to him: and the Devil, if the party will renounce the Christian Faith,
the Sacraments, and tread upon the Cross, gives him his hand, adding moreover,
that this is not alone sufficient, but that he will have an homage also,
containing, that he give himself to him body and soul for ever, and bring as
many as possibly he may into the same societ^y: furthermore, that he prepare
himself certain Ointments. This we inquisitors, say the Authors of a Book
called Malleus Maleficarum, know being fully informed by a young Witch.

Another married youth is said to have confessed to Peter Judge in Boltingen
after this manner. That the rest of the society, on Sunday before the water was
consecrated, brought the new Disciple into the Church, where he denied his
faith and c. and promised homage to his little Master (for so they call him,
Magisterulum, and no otherwise) then he drinks out of a Bottle presently, which
being done he begins to conceive something of his Profession, and is confirmed
in the principal Rites of it.

Manlius writes concerning their abominable profession, that in the Year 1553.
two Witches sto^e a Child from their neighbor, killed it, cut it in pieces, and
put it into a Kittle to boil, when the sorrowful Mother looking for her Infant,
came by chance into the house, and found the limbs thereof horribly consumed.
For which abominable Fact the Authors of it were burnt, having first in their
torture confessed this part of their horrible profession.

Two other Witches are reported by Spranger to have killed, the one, forty
Children unchristned, the other an infinite number; and R. P. P. Valdarama the
Spaniard relates, that in Germany were taken eight Witches, who confessed to
have murdered One hundred forty and five Children in the making their
Ointments.

CHAP. II. Of their familiar Imps, and their meetings.
THey are likewise reported by the same Author, to have each of them a Spirit
or lmp attending on, and assigned to them, which never leave those to whom they
are subject, but assist and render them all the service they command. These
give the Witches notice to be ready on all Solemn appointments, and meetings,
which are ordinarily on Tuesday or Wednesday night, and then they strive to
separate themselves from the company of all other Creatures, not to be seen by
any: and night being come, they strip themselves naked, and anoint themselves
with their Ointments. Then are they carried out of the house, either by the
Window, Door, or Chimney, mounted on their Imps in form of a Goat, Sheep, or
Dragon, till they arrive at their meeting place, whither all the other Wizards
and Witches, each one upon his Imps, are also brought. Thus brought to the
designed place, which is sometimes many hundred miles from their dwellings,
they find a great number of others arrived there by the same means: who, before
Lucifer takes his place in his Throne as King, do make their accustomed homage,
Adoring, and Proclaiming him their Lord, and rendering him all Honor. This
Solemnity being finished, they fit to Table where no delicate meats are wanting
to gratify their Appetites, all dainties being thither brought in the
twinkling of an Eye, by those spirits that attend the Assembly. This done at
the sound of many pleasant Instruments (for we must expect no Grace in the
company of Devils,) the table is taken away, and the pleasant consort invites
them to a Ball; but the dance is strange, and wonderful, as well as diabolical,
for turning themselves back to back; they take one another by the arms and
raise each other from the ground, then shake their heads to and fro like
Anticks, and turn themselves as if they were mad. Then at last, after this
Banquet, Music and Ball, the lights are put out, and their sleeping Venus
awaks. The Incubus's in the shaps of proper men satisfy the desires of the
Witches, and the Succubus's serve for whores to the Wizards. At last before
Aurora brings back the day, each one mounts on his spirit, and so returns to
his respective dwelling place, with that lightness and quickness, that in
little space they find themselves to be carried many hundred miles; but are
charged by their spirit in the way, not to call in any wise on the name of God,
or to bless themselves with the sign of the Cross, upon pain of falling, with
peril of their lives, and being greivously punished by their Demon.

Sometimes at their solemn assemblies, the Devil commands, that each tell what
wickedness he has committed, and according to the hainousness and
detestableness of it, he is honored and respected with a general applause.
Those on the contrary, that have done no evil, are beaten and punished: at last
when the assembly is ready to break up, and the Devil to dispatch them, he
publishes this law with a loud voice, Revenge your selves or else you shall
dye, then each one kissing the Posteriors of the Devil (a sweet bit no doubt)
returns upon their aerie Vehicles to their habitations.

These meetings are made commonly toward midnight, when the earth is covered
with darkness; yet Cardan writes, that a friend of his, a Bookseller, returning
from Alemagne, where he had newly been, saw several assemblies met near a
mountain, both Wizards and Witches dancing, some on Horseback, some on Goats,
others on Dragons, some on other Phantasms, but drawing n^er within a stones
throw, they all vanished and were no longer seen. The places of these Meetings
are in some desert, either in a fair plain, or under some large tree, of which
Pomp. Mela writes, that on the side of the Mountain Atlas in Mauritania, are
seen by night certain lights, and noises are heard of Cimbals, and almost all
sorts of Musical Instruments, which in the day time cease, and the Phantasms
vanish, and disappear. Solin and Olaus affirm the same, that the Shepherds
living near this place are often frighted by the Troops of Spirits that go
dancing and brawling toward this Mountain, esteemed by the common people to be
Egyptians. Valderama speaks farther concerning these meeting places, which
ought in no wise to be omitted, that by the new Castle belonging to the Earl
of Francesquin, he saw under a high Chesnut-Tree, hard by a little wood, a
circle of the breadth of twenty foot, being made so round, that it seemed to be
made by a Geometrical compass, where he imagined these Witches and Spirits to
have been; and what most astonished him, was that upon this round circle grew
no flower nor grass, although in the middle and round about abundantly.
Suspecting therefore that the earth was consumed by the quality of some ill
humor, which hindered the Herbs to grow, he caused it to be dug up and
diligently looked upon, but found the earth of the very same quality and
goodness with the rest ad joining.

Paul Grillaud, a most famous Doctor of the Law, reports that a certain Pesant
had a wife accustomed to go to such meetings, with her other companions, which
her Husband suspecting, often taxed her with it, which still she denied as
obstinately; till at last resolving to know the truth, he feigned himself, one
night, drunk and in a sound sleep, which happened to be the time she was advised
by her Spirit to go to the Assembly. So that looking round about her that all
things were sure, her doors fast and her husband to appearance dead drunk, she
retired into a private corner of the room, stripped her self naked, and ano^ted
her body: then in an instant as if she had wings, she flew up the Chimney. This
her husband perceiving, rose and hid the box of Ointment, till the next
morning; when examining her where she had been that night, he could neither by
fair nor foul means bring her to confess, that she had been out of the house,
till ^hewing her the box of Ointment, see here, said he, the witness that will
so convince thee, that thou shall be no longer able to deny thy wickedness; and
unless thou resolve to tell me immediately, whither and by what means thou
wen^'st, expect not to go out of my hands alive. Then did he W^, ^mbling at her
husbands threats, an^ convicted of what she had done, confess the truth, and
all the things committed in their impure Society; above all, she se^ forth the
pleasures of it with such cunning fla^tery, that the lusty young Pesant had a
mind presently to be partaker of those delights, and promised her pardon for
what she ^ad done, if she would conduct and bring ^im also to the place. This
she promised willingly, and the time being come, after she had asked leave of
her spirit to bring her husband with her, she caused him to strip himself naked
as she was, and both being anointed, they mounted, the spirit attending on them
in the form of a Sheep, which flying softly through the Air, carried them to
the designed meeting place. The poor man seeing so many men and women so richly
clothed (as to him they appeared) such preparations for a Feast, such strange
Music, and so many lighted Torches around him, stood long time amazed. But at
last after they were all set at the table by the commandment of the Devil; the
Country man not loosing time, but finding the meat unsavory and without ^ast
(for according to the Proverb, the Devils were the Cooks) he began to ask for
Salt, and at last a spirit waiting there in form of a youth, brought him some,
which receiveing, he said, God be praised for this good Salt. At which words,
in a moment, the Table, Meat, Servants, Guests, Men and Women, Music, Lights,
Spirits, and all vanished away from ^im, who found himself next morning naked in
the Country of Bene^ent under a great Walnut-Tree, almost a hundred miles from
his own home; whither with must distress at last became, accused his wife and
many o^ of the company, who after confession on the Rack, of their profession,
were afterward Burn^.

It is reported by the same Author of another Witch named Lucresse, that being
carried away from her house toward a meeting place, on the Sabbath, when the
Bell was ringing to Mattins, the sound of the Saints-Bell did so affright the
Devil, that he let her fall in a place thick with Brambles and Thorns, where
the next day she was found in pittyful plight, and accused, but what became of
her afterward the Devil knows.

CHAP. III. Of Persons Bewitched.
ANtonius Sucquetas Knight, o^ great Fame in Flande^s, had besides three lawful
Children, one Bastard who married a wife at Brage; this woman a little after
her marriage continually vexed with an evil Spirit, that wheresoever she was,
even from among the company of Chaste Matrons, she was snatched away, and was
drawn from the table or seat where she was, and thrown into this or that
corner; notwithstanding, all that were present did what they could to hinder
it. All this happned without any hurt to her, which many were persuaded was
caused by some Witches means, that envied her, or loved her Husband who was
very beautiful: to be short, while she was thus tossed too and fro by the evil
Spirit, she was at last with Child; and when her pains began to come upon her,
and she had sent the maid who was then alone with her, to fetch the Midwife;
the Witch suspected before to be so, came in and performed that office
privately, while the Gentlewoman by reason of her extraordinary pains was in a
swoun. Afterward when she came to her self, she found her self delivered, but
the Child could no where be found, which caused great astonishment. But the
next morning, she found her child by her in the bed in Swadling-cloaths, which
for some time she suckled, till at last it was taken one night from her side
and never after heard of.

In the year (says Langius) 1539, in a certain Village called Fugestal, a
Country man by name Ulricus Neussesser was cruelly tormented with strange pains
in his body; insomuch that when he despaired of all other remedies he cut his
own Throat. About three days after when he was to be buried, Eucharius Rosen of
Uveissemberg and many skilful persons Anatomised the body, and found in his
Ventricle, a rough and hard piece of Wood, four Knives and two pieces of Iron,
all being about a span long; there were also seen round bundles of Hair, and
things that could never en^er into a living man, but by the deceit and subtilty
of the Devil.

To this purpose it is also related of a servant to a Noble man of the Castle
of Bontenbrouch, that all the time he was bewitched, he vomi^ed Nails, Pins,
Needles, and Strings; and being asked concerning it, he said that a certain
woman met him one day and breathed upon him, from which time he became thus
troubled. But afterward when the evil Spirit left him, he confessed that there
had no such thing happened to him but that the Devil made him say so, and that
those he voided as Needles, Pins, and the like, came not from his stomach, but
were put into his mouch by the Devil.

Wierus in like manner writes of a horrible vexation of certain N^ns at
^verketes bewitched as 'twas thought on this manner. A certain old woman had one
day restored some Salt to these Nuns of whom she had borrowed, and besides what
was due, gave as much more. After which restoration, there was often found
about their Chambers a white substance in form of Salt, no body knowing by what
means it came thither. Then was there often heard in the night, a voice
groaning and desiring help, but when they came to the place whence it
proceeded, thinking it had been one of their companions that implored their
aid, they could see nothing. Sometimes they were pulled by the feet out of the
bed, otherwhiles so tickled on the souls of their feet, that they were ready to
dye with laughing; some had peieces of their flesh nipt out, and all were
tormented in some part or other, vomitting a black and acid humor, so strong
that it fetched the skin off their mouths. One time when their friends were come
to see them, they were lifted up from the ground, notwithstanding, all
resisted, some fell down as dead, some walked on their hams as if they had no
legs, others would run up Tree^ like Cats: and the Abbess her self, while she
was talking to the Lady Margaret Countess of Burens is concerning these things,
had a piece of flesh pulled out of her Thigh; the wound was of color, what we
call black and blew in relation to bruised flesh, and was afterward cured.
These outrages of Satan, lasted for three years, but concerning the end I find
no mention. One thing only more is remarkable of these Nuns, that if at any
time they were hindered from beating and striking each other, they were hugely
tormented inwardly: if by the desire of their friends, they went to Pray, their
tongues were tied, nor could they seriously attend to any good thing. But when
they talked concerning idle or lascivious sports, they were much refreshed and
recreated.

It happened in the year 1562. at the town of Levensteat under the Duke of
Brunswick, that a certain maid, by name Margaret, the daughter of one Achils,
about the age of twenty, was making clean a pair of shoes of her sisters with a
knife, whose sheath lay by her with another in it, at which time an old woman
came in asking the maid how she did, for she had been sick of a Fever, and
hearing her answer went out of the house immediately; when the maid had done
her work, she looked for the other knife and the sheath, but could find
neither; so searching very diligently, she saw at last a great black dog under
the Table, which she beat away, hoping to find the knife under him? but the dog
seemed very angry, and grinning with his teeth, leapt over the hatch of the
door and ran away. The maid presently began to be giddy, and a chilness seemed
to come from her head, all over her body; In the end she ^ell in a swoun, and
continued, as if she had been dead three days; then she began to come again to
her self, and being asked the reason of her distemper, answered that she was
sure the knife that she had lost was in her left side; and although her Parents
and friends judging her thoughts proceeded from melancholy, hunger, and the
like, gave no credence to her words: nevertheless she still persisted in
affirming of them, grieving the more to hear every one contradict and think
that impossible, of which she was sure. At length after three months, there
appeared, on the left side, a little above the Spleen, a swelling, about the
bigness of an hens egg, which according to the change of the Moon increased
and decreased; then said she, hitherto you have contradicted me always, but I
hope you will now believe what you see, and pressing hard upon the swelling, a
great quantity of matter gushed out, and the knife's end appeared in the
Rupture. The maid would ^ave pulled it out, but her friends hindered her, and
sent immediately for the Dukes Chyrurgeon of the Castle of U uolffenbuttle, who
first sent a Minister to her to comfort her, and instruct her in God's word,
for as much as she had been troubled by the Devil; and on the next day, which
was Sunday, he opened the flesh and took out the knife, which was the very same
that was lost, being only consumed a little about the edge.

Hector Boethius gives us an admirable Relation concerning King Duffus, that he
fell into a great malady, yet not so greiveous, as it was hard to be known by
the best Physicians of that time; for without any sign of Bile, Phlegm, or
the redundancy of any evil humor, the King was grievously tormented every
night with perpetual watchings and continual sweatings, and found but very
little ease in the daytime? his body wasted away by degrees, his skin grew
hard and close, showing to the beholders both the Veins, Nerves, and situation
of the very bones. Nevertheless by the regular motion of his pulse, it was
manifest that nothing of his radical moisture was wasted, and the color of his
lip, cheeks and ears, still remained vigorous and temperate, and his appetite
was no way abated. These good signs in a languishing body, and one that was
afflicted with much pain, the Physicians much admired; and when by all their
Art they could neither cause him to sleep, nor make his sweating cease, but
that the King grew worse and worse to both, they desired him to be of comfort,
for it might be that some Physicians of other Nations knew the nature of his
disease, and could cure it, whom they would send for, by which means he might
recover his health. But by this time there grew a strange rumor amongst the
common people that the King was bewitched, and that his disease proceeded not
from any natural cause, but by the Magic Art of certain women living at Forres
a City of Moravia, who used those means to the destruction of the King. This
report soon came to the Kings ear, and least the Witches, hearing they were
discovered, should make their escape, there were men sent secretly to Moravia
to enquire concerning this matter: the messengers dissembled the cause of their
coming, and under pretense of a League they were to make between King Duffus
and those of Moravia, they came to the City Forres, and were by night let into
the Castle (for that stood as yet for the King) here they told the Governor
Donevaldus, what the King had commanded them to search, and desired his aid and
assistance in this matter. Now a certain young whore (whose mother was a Witch)
one of her Lovers a Soldier, had learned by what means her mother wrought her
Enchantments, and had learnt something concerning the Kings Life and Fortune;
this he told Donevaldus, and Donevaldus related it to the Kings Ambassadors,
and sent for the woman, who was then in the Castle, whom he constrained to tell
the whole matter, and the manner of her mothers proceedings, and Soldiers were
sent at night secretly to search the business more narrowly. The Messengers
came to the witches house, broke it open, and found one of them turning, on a
spit by the fire, a waxen Image, made by their Art like to King Duffus: another
was reciting certain Spells, and pouring leisurely a certain liquor upon the
Image. They took them both, and brought them to the Castle, with the Image and
the liquor, where being examined the cause of these deeds, they confessed, that
while the Image was roasting, the King never ceased to sweat, and while they
recited their Charms, he never slept, and that as the wax melted away, so the
King consumed, and would dye after all was spent, as the Devil had informed
them; moreover, that they were hired, to do this, by those of Moravia. These
things so incensed the hearers, that they caused them both immediately to be
burnt, with the Image; at which very time, (as afterward it was known) while
this passed at Forres, the King was eased of his pain, and rested that night
without swearing, and the next day his former strength returning, he grew
better, and lived long after in as perfect health as ever he had been before
this calamity happened unto him.

Gulielmus Malmesburiensis Monachus, writes in his History, that there were in
the time of Peter Damion, two old women living in the way that leads to Rome,
that kept an Inn, and that as often as they had any single passenger, they turned
him into an Ass or Hog, and sold him to the Merchants; at last having for their
Guest a young man, that by Fidling and Juggling got his livelihood, they turned
him into an Ass, who by the strangeness of his Actions (for his understanding
was nothing altered) drew many passengers to the house, and by this means they
gained great Custom, and no small advantage; at last a neighbor of theirs
proffered great sums of money for him, and at length purchased him, but with
this caution, that he was never to ride him into the Water, which for some time
was punctually observed: but the Ass getting one day at liberty, ran into the
next Pool of water, where after he had cooled himself a little, he came to his
former shape.

The like is reported by the Inquisiter Spranger, of a Soldier in the Isle of
Cyprus, who was also turned into an Ass, yet his reason remained, and he
followed his old companions to their Ship; but supposed to be a real Ass was
beaten away, and forced to return to the Witch, house that had so transformed
him. In this shape he served her three years, till passing one day before a
Church, he was seen to kneel on his hinder legs, and to lift up them before, at
the holding up of the Sacrament of the Altar; which action some Geneva
Merchants perceiveing. apprehended the owner, and with torture made her confess
how she had enchanted him, and converted him into that form, and to render him
the likeness of man again. The Witch was burnt at Famagoste, and the youth
returned to England, affirming that his mind was never so much troubled, but
that he knew himself to be a man; nevertheless his imagination was so deceived
by the Devil, that he sometimes thought himself to be a Beast, and yet had
always this contentment, that he was known by the other Magicians and Witches to
be a true man.

CHAP. IV. Of Magicians and Negromancers.
Cornelius Agrippa the great Magician, going one day out of Town from Louain
where he dwelt, left the Keys of his Study with his wife, charging her
strictly to let no body go in; but it happened so that day, that a young
companion of Agrippa, a Scholar, and having ever had a curiosity to see some
of this Negromancers books, came to the house, and with much importunity gained
the keys; then entering the room and viewing the books, he perceived a
Manuscript of Agrippa's amongst the rest, as it were a compendium of them: this
he reads, and in short space raises an ill. favored Devil; who entering the
study, asked what he would have that he called him so; the young man
unexperienced, frightened, and ignorant what to say, was choked by the Spirit
and left dead on the ground. Agrippa not long after returns home, and finds the
Devil dancing, and showing tricks upon the house top; at which, astonished, he
goes into his Study, and finds the dead body, which he commands his spirit to
enter, and carry to the place where the Students used to meet; this being done
and the spirit quitting the body, it fell down and was buried for dead, having
some marks only of strangulation about the Throat. But not long after the
matter was discovered, and Agrippa for safty fled to Lorrain.

There was in the Emperor Maximilians Court, a famous Negromancer (as Authors
affirm) who at his command, and promise of pardon and reward, took upon him to
show the shapes of the three great Warriers, Hector, Achilles, and King David,
upon condition of silence when they appeared: and the Emperor he places in the
midst of his Magic Circle, seats him in his Throne, and afterward reading and
murmuring certain Charms out of his Pocketbook, he desires silence. Hector
then knocks at the door so vehemently, that the whole house shook, and the door
being opened, he came in, with a bright Speer in his hand, his Eye fiery, and
his Stature exceeding other men's. Not long after in the same Majestical
postture, came in Achilles, looking fiercely toward Hector, and often shaking
his Speer, as though he would have invaded him. Thus having thrice passed by
the Emperor, and made Obeisance, they vanished. Afterward came in King David
in his Crown and Princely Robes, with his Harp in his hand. His countenance was
more gracious then that of the other two; and he passed likewise thrice by the
Emperor, but without Reverence to him, and went away.

The Magician being asked by the Emperor, why King David denied him the respect
the other two gave, answered, that all things were subject to his Kingdom, for
as much as Christ sprang from him.

Saint Augustine writes of Pythagoras, that (whether by natural Magic or some
secret agreement with the Devil, it is doubted by Authors) he kept a Bear of
prodigious greatness with him many years, and at last making him swear never to
hurt any Beast, gave him liberty, and sent him into the Woods. The same
Magician being near Tarent, and seeing an Ox eating in a field of Beans, called
to the herdsman to drive the beast from eating the Beans. But the surly clown
made answer, he might chastise him himself if he would, as he used to whip his
Boys. Whereupon Pythagor as making certain magic Characters on the ground, and
muttering some Charms to himself, caused the beast to come out of the Beans, as
if it had been endued with reason; and ever after it refused the Yoke, and
retired to Tarent, living among the inhabitants, and taking her food from the
hands of Men, Women, and Children.

A certain Magician at Madeburg, was used to show a little Horse to the people
in the Market place for money, commanding it to do many rare things which
always it performed. But complaining one day to the people in the end of his
show, that he had got very little, that the times were very hard, and the like,
he wished that he were in heaven: then throwing up the bridle into the air, the
horse followed it; and he, as if he would have stayed it by the tail, was
carried up also: his wife catched hold of him, his maid of her, and all fly up
into the air like so many links of a chain. Now while the people were looking
and wondering at it, a certain Citizen came to the multitude, and understanding
the matter, affirmed that he met but a little before, the Magician going to his
Inn. To this purpose Niderius also reports, that in the year 1045, a certain
Magician, in England, was seen to mount on a black horse on a Sabbath day, and
to be carried away through the air.

Henry the third King of France, had a brother called the Duke of Allenzon, who
came to England formerly to be a suitor to Queen Elizabeth, in whose retinue
was the Valiant Busidamboyes who took the Dukes part, between whom and the King
was a perpetual sued The King, therefore by nature timorous and suspicious, was
always afraid of this valiant person, and after his return into France, devised
several means to take him out of the way. Amongst the rest coming by night out
of the Louure, he was set upon by seventeen armed and appointed men, ye^
behaved himself so stoutly, that he killed five of them, and made his escape.
The King seeing he had mist of him, and that ever after he stood upon his
Guard, put in trial another way. For there being a constant report at Court
that Bussidamboyes was in favor with the Earl of Monsurrous wife, he sent for
an Italian Negromancer, famous at that time, and called ^riscalino. Of him he
enquires if he could show or declare to him, what Bussidamboyes was then doing,
which the Magician after certain conjurations showed him in a Glass, where was
Bussidamboyes in bed with a Lady. Hereupon the King sent for his Courtiers,
amongst whom was the Earl of Monsorrou at that time, and a^ked if they knew
that Lady. The Earl much abased, replied, it was his wife. Then said the King,
I will have no Culckolds to be my Courtiers. To which the Earl made answer,
that to hinder what was done was not in his power, but that it was in the
Kings, to give him leave to avenge himself, which he earnestly requested. The
King glad to be any ways rid of Bussidamboyes, gave his assent, and the Earl
posted away immediately to his own house; and coming betimes in the morning to
his wife, as she lay in bed, offered her the choice of three things, either a
draught of Poison, a Dagger to kill her self, or to write such a Letter as he
would dictate to her. The miserable woman terrified with the thoughts of death,
consented to the Latter; and, according to her husbands dictating, sent for
Bussidamboyes, who suspected nothing, to come unto her. In the mean time the
Earl concealed himself in the house, armed with six more, and behind the
Curtains in her chamber. Bussidamboyes came not long after, and offering to go
up stairs in his accustomed manner, was desired by a Page, set for that
purpose, to leave his Spurs and his Sword below, because his Lady was ill, and
the least noise disturbed her. This he did, not mistrusting what would follow;
but as soon he entered the Chamber, the Lady gave a sign, and all rusht in upon
him. Nevertheless, being of an undaunted courage, he took the first chair he
found, and so behaved himself with that weapon, by reason of his great
strength, that he killed two of them; and then being wounded in diverse places, he
leapt out of the window into the Garden. But fell by misfortune upon a pole
that prop't up a Vine, and there stuck fast by the Breeches, which the
Conspirators perceiving, ran down and made an end of him there. The Negromancer
according to the Kings promise, had his pardon, and being asked, by the King,
how many Witches he thought were in his Dominions, answered above a hundred
thousand which he knew, and of whom he was Master.

Mr. Baudovain de Ronssey, in his Epistles, gives us this Relation; that in
Ostbrook near Utrect a place in Holland, dwelt a certain Negromancer, whose
servant observing that his Master went constantly on certain nights into the
Stable, and laid hold on the Rack, resolved to do the same unknown to his
Master, and see what would be the event. Thus following his Master who was gone
half an hour before into the stable, and returned no more; he laid hold on that
part of the Rack, and was posted immediately, he knew not how, through the
air, till at last he found himself, in a large Cave, amongst an Assembly of
Witches. His Master astonished and angry at his coming, fearing also least by
this means, their nocturnal meetings might be discovered, asked the counsel of
the rest concerning him; 'twas agreed upon at last to receive him, and make him
swear secrecy. This the poor fellow out of fear did, and promised whatsoever
else they desired: at last, when the time of departure came, they resolved
he-should be carried back, because he had sworn to be of the Society, and to
that end his Master took him upon his back; but in their way through the air,
as they came over a Lake, his Master fearing to be discovered by him, and
finding this opportunity, let him fall, hoping therein to have drowned him and
stifled him in the mudd; yet Providence permitted not the youth to be drowned,
or his fall to be deadly, for the abundance of Rushes and Sedge, saved its
violence, and there he lay with no great harm done to his body. The next day,
as he cried for help, he was heard by some Travelers, and by his voice found,
and helped out; the occasion of his coming thither being examined, he was
conducted to the Burgomaster of Utrect, named John of Cullenburg, who making
farther inquiry into this extraordinary accident, with intention to prosecute
the Negromancer, sent for him to the place of his habitation; but whether
advised by his Spirit, or warned by the Report, he was fled and could no where
be heard of.

John Theuteme, Canon D' Albestan, being oftimes reproached to be a Bastard,
and that he merited not to be a Canon, which belonged only to those of better
Extract, invited his revilers one day to Dinner, and after the Table was taken
away, asked them if they would see their Fathers; to which they answered they
all were willing: then caused he his Familiar Spirits to appear in their
likenesses, one like a Cook, another like a Groom, a third like a Pesant, but
his own Father came in the form of a Canon, clothed in a long gown, at which
sight the company was much amazed, and never after reproached him of his
Extract, since their own was no more honorable.

CHAP. V. Of Incubus and Succubus's
FLegon Trallian made free from slavery, by the Emperor Adrian, writes, in his
Book of admirable things, that Philinion Daughter to a Vintener, fell in Love
with Machates a young Forrester, but crossed by her friends, took it so to heart
that she dyed suddenly after, and was buried publicly. Not long after this sad
Funeral, Machates passing by, came and lay at the house, to whom Philinion
appeared, being alone in his chamber, asserting she was not dead, but had
raised that report to deceive her friends; insomuch that they both lay that
night together, and he gave her toward morning at her departure his Ring in
token of his love, and in recompense she gave him another: while these things
thus passed, a servant that lay in the next Chamber, hearing Philinions voice,
supposed really that her Masters daughter was alive, which she constantly
affirmed for truth: her Master desirous to know the certainty of it, found
means to get the young man to stay longer at his House, and caused persons to
watch every night in the next chamber; at last, hearing her voice, they went
into the chamber, and ran toward the bed, where she lay, to embrace their
daughter: but the Spirit said, O cruel Father and Mother, since you hindered me
to enjoy this youth in life, you can expect no kindess from me, and lo now I
leave you. At which words the spirit went out of her, and her carcass fell down
in the bed. Her tomb was immediately after opened, but nothing found there,
save the ring the Forrester gave her, which the spirit had left. Her body was
seen, as likewise the tomb, by thousands of people that came to see the truth
of this admirable accident. And at last by the council of the Divine Hillo, the
dead body was carried out of Town and buried. But Machates by this accident was
so frightened, that he fell shortly after into despair, and killed himself.

Another no less admirable History, we find of an Incubus, who, in the shape of
Policrates, was created Prince of the Aetolians, and was married to a young
Lady of Locres, with whom after he had lain three nights, he vanished, and was
no more seen by the people. The Lady brought forth for her Child, a monstrous
Hermophrodite; at which her Parents being astonished, assembled the people, the
Priests, and Diviners, to consult what should be done with the Child, or rather
Divelish offspring, and at last it was concluded it should be burnt. But then
Policrates the Father appeared again, in a mourning garment, and, with threats,
demanded his Son, which being denied, he rushed upon him, and toar him to
pieces, and then devoured all his members, excepting the head, and vanished. The
people resolved to send to the Oracle at Delphos, to enquire concerning this
matter, but the head that was left on the ground, began to speak, and with a
loud voice and eloquent Oration, informed the multitude of all the evil that is
threatened them, which came to pass the Year after in the War they had with the
people of Acarnania.

Boethius the Historian writes lib. hist. Scot. That a young maid, very
beautiful, and one that had refused the marriage of many Noble Persons, fell
into strange familiarity with a Devil. Till at last her big swelling belly
declared what she had done, and forced her to disclose the matter to her
Parents; how a handsome young man, came constantly by night and lay with her,
but from whence, or whither he went, she knew not. Her friends though they gave
little credence to these words, yet resolved to search into the matter more
narrowly; and about three days after, being informed by her maid that the man
was with her, they unlockt the door, and entered the Chamber with a great
company of lights, and saw by their Daughter a most horrid Monster, more
terrible in shape, then what can be described believed* The beholders of this
strange Spectacle, all run away, save an holy Priest that staid, and began to
read St. John's Gospel; and when he came to this passage, The Word was made
Flesh, the evil Spirit with a horrid noise, flew away with the window of the
chamber. And the woman at the fright, was delivered of a horrid Monster, which
the Midwives, least it might be a reproach to the Family, burnt upon a pile of
wood immediately.

In the year 1480. as the same Author affirms, a Merchants Ship was going to
Flanders to Traffic, when on a sudden, there arose so vehement a Storm that
the Mast was broke, and great damage done to the rest of the Tackling; insomuch
that nothing could be expected but present destruction. The Master wondering at
this unclemency of the Air, (for it was then about the Summer Solstice) when he
could attribute it to no natural cause, concluded it was rather by some evil
spirit. Which as he related to the Passengers, comforting them, forasmuch as he
trusted God would not suffer them to perish by those means of the Devil, a
pitiful voice was heard from the bottom of the Ship, of one of the passengers,
a woman, accusing her self, that for many years she had had familiarity with a
Devil in man's shape, and that he was then with her, and that she deserved to be
thrown into the Sea to save the rest from the imminent danger. The Minister
therefore, was sent down to this distressed creature, who prayed by her, and
after her confession, earnestly entreated her to repent, and ask of God
forgiveness for what she had done. This the poor distressed woman no so^ner
began to do, but a black and thick mist, seemed to rise up out of the pump of
the Ship, and with a great noise, flame, smoke and stink, threw it self into
the Sea; after which the Tempest ceased, and the Ship got safe to harbor.

Vincentius writes that a certain strong young man well skilled in Swimming,
was bathing himself by Moonshine in the Sea, and that a woman swimming after
him, took him by the hair, as if it were one of his companions that would have
ducked him: to whom he spoke, but no answer was made; nevertheless, she
followed him to shore, and the youth taken by the great excellence of her
beauty, covered her with some of his garments, and brought her to his home, and
not long after, married her. But being jeered often by his companions, that he
had married a Phantasm, forasmuch as she would never speak, he drew his Sword
one day, and threatened he would kill the Child she bore, if she would not
speak, and tell her Original. Alas poor man, said she, that loosest a good wife
by forcing me to speak. I had remained long with thee, and done thee much good,
had I not broken the silence enjoined me, and therefore henceforth thou shall
see me no more, and then she vanished. But the child grew, and began to use
himself much to swim, till at last as he swimmed one day in the Sea, many
people admiring him, he was taken way out of their sight by his Mother.

Hieronymus reports the like of a Monk, invited to uncleaness by a Succubus in
the shape of a very fair and beautiful woman; but when went to embrace her, she
sent forth a great cry, and as she was nothing in reality, but a mere shade and
Phantasm, vanished out of his arms, deceiving and deriding the foolish Monk
that had, by his Lust, rendered himself like the horse and bruit beasts, without
understanding.

CHAP. VI. Of Familiar Spirits, Goblings, and Pharies.
GIlbert writes in the eight Book of his Narrations, that a young Gentleman of
Lo^rain, of a good Family, but corrupted by ill company, frequenting often
Ordinaries, and such like houses of Debauchery, was one day walking in the
fields melancholy by himself, for want of money. To whom a Spirit appearing in
man's shape, asked the reason of his solitariness, profering to do him service
in whatever troubled him, providing he would steadfastly believe all that was in
a little Book he would give him, and swear never to open or show it to any
body. This when the young man had promised, the other produced a little Book in
his left hand, and shaked 60. Crowns out of it into his right, bidding the
young man do the like, who produced the same effect. But at last when he wanted
for nothing, being overcome with curiosity, he resolved to see what was
contained in it; and opening it, he saw in the midst a round Circle, divided
with certain lines in form of a Cross, on which was painted a horrible face of
a Devil. At this sight the young man was so frighted, that his Eyes became
black, and his Brains turned, that he thought to have some heavy load on his
shoulders. He was forced therefore to confess the matter to his friends, who
persuaded him to through the Book into the fire, which although there was
nothing in it but Paper, yet remained an hour in the fire before it consumed.

A certain Soldier traveling through Marchia a country of Almaigne, and
finding himself weary in his journey, abode in an Inn till he might recover his
strength, and committed to his Hostesses custody, certain money which he had
about him. Not long after, when he was to depart, he required his money, but
the woman having consulted with her Husband, denied the Receipt, and return
thereof, accusing him also of wrong in demanding that which she never received:
the Soldier on the other side fretting amain, accused her of cousenage; which
stir when the man of the house heard (though privy to all before) yet
dissemblingly took his Wives part, and thrust the soldier out of doors: who
being thoroughly chafed with that indignity, drew his Sword, and ran at the door
with the point of it: whereat the Host cried, Thieves, Thieves, saying that he
would have entered his House by force, so that the poor Soldier was taken and
put in Prison, and by process of Law, to be condemned to death: but the very
day wherein this hard Sentence was to be pronounc^d and executed, the Devil
entered into the prison, and told the Soldier he was condemned to dye;
nevertheless if he would give himself body and soul to him, he would promise to
deliver him out of their hands: the prisoner answering, said that he had rather
dye being innocent, then be delivered on such conditions: Again, the Devil
propounded to him the great danger his life was in, and also used all cunning
means possible to persuade him. But the other resolutely withstood his
temptation, that at last he promised to revenge him of his enemies for nothing;
advising him moreover to plead not guilty, to declare his innocence and their
wrong, and to entreat the Judge to grant him one that stood by in a blew Cap,
to be his Advocate: the Soldier accepted this offer, and being called to the
Bar, and indicted there of Felony, presently desired to have his Attorney, who
was there present, to plead for him: then began the fine and crafty Doctor to
plead, and defend his Client very cunningly; affirming him to be falsely
accused, and unjustly condemned, and that his Host did withhold his money, and
offered him violence: and to prove the Assertion, he reckoned up every
circumstance in the Action, yea, the very place where they had hid the money.
The Host on the other side stood in denial very impudently, wishing the Devil
might take him if he had it: at these words (for the subtle Lawyer waited for
this advantage) the Devil laid hold on the Host, and carrying him out of the
Sessions house, hoisted him into the air so high, that he was never after seen
or heard of.

A Gentleman near the City of Torga, who got his living by ro^bing and ranging
the fields, met one day with a Spirit in form of a horseman, who saluted him,
and proffered him his service: the other accepting of it, made him his Groom,
and ever when he went out, gave him special charge of a certain horse which he
esteemed very much of; the Devil finding he could never please his Master,
concerning this matter, and that, notwithstanding, all his double diligence,
his Master never thought him well enough looked after, took the horse one day
when ^is master was abroad, and carried him to the top of a high Tower, and put
his head out of the window. The horse seeing his Master, come home, began to
neigh and stomp, as though joyful of his return, but the servant never came
again to fetch him down, and left all the neighborhood in great admiration.

Froissard reports that a certain Priest going to Law with a Parishioner, was
cast by him; and, that resolving not to stop there (for he had skill in Magic)
he raised a Spirit, whom he sent to torment him, upon promise of such a reward.
The spirit posts immediately to the Gentleman's house, and there by his noise
and the pranks he played, soon manifested what he was. The gentleman upon this
strange vexation, got his neighbors, good Religious men, to watch with him,
and when at midnight the spirit came, it was resolved he should speak to it.
The Devil according to his agreement with the Priest, never mist his hour, but
came as he used to do that night, throwing the chairs and stools up and down
the house, making a noise and great disturbance. Whereupon the gentleman boldly
asked in Gods Name, what he was. Ah quoth the Devil, and laughed, do you not yet
know that I am a spirit? yes said the Gentleman again, but who sent thee
hither? the Priest, said the Spirit, because thou overthrewst him at Law, and
has promised me also ten Crowns for my pains. Away said the Gentleman for
shame, art thou so bare as to serve such a pittyful Rascal for so little money?
I will give thee forty Crowns to serve me, and all thy business shall be, only
to bring me News from all parts of the World. I Will do it, said the Devil, but if
ever you desire to see me, you shall certainly lose me. Thus did this Gentleman
know, before any Post could come, of all the Transactions in the World, and had
news from the remotest parts of it: insomuch, that he began to be sought after
by every one for News, since nothing in the whole world was done, of which he
had not intelligence. But at last perceiving this familiarity would bring him
into the trouble and strict inquiry of the Law; and fearing least the Spirit
might show him some slippery trick for his forty Crowns, he resolved to put him
away. And thereupon, the next time he came, Artan, said he, (for so the spirit
called himself) since thou have been so punctual hitherto in thy service, I
would now ^ain see thee in some shape or other. You shall, replied he, and the
first thing you see upon the floor of your Chamber to morrow morning, shall be
me. The morning being come, the Gentleman looked on his floor, but could see no
body. Wherefore when he heard the spirit next, did you not promise, said he, to
appea^ to me in some shape this morning in my chamber? well, and did you not
see, replied the Devil, two Straws tumbling over each other, that was I. But I
minded them not, said the Gentleman, and have not as yet seen thee as I desire.
Mind better then answered he, and the first creature you see to morrow out of
your window, shall be me. So the next morning, when the Gentleman rose to the
window, he could see nothing in his yard, but a great, leaner and uglier Sow,
then can be described, insomuch that calling to his servants, he commanded them
to hunt that ugly creature out of the yard, which as they were doing, it
vanished in a tempest, and the house was troubled no more.

Olaus relates, that a Gentleman passing by a Forest with his servants, was
belated in the way, and forced to stay in the Woods all night, having nothing
to eat; at which he said merrily to his Retinue, would Sir Hubert of whom so
many stories pass, would provide us some food in this solitary Wood. Which
words, he had no sooner spoken, but a great Wolf rushed by them, and returned
immediately with Sheep on his back, which he let fall in their sight, and
vanished; leaving them to dress the meat the Devil had sent them.

Alexander ab Alexandro, writes, that a Monk of the Monastery of Ardens, going
early in the morning through the Forest to a Town thereby, overtook a man of a
stern countenance, loose kind of vesture, and very tale stature, with whom he
traveled, till at last they came ^o a great wash; where the man proffered the
Monk, being a Religious person, and of lesser stature, to carry him over on his
back. The Monk gl^d of this profer, got up; but casting his Eyes down toward
the water that was very clear, and seeing his Porters feet, of a strange and
deformed shape, he blessed himself with the sign of the Cross; at which the
Devil hasted so fast away in a whirlwind, that it toar up a great Oak by the
roots; which gave the poor Monk cause to think that if he had not in time
perceived the Devil to be his Porter, he should have been stifled in the waters
by him.

Fincelius reports, that in the year 1532. a certain Gentleman to torment a
poor Tenant that owed him rent, commanded him with threats, to bring to his
house that night for fuel (it being the Christmas tide) a certain great Oak out
of such a wood, which if he failed to do, he would turn him out of his House.
The poor man, although the thing was impossible, nevertheless, to show his
willingness, went with his Ax toward the Wood, much afflicted at the hard
commands of his Lord. Thus as he is going, he is overtaken by a tall man, that
having asked his grief, profers him his help in the matter; the poor man
over-joyed with his courtesy, questioned not the means, but went with him to
the Oak, and was now preparing himself for the work, by pulling off his Doublet
and Breeches. But the other contrary to his expectation, takes the vast Oak in
his arms, and pulls it up by the root, and laying it on his shoulder (for 'twas
as easy to be carried, as pulled up) he brought and threw it down into the
Gentleman's yard; where afterward it became so hard, that it could never be
hewn in pieces with Axes, nor burnt with fire, but remained a lasting monument
in that place.

I judge there is none so ignorant of the Manners and Fashions of his
Neighboring countries, but knows they are far different, and in some manner
how they differ. I shall leave it therefore to the judicious Reader to suppose
in his fancy, a Country man of France, in his wooden shoes, leather doublet,
and high crowned hat, his Sith on his shoulder, bag and bottle at his waste:
which things, though in England, have nothing admirable, yet in Persia,
Mosco^y, and the like Foreign Nations, the whole habit will seem most strange
and wonderful. Such a poor Country fellow going to a piece of ground two or
three miles distant from his own habitation, to mow, is overtaken by a man on
horseback, whom taking for no other than some country man, he fell into
discourse with him concerning his journey, so that at last being both to go the
same way, the other proffered him the use of his horse, to ride behind him,
which the honest Mower willingly accepted of; but being well seated, and
thinking now to have proceeded in his journey, he is carried through the air
with such swiftness, that the astonishment gave him no time to speak, and fear
made him hold fast to the other. Thus passed they over many towns and
countries, till at last coming over the marketplace in Turkey, good God, said
he, what people are these, and whither am I going? the spirit confounded at the
holy name, let him fall in the midst of the multitude, but by reason of the
great store of Tents, and clothes that kept the commodities from the scorching
heat of the Sun, the vehemence of his fall was abated, and in short space he
came again to his senses. By this time an infinite number of Turks were
assembled in a ring around him, but a great distance, for some supposed him he
was a god dropped from Heaven; others that Saturn the Heathen Deity of Time with
his Sith on his shoulder, was come to hide himself again on earth; others
interpreted it that time was ceasing to be, and that the world was now at an
end: in brief, all were amazed, as you may imagine, as well at each particular
part of his habit, which was wonderful, as the strangeness of his coming being
no less admirable. Yet still their astonishment increased, to hear him speak in
a strange dialect, but he thinking they could not hear him, approaches toward
them; on the other side fear still makes them to recede. By this time news of
this rare accident came to the Grand Seignior, and Interpreters were sent, to
know the matter perfectly; which being done, he was sent back to France by the
Ambassadors means, then residing in Turkey, that the King and all the world
might be certified of what had happened.

Siarra a Spaniard, left in his Manuscript what is wonderful to relate,
concerning Spirits in America, that when the Spaniards began their Conquests in
that place, certain of them chased a great Liou, with their guns and swords;
and when they thought they had shot him, and that he fell down dead, and were
going to cut off his Head, he vanished in a strong wind that beat them all
back* some yards, but without great damage.

Another Spaniard being alone, thought he met with a foul Black Moor, and
discharged at him, but the Moor came running upon him with fingers open like to
the laws of a Cat, which caused him to trust no longer to his weapon, but to
call on God for help, at whose name the foul fiend vanished. Six other
Spaniards seizing upon a young Moor, near to a Mountain, that seemed to cry,
and be almost starved, threatened him, to see if he would confess of any thing
that was left by the enemy and hid; whereupon he brought them to a concavity in
the Mountain, and bid them follow him and he would show them great Treasures,
two of the company were so bold, but before they were gone far in, the rest
heard a pitiful noise, and none were so foolhardy as to venture after them;
from which time the place is called to this day the Devils Den.

The next delusion the Devil put upon them, was about a fortnight after, but
despairing of his former practices, he now assumed the shape of a Spaniard,
exhorting some fifty more to follow him, and he would go to the top of an Hill
and spy the enemy; where as soon as they were come he vanished in a strong wind
and smoke, dispersing and throwing them all down the Hill, to the loss of
seven, and much hurt to the rest: This, says the Author, was evident in the
sight of part of our Army, and forced belief from those that before gave no
credit to what particular persons often related. Yet what is more admirable, is
this, that as Siarra and his comrade were one day traveling together, a little
Blackamoor of exquisite shape, addressed himself to his companion, desiring he
would take him to wait upon him; this he spoke with such a grace, beyond what
could be expected from any Moor, that by Siarra's persuasions, the other took
him for his servant. Now whatever his Master set him about, he did it with most
admirable speed and diligence, insomuch that having left a knife one day four
or five miles off, where the Army last encamped, he would send the boy for it,
to whom Siarra said, this is indeed a task for the Devil himself (at which
words he remembered afterward the boy to be very attentive, and his eyes to
sparkle) and it were as good to seek a needle in a field of Hey; therefore
trouble not your boy about it; nevertheless the boye's forwardness incited his
Master to send him for it, and as though he had wings he went presently out of
their sight, returning again in short space with the knife: at which so speedy
arrival, his Master expected he should have been breathless, but he skipped and
jumped as it were for joy that he had pleasured his Master. Another time about
five hundred Moors rising out of an ambush, set upon a party of fifty Spaniards
whereof Siarra and his companion were two, yet for all their number, contrary
to the Spaniards expectations, the Moors ran away, terrified at something,
whereof the Spaniards were wholly ignorant, who dared not to follow least they
should bring themselves into some unknown treachery. Many such like services
did the young Blackmoor to Siarra and his companion, the last was as follows.
As these two with four more were traveling up a certain Mountain, to view the
subjacent places, they perceived a man of prodigious stature, walking up and
down very melancholy, who often cast such terrible looks upon them, that as
well by a certain fear caused by the extenuation of the air, when Spirits are
near, as by a conception they had that he was so, they were much astonished and
afraid; whereupon the young Blackmoor that served Siarra's companion, ran
toward him, and kneeled down, and as it were entreated him, whereupon he
immediately flew up into the air out of their sight. This caused greater
astonishment, then what ever had happened before, and therefore his Master never
left examining his boy what he was, till at last, he confessed after this
manner.

I am, though otherwise I have appeared to you in form of a boy, a Spirit of
this Region, subject to the great Master Agnan, whom you just now saw ascend
into the air, after he seemed to bewail the loss of his people, and his Worship
which the Spaniards have destroyed; he was certainly come to do you mischief,
as formerly he had done to some of your company, but my entreaties dissuaded
him, having told upon what account I served you; nor shall any of his ministers
torment you as long as you stay in this place, as you may believe by what is
already past: For when the Five hundred set upon you, I caused above a Thousand
Spaniards to appear before their sight, which was the cause of their sudden
flight. Now the reason why I serve you (for according to the charge laid upon
me; I was to declare it, before I left you) is, because you spared formerly a
Moor whom you took with your own hand in flight, a tall person, with a Hawks
nose; the same was a Priest to our great Master, and had a Spirit granted him,
to attend on him; by his charge I was sent to protect you, as long as you stay
in this Country, for the favor you showed him in sparing his life. Having
thus said, he ran a little from them, and beating the ground thrice with his
foot, he was carried into the Air out of their sight. Not long after, as they
returned to Spain, a great storm arose, during which, it was so dark that none
of the Heavenly light appeared, and all hopes of safety were taken away, till
at last Siarra perceived as he thought, the young Moor in the Shrouds, after
which that dismal Storm ceased, and their Voyage became Calm and pleasant.

Pharies.
OF Pharies also those little Mimick Elves, that appear always very small of
stature, and busy themselves chiefly in imitating the operations of men; we
read in Georgius Agricola that great searcher of Subterraneal mines, that they
appear frequently in those places whence precious Metals are dug, and from
their manners are called Cobali, or Imitators of men; these seem to laugh, to
be clothed like the workmen, to dig the earth, and to do many things, that
really they do not; mocking sometimes the workmen, but seldom or never hurting
them. The Latins have called them Lares and Larvae, frequenting, as they say,
Houses, delighting in neatness, pinching the Slut, and rewarding the good
housewife with money in her shoe.

Siarra has left us this notable Relation, that there lived in his time in
Spain, a table and beautiful Virgin, but far more famous for her excellence at
her Needle; insomuch that happy did that Courtier think himself, that could
wear the smalest piece of her work, though at a price almost invaluable. It
happened one day, as this admirable Semstress sat working in her Garden, that
casting aside her Eye on some fair Flower or Tree, she saw, as she thought, a
little Gentleman, yet one that showed great Nobility by his clothing, come
riding toward her from behind a bed of Flowers; thus surprised how any body
should come into her Garden, but much more, at the stature of the person, who
as he was on Horseback exceeded not a foots length in height; she had reason to
suspect that her eyes deceived her. But the Gallant spurring his Horse up the
Garden, made it not long, though his Horse was little, before he came to her:
then greeting the Lady in most decent manner, after some Complements past, he
acquaints her with the cause of his bold Arival; that forasmuch as he was a
Prince amongst the Pharies, and did intend to celebrate his Marriage on such a
day, he desired she would work him Points for him and his Princess against the
time he appointed. The Lady consented to his demands, and he took his leave,
but whether the multitude of business caused the Lady to forget her promise, or
the strangeness of the thing made her neglect the work, thinking her sight to
have been deceived, I know not; yet so it fell out, that when the appointed
time came, the work was not ready. The hour wherein she had promised the Phary
Prince some fruits of her Needle, happened to be one day as she was at dinner
with many Noble persons, having quite forgot her promise, when on a sudden
casting her eye to the door, she saw an infinite train of Pharies come in: so
that fixing her eyes on them, and remembering how she neglected her promise, she
sat as one amazed, and astonished the whole company. But at last the train had
mounted upon the Table, and as they were prancing on their Horses round the
brims of a large dish of white-broth, an Officer that seemed too busy in making
way before them, fell into the dish, which caused the Lady to burst into a
sudden fit of laughter, and thereby to recover her senses. When the whole
Phary company was come upon the Table, that the brims of every dish seemed
filled with little Horsemen, she saw the Prince coming toward her, hearing she
had not done what she promised, seemed to go away displeased. The Lady
presently fell into a fit of Melancholy, and being asked by her friends the
cause of these alterations and astonishments, related the whole matter; but
notwithstanding all their consolations, pined away, and dyed not long after.

It Is reported likewise of a country girl, being sent out daily by her Mother,
to look to a Sow that was then big with pigs, that the Sow always strayed out
of the girls sight, and yet always came safe home at night; this the maid
often observing, resolved to watch her more narrowly, and followed her one day
so close, till they both came to a fair green Valley, where was laid a large
basin full of milk and white bread; the Sow having eaten her Mess, returned
home, and that night pigg'd eleven pigs, the good wife rising early the next
morning to look to her beast, found on the threshold of the stye ten half
Crowns, and, entering in, saw but one pig, judging by these things that the
Pharies had fed her fow and bought her pigs.

A certain woman having put out her child to Nurse in the Country, found when
she came to take it home, that its form was so much altered, that she scarce
knew it; nevertheless not knowing what time might do, took it home for her own.
But when after some years it could neither speak nor go, the poor woman was
feign to carry it with much trouble in her arms; and one day a poor man coming
to the door, God bless you Mistress said he and your poor child, be pleased to
bestow something on a poor man: ah! this child, replied she, is the cause of
all my sorrow, and related what had happened; adding moreover that she thought it
was changed, and none of her child. The old man, whom years had rendered more
prudent in such matters, told her that to find out the truth, she should make a
clear Fire, sweep the hearth very clean, and place the child fast in his chair
that he might not fall before it; then break a dozen eggs, and place the four
and twenty half shells before it, then go out and listen at the door, for if
the child spoke it was certainly a Changeling, and then she should carry it out
and leave it on the Dunghill to cry, and not to pity it, till she heard its
voice no more. The woman having done all things according to these words, heard
the child, say, seven years old was I, before I came to the Nurse, and four
years have I lived since, and never saw so many Milk-pans before. So the woman
took it up and left it upon the Dunghill to cry and not to be pitied, till at
last she thought the voice went up into the air; and coming out, found, there
in the stead, her own natural and wel-favoured child.

CHAP. VII. Of Specters and Phanthasms.
THE History of Milan gives credit to an Adventure very notable, which happened
to two Merchants passing through the wood of Turin to go to France, who met
with a Spirit in form of a man of tall stature, who called after them, saying,
return, return back again, and go to Louys Sforce, to whom you shall give this
Letter from me. Then they asked him who he was, to which he answered; that he
was Galaas Sforce his brother: now Galaas Sforce, had been dead long before.
The Merchants therefore much astonished, promised to do his commands, and went
back to Milan to the Duke, to whom they presented the Letter. The Duke thinking
it a cheat and illusion, put them in Prison: nevertheless, because they
persisted still in affirming the truth of it, the Senate was assembled, where
much dispute passed, touching the opening of this Letter; at last there was
none but Galeas Viscount, that dared to lift up the Seal and read what was
written therein. O Louys, take heed to thy self, for the Venetians and French,
join together against thee to thy hurt, and will utterly destroy thy Race;
nevertheless, if thou will give me three thousand Crowns, thou shall see the
matter reconciled, for I will avert thy sad Destiny. Farewell.

But the Duke could by no means be induced to believe this, which afterward
did truly come to pass. By Lovys, the eleventh King of France, who sent him
prisoner to his Kingdom.

Marsilius Ficinus, as Baronius relates, made a solemn vow with his fellow
Platonist, Michael Marcatus (after they had been pretty warmly disputing of the
immortality of the Soul, out of the principles of their Master Plato) that
whether of them two dyed first, should appear to his friend, and give him
certain information of that truth; (it being Ficinus his fate to dye first, and
indeed not long after this mutual resolution) he was mindful of his promise
when he had left the body. For Michael Marcatus, being very intent at his
Studies betimes in a morning, heard an horse riding by with all speed, and
observed that he stopped at his window; and therewith heard the voice of his
friend Ficinus crying out a loud, O Michael, Michael, Vera, vera sunt illa.
Whereupon he suddenly opened his window, and espied Marsilius on a white Steed,
whom he called after, but he vanished in his sight. He sent therefore presently
to Florence, to know how Marsilius did; and understood that he dyed about that
hour he called at his window; to assure him of his own, and other men's
Immortality.

Dionysius, the Siracusian Tyrant, a little before his death, saw as he sat in
his house, molested with some troublesome thoughts, a filthy and ugly Specter,
brushing and cleansing his Palace, from which fear he was not free, till he
dyed.

Marcus Brutus likewise, when he was meditating something against Octavius, and
Antonius, in his Chamber by a Candle in the night, heard somebody come into his
chamber, and looking about to see if it were any of his Domestic servants, saw
a great and deformed Specter in shape of a man. Nevertheless, not much frighted
at the sight, ^e asked him whether he were a Spirit or a God, or what he would
have. I am said he, thy Evil Genius, and I Will meet thee at Philippi. To whom
Brutus again, as a true and Valiant Roman, I Will meet thee there. Then having
inquired of his servants if they had let any such person in, and finding they
had not, he began to doubt of the success of that War, as afterward it happened,
where again this Genius met him.

Alexander ab Alexandro; writes an admirable History of a Gentleman that had
newly buried his friend, and returning to Rome, lay at an Inn by the way. Where
being alone and awake, there appeared to him the Phantasm of his deceased
friend, pale and wan as when he dyed; whom when he saw and could scarce speak
for fear, he asked at last what he would have. But the Specter returning no
answer, seemed to pull off his clothes, and came to ly by him in the same bed.
The other being extremely frighted, gave way to him, who perceiving he accepted
not of his company, looked upon him with a stern countenance, and having dressed
himself departed. The other out of exceeding fear, fell extremely sick,
affirming for truth, that the feet of this Phantasm were as cold as Ice.

A Gentleman of Naples traveling in the Road, is reported to have heard the
voice of a man imploring and desiring help; and that going to the place, he saw
a terrible Specter beating a young man, but by his Prayers, caused him
immediately to vanish. Afterward he brought the young man to his house, and
although it were long before he came to himself (for the Phantasm ever appeared
before him) yet at last he confessed many great Crimes that he had most
wickedly committed.

The like, we read of a youth of mean parentage amongst the Gabis at Rome, that
going thither, and meditating some Treachery against his Parents, met the Devil
in his way, in shape of a man; so that falling into discourse together, they
came to the same Inn and lay together that night. But when the other was a
sleep, his cursed companion laid hold on him to strangle him, but that the
other awaking, began to pray to God for help, at whose Name Satan made such
have to be gone, that he broke through the top of the house; by which fear the
youth afterward changed his evil intentions, to an honest and Religious life.

A rich Gentleman, that lived thirteen Miles from Goi^is, had made a great
Feast, and invited his friends, but they came not. Whereat being extremely
incensed, come, said he, all the Devils that will, since my friends are so
unworthy. And immediately after, came in many Goblings, as it were, in the
several habits of Merchants, and Gentlemen, Forreiners, who were kindly
welcomed, and sat down to Table. But stretching forth their fingers like Cats
Claws, they were perceived indeed to be Demons; and the Gentleman making some
Invocation to God (as people in fear naturally use to do) they all vanished,
but so perfumed the room, that few guests ever came into it afterward.

Sabellicus writes for a true and admirable relation, that a Secretary of Lewis
Alodiser Lord of I^ole, traveling to Ferrara, met in a Valley between two
great Hills a Phantasme in shape of Lewis's Father, who dyed and had been
magnificently buried not long before, appearing on Horsback, and with a Hawk on
his fist, as it was his custom when he went a Hunting in his life time. This
Specter charged him to return presently to his Son and tell him, that he should
come the next day and meet him in that place, for he had matters of great
importance to discover to him: The Secretary through fear and obeisance went
back to Imole, where he related what had happened: but Lewis, whether he feared
some ambush in that place, or credited not the relation, would not go in
person, but sent another in his name to see what the Spirit would declare: the
Ambassador being arrived with the Secretary at the place, the same shadow
appeared to them, complaining greatly of the Prince that he would not come
himself, and hear what he dared not to reveal to any other. Nevertheless, he
commanded them to return, and tell their Master, that before two and twenty
years, specifying the Month and the Day, he should lose the Government of that
place. The time being come, Lewis stood upon his guard, remembering the threats
pronounced by his Fathers Ghost. Yet notwithstanding, all his preparations,
that Year, that Month, and Day, the Soldiers of Philip Duke of Milan, passed
the Trenches, scaled the Walls, and obtained the Town, and took him prisoner.

Cardan relates, that a friend of his, going in a dark night from Milan to
Galerat, saw a strange apparition of fiery Spirits, who inform of Pesants, ran
behind him in the way upon a fiery Cart, crying with a loud voice, Take heed,
take heed; and although he spurred his horse, and made all the have possible,
yet they were still at his back: till at last, when he came to St. Lorences
Church, which is without the Castle-Gate, he recommended himself to God, and
presently he thought he saw those Pesants, with their burning Cart and Oxen,
swallowed up in the Earth. After this, it was observed, that the Inhabitants of
Galerat, were tormented that year with a cruel Plague, and other great
afflictions.

P. Matthieu Historiographer to Henry the fourth King of France, writes, that
in the year 1598. as that King was hunting in the Forest of Fountainebleau, a
great cry of Hounds and Huntsmen, was heard at half a miles distance; which
sometimes again, as they drew near a wood, seemed to be within twenty paces of
them. Whereupon the King commanded the Earl of Soissons to set Spurs to his
horse and see what it was, believing that there was none so bold as to meddle
with his Game, or hinder his pastime. The Earl of Soissons went, and still
heard the noise, not perceiving whence it came, till a tall man in black
presented himself in a thick mist, crying, Do you hear me? do you hear me? and
suddenly vanished. At which words, the stoutest of them, resolved to leave off
hunting for that day, wherein nothing but danger and fear was expected. Now
although fear commonly ties the tongue, and freezeth the words, nevertheless,
they related this Matter, and have caused it to be inserted in the History of
that King; which many would think to be a fable of Merlin or Urgand the
unknown, if the truth affirmed by so many persons of Credit, and seen by so
many judicious eyes, had not put away all doubt.

There is a History no less admirable, of a Merchant of Sicely, that traveling
in the year 1536. upon the one and twentieth day of March, not far from the
Castle of Tauriming, met in the way with ten Demons in form of Blacksmiths, a
little farther with ten more, and again with another that seemed a true Vulcan,
and having questioned him whither he went, he answered he was going to forge at
Mount Aetna; to which the Merchant replied, that he wondered they should go to
forge on a Mountain that was always covered with Snow. Alas, said the other,
thou know not my strength, but ere long shall perceive it, and then he
vanished. The next day toward night, a great Earthquake opened the Mount in
several places, and much mischief was caused by the fire to the Inhabitants.

CHAP. VIII. Of Places Haunted.
THere was in Athens, a great and spacious House, but very infamous for a
report that it had for long time been haunted by an evil Spirit. That in the
dead time of the night, a strange noise was heard, at first as it were from the
yard, which came nearer and nearer, till there stood before them an old man,
lean, pale, and with a long beard, having his hands and feet chained, which he
often shaked. By these terrors, the Inhabitants fell sick, and many dyed; for
the rememberance of the image impressed on their fancy, caused a deadly fear.
Insomuch that at last, it was left desolate. Nevertheless, Bills were set up in
several places of the City, if peradventure any one would venture to hire and
inhabit it. At that time the Philosopher Athenodorus came to Athens, and
reading one of these bills, and the small rent it was to be let at, by reason
of its infamy, bought it, notwithstanding what the people reported of it. And
gave order the first night, that his bed should be made in the first room of
it, some books and his pen and paper to be brought, that his mind being
employed and busied, might cause no vain fears. In a studying posture therefore
he watched, and when at midnight he heard the noise of Chains and Irons, as had
been reported to him, he neither lifted up his eyes nor left writing, till it
seemed to be in the Room. Then looking toward the door, there appeared the
image of an ancient man loaded with chains, beckoning, as it were, for him to
follow: the Philosopher on the other side, made signs with his hand that he
should stay a little till he had made an end of what he was writing. But the
spirit began again to shake his chains, at which the other left off writing,
and taking the Candle in his hand, followed the Ghost, who proceeded slowly, as
if he were very aged, and much loaded with his chains, till he came into the
yard where he vanished. The Philosopher being left alone, left a mark upon the
place, and the next morning caused it to be dug up; where were found the bones
of a man chained, for the flesh was putrified and eaten away; these being
gathered and buried publicly; the house was never haunted afterward.
Sabellic. lib. 10 Exempl. cap. 3.

Erasmus in his Epistles writes, that on the tenth of April 1533. in an Inn of
Sciltac a town in Switzerland, there was a certain hissing heard about night
time, which seemed to come out of one of the chambers of the house; wherefore
the Host fearing their might have been Thieves, ran thither immediately but
could find no body, yet still heard the same noise in the Garret, and not long
after upon the top of the Chimney: then supposing that it was an evil spirit,
he sent for the Priest to exorcise him, who no sooner began his conjuration,
but the spirit answered he cared not for them, since one was a twhoremaster and
both were thieves, and herefore he would in spite of them burn the town as he
had undertaken (all this was thought afterward to proceed by the means of a
Familiar Spirit, which the maid of that house confessed on her deathbed, to
have had familiarity with, for the space of fourteen years) the Spirit
therefore took this maid to the top of the chimney, and commanded her to spread
such fire as he gave her, which she did, and in less than an hours time all the
town was consumed, notwithstanding the great abundance of water the inhabitants
brought to quench it. Here we may observe the reality of it, as also that the
fire was real that the Devil brought, but of another nature than the common or
any Artificial fire is, and that it did not fall from above as lightning, which
burns only very little, unless it happens on matters easily combustible, as
it happened in the year 1500. at Paris, when the lightning fell upon the Tower of
Billy where the powder was, and since that at Venice.

Furthermore, Philippus Camerarius says of it, that the fire fell here and
there upon the Houses in form of burning Bullets, and if any one went to help
his Neighbor, he was presently called back to help his own. Moreover, I have
heard (says Camerarius) the relation of this woeful visitation from the Vicar
of that place, and many others worthy to be believed, forasmuch as they were
Spectators of all things according to the former relation. The Vicar also had
as it were a Crown about his hair (which he wore long, after the Grecian
manner) of all sorts of colors, which he said happened by the same Spirit, who
threw a Hoop at his head. Moreover the same Demon asked him once if ever he
heard a Raven cr^ak, and thereupon croaked so horribly, that they were almost
dead for fear. The Curate also did affirm (though not without blushing) that he
often told him, and many others, of their private sins so exactly, that they
were forced with shame to quit the place.

CHAP. IX. Of Devilish Impostures.
ABout the year 1545 happened at Corduba a famous City in Spain, a most wonderful
Imposture of Satan. A young girl of a poor Family named Magdalene de la Croix
being but five years old, was put, by her Parents, into a Monastery of Nuns,
whether through Devotion or Poverty, it is unknown, since her years were so few.
Nevertheless (as the Judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out) the Devil appeared to her in shape of a Blakamore, and although
she was at first sight much afraid, yet the Fiend did promise her so many Toys
wherein children delight, that he brought her to discourse with him, ever
injoyning herstreightly, that she should never disclose ought of their private
Conversation. About that time, the Girl began to show a very quick and
apprehensive wit, and a nature different from others, which gained her no small
esteem from the rest of the Nuns, both old and young. Being come to the age of
Twelve, she was solicited by the Devil to marry him, and for her Dowry, he
promised her that for the space of thirty years, she should live in such a
reputation of Holiness through all Spain, that the like was never before. Thus
while Magdalene under this contract, passed the time in her Chamber with this
wicked Spirit, that entertained her with his Illusions, another Demon took her
shape and resemblance, and constantly resorted to the Church, to the Pulpit,
and to the Cloisters, and all the Assemblies made by the Nuns, with a great
deal of seigned Devotion; he told Magdalene also after he had gone to Church in
her place, all that was done in the world; of which she giving notice to those
who had her already in great Reputation, began not only to be accounted an Holy
Virgin, but to bear the name of a Prophetess: wherefore although she was not
yet come to full age, yet she was elected Mother Abbess by the consent both of
the Monks and Nuns. Now when the Nuns went to Communion on Easter day, and
other great Festivals among them, the Priest always complained that some body
had stolen one of the Hosts from him, which was carried by this Angel of
darkness unto Magdalene, who being in the midst of her Sisters, showed it unto
them, and put it in her mouth as a great Miracle. Moreover, it is said, that
when she was not present at Mass, though there were a wall between her and the
Priest, yet at the Elevation of the Corpus Christi, the wall did cleave that
she might see it. It is also very well known that if at any Festival day the
Nuns carried her in Procession with them, to make the action more venerable, by
some extraordinary action, she carried a little Image of Christ newly born,
which she covered with her hair that grew down to her feet. Many more such
illusions she used chiefly on solemn days, that they might be the more
recommendable. By this time the Pope, the Emperor, and the Grandees of Spain
did write to her, and by their Letters entreated her, to remember them in her
Prayers, and asked her advice and councels in all matters of great concernment,
as by several Letters found in her Closet was manifested. Many Ladies also and
Gentlewomen would not wrap their newborn children in Swaddling clothes, till
they had been blessed by the Abbess Magdalene. But God permitted not this
Diabolical cheat to lie longer concealed; for Magdalene after she had spent
about thirty years in this acquaintance with the Devil, and had been Abbess
twelve years, repented of her former life, and detesting these abominable Acts
and the horrid society of Satan, she freely discovered, when every one thought
least on it, all this notorious wickedness to the visitors of the Order; yet
some report, that perceiving the Nuns began to find the deceit, prevented their
discovery, by her own confession; for such is the custom in Spain, that he
obtains his pardon that does voluntarily confess his crime. At the hearing of
this Confession, Magdalene was imprisoned in the Monastery of which she was
Abbess. Nevertheless, in the mean time, Satan still continued his illusions,
taking the chief place in the Church according to its wonted manner, and was
seen on its knees praying and staying for the rest of the Nuns: insomuch that
every one thought it had been their Abbess, and that the visitors had given her
leave to assist at Mattins, for the great signs she gave of repentance. But the
next day finding she was still in Prison, the matter was related to the
Visitors; and her process was at last sent to Rome, but because she had
willingly confessed, she received Absolution. This History is affirmed by
Zuinger, au Theater de la vie human; by Bodin also, and Cassiodore Reny.

Josephus relates in his 18 Book and 4th. Chap. that there was at Rome a Noble
woman named Paulina, no less famous for her Paarentage than her virtue and
beauty, in the flower of her age, and married to Saturninus, a person not
unworthy of her. Now, Decius Mundus fell so extremely in Love with this Lady,
that after he had offered for one nights lodging, two hundred thousand drachms,
and was repulsed by her, he resolved to end his life in misery. But his Fathers
man, a person of evil and subtle nature, conscious to his passion, promised for
fifty thousand drachms to bring her into his Arms: and the money being paid, he
proceeded in this manner. Paulina being much given to the worship of the
goddess Isis, he calls together her Priests, and silence being sworn, he
procures them with large rewards to go to Paulina as sent from the god Anubis
to fetch her unto him. This message she received gladly, and her friends
rejoiced that she should be thought worthy of the god Anubis: no^ did her
Husband knowing her chastity to be so great, any ways let her preparations.
The night being come, she was after supper shut by the Priests in the Temple,
where Mundus met her, whom she obeyed and pleasured that night, supposing he
had been the god she worshipped. But it was not long after before Mundus meeting
her in the City, thou have well done Paulina, said he, that thou savedst me two
hundred thousand Drachms: nor is it any matter that thou denyedst me as Mundus,
since thou have entertained me for Anubis. At these words she tore her hair and
rent her clothes, and related the matter to her Husband, and her husband to
the Emperor Tiberius; who upon strict inquisition, hanged the Priests, raced
the Temple, and commanded that the Statues of Isis and Anubis, should be thrown
into the river Tyber; but Decius Mundus, escaped with banishment only, his
crime being referred to the strength of a passion that had deprived him of
reason.

Eusebius reports the same of one of Saturns Priests, by name Tyrannus, who
procured that such and such a Lady, as by the will of the god, should every
night be shut in the Temple; nor did any Husband think himself unhappy in this,
but sent his wife richly adorned that night to the Temple, and also great
presents, that she might be the more acceptable to the god. Now Tyrannus
constantly shut the Temple, delivered up the keys, and went away. But 'twas
not long before he returned through his secret doors into the image of Saturn
that was hallow at the back and joined to the wall. Then did he speak to the
woman as she prayed to him, and at last commanding her to put out the watch
Taper, descended to her betwixt fear and joy, that she was thought worthy to
accompany a god. This practice had long time passed undiscovered, till a Chaste
Matron abhorring the fact by perceiving that it was the voice of Tyrannus, that
spoke to her, complained to her Husband of the disgrace; who incited also by
his own, brought him to the Tormentors; where by confessing the abominable
fact, he filled the* Pagan Nobility with shame and confusion, their Mothers
being Adulteresses, their Fathers Cuckolds, and their Children Bastards.

Henricus Stephanus, in his Book Entitled Apology pour Herodote gives us an
admirable relation to our purpose, after this manner. There has been formerly
(says he) and remains still even to this day, a great quarrel and dispute
between the Dominican and Fvanciscan Friars, concerning the Conception of the
blessed Virgin. The former hold she was conceived in Sin, the Franciscan that
she was not. Insomuch that a Dominican Friar of Francford, named Vigand, made a
Book to maintain that the Virgin Mary was conceived and born in Sin, and found
fault with all the preceding Doctors that had been of a contrary Opinion. On
the otherside, John Spengler the Franciscan, thinking himself wronged by the
said Vigand, procured that a public meeting should be had at Heidlberg, where
the matter should be discussed. But the Prince Philip Palatine, hindering this,
the Dominicans (...) the Franciscans to Rome, where the case lay undecided a
long time. At last the Dominicans held their general meeting at Vimtffen, where
among other things, they consulted how they might uphold their Opinion,
although it was rejected by almost the while world, and several Doctors had
written so much against it, and persuaded the world to the contrary. They
resolved therefore by some false Miracle, to strengthen their Opinion, and four
Dominican Friars were to put the same in execution. These by the means of
Francis Ulchi, who was under Prior and a Negromancer, brought their design to
pass in this wise. It happened a while after, that a Journeyman Tailor named John
Jetzer born in Zurzea, was admitted into their Order, and after he had received
the Habit, one of the Conspirators went to him by night to his Cell, and began
to feign himself to be a Spirit, being wrapped in a sheet, and making a strange
noise with small sticks and stones that he threw. The other much terrified,
began to complain the next day, even to those persons that were the Authors of
it. But all comforted him and exhorted him to be patient. And one night among
the rest, the counterfeit Ghost spoke to the poor Novice, and charged him to do
Penance for him, which the Novice imparting the next day to the Friars, 'twas
resolved he should do public penance for the relief of that Spirit. At which
time one of them began to Preach, and expound to the people why that penance
was done, not without magnifying his Order, to which that spirit had addressed
it self, blaming on the contrary that of the Franciscans. One time amongst the
rest, the Spirit commended to the Novice, the order of the Dominicans, as well
for the number of Learned men that had been of it, as for the holy manner of
life they followed: adding, that he was not ignorant how their Order was hated
by many, because of their Dr. St. Thomas, whom they followed in that Opinion,
that the Virgin Mary was conceived in Original Sin. Nevertheless, many of their
Enemies were grievously tormented by the vengeance of God, and the Town of
Berne would perish, if it did not expel the Franciscan Friars, who were of
opinion that the Virgin was conceived without And that particularly Dr.
Alexander, Dr. Ales, and John Scotus the subtle Doctor, both Franciscan Friars,
were grievously tormented in Purgatory, for inducing the people to hold that
opinion. At last the said spirit did counterfeit the Virgin Mary herself,
assuring him she was conceived with sin, and certified him also in many other
things he desired to know from her. She made also in his right hand, a mark of
her Son Jesus Christ, by peircing his hand with a very sharp Nail: then to
appease the pain, she put Lint into it, made of the clouts she wrapped her
Child with in Egypt. But not contented alone with this, the said Friars gave
him to drink, a certain Magic Liquor by which he lost his sense and
understanding, and then with Aquafotis made four more wounds upon him.
Afterward when by means of a second Liquor, he came to himself, he was much
astonished at his wounds; but they persuaded him, they came from God; and put
him afterward into a little Cell all hung with the Pictures of the passions of
Christ: they gave him also a drink that made him froath at the mouth; and
persuaded him that he was then fighting against death as Christ had done. To
conclude, they played so many pranks with this poor Monk, that at last he began
to perceive the delusion, and escaping out of their hands, discovered all their
devilish practices. Whereupon the actors of this wickedness, John Vetter
Prior, Steven Boltzhorst Preacher, Francis Ulchi under-Prior, and Henry
Steniecker receiver of the Rents, were condemned to be burnt alive in a field,
before the company of the Franciscans.

There is a pleasant relation amongst the Narrations, Mundi Fortuitas, which I
shall not omit in this place; how in a Village of France inhabited by rude
country Boors, a Man fitter for the Cart than a Pulpit; yet as being the best
Scholar in the Town, was made Vicar: and according to custom, nothing was
done, nothing thought upon, but the Vicar was ever present among the good
women. Insomuch, that by such frequent familiarily, he grew to be well
acquainted with one Lisetta a Parishioners wife. Her Husband was not so blind,
but he could perceive his horn a growing, and from that time, permitted not the
Vicar to come any more to his house. Thus was all the fat in the fire, and
their hopes cancelled, had not love found out another way: for according to the
Vicars instruction, Lisetta counterfeited her self possessed with the Devil,
turning her eyes, arms and legs in strange postures, froathing at the mouth,
and rattling in her throat. The simple neighborhood astonished at these
actions, cried she was possessed; and her poor Husband not a little troubled at
it, forgot what was past, and goes for the Vicar, to exorcise the Spirit. Alas
my friend says the other, thy Jealousy and suspicion, I fear, of our holy
Order, has been the cause of this misfortune, for as much as the Chastest
Matrons have ran mad, and have been possessed upon this account. Then taking
his Robes, Book, and what was fitting on this account, he goes along with him
to his wife, and the usual ceremony in such cases, being performed, he asks
the spirit, who it was? Lisetta, as she was before instructed, answered in a
small voice, I am the father of this young woman, who am to do Penance for ten
years space, in one body or other. Her Husband thinking it to be her Fathers
spirit, my Father, said he, I desire thee for Gods Sake, to come out of her.
Then the spirit replied, I will indeed come out of her, but I shall enter into
thee, to complete the rest of my time alloted for my Penance. The poor man was
so terrified at this, that falling at the Parsons feet, my friend said he, do
you not know some way to avert this heavy Judgment, either by Prayers,
Fastings, Alms, or other Charitable deeds? then Lisetta perceiving all things
to succeed according to her desire, thou art too poor, said she, to hinder thy
fate by Alms or charitable Deeds, and instead of these, thou must go visit
forty Religious places, and pray in every one, and entreat God to forgive thee
thy sins, otherwise never look to escape what Heaven has ordained. Moreover
the spirit went on concerning his false Jealousy and suspicion of Holy Men,
insomuch, that he fell at the Vicars feet, asking forgiveness, and shortly
after began his Pilgrimage. In the mean time, the Vicar was always with his
wife, under pretense* to lay the spirit, but it is questionable whether he
raised not a worse.

In the year 1534. The Praetors wife Aurelia, had taken care before she dyed,
that she might be buried privately, without Pomp and Ceremonies (for then it
was a custom in Erance) that when any Noble person dyed, the Heralds should
call the people together by Cymbals and such like instruments, and then
rehearse the Nobility and worth of the person deceased, desiring the people to
pray for them: many mendicant Friars also attended the Corpse with an infinite
company of lights. So that by a kind of emulation, the more the Pomp was, and
the greater the concourse of people, the nobler the Family was esteemed. But
her Husband obeying her last desire, gave no more to the Franciscans that
buried her, than six Crowns, whereas much more was expected; and afterward,
when he cut down wood and denied them some, they were so incensed, that they
resolved in revenge, to make the people believe, his wife was damned in Hell.
To which purpose, they placed a youth upon the roof of the Church, who at night
in Prayer-time, made a great noise there; and notwithstanding their exorcisms
and conjurations would answer nothing; then being commanded to give some sign
that he were a dumb spirit, for a sign he made a great noise: the next day, the
Franciscans related to the people what happened, but desired them not in any wise
to absent themselves for that, So the next night, when Prayers began, the
spirit also made a noise in the former manner; but being asked what he was,
made a sign that he was not to speak; he was commanded therefore to answer by
signs (for there was a hole made where the youth could hear what the exorcists
said; and he had a Tablet in his hand, by striking upon which, he gave signs
that could be heard beneath) first therefore being asked if he were any of
those that had been buried there, he made a sign he was, then many names being
recited of all the persons buried there, when they came to the Praetors wife,
he knoc'd for a sign that he was her spirit, then they asked if she were
damned, and for what fault? whether for Covetousness, Lust, Pride, or for the
new Heresy and Lutheranisme? and what she desired by her unquietude? whether
that her body should be removed into another place? to which questions, the
spirit by its signs, did give either its affirmation or negation; and when it
had signified that it was tormented for Lutheranism, and desired to be removed
from that place: then they desired the people to bear witness of it, but the
people fearing the Praetors displeasure would not do it. Nevertheless the
Franciscans removed thence their bread and water, and all the sacred vessels,
till at last, the Bishops Vicegerent to be better certified concerning this
matter, came in person with many Honorable and Religious men, and commanded
them to exorcise the spirit in their presence, and to send some body to the
roof of the place to see if they could perceive any thing. This the Authors of
this villainy withstood, saying, the spirit was not to be troubled; and although
he was very urgent, yet could he not prevail with the Franciscans to permit any
one to go up. The Praetor in this time went to the King, and because the
Franciscans standing upon their privileges, hindered a strict inquiery into the
matter; the King sent some of his Council with full power to examine all
things. Those of the Franciscans therefore that were suspected, were laid hold
on, yet for fear of a shameful death, confessed nothing: But at last, the King
promising them Pardon, they disclosed the whole business. nevertheless, they
were condemned to be sent again to Aurelia, and put in Prison, till they had
publicly before all the people confessed their crime, in the place that
Malefactors used to be Executed.

CHAP. X. A true and admirable process of a Witch that wrought Miracles, by the
help. of the Devil.
Mr. Iosse Donhoadere, a learned Lawyer of Flanders, in his Book, Entitled
Practique Criminal, writes to this purpose. There was in the time that I was
Counselor in the Town of Bruges, an old woman, that in carriage, clothes, and
manner of life, was in appearance irreprehensible; insomuch, that she gained an
esteem from all, and every one had a reverence for her; forasmuch as she
healed, as it were miraculously, the children of many Honorable Families;
straightning the crooked, and setting broken joints instantly in their places;
not by Art or Physic, but certain words and ceremonies of Devotion: as to fast
three days, with bread and water, to say so many times the Lords Prayer, to go
on Pilgrimage to Nostre Dame d' Ardenbourg, or to St. Arnoul d' Audenbourg, or
to St. Iosse, or to St. Hubert of Ardennes, or to say a Mass or two in a day,
or to say other certain Prayers and Anthems: These Devotions being exactly
performed: the sick people were healed, through the faith they and their
relations had in this woman. The carriage and miracles of this woman being
published through the Country, the Counselors and Magistrates, that had more
wit than the vulgar sort, caused her to be apprehended one night; to be put in
Prison and examined, by what authority and means, and by what confidence she
performed such Cures. To which she answered, always confidently, that she did
them upon good intentions, and that there was no reason they should torment and
persecute her for doing good. Nevertheless the Council being moved by manifest
signs, condemned her to be Rackt, gently exhorting her to declare the truth;
but still she persisted in her first answer, affirming there was nothing
unlawful, and that all was done without any compact or agreement with the
Devil. There was then present at the Examination the Bourgomaster of Bruges, a
man very much tormented with the Gout, that of times he cried out as if he had
been racked himself; which the old woman perceiving, and turning her self to
him, said, Mr. Bourgomaster, have you a mind to be rid of the trouble of your
Gout, if you have, I shall cure you, and that very soon; if it were possible,
replied the Bourgomaster, I would willingly give two thousand crowns to be
whole, and you shall have them if thou performest what thou say. Then the
other Judges and Registers that were present told him. Sir, pray have a care
what you say, and what you do, believe us and let us send back this Witch into
her chamber, and hear patiently what we shall declare unto you: the woman being
carried back, see said they, what danger you put your self into, by a vain
persuasion that this woman should be equal to the Apostles, and can cure you of
your Gout by lawful means. All indeed that she does, seems apparently Holy
and Divine; but if you look more narrowly into the matter, there is much to be
said against it. Let us call for her therefore again, and inquire how she
pretends to cure you; if she promise to cure you miraculously, as the Apostles
have done the Diseases of their time, and that she follows the means they have
made use of, we shall not be against her, knowing that the hand of God is not
straigntned: but if she make use of unlawful means, and puts her trust in them,
there is reason that all her proceedings should be suspected both by you and us
also.

Therefore when she was sent for back again, one of them said, if thou
presumest to cure the Bourg Master of the Gout, what remedies and means will
you apply? none other, said she, but that the Bourg-Master believe and be
persuaded for certain that I have power to cure him, so shall he be sound, and
set upon his feet. Hereupon she was sent out back to her Chamber, then the
Judges with one accord, told the Bourg-Master and standers by. You see
Gentlemen by the answer of this woman, that she does nothing, but by the power
of Satan, and that she undertakes to cure the Bourg-master by unlawful means;
for in her way she does not follow the Holy Apostles, who cured the sick by
Divine Faith and Power, saying to the Lame man, In the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, rise and Walk: and to the Blind, In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
recover thy sight; so that one was set upon his feet, and the other recovered
his sight; not by humane help, but by the Divine Power, in the Name and Faith
of Jesus Christ. Now this Witch boasts only to cure, if the Patient put his
trust in her and believe that she can do it: such faith, or rather
perfidicusness, is directly against the practice of the Apostles. This answer
being well apprehended and digested, the Bourg-Master was sorry for what he had
done, gave no more credit to woman, and ever after repented him of his levity.
But to return to the Witch, because she did persevere in denying those things
she was accused of, it was concluded she should be put to the Rack, where being
stretch roughly, she acknowledged some light faults, but as for Witchcraft, she
utterly denied it. Whereupon she was released for that time, and locked in her
Chamber. A while after being again accused by new Evidences brought against
her, she was the second time put to the rack, where again she confessed some
small faults, as before. But finding her self tortured, she began to cry and
say, takeme away hence, or I shall stink you all out of the Room, for I can
hold my ex^rement no longer. There was a house of office near, whither the
standers by would have her carried; others more judicious, were of opinion she
should not, fearing some greater difficulty might arise; but by plurality of
voices, she was untv'd, and carried thither: and having staid there half an
Hour and more, although she were called twice or thrice, she was at last
compelled to come forth, and was put to the Rack again, and was tortured more
vehemently then before. But she without crying or lamenting as she had done
before, fell a laughing, and derided and mocked the Judges, bidding them do
what they would, their cruelty could prevail nothing against her. Hereupon the
standers by, thought the Devil had made her impassible, for she would confess
nothing that was charged against her: but being stretched on the Rack, she
either laughed or slept. Therefore by the council of some more judicious in such
matters than the rest, she was taken, and shaved in all parts of the body where
hair used to grow, and was searched by diverse woman, who found tied about her
arms, certain small Parchment notes, containing the names of evil Spirits, with
some crosses intermixed. These Bills being presented to the Magistrate, she was
again stretched on the Rack, where, at the first pull she began to roar and
confess all, whereof she had been accused: and being examined concerning her
former obstinacy in her denials, she said that if she had not been wholly
shaved, and deprived of those Bills, the truth had never came out of her mouth,
This being brought to this pass, the Judges proceeded to condemnation, some
were of Opinion she should be burnt alive, others for the most part, that she
should only be put to a rigorous fine, to be banished from the Country and
never to return upon pain of being burnt: according to this last opinion, she
was set upon a Scaffold, with a false Periwig made on purpose, which was taken
off her head by the Hangman and thrown in the fire kindled to that end.
Afterward she was conducted by two Judges and the Attorney of Bruges out of
their Territory. Thus out of Flanders she went into Zealand, and dwelt some
time at Middlebroug, where she presently fell to her former trade. The Lord
Florent Dam Judge of the town, was advised by us, of what was past concerning
this woman, and in favor of justice, the Copies of her Accusations and
Confessions, and Sentence was sent him; which made him strictly observe her,
and finding by undeniable truths, that she persevered in her diabolical
Witchcraft, caused her to be apprehended and put in Prison, and having narrowly
examined her, by her wilful confessions, and according to her former Sentence,
he condemned her to be burnt alive. After which he sent a Letter, with the
whole Relation to Bruges, whereof Danhoudere has given us this relation.

CHAP. XI. The horrid end of Witches and Negromancers.
ZAcoes and Arfaxad the great Persian Magicians, at the very hour St. Simon and
Jude suffered Martyrdom, were struck dead with Lightning.

Cynops the Prince of Negromancers, was at St. John's Prayers swallowed up with
waters; and Methotin who by his Diabolical illusions, got to be High Priest,
was stoned. Several have been taken away alive by the Devil, but one more
wonderfully, as we may read in Spec. Hist. lib. 26. c. 26. after this manner.

There happened one day that a certain Daw that an old Witch kept, spoke; at
which, the woman let fall the knife out of her hand as she was at dinner, and
grew extreme pale; till at length after many sighs and groans, she broke out
into these words. This day my Plough is come to its last Period, and I shall
certainly suffer some great evil. Whilst she thus spoke, a messenger brought
word that her Son was dead; upon which news, she fell immediately sick, and
sending for the rest of her children which were two* a Monk and a Nun: I have
by my wretched Fate, said she with grief, these many years, followed
Witchcraft, and given my self, body and soul, to the Devil, that persuaded me
to this wickedness, and will be the punishe^ as well as the Author of it. I
desire you therefore that you would not (...) me to assuage my (...) struction
of my soul is (...) shall also ^ew up my (...) skin, and put it into a (...)
^ing fast the top wa^ (...) shall bind it with (...), (...) if I lie securely
(...) ye shall bury me; (...) sung for me, fifty (...) Prayers said. All these
things her two children obeyed, after the death of their mother, but prevailed
not, for the first two nights, when the Monks began to sing Hymns about the
body, the Devils opened the Church doors, that were shut with a great bar, and
broke two chains, but the middlemost being stronger, remained whole: the third
night, the noise was so great of those Demons that came to fetch the body, that
the very foundation of the Church was shaken. But one Devil in shape more
terrible than the rest, broke down the door, and went toward the Coffin,
commanding the body to arise, which answered, it could not for the chain; thou
shall be delivered, replied he, from that hindrance; and going to the Coffin,
he broke the Chain, and with his foot thrust off the covering, then taking the
woman by the hand lead her out of the Church in presence of them all, to the
door, where stood a black horse ready, and proudly Neighing, upon which the
woman was placed, and all the company of Devils went away with her through the
Air, their noise being so great, that the Inhabitants thereabouts were no less
astonished then the beholders.

CHAP. XII. The difference between good and evil Angels, with an admirable
relation of a good Genius.
HAving hitherto in some manner, declared the acts of evil and cursed Spirits,
'twill be reasonable, that before I conclude this Treatise, I give you some
account, of those blessed Angels, which God often times, for reasons best known
to himself, has caused to appear unto men, and to distinguish the one from the
other, there are three ways of discovery. The first is according to Jamblic^s
d' Mysterijs, that the good never appear in any fantastical shape, nor strive
to deceive us, or offer to council us in wicked matters. Evil angels on the
contrary, appear always in strange shapes; and although sometimes they strive
to imitate the Children of Light, to be thought Angels of God, yet because of
their evil nature, if desired to do evil, they willingly consent to it, and are
unconstant, and unstable in all their actions. The second rule to distinguish
them, is, that the works of unclean Spirits, profit no body, as to make a
starve walk, an image speak, and the like, as Simon the Sorcerer, it said to
have done: but those of Divine Powers, allway contribute to man's good, thus our
Savior made the Blind see, the Lame walk, cast out Devils; and the like did
the Apostles, which Simon Magus could not do. Thirdly, they are discovered
according to Athanasius by St. Antony, from their manner of appearing. For the
aspect of evil spirit is terrible, their noise horrid, their speech ^ordid;
when it hap^eth that our mind is terrified at their sight, and our senses
stupefied. At their departure likewise, they terrify us most, and always leave a
noisome scent behind them. But the Holy and blessed Spirits appear with a meek
and gentle countenance, for they never scold nor brawl, but bring joy and hope
to a penitent sinner; forasmuch as they came from God, the Author and Fountain
of joy; nor is our mind troubled much at the sight, but is rather illuminated,
and desires forthwith to leave this earthly Tabernacle, and to hasten with what
it sees to an eternal mansion; and as the Angel that saluted the Virgin, that
spoke to Zacharias, that told the Shepherds concerning our Saviors birth, that
they should not fear; so they remove all fear from us, and leave us in a joy
unspeakable.

An admirable History of a good Genius or Guardian Angel.
BOdin makes mention of a friend of his that had always a Spirit accompanying
him, which he began first to perceive, at the age of seven and thirty, not but
that he thought the same Spirit had always been with him in his lifetime, by
reason of many dreams and visions by which he had been forewarned to shun many
imminent dangers and vices; but that he never perceived it so plainly as he did
at that age and upwards, which happened after this manner. 'Twas his custom to
Pray so continually, that for above a year he had not ceased to desire of God,
morning and evening, that he would be pleased to send him a good Angel to guide
and direct his actions. He spent also certain hours after his Prayers in
contemplating on the works of God, meditating, and reading the Bible, to find
out, among the multitude of Opinions which was the true Religion, and to this
purpose he often repeated the 143 Psalm.

Me Deus informa quae sit tuasancta voluntas
Morrigerasque manus praesta, gressasque sequaces:
Namque eris ecce Deus semper mihi tramite recto
Spirituus ille tuus divinaque virgula ducat.
And reading many Holy Authors, he found in Philo the Jew, de sacrificiis, that
a good and perfect man, could offer no better sacrifice to God than himself;
whereupon he offered his soul to God: from which time forward, he had dreams
and visions full of admonition; sometimes to correct this or that vice,
sometimes to give notice of ensuing dangers, other while to solve some great
dificulty, as well in divine as humane affairs. Amongst the rest of his dreams,
he heard a voice saying to him, I will save thy soul, I am the same that
hitherto has appeared unto thee. Afterward daily about three or four a clock
in the morning, the Spirit knocked at his door, but when he rose and opened it
he saw no body. Thus the Spirit continued every day, and never ceased knocking
till he arose; this put him in fear it might be some evil spirit, wherefore he
never ceased in his Prayers to desire God to send his good Angel, singing
Psalms and Praises to God continually. Upon this the spirit manifested it self
to him as he watched one night, by striking gently upon a glass vessel that was
in the room, which very much astonished him; two days after he happened to
entertain his friend the Kings Secretary at dinner, who was much affrighted to
hear the Spirit knock on a bench that was near him; insomuch that he was forced
to declare the whole matter to him: and from that time ever after, the spirit
waited on him, admonishing him always by some sensible sign, sometime by
pulling his right ear, if he had done any evil; as also it any one came to
deceive or cheat him, his right ear was pulled, and the left, if good men on
honest designs: likewise if he went to eat and drink any evil, he was
admonished to desist; if good, to proceed. And as often as he went to praise
God in Psams and Hymns, or to meditate on his wonderful works, he was
strengthened, and confirmed by an extraordinary and spiritual power. And to the
end he might discern the better, his inspired dreams, from those that proceeded
either from the temperament of his body, or perturbation of his mind; he was
wakened by the same spirit, about two of the clock, after which time he slept
again, and dreamt those that were true, which admonished him of what he was to
do, and believe, concerning those things of which he doubted. So that from that
time forwards, nothing happened to him of which he was not forewarned; nor did he
at any time doubt of any thing to be believed or rejected, but he was certified
concerning it. Wherefore he chose one day in the week particularly to praise
God, and seldom went out; if p^radventure he did, he was always seen to be of a
joyful countenance, according to the Scriptures, Vidi facies sanctorum laetas;
but if in discourse and conversation, with others, there passed any evil; or if
at any time he omitted his Prayers, he was admonished of it in his sleep: if he
read in any evil book he was pulled softly by the ear till he laid it down, and
was hindered from doing any thing prejudicial to his health; but chiefly he was
admonished to rise early, and if at any time he slept late, he heard a voice
say, who will rise first to prayer? he was warned also to give Alms, which the
more he did, the better did things prosper under his hand; once when his
enemies came by water to take away his life, he dreamed his father bought him
two horses, a red and a white one, therefore he gave order that two horses
should be bought, and although he had said nothing to his servant, concerning
their color, nevertheless he bought two of those colors. Now the reason why
he never spoke to this spirit, was, because he had once desired it, and on the
sudden it struck so vehemently against the door, as if it had been with a
Mallet, whereby he showed it was unpleasing to him, the spirit also never
permitted him to read or write long, and often he could hear a small shrill
voice, but not distinguish what it said: nor did he ever see this spirit in any
shape, but of a certain clear light, in a round square or circle: once only
when he was in great danger of his life, and he had incessantly prayed to God
to save him; about morning, as he lay in his bed, he saw a boy in white
garments of excellent countenance and form. Another time being in great danger,
and going to lie down, he was often hindered by this good Genius, till such time
as he arose and passed the night in prayers; after which he escaped death
miraculously, and heard in his sleep a voice saying, Qui sedet in latibulo
Altissimi, etc. Thus in all difficulties he received council, and in all
dangers he was assisted and saved by his Guardian Angel.

Now the truth of this relation we may gather from several circumstances, as
well that the person said his ear was struck by the good Angel to admonish him
what was to be done, according to that of Esaiah, Dominus, says he, vellicavit
mihi aurem diluculo: as also that he said, the good Angel manifested himself by
knocking, as it were, with a hammer, for we read in the book of Judges,
concerning Manoah, that the Angel began to knock before him, the Original of
the word whereby it is expressed, being, tintinabulum or tympanum. But whether
every one has his Genius, Good or Bad, attending on him, it is hard to
determine, although it has been an old and received Opinion, according to
these words, (...).

FINIS.

