Popery and Hypocrisy Detected and Opened FROM THE HOLY SCRIPTURES: As it
respects Magistrates, Ministers, and People.

IN A SERMON Upon the Occasion of A General Fast, Kept December. 22. 1680.

By the Author of the Plotters Doom, A True Son of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1680.

A Fast-Sermon Upon JOEL II. 13.
Rent your Heart and not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God.
BY the Commands of God and the Government, we are here assembled to celebrate
a Fast, and I have chosen this Text as suitable to the Occasion, because it
instructs us how to perform our Duty herein both acceptably unto God, and
profitably unto our selves; without which our present Fasting, and all our
Religious Performances, are but a mere mocking of the Almighty, and putting a
Cheat upon our own Souls.

I shall not insist on the Context any farther then to give you a general scope
of this Prophecy, that you may see how this Command in the Text, to rent our
Heart and not our Garments, does arise.

The Prophet foreseeing sundry Judgments of God impending, and ready to fall on
this drousie stupid sottish People, calls on them to awake: Awake ye Drunkards,
Chap. 1.5. and weep and howl all ye drinkers of Wine: And when he has thus
awakened them, he gives them such a dreadful description of those Judgments
that the Lord was a bringing on their Land, that he declares the very Earth
shall quake before them, nay the Heavens themselves shall tremble at them, in
the 10th verse of this Chapter; and certainly they must be notable Judgments
that makes both Heaven and Earth to quake and tremble at them. You read in many
places such Judgments threatened that the Earth should tremble at them; but here
are such Judgments as shall make the Earth and Heavens too, to tremble: Well
therefore might the Prophet, after this amazing description of this great and
terrible day of Judgment, which he denounced was coming on them, ask this
question, Who was able to abide it? verse. 11. For if the Earth quake, and the
Heavens tremble at it, it is no marvel that the Sinners in Zion are afraid, and
that fearfulness surprizeth the Hypocrites, as Isaiah expresses it, Isa. 33.14.

The Prophet having thus declared the greatness and terribleness of their
approaching Doom, proposes to them the one and only way to prevent it, and
that is Repentance. One branch of which Proposition, is this of my Text; for
the whole runs thus: Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with
all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, verse.
12. and rent your heart, and not your Garments, as here in the Text.

To which, thus briesly I have brought you, and given you the occasion of these
words, Rent your Heart and not your Garments: Which before I handle, I must
crave leave to give you these following Remarks upon the Context.

1. That the Almighty seldom or never strikes a Nation with his Judgments, but
he gives them first a Warning of it. 2. That the Warnings that God gives a
Nation of his approaching Judgments, ought to rouz and awaken them to their
Duty. 3. That nothing can avert Gods Judgments on a Nation for their Sins, but
Repentance. 4. That it has ever been the wont and practice of the true
Prophets and faithful Ministers of God, to preach forgiveness of Sins and
aversion of Judgments, upon no other terms but Repentance only.
And now I proceed with the Text, Rent your heart and not your Garments, and
turn unto the Lord your God. Wherein you have these three particulars:

Two Duties enjoined. And

One Practice forbidden.

The two Duties enjoined, are these:

1. Rent your Heart. 2. Turn unto the Lord your God.
The Practice forbidden, is, That they should not rent their Garments.

The whole Text is but a figurative Expression; for it was a Custom amongst the
Jews, upon the hearing of any sad disaster that either had or was like to
happen upon their Nation in general, or upon their Families or themselves in
particular, to rent their Garments. So upon the sight of Joseph's Coat, the
Patriark Jacob rent his Clothes, Genesis 37.34. through an apprehension that his
Son was destroyed; and so you sind King Hezekiah, upon that invective and
menacing Speech of Rabsheka, rent his Clothes, Isa. 37.1. Likewise Ezra, upon
hearing the enormous behavior of the People, rent his Garments and his Mantle,
Ezra 9.3. And you read that Tamar, King David's Daughter, being ravished by her
Brother Amnon, rent her Garment of diverse colors, 2 Samuel 13.19.

But this external sign of Sorrow grew at length so into mere custom and
formality, that it signified no more the sense of their minds, then our common
wearing of Mourning does: And therefore God, that did accept it while there was
any thing in it, now it was grown to be a Ceremony only, would have none of it,
but expressly forbids it, saying, Rent your heart and not your Garments. As if
the Lord should say, Come, don't ye think to cheat me with your pitiful feigned
and formal Repentance of renting your Garments, and tearing your Clothes, while
you keep your sins whole: But instead of all this ado of renting your Garments,
rent your Hearts: It Is not your Clothes, it is your Wickedness and your
Corruptions that I would have you rent off from you. Wherefore rent your
Hearts, the Seat and Fountain of all your guilt; and don't ye think that the
tearing your Coats shall explate your Sins, or make an amends for your breaking
my Commands, and the defiling your own Consciences.

Wherefore the Text affords us this Proposition: That true Repentance, and such
as is acceptable to God, consists not in any formal exterior Observations, but
in the renting off of Sin from the Heart.

The terms of this Proposition are so plain that they need no explanation: for
the known and common acceptance of Repentance, is the best, that It is an
Aversion from Sin, and a Conversion to God

And by formal and exterior Observations, is meant such Religious Performances
as Custom and Tradition, not Divine Injunction, has delivered to, and imposed
upon us. And therefore I proceed to the proof of the Proposition, which is
twofold: 1. Negative, That true Repentance, and such as is acceptable to God,
consists not in any formal outward Observations. 2. Positive, That it does
consist in renting off Sin from the heart. But I doubt I shall not be able in
this present opportunity to reach unto this second head of our Proposition.
Wherefore to the first or negative part thereof.


1. That true Repentance, and such as is acceptable unto God, consists not in
any formal exterior Observations: For the proof of this part of the
Proposition, take ye the Pharisees, who certainly were the greatest Sticklers
for, and Promoters of such Observations, of any Generation of men that ever you
read of, either in sacred Writ, or in profane: for they were so eaten up with
the rust and canker of Ceremonies and Traditions, that Christ tells you, that
they made the Commandments of God of none effect by them, Mat. 15.^. and yet
you find these men, for all their multitudes of formalities and superficial
Observations, were so far from true Repentance, and such as is acceptable unto
God, that our blessed Lord accounts and calls them but Hypocrites, who though
they did draw nigh to him with their mouth, and honor him with their lips, yet
their hearts were far from him, verse. 7, 8. And therefore it is worthy your
notice, that our Savior denounces more Woes against this Generation, then
against all the World bolides; and testifies that for all their protended zeal
and sanctity, in their formal and outward demeanor, that very Publicans and
Harlots (though they are but a brace of he most hateful (...) of People that
the World has in it, yet even those) should go into the Kingdom of Heaven
before them, Matthew. 21.31.

In Isa. 1.10, 11. you meet with a Crew of Rulers and people so wickedly
religious, that they quite nauseated the Almighty with their Sacrifices;
insomuch that God forbids them bringing any more: and yet for all this puther
of Devotion, you find that these mighty religious Rulers, were but Rulers of
Sodom, and these bigoted people, were but the people of Gomorrah, verse. 10.
and therefore they and their Oblations both, were but an abomination to the
Lord. So that you see, true Repentance consists not in exterior Observations.

The Prophet Jeremiah is commanded by the Lord in the beginning of Chap. 7. to
go and stand in the Lords House, and to proclaim there, to all that go in at
those gates to worship the Lord, That they should amend their ways and their
doings: What? Amend their ways and their doing when they are going into the
Temple? And going thither too to worship the Lord there? Yes: for you may go to
Church, and to Gods worship, and yet go to the Devil too for all that, if you
are but such Worshippers as these were: for in verse. 9. you have this Character
of them, that they were Thieves, and Murderers, and Adulterers, and perjured
Persons, and Idolaters; which are but a pretty odd pareel of Worshippers of
God: And yet, as odd as they are, you hardly find any in all the Scriptures
that cry up the Temple, and God Almighties Church and Worship, at a higher rate
then these do, verse. 4. Insomuch that when the Prophet called for true
Repentance from them, to prevent that great Captivity was coming on them; they
had such a confidence in their Temple, and their worshipping therein, that they
would not credit him in any of the threatenings and denunciations against them.
But for all their confidence in, and crying up of the Temple, pray see what a
Resolution the Lord takes up, concerning these wicked formal impious wretches;
for he commands his Prophet, verse. 16. that he should not so much as pray for
them: Pray not thou (says the Lord) for this people, neither lift up cry nor
prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee.
What a Church! and a Church that boasts it self so much in its Worship! that
pays so much Reverence and Respect to the Temple of the Lord! that are such
constant frequenters of Divine Service, and of his Worship therein! and that
are every way so abundant in their Formalities and Religious Observations! and
yet to be such miscreants that neither Cry nor Prayer is to be lift up for
them! Yes, such miscreants you see a Church may be. Wherefore it is not your
going to Church, no nor your performing Worship there, that will ought avail
you, if you amend not your ways and your doings; for these both went and
worshipped too in the Temple, and yet you see what vile Wretches, nay very
Castaways, they were for all that. From whence it is manifest, that true
Repentance, and such as is acceptable unto God, consists not in any formal
outside Performance whatsoever.

And the Reasons are plain: for if true Repentance, that is, such as is
well-pleasing to God, did consist in these customary external Compliances; then
the wickedest men, and the worst of Hypocrites, would be more acceptable to
God, than the sincerest Christians; nay, Papists would be more acceptable God
than Protestants; and Pagans then either: for the worse the Worship is, the
more are the Ceremonies. Balaam will have Seven Altars to Elijah's One: for
they are fain to supply the defects of their Worship by the multitude of
exterior Performances and Observations.

Again, If true Repentance, and such as is acceptable to God, did consist in
such Observations, then all the Scriptures were a falsity: For why should the
Lord command us to (...) Hearts and not our Garments, if the renting of the
Garments is that which is acceptable to him? Why should the Lord profess
himself to (...) weary of their Sacrifices, (though a part of the (...)
himself) in the first of Isaiah, and (...) to make our selves clean by putting
away the (...) of (...) before his Eyes, and bid us cease to do evil, and learn
to do well? In muttering over a few Prayers by rote, and sorrowful faces, ^^c.
might serve the turn, to what end are we told in the holy, Word of God, that
the Lord is the Searches of Hearts, and the Tr^^^ of R^^ns, and that he knows
all our thoughts a far off, it (...) the work of Repentance, and all our
Religious Performances, the formal and exterior Observations are that which are
acceptable to him? Nay, why is Repentance, why is Faith, why is Love called
Work and Labor in the Scripture? Why is the way that leads to the Heavenly
Kingdom called a narrow Way, and (...) Gate, and we commanded to strive to
enteron, and (...) that many shall ^e^^ to enter in that shall not be able? For
all this labor and toil may be saved, if formal and mere bodily Observations
makes us acceptable unto God, The first worship that we find performed unto
God, are the Offerings of the two Brothers Gain and Abel^ in Genesis 4. and su^e
(...) man^^^^ render a reason why Ca^^ and his ^^^^ring should be (...)
exterior Observations be ^^^ly required by (...).

Wherefore let us now see what profitable Use we may make from this (...) of
the Proposition, That true Repentance, and such as is accep^^^^ (...) God,
consist^ not in any formal and exterior Observation.

(...) the (...) Use shall be for Instruction. Is it so, that true Repentance
consists not in any exterior Observations? Then hence we may learn how much and
deservedly they are to blame, that place (...) more in renting the garment,
then in renting the heart; (...) to a Ceremony, or some external Observation,
as an (...) of true Repentance: Who instead of preaching up a good, a virtuous,
and a Christian Life, and of pressing their People to bring forth Fruits meet
for Repentance, do lay out a deal of Dull Divinity in urging their Auditors to
a through Conformity to a few Humorous and Caprioious Ceremonies.

In the 15th of St. Matthew. and the beginning of the Chapter, you find the
Scribes and Pharisees, for want of other matter, quarrelling our Savior,
because his Disciples transgressed the Tradition of the Elders, in eating Bread
without washing their hands: A tidy crime, and cause of quarrel, was it not?
And yet you may see by our Lords reasoning, that they were such Traditional and
Ceremony-Fopps, that they would quarrel him and his Disciples too sooner and
fiercer upon this account, than if they had broken a Commandment of God: Would
to God the Papists only had the Succession of this Pharisaical temper among
them; but the more is the pity, we daily see and hear protestant Pharisees, as
well as Popish, who had rather mix Heaven and Earth together, and hazard the
consusion of Church, nay and State too, than part with a dry and empty
Ceremony: what if I should instance but in Christening with the Sign of the
Cross? I doubt I am not uncharitable in thinking, that many even of us
Protestant Ministers, would rather never Christen a Child at all, than to
Christen it without that Ceremony, though they do acknowledge that Christening
is a Divine Command, and the Signing with the Cross is but a Humane; and that
the Child is never the better for it, nor never the worse without it. As for
them indeed that do think that the Sign of the Cross has some magical virtue
in it, that it is a spiritual Spell to drive away Spirits and Hobgoblins, and a
good guard against Jack of the Lanthorn and haunted Houses, and that do believe
it keeps the Devil in some better decorum toward us than otherwise he would
observe, they have some pretense to be tenacions of it; but we that laugh at
such fooleries, and that deny these Popish and pious Frauds, as sitter to be
ridiculed than to have any Reverence done them; for us, I say, to be so
peevishly fond of it, as that we will break all the bonds of Love and Peace
rather than part with it, does show us rather of an obstinate and a passionate,
than of a Religious Mind. I might instance in other Ceremonies also, but this
is sufficient to instruct us, that our Conformity to formal and exterior
Observations in Religious matters, is no Essential part of a sound and true
Repentance.

Secondly, Is it so, that true Repentance, and such as is acceptable unto God,
consists not in any formal and exterior Observations; then be instructed not to
overvalue them; there is a mighty propensity in our Natures, to say of our
exterior Observations, as Micah did of his Consecrated Levite, Judge. 17. last
ver. Now know I, says he, that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite
to my Priest. But he was so mistaken, that you find in the very next Chapter,
that this very Priest, which he hugged himself so much for, joined with a
company of Robbers to plunder his Masters House, and steal away his Gods from
him, ver. 20. So all your Confidence in the external parts of Religion, will
but serve you like this Levite, Cheat and deceive you. Nay of all the deceits
in nature this is the most dreadful, for it not only deludes you to the day of
your Death, but continues its delusion at the very day of Judgment; for in the
7th of St. Matthew, you find that these Confidents come with such a mavelous
boldness to Christ, that they argue the matter with him, saying: Lord, Lord,
have we not preached in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in
thy Name done many wonderful works? verse. 22. Nay the Evangelist St. Luke goes
further, and tells you that these mistaken Souls demand entrance into Heaven,
saying: Lord! Lord! Open unto us: For we have (received the Sacrament) eat and
drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our Streets, Luke 13.25, 26.
Good Lord! what a dreadful delusion is this, that carries exterior Professors
not only through Death, but to the day of Judgment too? and are never convinced
of their mistake till they receive that final and eternal doom, Depart from me
ye warkers of Iniquity, v. 27. And certainly it is from hence that St. John the
Baptist thus charge the Pharisees and Sadduces that came to his Baptism,
Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father, Matthew. 3.9.
As if he should say; Have a care, for that thought will make you rest short of
true Religion, and make you miscarry at the last. And as St. John bid them that
they should not think to say, that they had Abraham to their Father; so I bid
you, do not think to say that you have the Church for your Mother; for it is
not your being Sons of the Church, if you reckon your Sonship merely from your
Birth, or Baptism or outward Conformity, that will profit you any thing; for
you may come to Church and perform all the Ceremonies and exterior parts of
worship, and yet be bid depart at last among the workers of Iniquity, if the
Power of Godliness as well as the Profession thereof be not found in you:
Wherefore, be instructed not to overvalue any formal or external part of
Religion whatsoever. And thus much for Instruction: Come we next to Rproof.

If it be so, that true Repentance, and such as is acceptable unto God,
consists not in any outside Formalities; then be Reproved all ye of the Clergy,
that do so utterly pervert your Office and the Ends of your Ministry. What,
were you sent of God to preach Repentance and remission of Sins to the Children
of men? Are you sent by God to cry out to men, that they should Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand? Matthew. 3.2. And to awake them that sleep, that
they should Arise from the dead, that Christ may give them light? Ephesians. 5.14.
What, were you sent to bid men Rent their hearts and not their garments, and to
turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God? Matthew.
26.18. And do you spend your Ministry about such tristing stuff, such sorry
things as you your selves acknowledge to be but indifferent? Truly this is but
indifferent Divinity, and such as I doubt you will give but a very indifferent
Account of, when our great Lord and Master shall appear; therefore pray bethink
your selves: For,

First, Consider seriously whether ever God required this at your hands: He
has required here in the Text you see, that you should bid men Rent their
hearts and not their Garments: But where has he required you to teach men to
Rent their Garments and not their hearts? to observe the formal and exterior
parts of Religion more than the real and interior parts thereof? For Religion
is a heart work, and consists not in Formality but Reality; and therefore the
good men of God have prayed in all Ages like David in the 51 Psalm. ver. 10.
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Hence is
it that King Hezekiah beseeched the Lord to remember for him, how he had walked
before him (what in Ceremony and Formality? No;) in truth and with a perfect
heart, Isa. 38.3. and therefore the true Prophets of God have ever cried out, O
Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, Jer. 4.14. They are pharisaical
Hypocrites that cry up the washing of the hands, and that place the total of
Religion, Divine Worship and Devotion, in exterior Observations, where Gods
Word never placed it: In the fifth of St. Matthew, among those glorious
Beatitudes of our blessed Savior, you will find one appropriated to the pure
in heart, ver. 8. but you no where find a blessing appropriated to formal
Ceremonies, or bodily Gestures, or lip Devotions; wherefore, those sour and
angry Gentlemen that are so mightily for the Gaityes of exterior Observances,
may do well to bethink themselves in time, what answer they will give the Lord
to that great question, Isa. 1.12. Who has required this at your hands?

Secondly, Let those that fall under this Reproof, bethink themselves, whether
in their heat and zeal of preaching up Conformity to exterior Observations,
they have not fed their Flocks with husks instead of Bread? And by reason of
this may not your Hearers cry out with the Prophet, My Leanness! my Leanness!
Woe unto me, Isa. 24.16. In the Jewish Church there were many external
Observances commanded, and therefore had Divine Authority for their warrant;
and yet when these Externals were screwed up to that height, and grew so rank
that Religion run all into stalk, and had nothing but a bare appearance and
mere outside in it, the Lord loathed and abhorred them, though they had his own
Precept for them: Pray will you see how that great and Evangelical Prophet
Isaiah both opens and shuts up his Prophecy: In his first Chapter you find him
opening his Prophecy thus: Thus says the Lord, Bring no more vain Oblations,
Incense is an Abomination to me, the New Moons and Sabbaths, the Calling of
Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity even the solemn meetings; your
New Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates, they are a trouble unto me,
I am weary to bear them. And now see how he shuts up his Prophecy in his last
Chapter: He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a
Lamb as if he cut off a Dogs neck: he that offers an Oblation as if he
offered Swines blood, he that burns Incense as if he blessed an Idol, ver. 3.
Yet Sacrifices, Oblations, Incense, New Moons, Sabbaths, their solemn
Assemblies, and their Festivals were all commanded by the Lord; but when all
Religion came to be put in these exterior Observations, and that they eat up
and usurped the place of the life and power thereof, they became an Abomination
to God and all good men, and their Sacrifices, Oblations, and Incense, were but
as Murder, Prophanity, and Idolatay before the Lord. A mighty memorable and
particular instance of this matter, you have in the Second of Kings, Chap. 18.
ver. 4. In the third Verse it is said, that King Hezekiah did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his Father did. And
the fourth Verse tells you what those right things were; He removed the high
Places, he brake the Images, he cut down the Groves, and that he might make
clear work, it is added, that he brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses
had made. The occasion of making it you will find in the twenty first of
Numbers, which was thus: The Children of Israel in their Journeyings in the
Wilderness, were grievously afflicted with fiery Serpents, which bit and killed
many of them: Upon this the people besought Moses, that he would pray unto God
for them, that he would take away those Serpents; which Moses did: And the Lord
gave this answer to the prayer of Moses, ver. 8. Make thee a fiery Serpent, and
set it upon a pole, and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten,
when he looks upon it shall live. And in the ninth Verse, Moses made this
Serpent of Brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass that if a Serpent
had bitten any man, when he beheld that Serpent of brass he lived, as the Lord
had promised. And you find that this brazen Serpent had the honor to be
reckoned a Type of Christ, even by our Lord himself, John 3.14. As Moses lift
up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so (says our Savior) must the Son of
Man be lifted up; that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
eternal life. How then comes it about, that the breaking this brazen Serpent in
pieces, should be one of those excellent Acts which is said to be right in the
sight of the Lord? Why, the Text tells you that the Children of Israel burnt
Incense to it: And when any thing becomes an Idol, though it has been honored
with never so great a Divine presence, and has performed never so many and
mighty operations, and have been never so much instrumental in the hand of God,
to work wonders in the world, yet it must be removed and destroyed: A Mind that
is thoroughly set for God, and a Magistrate that is resolved to discharge his
duty aright, must down with not only Images and Groves, and those grosser parts
of Idolatry and Will Worship; but the brazen Serpent also, when it not only
cease to propagate true Religion, but is set up in opposition against it: For
though it have been never so useful and serviceable to heal and save the people
formerly; yet when it does degenerate and becomes instrumental to destroy them,
it should down too; for it is not their past excellency nor service should
prevail with you to spare them, when they are become a present damage. Well
then, if exterior Observations of Gods own appointment, and such as have had
his express Commands to warrant them, may become so abominable, when it runs up
into Forms and Ceremonies only, and engages it self in a direct opposition to
the power and life of Religion, how abominably abominable must those
Observations needs be that have no sacred Sanction, and at best nothing but
humane Precepts and humor to maintain them? And are they to be reproved that
exalt and cry up the formal and external Observations of Instituted Worship,
and give it the preference to the internal and Spiritual part of Religion, as
such as do but betray and undo their hearers? And are they to be excused that
magnify and exalt the formal and exterior Observations of invented Worship, to
the eternal and everlasting Ruin of the Souls that credit them? God forbid: But
I must go on.

Thirdly, Let such as are included in this Reproof, bethink themselves; for
whatever they may fancy, they are but of the Devils side, and are but doing
this work; for God calls for renting the heart, it is the Devil that would shamm
off this duty by renting of the Garments; for he cares not how much nor how
abounding you are in this work of exterior Observations, so you do but let
alone That: he will compound with you, and let you pay Tithes of Mint, Cummin,
and Annise, all the days of your life if you will, so you will but omit the
weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith. Nay, he will aid and
encourage you in your formal and exterior Observations, so that you will but
rest there and go no further; for he will let you be indefatigably zealous in
that work: In the 18th Chapter of the first Book of Kings, you find the
strangest Question started, that ever you read of in any Book either Religious
or Profane; for the Question was, Who should be God? The God of Heaven or
Baal? The Priests and Worshippers of Baal contended strongly that Baal was God,
and to be served and followed: The Prophet Elijah asserts that the Lord is God,
and that they ought to serve and follow him. At length they agreed in this
issue, that two Bullocks should be brought, and the Clergy that were for Baal
should choose one of these Bullocks, and cut it in pieces and lay it on wood,
and put no fire under; and the Prophet Elijah would dress the other Bullock,
and lay it on wood, and put no fire under, and they should both call on the
Name of their Gods, and the God that answered by Fire, he should be God, verse.
23, 24. Well! this was done; and now pray mark the carriage of these
Worshippers: The Priests, the Text tells you, called on the Name of Baal from
Morning to Noon in their dull Let any, saying, O Baal hear us, we beseech thee
to hear us good Baal; and they leaped up and down about the Altar; but there
was no hearing, nor no answering for all that. Then they cried aloud, and cut
themselves with Knives and Launcets till the blood gushed out; and this they
did until the Evening Sacrisice, but received no answer still. And now the holy
Prophet comes to act his part, and pray observe, that he uses no such Formal
and Exterior Observations; no Cap^rings nor Cringings neither about the Altar,
nor no Canting out of a little Nonsense or Tautology from Morning to Noon, and
from Noon to Night: No cutting nor slashing himself, nor mingling blood with
his Sacrifice, but calmly and humbly addresseth himself to God, in an honest
and plain Prayer suitable to the occasion. Then the fire of the Lord fell, and
consumed the burnt Sacrifice, and the Wood, and the very Stones, in so
prodigious a manner, that all the people were convinced, and falling on their
faces, with an universal Vote cried out, The Lord he is God, the Lord he is
God. Verse 37, 38, 39. From whence you may discern, how elaborate and
indefatigate a corrupt Clergy is to propagate the Devils side, and the worser
Worship; and how they lay out themselves in promoting the Observation of
exterior Ceremonies, which are of no avail. They cry aloud, frisk about the
Altar, and cut themselves like any mad, and do a world of things which were
never commanded by God, and which are but ridiculous among men; and yet all
this Frenzy must pass for true Religion and Decency of Worship, or they will
quarrel you for Fanatiques. One would wonder what Baalam mean'd, Numb. 23, etc.
where he commands seven Altars to be built, and seven Oxen and seven Rams to be
prepared: One would think that he were going to offer to a whole Heptarchy of
Gods, did not the Scripture every where show us, that hypocrytical false
Prophets and false Worshippers are mighty Wonderful abounding in their Altars
and Offerings, and all the exterior parts of Religion: pray will you take a
view of that formal Gentleman you meet with in the 18th of St. Luke, verse. 12.
and see how he pranks himself up with his exterior performances: I fast twice a
week (says he) I give Tithes of all that I possess; and yet for all that he was
but a proud Pharisee still, a wicked false Hypocrite still, and came out of the
Temple the same man that he went into it; so that though he fasted and went to
Church every Wednesday and Friday, yet he had been as good he had stayed at
home; for he got no good by going thither: It only prided him up to despise his
Neighbors, and wrought in him a Conceit that he was better than them; and pray
God this be not the Case of too many of us: For while we lay the stress of all
Religion upon formal and exterior Observations, we are but doing the Devils
work, even when we are engaged in Gods Service. For whiles we are but for
Renting of the Garments only, and so quarrelsomly set for formal and exterior
Observations, we may pray and preach too in the Temple as long as we will, and
yet be still but on the Devils side for all that.

Fourthly, Again, bethink your selves, you that are concerned in this Reproof,
that while you are for Renting of the Garments only, for the outside, gilded
part, or Husk of Religion; you are but for a Faction and a Party, and have no
Communion with the Universal Church of Christ: You are but for Christians of
your own Size and Hue, and grow up into a little creeping narrow spirit, that
can never love nor serve any Soul but what is just and directly of your own
dimension: Whereas a Christian of the Universal Church, is of a large,
comprehensive, generous Spirit and Principle, and loves a good and a virtuous
man, that makes it his Religion to Rent his Heart and not his Garments, let his
persuasion in other and minuter things be what it will. For this is Gods
Religion, all other is but Man's, and subject to Innovation and Changes,
according as their humors vary, and must be managed by brutal and unnatural
heats and sury: Hence is it that you see those that are for Renting the
Garments, for formal and outward Rites, are always sour and quarrelsome,
fretting themselves, and vexing others, if they come not up to every Punctilio
of their Observances: For they quarrel your Carriage, your Company, your
Discourse, and in a word your whole Conversation. For it is a Spirit of such a
silthy, rude, imposing Nature, that you must be an absolute Slave to it, or it
is never satissied. Pray look into the second of St. Mark, and you will there
find these men quarrelling our Savior upon all these Accounts, for they fall
out with him no less than four times in that one Chapter. First, They quarrel
his Discourse, and charge him with Blasphemy, in saying to the sick of the
Palsy, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Why does this man speak Blasphemy, say
they, who can forgive sins but God only? verse. 5, 7. Secondly, They quarrel him
for his Company, and charge him with Profanity, in eating and drinking with
Publicans and Sinners: How is it, say they, that he eats and drinks with
Publicans and Sinners? verse. 16. Then they quarrel his Conversation, and charge
him First with Neglect of Duty in his Non-observance of Fasting: Why do the
Disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, (say they) but thy Disciples fast
not? verse. 18. And then lastly, with the breach of the Sabbath, when his
Disciples plucked the Ears of Corn: Why do thy Disciples on the Sabbbath day,
say they, that which is not lawful? verse. 24. So that our blessed Savior
himself, you see, who was so exact in all the parts of his Conversation, could
not please them, neither feasting nor fasting: For if you go one Inch too swift
or too slow for their pace, they run upon you presently, and reckon you none of
their Church; and truly it matters not much whether you are or no: For their
Church consists of a little Faction, of a few Formal waspish Fopps, that place
more Religion in an old Cobweb'd or a new upstart Ceremony, than a good man
durst place in his exactest performances. These are those which our Lord calls
blind Guides, and denounces so many Woes against in the 23d of St. Matthew, and
you may ever know them by that Character which he has given them in the 24th
Verse, they strain at a Gnat: Are mightily offended at your omission of some
poor starveling exterior Observation: But swallow a Camel. You may drink, and
whore, and tare, and swear, and be as debauched as a Devil, and this never
offends them, they will never quarrel you for this; for this will down well
enough. For though they compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte to their
Ceremonies and exterior Observations, yet when they have made him so, though he
be twofold more the Child of Hell than he was before, they are satisfied,
verse. 15. So that you see whom they convert, they do but pervert: For they care
not for increasing the Church of Christ, but lay out all their Care and
Industry to greaten and increase their own Faction and Party. If they get but
such as will Rent their Garments, and be of their Outside Religion and
Profession, they have done their do, and care not whether ever they rent their
Hearts or no.

Fifthly and lastly, You that come under this Reproof, bethink your selves
betimes, for in your crying up the Renting of the Garments, formal and exterior
Observations, against the Renting of the Heart, you are engaged in a direct
Opposition to Christ: For his Kingdom, Church and Worship are all Spiritual,
and built upon the sure Foundation of Scripture Precepts and Divine
Institutions. But exterior Ceremonies and Observations are too much Carnal, and
built but on the false bottom of humane Inventions and Injunctions. Pray see
the second of the Ephesians and the twentieth verse, and you will there find that
the true Church is built Upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone. And the same Apostle tells
you in the 1 Cor. 3.11. that Other Foundations than this can no man lay, that
is, no man can warrantably and by any divine Authority lay any other Foundation
than this that is laid. And therefore you see that those that are for exterior
Observations, they leave the Canon of the Scripture, and support their Building
by Laws and Canons of their own devising, and to oblige the Magistrate to give
a Sanction to their devices, they decry not only the Law of God but the Laws of
the Land too, and preach up and magnify Absolute Rule as the Magistrates
Right, and by that Bait and Lure draw the Government to their side; for they
give to Caesar more than the things that are Caesar's, that they may take away
from the People the things that are theirs. Nor is it for Caesar's sake that
they do this neither, for they inslave us to the Magistrate for no other end,
but that they may enslave the Magistrate and us both to themselves. For, for
Gods sake what does the King get by my Conformity to a few Ceremonies and
formal Observations? Or what does he lose by my Nonconformity to them? And if
his Majesty neither gains by my Observance, nor is damaged by my non-Observance
of them, wherein is it his interest to be concerned at it? And as his Majesty
receives neither Advantage by the doing of it, nor Detriment by the leaving of
it undone, so neither does any of his people. For saving the Reverence due to
the Folly of this humor, pray who is a penny the better for my going to
Church? or a penny the worse if I should go to what they call a Conventicle? If
then neither King nor People be benefited by the one, nor damaged by the other,
how comes it to be the Interest of the Government to be so mightily or indeed
at all concerned in the matter? Why nothing but that those Gentlemen that are
so wonderfully fond and foolishly forward for Renting of the Garments, for a
formal and external Gaity in Religious Worship, perceiving they cannot carry on
a design so directly opposite to the pure and spiritual Worship of Christ,
especially in a Reformed and Protestant Nation; without the aid of the
Magistrate, they revive the old Cheat, and persuade the Magistrate that those
that are for renting the Heart only, and are Non-Conformists as to renting the
Garment or exterior Observations, are Enemies to their Government, and so
frighten the Magistrate, that they think they have no other way to secure their
Government but by destroying them; when the plain truth is, that it is
themselves are afraid that if the Doctrine of renting the Heart only should
prevail, they are undone; and therefore by their Art they transfer the fear
that is on themselves to the Magistrate, and insinuate that the Government is
stabbed through their sides, though you see neither the Magistrates nor the
People are at all concerned in the case, and that the controversy is only with
them who are too strait saced in the point of renting the Garments, and that
stand over stiffly for exterior Observations, in opposition to Christ in his
more pure and spiritual worship of Renting the Heart: And so much for Reproof.
Come we now to Admonition.

The third Use or Improvement of this Point shall be for Admonition, and this
Admonition extends it self to all Persons, to the Governors and Governed.

First, To Governors.

Ye have heard the first Branch of the Proposition, That true Repentance and
such as is acceptable to God, consists not in any Exterior Observations: Be
admonished then, not to impose upon your people what can never be acceptable
unto God. But remember that you are Gods Vicegerents, and therefore should
impose nothing upon your Subjects but what is acceptable to him whom you
represent, and what you have just ground to believe that he himself would
impose were he personally present; and have you any ground to believe that if
he were personally present, that he would Act against his own Commands, and
Punish men because they would not break his own Precepts? For it is his Precept
that you should only rent your Hearts, but that you should not rent your
Garments; and do you think that the Lord would go against his own Will, and
against his own Word? and if you think that he would not, then why do you? For
God has not advanced you, and set you in those high Stations and in his Stead,
that you should rule ad libitum, and make your own Lusts and not his Laws the
Standards of your Actions; No, Let who will teach you these Doctrines, it is but
slight Crapedivinity, and such as the Ancients and the Orthodox never knew:
Listen not therefore to those that put you upon such wild and Savage Notions,
to persecute all that are not for renting their Garments, for every formal and
exterior Observation; and be not rode by those heady humerous persons to your
own destruction. You have seen how they have embroiled this Kingdom, and that
of Scotland too, in a bloody and intestine War upon the Account of Ceremonies
and exterior observations, once already. For this quarrel of theirs has cost
more English and Scottish blood than all the Ceremonies of the Roman Church and
Ours too are worth, though they were bound in one bundle both together.
Wherefore please to Remember that Exhortation in the second Psalm. and the tenth
verse. B^^^^se now therefore O ye Kings, be Instructed ye Judges of the Forth.
And truly ye have need of Wisdom and Instruction* (...) you stand but in
slippery places. And if you trust your ^^lves so wholly to the Conduct of
others, as that that yo^ will see by no Eyes but theirs, nor hear with no Ears
but theirs, nor will make use of no sense of your own but theirs, you may soon
slide. For if so great a Man and so great a Magistrate as David was, and one
that kept such a diligent watch over himself, tells you that his seet were
almost gone, his steps had well nigh slipped, Psalm. 73.2. surely Governors
ought to be very careful of their footing, and to see that they be not
trapann'd, neither by themselves, no nor by the advice of others, into
precipitate Acts. How happy was it for King Ahasuerus that the followed his own
sense and not Hamans? and how happy had it been for Pilate if he had obeyed his
own Judgment, and not followed the hot and furious Clamors of that Corrupt
Clergy, Math. 27.20, 21, 22. Have a care therefore how ye are engaged by others
to lay out your Power, or else before you are aware you will miscarry; in the
Eleventh of Matthew. and the Eleventh verse, you read of one of the greatest men
that ever the World brought forth: For our Savior testifies, that among them
that are born of Women, there has not rosen a greater than John the Baptist,
and yet this great man lost his Head to please a Miss. For though King Herod
feared him, and knew that he was a just man and a holy; nay though he observed
him, and when he heard him, did many things, and heard him Gladly, Mark 6.20.
yet Herodias's Daughter Danced off his Head for all that: so that you had need
look about you that you be not surprised, and this in all Cases, but especially
in those that relate to Renting the Garments and exterior Observations; because
your Flatterers will persuade you in that Case, that your sin is so far from
being a sin, that it is a Service to God, and a Service to his Church;
according to that Prophecy of our Savior, Joh. 16.2. the time comes that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God Service; and when men,
especially Magistrates, are under that Mistake, that they reckon their Sin to
be their Duty, they then play the Devil for Gods sake. In the 66 of Isaiah and
the 5 verse, you will find a people that hated their Brethren and cast them
out, and yet said, Let the Lord be Glorified; they sang their Gloria Patri,
even while they were engaged in the Devils work: But the Text tells you that
God should appear to the joy of them that were Hated and Persecuted, and their
Enemies for all their Crying Let the Lord be Glorified, should be ashamed: It Is
not therefore your Crying Glory to the Father, To the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost, that will ought avail you, or stand you in any stead, while you hate and
Persecute your Brethren, because they cannot Conform to our exterior
Observations. Be admonished then to let your people alone; and if they Rent
their Hearts, Live honest and virtuous Lives, let it satisfy you, though they
cannot rent their Garments and Conform to every outward Ceremony or Observance:
And since the Lord has Commanded them not to Rent their Garments, let not your
Commands run counter or contrary to the Lords, lest you be found sighters
against God, and Advancers of your Laws in opposition to and above the Laws of
the Almighty; in the Prophecy of the Prophet Malachy, you find the Lord
displeased that they offered up to him such Blind and Lame and Sick Sacrifices,
that their Governors would not accept from their hands though they offer it
unto them, Mal. 1.8. And sure the Lord would be much more displeased, if
Governors should Punish their People for Offering such Sacrifices as are
acceptable unto him; and the Psalmist tells you that the Sacrifices that are
acceptable to God, are a broken Spirit: For a broken and a contrite heart
(says he) O God thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. And therefore have we this
Command in the Text, to Rent our Hearts, as the only Sacrifice that is
Acceptable unto God; and will you dare to contradict this Command; and Oblige
your people to Rent their Garments, which the Lord has expressly forbidden, as
that which is unacceptable to him? God sorbid. And thus much to the Governors.
Come we now to the second part of this Admonition, to the Governed.

Is it so, that true Repentance, and such as is acceptable unto God, consists
not in any formal or exterior Observations? Then be you admonished to two
Duties.

First, To Moderation.

Secondly, To Peaceableness.

1. To Moderation; that is a great Exhortation the Apostle gives us in the
fourth of Philip. and fifth verse, Let your Moderation be known unto all men;
and it is an admirable Reason that the Apostle annexeth to enforce his
Exhortation, For the Lord (says he) is at hand. You see here in the Text, and
from the plain Word of the Lord, that it is not renting your Garments, nor any
exterial observations, but the renting of the Heart that is Commanded and
Accepted of God. Then be not immoderate for any external Observances; for if ye
are, true Religion never will nor can take root in you; In the fourth of St.
John, Christ met with a poor Samaritan Woman, and discoursed her so long that
at length she saw he was a Prophet, and therefore resolved that she would
improve the present Opportunity: (But how?) Not by enquiring after the Truth of
Worship, but about the Place: Sir (says she) I perceive that thou art a
Prophet, our Fathers Worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is
the Place where men ought to Worship, v. 19.20. Now pray see how Christ nips
this little external Quaere: And Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me, the
hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem
Worship the Father, v. 21. and then goes on to show her what true Worship was,
and who the true Worshipers are, but says not one word of the Place. In like
manner many are mightily inquisitive about Places, Times, Gestures and
Circumstances of Worship, and have a great zeal for all these external parts of
Religion, and yet are totally ignorant both of the true Worship and true
Worshippers: wherefore you had need be very Moderate and Sober, that you be not
so transported with external Observations, and run away with the Shadow instead
of the Substance of Religion; for Moderation tempers the mind, and allayes
those heats and excursions which otherwise it is apt to make: And therefore it
is called a being sober-minded, in the 2 Titus, v. 6. for without this ye are
like Mad Distracted persons, and will run upon a Neighbor or a Relation for
dissenting from you in a Ceremony or some exterial Oblervation, as if he were a
Turk or an Insidel: But this makes a man remember, that in Christ Jesus,
neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature,
Gal. 6.15. And therefore this teaches us to put no such mighty stress and
value upon that which is of no avail; but to embrace Moderation as that which
will balance the mind, and keep it in an even and sober posture at all times
and in all cases.

2. Be admonisht to Peaceableness, and reckon not this admonition strange; for
the holy Scripture tells you of some that hate peace; and the Psalmist says,
he had long dwelt with such, Psalm. 120.6. My Soul (says he) has long dwelt
with him that hates Peace: I am (says he) for Peace, but when I speak, they
are for War: And yet these Haters of Peace have always the Impudence to
complain first, and to burden others with their Guilt; and if you search the
Scriptures, you will find none so deeply culpable of this Crime as those that
were for external Observations; for who so much oppose the Miracles and
Doctrine of Christ, and so bloodily pursued him to the very Death, as those
that were for the Traditions of the Elders?

And who raised the uproars, the mutinies and tumults against the Apostles of
Jesus Christ in every Country, City, Town, and place where they came, but the
same Spirit? And yet they had the foreheads to accuse the holy Apostles, nay
our blessed Lord and Savior himself for Seditious, and the Ringleaders of
Sedition. Be careful therefore that ye be not ensnared to herd with this
tumultuous and unpeaceable spirit; for if ye do, you will run clamouring with them
to the Magistrate against your neighbors, and against your friends, to ruin
and undo them for the non-observance of some external rites and customs. You
see how fierce and savage this spirit has been in all ages, and quite through
the Scriptures, that have been for renting the garments and exterial
observations. But pray look and see where you can find that they that were for
renting the heart were ever tainted with this unpeaceable and turbulent temper.
And yet (which is greatly to be lamented) you generally find the Magistrate
take in with that mutinous spirit against this, and laying the imputations due
to them upon these: Hear thou not (says Pilate to Christ) how many things
they witness against thee? Mat. 27.13. and yet they were all false Witnesses,
and he himself was unjust; they were such; for after the Witnesses had spoken,
he calls our Savior a just person, verse. 24. and washes his hands as innocent
of his blood. And yet Oh the wickedness of an unjust Judg'l for all this,
against the convictions of his own Conscience he falls in with that cursed
impious and unpeaceable party against-Christ. Have ye not need then to be
admonisht to look well to your selves, that your hearts do not engage you to
this unpeaceable spirit? There ever was, and I am afraid still is too much
Tory-Divinity in the world; but you may easily know it, for it is always on the
Tantivy, Away with him, away with him, crucify him, crucify him, was ever
their language. And if you do but ask why? what evil has he done? this does
but whet their rage, and make them urge the multitude to cry out the more, Let
him be crucified. For they are acted by a wild kind of ungovernable zeal, such
as the Apostle St. Paul tells you he had before his Conversion, Act. 22.3. I
was zealous toward God, (says he), as ye all are this day, and that you may
see what their zeal was that day, pray look into Act. 21.27. you will find that
some Jews which were of Asia (where St. Paul had been preaching) had spied him
in the Temple at Jerusalem, and they stirred up all the people, and laid hands
on him, crying out, Men of Israel help, this is the man that teaches all men
every where against the people, and the Laws, and this place, and further,
Brought Greeks also into the Temple, and has polluted this holy place. And
upon this outcry all the City was moved, and the people ran together, and they
took Paul and drew him out of the Temple; and the Text tells you, They went
about to kill him: and had certainly done it, had not a Captain of a band
rescued him, verse. 31.

So that you see what their zeal at that day was, and is but the same which the
same Apostle tells you in fewer words in Phil. 3.6. That he was as concerning
zeal a persecutor of the Church. So that this wild kind of vagabond zeal, which
is always conversant about exterial observations only, and spends it self but
about the bark and husk of Religion, does but make men the fiercer and the more
inve^om'd in their minds against true Christianity, and renting the heart; for
this zeal will transport you to such inquietudes and extravagancies that ye
will prefer a Barrabas a Robber and Murderer before Christ and a sincere
Christian. It will make you mutinous and sticklers for the worst men, and the
wickedest interest; what need have ye then of this admonition to be of
peaceable spirits, that ye be not hurried away by a mistaken zeal into such
strange and brutish exorbitances?

And thus much for Admonition, come we now to the next and, last improvement of
this Point, which is Examination.

And this shall be Threefold: 1. To the Magistracy. 2. To the Ministry. 3. To
the People.


1. To the Magistracy: For I am for the old Computation of reckoning Moses
before Aaron, and am for placing the Crown above the Miter; though I am sure
this is no way to a Bishopric; for all our new fashioned Divinity is for the
other Calculation, and mightily dissatisfied if you don't put the Church before
the State; however I address my-self first to you: Is it so that true
repentance, and such as is acceptable unto God consists not in renting the
garments, or exterial observations? then be you exhorted to examine your selves
whether you lay out your Magistracy consonant to, and agreeable with this
Doctrine: The highest Character that was veer given to any Magistrate, is that
which we find given to David, That he was a man after Gods own heart. And
indeed the heart and mind of a Magistrate should be agreeable to the heart and
mind of God, for he bears his Image, and is his Deputy in the Earth. Upon which
account Magistrates are also styled Gods in Scripture. Now therefore examine
your selves as to this duty before you, and see how your hearts stand affected
toward it. God is all for renting of the heart for zeal and spiritual worship,
on such days, and in such duties as we are now engaged in. But are you not
more, or rather for renting the garment? for vain Ceremonies, and humane
invented observations? How then comes this discrepancy betwixt the heart of God
and your hearts? between Gods mind and your minds? Inquire well into the
matter, for there must be a fault some where; and it cannot be on the Lords
part. Has not God told you by his own Son, That he is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth; and that his Father
seeks such to worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24. And will you seek such to punish
them? Examine your selves, and do not think to shamm it off, That it is for the
Church that you do this. Pray turn to 1 Samuel 15. and you will there find one of
the greatest Cheats that you meet with in the whole Word of God; for 'twas by a
Magistrate, and a Magistrate of the highest Order, and 'twas a Cheat that had a
pretense for the Church too. The business is this: King Saul received a
commission from God to go and smite the Amalekites, for laying wait for Israel
in their way when they came up from Egypt; and the sum of the Commission you
have in the third verse, Go and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare
them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel
and ass. Pursuant to this Commission, Saul gathers 210000 of the people
together, and goes up and smote the Amalekites, but spared Agag their King, and
the best of their sheep, and of the oxen, and the fatlings, and the lambs, and
all that was good; and would not utterly destroy them. But every thing that was
vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly, verse. 9. Upon this breach of his
Commission, the Lord sends his Prophet Samuel to meet Saul at his return, and
you find that Saul met Samuel in a very brisk humor, verse. 13. for Saul said
unto him, Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have performed the commandments of the
Lord. But Samuel replied, What means then this bleating of the sheep in mine
ears and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? verse. 14. And now pray see the
Cheat that Saul would have put upon the Almighty, and his Prophet; for he saw
he was run on ground, and therefore observe his answer: The people (says he)
spared the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy
God, ver. 15. So he would have shuffed off, and excused his sin upon the
specious pretense of maintaining the Church, and the Worship of God. But this
would not do, for the Prophet reproves him in verse. 22. thus: Has the Lord as
great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the
Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of
rams; for Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft. It Is the disobedience of a
King against his God is so styled; and therefore he proceeds and tells him his
doom, That because he had rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord had rejected
him from being King. And that is all that Saul got by this Cheat.

Do not think therefore to palliate your faults with your esteems for the
Church, and the Divine Service of God; for God had rather have no such Worship
at all, than a Worship that must be supported and maintained by the breach of
his holy Commands. In the 7th. of St. Mark, you may see a knot of Hypocrites,
and such as were of no inferior rank neither. So much for the Charch, that
they break not only the Law of God, but the Law of Nature too; for the Law of
Nature as well as the Law of God, obliges us to honor our Parents, and as a
part of that honor, to succor and relieve them in their necessities; but they
were so unnaturally Religious, that they would give to the Church what they
should give to their Parents; and by their gift to the Church they were held
absolved from the Law of God and Nature, to do ought for their father or
mother, verse. 11, 12 so that let their father and mother starve if they would,
for them, they were resolved to be superabundantly Religious. But God bless us
from such an unnatural and abominable Religion! Well therefore might our
Savior conclude that Discourse with this remark, That Traditional men, and
such as are so much for exterior observations, do ever make the Word of God of
no effect, verse. 13. You were as good have no Bibles, for they will suffer you
to make no use of them; for these Jews they had the Law of Moses, and it was
read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day, as St. James assures us, Act.
15.21. And though in that Law it was written, Honor thy father and mother, and
that too with a promise of length of days; yet you see when men's Traditions
prevailed, it had been as good they had had no Law at all. And therefore by the
way, whatsoever Profession or form of Religion makes you barbarously sour and
unnatural to your Relations, friend and neighbors, which the Law of God, and
the bands of Humanity obliges you to love, respect and tender, you may lay
your life upon it, that that Profession and form of Religion is but a false and
counterfeit Christianity, be what it will. Wherefore you that are Magistrates
had need examine and try your selves, and to purpose too, whether you are for
that Religion which is acceptable to God, the renting of your heart? or whether
you are for that only which consi^ts in renting the garments, and trifling
reservations. And so much to the Magistrates.

The next Head is to the Ministers; and would to God there were no cause to
press the improvement of this Point upon us also. But methinks I hear the Lord
saying, Physician cure thy self, Luke 4.23. We are called the Physicians of
Souls, and usually say the care of Souls is on us; and it behooves the Physician
to look well to it, that the remedy he prescribes be warrantable and proper
against the distemper, or else we shall prove our selves to be like Jobs
friends, Physicians of no value, Job 13.4. Wherefore let us examine our selves
and see whether we that are so abounding in our Prescriptions to cure others,
are sound our selves? and let us be content to try our selves by this Text,
Whether we are more for renting the heart, or for renting the garments? for the
life, spirit and power of Religion, or for some little jejune and starveling
ceremonies and crotchetly observations? Whether we are not more reconciled to,
and have a stronger affection for a lewd and wicked Conformist than for a
virtuous and sober Nonconformist? And pray God our own Consciences do not
answer for us, that this is true. For it is a strange venom of spirit that some
of us are too apt to discover upon all occasions against such as differ but in
the least from us in outward forms of Worship, though they are never so exact
and exemplary in their lives, and every way are of a sound and Orthodox faith.
What invictives have we in our Pulpits, out of our Pulpits, in all Companies,
and at all seasons against Dissenters? especially against their Ministers? In
Numb. 11.27. you find a young Informer running to Moses, and telling him that
Eldad and Medad were Prophesying, or Preaching in the Camp; upon this
information, Joshua that then waited upon Moses, was but a young man too, and
would have had Moses forbid them; (but he lived to be both older and wiser) but
see how that meek servant of the Lord answers them, v. 29. Enviest thou for my
sake! would to God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord
would put his spirit upon them: as i^ he had said, you tell me of Two that are
Prophesying in the Camp, and I would to God there were twice 200000 there. Now
do not we like this young man, run to the Magistrates with our informations,
and cry out, here is a Conventicle, and there is a Conventicle, and Eldad and
Medad pray in this and preach in that place; and then you pray and press the
Magistrate that he would forbid them; nay not forbid them only, but that he
would send to apprehend them, and clap them up into Gaol; and all this at a
time too, when wickedness covers the face of the whole land, and grows up so
rank under our Ministry, that it is not able to top it: Pray let us examine and
see, whether this spirit be agreeable to the spirit of Moses, or to the spirit
of this young informer. St. Paul tells you of some that preached Christ even
out of envy and strife, as some preached him out of good will, Phil. 1.15. Now
if any preachers were to be forbidden, one would think these should be they;
and yet the Apostle professes that he did rejoice that Christ was preached
even every way, whether in pretense, or real sincerity; so that admit they did
preach out of no principle, but envy only, yet you see, that a true Apostolical
spirit can and will rejoice at their preaching, though emulation or envy only
prompts them to it; let us reflect then, what it is that acts us in this
unchristian, I had almost said inhumane rage against our dissenting brethren:
for it is not (whatever we may pretend) the Spirit of God; for that you see is
of another nature and temper, and acts those that are under its conduct in as
different a practice from this of ours, as is light from darkness; and pray God
we come not nigher the character of those blind guides spoken of in Mat. 23.13.
that shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and neither go in our selves,
nor suffer them that are entering to go in; and if we are of the number of
these, how unfit are we to teach others the mind of God? and to guide their
feet into the ways of peace, that are not able to guide our selves. Does not
our envy at them therefore rather arise from this consideration, (if envy can
be considerate) that we are afraid that people seeing the vileness of our
conversation, and the sobriety of theirs, the laziness of our Ministry, and the
laboriousness of theirs, will at last come to be more in love with them than
with us: For if the generality of professed Christians should come to that
pitch in Religion, as to be for renting the heart and not the garments, I doubt
we should be out of esteem, for they would then be for a Ministry suitable to
their profession; whereas we are a Ministry mostly for renting the garments,
and exterior observances; so that whenever the people rise but one degree
above that ignorance, that we are obliged to keep them in, we naturally go out
as a stinking snuff, and there is a Mean Tekel on our Ministration: wherefore
is it not from hence that we dunn the Magistrates continually to down with
them, for fear that the soundness of their doctrine, and the uprightness of
their lives, will down with Rome and Renown; and is it not from hence, that we
are every where laying out, and engaging our selves and interest in getting the
worst of Magistrates, the worst Parliament Men, the worst Justiees, the worst
Mayors, etc. that all the Countries and Cities can afford; insomuch that it is
almost become the surest indication of a Knave, to have us Clergy men for him;
and of an honest man to have us against him, that can be given; for our breath
blesses every man we are against, and blasts every man we are for. Examine the
matter, and see whether you do not find all this too true; and can the world
ever believe us a good Ministry, while we are so engaging for a bad Magistracy?
or will they ever believe us to be true Protestants, while they see us join
Votes and Hands with professed Papists? The Romanists contrived, and are
carrying on an Hellish Plot against the life of our King, Government and
Protestant Religion, and when God in infinite mercy was pleased to discover it,
have not many of us showed our selves peevishly backward to credit such
discovery, and no less forward to undervalue reproach, or scandalize the
discoverers? The same Engineers of Hell since forged a false, wicked sham-plot
to be cast on the Presbyterians, and thereby cut off the most active
Protestants, and diverse of as good Church of England-men as any in the land;
and did not some of us nurse up that spurious Brat for them, and make our
Pulpits rattle, and our hearears ears tingle with Railings against
Presbyterians; and all this without the least occasion, and when it was
impossible to serve any other than a Popish Interest by it? Is stifling a
Popish Plot, and causelessly inraging as much as in us lies the Magistrate
against Protestant-Dissenters, and endeavoring to absolve Popish delinquents
from deserved punishments, the way to suppress Popery? or crying up and
espousing the interest of a Bigoted Popish Successor any demonstration of our
zeal to the Protestant Religion? The Prophet Zephaniah tells us of a strange
odd kind of dappled people that lived in his Age, that did swear by the Lord,
and that swear by Melcham, (i. e.) by the true God, and by a false God too,
Zeph. 1.5. somewhat too like many of the Ministers and Popish-Protestants that
are for our Church, and the Church of Rome too, and indeed for any Church
(provided they are but for renting the garments, and superficial observances,
and lip-labor only, and can withal keep their Honors, Preferments and
Revenues): You read in Exodus 12.38. That a mixed multitude went up with the
children of Israel out of Egypt (for we are but party-colored and mixed men at
the best) where I take mixed multitudes for men of mixed spirits. But upon what
grounds or inducements they went up, we do not find; but this we find, that
upon all occasions they were the forwardest to murmur, and repine, and for
returning into Egypt again: The like may be said of many that came out of the
Roman bondage with us in the first Reformation; upon what account they came
with us we know not, but this we know, that these men of mixed spirits have
always been for returning to old idolatrous Garlic and Onyons, I mean to Rome
again. Let us therefore, I say, examine our hearts, and upon a strict impartial
disquisition, it will be well if many of us of the Clergy do not find that most
of our envy and passion against our dissenting brethren proceeds from this,
that they are for going forwards still, and further Reforming, whereas we are
for going back, or for staying where we are, at the best: And I doubt the
truest Reason of our hatred to them, is that they are for renting the Heart,
which is grounded on the Commands of God, and that we are for renting the
garments, and outward Ceremonies, which are founded on the fancies or
superstitions of men; wherefore the Lord grant that we may examine our selves
thoroughly in this matter.

And so I pass to the Third and last Head of this Examination, and with which I
shall conclude, and that is to the People.

3. Is it so, that true Repentance, and such as is acceptable to God, consists
not in renting the garments, etc. then examine your selves whether ever you did
truly repent or no? whether in duties of this kind that we are now a
celebrating, you have not been like those in Isa. 58. that fasted for strife
and debate, and to strike with the fist of wickedness; that hung down their
heads like a bullrush and spread sackcloth and ashes under them; or like those
hypocrites that the Lord speaks of in Mat 6. that put on sad countenances, and
disfigured their faces, that they might appear unto men to fast. But this is of
no value, but only to aggravate your condemnation; it is not your putting on
your black, nor your pulling off your Patches, nor your Paint, or laying aside
your Russian Periwigs for a day that the Lord respects: No, no, this amounts to
nothing in his sight; examine your selves therefore, for if you have only rent
your garments, and performed the outward part of Religion, think of your selves
what you will, you are but in a miserable condition: That is a mighty word of
our Lord in Matt. 21.28, 29, 30. A certain man (says our Savior) had two sons,
and he came to the first, and said, Son go work to day in my vineyard; he
answered and said, I will not; but afterward repented, and went; and he came
to the second, and said likewise, and he answered and said, I go Sir, but went
not. His second son seems to pay great observance to his fathers pleasure; and
to be a perfect conformist to his fathers commands, very ceremonious and
reverential in his answer, I go Sir (says he); but for all these good words,
and exterior appearances of obedience, he was of a wicked, false, deceitful
heart, and did but delude his father with his conformity, for he never went to
the work commanded. Now examine whether of the sons you are; for if you are not
of the number of those that only refused to go, yet afterward repented and
went, you are certainly of the race of the second son, that said, I go Sir, but
lied, and went not.

But that you may be more faithful to your selves in the discharge of this duty
of examination, try your selves in these Two particulars.

1. How your affections stand. 2. How your wills are inclined.
1. How your affections stand, search your souls, and see whether you are more
in love with renting your garments, or renting your hearts; whether you are
more taken with the new fashioned modes and gaities of a glittering, formal,
exterior profession, or with the old fashioned plainness, and sincerity of
Gospel Worship. In 2 King. chap. 5. you have a great man coming to Elisha to be
cleared of his Leprosy, and he came in great state with his Horses and
Chariots, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha, and Elisha sent a
Messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh
shall come again to thee, and thou shall be clean, verse. 9.10. Now here was the
end for which he came; for his end was to be clean; but because the means to
that end was not so formal and full of ceremony as he would have them, he went
away in a huff, verse. 15. And Naaman was wroth, and went away and said, Behold
I thought the Prophet would surely come out to me and stand and call on the
name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the
Leper. And because the Prophet did not follow those methods in cleansing, which
he had fancied, he turns, and went away in a rage. But you find that he had
some wit in his anger; and though he would not hear the Lords servant, yet he
would hear his own servant reason him out of his Choler; and then he went into
Jordan seven times, according to the saying of the man of God, and was
cleansed, verse. 13, 14. Now examine your selves, whether this be not your case;
you would be cleansed, but it must be by such gentle and ceremonial methods as
you fancy, or else you are wroth and going away in a chaff, as mediums too
mechanic and beneath your grandeur; try now your affections in such a case, is
not the simplicity and plainness of the Gospel an offense to you? and are you
not for Humane Trappings and Gauderies, that may put a greater finery and pomp
upon them, so that you are wrath with all those that think sound Truths are the
greatest beauties when they are most unarted, and in their own dress? Sound
your affections therefore how they stand in this case. Whether they be for
inward work, renting the heart, or outward, only for renting the garments; and
if they give the preference to heart-work, they are certainly right, and well
set for God; but if to formality, ceremony, and exterior observations, they are
most assuredly wrong, how right soever you may think them to be.

Secondly, Examine and see how your will is inclined, and this both to your
selves, and toward others.

First, To your selves, you see the will of God both negatively and
affirmatively, both in what you should, and what you should not do herein; that
you should rent your hearts, and that you should not rent your garments:
Examine then whether your wills be not cross and averse to this will of God;
that though God has bid you rent your hearts, and not your garments, yet you
will rent your garments, and not your hearts: you will be for formal and
exterior observations, rather than for that unfeigned repentance that is
acceptable unto God. It is said Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O God.
Examine then whether your will takes up a delight to be conformable to the will
of God; you pray every day, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven;
search therefore your own souls, and see whether your will and heart be in that
petition, or whether you say it only by rote and custom; if your will be well
inclined to it, then you will conform to the will of God here in the Text, and
not set up your posts against Gods posts, nor your will against Gods will, as
you certainly do, if you are for renting the garments before renting the heart;
and for formal observances, before true and spiritual Worship. Many a time in
the Gospel you find our Lord answering supplicants, Thus be it unto thee
according as thou will. O examine then your wills, how they stand inclined, for
if they are not bent to God, it were mercy to you if you missed your own wills;
So Saul found it before his conversion, he would needs be going to Damascus,
(while he was breathing out blood and cruelty to persecute the poor Christians
there also): but Almighty mercy prevented and made him miss his will, in Acts
9. Among the many offerings which were in the time of the Law, there was one
which was called a free will-offering, to which the Psalmist alludes, Psalm.
119.108. Accept, I beseech thee, says he, the free will offerings of my mouth,
O Lord: and this offering above all the offerings seems to be most acceptable
unto God; it was purely voluntary, because unconstrained; therefore toward the
place for the first public Worship, you find the people so liberal in this
offering, that Moses was fain to restrain them from offering any more, Exodus
36.6.

Now examine your selves, whether your wills are thus bent for God; whether you
voluntarily and without any reluctance or constraint so close with this holy
pleasure and command of God; nor to busy your selves about the many things of
renting your garments, and keeping a bustle about the formal ceremonious
outward modes of Worship; but have your wills taken up and wholly inclined to
the one and only thing necessary, the renting of your heart; and if upon a
through search you find your wills thus well inclined to your selves,

Then Secondly, examine how they stand as to others: for many are for that for
themselves, which they would deny to others; they would be free themselves in
their Worship, but they would put a force on others. Examine therefore how your
wills stand inclined in this particular; are you willing to give another the
same measure that you would have meeted to you again; do you love your
neighbor as your self, and are willing that he should rent his heart, and
worship God according to the persuasion of his Conscience; though he do not
rent his garments, nor perform those formal and exterior observations that you
do, as you your selves are willing to worship God according to the persuasion
of your own Conscience? are you willing to maintain the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace, agreeable to that great exhortation, Ephesians. 4.3. Or do your
wills incline you to break all the bonds and ties of unity, love and peace,
which God and Nature have laid upon you; because your neighbor does not rent
his garments, and perform such formal and exterior observations as you would
have him? In Mat. 13.14. our Lord put forth a Parable of a man which sowed
wheat, or good seed in his field, and in the 25th an enemy came and sowed tares
among the wheat; in the 26th. verse. the tares appeared, in the 27th. verse. the
Ministers or servants tell their master of it; in the 28th. verse. they ask the
Master leave to root them out; Will thou, say they, that we go and gather them
up? For they were willing to the work, had he been so. But now pray observe
their masters answer, and the reason thereof in the 29th. verse. But he said,
nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them.
And in the 30th. verse. ye have the Masters express command, Let both grow
together until the harvest; and this harvest our Lord himself tells you (in the
explanation of this Parable is the end of the world, verse. 39. And it is well,
we have our Masters mind in this matter, for else here would be mad work in the
world; for you see that the very Ministers are for rooting up; and pray whether
would this go? and where would be an end of it? for we reckon the Dissenters
tares; and we would be a rooting up of them; then the Papists reckon us the
tares, and they would be rooting out of us. And it is well if the Turk do not
reckon both them and us all tares, and would be a rooting up both them and us,
and the whole Christian name for tares. So that all the bonds not only of
Christianity would be broken, but those of common society also. Therefore try
your wills by this command of your Masters; for admit the Dissenters were
tares, which without a notorious breach of Christian charity you can never judge
them to be; for truly bate but their not renting their garments, their
conformity, to a few formal and exterior Ceremonies, they give as good an
evidence, that they are wheat, and good grain, as the best of us can do; but I
say admit they were, yet here is the will and mind of your Lord concerning
them; and do you think that he did not know what was most fit and properest to
be done in the field of his Church? The Ministers you see then (and I do not
perceive that they have altered their temper yet) were eager and hot to root
them up; Will thou, say they, that we go and gather them up; Nay, says our Lord
lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up the wheat also. He knew whither
that zeal would tend, and that though it pretended to root up none but tares,
yet it would fall upon the wheat too; and therefore gives them a positive
command, to let them both grow together until the harvest. Wherefore do you
find your wills seconding the will of God in this command? Or have you a rising
of heart against it? Examine well the matter, for if your wills conform not to
the will of Christ your Master, even in this particular, whatever opinion you
may have of your selves, you are the worst Nonconformists that the Church has
in it; for your Nonconformity is of a cruel and a bloody nature, and such as
would make the Church a Shambles. You see what work the Inquisition has made
in the world, and all those murders and mischiefs that it has committed, have
been perpetrated under the pretense of plucking up of tares. Make a thorough
inquiry therefore into your hearts, and search the most inward recesses of your
souls, how the inclinations of your wills are in this point, lest you also
fulfill that dreadful Prophecy of our Savior, Of setting a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in
law against her mother in law, and make a man's fees to be those of his own
household, Mat. 10.35, 36. And lest under the pretense of Law, you break all the
Laws of God, Nature, Duty, and Relation; to the observance of which you are so
strictly injoined. But if you find your wills inclined to answer the will of
Christ, and will use no other force than Gospel arguments, and an upright
conversation, to convert and turn the Tares to be good seed, and are willing
that others should live quietly; that rent their hearts, though they do not
conform to such renting of the garments, to such exterior forms and Ceremonies
as you practice; then have we ground to believe, that God will accept us; and
turn away that deluge of wrath which threatens our King, our Church, our
Princes, our Nobles, and all ranks, degrees, and orders of men in the Land; for
the aversion of which we do solemnize this day; and which God of his insinite
mercy grant for his dear Sons sake, our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.

