Quaer's to be propounded to the most ingenious of each County in my Travels
through England.
IS there any eminent Mathematitian in this County? has He found out any thing
new, in his celestial, or other observations?

Know you of any thing unusual in the Air hereabout? in the Winds? or in any
Tempest that has happend here?

Is there any place where the Wind breathes continually forth of the Earth? or
know you of any considerable Echo in this County?

Enquire of Seamen.

Concerning Navigation, of the most considerable Currents about England, of
Tides, Eddy's of water, of the Saltness of the Sea, why not alike every where?
of the Gulf between England and Normandy; of Lands, Citys and Castles drowned
by the Sea: of any strange shells, fishes, Herbs; Stones, Sands, or any other
unusual thing that they have observed on the cost of England. Enquire of them
for the stone Sagda.

Know you of any strange fountains in this County, such as break forth but now
and then, as against a dearth of Corn, War, Plague etc? Such as Ebb and flow
with the Sea?

Have you any petrifying Waters? ancient Aqueducts? or Waterworks? Rivers that
have any thing unusual in them, such as run underground? have they any fish
peculiar to them?

Is there any Medicinal waters, of an unusual color, smell, or taste? or any
other thing strange attending Water?

Have you any Sands, or Earth of use in this County, such as sands for the
Glass houses, Marles, fullers Earth, Boles, Peats, Ochres, Tobaccopipe clay's,
Clay's famous for brick or Tile or other Earths remarqueable for their color,
weight, smell, taste? Is there any Coals found here?

Is there any Mountains in this County noted for any thing or Caves in the
Earth? Barr^wes, or any thing unusual attending the Land?

Have you any Minerals dug in this County, as stone coal jet, Amber, or
does any Naphta or Petroleum, swim on the water or distill from any rock
hereabout?

Is there any Quicksilver, Sulphur, Arsenick, Orpiment, Calamy Stone, Salt,
Alum, vitriol, or Niter, dugg or made in this County?

Know you of any Stones not common in this County, such as Hyacinths, Emraulds,
Agats, Jaspers, Chrystalls, Sparrs, Marble, Manganese, Magnets, Goldstones,

Is there any stones to be found here ruriously work't by nature? either like
any living creature, viz. Oisters, Cockles, Escallops, Serpents etc? or like
inanimate things, as stars drops of water, Sugar Plumms, figs, a wheel, a
Cheese, Letters of the Alphabet, or Geomatricall figures?

Do you know of any place here about where wood is turned into stone? or of any
Quarrys of free stone, Millstones, Gravestones.

Have you any gold or Silver found in this County, any Copper Iron, Tin or Led
ores, any Bismuth, Antimony Bell-metall, Zink, Chrysocolla or native green,
native blue, Cinnaber, Lignum fosssile, Amianthus, or fossile teeth? or any
kind of ore unknown to you?

Know you of any strange or prodigious trees, either in their, growth, fruits,
leaves, or time of blossoming? Is there any Tobacco, Safforn, Carrawayes,
Samphire, Calamus Aromaticus or any other unusual plant plentifully growing
here? Have you any vineyards, Curious Gardens for rare plants, fruits, flowers
etc?

Has there any body here about found out any new improvement of Land, or other
curiosity in husbandry?

Know you of any body in this County that is studious in infects an observer of
the works of Bees, Silkwormes? Know you of any strange Birds or fishes that are
peculiar to this County, or of others that are never found in it? Know you of
any strange beast, Sheep, Dog, Hog, Horse etc, of any unusual quality, or mixed
generation? of a great Age or Wonderful bigness?

Know you of any strange qualified Man, of any body that has been the Inventor
of any profitable or curious Art? Know you of any prodigious births, numerous
ofsprings, Hermaphrodites, Men extremely alike; Men of prodigious Memorys, of
extraordinary stature, either in excess or defect? of unusual fasting, sleep,
or Dreams that have strangely come to pass? of men of extreme Age, of sudden
deaths? of any that have been dead and raised to life again? Know you of any
thing remarqueable that attends a family in their lives or death? Is there any
ancient sepulchers of men of Gigantick stature, Roman Generals or others that
are notable? Has there been any certain apparition? or Know you of any
Monstrous creatures to be seen in this Country? any strange Customs now in
use in this place? or any strange confusion in Consanguinity or affinity?

Do you know of any Extraordinary Engines, Stupendous or curious building
either in the whole or parts? Is there any body here that has any thing
peculiar to Himself in Clockwork painting, Graveing, Etching, dying, Weaving,
or any other handicraft?

Find you hereabout any ancient Money, Urnes, lamps, Lachrymatorys, or other
ancient British, Roman or Saxon antiquitys? and whether any Gentleman
hereabout have any such in his posssion?

What words do you know peculiar to this County? Is there any person hereabout
that has any ancient Manuscript books? or any other rarity's of Antiquity?

Finally you are desired that whatever you meet with (worthy notice) in your
reading, or converse in the World, upon any of these subjects, to take notice
of it, and transmitt it to the undertaker of this define accordingly as you
shall be directed; for which all persons shall receive due acknowledgment
according to the merrits of the information, by

Their faithful Servant R. P.


