THE PLEA OF THE Harmless Oppressed, Against the Cruel Oppressor. With
Allowance.
THis Kingdom having suffered great Miseries and Calamities for several Ages
and Generations past, and of late have been in a shaking unstable State and
Condition, by reason of the great Animosities and Divisions amongst the
Inhabitants ^hereof, and especially touching matters merely concerning the
Worship of God, which alone belongs to the Great God to appoint and order,
whose Prerogative alone it is to rule in the Consciences of Men; for whatsoever
is not of Faith is Sin, and the Scriptures ^a^th, Let every one be fully
persuaded in his own mind: And now such is the dark depraved state of Mankind,
that tho his understanding be so darkened, and his mind thus blinded by the
Prince of Darkness, who rules in the Hearts of the Children of Men, that he is
always aspiring, and meddling with those matters that God has reserved alone
to himself, viz. to prescribe Rules, and make Orders for the Worship of God;
tho the Lord has threatened, that because their fear to him is taught by Men's
Precepts, he will proceed to do a mavelous work, and a wonder, for the wisdom
of their wise men shall Perish, etc. Jer. 29.13, 14. Notwithstanding tho men
generally in this Kingdom profess Scripture to be their Rule, yet with what
Violence and Cruelty has the contrary been practiced? what Laws have been made
under severe Penalties, to force People to this or that Religion, whether they
have Faith in it or no? or whether it be the true Religion or no? for tho some
that have been violent in forcing, yet concludes there is no infallibility, and
so as some have been thus wicked in forcing, others weak in conforming having
been thus put on the Rack either to suffer the loss of all that's near and dear
to them in this World, or make Shipwreck of Faith or a good Conscience, and of
everlasting Life in the World* to come; but others have been so steadfast and
resolved, so as not to Wound or D^file their Conscience, what Sufferings both
in Prisons and spoiling of Goods have such undergone, this present Generation
may afford pregnant and plentiful Examples.

And now on serious consideration of those violent Practices, in forcing in
matters of Religion, and generally by Men of no true Religion, the forcing of
many contrary to their Consciences, to preserve their outward Interest, and
ruining, others, who chose rather to lose their outward Concerns, to preserve
their Conscience; whether this has not been one of the greatest causes of
those great Revolutions, Devastations* and Overturnings that have happened in
these latter Days, let the wise in Heart judge.

And then what can better tend to the Stability, Peace and Union of the
Kingdom, then the removing the causes aforesaid? viz. those Laws by which many
conscientious People have been Destroyed, and others divided in their Hearts
one from another, and set one against another; and indeed even the worse of Men
let loose to serve the Devil* and conscientious People prohibited to serve God
in the way they were fully persuaded God required of them.

And the Lord having now put it into the Heart of our King to relieve many
under those great Oppressions, and to propose a way for a future Settlement, as
by his Princely D^claration is expressed, in which he has exceeded all his
Ancestors that went before him; of what w^ight is it for all his Loyal Subjects
to join Heart and Hand with him in this Blessed Work, so much tending to the
Glory of Almighty God, the Honor of the King* and the Peace and Tranquillity of
this Kingdom?

And now there being a Generation of Men that appears greatly in opposition to
this Work, so happily begun, contrary to the expectations of many, which as the
Heart of the King is upright before the Lord, the Everlasting God will stand by
him therein, and frustrate all the Councels of those that oppose him, which
generally are such whose Interest is greatly concerned therein, who may greatly
pretend Worship, as sometimes Demetrius the Silver-Smith did when his Crast was
in danger.

And now there being several able Pens that have writ on this Subject, to
assert the Rights of Liberty of Conscience, and Answer the great Objection to
the contrary, viz. Tha^ if these Laws and Tests be taken away, the great danger
that may ensue thereby, even the flowing in of Popery like a Flood.

Which Objection, tho it have been su^^iciently answered, yet it was before me
to cast in my Mite, and offer a few Lines on this account, having taken notice
of a certain Pamphlet entit^led, A Letter to a Di^senter, and some Passages
therein; its not my purpose to answer Particulars, it being sufficiently done
by other Hands: The drift of that Paper seems to show the danger of Repealing
the Tests, as if there we^e no other way to keep out Popery, whose Principles
and Practice have been so Dangerous and Cruel, insinuating as if all the
promises of free Liberty in the Kings Declaration were but pretenses to bring
in a greater Bondage, and that those Address^s to him were first drawn for that
purpose; and indeed, as if the King in his D^claration were not Sincere but
Falacious; also intimating how safe it may be for the Church of England to be
continued in Power, and what Indulgence she may give, saying, p. 5. If you had
to do with thos^ ridged Prelates, who made it a matter of Con^ience to give you
the least Indulgence, etc. but kept you at an uncharitable Distance, and ev^n
^o your more reasonable Scruples continued ^^iff and inexorable.

For answer, What kept out Popery before the Test was made? it being but about
^ifteen Years old, and whether it may not be kept out for the future without
the Test as well as before? it seems to me that ways sufficient have been
proposed.

And as for the Kings sincerity in his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
what could he have done more then he has done to assure his Subjects of his
reallity therein, and that they may confide in him accordingly? but these Fears
seems to arise from groundless Jealousies, rather the just cause, and evil
Suspicion usually proceeding from an evil Disposition, that would uphold its
own Interest more then the public Good, and would have a Liberty to keep
others in Bondage.

And as to what the Church of England may do to give Indulgence, and that if
you had to do with those ridged Prelates, etc. some of their former Practices
and Resolves may sufficiently manifest, whereof some Instances may be given; I
may give two, first the Orders of the Quarter Sessions in the County of Devon,
three of them in Print coming to my Hand, the first, the tenth of January 1681.
the second, the twenty fifth of April 1682. and the third, the second of
October 1683. to all of them is annexed the great App^obation and Commendation
of the Bishop of Exon, with his order for all the Clergy in his Diocese to
publish the same the ^ext Sunday after tendered to them: I think it too large to
expose them all in Print, but I think it convenient to Print the last of them,
and I shall mention Particulars of their Resolves in the former, with some
Observations thereon, and then l^ave i^ to the Moderate to judge.

But before I go on with this, it coming to my mind what the Author of the
Letter says, viz. It is not ^o long, since as to be forgott^n, that the Maxim
was, That it is impossible for a Di^sen^er not to be a Reb^l. I may give a few
Words in Answer hereunto.

It seems this to be the Maxim of the Church of England, I s^ppose none
questions but that the Bishop, Justices and Grand ^ury o^ the County of Devon,
were Church of England Men. And in their Pre^ace to the first Order, of the
tenth of January 1681. they thus express themselves, viz.

Forasmuch as Religion is the Foundation of Civil Government, and while Faction
and Schism is allowed and permitted in the Church, we can never expect Peace
and Quiet in the State; and observing at this time (as we have by sad
Experience heretofore) that those that dissent from us, in our Established
Religion, of what Persuasion soever, tho at seeming Variance and Difference
among themselves, yet they agree in their wicked attemps upon the Government,
and their traitorous Plots and Designs against the Kings sacred Person -- And
therefore do unanimously resolve effectually to put the Laws in Execution
against all Dissenters, whether Papists or Sectaries. And so by this its
manifest that its their Maxim; and ^o you may see what Quarter the Dissenters
are like to have from the Church of England. And in their Order of the second
of October 1683. they thus express themselves, We have been so abundantly
convinced of the Seditious and Rebellious Practices of the Sectaries and
Phanaticks, who through the course of an Hundred Years, since we were first
infected with 'em, have scarce afforded this unhappy Kingdom any interval of
rest from their Horrid Treasons, as that we must esteem 'em, not only the open
Enemies of our established Government, but to all the common Principles of
Society and Humanity it self; wherefore that we may prevent their horrid
Conspiracies for time to come, we resolve to put the severest of the Laws
(which we find too Easy and Gentle, unless enlivened by a vigorous Execution)
in force against 'em. Now observe,

O how horrible Zealous and Charitable are these Church Men of England! it
seems nothing but a vigorous Execution of those Laws will serve their turn, and
what these Laws are may be seen in a Book, lately put forth, called Draconica,
which one whereof at least is Death without Conformity: Are these the old
Friends that the Author of the Letter talks of? We may well say, From such
Friends, Good Lord d^liver us; far better venture to cast our selves on the
new: May we not justly reason a^ the fo^r Leperous Men did, that were without
the Gate of Samaria, 2. Kings 7.3, 4. That if they staid there they must Dye,
and the like if they went into the City, and then resolved to fall into the
Host of the Assyrians, etc. And what is our case better in relation to ^ur old
Friends? for by these Laws, here is nothing but loss of all visible
Enjoyments, for the Conventicle Act will soon fetch all that away, and the
Thirty fifth of Elizabeth takes Life and all, and no Ranso^ to be accepted, but
the Shipwreck of a good Conscience, and so everlasting Life; a dear purchase
indeed.

And as for the former Wars in this Land, may not the ground of them, in a
great measure, be imputed to the violent Persecution of Church of England Men
against People for their Consciences; and as for the late Rebellion, were none
engaged therein but such as these Men call Sectaries and Phanaticks? Its well
known to the contrary; Was not Monmouth a Church of England Man? And the Lord
Gray a Church of England Man? And other eminent Men who suffered, and the most
part of those that were condemned on that account were such as did frequent the
fervice of the Church of England; so that the Church of England Men are ^ot the
only Men free of that which is charged upon Dissenters.

And in their Order of the Tenth of January 1681 they say We order and agree
that all Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor, that shall give and allow
any Relief to any that are able of Body, and do not repair every Sunday to
their Parish Church, and there abide Soberly and Orderly during the whole time
of Divine Service, no such contribution in the passing their Act shall be
allowed. What Law there is for this I know not; some wise Church Men of some
eminency have declared their opinion otherwise, but it seems by this Devenshire
Law, the Poor must come to Church or Starve, and the Bishop highly app^oves
this Order, and says They that signed it (which were Twenty eight Justices of
the Peace) Have approved themselves, good Subjects to his Majesty, true Sons of
the Church of England, and good Patri^ts of their Country; The Lord will have
Mercy, and not Sacrifice, but these Men will have Sacrifice without Mercy.

And in their Order of the Twenty fifth of April 1682. they say That no Person
shall be permitted to keep Alehouses, but such as repair to Church, and
produce a Certificate that they have at least twice in the Year last past,
received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the usage of the
Church to England. Observe, it seems right or wrong they must recei^e it, or
not sell Ale, tho they Eat and Drink their own Damnation; its the usage of the
Church of England, but I find no such usage in the Church of Christ; and now
consider here is Sacrifice required, but no Mercy to Body nor Soul.

And in the same Order they say. And we would have all those Schismatical
Factious People, who upbraid us with the countenancing Debauchery and Ludeness,
to look back upon the late times, and they will find it was their Schism and
Rebellion (and which was prologued with such an entry as this too) which at
first weakened, and at last brake down the Banks of Government, and let in upon
us a deluge of Pro^ainness and Irreligion: These Men would seem greatly to be
against Profainness and Irreligion, and Zealous for Worsh^ps and Services; Have
they forgot, that within the memory of some yet alive, how there was a Book for
Recreation to be used on the Sunday for Dancing and other Sports, was this to
suppress or encourage Profainness and Irreligion, and by whom was that Book set
forth, and ordered to be read in all Parish Churches in the Kingdom, and
several Ministers suspended for refusing to r^ad it? and when the Church of
England (after a time of interruption) came again into her Seat, what a Flood
of Wickedness followed, so that the King was then pleased to give forth a
Declaration against it, expressing that h^ was ashamed of their Drinking of
Healths, and other looseness, or to that effect.

And now these Men would throw all the Dirt they can upon Dissenters, and wipe
their Mouths, as if the Church of England were the only spotless Assembly;
there is an Eye open that sees them, and how conscientious sober Men have
Suffered by them, many of the Goals in this Kingdom are witnesses thereof; many
others Particulars may be taken notice of, in these Orders worthy of
observation, wherein that Spirit is manifested, that under the profession of
Zeal for God, the Honor of the King, and the Preservation of the Established
Religion (as they say) have Persecuted and Ruined many So^er Co^scious, and
Industrious Families and People; and the Bishop highly applauds these Orders,
and gives order for the reading of them by the Clergy of his Diocese, in their
Parish Churches, and subscribes to it Tho. Exon.

And because the Author of the said Letter to Dissenters says, If you had now
to do with those ridged Prelates, etc. I will give one instance more as before
hinted, of a Prelate now, or very lately in being.

A certain Prelate acting as a Justice of the Peace, with some other Justices,
convicted a Meeting of Dissenters, twelve Miles from their Homes, on the Oaths
of two credible Witnesses, as they say (one of which not long after was
convicted for Perjury, and stood in the Pillory for the same) Seven of these
Dissenters coming before the said Prelate, or Bishop, and because it was so far
from their Homes, borrowed each of them a Horse or Mare to ride; being fined
Three Pounds a piece, they were all kept Prisoners in the Bishops Palace, until
about seven at Night, it being in February, and in the mean time all their
Horses taken away (tho not their own, nor either of the Owners at the Meeting)
and sold or conveyed them away; the Horses were worth Thirty two Pounds Ten
Shillings, the Owner of one of them redeemed his Mare for Seven Pound; and it
being alleged that the seven Horses were not sufficient to pay the Fine, they
ordered them to be had to an Inn, and strip of their Clothes, it being dark,
about seven at Night: One of the Dissenters, when they were come into the
Street, said, They would not go into an Inn, but if they would strip them, they
should do it in the Street, and there made a stand; and a Concourse of People
coming about them, and they declaring their unchristian dealing with them, the
Executioners were almost ashamed, and left the Prisoners, the Townsmen standing
by them, and promised not one Cloth should be taken from them, and so they
returned with the loss of the seven Horses.

Now what the Author of the Letter accounts ridgedness is a Question, if these
Actions do not render these Men ridged Prelates, let Men of Moderation judge;
many other particulars of Cruelty may be instanced, that Men of Civility and
Humanity would even blush to hear of, acted by force of those Laws (utterly
contrary to Christianity and Humanity) by Church of England-Men upon the
Dissenters, which these Devonshire Men in one of their Orders do account the
open Enemies to all the common principles of Society and Humanity it self; and
now let the right^ous just God judge between us, if Principles may be judged by
A^tio^s, who are the greatest Enemies to common principles of Society and
Humanity? and if these Church Men do intend what they say, what Conscientious
Man can ^^joy a being amongst them, without Conformit^ to their O^ders?

They further say in their Order of the twenty fifth of April 1682. Having
found the good effects of the Order and Res^lutions agreed on last Sessions,
for the putting the Laws in Execution against Diss^nters, it having wrought so
great a Reformation, and (in those parts where it was observed) reduced most of
those wandering People into the Bosom of their Mother Church, which they had
undutifully forsaken, w^ are encouraged and resolved cheerfully to proceed in
the Method we have begun.

But the Everlasting Almighty God has beheld you, and heard the Cry of many
poor Widows and Fatherless, who have been crushed by your oppressive Laws, and
cruel Ex^^c^tioners, and put a stop to your Carriere, and at present put a
limit to your Power for his Name sake and Elects sake.

But now let me a little inquire into the good effect of your Orders and
Resolutions, and the great Reformation wro^ght ^h^re (...); you sa^, You have
reduced many wandering People in^o the Bos^^ ^f their Mother Church, etc. your
m^aning is, they come to (...), but are they converted conscientio^sl^ to come
there, (...) come only for fear of your ^ruel ^n^ent^ons to put the (...)
Excecu^ion upon them? doubtless on the l^^ter Acco^nt, (...) they are but
Proselites or Hypocrite^, seems such Members (...) well with your Church, but
wha^ Bene^^^ or ^ewa^d are ^ou l^ke to have from God or Man, thus to make
P^o^^lites or H^pocrites? how many poor Souls have you, by your cruel Laws, an^
Excecutione^s, made to violate their Consciences, and make shipwreck of Faith?
I think the present thinness of your Assem^li^s may by this time convince you
that you made but Hypocrites i^st^ad of Converts; consider seriously, was it
ever the Practice or Order of Christ or his Apostles thus to force People to
the Wo^ship which he set up, and they practiced? was it not their way to
convince by a holy and humble Life and Conversation, and sound Doctrine? If you
Object, There were then no Christian Magistrates; I answer, If Christ Jesus had
seen need of them, for his Work, he could have Called and Converted them, but
his way was to entreat and persuade by Love, and not to compel by Force.

And now, O that you had Hearts, to understand, Eyes to see, and Ears to hear,
for the Violence and Oppression done by you to many of the Lords People, and
Repent of your Doings, for God has heard the Cry of the Oppressed, and is
risen for their Deliverance, and do not strive to uphold those Laws which God
will remove, and be still and quiet, least you be found Fighters against God,
and the Lord break you to pieces.

For what ever your Imaginations are, that God, that has the Hearts of Kings
in his Hand, has put it into the Heart of our King, to relieve many of the
Lords Oppressed People, and break the Yoke of the Oppressor, and the Lord will
stand by him in this Work, and overthrow the Attempts, and confound the
Counsels of them that oppose him; many has been the eminent Deliverances and
Preservations the Lord has afforded him, and who knows but that he has
reserved and brought him to the Crown for this very purpose; for the Work is
the Lord that he has begun, and its very acceptable to him, and what Peace
and Quietness ^ath his Subjects enjoyed under his Government? only some that
disturb themselves with their own Fears, because such disappointments are come
upon them, so that they are ready to fret and curse their God and their King,
Isa. 8.21. And nothing will satisfy such, but ^uch Lib^rty to themselves, by
which they may keep others in Bondage.

I say unto such, Take heed how you meddle with Gods Prerogative, his Rule in
the Consciences of People, he ha^h long born with you on that account, and your
time is now to R^pent of what you have done, and not strive ^o keep up that
Power which God will destroy; and be content to enjoy equal Liberty with your
fellow Su^je^ts, and let those L^ws and Te^ts, by which People has be^n thus
long e^slaved, be taken awa^, and that such a Magna Charta may be made, so that
i^ may never be i^ the Power of any Person or Persons whatsoever to Tyranize or
bear Rule over the Conscience of any, or Ruin or Oppress them in their Persons
or Estates on that account; but let every one walk in the way of his God, and
Worship him as God shall persuade him in his Conscience, and then sit down
quietly under his own Vine, Micah 4.4.

But its the great Artifice of that Spirit, that would usurp Authority over the
Conscience, to persuade People, That if the Test be taken away, then Popery
will come in. The Test is but about fifteen Years old, and what has kept it
out before the Test, as is said before, Our God is a God of Justice and Mercy,
and he requires it of Men, and let it be done to all, and trust God with the
event; do not People thus reasoning manifest their forgetfulness of God? as
indeed they have in making and severely excecuting those Laws, to the Ruin of
many Conscientious People.

And now I cannot well omit to observe the Spirit and Temper of the Author of
the Lett^r to Dissenters, What Insinuations he uses; sometimes as if the Church
of England were blamed for Compliance, and accounted Trimmers for enduring
Dissenters, and then how safe is it to keep to them, and many Insinuations
against the King, as his dispencing Power, (tho to save many of his Subjects
from Ruin) and as if all he did were to advance his own Prerogative, with many
Insinuations tending to alienate the Hearts of his Subjects from him, and then
with a Spirit of high Arrogance speaks proudly, saying, Whatever may be told
you at this very hour, and in the heat and glare of your present Sunshine, the
Church of England can in a moment bring Clouds again, and turn the Royal
Thunder upon your Heads, blow you off the Stage with a Breath, if She would
give but a Smile, or a kind Word, the least glimps of Her Compliance would
throw you back into the state of Sufferings, etc.

Now indeed, if we measure the Church of England by this Letter and the
Devonshire Order, and Resolves, we were of all People most Miserable, however
we are not affrighted at high Words, Psa. 12.3. The Lord shall cut off all
flattering Lips, and the Tongue that speaks proud things, But he farther says,
the Church of England, with all her Faults, chooses rather to bear the weight of
Power thenly under the burden of her being Criminal: It seems she would be
accounted Innocent with all the voiolence, and Cruelty, Ruin and Spoil, she and
her Purjured Informers, and envious Priests has done upon many honest
conscientious Men, but the just God will reckon with her for all; and I cannot
yet believe that she is so formidable, that the King or we have need of her
smiles, or fear the want of them, what virtue they may be of to us we know not,
the Informers and such like have had them as yet, and indeed there must be a
great change in her, or us if ever they fall to our lot; however we have lived
under her cruel frowns, and are yet alive, tho she f^owns at that too, when God
shall fulfill that which he has spoken by the Mouth of the Prophet, Is^. 33.1.
Then let such beware, and therefore its good for them not to be high minded,
but fear: The Author says, It cannot be said that she is unprovoked: Books and
Letters comes out every Day; It seems it is but by Books and Letters, etc. It
is not by Goals, and spoiling of Goods, and ruining of Widows and Fatherless,
as she has provoked God, and many of his People, and will she now be offended
that she can do so no longer. Why should she not be contented to enjoy equal
Liberty with others. God forbid that any of us should do to her as she has
done to us, and that for our Consciences toward God; but if the Lord will do
it, who or what can hinder it, but her timely and unfeigned Repentance.

And now my dear Countrymen that are Dissenters, by those Papers before
mentioned, you may see what is the mind of those Church Men, and therefore as
the Lord puts an oppertunity into your hands for future Liberty, be diligent to
inprove it, and use the best endeavors for the removing those Laws and Tests by
which so many have cruelly suffered; and trust God, who will bring to pass his
great Work, and if he have raised up and preserved the King for that purpass,
and endued him with Wisdom and Courage for that end, lets trust him also in his
Gracious Declaration, and often repeated Resolutions for that purpose, and pray
unto God for the prosperity of this Work in his Hands, and not believe, the
vain insinuations of such who profess much Loyalty to him, while he is serving
their ends, but in the disappointments thereof, becomes his secret Enemies.

And if any inquire who, and wha^ I am, they may assure themselves that I am a
Dissente^ from the Church of England, and have so been m^r^ then Forty Years;
and be assured also, that I am not a Roman Cath^lick, but o^e that desires the
Good of all Men, and that none may ^uffer for Conscience sake, and do pray for
the King and (...) ha^ are in Authority under him, that we all may lead ou^
^ives in a^l Godliness and Honesty, and that as the Lord has begun this great
Work by him, so he may live to see the same pe^fected, and that he may have his
Reward from God accordingly, and we all a peaceable Government under him, that
God may have the Glory of all for ever.

I am of the pure Religion, which is to visit Fatherless and Widows in their
Affliction, and keep unspotted of the World.

Devon ss. Ad General. Quarterial Session. Pacis Dom. Regis tent. apud Castr.
Exon. in and pro Comitat. praed. Secundo die Octobris, Anno Regni Dom. nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensor, etc. Tricessimo quinto, Annoque Dom. 1683.
WE have been so abundantly convinced of the Seditious and Rebellious Practices
of the Sactaries and Phanaticks, who through the Course of above One hundred
years since we were first infe^ted with 'em, have scarce afforded this unhappy
Kingdom any interval of rest from their Horrid Treasons, as that we must esteem
'em, not only the open Enemies of our Established Government, but to all the
common Principles of Society and Humanity it self. Wherefore, that we may
prevent their Horrid Conspiracies for the time to come, and secure (as much as
in us lies) our most Gracious KING and the GOVERNMENT from the Fury and Malice
of 'em, we resolve to put the Severest of the Laws (which we find too Easy
and Gentle, unless enlivened by a vigorous Execution) enforce against 'em.

1. We Agree and Resolve, in every Division of this Country, to require
sufficient Sureties for the good Abearing and Peaceable Behavior of all such
as we may justly suspect, or that we can receive any credible Information
against, that they have been at any Conventicles and Unlawful Meetings, or at
any Factious or Seditious Clubs; or that have by any Discourses discovered
themselves to be disaffected to the present Established Government, either in
Church or State; or that have been the Authors or Publishers of any Seditious
Libels; or that shall not in all things duly conform themselves to the present
Established Government.

2. Because we have a sort of False Men, and more persidious than professed
Phanaticks, who either wanting Courage to appear in their own shape, or the
better to bring about their Treasonable Designs, privately Associate with, and
encourage the Seditious Clubs of the Sectaries, and with them Plot heartily
against the Government; and yet, that they may pass unsuspected, sometime
appear in the Church with a false show of Conformity, only to save their Money,
and the better to serve their Faction: That we may (if possible) distinguish
and know all such dangerous Enemies, we will strictly require all
Churchwardens and Constables, at all our Monthly Meetings, to give us a full
account of all such as do not every Sunday resort to their own Parish Churches,
and are not at the beginning of Divine Service, and do not behave themselves
Orderly and Soberly there, observing all such desent Ceremonies as the Laws
enjoin: And that they likewise Present unto us the Names of all such as have
not received the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper in their own Parish
Churches Thrice in the Year.

3. Being fully satisfied, as well by the clear Evidence of the late Horrid
PLOT, as by our own long and sad Experience, That the Nonconformist Preachers
are the Authors and Fomenters of this Pestilent Faction, and the implacable
Enemies of the Established Government, and to whom the late Execrable Treasons,
which have had such dismal effects in this Kingdom, are principally to be
imputed, and who by their present obstinate refusing to Take and Subscribe an
Oath and Declaration, That they do not hold it Lawful to take up ARMS against
the KING, and that they will not endeavor any Alteration of Government either
in Church or State; do necessarily enforce us to conclude, that they are still
ready to engage themselves, (if not actually engaged) in some Rebellious
Conspiracy against the KING, and to invade and Subve^t his GOVERNMENT:
Wherefore ^e resolve in every Parish of this County, to leave strict Warrants
in the hands of all Constabl^s, for the Seizing of such persons. And as an
encouragement to all Officers and others, that shall be instrum^ntal in the
apprehending of any of them, so as they may be brought to Justice, we will give
and allow Forty shillings, as a Reward, for every Nonconformist Preacher that
shall be so secured. And we Resolve to prosecute them, and all other such
Dangerous Enemies of the Government, and common A^senters from church, and
Frequenters of CONVENTICLES, according to the D^rections of a Law made in the
Five and T^i^tie^h ^ear of the R^ign of Queen ELIZABETH, Entitled, An Act for
the keeping Her Majesty's Subjects in due OBEDIENCE.

Lastly. That we may never fo^get the infinite Mercies of Almighty God, in the
la^e W^nderful Del^verance of our Gracious KING, and His Dearest BROTHER, and
all His Loyal Subjects, (who were designed for a Massacre) from the Horrid
Conspiracy of the ^hanaticks, and their Accomplices; and that we may perpetuate
as well our own Thankfulness, as their Infamy, that the Generations to come may
know their Treachery, and avoid and never trust men of such Principles more;
and also that we our selves may perform our public duty to Almighty God,
before we enter upon the public Service of our Country: We Order, Resolve, and
Agree, with Advice an^ oncurrence of the Right Reverend Father in God our much
Honored and Worthy Lord Bishop to give and bestow for the Beautifying of the
Chapel in the Castle of Exon, and for the erecting of decent Seats there, Ten
pounds: And we will likewise give and continue Six pounds to be paid yearly to
any one of the Church of Exon, whom the said Lord Bishop shall appoint, to read
the Divine Service with the Prayers lately appointed for the day of
Thanksgiving on the Ninth of September last, and to Preach a Sermon exhorting
to OBEDIENCE, in the said Chapel, on the first day of every general
Quarter Sessions of the Peace held in the said ^astle, to ^egin precisely at
Eight of the Clock in the Morning.

And may the Mercies of Heaven (which are infinite) always protect our
Religious and Gracious KING, his Dearest BROTHER, and every Branch of that
ROYAL FAMILY; and may all the Treasonable Conspiracies of those Rebellious
Schismatics be always thus happily prevented.

Hugo Vaughan, Cler. Pacis Com. proed.
That the ^^ntinued Care of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County
of DEVON, for the Safety of His Majesty's Sa^r^d Person, the preservation of
the Public Peace, and advancement of true Religion, may be fuller known, and
have a better Effect; I do hereby Order and Require all the CLERGY of my
Diocese within the County of Devon, deliberately to publish this Order, the
next Sunday after it shall be tendered to them.

Tho. Exon.



Postscript.
I Intended brevity in this Paper, for should I have set my self to answer all
Particulars in the said Letter and Devonshire Orders, it might amount even to a
Volume, to set forth the secret Treachery and false Insinuations against the
King in the Letter, and cruel Intentions and Resolutions in the Devonshire
Orders, before mentioned. However, I thought meet that the last of th^se Orders
may be with what is before expressed exposed to public view, that all may see
the nature of that Spirit, which has exercised such Cruelty on Innocent
People, and what their Resolutions further were, if the Lord for his Elect
sake, had not raised up, and put it into the Heart of the King to shorten the
days of their Power; and against all the Jealousies and Fears suggested, that
this present Liberty and Freedom is but to make way for further Bondage and
Slavery, that so they may uphold those cruel Laws and Tests, for a future
opertunity to exercise their former Tyranny, and is it Condemnable in the
Church of Rome, and Justifiable in the Church of England.

Its left to the serious consideration of all that loves true Freedom rather
then cruel Bondage, whether it be not far better to accept and trust the King,
for the Liberty and Freedom promise^ in his Princely Declaration, and since
often confirmed by expressing the reality and sincerity of his Resolutions
therein, the^ labor to uphold those Laws and Tests that may enable those
Church of England Men to prosecute their cruel Intentions and Resolutions in
those Orders expressed, which tho but the Orders and Resolutions of the Bishop,
Justices and Grand Jury of one County, yet without much straining may be taken
for the general Resolutions of the Church of England, whose Practice has
spoken forth as much.

Yet one thing more coming to my view, I leave to be consider^d, the Author of
the Letter says, The Church of Rome does not only dislike the allowing of
Liberty, but byits Principles it cannot do it. I answer, Is not the Principles
of the Church of England, and some others not far different, tho Dissenting
from them, the same? their practices have evin^ed it. However the King has not
only declared it to be his Principle, That Conscience ought not to be forced,
and that all Men ought to enjey the Liberty of their Conscience; but has
performed the same accordingly. And when the former King Charles the Second had
give^ out a Declaration to that purpose, what opposition did the Church of
England make against it, pretending a dislike of the manner of it, but never
offered to do in a way which they might account legal; but rather crushed it in
the Bud, plainly manifesting their Principles to be such, that none should
enjoy that Liberty but themselves; and now are greatly offended that the King
that now is has done it; so that its evident, it should never be done if they
could help it: And now whether it be not best for the Dissenters to choose the
New Friends before the Old; but they say, This will not hold, its good to hold
it while we can, and if it be taken away we are but where we were before, some
in Goals till Death set them at Libe^ty, and others Goods spoiled by the worst
of Men, being let loose for that purpose, and no guard for them, unless
purchased with the loss of a good Conscience.

I further answer, suppose the Principles of the Church of Rome be such, the
Church of England is the same; but can neither of these be Converted from such
Principles? they are not likely while they account them Just and Good: Now that
the Church of England do so account them their Sentiments in the Devonshire
Orders do manifest, and their Resolves to prosecute them accordingly, and what
else can be expected should hinder ^h^m, for they will have their Sa^rifice,
tho without Mercy to the poor Widows and Fatherless; for if they will not come
to Church and stay their all the tim^ of their Divine Service, they must have
no Relief by their Devonshire Law, and so here is li^^le hope of the Conversion
of the Church of E^gland from this P^inciple, and therefore its good that thos^
Laws may be taken away that gives them power to put them in Practice.

And now wh^^her that the King, if his Principles were such as these Men
su^ge^t, (but himself otherwise affirms) whether there be not a possibility
that he may be Converted? Was not Paul while Saul a Persecutor, yet by the
Lor^s Power Converted? King Manasseth the like. And now whether there is not as
much hope of this Kings Conversion as the Church of England's, if not from his
Religion, yet from this Principle, which yet he has declared is not his
Principle, and by his Practice has put a limit to the same, and proposed a way
to cut o^f its Power forever, and settle F^eedom, and Liberty of Conscience, so
that it shall not be in the Power of after Ages to alter it; and so let us try
whether the King intends as he says, and let a Parliament when called be ready
to join with him therein; and I doubt not but the Everlasting ^lmighty God will
add a Blessing unto a Work so acceptable to him.

And therefore let me conclude with this, The Lord Bless and Prosper the King
in this Work he has begun, and discover all the secret Conspiracies, Counsels
and Contrivings of all that design to oppose or hinder the same, and Crown him
with Everlasting Life in the World to come.

Page 4. Line 10. for the read then. p. 6. l. 8. f. Persecution, r. Prosecutio^
l. 25. f. Act, r. account. p. 7. l. 1. f. to, r. of.

A Persuasive to Moderation to Church Dissenters, in Prudence and Conscience
Humbly submitted to the King and his Great Council. By one of the Humblest and
most Dutiful of his Dissenting Subjects.

Remarks upon a Pamphlet Styled, A Letter to a Dissenter, etc. In another
Letter to the same Dissenter.

Vox Cleri pro Rege: Or the Rights of the Imperial Sovereignty of the Crown of
England Vindicated. In Reply to a late Pamphlet pretending to answer a Book,
entitled the Judgment and Doctrine of the Clergy of the Church of England
concerning the King Prerogative in dispencing with Penal Laws. In a Letter to a
Friend.

Advice to Freeholders and other Electors of Members to serve in Parliament. In
Relation to the Penal Laws and Tests. In a Letter to a Friend in the Country.

Reasons for the Repeal of the Tests. In a Letter to a Friend in the Country.

Old Popery as good as New. Or the Unreasonableness of the Church of England in
some of her Doctrines and Practices, and the Reasonableness of Liberty of
Conscience. In a Letter from a Private Gentleman in the Country to his Friend a
Clergyman in the City.

The Great and Popular Objection against the Repeal of the Penal Laws and
Tests, briefly stated and considered.

Pax Redux, Or the Christian Reconciler. In Three Parts. Being a Project for
Re-uniting all Christians into one sole Communion. Done out of French into
English, by Philip Airs Esquire.

Three Letters tending to demonstrate how the Security of this Nation against
all Future Persecution for Religion, lys in the Abolishment of the present
Penal Laws and Tests, and in the Establishment of a New Law for Universal
Liberty of Conscience.

A Rational Catechism: Or, An Instructive Conference between a Father and a
Son. By the Author of the Three Letters

All Sold at the Three Keys, in Nags-Head-Court, in Grace Church Street,
over against the Conduit.


