The Last SPEECH OF Mr. Oliver Plunket, Titular PRIMATE of IRELAND, Who was
Executed at Tyburn on Friday the 1st. of this instant July, 1681.
Written by his own Hand.
I Have some few days past abided my Trial at the King's Bench, and now very
soon I must hold up my Hand at the King of King's Bench, and appear before a
Judge who cannot be deceived by False Witnesses, or Corrupted Allegations; For
he knows the secrets of Hearts: Neither can he deceive any, or give an Unjust
Sentence, or be Mislead by respects of persons; He being all goodness, and a
most just Judge, will infallibly decree an eternal Reward for all good works,
and Condign punishment for the smallest Transgression against his Commandments.
Which being a most certain and undoubted Truth; it would be a wicked Act, and
contrary to my perpetual welfare, that I should now by declaring any thing
contrary to Truth, commit a detestable sin, for which within a very short time
I must receive Sentence of Everlasting Damnation; after which there is no
Reprieve or hope of Pardon. I will therefore Confess the Truth, without any
Equivocation, and make use of the words according to their accustomed
signification; assuring you moreover, that I am of that certain persuasion,
that no Power, not only upon Earth, but also in Heaven, can dispense with me,
or give me leave to make a False Protestation: And I protest upon the word of a
Dying man, and as I hope for Salvation at the Hands of the Supreme Judge, that
I will declare the Naked Truth with all Candor and Sincerity: And that my
Affairs may be the better known to all the World,

It Is to be observed, that I have been Accused in Ireland of Treason and
Praemunire, and that there I was Arraigned and brought to my Trial; but the
Prosecutors (men of Flagitious and Infamous Lives) perceiving that I had
Records and Witnesses who would Evidently convince them, and clearly show my
Innocence and their wickedness, they voluntarily absented themselves, and came
to this City, to procure that I should be brought hither to my Trial (where the
Crimes objected were not committed,) where the Jury did not know me, or the
Qualities of my Accusers, and were not informed of several other Circumstances
conducing to a Fair Trial. Here, after six Months Close Imprisonment (or there
abouts) I was brought to the Bar the third of May, and Arraigned for a Crime,
for which I was before Arraigned in Ireland: A strange Resolution, a rare Fact,
of which you will hardly find a Precedent these five hundred years past: But
whereas my Witnesses and Records were in Ireland, the Lord Chief Justice gave
me five weeks time to get them brought hither: But by reason of the uncertainty
of the Seas, of Wind and Weather, and of the difficulty of getting Copies of
Records, and bringing many Witnesses from several Counties in Ireland, and for
many other Impediments (of which Affidavit was made) I could not at the end of
the five weeks get the Records and Witnesses brought hither; I therefore begged
for twelve days more; that I might be in a readiness for my Trial, which the
Lord Chief Justice denied; and so I was brought to my Trial, and exposed, as it
were, with my Hands Tied, to those Merciless Perjurors, who did aim at my Life,
by Accusing me of these following points.

First, That I have sent Letters by one Nial O Neale (who was my Page) to
Monsieur Baldeschi, the Pope 's Secretary; to the Bishop of Aix, and to
Principe Colonna, that they might Solicit Foreign Powers to Invade Ireland;
and also to have sent Letters to Cardinal Bullion to the same effect.

Secondly, To have employed Captain Con O Neale to the French King for Succor.

Thirdly, To have Levied and Exacted Moneys from the Clergy of Ireland to bring
in the French, and to maintain seventy thousand men.

Fourthly, To have had in a readiness seventy thousand men, and Lists made of
them, and to have given Directions to one Friar Duffy to make a List of 250 men
in the Parish of Foghart in the County of Lowth.

Fifthly, To have Surrounded all the Forts and Harbors of Ireland, and to have
fixed upon Carlingford as a fit Harbor for the Frenches Landing.

Sixthly, To have had several Councils and Meetings, where there was Money
alloted for Introducing the French.

Finally, that a Meeting in the County of Monaghan, some 10 or 12 years past,
where there were 300 Gentlemen of three several Counties, to wit, Monaghan,
Cavan and Armagh; whom I did exhort to take Arms to recover their Estates.

To the first I answer, that Nial O Neale was never my Servant or Page, and
that I never sent Letter or Letters by him to Monsieur Baldeschi, or the Bishop
of Aix, or to Principe Colonna. And I say, that the English Translation of that
pretended Letter produced by the Friar Macmoyer is a mere invention of his, and
never Penned by me, or its Original, either in English, Latin, Italian, or any
other Language. I affirm moreover, that I never wrote Letter or Letters to
Cardinal Bullion, or any of the French Kings Ministers; neither did any who was
in that Court either speak to me, or write to me directly or indirectly, of any
Plot or Conspiracy against my King or Country. Farther, I Vow that I never sent
Agent or Agents to Rome, or to any other Court, about any Civil or Temporal
Affairs: And it is well known, (for it is a Precept publicly Printed) that
Clergymen (living in Countries where the Government is not of Roman
Catholics) are commanded by Rome, not to write to Rome, concerning any Civil
or Temporal Affairs. And I do aver, that I never received Letter or Letters
from the Pope, or from any other of his Ministers making the least mention of
any such matters: So that the Friars Macmoyer and Duffy Swore most Falsely, as
to such Letter or Letters, Agent or Agents.

To the second, I say that I never employed Capt. Con O Neal to the French
King, or to any of his Ministers; and that I never wrote to him, or received
Letters from him; and that I never saw him but once, nor ever spoke to him to
the best of my remembrance ten words; and as for his being in Charlemount, or
Dungannon, I never saw him in them Towns, or knew of his being in those places;
So that as to Con O Neale, Friar Mack Moyer's Depositions are most false.

To the third, I say that I never Levied any Money for a Plot or Conspiracy,
for bringing in Spaniards or French, neither did I ever receive any upon that
account, from Priests or Friars, as Priest Mac-Clave, and Friar Duffy most
untruly asserted. I assure you, that I never received from any Clergyman in
Ireland, but what was due to me by ancient custom for my maintenance; and what
my Predecessors these hundred years past were wont to receive; nay I received
less than many of them. And if all what the Catholick-Clergy of Ireland get in
the year, were put in one Purse, it would signify little or nothing to
introduce the French, or to raise an Army of seventy thousand Men, which I had
Insisted, and ready, as Friar Mac Moyer most falsely deposed; Neither is it less
untrue what Friar Duffy attested, viz. That I directed him to make a List of
250. Men in the Parish of Foghart, in the County of Lowth.

To the fifth, I answer, that I never surrounded all the Forts or Harbors of
Ireland, and that I was never at Cork, Kinsale, Bantry, Youghal, Dungarvan, or
Knockfergus; and these 36 years past I was not at Limerick, Duncanon or
Wexford. As for Carlingford I was never in it but once, and staid not in it
above half an hour; Neither did I consider the Fort or Haven; Neither had I it
in my thoughts or imagination to fix upon it, or upon any other Fort or Haven,
for Landing of French or Spaniards; and whilst I was at Carlingford (by mere
chance, passing that way) Friar Duffy was not in my Company, as he most falsely
Swore.

To the sixth, I say that I was never at any Meeting or Counsel, where there
was mention made of allotting or collecting of Moneys, for a Plot or
Conspiracy; and it is well known, that the Catholic Clergy of Ireland, who have
neither Lands nor Revenues, and hardly are able to keep decent Clothes upon
their Backs, and Life and Soul together, can raise no considerable sum; nay
cannot spare as much as would maintain half a Regiment.

To the seventh, I answer, that I was never at any meeting of 300. Gentlemen in
the County of Monaghan, or of any Gentlemen of the three Counties of Monaghan,
Armagh, and Cavan, nor of one County, nor of one Barony; and that I never
exhorted Gentleman or Gentlemen either there, or in any other part of Ireland,
to take Arms for the recovering their Estates; And it is well known that there
are not even in all the Province of Vlster 300 Irish Roman Catholics, who had
Estates, or lost Estates by the late Rebellion; And as it is well known, all my
thoughts and endeavors were for the quiet of my Country, and especially of
that Province.

Now to be brief, As I hope for Salvation I never sent Letter or Letters,
Agent, or Agents, to Pope, King, Prince, or Prelate, concerning any Plot or
Conspiracy against my King or Country; I never raised sum or sums of Money,
great or small to maintain Soldier or Soldiers all the days of my life; I
never knew or heard, (neither did it come to my thoughts or imagination,) that
the French were to Land at Carlingford; and I believe there is none who saw
Ireland even in a Map, but will think it a mere Romance; I never knew of any
Plotters or Conspirators in Ireland, but such as were Notorious and Proclaimed
(commonly called Tories,) whom I did endeavor to suppress. And as I hope for
Salvation, I always have been, and am entirely Innocent of the Treasons laid to
my Charge, and of any other whatsoever.

And though I be not guilty of the Crimes of which I am accused, yet I believe
none came ever to this Place who is in such a condition as I am; for if I
should even acknowledge, (which in Conscience I cannot do, because I should
belly my self) the chief Crimes laid to my charge, no wise man that knows
Ireland would believe me. If I should confess that I was able to raise 70000
men in the districts of which I had care, to wit; in Vlster; nay, even in all
Ireland, and to have levied and exacted moneys from the Roman Clergy for their
maintenance, and to have prepared Carlingford for the French's Landing, all
would but laugh at me; it being well known, that all the Revenues of Ireland,
both Spiritual and Temporal, possessed by His Majesty's Subjects, are scarce
able to raise and maintain an Army of 70000 men. If I will deny all those
Crimes, (as I did, and do) yet it may be that some, who are not acquainted with
the Affairs of Ireland, will not believe that my denial is grounded upon Truth,
though I assert it with my last breath. I dare venture farther, and affirm; That
if these points of 70000 men, etc. had been Sworn before any Protestant Jury in
Ireland, and had been even acknowledged by me at the Bar, they would not
believe me, no more than if it had been deposed, and confessed by me, That I
had flown in the Air from Dublin to Holy-head.

You see therefore what a Condition I am in, and you have heard what
Protestations I have made of Innocence, and I hope you will believe the words
of a dying man; And that you may be the more induced to give me credit, I
assure you, That a great Peer sent me notice, That he would save my Life, if I
would accuse others. but I answered, That I never knew of any Conspirators in
Ireland, but such (as I said before) as were publicly known Outlaws; And that,
to save my Life, I would not falsely accuse any, nor prejudice my own Soul. Quid
prodest homini, etc. To take away any man's Life or Goods wrongfully, ill
becomes any Christian, especially a man of my Calling, being a Clergyman of
the Catholic Church, and also an unworthy Prelate, which I do openly confess.
Neither will I deny to have exercised in Ireland the Functions of a Catholic
Prelate, as long as there was any Connivance or Toleration; and by Preaching,
and Teaching, and Statutes, to have endeavored to bring the Clergy (of which I
had a care) to a due comportment, according to their Calling; and though thereby
I did but my duty, yet some who would not amend had a prejudice for me, and
especially my Accusers, to whom I did endeavor to do good; I mean the
Clergymen, (as for the four Laymen who appeared against me, viz. Florence
Mac-Moyer, the 2 Neals, and Hanlon, I was never acquainted with them;) but you
see how I am requited, and how by false Oaths they brought me to this untimely
death; which wicked act being a defect of Persons, ought not to reflect upon
the Order of S. Francis, or upon the Roman Catholic Clergy. It being well
known, that there was a Judas among the ^2 Apostles, and a wicked man called
Nicholas amongst the seven Diacons; And even, as one of the said Diacons, to
wit, holy Stephen, did pray for those who stoned him to death; so do I, for
those who with Perjuries spill my Innocent Blond, saying, as St. Stephen did, O
Lord lay not this Sin to them. I do heartily forgive them, and also the Judges,
who (by denying me sufficient time to bring my Records and Witnesses from
Ireland) did expose my Life to evident danger. I do also forgive all those who
had a hand in bringing me from Ireland to be tried here, where it was morally
impossible for me to have a fair Trial. I do finally forgive all who did
concur, directly or indirectly, to take away my Life, and I ask forgiveness of
all those whom I ever offended by Thought, Word or Deed.

I beseech the All-powerful, That his Divine Majesty grant our King, Queen and
the Duke of York, and all the Royal Family, Health, long Life, and all
Prosperity in this world, and in the next Everlasting felicity

Now that I have showed sufficiently (as I think) how Innocent I am of any Plot
or Conspiracy; I would I were able, with the like Truth, to clear my self of
high Crimes committed against the Divine Majesty's Commandments (often
transgressed by me) for which I am sorry with all my heart; and if I should, or
could live a thousand years, I have a firm resolution, and a strong purpose, by
your Grace (O my God) never to offend you; and I beseech your Divine Majesty,
by the merits of Christ, and by the Intercession of his Blessed Mother, and all
the holy Angels and Saints, to forgive me my Sins, and to grant my Soul Eternal
Rest. Miserere mei Deus, etc. Parce animae, etc. In manus Tuas, etc.

Postscript.
TO the final satisfaction of all Persons, that have the Charity to believe the
Words of a Dying Man; I again declare before God, as I hope for Salvation, what
is contained in this Paper, is the plain and naked truth, without any
Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or secret Evasion whatsoever; taking the
Words in their usual sense and meaning, as Protestants do, when they discourse
with all Candor and sincerity. To all which I have here subscribed my Hand,


OLIVER PLUNKET.

London, Printed by N. Thompson, 1681.


