THE PLOT in a DREAM: OR, THE DISCOVERER IN Masquerade.

IN A Succinct Discourse and Narrative of the late and present Designs of the
Papists against the King and Government.

Illustrated with Copper Plates.

By PHILOPATRIS.

Fictae Religioni ficta decent. LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden for John Hancock
and Enoch Prosser, and are to be sold at their Shops at the Three Bibles next
Pope's Head Alley over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, and at the Rose
and Crown in Swethings Alley at the East end of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
1681.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe ingenious Author wants neither Wit nor Eloquence, to recommend this
delightful Mirror of the Popish Plot to thy acceptance; but his great humility
restrains him from doing that Justice to himself, and kindness to me. Yet
rather then so fair a Birth should perish in the bringing forth, so curious a
Work lie by for want of a few good words, I resolved to say somewhat my self:
and not only for the Authors praise, but a little for my own profit.

I know what has been said in some Prefaces, of the bottomless deserts of some
Writings to deceive the Credulous World. And it is easy to say more in a Page,
than you shall find true in a volume. But my design is not to swell this Book
or thine expectation, by a prolix and undeserved Encomium. My purpose is only
to bespeak thy Faith, as the Author (I doubt not) has pleased nor a damnable
black and bloody Plot against our King, Laws, Lives, and Religion more fully
discovered, and fairly represented, than you do in this Vision. To conclude, If
thine eyes be shut, this Vision will open them; if open, it will delight them.
What thou see in it, or by it intended, but defeated; designed, but
discovered; let it excite thy praises to that God, whose All-seeing eye
beholds, and whose infinite power and wisdom bounds the Rage, and baffles the
Counsels of these wicked Achitophels. Neither do thou cease to pray, that the
same Jehovah would evermore mightily defend our Gracious Sovereign, this great
and populous City, the whole Kingdom, and all the Churches of God both at home
and abroad, from Hells Rage and Romes Religion, till Christ shall come in glory
to judge that Scarlet Whore, and give us and all his Saints a clearer Vision of
that Mystery of Iniquity than the World ever had, or shall have till that day.

Farewell.
To the Ingenious Dreamer.
It Is well, when others with their waking Wit,
Will Not see a Plot, that Dreams discover it;
When our grave Narratives grow out of date,
You lend brisk Fa^sie to perpetuate
Its Memory: Pray take the other Nap,
And dream who would our Phileroy entrap.
What yet I saw is but the midnight Theme,
But hope ere long to see a Morning Dream
That will reveal not only what is past,
But what conclusion they will come to at last.
Servile Applauses to no man I owe,
Yet on your Dream my Verdict, I Will bestow,
More Truth nor better Sense no Dreamer spoke,
But Sir you dream as if you were awake.
Your unknown Friend, T. D

Ad Authorem Epigramma.
Heu! quam grande nefas haec dira insomnia narrant?
Ni fallor, vere, somniat hic, vigilans.
T. D.

THE PLOT in a DREAM: OR The Discoverer in Masquerade.
CHAP. I.
The Author in a Vision traveling over the Petropolitan Countries, arrives at
Strombolo (the supposed place of Purgatory) in company with some Petropolitan
Travelers; There they met with an Apparition talking to it self about the
present Plot; A pleasant passage of the fright the Petropolitans were put into
by the Apparition, and their flight upon it. The Apparition proves to be
Phileroy, the Discoverer of the Plot, and an acquaintance of the Author's; upon
renewing their acquaintance, Phileroy, discourses with him concerning the Plot,
and of his end in coming thither, which was to attend a Consult there holden by
the Great Bishop and his Emissaries, about carrying on their Designs against
Albonia: Their arrival at the place of the Consult: A description of the place:
The Author placed on Phileroy's Apartment, where incognito, he takes his
Observations.

BEing naturally delighted in reading of Foreign Peregrinations and Observations
of the different Manners and Customs of strange Countries, I was one night
musing upon such Subjects, till sleep (the Ape of Reason) had dispossessed me of
my considering faculty, and turned it wholly into Imagination and Fancy; by the
force of which on the sudden I was carried into the Hysperian Countries, where
having staid a small time to remarque some most noted Observables of that
Catholic Region (me-thoughts) I approacht toward the Seacoast, and finding a
Vessel ready, did (having agreed for hire) therein imbarque my self for Italy,
the principal of the Petropolitan Countries, and thence to return again to
Christendom, having past the Fretum Gaditanum, and entered into the Levant, we
were by force of Winds carried to the utmost parts of Italy, amongst the
burning Islands; the chiefest of which is Strombolo, commonly affirmed by the
Petropolitans of those Countries to be the Jaws of Hell, and that therein the
damned souls are tormented; here, notwithstanding the frightfulness of such
Reports, we were forced to put in for a Refuge against the Storm; and having
landed our selves at the foot of that burning Mountain, I and some of our
Company had a mind to ascend it, to see the curiosities of that feigned
Incendium. We had by leisurely and winding Ascents arrived to near three parts
of the way, when in a solitary by-way amongst a queach of bushes, we discovered
something in the shape of a black man, softly moving before us; I and my
company were, I must confess, somewhat startled and surprised to see any thing
like humane in that desolate and uninhabited Region, and therefore concluded it
must be some Devil or other that was sent out as a Scout to surprise such
unwary passengers as our selves; or else some poor Purgatory Soul (that by the
power of Masses) had got leave to cool himself in the open Air: My Company were
at the point of turning back again in a fright, but I persuaded them against
it, telling them, if it were the Devil, it were more safe to resist him, than
to fly; whereupon they all besides my self being Petropolitans, began to cross
themselves a main, to rattle their Beads, and to mutter over their Ave Mary's
at such a rate, that for my part, though I could not forbear smiling at their
folly, yet I was more afraid of such their ridiculous incantations, than of the
supposed Devil: The best on it was, all this while his back was toward us, and
his posture rather standing than progressive, taking his steps so leisurely, as
if some weighty notions in his head had retarded the motion of his heels: By
this means we hoped to avoid his sight of us, and proceeded forward, when on
the sudden we heard him (who had hitherto kept silence) break out into these
expressions, which he uttered with somewhat a low, but earnest voice, and plain
enough to be heard [Oh Albonia, Albonia, Dear Albonia, What will become of
thee?] The Company heard the words as well as I, out understood them not, being
spoke in the Albonian Language, which being my own native Dialect, made me
wonder much more, and to be more attentive to what followed, which after a
short pause was this; [Here's a Plot indeed with Hell and destruction at the
beginning and end on it -- Now the Devil take the Plot, and Hell take Devil,
Plot, Plotters, and all, I Will get rid of them as soon as with safety I can, and
discover, and then let their Devilships do their worst, I will put my self
under the protection of the Albonian Prince, and defy their malice; and as I
have now opportunity to know, I shall be then as well able to countermine their
designs. These expressions I heard and understood, but were as mysterious to me
as a Delphian Oracle: My Company were surpised too, to hear what they
understood not; and imagining by my attention, and some alterations they
discerned in my looks, that I might understand the Lingua, they desired me for
once to be so kind to them, as to be Interpreter for the Devil; but I excused
my self with a Pardonne moy Messieurs; I told them I had not been bred up long
enough in the Infernal Countries, to understand any more of their Lingua than
themselves -- The truth is, hearing talk of Plots, and my own dear Native
Country of Albonia named, I was unwilling (till I could be better informed) to
discover any thing to them, that I knew as they were Petropolitans, were
Enemies to us. But however, with the muttering noise we made, the Apparition
turned about, and looked at us: I confess when I saw him move, I was afraid I
should have seen the Devil's Countenance, that like Medusa's head, should have
turned us all into Stone, or Changelings; but seeing him look with an humane
Form and Visage, I took heart of grace, and stood my ground till he came nearer
to us; but then standing still, and looking steadfastly and grimly upon us, he
spoke to us in the Hysperian Language, which my Company then understood thus:
Sirs, What are you? Whence come you? What make you here in the Luciferian
Territories, which is ground not for Mortals to tread upon -- These words were
Thunderbolts to our Company, who without any other reply, fell to crossing and
blessing themselves as before, expecting nothing but presently to be devoured
-- or to have their Souls shaken out of their Bodies, and carried directly to
Limbus -- But his next words were yet more dreadful, when he told them, That he
was Bailiff to the Infernal Lord of those Countries, and that his office was to
seize upon all Waiss and Strays that he found there as forfeits to the Lord of
the Soil, that finding us such, his commission was presently to uncase us of
our Bodies, and to faggot up our Souls together, and carry them to Limbus.
Dreadfully did these words sound in the Ears of the poor trembling
Petropolitans, who needed no other disanimation than their own fears, who thus
hearing their doom, and knowing no way to avoid it, did pitifully request one
boon only of the Apparition before their seizure, That he would give them leave
to return back to their Vessel, that brought them thither to send away Letters
to their friends to say Masses and Dirges for them (when in Purgatory) for
their releasment. This their request, urged with their pitiful looks and
behavior, was at last granted upon their solemn Paroll given of returning back
to the same place, as soon as they had sent away their dispatches; and leaving
one of the Company in hostage for the return of the rest, and for this we were
to cast lots, which we did; and the Lot fell upon me -- The truth is, I had no
such pretense to make for my self as they had, and joined not with them in
theirs: I had security of better means to preserve my self against the Infernal
Powers, than Masses and such fopperies: Neither indeed did I much dread them,
having a strong persuasion grounded upon reasons best known to my self, that
this whole Scene which appeared to them so Tragical, was no other than mere
Figment and delusion. Well, thus I was left, and my Companions having received
their Manumission, turned down the Hill swifter than they intended to return,
which indeed they never did, as the Apparition upon our after-acquaintance told
me pleasantly he expected not they should; notwithstanding they had pawned
their Words and Oaths to boot for it; for he told me their Religion was such,
that they could easily dispense with such things; and as they stick not to
break their words with Heretics, so neither would they keep it with the Devil
himself, except it were to serve him on their own designs -- Timor addidit
alas, the source of a Torrent from the fall of a precipice was not more swift
than their motion in their retreat, they ran as if the Devil (indeed) had drove
them. After they were gone, and I left alone with my Guardiane -- I perceived
his Eyes steadfastly fixed upon me, but knew not the meaning of it, till he
resolved me by the kindness of an affectionate Embrace, and calling me by the
term of his dear Friend and Countryman Philopatris, and at the same time upon
more strict observance of his voice and features, I knew I was in the Arms of
my old Friend Phileroy -- I was glad, you may conceive, to find an old Friend
in a New Soil, which (upon his request) I informed him how I came to Land upon,
with a short History of my Adventures in the Neighboring Countries; but being
especially desirous to know how things stood in Albonia, I satisfied him that I
left all things well, that we enjoyed the benefit which our Neighbors round
about us were deprived of, of a secure and happy Peace -- God grant it be so,
quoth he, and that it may continue. But I fear it will be too soon disturbed by
that Cursed Plot that is now hatching against them -- Hearing again the name of
a Plot, I could not be much disturbed in my mind, till I understood what he
meant by it. I knew Phileroy of old to be no Flash, or one that would speak
things unadvisedly, or at Random, and therefore desired him at once to heal my
fears and curiosity, by explaining his meaning -- But what, quoth Phileroy, Is
indeed the name of a Plot so strange a thing to you, that you seemed so
surprised at the hearing of it? Heard you no rumors of it in Albonia before you
left it? Not a word, quoth I -- nor any suspicion or jealousies, replied he, of
a Party there lurking upon design to take off the Prince, and subvert the
Government? Forbid it Heavens, quoth I again, (then in a great passion) That
our Dear Albonia should harbor any such Vipers in her Bowels. You know full
well, Dear Phileroy, how well we are secured against any fears of such Attempts
by the graciousness of the Prince, and happy Constitution of the Government we
live under: It is Tyranny and Oppression that first raises discontents, and
then puts factious spirits upon designs of Rebellion; but as there are no such
grounds amongst us to provoke to such designs, so we the less fear any to
attempt, except the Devil himself should raise any Cursed-Instruments that out
of mere Envy to our happiness, should go about to destroy it. To suppose any
such Intestine Monsters lurking amongst our selves, that should go about to
disturb that blessed Peace and Tranquillity we enjoy, were to conclude men
Enemies to their own good, as well as their Country's, in whose welfare they
are joynt-sharers. You know we are an United Christian Kingdom under a
Christian Prince, whose prerogative it is to be Scutum Fidei both to us and the
Christian World: And though it be our unhappiness to have some Parties amongst
us, that out of respect of Conscience do dissent from others in some lesser
matters, relating to Modes and Ceremonies of Worship, yet as the Principles of
that Religion (wherein we are all united) does bind them; so also, the clemency
and moderation of our Prince has farther obliged them to their duty and
obedience by those in-indulgencies which he has graciously allowed them against
the severities of the Laws against them. And though contrary to the Princes
inclination, some ill men have gone about maliciously to exasperate some of
them by forcing the Edge of those Laws against them; yet the Experience of now
above twenty years, has confirmed us, that there has no such Plots or Attempts
on their parts been attempted. And this Phileroy is so well known to you, that
I may suppose these are not the Parties you mean for the Plotters -- No,
replied Phileroy, yet those persons that are the real Plotters, have laid their
design so, as to endeavor to represent them such, and so to Sham it off
themselves -- But seeing we are so happily met in a strange place, and have
opportunity to discourse things so material to the welfare of our selves and
Country; let us quit our Station, and walk on; for I know you have a curiosity
of seeing that place, which your timorous Companions are so glad they are freed
from. I will discourse these things more fully to you by the way, and withal
the reason of my coming hither, and stay here; with all my heart, cried I -- So
we proceeded, he leading the way through solitary by paths, still leisurely
ascending. We had not gone far, nor entered into any farther talk before we were
attacqued with the noise of a great shout from the top of the Flaming Mountain,
and after that a roaring kind of noise, like the bellowings of a Bull; at which
I startled, being frightfully possessed with an apprehension that I should be put
to encounter with Monsters or Devils, if I proceeded farther. I expected indeed
that my Friend Phileroy (that I knew was neither Witch nor Conjurer) should be
scared as well as I -- but instead thereof I was surpised to see him fall into
a loud fit of Laughter, asking me pleasantly what was the matter? The matter
(quoth I) Are you so danger-proof to make a jest of these things? Heard you not
the shouts and hollowings just now over our heads, together with the bellowings
of a Bull: For my part I am apt to think now indeed, that I am in the Devil's
Country, and that some of his Scouts, having discovered our Arrival, are gone
to inform the Garrison of it, to come and seize us: Courage man (replied
Phileroy still laughing) I thought you, being a Christian, had been
Devil-proof, tho your Companions, the Petropolitans, were not; you are more
afraid than hurt, I will assure you: And to evidence this to you, I will
endeavor to release you from your frights and astonishments by this short
Narrative, wherein (to prevent farther questions) I will first acquaint you
with the Cause of my coming hither; you know, when I left Albonia about two
years since I designed to travel into the Petropolitan Countries, not to learn
their Religion, but to observe their Manners, and to satisfy my curiosity
concerning their Policies, and those things which are so commonly reported of
them in our Country. Having with little stay posted over the Adjacent
Countries, I came to Petropolis it self, the place where I intended to make my
Residence; there the Arch-Flammin, or Great Bishop of the Petropolitans keeps
his Court; I had a great desire to inform my self of the present State of it,
and of those grand Affairs that were there managed relating to the
Petropolitan-Weal, by the Grand-Bishop and his Scarlet Senate. But this being a
thing difficult, you know, for a Christian to enterprise amongst professed
Enemies, I had learned so much of their Arts, as to conceal my Religion, and to
profess my self one of theirs conforming my self in all places to the same
Modes and Customs as they did; and by this stratagem insinuated my self so far
into the good Opinion, not only of the People, but the Priests themselves, that
at last I was persuaded by them to take upon me a Religious Habit; then I
thought my self a fine fool indeed; but having so got a cloak for my knavery, I
thought I should thereby have the better opportunity to discover theirs, and so
indeed it happily fell out; for by this means being looked upon as a Brother of
the Petropolitan-Tribe. I had the more freedom to be present at their Consults
and Meetings, which I quickly understood to be then managed principally against
Our Dear Country of Albonia. Nor (although I was well known by them to be a
Native of that place) were they any wise jealous of my company, or debarred the
freedom of theirs, looking upon Renegades, (such as they took me to be) to be
most serviceable to their Designs and Interests.

They had now by the influence of their great Bishop fully resolved upon the
ruin of our Hilbonian State, whose happiness in our Religion, and that civil
peace we enjoyed, had been such a continual eyesore to them; And to accomplish
this the better, Lucifer their old Friend is to find them with fit Instruments,
to carry on their treacherous Designs, such as shall not stick or boggle at the
greatest Villainies, the subversion of our ancient Laws and Religion, the
destruction of our Towns and Cities, the massacreing of their Inhabitants, and
(which is more than all and the most likely means for them to make a full
Conquest of us) the assassinating of our dear Prince, in the preservation of
whose sacred Life consist the Securities of our own Lives, Liberties and
Religion; This is the work they had cut out for their hellish. Instruments to
dispatch for them -- Here I interrupted him having heard him thus far with the
greatest terror and amazement imaginable -- But what quoth I, if they should
succeed (which God in mercy prevent) to take away the life of our gracious
Prince, what would they be the nearer, when the next immediate Successor, shall
by his Authority at once Revenge their Treasons past, and prevent their Designs
to come against us -- That Is true indeed, replied Phileroy, could we be secure
of a Christian Prince to succeed in the Government; but to prevent that, they
have by their wicked Agents already made sure of him, that is presumptively to
succeed, by seducing him from the Religion of his Country, to the Petropolitan
Faith, whose future Authority thereby so necessarily obliged to their
Interests, instead of being a Terror, is become their greatest encouragement in
their Proceedings. This they look upon as their Masterpiece and very
groundwork of their Conspiracy: And having gained this great point by securing
one that shall be true to their Interest, their next work is to make way for
him by taking away the life of our present Sovereign, to carry on which cursed
design (as the Devil has helped them with Agents enough, and fit enough for
their purpose) so now they are at this time engaged in deep Consults, how to
manage them in their Attempts of it. And because they would (in a matter of
such Secrecy and importance) be the more private in their Consultations. The
great Bishop and his Counsel, and Agents have chosen this place as most fit for
their purpose, where they have been retired for some days in the sooty
apartments of the Luciferian palace, which is the place I shall presently
discover to you; it lies at the very mouth of the sulphurous Gulf, underneath
which, they say, is the place of Purgatory: The great Bishop holds himself by
virtue of his Keys Lieutenant of this fiery Garrison, and has thence arising a
very great Revennue for sees of releasing tormented Prisoners out of it; and
this they rather chose for the place of their Caball, that they might have
their great Friend and Oracle Don Lucifero present at their Consultations; I
accompanied them hither, not out of any great desire I had to give the Devil a
Visit, but to observe the Progress of their Designs; upon which they have been
now these 3 days in close Consultation; This morning being quite, quite
wearied and almost stifled with heats and clamor, I stole away from my Company
to recruit my Spirits with a little fresh air, and taking the next solitary
path I met with, I walked on musing upon these matters, and contriving with my
self, how I might make means to prevent their Proceedings by a timely
discovery, which I resolved to do, as soon as possibly I could with any safety
to my self, get loose from them. In the midst of these cogitations it was, that
you found me in that solitary place and posture; and glad was I so happily to
meet one with whom I can with freedom discourse of those things, that have been
so long burthensom to my thoughts -- And now dear Philopatris having given you
an account of the occasion of my stay here, you shall bear me company back to
the Consult, where you shall your self be a Witness of what is acted amongst
them. And this you may do without fear or hazard, being in my company, and
pretending your self to be a Petropolitan, and one of my Friends and
acquaintance, you shall fare no worse than I do, and have as good entertainment
as Purgatory can afford, I will assure you; I thank you for your kindness
replied I, (smiling at the conceit of it;) No question but the entertainment
must be extraordinary where the Devil is the Host and his Imps the Servitours;
but if we come to Table with him, I hope we shall have long Spoons to eat our
broth with; I know not (quoth Phileroy) what length your Spoons are of; but I
will engage your Commons shall be short enough -- discoursing thus together, we
were come almost to the pitch of the Hill. When we were alarmed with another
great Shout like that before. I asked my friend if he knew what it meant; he
told me, he supposed it was occasioned by a Bull which they had designed to
send over into Albonia, and were that morning preparing him for the voyage,
with Swords, Pistols and Fire-bolts fastened about him (like the Bulls in the
Bear-garden harnessed with Crackers and Serpents) which were designed for some
dismal Execution; I hope said I when he comes there, he will be baited to some
purpose: No doubt on it replied Phileroy, and I hope my self ere long to be one
of those that shall worrie him -- He is to roar out Excommunication against the
Prince, and Threatenings (of no less than damnation) against such Subjects as
shall dare to Obey him contrary to the great Bishop's Pleasure; but as cursed
Cows are said to have short Horns, so have their Bulls too, too short to do
mischief, let them make what noise they will; Our Christian Albonians neither
value nor fear them -- But Whist -- no more of this, lest we hap to be
discovered by some of the Centries that are posted up and down about this place
-- See yonder is one stands ready to examine us -- and with lifting up mine eyes
(upon the very brow of the Hill) I saw an ugly, black, Grim-look'd Fellow, with
a Musket on his Shoulder, and Match in his Hand, who, upon our nearer approach
toward him, cried out, Stand -- Who are you -- Friends, replied Phileroy, (and
with that privately shuffled a Rosary of Beads with a Crucifix into my hand,
which he bid me put in my Pocket) We are Friends I tell ye; But how shall I
know that (says the Devil's Officer) I know you (Phileroy) well enough; but
who is the other with you -- An Honest Fellow, replies my Friend, I will engage
for him -- An honest Fellow, says the Centry -- What should he do here, you
know this is no place for such Persons -- What have we to do with Honesty- he
looks like an Heretic, be he what he will, I will have him before the
Inquisition -- Soft Friend, quoth Phileroy, you are mistaken in the man, I tell
you he is a Friend and a Petropolitan, which he shall make appear to you by his
Certificate, and with that he whispered me in the Ear to produce the Beads to
him, which I did, and thereupon he let us pass -- I was afraid by this passage
(as I told Phileroy) that Honesty being so much abhorred in that place, I
should by some looks or gestures pretending to it, betray my self to their
Suspicion, and so incur their Censures -- But for that he told me, I must learn
to dissemble as well as he, when I came amongst them; to lay off my natural
Serenity, and to assume a distorted, furious, and troubled Visage -- This I
thought I might easily be forced to do, when I came amongst such a company: The
apprehension of which, methoughts had already altered my very form and I
questioned not (as I told him) but if I stayed any time with them, I should be
so far bewitched by their Society, as to look as ugly as themselves. One
Caution more he gave me, that I should have my Rosarie always in sight, either
in my hand, or at my Girdle, as a badge of the Religion; but because I did not
much care to handle such Sorceries, I chose to have them hung dangling at my
Girdle -- And thus on the sudden I was turned Friar in Masquerade -- And
wishing my self good luck in the Adventure we proceeded till we came to the
very gates of Limbus. Horror itself cannot express the dismalness of that
place, it is seated in the midst of a little Plain, about a furlong over on the
highest top of the Burning Mountain, the flames of which in several places from
the Caverns and Hollows of the Earth, (caused by their irruptions) brake forth
in an hiddeous manner, and darkened the Sky with mighty Clouds of sulphurous
Smoke and Vapor arising from them: The passage to the Infernal Palace lies
through a hollow Way descending from the surface some few paces to a great pair
of Gates that gives Entrance to it; here we arrived, and my friend Phileroy
knocked at the Wicket: But it seems they were very close at their business; for
we stood a considerable time before we could gain Admittance -- At last one of
them came and opened the door, holding it in his hand, till he had taken a full
view of us; and seeing (by the glimmering of a Lamp that was set over the door
for such purposes) who it was, Phileroy was presently admitted, who taking me
by the hand, endeavored to pull me in after him; but the suspicious Feind
would not suffer that, till I was fain to show him the baubles at my Girdle;
and that Phileroy had assured him that I was a friend of his, and a
Petropolitan; then I was admitted, and taking fast hold of Phileroy, stumbled
along through a blind Entry, so rough and declining withal, that I think if it
had not been for Phileroy, I had broke my Neck before I had come to the end of
it; but he being better acquainted with the passage, bore me up steady, till he
brought me through it into a very large Room, as big for its dimensions as the
Vatican at Petropolis; the place was sultry hot, as a Dutch Stove, or rather
much hotter, insomuch as I was fain presently to rip open my dublet, and fall a
breathing like a Fish out of water, expecting to be stifled forthwith, if I
could not get in some mouth-fulls of Air into my gasping Jaws to relieve me;
and yet that very Air I did suck in, was so sultry and scalding, as made my
very lungs to boil like a Pot over a Furnace: Besides, the Room was all over so
full of stinking Smoke and Vapor, that there was no possibility of seeing any
thing, or distinguishing one person from another, had it not been for a
numerous company of Candles, that were set up and down round about it, the
flame of which seemed to me to look of a blood-red color (as we see the body
of the Sun sometimes to look in misty Weather.) I was afterward informed by
Phileroy; that these Candles were compounded of the Grease of humane Bodies
taken out of the Massacred Carcasses of the poor Martyrs of B^gland, or (...)
Tories Country, and reserved as choice Ware for the special use of the
Consistory -- We made no stay here to make any Observations; the room was
indeed full of People or Spirits walking up and down and making a croking
noise, like Frogs in a quagmire; but Phileroy seeing me begin to make ugly
faces (as he advised me, though for the heart of me I could not help it)
concluded the purgatory Air did not well agree with me, wherefore haling me
along through the crowd, he brought me without stop or stay to the end of the
Room, where at one corner of it, was a little Wicket, which with a Key that he
took out of his pocket, he presently opened and led me up an ascent of ten or a
dozen Steps into a little Cell, which he told me was his own Apartment,
assigned him for his repose and Convenience, during his stay in that place:
This was somewhat cooler than the place we came from, having a little fontinel
in it, which brought in the air from the top of the Mountain. This did
wonderfully refresh me (being almost stifled before) so that now I began to
look about me, and to consider where I was, (...) what I had to do here: I had
a great ^uriosity (seeing I had proceeded thus far) ^o discover the manner of
their Consults, and to understand their proceedings upon ^t; but was loath to
become a Martyr to any own fancy, by ventring my self again unto that sultry
Region; but for that, my Friend told me he would take care of a place where I
should see and hear all passages, without exposing my self to such
inconveniences; and accordingly at the corner of his Cell he showed me a
little window which looked into the Court, and where we might plainly see and
hear every thing without being discovered our selves or the least notice taken
of us. I was very glad of the opportunity, and presently planted my self ready
to make my discoveries getting Phileroy (who stood by me) to be my Interpreter,
in explaining every thing to me.

CHAP. II.
A View of the Company attending the Consult. The Description of Heraclitus;
the Designs of him and his party. The Furniture of the Consult Room with
relics of Saints and Pictures, as, namely, one of the Massacre at Paris,
another of that in Bogland. The Description of a company of Scriblers and
Pamphleteers concerned in the Plot, particularly of one called the Discoverer.
The Entrance of the Great Bishop with his company, and the form of their
sitting described; upon proclaiming of silence, they are interrupted by the
clamours of some Souls in Purgatory, that were broke loose, exclaiming against
the Great Bishop for his ungratefulness to them for their Services and
sufferings. The lame Apologies he used to excuse himself. Their Remission back
to the place of punishment.

THe Room, as I said before, was very large and spacious, and yet full of
Company walking to and fro, as they do at the Exchange, and talking together
with much warmth and earnestness, with stretching out the hand, thumping the
Breast, and looks composed to so much austerity, as somewhat exceeded the
natural gravity of the Spaniard, tho those Majestic Don's we know are the most
solemn and grave in their deportment, of any other. Only one fellow I observed
much to be admired, being both in his habit and carriage different from all the
rest of the Company; his habit was party parpale, the one Moietie of his
karkals from head to Toe, was dressed up in the Spanish Mode, with all the formal
habiliments of a strutting Don, with Beaver cockt, and arm a kimbo; the other
half of him was on the contrary accoutred in a most ridiculous dress, like the
Knave of Clubs, in Coat and Hose, with an hanging Sleeve, made up of patches of
more various colors than a Taylor's Cabbage-bed, or a Party colored Cushion,
on that side of him, he wore a Cocks Feather in his Hat, and other mimical and
antique accoutrements; He was of himself an ugly squinting fellow, whose Eyes
looked nine ways at once, and that which was more strange in him, his looks
were as much diversified as his habit; for look upon him on his Spanish side,
and his look was composed to a demure and supercilious gravity, rather frowning
than otherwise; but look upon him on the other side and his face was all ape
and ridicule, and his Jaws drawn up into the form of laughter, all fop and
foolerie. I was much pleased with the humor of this compounded Animal, but
could not tell for the life of me what to make on it, except a Jack-a-lent,
having seen Puppets so called in Albonia, patched up in that manner. But
Phileroy better informed me, that it was the great Bishops Iester, and that he
called himself by the name of Heraclitus -- That, said I, methinks is a very
improper Title for a man of mirth, (as Jesters should be) Heraclitus we know
was all over sober sadness, nothing of fop in him; That Is true replied
Phileroy, but this Fellow acting both knave and fool has taken upon him a
double part accordingly, which you see he represents both in the garb and
gesture. He pretends himself a Tragi-comedian, and acts both Jest and Earnest,
upon which account he might as well have compounded his name as his humors,
and called himself Heramocritus, it would have sounded in my mind much better,
however as strange a Creature as he appears to you. He is looked upon here, as a
very serviceable instrument for the Promoting the Petropolitan Interest; being
one of those Factionmongers (of whom there are a great many in this place) that
betwixt jest and earnest are to create divisions, and set the Government and
People at odds one with another; thus when he is in sober earnest, his serious
part is employed only about dreams, and stories of a former Rebellion long
since acted in Albonia; of which though the Actors are long since dead, and
their crimes almost forgotten, yet this politic Whister would needs persuade
the Government that the Ghosts of those Rebels are revived under a new form to
act their old parts over again; and by this means to divert the Magistrates
ftom all suspicion of the Petropolitan party, and to believe the Albonians
themselves to be the Plotters against their own Country; And thus his serious
part is made up of mere fiction and foolery, but his fooling part is compounded
on the contrary of things of a most sad and solid nature (enough to make a true
Heraclitus to weep In earnest (the fear and troubles of the People about the
Events of this hellish Conspiracy, now on foot against them all which (his part
is to turn into droll and ridicule, and to persuade the People, that their
Governors do but laugh at them for their foolish fears; and that that is all
the remedy they will afford to prevent them -- And by this way he designs to
jest the People into hard thoughts of the Government, and so to set them one
against another. Well, having received this account of Heraclitus, I thought
him not worth any further regarding, so let him pass on in his jocular huff to
divert my eyes with some other prospects: But here I must not omit to acquaint
you (before I pass further) with the furniture of this sooty Palace; there
were hanging against the Walls of it, in some places, the Relics of some of
the Petropolitan Martyrs, which the great Bishop and the Conclave for their
zealous services and sufferings had cannonised with Saintship; in one place was
a Knife hanging besmeared with blood, which Phileroy told me was the instrument
wherewith Ravillaie murdered Henry the fourth of France, and for that fact
tormented to death (as he deserved) with most exquisite tortures; next to that
was placed the dark Lanthorn of Guido Faux the Albonian Traitor, that was to
have blown up the Senate House, with the Assembly of the two grand Estates and
Royal Family in it, had not Providence by a Discovery in a very strange manner
prevented the Design, for this Fact he received a deserved punishmenr, but was
afterward at Petropolis Sainted for it -- there was also hanging by a thread a
Ball, in resemblance of the Fireballs wherewith the Petropolitans lately since
had destroyed the famous City of Londinople the Metropolis of Albonia; the
principal Author of which, was afterward hanged, though the rest by the means
and interposition of some great Interests, for that time escaping, are yet
reserved for a future Vengeance -- Besides these were hanging several pictures
the designs of which particularly Phileroy explained to me. One of them was a
representation of a most horrid Massacre, acted within the circuit of a great
and populous City by the Bloody-thirsty Petropolitans distinguished from the
rest by Crosses and other signatures; the slaughter was so great, and the
Villainies and Cruelties there acted (which the Painter with great Art had most
lively deciphered) so notorious, as made me shrink with horror at the sight of
it. This he told me was intended for the Massacre, at Lutetia, of the poor
Hugenot Christians. A piece of service esteemed so meritorious and grateful to
the great Bishop and his Consistory, that they ordered a Jubilee to be observed
for it, with many other Expressions of Joy and Triumph for so glorious an
Undertaking.

The next I observed was that of another Massacre or Slaughter like the former,
but varied (if possible) with cruelties of a more surpassing nature than other;
the Painter indeed in this piece had played his part so well that all the most
brutish and barbarous Villainies that were ever acted in the World, seemed to
be crowded together in this model. The Scene of this Tragedy was a large and
spacious Country (yet environed every way with the Sea) full of Lakes, Fens and
Marshes, and very woody in some places. Here was to the Life described a crew
of Bloody Ruffians (bearing the Petropolitan colors) roving up and down the
Country, like savage Tigers with Instruments of Death in their hands, wherewith
they killed and destroyed all they met with. In some places We might see Cities
and Towns weltring in destructive flames, while the distressed Inhabitants
flying out of the Gates for the preservation of their Lives, have falln upon
the Swords of their Enemies; and so lost those lives which by their flight they
endeavored to save. Otherwhere were seen those brutish Villains gratifying
their beastly Appetites in ravishing Women, stripping of them, and so driving
them together in herds (naked as they were) to the bogs and Rivers to drown
them. Some were pictured wresting the tender Infants from their Mothers Breasts
to slay them, and then spitting them upon their Pikes to carry them about in
that manner as trophies of their Cruelty. These Slaughters (as they were there
described) were so Universal, that the whole Country seemed but one Aceldama,
or field of Blood. The Scene of this Tragedy I understood was Bogland or the
Tories Country, and this was the Description of the horrid Massacre there acted
some years since within our memory, and much feared (as Phileroy told me) to
be acted over again by the treacherous Petropolitans, who swarm in that Island,
and notwithstanding the Country is a Colony or Tributary Province belonging to
the Albonian Prince: yet neither the tutelage of his Government, nor all the
Reliefs and Aids he can afford them for their Defense and Security, have been
sufficient to preserve them from the restless Attempts of their Petropolitan
Enemies; who, said he, are at this day as busy in their Designs as ever, for
the Ruin of that poor Christian Country; and it is one part of their present
Consults in this grand Conspiracy either by secret Treacheries, or open Force
by the Assistance of the Franconian Monarch and other of the great Bishops
Friends, to reduce that Province to the Obedience of the Petropolitan Chair;
and this ^sland is looked upon as the most likely to begin with for the
reducing of Albonia it self, with the rest of its dependant Provinces. The
Albonians having a Pr^^erb current amongst them to this purpose: He that would
Albonia win
Must with Bogland first ^^^in.


This Picture in a very large frame was hung up at the end of the Room, just
over against the great Bishops Chair, who ('it is said) from thence uses to take
a Prospect of it with much Delight and Satisfaction, often applauding the
Religious Zeal of the Petropolitan Tories in those inhumane Slaughters by them
committed upon the poor Christians, with such Sacrifices I perceive the Devil
and the Gr. Bp. are always well pleased.

There were several other Pourtraits which I would have perused, but was
diverted by a sudden bustle, that was made by the company at the coming of two
persons with great Sachels at their Backs, which they threw down upon a long
Table at the end of the room, and thence took out several fardels of Paper
Books, Parchments with Seals, Standishes, and other things necessary for the
Consult. It seems this was the place where the great Bishop and the Consistory
were to sit; who having for some time retired themselves to their apartments
there adjoining, were now returning, and these Harbingers coming before to
prepare for them, was the occasion of this bustle: For immediately upon their
appearing, I perceived the Company that were before promiscuously mingled
together, to separate themselves into several parts according to their distinct
Orders and Capacities, and took their several Stations up and down the rooms,
where they stood together ready against they should be called upon by the
Council to receive their O^ders. 'Twas strange to observe how this great Body,
that were so lately united, were on the sudden dwindled away into so many
divisions; whereupon I told Phileroy, I marvelled, that the Petropolitan Church
that pretended so much to Unity, should admit of so many fractions! That Is no
wonder, replied he, there are by far many more different parties amongst them
than you see here; and yet all this makes no Schisms amongst themselves; for
they are but several Limbs of the same Body, and agree well enough together in
this grand Affair; and their separate Companies argue no breach amongst them;
but are intended to cause Breaches and Divisions amongst their Enemies the
Albonians, as you shall hear presently when their Instructions are read to
them. Near to the great Table where the Council were to sit, was a side Board
of an Oval Form, round about which were a company of Scribes perpetually
scribbling and blurring Paper they were most of them in Albonian habits (as were
several others ^^out the place) only they had the Beast's Mark upon them for a
distinction. I stood amazed to see and consider, that so many of my own
Countrymen should (setting aside Religion and Allegiance to God and their King)
be such Apostates as to be concerned in such an horrid and cursed Design as was
here on foot against their own Country. But what cannot the Devil and his dear
Viccar do with ill minds, that have first given up themselves unto their
Service? I was curious to know what they were, and what it was that their Pens
were so busily employed about. Phileroy presently resolved me, that they were a
sort of men that were ambitious of being counted the Wits or the Thinking-men,
(forsooth) a company of frothy Sotts! That all the thoughts in their Skulls are
not worth the breaking of a Pullets bone to know them) their Employment was to
compose Libels, Lampoons, Drolls, Forces, Visions, Characters, Dialogues,
Appeals, Discoveries, and such like sustian Pamphlets, wherein they were with
their utmost endeavors to promote the Petropolitan Interest; either by
vindicating their Innocence (upon any discovery) by some impudent Lies and
Falsehoods, or palliating their crimes by subtle and sophistical discourses;
whereby to amuse the Vnthinking herd into a misbelief of them, or else by
wheedling insinuations to reflect the Plot upon the Albonians themselves as the
proper Authors and Agents of it, or (whether these Stratagems succeeded or not)
they were still to vindicate the Right and Title of the Albonian Duke, whose
Succession to the Monarchy they knew would make good all their Interest; this
he told me was their business: And subservient to them were another Company
(none of Apollo's Birds) but Mercurists or Intelligencers, whose work it was to
impose upon the Vulgar all manner of fictitious Trash, Lies, and Stories, under
pretense of news, to create Faction and Sedition amongst the rest. he showed me
one far different from the others, he called himself the Discoverer; a Fellow
that pretended he could see many foot deeper into a Millstone than all the World
besides; a politic Cockscomb, that writes nothing but Palinodes and Rehearsals
of things done in the days of his Grandfather. All his news are but
repetitions of old things in Forty One and Forty Two, which the Politooke
Gentleman would persuade you is the very Plot now in Being. The Devil himself
(said Phileroy) the other day could not forbear laughing at the pretty odness
of this Fellow's humor; and to say the truth, this whole pack of whifling,
trifling, scribbling Pragmaticos, are no other than a select company of
mercenary tools, that his Devilship has picked up for the service of the Grand
Viccar and the Petropolitan cause. Well, I had enough of this Discovery, and
before I could proceed to make any farther observations. The Pageant came in
(to wit) the Grand Viccar with his attendants, which consisted of Cardinals and
other Ecclesiastical Dignitaries of the superior Orders. Before him came an
Officer to make way, an ill favored black Creature whether humane or Devil I
know not: But he made a great noise and busle in preparing a passage, crying
out, make room for the great Bishop and the Conclave. The great Bishop was not
at this time (I perceived) in his Pontificalibus, or attired in that sumptuous
manner, which he uses to appear in at Procession, or in giving Audience to
Ambassadors; but in a plain black Gown, as a color most agreeable to the
Place and Business: Yet for the greater grace of the matter, his reverend
Bald-pate was covered with a Tripple Crown; the Pontife Crosier in his Hand,
and his Keys at his Girdle, together with his Rosarie Crosses and other
trinkets. Before him were carried three Crosses of ingraved Work, and imbost
very richly: after him followed first the Conclave of Cardinals in black also,
only with red Hats and Tassels hanging down from them. Amongst this number I
spied out one that I knew to be our Countryman, and of no mean rank of the
Nobility in Albonia: After these followed the mitered Clergy in their proper
Habits, several of which had this Inscription upon their Miters, viz. [Titular]
these Phileroy told me, were a kind of sine Cures, upon whom the Great Bishop
had bestowed Titles of several Bishoprics in Albonia and Bogland, with free
leave to take possession of them as soon as they could get them into their
hands, by means of this Plot, or any other way whatsoever. Ay marry, said I,
they are good fish when they are caught indeed; but I hope the Fisher (as the
great Bishop styles himself) nor those his Anglers will be ever able to hook
any thing of that nature, while our King continues Lord of the Soil, whose
undoubted right it is to have the donation of those places: next followed a
company of mixed Orders, some of them being Ignatians, others Franciscanes, and
others Benedictines, all of them in the several distinct habits of their Order:
These I understand were a fraternity of a distinct faculty, that had a
Commission from the G. B. ad propagandum fidem, for propagating (I should have
said perverting) the faith, these made up the whole board, who after the Gr.
Bp. had seated himself in his Chair at the upper end of it, did severally take
their places according to their Rank and Precedencies, after the order they
observed in their coming thither. I wondered something at it to see so much
Order observed in a place of Darkness and Confusion, but I was told by my
Friend, it was a thing not so much to be admired, that those ambitious
Churchmen, that stood so much upon their Privileges upon Earth, should hold
their precedencies as well here -- They were no sooner seated, and the
Companies in the Room beginning to draw about them, but proclamation of silence
was ordered to be made, which was accordingly done by that ugly creature that
was their Harbinger to the Board (whose Office Phileroy told me was to be
Keeper of the Purgatory Prison, and the Infernal Vaults underneath that place)
with a solemn O^^es. But no sooner was Silence thus proclaimed, but it was as
suddenly broke by a lamentable and hideous Outcry, which put the whole Court
into a frightful amazement; it came, it seems, from some of the Purgatory
Captives, who in the absence of their Keeper, had stole up to a private Door,
that led into the Court Room; and understanding that his ^unoliness was then
there Sitting with the Conclude, they set up their Acclamations, crying out,
Release, Release, Thou Old Sot that pretendest to have the Keys of this place
at thy Girdle, if thou have as much power to let out, as to let in, why do
thou not come thy self and discharge us, seeing it is for thy sake, and those
Treasonable services, that to gratify thy Ambition we performed against our
Native Prince and Country, that we are come into this misery, to be first
hanged on Earth for Traitors, and then punished here as sinners. Are these the
rewards? Is this the Elysium thou promisedst us -- O cursed Cheat? and then
they fell a howling in a horrid manner -- This unexpected Outcry gave the Gr.
Bp. a deadly Flea in his Ear, as we might perceive by the coming and going of
the color in his countenance; for as Phileroy told me -- (smiling at it) he
knew the Viccar must -- needs be dreadfully netled at it, to have such a
clamor so surprizingly break out against him in the hearing of those that were
now attending upon the like services with which those his Prisoners had so
reproached him for rewarding them no better; and he might justly fear hereupon
that his new Serviteurs upon such a discouragement, would be but cold in their
services when they were to be so hotly rewarded -- however his unholiness
perceiving there was so much notice taken of their words, as to cause a
muttering, and almost a mutiny amongst the Company -- he was put so to his
Trumps, that he sat a while as in a stund; but at last bethinking himself of
an help at a dead lift, he rises up and declares to the Company, that the
Authors of that clamor were a pack of Lying Villains to asperse him with
ingratitude, for that their services to him had been rewarded before this time
(and should be hereafter if they behaved themselves accordingly) to their
content in the place of happiness [that is, thought I with my self, The Fools
Paradise] but that they came not hither upon any account of their services
performed for him, or defect of merit in any such services to secure them from
coming into such misery; but that their slipping it there contrary to their own
expectation, and his promise, must be occasioned either by their concealing and
dying in some mortal sin, without receiving Absolution for it; or else they had
at their death (tho they suffered as Martyrs at the Gallows in the Churches
quarrel) confessed something that tended to the prejudice of the Churches
Designs and Interest, which they ought rather flatly to have denied, or by some
feigned Aequivocations to have concealed rather than the Church should suffer
by their plain confessions: One of these two he told them must needs be the
cause of their coming into that place of misery: And therefore by the way, he
gave it as a Caution to the New-listed Reformado's there present that had
offered their services in his and the Churches quarrel [in the present design]
to be courageous to the death; and if ever they should upon their discovery
come to the honor of Martyrdom, that they should not (to save their Lives)
betray the Churches Designs by any sneaking confession which might turn to
their prejudice, which if they did, they might be in danger of coming into the
same condition that these poor-wretches were in; but if on the contrary they
persisted courageously to vindicate the Cause, tho they denied the Truth, the
Crime of the Falsehood (being for the Churches Service) should be pardoned, and
themselves rewarded -- both with Saintship here, and immediate Felicity in the
other World -- But as for those poor Souls that by their own folly had lost the
merit of their Services, and brought themselves into that place of misery, he
bade their Keeper (whom he first checked for his negligence) to go back to them,
and assure them, that after this grand business was over) he would order a
Jubilee to be kept in order to releasing them and their fellow prisoners.

This latter part of his Oration he spoke with an Elevated Voice, much louder
than the former, intending (as I fancied) that it should reach the Ears of the
Purgatorians; but the former part he spoke so low, that the Company in the Room
could hardly understand him; this he did purposely, that those Apologies that
he made for suffering them to come into that place, might not be understood by
the Prisoners, lest they should reply upon him, and return him back the Lie he
had given them; which he knew might possibly occasion such broyls between them
as might make the place too hot for him to stay in (tho it were warm enough
already.) The Prisoners I perceived by their present stilness, were attentively
listening to what he said, but I supposed heard but little, except (what he
intended they should) his cokesing conclusion; immediately upon which their
surly Jailer, with Hell and fury in his countenance, and Keys gingling in his
hands, runs back to the door, which which he ratled open, and with a good
Cudgel that he carried with him, fell upon the poor Slaves, and beat them back
again to their Infernal Stations, telling them by the way, That he would make
them dearly suffer for this their insolent misdemeanour, for which, had it not
been for his Unholinesses Goodness, he might have lost his Place and Office.

CHAP. III.
The Jailer that carried back the Prisoners, gives an account to the Court, of
the Merits of their Sufferings, that one of them, a Carthusian, died of the
wound he received by the loss of his Testicles cut off by the Husband of a
woman whom he had abused; some descants upon the passage. The Speech of the
Great Bishop to the Assembly at the opening of the Consult about the Designs of
the Plot; some descants between the Author and Phileroy upon it. The
Petropolitan Secretary (who ordered the business of the Consult) described;
calls over the several Parties concerned in the Consult, beginning with the
Commissioners ad propagandum fidem, declares to them the Great Bishop's Decree
to them against Albonia; their Instructions read to them. A Description of the
Seminaries. Phileroy's discourse to the Author of the Original of this
Fraternity, and the History of their Proceedings. Lastly, Their Instructions
for the Service.

I Question not but he was as good as his word to them; for a little after, we
could hear them (though not so list as before) howling and yelling in a
pitiful manner; after he had secured his Prisoners, he returns back to the
Court in a great heat, puffing, and rubbing the sweat off his greasy Brows
dripping upon his fiery Nose: after he had panted a while and recovered breath
enough to give an Answer, I heard the Great Bp. ask him, who those Prisoners
were that had occasioned the Uproar; for that they pretended themselves to be
Martyrs for the Petropolitan Cause, which, if it were truly so, they should be
taken into Consideration, and rewarded with Canonization if they deserved it --
I know not, replied the Jailer, whether their deserts will reach such a Reward
or no, but must leave that to the discretion of your Unholiness and the
Conclave. I will give you an account only of the bare matter of Fact, for which
they came hither. The Ringleader of them, that mouthed it so fiercely against
your Unholiness, is a mere cock-gelding, an untesticled person; He was upon
Earth a Carthusian Brother, who, in Obedience to his Order (which I suppose he
intends to be the Merit of his Sufferings) having kept himself out of the Yoke
of Matrimony, did, for the necessary Relief of Nature, take occasion sometimes
to root in his Neighbors Enclosures: But one time amongst the rest happening
to light upon a pretty spot of Female-ware, belonging to a Butcher; the
Husband, whether he had any suspicion of it, or whether it were by accident,
unfortunately broke in upon them, and finding the sign in Aries, without
consulting farther he took this fit season for the gelding of such kind of
Cattle; wherefore to cure him of his Calenture, he was resolved to phlebotomize
him, which with his slaughter-knife he did, applying it to the Seeds Morbi, and
castrating him so close, that together with a torrent of blood, that followed
upon the amputation, his lecherous Soul, after some dismal Screeks and Ave
Maria's uttered, was released from his Body, and came limping hither, whining
more for the loss of his Mistress than for the pains he had suffered. I saw the
poo^ thing was so chill with the loss of blood, that to comfort him, I put him
into one of the hottest baths we had, where after he had sweat a while, I asked
him how he liked Purgatory, and whether the place were warm enough for him; he
told me, he had been in some purgatories on Earth, that were as hot as this,
namely, when he frequented the Stews at Petropolis amongst your Vnholiness's
licensed Courtizans, where he was once burnt by a pocky Whore so terribly, that
had it not been for the skill of an able Mountebank, he might have saved the
Butcher the labor of Castration; but since he came hither, he has been pretty
well fluxt for it. And this, so far as I know, is all the reason of his
pretense to Martyrdom; the Services he has done for the Mother Church, being
his Endeavors (ad propagandam prolem) or getting Bastards for their keeping,
which he looks upon as a Work so meritorious, that he hopes (considered
together with his Sufferings upon that account) your Apostleship will not fail
to remember him for it at the next instalment of Martyrs. -- And is this the
service he boasts of? (quoth the Grand Viccar.) Out a pon't, this will not do:
Our Mother Church has too many such Bastards already in her keeping, except we
could enlarge her Revenues to make better provision for them. What! (said I
then to Phileroy) I perceive the poor Purgatorian is like to lose his
Expectations of Saintship: Yes, yes, said he, that he will indeed; there is
nothing carries it in such cases, but what tends directly for the Interest of
the Papal Chair; but that being sufficiently supplied already with Nephews of
the blood, has no need of any other assistances of that nature, however had
this Lecherous Fool been so lucky to have committed Treason, when he did
Adultery, by taking away the life of an Heretical Prince, and been hanged for
his pains, he might have been Red-lettered before this time, both with
Saintship and Martyrdom. This tragi-comical passage so unexpectedly
intervening, caused no small noise amongst the Company, muttering one with
another whatever came into their minds to say about it; insomuch that the
Viccar was forced to order another Proclamation of Silence to be made, which
was done accordingly with three solemn Cries as before; after which the Great
Bishop rising up from his seat, began a Speech to the Assembly (that now began
to gather about him in a posture of Attention) in this manner. ^ Worthy
Petropolitans: The Design of our meeting here at this time is well known to
you, to be for the reducing of that Rebellious, and Heretical Province of
Albonia, to the Obedience of the Apostolic Chair, from which it has long
since departed, by a schismatical Separation; and having thereby not only cast
off their Allegiance unto us (to whom as St. Peter's Successor all States and
Kingdoms in the World do owe an undeniable Subjection) but also sacrilegiously
robbed the Church it self of its Incomes and Revenues; All which they have
converted to their own use and benefit: We have out of the constant Zeal for
the promoting of the Glory and Interest of the Petropolitan Empire, and to
regain so considerable a part of our Patrimony, as are by those Heretics
detained from us, Resolved to leave no means unattempted till we have fully
subdued that Rebellious People and either brought them back again to their duty
to us, or so consumed them, that they shall not have a name left upon the
Earth; and for you (our dear Children) that have so dutifully and freely
offered your selves to our service, and to become the Ministers of our Revenge
upon them. Be courageous and proceed with Vigor in this great undertaking, you
shall not want either Encouragements or Rewards; let your valor and Resolution
appear as evident for the subduing these Enemies to the Ecclesiastic State, as
ever the ancient Romans did for the Enlargement of their Empire. We go not to
subdue them with open Force or Strength of Armies; those Heretics being that
way too hard for us, as we experienced when our Catholic Son sent out his
invincible Navy to invade them; but were by those stubborn Albonians in a short
time miserably overthrown and ruined. Their Fleets and Armies are so powerful,
as keeps the whole Europian World in awe of them; so that it is to no purpose
to attempt by any such means to subdue them: but what cannot be gained by
Strength, must be done by Policy and secret Contrivances; for which end we have
now the fairest opportunity in our hands, that we could wish for, to encourage
our Proceedings, sufficient to redeem all those former defeats, that we have
suffered by them; We know the time is yet fresh in memory, when those that the
World could not subdue, were destroyed by themselves by an Intestine Civil War,
created by their own Factions, but fomented and carried on by our
Petropolitans; this flame could not be extinguished but by the blood of their
own Prince and Sovereign, who was sacrificed to the revenge of the insulting
Vulgar before the Gates of the Imperial Palace. This Fact contributed no little
to our Designs, while our Party, many of them siding with the Prince against
the Rebels (as it was either their interest, or necessity then to do) did
thereby take off the suspicion of the Treason from themselves, and left it upon
the Factions, who by that means have rooted such Jealousies and Suspicions in
the Government against those Factions, that (as we by Our Agents amongst them
have and do continually improve the Argument) they shall be sooner suspected of
Treason and Disloyalty, than their Enemies the Petropolitans; there are those
heats and feuds (as the effects of that Civil War) yet left amongst them, as
'twere easy for you by stirring up the grounds of their Old quarrel, to work
into them another Rebellion, or to keep their Divisions open so wide, as to
afford a fair way toward it. Albonia (says one of their own Writers) is a
great Animal that can no ways be destroyed but by killing it self; let us but
put swords into their hands, and they are mad enough to thrust them into their
own sides -- Divide and impera is a true Maxim in Policy; Divide them a while,
and we may come in time to rule them. Now then it is the opportunity presents
it self fairly to our hands; we need not make Divisions amongst them, but only
keep them open; the Order of their Church is disturbed by Dissenting Parties.
Mingle your selves disguisedly amongst those Herds; foment their differences;
incense them against the Government by suggesting fears of troubles and
persecutions from them. And at the same time stir up the Government against
them, to increase the provocation. Thus keep the Body Politic in a posture of
Opposition, till they fright one another into fightings, and then will we come
and part Stakes between them.

In the mean time, while we disease the Body, let us strike at the Head; the
former remedy may be chronical, this must be fatal; the Petropolitan Church
acknowledges no Head besides our self: And seeing the Albonian Princes, since
their Apostasy from us, have usurped that Title to themselves, by arrogating a
peculiar Jurisdiction and Supremacy over the Churches within their Dominions;
It is necessary that such Heads be lopt off, that so the body may be again
united to its proper one the Petropolitan Viccar: And therefore I adjure you
all by that Obedience, that you owe to me and to the Apostolic Church, that
you will by all means imaginable, according to your several powers and
Capacities, endeavor to cut off the present Heretical, Albonian Prince, as the
nearest and likeliest means for us to attain our ends in reducing the Albonian
Countries to the obedience of our Government; which meritorious fact, when once
it is accomplished, we have already taken care, that the next Successor shall
be one true to our Interest, and a Petropolitan; one that we have proselyted to
our Religion, and such an one, that tho the People detest him for his faith,
yet must admit him upon his right to the Government of those Kingdoms. And
besides this, the better to facilitate your proceedings, we have engaged our
dear Son of Franconia the most Petropolitan King, to assist you both with Men
and Moneys upon all occasions to carry on your designs. We have farther issued
out our Bull of Excommunication against that Heretical Prince of Albonia,
thereby (by virtue of our Apostolic Power) depriving him of his usurped Title
to the Albonian Countries, and absolving the Albonians (his Subjects) from
their Duty and Allegiance to him, under pain of our highest Displeasure and the
bitterest Curses we can inflict upon them, And such of them as out of an holy
fear of our Indignation shall observe our Pleasure in this particular, by
turning Traitors to their Prince, to become Friends to us and our Interest,
shall not only have our Dispensations and Indulgencies granted to them for so
doing, but shall have the Benefit of our sacred Benediction, and such rewards
as the merit of their doings or Sufferings shall require. And now (our dear
Friends and Children) if those Encouragements be not sufficient to animate you
in your proceedings, yet let ^he Interest of your Mother Church (which should
be dearer to you than your very Souls) provoke you to it; Consider what a
goodly part of St. Peter's Patrimony is kept from us: That Albonia whose
fruitful soil and large revenues did sometime plentifully enrich both our own
Coffers and our Clergies purses, a Country once so piously devoted to the
Churches Interest, that the best and greatest Estates within it, were hallowed
to divine Uses; Our Levites had not only the Tenths but (rather) Nine parts in
Ten set apart for them; What goodly Monasteries, Abbeys, and Relgious places
were there founded? how richly endowed? how large their Revenues? All which
upon their Apostasy from our Church were by Edicts of that Heretical Tyrant
Hen. 8. sacrilegiously taken from the Clergy and devolved into the hands of the
Lay People; They yet enjoy them, but the right is ours; nor can any Antiquity
of prescription or Authority of Records so supersede our Title, but that the
right is still in us if we can but gain the Possession of them. Ay ( my Lads)
win them and wear them; turn out those heretical Robbers, and possess their
places, the Inheritances of your Fathers. We have of our Apostolic bounty
freely given the Land amongst you; destroy the Canaanites, that brood of
Heretics that enjoy it; a People accursed by us. Balaam was by a divine hand
restrained from cursing the Israelites; but nothing shall restrain us from
cursing them as a Nation devoted to destruction; We have given you full power
to be the Executioners of our Vengeance upon them, to kill their Persons,
destroy their Cities, possess their Lands, and to rule and reign over them. And
lastly if all this be too little, I conjure you by the blood of your Martyred
Ancestors, that have been hanged like Traitors for their Zeal in this holy
quarrel; and by all those Severities and Persecutions that you your selves have
suffered from them, that you now take a full and fierce revenge upon those
wicked Albonians: If you succced in your Attempts you have the booty for your
Reward. If you miscarry in them yet shall you not be unrewarded, while we your
Father have a Blessing left for you: your Sufferings shall be rewarded with
Martyrdom, and your selves with Happiness. We give you our Apostolical
Benediction, and so go on and Prosper. --

And here the Grand Viccar concluded his Oration, seating himself again in his
Chair, and puffing for Breath, as having almost spent himself with his over
earnest delivery: For my part I was glad of his close, being as much wearied
with hearing, as he was in speaking such horrid and bloody matters against my
own Country. I perceive (said I to P^^eroy) the Grand Bishop can sometimes play
the Devil for Godsake, here is a pretty Scheme of Treason and Rebellion covered
over with Religion. But what shall we do for our Lands when we return home
again, seeing his Viccarship has now so frankly given them away from us to his
Petropolitans. We must even Petition our new Masters for the favor to be their
Bailiffs over our own Demesnes, and be contented to exchange our Rents for
Wages. Soft there (replied Phileroy) we are not brought to that pass yet; to
let them Ride while we are in the Saddle: We have yet eleven points of the Law
in our own hands, let them have the twelfth and make the best on it: Their Title
to Heaven, and to our Lands are grounded much alike upon the Promises of the
Great Prophet, who is most liberal in giving away those things that he has no
right to himself, although the proud Prelate claims the same prerogative over
us, as the Israelites of old (by God's special Commission) did over the
reprobate Heathens, whose Countries (by Covenant with their Fathers) God gave
to them; or as he has done over the poor Americans, Millions of whom by his
Authority been have slain and murdered, to make way for their Conversion, but
more truly to gain their Possessions: Yet till he can make out such another
Title to our lands as the Jews did to the Canaanites, by some Feoffement or
Deed of Gift from the supreme Owner, let him make what Grants of them he
pleases, or to whom he pleases, he shall give us leave to hold our proprieties
as long as we can. He must first buy them and pay dear for them too before he
has them: And as for the Church-Revenues in the hands of the Albonian Clergy,
we can plead an antiquity of Prescription before them, or that the
Petropolitans had any thing to do amongst us. We had a Christian Prince before
ever they had a Christian Bishop, that by virtue of a Universal Monarchy could
lay claim to any Homage from us: And until our King and Country shall come to
pay their fealties to him again, our Tenures are such, that the Fee and Homage
are inseparable, and he shall never gain the one without the other. Well here
we broke off our parley to make our Observations of the following passages. The
Great Bishop, as I said before, having finished his Oration, some of the
Company began to shout, others hum'd a little, the rest were silent. But after
a little pause of some few minutes, they all fell close to their business; the
several parties being gradually called up to the board to receive their
Instructions and Commissions; which, by the Great Bishop's Order, were
particularly delivered out to them by one that sat at the board not far from
him. This person, by his looks and habit, seemed to be an Albonian, I asked
Phileroy if he knew him; he told me yes, That he was indeed our Countryman,
the Son of an Albonian Divine, and that having a liberal Education bestowed
upon him in one of the Albonian Academies, and one of a strong and quick
apprehension, he having an humor of Traveling (to satisfy his Curiosity)
into the Petropolitan Countries, was there amongst the learned of that Religion
so far insinuated into by their subtle Arguments and persuasions, that he was
proselyted to their faith, and thereupon had in great esteem amongst them, as
one that by reason of his great parts and abilities might be a very fit
Instrument for them to make use of in their Designs; for which the better to
qualify him, they got him into the service of a great Princess in Albonia of
an Italick Family, and a Friend to the Petropolitans, where he might
conveniently hold correspondencies by means of hers, and the Great Duke her
Husband's Interest, with such Princes and States as were friends to the
Petropolitan Interest. And in this Capacity, having by some signal services
already obliged them, they have thought fit to choose him their Secretary in
this grand Consult, and entrusted him with the management of the most principal
matters relating to their present Designs.

This person thus deciphered by Phileroy, I perceived, was very busy in
tumbling over and sorting the Papers and Parchments that lay before him, which
he disposed into several parcels, ready to be distributed to those that they
particularly belonged to, which having done, he proceeded to call over the
several parties to receive their Orders, and first began with the Commissioners
or Congregation (as they call it) de propaganda fide, for propagating the
faith; of which number was the Great Bishop himself, the Scarlet Senate, the
Mitred Men or Bishops, (most of which were the Titula^s) upon whom the Viccar
had conferred the promotions of several Bishoprics in Albonia and Bogland, and
appointed for their principal the noble Albonian Cardinal as his Legate and
Procurator, in his Viccarship's name to take possession of the Albonian
Territories: Besides these Were included in the same Commission, several of the
superior Orders of the Clergy together with some eminent persons of the Laity,
all which were by their Names and Titles distinctly called upon, and answered
to it in their places, they all sitting about the board where the Gr. Bp. was
present: Then he took up an Instrument and read to them signed by the Gr. Bp.
wherein he declared* [ That all the Albonian Dominions and Territories were
part of St. Peter 's Patrimony, as forfeited to the Holy See, for the Heresy
of the Prince and People, and so to be disposed of as he should think fit.]
This short Declaration it seems was their grand Charter, by which they were to
proceed in their Designs. Then next he read over to them a Paper containing
Instructions to direct them in their Proceedings to this effect; That they
should take upon them the superintendency and Government of all the inferior
Consults, to direct them in their Managements, to appoint their Stations and
Order of Meeting: to receive Advices from them, and give out Orders thereupon;
to grant Licenses, Indulgences, and Dispensations by the grand Viccar's
Authority (as his Delegates) where they saw occasion for them; to keep
Correspondencies by Legations and Missives with such Princes, States, and
Persons of Eminency, as were known Friends to the Petropolitan Interest; that
they were from this place to adjourn themselves over to St. Omers, which being
an Academy and Nursery of Learning, they were there to found a College or
Seminary for the training up of Youth in the Petropolitan Religion, and in the
Arts and Policies of the Petropolitan State, so to fit them for their Services,
when ever they should have occasion to employ them, either in Albonia, or other
places; here they were for the future to keep their grand Consults, to send out
their dispatches, and to receive advices, the Effects of which they were from
time to time to send over to his Viccarship at Petropolis in Order to the
receiving such farther Order and Direction from him as he should think fit.
This was the Sum of their Instructions, which was then in Writing delivered up
to the noble Albonian Cardinal for the use of himself and the rest in
Commission with him. Next to these was called up to the Board another party by
the name of Seminaries, (sowers or seeds-men) there drew up a great number of
them all in religious Habits, with Baskets on one Arm, and throwing the other
Arm about in the posture of one that scatters Seed before the Plow. I wondered
what the Devil was the meaning of this humor, I thought this burning Soil was
too hot and parched to nourish any Seed that should be cast into it. But it
seems all this was but a figure or representation of their Name and Office; For
asking Phileroy the meaning of these Actions, and who they were that performed
them, He told me they were the great Bishop's Planters or Seeds-men that he
employed to cultivate all those Lands that the Viccar laid claim to, as any
part of his Patrimony, and to sow them with the seeds of the Petropolitan
Doctrines and Discipline (this is their pretense) but indeed rather to sow the
seeds of Sedition, Treason and Rebellion, in the heads of the Vnthinking
Vulgar, whose thick, and soft Skulls they make use of as a fit ground for such
disseminations; and these you see here, are now designed upon the same
Employment into our Country of Albonia -- How, said I, into Albonia? Nay then
-- and here without prosing it farther, my Indignation against these Varlets
threw me into a poetical fury, which I expressed thus -- -- If this be true,
Cursed be the Viccar and his seeding Crew;
Never may Heaven on their endeavors smile,
That thus their Seed sow in another's Soil;
But blast their Crop, and all their Pains defeat,
That go to sow their Tares amongst our Wheat.
And while among us they design to sow
Their Treasons, may the Devil speed the Plow,
And When they have done, pay them their Wages too.
And they that sow false Doctrine and Delusion,
May they again reap Halters and Confusion,


Phileroy smiled at the fancy, but could not but be surprised to see me fall
into such an unusual rapture, asking me what I ailed, and whether the warmth of
the place had made me hot-brained or no? I told him not so much that, as the
warmth of my own Zeal justly kindled at the sight of those Religious Monsters,
that not content to brood, and spawn in their own corrupt and putrid soils,
must go about to spread their infection in the wholesome air of our reformed
Countries. -- However I desired Phileroy (while their Commission was reading to
them, which I did not much mind) to discourse to me something of the Order and
Constitution of this Religious Fraternity, which (at my request) he readily
performed in this manner; These Seminaries, said he, were an Order of Priests
at first instituted by a Countryman of ours, one Alanus, a Petropolitan
Cardinal, about the latter end of the reign of their grand Enemy, our
unparalled Christian Princess Elisa, by whose successful care in the
Reformation of Religion, the Petropolitans finding they had lost their Harvest,
they contrived to lay in for another, by sowing again those Principles of false
Worship, Sedition and Rebellion against Government, which had been by the
endeavors of this Princess for some time happily rooted out from amongst us.
To the undertaking of this great work, Ala^us, out of a Company of straggling
Albonian Fugitives, had in a short time selected such a parcel of Scoundrels
fit for his purpose, as were amassed into a great and bulky body; these he
convened into the Order of a distinct Fraternity, which, for their better
Convenience and Discipline, he incorporated within the Walls of a Foundation,
purposely raised at his own charge for them at Doway in Flanders; where under
the tutorage of Presidents and Provincials set over them, they were studiously
instructed in all the arts of carnal Policy for the propagating of a false
Religion, and stirring up of an unnatural Rebellion against their native Prince
and Country. This College of Priests (or rather Kennel of the Devil's Beagles)
he instituted by the name which yet they retain of Seminaries or Sowers: Sowers
of Strife and Mischief, Sowers of Schism and Faction, Sowers of Treason and
Rebellion; these were the happy parts, these well qualified Gentlemen were to
act, and to these purposes after they had been nursed up to some maturity
there; they were sent over in great numbers (as they will be now) into Albonia,
to practice their sowing Trade under several disguisements to avoid Suspicion
of their designs. But this new cultivated Country though it was their natural
Soil, yet proved too unnatural to receive any of their pestilent Seed within
it, but cast it out with abhorrency; and wherever it did take root, yet all the
Crop they gathered from it, was but an unkind and pernicious sort of Hemp Seed,
which afterward proved so fatal in the winding up of the matter, as to be the
Instrument of their Destruction; So true holds that old adage.

-- Nec Lex ^st justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
Those that Destruction sow and Death,
It Is fit themselves should lose their breath.
In short, they justly received the reward of their Treasons at the Tyburnian
T^ide^t; and we through Gods Mercy kept our Peace and Religion secure out of
their grasping clutches. Yet still they continued their Consults at their new
founded College at Doway, where no sooner one Treason was knocked down, but
presently like Hydra's heads they hatch and start up a new one; till all at
length became but Victims to the prudence, Courage, and Piety of our blessed
Reformer: But Wars afterward breaking out betwixt her and the Catholic
Monarch, he would no longer suffer these Alboniaus (tho Petropolitans) being
her Subjects to roost themselves within his Territories, but broke them up to
go whither their own Wills or the Devil would carry them; thus being dislodged
from their old dear Habitation to follow their fate in a Pilgrim Condition, the
then great Bishop hearing of their Misfortune, and esteeming them for the merit
of their Undertaking, did, out of his compassionate tenderness to such pious
Creatures, as well as good Will to their Designs, allot them two other new
places for their reception, the one at R^mes, and the other at Petropolis it
self, where they became again Collegiate, and resumed their former Order and
Discipline that they observed at Doway. Besides this great favor, his
Viccarship, for their better Encouragement, endowed them in these places with
large Stipends and Revenues: And well he might; for you know the Labourer is
worthy of his ^ire; while they bring grist to his Mill, he may well suffer them
to take toll, and while they sow his corn, to let them eat of his bread, since
they have been so well settled, and such ample provisions made for their
Encouragement; their Order has increased wonderfully to a great unweildy Bulk
and Proportion; they are become as ^umerous as the Frogs in Egypt, and like
those noisome cattle, we may find them ^^aking (so impudent are they grown)
^^ea in the most sacred retirements of ^^e^s Courts; their very Closets and ^ed
Chambers, where they spare not to ^it their Venom, if possible, to infect the
^ery Government it self; of the same ^eaven are the ^erd now before us, which
^ou see of themselves are of a pretty consi^erable number, besides those that
are already sent over into Albonia upon the same service. They are most of them
Albonians, but Renegado's, and I hope when we come to meet them shortly in
Albonia, we shall see them punished accordingly.

Here Phileroy broke off his Discourse, (which was very pleasant to me) for now
the Secretary, who all this while had been reading the Commission, had
concluded, and then proceeded, as we perceived, to fill their Seed-baskets with
heaps of odd kind of trumpery, such as Crucifixes, Agnus Deis, Crismes,
Rosaries, little pots of Water, Scrolls, Pamphlets, and a world of such kind of
Frippery.

This was their Seed it seems, but 'twas not Wheat,
To say the truth, 'twas nothing but a Cheat.
Well, thus the Asses being sadled for their journey, the next thing in order,
was to discipline them, according to the paper of Instructions, which was then
formally read to them after this manner, (their consents being first asked
whether they were all willing to undertake the design, which they all jointly
consented to by the holding up of their hands) They were all of them forthwith
to imbarque themselves for Albonia, where upon their landing, they were to
disperse themselves, in such disguised habits as were most proper for their
concealment, into the most populous and noted places of the Kingdom; where,
while they continued, they were by a free and generous Converse, to insinuate
themselves into the familiarities of all sorts of persons (especially the
illiterate) where they had hopes of proselyting any to the Petropolitan faith,
and to use their utmost Endeavors to bring them over to the Mother Church; and
that they might not be frighted by the Albonian Laws against such practices,
his Viccarship had granted them full and ample Dispensations (under the Seal of
the Fisher) for their concealment (if any danger should happen) that they might
pretend, equivocate, falsify or use any artifices whatsoever, that might be
conducible to their Preservation.

They were under pretenses of Religion, to assume the habits of the Religious
amongst the Albonians, and under that pretext, having procured some estimation
amongst the Clergy, to get into their Pulpits, and there to vent, under some
smooth and glossy way of expression, their Petropolitan Principles, and to
exasperate the Conforming party against the Dissenters.

On the other side they were to ingratiate themselves with the Dissenters and
under pretenses of the more strictness in their profession, to get in (with
such of them, especially as would admit of a Lay Communion betwixt Pastor and
People, and permit unordained persons to preside in their Congregations) to
teach in their Assemblies, and to instruct them in such things, as upon the
opposite point would exasperate them against the Conformists.

Thus by the usual art of Petropolitan ambodextership, they were to set one
party against the other, and so using them as Sampson's Foxes, by linking them
with opposite faces and fire brands between them of their own kindling, to
cause a flame of Faction and Difference, that should terminate in destruction
and ruin to them both.

They were to ingratiate themselves with such of the less knowing Nobility, as
might by their subtle persuasions be the more easily bigoted to the
Petropolitan faith, and having proselyted them to that faith, they were so far
to indear themselves to them by their obliging Converses, as to become Masters
of their purses, and to extract from them such supplies as might be conducible
to the carrying on of the present design.

They were by their most strenuous endeavors to obstruct the convention of the
Grand Senate, (the greatest Oppugners of the Petropolitan Interest) and either
to corrupt them by gaining upon the Vulgar, to prefer such Persons in their
popular Elections, as should be for the Petropolitan Interest, or by some means
to cast bones of Dissension amongst them, to raise a quarrel between
themselves, and so to occasion their breaking up.

They were to amuse the people by scattering such papers and Pamphlets amongst
them, as should tend either to incense them against the Government, or to
create divisions between themselves.

These, as near as I can remember, were the principal heads of their
Instructions, a Copy of which was afterward delivered to them, together with
some Pardons and indulgences necessary to such sinners as they were like to
prove, if they followed their Directions; All which being dispatched, they were
dismissed with his Viccarship's solemn Benediction, and so having made their
low obeisance to the Great Bishop, they went back again in Order to their place.

CHAP. IV.
The next Order that comes up, is that of the Ignatians; a Description of them;
their Original, and practices; Instruments of Slaughter delivered to them by
the Gr. Viccar; their Instructions. Then come up the Provincials of several
Countries, that were to superintend the other inferior Ministers. Their Names
and particular Instructions about the management of the Plot. Next come up the
Benedictines who were to settle themselves in a College in Albonia. Then the
Petropolitan Physician that was to poison the King, some pleasant passages
concerning him. A Glass of poison, and purse of Gold delivered to him by the
Gr. Bp. The Petropolitan Advocate succeeds him; his Description and
Instructions. The Petropolitan Mesqueraders described; their ridiculous Habit,
some particular persons of that faction merrily hinted at.

NExt unto those came up a Crew of Fellows, such as in my Life I never saw the
like before, so uncouth and ugly both in their looks and Deportment; They were
called on by the name of Ignatians; their habit as black as Hell, formed after
the manner of a religious Order, only their Gate was novel and strange every
one of them as they marched along limping and halting with one Leg. I did not
for all their religious outsides, take them for such sanctified Persons, that
they got their lameness (as Jacob did his) by wrestling with Angels, but that
they rather got it by some excessive Exercises in Franconia, however, be the
cause what it would, I wondered that the Grand Viccar should make use of such
lame tools in his Service: But my Oracle Phileroy presently resolved me, who
told me they had their Name and Institution from one Ignatius a famous Saint
amongst the Petropolitans, sometimes an Hysperian Soldier of the lowest rank,
and for his Debaucheries afterward cashierd, and then turned Religious who
having obtained Orders for himself, did afterward institute that Order which
is now so called after his name, and that he being himself a Cripple, his
Disciples do thus imitate him in their counterfeit lameness.

This Order, said Phileroy, since their first Institution are become so
numerous, that they have their Societies in most parts of the Petropolitan
World, and are become so famous for their Exploits in the Great Bishops
service, that he seems to repose more confidence in them, than in any other
Order of the Hierarchy. They are indeed his Janissaries, persons so bold and
daring, that they will venture upon the greatest dangers and difficulties to do
him service, tho it be to kill^ ^^narch, to burn Cities, massacre a Country, or
to perpetrate any other villainy, and afterward be hanged, or otherwise
tortured to death for their pains.

These Vermin are not more savage in their practices, than subtle in their
Designs, and therefore they take none into their Societies, but persons of most
quick and acute parts, whom they afterward educate in the most sublime arts of
State and Policy according to the Machiavellian documents; and having so
prepared them, they are sent abroad into the Courts and Countries of Christian
Princes to execute such designs (tho never so villainous) as the Grand Viccar
shall impose upon them. I desired to hear no more of them, but to observe the
Passages of their proceedings; but then a new fit of Wonder seized me, when
upon their coming up, the first present that was made to them (after their
Commission) was a parcel of tragical Instruments of death and destruction, as
Knives, Daggers, Pistols, Match, Fireballs, and such like, all which were by
his Viccarship first solemnly consecrated, by taking them in his hands, and
bestowing upon them his Apostolical Benediction, and then dellvered by the
Secretary into the hands of the Ignatians, who received them with the Ceremony
of Kissing, and then disposed them at their Girdles, or in their Pockets, as
they thought fit.

After which their Instructions were likewise read to them as the former, the
substance of which was,

That they were according to the solemn Vow of their Profession, and their Duty
to his Viccarship, and the Mother Church, to endeavor the Extirpation of
Heresy and Heretics out of all places in the Europian World, especially
Albonia (the principal Place designed in this grand Consult) And to this end
they were speedily to imbarque themselves thither; and having there fixed the
places of their Consults and Meetings together, were to disperse themselves
into the Countries, and to endeavor by the Arts and Methods of their Policy,
either to proselyte the People to the Petropolitan faith, or to make them lose
their own by raising and occasioning such Schisms and factions amongst them, as
should terminate in destruction and confusion.

But in order to the more grand design of Subverting the Government (as the Gap
by which the Petropolitans were most probably to enter) they were with those
consecrated Instruments of Death and Destruction delivered to them, by
themselves (or their agents) to destroy the sacred person of the Albonian
Monarch, and all others commissionated by him, that were known Enemies to the
Petropolitan State. And if Heaven should cross them in these Enterprises;
Flectere si nequeant superos (yet) Acheront a movere; (that is) [Devil do thy
worst] if the King, in spite of the Devil and his Agents, should continue to
live and reign, yet let his Subjects suffer; They were to fire their dwellings
(and themselves run away by the light of them) and if any other fair
opportunity of Mischief happened in the way, to raise a Mutiny, to pilfer their
goods, or to cut the throat of any well-willer to the Albonian Weal, they were
not to stick at the doing of it.

And if any Christian Magistrate should be over-active in his Office, either in
prosecuting the Laws against them, or enquiring into the Mystery of their
Designs; He was presently to be taken off; Their Eye must not spare him; but
they or some agents employed by them, must by some means or other get him
discharged both of his Life and Office at once. And if in attempting any of the
aforesaid Villainies, their Designs should happen to be discovered before their
Execution, and they thereupon called to question about them, they had
Dispensations granted them by his grand Viccarship, to conceal them by any
Lies, Denials, or equivocations, that their Wits should help them to make use
of.

Nay, if they should be prosecuted so far, as to bonds and Imprisonments, and
afterward be brought to their Trial, and receive judgment of Death, and
brought to Execution, yet should not their very Lives be dear to them in such a
case, and for so glorious a cause; but they should rather part with them in an
obstinate affirming of their pretended innocence (let there be never so many or
sufficient proofs to the contrary) than to save them by a sneaking or timorous
Confession of the truth to the discouragement of the other Undertakers, and
marring their designs.

And if thus like true and courageous Champions of the Petropolitan Church,
they persisted to the death in the Vindication of their cause. The great Bishop
had granted them the glorious Titles and Rewards of Martyrdom, they should be
Canonized and Kalendered amongst the Red-lettered Worthies; they should be
immediately freed from the pains of Purgatory, and be taken into Paradise, and
their Blood and Bones, and the very Rags of their Vestments be consecrated and
laid up in the Petropolitan Conservatories as eternal trophies of their Faith
and Martyrdom.

Thus they are encouraged to destroy their lives
Themselves; needs they must go, the Devil drives.
Thus we may see what Martyrs Rome has owned,
The vilest Traitors thus as Martyrs crowned:
Let Rome reward their sufferings as they please,
Halters and hatches still are here their Fees.
Armed with these Instructions (pure Gospel documents were they not) these Sons
of Violence and Confusion, after having received their consecrated Tools
Dispensation and other Trinkets, at the hands of the aforesaid Secretary, went
limping back to their place, as did the former, not without his Viccarship's
Apostolical Benediction solemnly bestowed upon them; and they had mine too in
to the bargain, though after the manner that witches say their prayers, and the
Jews read the Talmud. I heartily wished that God would blast and confound them
in all their cursed Designs and Practices, and did not question, but such
wishes might be as prevalent as his Vnholiness's Blessing. I expected to see no
more of them, till I should meet them at the Gallows, and then I should see how
well they observed their Instructions.

Next to these came up an Order of Churchmen in more costly habits than any of
the former, and seemed by their Garb and going to be none of the small
Prophets, but some special Dignitaries amongst them. These, Phileroy told me,
were Provincials invested with presidencies over the several inferior Orders,
and were according to their Instructions to hold their residencies in several
of the Petropolitan Countries as namely the Catholic Provinces, Franconia,
Castilia, etc. Where they had their several Titles and Jurisdictions; and these
were to hold Correspondence, and to give directions to those Provincials in
Albonia, and other places that were inferior and subject to them, as namely,
Father Paulus d' Oliva Provincial general, presiding the Ignatian Order, was to
direct the Consults and Managements of that Order residing at Londinopolis, and
had a particular Commission delivered to him to that purpose.

Then came up Mounsieur Ieronimo Provincial of the Ignatians in novo Castilio
whose instructions were according to the form of his Commission, to furnish
such of that Order, that were engaed in the present Design, with Counsel and
Money, and to misrepresent the actions and intentions of the Albonian Monarch in
the Catholic Court, so as to create Jealousies and Feuds between the Two
Crowns; as knowing that as the Interest of their Kingdoms did oblige them to a
mutual amity; so such an amity would be inconsistent with the interest of
their present Designs, and very much hinder their proceedings, unless it were
some way broken, or disturbed by them.

Enter next Father le Chese, an Ignatian, who though no Provincial, yet being a
person of great Eminence and Authority, as being Confessor to the Franconian
Monarch, was thought fit to have his place amongst the aforesaid Dignitaries.
He was it seems a notable Sacropolitico of that Order in whose Policies the
grand Bishop reposed much Confidence as to this Affair; and besides was a great
Friend of the Secretaries, with whom, when in Albonia, he was to hold a
constant, but very private Correspondence by Ciphers and Figures, whereby the
said Secretary was to inform the said Father le Chese, and he to inform his
great Master, the Franconian Prince with all the most considerable matters of
State, according to which they should take their measures, and for his
Encouragement in such services, the most Petropolitan Monarch would allow him a
considerable pension, (as the Reward of his Treasons.) I perceived the
Secretary in speaking to him, did observe more than Ordinary Reverence toward
him, but had he then known what afterward I knew happened, that his
negotiations with him should be rewarded with an Halter, I suppose he would not
at this time have been so officious in his Observances to him.

This Service indeed was dangerous and difficult to manage in the Court of a Ch
istian Prince, and such an one whose own known sagacity, besides the assistance
of an able and discrete Council, might very probably, in good time, discover,
and so prevent such treasonable Correspondencies: but the Petropolitan
Politicians are men too bold and daring to start at dangers, tho they lie in
immediate prospect, their usual Motto being Neck or nothing, when (like foolish
hardy people, rushing themselves from precipices) they venture upon such
desperate attempts in the service of their ambitious imployers.

The last of this company, that presented himself to the Board, was another
Provincial; that by his looks and gesture seemed to be an Albonian, and so
indeed he was (as Phileroy informed me) an own dear Traitor Countryman of ours,
that out of his devilish Zeal to the Petropolitan Cause, was going (with the
rest of his parrieidian crew) to destroy his own natural Prince and Country. I
asked Phileroy the name of this Monster, he told me his surname was Strange,
but by what name of Baptism he was called, whether Roger, or Thomas, or John,
he knew not, but that he was commissionated to be Provincial over the Ignatians
in Albonia, whose Instructions were no other than that he should govern and
direct them in the management of this Design, according to their general
Instructions, and as he should be Ordered from time to time by the Father
general at Petropolis. These were all the Persons (so near as I can remember)
of this Gang, who having severally discharged their Duty at the Board, went off
as the former.

I thought there would be no end of this tragical Procession, the scenes
multiplying so fast one after another, and to say truth I began to be almost
tired with beholding them: But Phileroy told me there was one Order more to
come up in the rear of these, who were an Albonian Fraternity, called
Benedictines, to whom his Viccarship (of his special Bounty) had by his Pattent
granted an ancient and goodly Structure (sometime the residence of the Albonian
Princes) situate in Londinopolis, called Savoy, which they were to use and
enjoy as a College for their Fraternity therein to repose their Library and
sacred Utensils, and to manage there their Consults with the rest of their
Brethren, as they should see occasion; there was a pretty number of them I saw
draw up to the Board, most of which by their Countenances seemed to be
Albonians, but what they did there, or what was said, I minded not; for the
truth is, at the understanding of this, I fell into a deep fit of musing,
thinking with my self of the presumptuous arrogance of the Petropolitan Bishop,
who would not be content only to let his destructive Beagles to skulk up and
down in shelters, in a Country where their Company was so much abhorred and
hated, but should assign them so public a place in the midst of a populous
City, and near to the Princes Court (as it was) to kennel in. I confess my
admiration at this and some other passages that I had observed, put me into a
very profound fit of musing and thoughtfulness, so that I never observed this
new Company, either what they did at the Consult, or when they departed; But my
Friend Phileroy seeing me stand in such a studious posture, with my Eyes fixed
upon the ground, and Head leaning upon my Hand, began to rouse me up by
plucking me by the Elbow, and saying, What, are you asleep? A wake-man, Here is
another rare Show a coming; No, no, said I, Phileroy I ^m asleep; though I lied
in that, for (...) was asleep all this while; but however at this time, I
fancied my self awake, only got into a brown Study, out of which being thus
roused by Phileroy, I opened mine Eyes again to see what Pageant was next, and
presently I discovered a single person by himself, and without any other
Company, marching up in great haste (as if he had forgot himself) toward the
Table; he showed himself by his habit to be an Albonian, and was a spare
thin-faced old man, pretty tall, having over his other clothes along scarlet
Gown and Hood, such as in Albonia are used by those of the Degree of Doctor; to
satisfy my curiosity, Phileroy told me that he knew him very well, and that he
was an Albonian Physician: (A Physician (said I) what need is there of such
here) their province being to save men's lives; but those are all for destroying
them. It Is true indeed replied he, it is a Physician's work to preserve Life,
if they can, though through their ignorance too often they destroy many; but
what such do ignorantly, this great man (for he is a person of quality) shall
do wilfully, and kill as many at once (if he succeed in his Design) as Nero
would have done, when he wished that all the Citizens of Rome had but one Neck,
that he might strike it off at a blow. The Albonian Nation have but one supreme
Head upon whose preservation, the Lives and Properties of the whole Kingdom
does depend? Him this Devils drugster is to take off by poison, and to
facilitate his way to it, he has already got a place in the Albonian Court,
whereby he may have the freer access to the King when he has occasion, and is
lately come over to the Consult to receive his Orders; the Great Bishop has had
several discourses with him in private, since his being here, and I suppose has
firmly engaged him to the business, and that he now attends the Board for
Instructions. And accordingly I saw the Secretary deliver him some Instruments
into his hand, and wished him to be very careful in his management. The Great
Bishop himself then beckened up to him, and whispered something in his Ear
(what it was I know not) and then took up a small glass of liquor, which
Phileroy said he believed was the poison, and having mumbled a few words over
it, which was the Blessing or Consecration of the Viccar to make it effectual;
he then delivered it to the Darts, wishing its operation to be successful, and
him to be saithful and courageous in the applying of it; after which he took up
a good bulky purse (of Gold as it is supposed) and having likewise bestowed his
Benediction upon it (such blessings I confess I thought I could be content to
receive from his Viccarship my self) he likewise gave the Physician that; upon
this purse was plainly inscribed this Motto in Capitals, -- Auri sacra Fames
-- Quae non mortalia pectora cogis? Virg.
which Phileroy was pleased to english thus, -- The sacred hunger of Gold
Will Judges make corrupt, and Cowards bold.


Thus furnished with his poisonous drug, and healing bag, this new Doctor Lopez
made his Obeisance to the Court and vanished; In whose room starts up presently
another Gown-man (an Albonian) but of a different Robe, having on him such an
one as is usually worn by the Advocates and Pleaders in Albonia; he seemed to
be about 50 years of age, a spare man, but of a comely aspect, and very grave
in his deportment; the Court seemed to give him much respect, he being as
Phileroy informed me, the chief Counselor and Advocate to all the Petropolitan
party in Albonia, and his services in that particular was looked upon to be of
no small consideration to their Designs and Interest, being to draw up the
Conveyances of such Estates as they should purchase in Albonia, or such Stocks
as they should raise for the carrying on their Designs, to settle them
securely, as also to draw up such Commissions and Pattents, as should be
necessary to their purpose; His charge which he received from the grand Viccar
himself was no more in short than that he should be careful and faithful in his
trust, in the management of which, they knew his own skill and learning in the
Laws would be most proper to direct him without receiving from them any
particular Instructions.

Thus Physic, Law, and feigned Divinity
In heats against their Native Country burn,
Let them go on, but may that Misery
Designed to us, upon themselves return.
The Lawyer, after a short stay, did likewise make his Exit: And who the Devil
should come up next but a sort of Masqueraders or Protesto-petropolitans, for
so Phileroy called them; their habit indeed was per^ Masquerade; for their
inside Garments was after the Petropolitan guise, a monkish kind of Gear with
Rosaries and Crosses dangling at their Girdles, But over these they wore an
upper Garment of the Albonian fashion, some in Cloaks, and some in Coats, and
some in Gowns, such as our Clergy in Albonia do usually wear; upon their first
appearing I saw the Secretary deliver out to them Instruments under the Seal of
the Fisher, containing Indulgences and Dispensations; I minded not much what
was said to them, being willing rather to be inform by Phileroy, who told me
that those Indulgencies given them were for Lying and Disturbing, the main
necessary part of their Undertaking. These, (...) he, are looked upon as no
part of their standing (...), but a kind of Aluri^^a^i^^ or (...) that being
bred up in the C^^istian Faith, are yet in their Hearts and Judgments
Petropolitans, which they keep close to themselves, and only wear the
profession of their Country Religion, for a D^g^i^ and (...)

-- Sic, sic juvat ire per umbras.
In masquerading Shades these Sons of Night
And Darkness, love to hide them from our sight,
Ravencus Wolves in (...) clothing, a pack of knaves, whose Religion is made
up of Hypocrisy and Apostasy, Faction and Treachery, their piae fraud^s are by
those Indulgences and Di^^^sations warranted, so that by virtue of these, they
may assume the pretenses of the highest Zeal for the Worship of the Albonian
Church, to join in Communion with them, and partake with them in the most
solemn Mysteries of their Religion; yea, they had a Liberty given them (upon
occasion, and to avoid suspicion) to write and rail against the Petropolitans,
and the grand Viccar himself; and yet they were at the same time covertly to
act for them, and by their sly and subtle insinuations to amuse, the
thoughtless people into a Disbelief of any Plot or Designs acting against them.

Amongst this herd I observed one, that methoughts looked very Strange-lee, he
was an elderly person, with a Pen in his Ear and a Broom under his Arm. I was
very desirous to know of Phileroy, who this person should be, and the meaning
of his humor; but he (smiling) told me he would forbear informing me at
present, but that I should know more of him hereafter. But as for the Broom he
told me, it was a necessary Utensil used by him and others of his party, for
the sweeping away of the dirt and filth from the Petropolitans Doors, and
laying it at the Doors of the Christians: A pretty Artifice indeed of Rome,
To skim their Pot and throw on us the Skum.


Well, at the tail of these rutted another sort of Animals different in their
habit, but so close joined to them, that the seemed to be all of one herd;
their Garb and Gesture was as strange and uncouth as any I had yet observed
amongst them; I believe Africa or Nile never produced such variety of Monsters,
as were spawned at this Assembly: Their under Garments were (contrary to the
others) exactly of the Albonian cut and fashion, over which they wore a full
Garment patched up of Wolves and Foxes skins promiscuously interwoven, which
hung so loose about them, that they could readily throw them off, or put them
on at their pleasure; as I perceived (upon what account I know not, except it
were to represent the humor of their Design) they sometimes did waggishly,
snatching off their Cloaks and throwing them upon others backs, whom they then
laughed at, while they themselves skipped up and down the room in querpo. --
These Ridiculoso's, Phileroy informed me, were properly called Sham-Plotters, a
name that very properly agreed with their Office and Designs: For, said he,
their business is, having contrived some ^^acherous Design, if they should
happen to be discovered, or but suspected of it, presently to sham it off
themselves, and throw it as they do their Cloaks upon others, (namely) the
Christians, especially the Dissenters, and such of them as are men of Power and
Estates, whose names they shall get into Lists and present to the Government,
as persons designed to subvert the same by an open Rebellion.

And thus these coupled Mates in Masquerade
By different ways drive on their hellish trade;
The one for his Knavery gets a Cloak; the other
His knavish One casts on his honest Brother.
I had enough of this Pageant, and therefore what they did at the board, or
what was said to them, I minded not, I perceived they staid not long there
before they retired; and so this Scene being likewise withdrawn, I perceived
the Court began to be in a great bussle, as if they were breaking up, a time
that I heartily longed for, being quite tired with their fopperies; but the
Coast being somewhat clear, I perceived a company of fellows (all Albonians)
bussling up in great haste toward the Table, who by their Instruments and
badges of their Trade that they carried with them, appeared to be Printers.

Sulphur and Print, both Jesuits Inventions
To blast the World with Ruin and Contentions.
One of them amongst the rest carried before him a Tablet, wherein was figured
the Great Bishop's Keys (as I supposed them) being two gilded Keys a crossed,
which perhaps might be a badge of His Viccarship's favor: I saw they addressed
themselves to the Secretary, and their Errand was to desire a Faculty or
License from the Great Bishop to serve him in their Mystery by printing such
Pamphlets as should be contrived by the Ma^queraders or other their friends for
the furtherance of the present Design. The request of theirs was no sooner asked
bu^ granted. The Secretary presently drawing up a License or Instrument, which
the Grand Viccar signed and delivered to them, bidding them not spare for Ink
or Paper in his Service, they should be well enough rewarded for their pains;
ay, said I to my self, if you do not, I hope the Devil himself will pay them
their Wages; for I know not any sort of men upon Earth, that do him better
service than those sort of fellows do: Well, having got what they came for,
after some formal Observance made to the Court, they turned back again, very
well pleased, as I perceived; for they began to be frolic with one another:
One of them smearing some of his Printing Ink upon his finger, smutted his next
companion upon the face with it, saying, O Sir, you are a Phanatick, I Will mark
you. No, says the other, you are mis-Tooke, I am an abhorrer of them, and all
their actions. By this (said Phileroy, who observed the passage as well as I)
you may see the humors of these fellows, who (to please a party that they are
sure to be no losers by) will not spare to blacken or bespa^ter any one that
comes in their way, by fastening on them all the vil^i^ing terms they can think
of, to make them odious to the Vulgar; well, let them go, they will be made
look as black as their own Ink, by that time they are known to the World a
little better.

This was but a kind of an Interruption, the Court, as I said beginning to
bussle toward a breaking up, in order to which the Grand Viccar again rising
up from his Chair, told the Board and the Company, that they had now no more to
do, but to take their leaves one of another, and from that place to disperse
themselves unto the several places and Countries where their business was
ordered for the carrying on of this present Design; there they were to Govern
themselves according to the Instruction now given them, which as they were the
results of the grave and mature Debates of this great Consult, were to be
regarded accordingly with all Care and strictness; and for the better ordering
their business, they were from time to time upon all Emergencies to have
recourse to their Provincials and Superiors, who were in all cases of
difficulty to direct them in their proceedings, and by whom he expected himself
to receive frequent accounts of them: He thanked and commended them for their
Zeal and Readiness to his and the Churches Service, assuring them, that as soon
as Albonia was theirs, which he questioned not but by their faithful Endeavors
would soon be, he would distribute it amongst them, the ancient Rents and
Revenues of the Church should be theirs, and in the mean while they should not
want Encouragement; for that Order was taken for the raising of several Stocks
to be deposited in the hands of their Provincials for their present Supplies;
and so wishing them all good Success in their proceedings, and with his hands
stretched abroad, bestowing upon them once more his solemn Apostolical
Benediction, he bid them all heartily Farewell: at which the Company universally
gave a great Shout, crying, long live the great Bishop. And the Scarlet Senate
themselves seemed to join with them, who yet (for all their anniversary
Ceremony of (ad multos annos) may be thought to pay those respects but
formally, their ambitious hopes of succeeding him rendering them not over fond
of his continuance.

After this Dismission we saw the several Companies withdraw themselves
successively to their several apartments, which they went into by several Doors
leading through subterranean passages (the Devil knows whither) leaving the
Viccar and his Commissioners still sittings at the Board, till such time as the
Secretary had packt up his Tools and Papers; but before he had quite done,
something came into the great Viccar's head, which he called to him about, and
that was, that when he came into Albonia, he would have him strictly to search
into all such Statutes as have been published in the Reigns of the several
Albonian Princes, since the time of their Apostasy from the Mother Church,
against the Petropolitans, especially those in the Reign of Queen Eliza, and
such as related only to their recusancy or refusing to join in Communion with
them in their public Worship. He was to observe whether the dissenters amongst
themselves upon the account of the like recusancy, were not intended to be
comprehended and liable to the same penalties; which however he was to
endeavor to get some Persons eminent in the Law, to make such Constructions of
them, that so the force of them might be wrested against the dissenting
Christians, and the Petropolitans escape.

This was a sudden fit of Policy that came into the Old Viccars mind, which the
Secretary with an humble cringe promised faithfully to observe, withal telling
him, that the work would be more facile, to bend the force of those Statutes
against the Dissenters, for that they had Enemies enough amongst them of their
own Religion, who would sooner prosecute a Dissenter upon those Statutes than a
Petropolitan, as has been found the Experience of some years past. This Answer
much satisfied the Great Bishop, who presently thereupon removing from his
Chair, with his aforesaid Harbinger before him, returned back to his
apartments, the Scarlet Senate and the rest of the Consult, together with the
Secretary following him, much after the same Order that they came hither. And
now the Actors being withdrawn, there remained a clear Stage, and our
Observations were ended: Wherefore Phileroy taking me from the window, we sat
down to chat a while about these matters; but being both tired with standing so
long a gazing upon these Pageants; he first went and fetched out of a little
hole in the room, a bottle of rich Canary Wi^es, and some Tobacco, and then
struck a light, (for the lights that glimmered upon us out of the great Room
were now all taken away) and having drunk down one glass, I found my Spirits
much revived, which were before very lumpish and heavy, but the refreshment of
the Wine and the company of my dear friend did much allay the melancholy, which
otherwise the dismalness of that place and company would have moved me to; but
I knew I should fare no worse than he did: But then beginning our chat
together, it came into my head, to ask him how he came to be excused from
giving his attendance at the Consult all this while, together with the rest of
the company; he told me for that he was excuseable (though had it not been for
my Company he would have been there) he being none of the Commissionated Orders
or Parties amongst them; but though, said he, I am admitted into the Ignatian
Order, yet they permit no Novices, as they yet account me for some time, to
engage on any considerable Enterprises amongst them; and therefore my Province
hitherto has been no other than to carry Letters and Missions from one place
to another, yet notwithstanding the meanness of my present Employ, I will
assure you, I have got into so much favor with them, as twice to be admitted
into the Great Bishop's own Cabinet, where His Viccarship has very freely
discoursed me about matters in Albonia, and seemed to have so much confidence
in my Faithfulness, that he assured me he had ordered our Provincials to put me
soon after our arrival there, into some higher place of Trust, and that my
services should be amply considered: I thanked His Unholiness for his kindness
(which truly in my heart I was little ambitious of) and promised to serve him
to the utmost of my abilities, and so I will, said Phileroy, if ever I get over
into Albonia, I will serve him according to his Deserts, by discovering his
Treasons to him against whom they are intended; but when will that happy time
be, said I, that we shall be moving thither, Purgatory is no comfortable place
to dwell in; tho my Entertainment here (by your means) I find to be much better
than I expected; you shall fare no worse than I do, said Phileroy, while we
stay, however I think our Stay will be no longer than to morrow, the business
of the Consult being now all dispatched: And I heard the Great Bishop give
order for his Galleys (and the rest of the vessels that brought us) lying in
Harbor at the foot of the Mountain, to be ready against that time; Most of the
Company are bound for Albonia, but disperse themselves in several Ships, and
are to land themselves in several ports of that Kingdom; to avoid suspicion of
their Numbers, if any of them should happen to be discovered. But you and I
(said he to me) will go together in a small Frigate with some others, old
Companions of and all Albonians; some of whom I know to be true Christians, and
only have mixed themselves with this rabble upon the same accounts that I do, to
have as Spies to betray them, and hereafter according to their Observations to
make Discovery of the Petropolitans practices. We are all well known one to
another, and when we can get aside together in private, we use to manage our
little Consults together to Counterplot the greater; their company will be a
good diversion to us in our Voyage, when we can get privately into our Cabin
together; I would have you be acquainted with them, Philopatris, they are
honest Lads I assure you; With all my heart replied I, I love true hearts and
honest men, but did not expect there would have been any in this place besides
my self, but it seems I am mistaken; certainly did His Viccarship know what a
crew of prying Heretics were here, he would stay some days longer to call an
Inquisition for us, and secure us for ever getting out of this place. You may
be sure on it, said Phileroy; but as I have had hitherto the good luck to
conceal my self from their suspicion, so we must for the future carry our
selves warily to avoid it, till such time as we are arrived in Albonia.

Thus methoughts we past away our time talking and discoursing till it grew
late, and our Eyes waxing heavy, we began to play a game at Noddy. But Phileroy
went and spread his pallat and quilt (the same that belonged to his Cabin in
the Ship) and so we lay down together and in a little time I fancied we fell
asleep; but what strange whimsies are there in dreams; for alas I was asleep
all this while, yet my fancy in this Parenthetical slumber ran into new
fancies, dreams within dreams, like the Petropolitans Plots, one within
another. Well, as I fancied I slept, so I fancied I waked again in the morning,
and my mind being intent about our Removal, I jogged Phileroy to strike a
light, that we might see to rise, which he presently did, and looking upon his
Watch, found it was near Eight a Clock, whereupon we bussled up as fast as we
could, and Phileroy fell to packing up his things; for we perceived by the
lights set up in the great Room, and the bussling to and fro of the Company,
that they were preparing to depart. After we had packt up the things, we
withdrew to the little Window, where we saw a Company of Sailors (who were sent
for to that purpose) with burdens on their backs to carry them down to the
Ships; amongst the rest that were unburthened Phileroy saw five or six jolly
Albonian Sailors, that belonged to the Vessel that we were to go in, and
calling out to one of them by his name, to take his parcel with him, which we
together heaving down Stairs, the fellow took upon his back and went off with
it, telling us we had now a merry gale of Wind for Albonia. I would have had
Phileroy that we should go along with him; but he told me he must stay till the
rest of the Company, that were to go along with us were ready; several of the
Companies that we observed yesterday, we saw marching off one after another. I
perceived they were most of them now (if not all) in Lay habits, their Monkish
Vests and trumpery being sent before, trussed up in their baggage; nay,
Phileroy himself had now left off his disguise, and put himself into an
Albonian habit. I told him, he now looked like Phileroy himself, but he
cautioned me not to call him by that name, which he durst not own amongst those
people, but Petrophil, which was the name he had assumed, and was known by
amongst the Petropolitans, to whom he knew the other name would be odious, and
a dangerous Intimation to them of what he endeavored to conceal; I promised to
observe his Direction. After this the next Company that appeared, was the Grand
Viccar himself (with some harbingers before him) and his Scarlet Senate
following; but they were all now (even the Bishop himself) in black Coats (I
suppose their usual traveling habits) girt close to them. Phileroy seeing the
Great Bishop marching along, suddenly drew up toward him, and I followed him
at a small distance; The Viccar I perceived presently took notice of him (
Phileroy making a very low Obeisance to him) and said, I see Petrophil you are
prepared for your Voyage, Pray remember us to all our Friends in Albonia, and
to our Rebellious Son your King, when you see him, (I imagined what kind of
Remembrance His Viccarship meant) Phileroy acquainted His Unholiness he would
do both; the latter I am sure he did soon after to some purpose, though quite
contrary to the Great Bishop's meaning. This was all that passed betwixt them,
the Viccar went on; and presently after came up the Company we waited for, that
we were to go along with, with whom we joined our selves, and marching the way
we came in at, through the dark Entry, we ascended the brow of the Hill, and so
down again to the Harbor, where our Vessel lay ready to take us in; we got to
it by a Shallop sent out to fetch us, and being on Board, the Seamen presently
hoised Sail, and having a fair Wind with us, set forward, and in a few days
came to Anchor at one of the five Ports in Albonia.

During the time of our Voyage, Phileroy brought me into some acquaintance with
those Christian Albonians before mentioned, with whom, when we could get
opportunity, we discoursed together about the present affairs, and how we
should do to circumvent the Designs laid against us; to which end we resolved,
when we were got into Albonia, to keep together, and to have frequent meetings
in order to considering of the most effectual ways to do it.

At our first landing upon our Native Soil, we went altogether in a company to
a Tavern, to congratulate each other upon our happy arrival, but chiefly to
attend our Provincial who came along with us, and to receive his Commands,
where we were to wait upon him at Londinopolis, (the chief place intended of
our Rendevouz) in order to our Consults; which he having informed us, and an
health drunk round to the good success of the Petropolitan Design, (which we,
that were abhorrers to it, durst not, for that time, but pledge) we parted
Company, betaking our selves to our several Inns. Phileroy, my self, and our
Christian Countrymen still keeping Company together, (as we had before
resolved) both that night and the next, (taking up places in the Stage Coaches
belonging to the Town) we journeyed together to Londinopolis, where we all
desired to be, for that all our particular Concerns lay in that place.

Our Petropolitan Friends we left behind, some of them resolving to stay some
time in the place they were in, others intending to travel some time about the
Countries, as our Provi^cial (called Blanc-pain) for o^, yet all of them
designing to be in the ^^ty, at the time prefixed for the Gra^^^ Consult, at
which we (for I was now counted one of them) were to meet them.

Being arrived at the City (having first taken account of each others Lodgings,
and agreed upon a certain place of our meeting together) we went every man to
his own home, and spent some days in settling our concerns there.

But during that time, I stole so much leisure as to enquire a little at
Coffee-Houses and other places of Intelligence, what news was stirring, and
whether I could find any inkling of this present intended Plot, but could not
hear any mention, 5 Lords Seduced by ye Jesuits



ye Grand Consult at ye white horse



Kirby Offering Oats Informations



The 2 Ruffians Attempting to kill The King



or discover the least Suspicion of it; we were now at Peace with all the
World, dreading no Enemies abroad, and as little suspecting any at home; all
was in a quiet and tranquil posture, till the arrival of these Sons of mischief
and Confusion with whom in a little time (tho they walked up and down
incognito) the Town swarmed. During this while Phileroy and I met often
privately together; for I desired not now to associate any more with my new
acquaintance of the Petropolitans, lest (if discovered) it might turn to my
prejudice, and therefore avoided coming to their Consults, but received
accounts from time to time by him of what was done in them; Phileroy keeping in
close with them till such time as their Designs were ripe for Execution, and
then he intended as he told me, to make his Discovery.

One time my Visions carried me in a melancholy posture into the Solitudes of a
shady Grove, curiously cut out into Walks and Ambulets, and near adjoining to a
magnificent Building, but what the place was, or who it belonged to, I knew
not; here I discovered six persons very earnest in discourse together; One of
them I knew by his habit to be an Ignatian, the rest I supposed by the
Sumptuousness of their Garb, and Titles of Honor and Respect that the other
gave them, were Noblemen; after they had discoursed a while, I saw the Priest
take a Book from under his Arm, which, holding out to them, they severally
kissed, and something they said each of them, bu^ what it was I could not well
hear: I took this for the Ceremony of some Oath that the Ignatian imposed upon
them; for ^ ^eard him say to them very audibly, that it would be no less than
Damnation to them, if they should in the least matter violate what they had
promised, telling them what great Confidence the Great Bishop had in their
assistance, and that they could not sacrifice their Estates, no nor their Lives
upon a better account than the Service of the Mother Church, nor do better
Service to it, than by cutting off their Heretical King, from their Obedience
to whom, they were by the Grand Viccar's Bull (lately come over) ipso facto
absolved; and for their better Encouragement informs them how bountifully the
Great Bishop had considered them by conferring on them several places of the
greatest Trust and Honor, as namely, one of them (naming him and all the rest
particularly) to be Lord Great Chancellor, a second Grand Cashier, the third to
be General of the forces, a fourth to be Lieutenant, and a fifth to be
Play Master of the Army; for all which Places and Offices, he told them there
were Commissions ready for them, remaining in the hands of their chief Advocate
at Londinopolis, and so wishing them to be constant and resolute in their
proceedings, (in so glorious an Undertaking as he called it) and not to stick
at venturing their Lives and Liberties in the promoting it, the Wizzard
concluded by giving them his Benediction; In requital of which, I saw them
return him theirs, every one bestowing a handful of Gold upon him, which they
told him, was but an Earnest of their future Liberality, and promising jointly
to exhaust their Revenues (if need should be) to the last penny in this
Service. I now (laying those passages together) imagined to what they tended,
which filled me with such a rage against the Devil in a Cowle, the Ignatian,
that I had certainly fell upon him and beat him bur that the impetus of my
fancy at this very time hurrying me away from their compaany, broke off my
revenge, and placed me again in my own house, where I became more troubled and
discontented than I was before, still longing to meet with Phileroy, that I
might confer a little with him about these things.

And according to my Wish, the next day he sent to me to meet at a place near
by, I presently went to him, and after usual civilities past beween us, I
presently acquainted him with my Dream yesterday which he listened to with good
attention; and then asked me if my Memory would serve to describe the several
persons I saw there; I told him yes, and accordingly did as near as I could
remember describe them to him; whereupon he told me that my Vision was a real
thing, and that those five Persons were five Noblemen of great Estates in
Albonia, and the other an Ignatian, who together with some others had, in
pursuance of their Instructions received at Strombolo, treated with, and
disposed the aforesaid Lords, both by voluntary Contributions out of their
Estates, and otherwise to give in their assistances from time to time to the
carrying on of the present Design: As they had acquainted the Provincial and
other Members at their Grand Consult, which ( Phileroy told me) was by
appointment held last night at the White Horse in le Strand, a Tavern there so
called, which was the usual place of their Meetings.

-- The treacherous Trojan Horse of old
Did not more Mischiefs in his Bow'ls enfold,
Than did this place. --
I was extremely desirous to hear how things passed at this Consult, and in
what posture their affairs stood. All which Phileroy (who carried a continual
load within him, and had none to unbosom himself to but my self) did very
freely and satisfactorily inform me after this manner; he told me at this
Consult, there was a far greater appearance than there had been at any of the
former, and that there were scarce any of any Order in Town, or any of their
Agents and Instruments, who was not then present: The Provincial Blancpain sat
there in chief, to whom the several persons engaged in the Design, gave in
particular accounts of their Actings and Proceedings: The first that did it was
the man of Cole, as the Albonians call him, or the Great Dutchess's Secretary,
he acquainted the Board how successfully he had engaged his Master the Great
Duke to the Petropolitan Interest, and what an amity and Correspondence he had
maintained between his said Master and Mr. le Chese Confessor to the great
Franconian Monarch, and a powerful Minister in that Court; and had so far
prevailed (by his Letters) with him in the behalf of the Petropolitans here,
that the said Le Chese had sent over the Sum of 10000 l. which was now lying in
the Banker's hand, ready for their use and Service: And for that his great
Master's Title of Succession to the Imperial Crown, (he being now suspected for
a Petropolilitan) was like to be questioned by the Grand Senate, at their now
near approaching Convention; he had farther by his strong and plying mediation
with the aforesaid Minister, obtained from him a promise of a vast Sum of
Money, out of Franconian King's Coffers, wherewith to allow Pensions and for
other secret Services in Court, for to hinder the Senates sitting, or to cause
their sudden breaking up when ever they should enter upon the point of the
Succession: That withal if his great Masters Interest could not be secured this
way, yet to hasten it another, he had not, nor should be wanting to consider of
some way to take the King off, (the word they commonly use for the intended
Murder of him) and should not stick to do it himself, if he could meet with a
fair opportunity to do it: Besides this Narrative he pulled a packet,
containing Copies of the Letters that he sent to Le Chese, and those Letters
that Le Chese had returned back again to him; all which he laid before the
Provincial, who looked them over, and did as well highly applaud his Services
as congratulate his success in them; telling him, that the Great Bishop had
been already acquainted with his Endeavors, and in recompense thereof had
(besides other favors intended) by his Apostolical Pattent constituting him
chief Secretary to the Apostolical State, which he would in a few days deliver
to him, and in the mean while, setting aside the lesser Title of her
Highness's, he was to be known by no other style than that of His Vnholiness's
Secretary.

The joy that the Secretary fell into at the hearing this blessed News (as he
called it) seemed less than astonishment, standing for some time in a fixed
posture, with elevated Eyes, and hands folded together like one of Medusa's
Statutes, but at last recovering himself, with a profound Reverence he bowed
himself with his arms cross, his breast toward the Provincial, desiring him to
return his humble thanks to the Grand Viccar, with an assurance that (tho he
did not deserve, yet) he should by all means endeavor to answer so great a
Trust with the utmost hazard of his Life and Fortunes: This unhappy word was
spoken truer than perhaps he was then aware of, as the Event shortly showed.

-- Tolluntur in altum
Vt lapsu graviore ruant. --
-- Lift up on high
To fall into the greater Misery.
The Provincial having thus done with the Secretary, took the opportunity here,
not to be unmindful of his own Services, acquainting the Board how that himself
had obtained of Pedro d' Oliva, Principal of the Ignatian Order at Petropolis,
the Sum of 11000 Crowns; from Ieronimo de Corbuda 10000 l. and of the Monks of
the Benedictine Order 6000 l. all which Sums he told them, were new in bank in
Londinopolis, ready for such uses as they should be employed for. These
Services he straight ordered the Secretary, as an hansel of his Office, to be
entered into Registry kept for such purposes; I stood amazed to hear of such
prodigious Sums to be already got in, besides what was after expected. But
Phileroy told me that all this was nothing, and might be counted but as their
running cash, or spending Money, they having already far greater Stocks in
Albonia than these came to; as namely, one single Order amongst them of the
Ignatians had, by Advocate Horne's procurement, Lands settled in Trust for
their use in several Provinces in Albonia, to the value at least of 60000 l.
per annum, besides a Stock growing at Interest of at least 100000 l. you may
think (said Phileroy) that they should not know how to employ so vast a
Revenue; but if you could consider (besides what is necessary for maintenance
of their numerous selves) the charges of their Consults, sending away
dispatches, buying up of Arms and Ammunition (whereof they intend to have great
Stores and Magazins (concealed) in several Counties) the allowing of Pensions,
besides excessive Rewards (for they resolve not to be sparing) to such as shall
perform any signal or desperate Services for them. I say, lay all these
together and it will abate your Wonder. I was very well pleased to hear from
Phileroy, that the Petropolitans were so rich and able, hoping in time when
they should come to be discovered; Our King himself would be never the worse
for it; very likely so, said Phileroy. But to proceed in my Narrative, as this
was a general Consult, so the principal Design of it was to consider of a
speedy way of cutting off the King, whose sacred life (which God long continue)
they looked upon as the greatest Remora to their Designs; several persons came
and offered to be employed in it; They refused none, but took them in all, that
they might make sure Work on it, and though they laid their Designs several
ways, yet they, whose Designs took first, were likely to be best rewarded; yet
every one had a round Sum propounded for his Encouragement.

The first that came up and offered his Service on this Design, was the Devil's
Drugster the old Physician that we saw at Strombolo, who having, as I there
told you, by the means of some great Petropolitan Friends, crept into so much
favor as to be attendant to the Royal Consort had so much the fairer
opportunity of perpetrating his Designs; The dose of consecrated poison, that
we saw the Great Bishop deliver to him at Strombolo, was the Instrument he
chose for the dispatch of his Treason, as most suitable to his faculty; but for
the dose of Gold then also given, he esteemed that but a retaining Fee, he
resolved he would not venture his Neck for nothing, but stood gaping as he used
to do over his sick Patients after he had dispatched his Recipe's, expecting
the Proposal. The Provincial proposed 15000 l. (too great a Reward for a
Traitor, but too little a price to value the life of such a King at) part of
which was to be paid him down by the Provincial of Londinopolis, and the other
to be likewise paid him when the Design was perfected. Whether he liked the
proffer I know not, but I suppose he did; for having withdrawn from the Board
with a low Obeisance, he promised to be careful; after he was withdrawn came up
three persons two of them in Priests habits, the other in a Lay one: One of
these Priests was to contrive the way and Method of the Design, the other two
were to execute it, and the way then proposed, was that they should take some
opportunity of the King's walking privately in his Royal Park, and then to
shoot him, to which purpose they had each of them a Pistol delivered to them,
with silver Bullets (forsooth) because they were to soak in Royal Blood (which
God grant they never may.) These Pistols, being made of a length more than
ordinary, that they might do Execution the further, were first consecrated by
the Provincial in the name of the Oreat Bishop, the Rewards proposed to them
for this Service, was to one of them (being the Layman) the Sum of 1500 l. to
the other, being a Priest, 30000 Missals, which at 12 d. a Mass (the usual rate
of that Commodity) amounts to the like Sum. After these came up four rude,
ruffianly, hectoring Blades, I understand they were Tories or Inhabitants of
Bogland, their very looks spoke Death and Terror, fit Instruments for such a
purpose; these boldly bussling up to the Board, offering their Services, that
they four, or some of them should shoot the King at one of his Country Palaces
Westward, where he was then retired, as soon as they could find an opportunity
fair to do it; their Motion was presently accepted, but what rewards were
agreed upon I could not well understand; being withdrawn to the other end of
the Room, they stayed not long, but they withdrew also with a Complement, but
at a huffing rate, with their hands upon their Swords, as if they had been
presently going about the Execution of the Design. After a little space, all
the aforesaid Undertakers were called up again together to receive the
Provincial's Blessing, but indeed to take the Oath of Secrecy, an old, but
cunning Invention of the Petropolitans, to oblige undertakers to the most
obstinate silence; this Oath was made Penal with Imprecations of no less than
Hell and Damnation to the Violators of it. This Oath they severally took, by
repeating the words of it, and then kissing the Book they were swore by.

This was the sacred Padlock wherewith they
Locked up the Mouths of those they did employ,
Filled with a Curse, which if it should fly open,
Was to afflict them, tho they escaped the Rope.
But this was not all, they were for farther Confirmation, severally to receive
the Sacrament upon it at the hands of their Priests or Confessors, before they
went about their Enterprise, sure bind, sure find, said the Provincial, but
thought I with my self, as the Devil here binds, so I hope God will unbind, and
loosen their cursed Intrigues: This was the effect of this damned Consult:
there were other matters of less moment then dispatched, which I will not now
trouble you with, it being now late; so we fell to some other chat a little,
and then took leave one of another: Phileroy appointing a short time after to
meet me again, and to acquaint me further.

CHAP. V.
Phileroy's Proceedings about making a Discovery. The Grand Cashier's practices
to stifle it. The Petropolitans Practices to seduce the People under several
religious Disguises.

ACcording to this Appointment I met him a few days after at our usual place
of Meeting, and having conferred notes a little of what we had observed since
we came to Town. I told him my Thoughts (which I knew was agreeable enough to
his mind) concerning a Discovery. He told me (with a look much more troubled
than ever I had seen him with before) that while this horrid Conspiracy against
his Prince and Country lay concealed in his bosom, he carried a fire within him
much more hot than the place we came from; but for him at that time to attempt
a Discovery, being a stranger at Court, and knowing no great Person there,
whose acquaintance should be a means of his Introduction, and give Credit to
his Testimony, he thought would be altogether in vain; and besides the
Petropolitan party being now all in Town that knew him, should he attempt a
Discovery before he had got some protection from the higher Powers for his
security, he should be in continual danger to have his Life and Evidence taken
off together. But withal he told me he would acquaint me with a secret, which
he had never yet revealed to me or any one, which was, That the Provincial
Blanc-pain had enjoined him to murder an eminent Albonian Divine one Dr.
Tongus, who had lately put forth a Book, called, the Ignatians Morals, a Book
so palpably detecting the Villainies of that Party, that in revenge thereof they
had engaged him to that barbarous service of cutting him off. But, said
Phileroy, I have considered with my self, that taking hold of this Thread, I
might possibly unravel the whole bottom of their Designs; and therefore I have
purposed to go forthwith to the Doctor, and first to acquaint him with the
Mischief intended against himself, and then to inform him of the Plot in
general (in its various Contrivances) against the King and Kingdom; to which
end I have drawn up a Paper consisting of forty three Articles, and containing
the general heads of my Discovery, which I intend to deliver to him, and withal
to engage his assistance (being a person of so much Note and Eminency) to get
it preferred to (him whom it most concerns) the King himself, with a Promise to
appear my self to justify it, when ever I shall be thereto required.

This project of Phileroy's did exceedingly well please me, wishing him without
delay to proceed upon it, and withal to give me an account of the Result at our
next Meeting.

Which accordingly he did, for then looking with a more gay and pleasant
Countenance than before, he told me merrily that he had been at Confession; but
said he, it was to a Christian and not a Petropolitan, tho I wish I may not
come to be pennanced by them for so doing.

In fine, he acquainted me how that he had been with the Doctor, and made his
Discoveries to him, not only of the Conspiracy against himself, but that
against the King and Kingdom, both which he accepted very kindly; and as for
the latter (as a loyal Subject concerned for the safety of his Prince) he had
engaged a Noble Colonel (a Person great at Court) to deliver the Articles into
the King's own hand) which he accordingly did, taking a fit opportunity for his
purpose, as the King was for his Recreation walking in his Park. And His
Majesty received the same very graciously from him, and afterward at his
return from his Walk, vouchsaft to hear him more particulary of the Treason
intended against him, as also an account of the Traitors themselves, their
Names and Characters. But being more secure in his own Innocence, than aware of
the danger threatened him, and being to go the next day to one of his Royal
Palaces in the Country, told him he would leave the Papers in the hands of his
Oreat Cashier, and ordered the Colonel to attend him, that he might put him in
mind of them, a Person whom he said he could confide in, but one that has since
proved himself too much a friend to his Enemies, but not so much a friend to
his Master, as the Duty of his Place, besides the Rewards of it should have
obliged him to have been, especially in an Affair of this Nature, wherein no
less than the Life of his Sovereign was concerned. For, said Phileroy, although
for the more clear evidencing of the Design, it was offered him to produce the
very Persons that should perpretrate the intended Murder (with their Weapons
and Instruments of Death about them) in such time as the King should happen to
take a Walk next in the aforesaid Park, and although farther the Colonel
acquainted him with a means how to seize the Letters of their Correspondents,
which might give a further light to the Discovery, yet all these opportunities
were slighted or neglected by him: Neither would he permit any access to him by
the Discoveror, to give in his farther Information; bur put him off with delays
from time to time, and hardly any notice taken of this important affair; so
that the Progress of our Discovery being retarded thus by one that appears so
much a friend to the Petropolitans, we are in danger of being Discovered our
selves before we can make out our Discovery against them.

I was much dampt to hear that the Design should be thus slighted by a man in
Power, and so near to the Prince's Person, as the grand Cashier (by his place)
was; and withal I feared by this Instance, that the treacherous Petropolitans
had corrupted more such men as he was, and by Bribes, or otherwise, drawn them
over to their Interest; and, said I, if they have gained this point of us, to
infeeble those that should be the Supporters of our State, and to render them
defenseless to us, we may well give over stirring and leave them to play out
their game; for who shall hinder them?

That will I (replied Phileroy bravely) so long as I am sure the main Pillar of
all stands fast, and unshaken: I mean His Majesty, to whom I am resolved,
seeing I can have no better success with his Minister, to go my self as soon as
ever I can find means of access to his presence, and give in my Informations my
self to him, and leave it to his own Royal Breast to consider of his own and
his Kingdoms danger; I very well approved of his Resolve, and encouraged him by
all means to proceed and to leave no means unattempted till he had perfected
his Discovery. After a little more chat passed concerning this and other
matters, we broke up for this time, leaving the rest to our next Meeting.

During which time, our Petropolitan Friends swarmed about the Town; for I met
with one or other of them very often as I walked in the Streets, and
notwithstanding their various disguises, I knew them by their faces to be the
same persons that came over with us from Strombolo. One of them (that I knew to
be a Priest) I saw go huffing along in an Hectorian Garb, Hat buttoned up, a
long Periwig, and a Rapier by his side, I avoided taking notice of him for that
time; but the next Sunday in the morning, going by an Anabaptist Meeting, I
looked in, and saw my Gentleman again in another Garb, being new cast into a
religious Form, a short black Cloak, black Cap, and pricked Ears (the
ambuscading Periwig being now laid aside) little Collar Band, and other precise
accoutrements, and having got into the Speaking-place or Pulpit, he was thus
with great vehemence and earnestness preaching to the unwary people. This was a
Seminarian or Sower; and I perceived by this Instance, how close they kept to
their Instructions. I stayed not long to hear his Discourse, which all tended
to Sedition, and to incense his auditors against the Government, but withdrew
to the next neighboring Church, where I heard something more profitable: Not
long after upon a weekday, I happened to go by a meeting of the Enlightened
men, as they call themselves, or Quakers, as we call them, where my curiosity
again leading me in amongst them, I observed another of our Strombolians, a
Seminary, that was perkt up, and holding forth, as they usually do, with an
obstreperous noise, and excessive bawling, stretching his Jaws and distorting
his Looks with such uncouth postures, that Strombolo itself could not afford a
more ugly Visage; he was in a plain, and untrimmed colored Suit, after the
guise of that whimsical People, who place more Superstition in holding to their
own little Singularities, in being contrary to other men in their Garb and
Speaking, than any they can find in those they most condemn for it.

But good Lord! what a farce of ridicule and Nonsense did I hear from the Mouth
of this cunning Impostor, who had so well learned their way of Cant, that he
could artificially dissemble his Reason, and speak without it as well as they
themselves: All that his extravagant bawling tended to, was no other than to
inform them of the miserable Persecution that their dear Brethren of the Light
had suffered, and were like to suffer from the Priests and men of this World,
such as have denied the Truth and walk in Darkness; but the time of Vengeance
was now come, yea, Judgment was at the very door, the Decree was past, the
Nations should be judged, and the Powers of the World should be shaken, and
then the Saints should be all of one Heart and one Way; with abundance of other
such nonsensical Stuff, whose Coherencies were like Ropes of twisted Sand,
without any cohesion: But these were the Seeds (Seditions enough) that this
subtle Seminary sowed in the impressible heads of this bigoted party, who were
ready enough to take any Impressions of this Nature. I tired my self for about
a quarter of an hour in hearing his Harangue, and then drew off to follow my
occasions. But the next day happening to go again that way, in a little Ally,
hard by the aforesaid Meeting Place, whom should I see in a little Cobblers
Stall, but the aforesaid Speaking man of Light, mending of Shoes; I knew him
again exactly, and had a great desire to have a little private Conference with
him, which to accomplish the better, I withdrew to a door near by, and
loosening the Heel of my Shoe, by knocking it against the Grunsel, I went to
the next Alehouse and sent it to the said Cobblers to mend, and to bring it
thither to me, which in a little time he accordingly did, and I paid him for
his work: And now being alone in a room by our selves, I caused him to sit down
and drink with me, and then fell to question him after this manner: I asked him
if he was not a Quaker? he told me he was one of those whom the men of the
World in scorn called so; and whether he did not yesterday preach to his
Brethren? he told me he did then speak to them the words of Truth and Soberness
as the Spirit moved him; Come, come, said I, (resolving to be plain with him)
you are no Quaker but a Priest, and a Petropolitan, I know you well enough.
It Is unexpressible what a strange damp and confusion these words of mine put
him into, as appeared by the sudden alteration in his Countenance,
notwithstanding he began stoutly, and with some show of abhorrency, to deny it,
till I told him it was a folly for him so to do, having my self seen him at the
Consult at Strombolo, and come over with him from thence in the same Vessel;
which upon better observing of me, he confessed to be true, as knowing me by
the Companionship I had with Phileroy in that Voyage; whereupon taking a little
more heart of Grace, as thinking he had met with a Petropolitan; He enquires of
me whether I was of the same Order with Phileroy; which (not being willing at
this time to be known what I was) I told him I was, whereupon my new modeled
man of Light began to be more free and open with me, telling me the reason of
his Undertaking: That he was before his entering into the Order of Priesthood,
by profession, a Shoemaker, and that (the better to disguise himself) in the
management of his part in this grand affair, which he presumed, was well enough
known to me, he had taken upon him now (since his return over) the Employment
of a Translator (or a Shoemaker translated) which being generally a sociable
faculty, and none more talkative over their Cups than they are, he had thereby
opportunity to insinuate himself into the good opinion of the Vulgar,
especially the Enlightened herd, whose company he mostly used so far, that for
his pretended Zeal to the humors of that idle Faction, he was soon admitted a
Member, and quickly after a Teacher in their phrentick Meetings, and thereby
got into great Esteem amongst them, and questioned not but by this means, he
should win over many of them to the Petropolitan Interest; of which his Service
in this particular Agency, he intended to give the Provincial a satisfactory
account at the next Consult. I asked him when that would be; he told me the
time and place, and I promised him then and there to meet him, wishing him in
the mean while (but very feignedly) good success in his Undertakings, and so
after a draught or two to our better acquaintance, my Gentle-craftsman and I
for this time parted, he again to his stall, and I to my business.

Thus to conceal his cloven Foot
The Devil will draw on a Boot;
And thus to hide him from our sight
The Jesuit turns Man of Light;
Friends, mind the Light, (cries he) and whilst they stare
To see where it is, they drop into his Snare.
I was methoughts passionately desirous all this while to hear from Phileroy,
what further Progress he had made in his Discovery: At the time appointed
therefore I went with much eagerness to meet him at the usual place; I happened
to be there first, but he was not long after me, bringing along with him a
grave comely Person in the habit of a Divine; and this it seems (as Phileroy
told me) was Doctor Tongus, whom he had brought along with him at that time, to
begin an acquaintance betwixt him and me, I thanked him for doing me so great
an honor, so I applied my self to the Doctor, and after mutual Salutations
passed betwixt us, I asked him pleasantly how he durst trust himself so freely
in the company of his Murderer: (meaning Phileroy) He answered me again as
pleasantly, That he took him rather for a Cheat than a Murderer; for that he
had cheated the Petropolitans of their expectations of a Revenge upon him, and
that if he ever went upon the killing account, he hoped it would be to murder
that cursed Plot they had then on foot, and to bring that Blood which they
designed to draw from others upon their own heads. But, said the Doctor,
(smiling) your friend Phileroy has been paid for his Service already, tho his
work be unfinisht. Ay, says Phileroy, that I have, but I will see them all
hanged before I will work any longer for them for such Pay: I seeing this
Passage to be managed pleasantly on both sides, desired to know the Mystery of
it, which Phileroy presently resolved me in this manner. The payment, says he,
that the Doctor means, I received from the hands of our Provincial Blanc-pain,
who having some Information from the Great Duke's Confessor, that two persons,
the one in such a kind of Habit as I now wear, (which was the noble Colonel I
formerly mentioned) the other a Minister (the Doctor here present) had been
with the King to make a Discovery of their Designs, concluded that I must needs
be one of them, and so without any farther examination of the truth of it, the
old Rogue in a great rage fell upon me and beat me; he knew that as he was my
Superior, I was bound to take my Penance with Submission, and I durst not at
that time do otherwise, else, rathe^ than to be so abused by a Religious
Monkey, I should have cuffed his treasonable Soul out of its rotten Enclosure,
and rather ventured to be so hanged for him, than to be hanged for serving him;
so I spared him as a reserve for the worse punishment. After he had thus
pennanced me, and his anger began to cool a little, I got liberty to speak for
my self, and then I told him that he was wrongfully possessed against me; for
that I never was with the King since my coming over into Albonia, which I
affirmed to him (as truly I might) with many solemn Protestations: The
Provincial knew we had no Dispensation to lie or equivocate amongst our selves,
though we might do it with Heretics, and so seemed to be satisfied with my
Vindication, and after an unjust Penance gave me his Absolution, only as a
further trial of my fastness to them I was to prepare my self for a sudden
Voyage beyond Seas, where I was to negotiate some special business for them.

An account of these Passages betwixt the Provincial and me I presently gave in
to the Doctor and the noble Colonel, who thereupon perceiving that our Designs
of a Discovery had taken scent amongst them, concluded that without farther
delay we must with all Vigor proceed in the Undertaking; and to that purpose
the Colonel resolved the next day to take a journey into the Country to the
King, and the Doctor in the mean while was to get his Informations sworn before
some Magistrate, to render them more authentic when they should come to be
examined by Authority; pursuant to which Resolves, the Doctor soon after went
before one Sir Edmond, a worthy Magistrate, and true friend to the King and
Christian Interest, before whom he took his Oath of the truth of his
Information, as they were contained in Papers there showed to the Justice, but
without permitting him to read over the particulars, but that in general they
contained matters of Treason and other high Crimes, and that His Majesty had
already Copies of them: In the mean while the Colonel attending at the Court,
found that the great Duke's Confessor had, by some prepossessions to take off
the credit of our Informations, obstructed his way so that after two days
waiting he could not obtain audience; whereupon he repaired to the Grand
Cashier, and acquainted him that the Original Informant was now discovered,
having been beaten out of their service by one of the Petropolitan Superiors.
This account his Greatness seemed to be well pleased with, yet put him off
then, and so delayed him from time to time, that he could never get to speak
with him, but was forced with these discouragements, after a long attendance,
to return back again to Londinopolis.

During these transactions of the Colonel and the Doctors, I was forced to
hold on my Correspondencies with my Ignatian Brethren, whom I durst not quite
fall off from, till our Discovery had got so much credit as to afford me a
Protection against their malice.

And this that I so much desired, was soon after by a strange accident (I
question not but ordered by Providence, as well for the preservation of the
Kingdom as my self) effectually brought to pass; for being one day at the
Provincials house, where several Ignatians were attending to receive their
Orders, I was standing without the Door, and heard them discoursing together
about disposing of a Person, whom they designed to take off; some of their
Expressions were these: [This man has betrayed us, we will give 20 l. to a
Coach man to take him up, who by by-ways shall carry him to one of the five
Ports, and when we have got him beyond Sea, we will force him by tortures to
confess who had been with the King and informed him of the business] I
presently imagined (especially having been so lately under the suspicion of the
Provincial himself) who it was they intended, and therefore thought it high
time to break off from them, and to go on with my Discovery, seeing I was my
self discovered, and in danger of being made away by them; wherefore concluding
it was not safe for me to stay longer there, I pulled off my Shoes, that I
might make no noise in my retreat, and softly crept down stairs, and got clear
out of Doors; glad was I to be thus delivered out of the hands of my
treacherous Companions, but durst not for that night go home to my Lodging,
which was too well known to them, but concealed my self at another place. The
next night I ventured, when it was something late, to go to my old Lodging to
fetch some necessaries that I wanted; but the mischievous Varlets had so
waylaid me, that I was set upon by one of them before I got thither, and had
certainly been murdered, had not Providence sent in some persons timely to my
rescue, by whose kind assistance I did for that time get clear of my
blood-thirsty Enemies, and resolving now wholly to quit my old Lodging, I
repaired to the Pegasus in the Royal Ville, where I met my trusty Friends, the
Doctor and the noble Colonel, and by their persuasions (for my better
concealment) took up my quarters for some time in that place.

CHAP. VI.
The Doctor and Phileroy make their Discovery to the King and Council, and are
taken into the King's Protection; The Author's Vision of the Murder of Sir
Edmond; Another of the Grand Senates Sitting. The Author meets Phileroy with
some Priests that he had seized. Phileroy gives him an account of his seizing
the Physician, and his Examination before the Council; the Secretary seized and
examined. Phileroy gives the Author a full account of Sir Edmonds Murder, and
the Practices of the Petropolitans to conceal it. The Murder stangely
discovered.

IMpatient we were all now to have this great affair dispatched, and many
attendances made upon the Grand Cashier to give in such farther Informations,
as we had prepared to that purpose, but with no success till the other night we
received a Summons by one of His Greatness's Servants, to appear jointly before
the Royal Council, in order to which having got our several Informations with
Copies of them fairly drawn up, we went before the worthy Magistrate that took
our first, and swore to them before him, and at his request (having had none of
them before) we left one Copy of the said Informations with him. It was his
Loyaly that did him move
To have the account of this damned Mystery
But little thought the keeping them would prov^
The Occasion of his future Tragedy.


D Oats Sieznig of Jesuits



Execution of a Traitor



Reading standin in The Pillory.



(...) petus of my imagination, carried some distance into the fields adjoining
to the North parts of the City, in a dark and gloomy night; but Extasied
persons (like Cats) see as well by night as day, and the shades of darkness
hinders not their enlightened Fancies from making their Discoveries; I drew
near (in my Vision) to a little Hill much frequented by the Citizens in the
Summer season, which takes its name from a sort of Flowers that grow up there
in great abundance; and falling into a little Road that led to it, I perceived
a person on horseback Riding a slow foot-pace, with three or four men walking
after him; the Horseman held up in his Arms, a Tall Man in black Clothes, who
was seated before him, with his Legs hanging down on each side the Horse; but
to my apprehension they strutted out as stiff as the wooden Legs of a Cripple,
without any bendings, and the rest of his body as free from motion as his Legs;
he seemed to me more like a Larva or Spectrum, than a living creature; I knew
not what to make of this Vision; but by and by I heard one of the Footmen that
followed crying out to him on Horseback, to Have a care of the Dead Man, that
be did not make his escape from him. I imagined by this Expression laid
together with what I observed before, that this was indeed a Dead Man, that had
been lately murdered by these fellows; and that they were carrying him to some
private place to bury him, so to avoid suspicion of his being murdered. To
resolve my self of which, I went after them to a place on the aforesaid Hill
where they all staid; and taking down the dead Carcass, they laid it in a
little Ditch, near to a Common Path that led that way, and then one of them
drawing a Sword, that he carried in his hand out of the Scabbard, I saw him run
it through the dead person, leaving it sticking in his Body, but no blood
followed the wound that I could perceive, by which I concluded that he was
indeed dead, and that this last was not the mortal thrust, but given upon some
other design; but what that was I could not guess: I perceived moreover that
they took the Scabbard belonging to the Sword, and the Gloves of the Murdered
Person, and laid them together upon the bank of the Ditch, just by him; which
having done, they all marched off together the same way they came: One of them
saying as they went [I wish we had an hundred such Rogues as secure as we have
this.] I could not yet tell what to make of these passages, but imagined it to
be some notorious piece of Villainy, which time would hereafter bring to light;
but I was not my self for the present able to do it; upon their departure, my
Visions carried me through unknown Tracts in the Air back to my Lodging, where
I had now a new Subject for my musing Thoughts to work upon.

The Town appeared to me now like a Swarm of Bees; its Inhabitants in swarms
hurrying and humming up and down, having their peaceful Repose disturbed by the
breaking out of this Discovery of a Plot, which filled all things with noise,
tumult and distraction.

In these Ecstasies I seemed one time to be transported into the most glorious
place that ever mine Eyes beheld; it was a spacious Room, hung round with rich
Tapestry, at the upper end of which, upon a stately Throne was seated Our Great
Albonian Monarch in his Royal Robes, and the Imperial Crown encircling his
sacred brows, which rendered his presence very august and awful; round about him
on both sides were seated an illustrious company of Grandees, in most
magnificent Robes, with Coronets on their heads, which I concluded was the
Peerage of the Realm; and this to be the Upper Order of the Great Senate or
Assembly of Estates convened in this place, amongst whom all things relating to
the Interest of King and Kingdom, are first judiciously consulted, and then
such Votes, Orders and Acts passed thereupon, as they think needful to the
purpose.

At the Bar, at the lower end of the House, whom should I see standing but my
friend Phileroy, who I perceived was now upon his Examination before that Great
Assembly concerning the matters of his Examination given in to the King; I was
glad to see things brought to this ripeness, that now not only the King, but
Nation too (the People whereof were representatively included in this great
Assembly) should be acquainted with this Hellish Conspiracy, and that it now
lay before them whose united Wisdoms could not fail finding out the Mysteries
of it, and their powers as well serve them to make provisions against the
Autho^s of the Design. Methoughts I lift up my heart in a hearty prayer for a
blessing upon their proceedings, and here my Vision terminated in a strange
transport of joy and admiration, upon the consideration of the Divine goodness
so evidently appearing in these hopeful beginnings.

Some time after methought I was walking about the West parts of the City,
where I met with a crew of Matchmen and Soldiers that guarded along three or
four persons, whose dejected looks well enough showed what their Condition was;
One of them (looking wistly in his face) I knew to be a Petropolitan Priest,
one of those that came over with us from Strombolo. I was glad to see these
Beasts of prey to be taken in our Toils; but did not presently understand who
it was that chased them thither, till hearing a voice behind me crying out,
look well to your Prisoner. I looked back and saw one following them dressed
after the Mode of the Albonian Clergy and followed at a small distance by a
party of the Royal Guards, observing him more wistly, I knew him to be
Phileroy, I did not so much wonder at his Divinity Habit, as knowing he had
Title to it by those sacred Orders which he had taken up in Albonia before he
fell in with the Petropolitans; the Guards I imagined were those allowed him
for his defense in those dangerous Services; notwithstanding his have and
business, I could not forbear speaking to him, but his have would not permit
him to parley with me, only taking me by the hand he whispered me in the Ear,
that he would meet in the Evening at the usual place, and treat me with a feast
of Wonders. I expected indeed, having not had his company a considerable time
since, to be now extraordinarily treated with accounts of things which I
perceived began to work now very briskly; so with much seeming impatience, and
with a world of fancies, that like Atoms fluttered up and down in my heated
brains, I dreamed away the time till Evening, and then posted to the place
where I was to meet with Phileroy.

He had got thither (luckily) before me, and I found him with his Royal Guard
of Partisans about him, and a Bottle of Wine upon the Table, which after I had
saluted the Company, we drank about, Phileroy being pleased at that time (tho a
thing not usual with him) to begin an health which was to the Preservation of
His Majesty's Royal Person and Government against the Plots of the
Petropolitans. This Health was echoed with hearty Amens, and as cheerfully
pledged by all the Company, amongst whom it went round, and was lastly pledged
by my self; after which Phileroy taking me by the hand, told his Guards that he
had some private business for which he must withdraw from them for a little
time into the next Room, bidding them in the mean time to make much of
themselves, so we withdrew together; and being by our selves, Phileroy told me,
that to make good his word to me, he had with much difficulty got loose from
his business, which said he, at this time lies very hard upon me; for having
made my Discovery to the King and his Councils, they have ordered me to pursue
the Chase of these Petropolitan Vermin till I have brought them into their
Toils, and so to the Tribunals of Justice to receive the Reward of their
Treasons; and when you met me in the morning, I had been upon the hunt, and
seized one crafty old Fox (a Priest) in his kennel, together with two other
Petropolitans, whom I carried before the Council, and having proved my charge
against them, they were by Order of that Sacred Board committed to the Den of
Thieves, the fittest receptacle for such Cattle. But to proceed in my Narrative
of the State of things since we were last together, I then told you that upon
my Discovery the King was graciously pleased to allow me a Guard for my defense
(as you see I am now attended with) otherwise it had been impossible for me to
have ventured upon discovering of the traitorous gang (which was the province I
was now enjoined to) without apparent danger to my own Life; yet being thus
guarded, and as well defended within by my own Innocence, I have made many bold
Sallies into the retreats of my abjured Friends, but now revengeful Enemies,
and have not left till I have left them in the hands of Justice. The first I
seized were some of my old Companions of the Ignatian Order; they called me
Achitophel, Judas, Renegade, Apostat^, and what not; I gave them leave to speak
their Will, it being the Privilege of losers, as I saw plainly they were like
to be in this Bargain: After these proceedings according to the Method of my
Informations, I went on with the rest in Order; the next being the Physician
before mentioned, I got a Summons from the Privy Council for him to appear
before that Board, where I justified my charge against him of his Undertaking
to poison the King, and did prove it by a Letter under the hand of Provincial
Blancpain to one of the Confederates, that he had, for the Reward of 15000 l.
undertaken to do it, and that 5000 l. of the said Money had been already paid
him (as an earnest) by the Secretary; The Defense he made for himself was
nothing to the purpose, or any denial of the fact, but only an insolent kind of
boasting of his Loyalty to the King, expressed in some former Services done by
him; what those Services were I knew not, but what the present Service was I
knew so well, that I hoped he would be rewarded according to his deserts;
however for that time he got off impune, but some littte time after was taken
into Custody, and committed Prisoner to the Den of Thieves, amongst the rest of
his Companions.

Next after him, I proceeded against the Petropolitan Secretary (the chief
Engineer in this Plot) and having got an Order to search his house, we seized
on some of his Papers, and brought them to the Council, before whom (hearing
there was a Warrant out against him) he voluntarily appeared, and bore the
brunt of the Articles I charged against him with a true Petropolitan Courage,
that is, with impudence and slighting. However the Council thought fit to
deliver him into the hands of the Lictors, and afterward ordered him to the
Den of Thieves; some farther Discovery being made of other of his Papers of a
very dangerous Consequence, the consideration whereof was left to a Committee
of Lords appointed for that purpose.

Then I proceeded against the Petropolitan Advocate, whom I caused to be
apprehended and imprisoned with the rest.

The Petroplitans perceiving me so active in my Discoveries, and yet that I was
but one single Witness (which is an Evidence too little in Law to convict in
cases of Treason) began to grow insolent, and to brazen it out with Lies and
Falsehoods vouched (by some powerful Friends, that they had got in to their
Interest) that there were no Plot on foot; or if there were, it was not theirs,
but rather the Dissenting Christians; nay, to strengthen their design, they
wanted not some of the Christian party themselves (men unworthy that Title)
that counting it a piece of Gentility to be singular in their fancies, spared
not their Endeavors to elude the belief of it, by turning the whole truth
thereof into jest and ridicule: Notwithstanding which, their Artifices to
conceal their Designs, it pleased God so to order it, that in a little time
they discovered themselves in a piece of Villainy of undeniable proof against
them,

For their Actings being influenced, as well by Revenge as Interest, they
contrived now how to wreak their spite upon that worthy Magistrate, that
received our Informations, and took our Oaths upon them, whose life they
resolved should now pay for that Service.

To which end having waylaid him several days together by some of their
party, whom they had confederated to that purpose, they dogged him (that day
they acted their Tragedy upon him) from place to place, from Morning till
Night, till they had fixed him at a certain place near the Queens Palace, where
their Confederates were, and where they designed to dispatch him, and then went
to prepare their fellows for the bloody Undertaking against he should (as he
must of necessity) come by that way. They had so laid their Design, that one of
them, being a Priest, and another should begin a Quarrel, just as notice should
be given that the Justice was coming by, as a means to draw him down to them,
which Design of theirs accordingly took effect; for the Rogue that watched for
him at the Gate leading down to the Queens Stables seeing Sir Edmond coming,
presently dispatched notice to the other two to begin their pretended Fray, and
that being himself well known to the Justice (as having frequented his House
some time on purpose to find an opportunity to mischief him) he confidently
went up to him, and telling him there were two Persons in the Yard below that
had begun a quarrel, and he was afraid, if they were not suddenly parted, would
murder one another; and therefore earnestly desired him to go down to them,
supposing his presence, as a Magistrate, would cause them to leave off. Sir
Edmond was loath to engage himself in the business, it being not so proper for
him, as a Justice, to intermeddle with Frays, as to punish them, besides the
lateness of the night (he being an orderly person and keeping good hours at
home) might have excused him from so troublesome an Office; notwithstanding all
which he was overcome by the importunity of this Ruffian, to walk along with
him to the place where the Fray was, which was near to the rails over against
the Queens Stables, and a kind of scuffle was there in Mockery made a show of,
but no sooner did the innocent Gentleman begin to interpose his Authority to
part them; but the Scene was presently altered, and that rage and Fury that
they pretended against each other, was now turned upon him; these two together,
with that villainous Judas that betrayed him to them, and another of their
Com-rogues falling altogether upon him, got him down upon the Ground, and
taking a Neckcloath or Cravat that he wore about him, and twisting it about his
Neck, they pulled the Ends thereof so hard, that they soon throatled him, and
by that means, and some other violences they used toward him, they deprived
him of Life, and left him a senseless Carcass prostrate at their murderous
feet: The News of this Tragedy was not presently known; but being missed two or
three days without any tidings come to his house of him, it was concluded by
all that knew how zealous and concerned he was against the Petropolitan
Plotters, that they had by some means or other murdered him; for the better
Discovery of which, the King himself, as well out of a Princely abhorrency of
such an horrid Fact, as the affection he had to this worthy Magistrate for the
services he had done him, caused his Royal Proclamation to be issued out,
commanding a strict search and enquiry to be made about it, and promised a
great Reward to any that should discover the murder (if any were) besides a
Pardon to the Discoverer, if concerned in it.

This Alarm netled the Petropolitans to some purpose, and put them to their old
shifts of Evasion and dissimulation; so that now they spread reports about the
Town, that Sir Edmond was gone a journey into some remote Country, to be
married to a great Lady, and took the confidence to name her.

But it pleased God (who seldom (if ever) leaves Murders undiscovered, or
unpunished) in a little time to reveal the Mystery of this Villainy to the
World; for not long after the fact two or three persons walking over the fields
upon the Northside of the City, near to a certain Hill there, well known to,
and frequented by the Towns men, they discovered lying in a Ditch, the Body of
a man, habited like a Gentleman or Scholar in black clothes, his Perriwig,
Gloves, and Scabbard of his Sword lying upon the bank by him, and a Sword run
through his Body, but without any blood appearing; surprised at this tragical
Sight, and knowing it was fit there should be a legal Enquiry made into the
causes of it, they found out an Officer of the Peace whom they brought to the
place, and from thence conveyed by them to another place, where the Body might
be more conveniently viewed by those that came to see it.

It is remarkable that his Rings, Watch, and some Moneys both Gold and Silver
were found in his Pockets, which should evidence that he was not murdered by
Thieves or Robbers, but that it was done either out of revenge by some others,
or in discontent by himself.

The Petropolitans as well to excuse themselves, as out of a farther Revenge to
him, by taking away his Good-name as they had done his Life, would have fixed it
upon the latter, and to that end they had left his own Sword sticking in his
Body, but without any Blood appearing to be let out by it; nor did they spare
to confirm this suspicion with reports about the Town, that Sir Edmond being a
melancholy man, had in a fit of Discontent acted this Murder upon himself.

But it pleased God upon this Discovery of his Body, to bring things so about,
that in a short time both his Innocence was cleared, and their Villainy detected.

The rumor of this Murder being quickly spread about the Town, drew many
people to the place, out of curiosity, to see the murdered Body, of whom
several of them that were acquainted with him in his life time, knew it to be
the Body of Sir Edmond; whereupon his mournful Relations upon notice of it,
took him into their Custody, in order to bestow upon him (as he deserved, and
afterward had) a decent and becoming Funeral.

CHAP. VII.
Captain Lobed comes in a Discoverer. The Queens Goldsmith seized, as one of
Sir Edmond's Murderers; His Confession and Discovery. The Author's Vision of
Staley's Ghost; the Narrative of his Treasons and Sufferings. The Author in a
Vision meets the Ghost of the Secretary, with whom he travels to Strombolo. A
Court there holden by Radamanthus; the Secretary, and other Albonian Traitors,
that were executed for their Treasons, examined by him, to whom they give an
account of their Sufferings, and are all sent to Purgatory.

THis Narrative of Phileroy's put me in mind of my late Vision, which hereupon
I acquainted him with, and concluded by the congruity of Circumstances, that
this was the very person that I saw then carried dead before a man on
Horseback, and afterward laid in a Ditch, and his Sword by one of them run
through him and left in his Body.

And all this, said Phileroy, has happened to be true, as has been since
proved by some unexpected Evidences, that God by his providence has raised to
confirm the truth of it. The first whereof was one Captain Lobed, sometimes a
retainer to one of the Petropolitan Lords, and by him recommended to some of
the chiefs of that party beyond the Seas, where he had got so much credit
amongst them (especially the Ignatian Order) that they employed him, as their
Agent in several Negotiations about the present Plot, carrying Letters into
foreign parts where the business required, and other Services; by which means
he came to have an understanding of their present Designs.

He continued thus a Servant to them till after the time that I had made my
Discovery, when being jealous lest he also should become a Discoverer, they
obliged him by taking the Sacrament and the Oath of Secrecy once a week, to
continue faithful to them.

And then treated with him about their Design to murder Sir Edmond B. an^ to
get an acquaintance with him upon tha^ account, and told him that there w^ 4000
l. offered, by the Petropolitan Lord whom he had served, to any person that
should effect it, which was to be paid by the Petropolitan Secretary; but he
out of a natural principle of honesty, abhorring their Designs, still failed
them at the times appointed, only once was present with the rest of the
confederates at their request, to see the Murdered Body, where he took notice
of the persons concerned in it, and understood something of their Proceedings;
but being disturbed in his mind about it, he retired to a City on the Western
parts of Albonia, whence he dispatched Letters to one of the Royal Secretaries;
upon which he was sent for back to Londinopolis, and made his Discovery which
(notwithstanding that he and I had never any acquaintance or knowledge of each
other) agreed so exactly with mine, that it got a better credit to the Belief,
and proved a greater Confirmation of the present Plot.

After this, one of the Confederates in the aforesaid Murder, by Trade a
Goldsmiths, and servant to the Royal Consort, having, before the aforesaid
Murder, in a Coffee-house offered to defend the case of some Petropolitan
Traitors that had been lately executed, and being himself known to be a
Petropolitan, fearing to be called in question about what he had said, did
therefore abscond himself for two or three days from his house. But some time
after, a quarrel happening betwixt him and one of his Neighbors, who
understood by a Servant of his, that the time of the Goldsmith's absconding was
about the time of Sir Cdmond's Murder. He went presently to the Council, and
charged him as a Confederate in that Design: A Warrant was issued out against
him to answer the Charge, upon which he appeared, and Captain Lobed being
present, knew him again to be one of the persons concerned in the said Murder,
and swore it against him; whereupon he was by Order committed to the Den of
Thieves; but the next day made a Discovery of the Design, and the Persons
concerned in it; who were thereupon taken into Custody. Yet, although the
Petropolitans had prevailed so far with him, as to deny what he had said, the
Impulses of his own Conscience, besides the promise of a Pardon and Reward to
any that should make a Discovery of it, by the Kings Proclamation, obliged him
to assert the truth of his first Information, (which he has since published to
the World) and therein gave an account, how that after they had strangled Sir
Edmond, as I before told you, they conveyed him into the Palace where they
kept him (shifting the Body out of one Room into another for the more privacy)
for two or three days till they had an opportunity to remove him to the place
where they designed to leave him.

The Evening that they designed to remove him, having got the Soldiers that
attended at the Court Gates out of the way, at a drinking match that they had
provided for them, they had hired a Sedan, into which they put the murdered
Body; and two of them carrying it out of Town, late at night, when few people
were stirring, at the Towns end they set the Body upon an horse, with which one
of them was there ready, and with two or three more of their Confederates, that
walked a foot by them, they carried him in that manner that you saw him in your
Vision, to the place where he was afterward discovered, as I have told you.

This Witness has discovered the Ruffians engaged in this Murder, the
principal of whom, being Vernatti, is since fled, as also two other Priests
concerned in it, but three of them that were actual instruments in the Murder,
one of them being the Porter at the Court Gates, and two others that were
there, Servants to the Royal Consort, have since been taken into Custody, and
at the Petition of the Great Senate, a Court of Justice summoned by the King,
before whom they have been tried, and by many undeniable proofs brought against
them by the aforesaid Witness, and others that came in against them, they were
legally convicted and condemned, and have since received the just reward of
their horrid and unparalled Villainy at the Tiburnian Trident.

The Body of this martyred Worthy, attended by the Magistrates of the City, and
many of the Nobility and Gentry in a numerous company, was carried to one of
the principal Churches in the West parts of the City, where, after an elegant
Oration made upon the Occasion, by an eminent Prelate of the Albonian Church,
it was with many Tears and Lamentations afterward decently interred.

An Honest, Worthy, Loyal Magistrate,
Who was the Proto-Martyr for the State;
His Death preserved our Lives by pointing out
The cursed Designs the Papists were about.
The Justice as an Enemy to their Cause
Must dye; could they as well have killed the Laws,
Oh, happy Rome! how would the Devils Brats
Insult, and we no Laws nor Magistrates
To punish them; The Sword of Justice yet
Is keen, and we have men to manage it,
And maugre all the Plots they have devised,
All are not Godfrey'd yet, nor Arnoldis'd,
His Name shall live, and we shall live to see
Their Plots to end in their own Tragedy.
The murder of this Loyal Gentleman gave so great a light to the Discovery of
the Petropolitan Designs, that the Great Senate of the Nation (being now met
together) were pleased to take notice of it, and after having examined me and
some other Evidences (that were summoned in) upon the particulars of the Plot,
they came to this unanimous Resolution which was recorded in their Iournals:
[That there has been, and is a damnable and hellish Plot contrived and carried
on by the Popish Recusants, for assassinating and murdering the King, and for
subverting the Government, and destroying the Protestant Religion by Law
established.]

This being made matter of Record by one of the three grand Estates of the
Kingdom, is a sufficient Confirmation to all the World, of the reality of the
Petropolitans Design against us.

But (said Phileroy) my Narrative having wasted time, I must be now obliged to
return to my Company, and leave the rest to the next Convenience we shall have
of meeting.

So for this time we brake up our Conference, and going back to the Company we
had left in the other room, we took a glass or two with them, and then friendly
parted.

It was not long after this meeting, that I was by the Impulse and Ecstasy of
these Visions, transported to a solitary place not far from the City, but near
adjoining to the Tiburnian Trident (become now sacred in the Eyes of the
Petropolitans, by the Martyrdom of their Confederates) where I discovered a
tall Person, halting and limping along in a strange untoward posture, and now
and then reeling, as if he were falling to the ground; I imagined that
something extraordinary was the cause of his disorderly motions, and that he
was either drunk, or troubled with some kind of Epileptick fits; to be resolved
of which, and out of Compassion to his Condition, I drew toward him, but going
to take hold of him, he flew from me like the Wind, and I took hold of nothing;
whereupon I concluded he was a Spirit, but being now my self an extasied
Person, I dreaded no apparitions, but pursued the Spectrum for a better
acquaintance.

Upon my next View of him, he began to make an hellish noise (that scarred me
ten times more than the sight of him) and withal his Tongue hanging out of his
Mouth, swelled, and of a loathsome black color; I saw him snapping it betwixt
his Teeth in a most cruel manner, so that the blood seemed to run about his
Jaws, and sometimes with one of his hands he seemed to tear and scratch the
other in the like unmerciful manner; his actions appeared to me a strange kind
of selfe-revenge, such like as the Petropolitans use to inflict upon themselves
in way of Penance, but for what cause, or to what purpose, I know not;
wherefore to be resolved, I asked him two or three Questions, which as soon as
he could get his mortified Tongue into his mouth, he civilly answered me,
First, I demanded what he he was -- He told me, he could not tell, but asked me
what I was, for he never saw any thing like an humane creature, since he came
out of the other World: Why, what World, said I, do you think we are in now? I
know not (replied he) but it is a strange World to me, having lost my friends,
company, estate, hopes; nay, and my body too all in an instant; your body man,
said I, why, what Body have you now? or have you any at all? I cannot tell,
replied he, what I am, or where I am; whatever form I appear in to you, you
need not fear me, for I assure you, I can neither bite nor scratch, having left
my body lately at the Tiburnian Trident, mangled by the hands of a cruel
Carnifico into four quarters; I took a sad leave of them, and what is become of
them I know not, being since become a Wanderer in shades of darkness, to find
out that place of light and happiness which the Petropolitans told me would be
the certain portion of all such as dyed in that Cause that I suffered for: Why,
said I then, were you a Petropolitan? Ay, replied he, or I had never left the
other world so untimely; it was my Zeal, my Zeal for their Cursed Cause -- and
with that he began to bite his Tongue afresh, and to rave at the rate he had
before done: I stayed with some trouble in my spirit till his passion was over,
and he began a little to recover himself; and then I asked him the meaning of
his biting his Tongue in that violent manner; he told me, it was but a just
Revenge he took upon that Member for betraying him to that Cursed End; but,
said he, to satisfy your Curiosity at once (for I perceive you are a stranger
to the affairs of the other world, as well as I am now:) I will tell you in
short the History of my Tragedy; I was upon Earth the Son of a Citizen of
Londinopolis. and a Petropolitan, and being educated and instructed in that
Religion, I betook my self for some time to travel, where I was farther
instructed in the Policies of that People, and of a Design they had laid
against my late native Country of Albonia, which I suppose is yet on foot,
although I am untimely taken off from seeing the end of it? Upon my return into
Albonia I was employed by my Father to look after the Cash which (he being by
trade a Goldsmith) was entrusted in, his hands by the Petropolitan Party; but
the Plot, for carrying on of which the said Money was treasured up, coming
unluckily to be Discovered; they began to call in their Moneys so fast, that I
began thereby to be perplexed and confused in my mind about clearing my
accounts with them; upon this I contracted such a spite and revenge in my mind
against the Albonian Government as the cause of this disaster, that I could not
forbear letting loose this cursed Tongue of mine one time amongst Company,
where I was overheard into these expressions which I then spoke in the
Franconian Lingua, my Consorts being of that Country [ The King of Albonia is a
grand Heretic, and the greatest Rogue in the World: There Is the Heart
(striking his hand upon his Breast) and here is the hand that will kill him my
self]

Some other words I spoke to the like purpose, treasonable enough; all which
being overheard by the Company in the next room: One of them, a Loyal
Gentleman, was so exasperated thereby, that he drew toward the room (where we
were) to have run me through with his Sword, and had done it, had not his
Friend interposed; so they spared me for this time to reserve me for a worse
punishment; for upon this they having enquired out my Lodging, presently went
and gave in their Informations of this passage, (for by the Laws of Albonia, no
man dares conceal Treason, as this was, under peril of his own Life) and
thereupon the next day being summoned to answer it before the King and his
Council, I was by them committed to the Den of Thieves, where I remained till
my Trial, and then upon clear proof made of the words spoken, (notwithstanding
I would fain have made my Tongue then to have loosened what it had tied before
by some Petropolitan Evasion) it was the opinion of the Court, that I deserved
to dye, and had Judgment accordingly passed upon me to be executed as a
Traitor, by strangling and dismembring of my Body, which Sentence has been
lately executed upon me; and now Bodiless as I am, I wander in these Shades to
find a rest: The little comfort I have is, that before this time my poor limbs
are disposed by my Friends in some quiet repository, that they may not remain
as standing Dishes for Kites and Crows to feed on. But Oh this Tongue, this
Tongue! (cried he) beginning then to rave again as before. I advised him;
seeing that noisy Instrument was so great a torment to him, to bite it off,
rather than to be troubled with the keeping of it, telling him withal that I
was going back to the other World, and if he thought good, would take it along
with me, and present it to some of his Petropolitan Friends, who, no doubt,
would dearly esteem it as a precious Relict. No, said he, it deserves no such
foolish honors, although such (for ought I can see) be the only Recompense
that the Petropolitan Church allows its Martyrs (as they call us) when they
suffer in its Cause. I will rather keep it to punish it for my own folly; and
with that gnashing upon it twice or thrice, as a Token of his Revenge, I heard
him give a shriek, and then presently disappeared.

Farewell thou poor deluded Ghost, farewell,
Stories unto the other World go tell
Of thine own folly, let this be thy Note,
I am the Caitiff that has cut my Throat
With my own Tongue, cursed be that Zeal that first
Inflamed it, and that devilish Cause be cursed
That caused it; Now the difference I feel
'Twixt sober Actions and a wrong-plac'd Zeal.
My Vision presently carried me back to the City, entering into which by one of
the Gates, methoughts I saw upon the battlements of it, fixed upon a long P^le,
the Arms and Shoulders of a Man, with many Spectators gazing at it; I supposing
it to be of the quarters of some Tra^^or lately executed, enquired of one of
the Bystanders whose it was; he told me it was the Goldsmith's that was lately
executed for speaking treasonable words against the King. Why, said I, were not
his quarters buried? Yes, replied the other, by the King's leave he was
suffered to be buried; but his Petropolitan Friends, to take of the ignominy
of his End, performed it with so much superstitious Devotion, besides the
extraordinary pomp of it, as if it had been the funeral of some great Saint, or
Worthy, rather than a Traitor; which being looked upon as an affront both to
the Government and Justice of the Nation: His Body was Ordered to be taken up
again, and the mangled quarters of it to be set up on some of the principal
Gates of the City, in such manner as this here is disposed of. I could not but
think nowhow the poor Ghost was cheated, thinking his Body might have been
suckling of Worms in some earthly repository, when alas (the thing he so much
abhorred) it was hung up for Birds meat.

I was, not long after, transported by a like Vision into a most dismal place,
and full of Horror, I expected I was then again in the Regions of the Dead, and
that I should meet some more Spectrums, as one I did, a proper comely Person to
look to, but in his motion, his limbs quivered and shook about him, as if they
had been hung on with wires, and his head, though he could not keep it from
wagging every way, yet he would often throw it up, and seem to look very
loftily about him; before I came near him, I heard him use this expression,
repeating it often with a stern and angry voice, There is no Faith in Man.
Where am I now? Is this the Reward of my service? Is this the Elysium of
Martyrs? or where shall I find it? But perceiving me now to draw near him, he
courteously saluted me with a [Comment portez vouz Monsieur] I imagined by his
dialect, together with his crinkling postures, that he was some Frenchified
Person, but looking wisely upon him, I knew him to be one that much used that
Lingua, and that he was the famous Petropolitan Secretary, whom I perceived
Justice had sent into those Shades to seek the Rewards of his Martyrdom, I
answered the civility of his salute with a bien, mercy Dieu, Mounsieur
Secretary, Why, said he (wondering at the appellation) Do you know me? very well
said I; I remember you at the Consult at Strombolo, and have often seen you in
Albonia, and am well acquainted with your History both of your services and
sufferings in the Petropolitan Cause; why then you are a Petropolitan, I
perceive, replied the Secretary; Are you a Martyr for the Cause? No, said I,
nor ever will be as long as I have life left me upon Earth to spend in better
services. The more Fool was I, said he, to lose my own life so simply, but it
was my dependence upon my great friends that made me hazard it so ventrously
(otherwise a free confession might have saved it) but they fearing I should
babble something to their prejudice, resolved to prevent me by leaving me to
the course of Justice, and slipping me out of the hands of their protection,
dropped me into that fatal Noose that brought me hither. Well, There is no Faith
in Man. But now that I am loosed from that treacherous Race of Mankind, what
company shall I have next, and where lies my way; Are you (Sir) acquainted with
these Countries? No, said I, I am a Stranger in them, being an Inhabitant of
the Earth, only was brought hither by an Extasi^ for a Diversion; however, as
long as my stay suffers me, I will bear you company in your way to whatever
place you are determined: Discoursing thus together in a moving posture, a
little farther we entered upon a Road, rising with a winding ascent, and well
beaten by Travelers; as we marched along, to divert the way, I desired my
limping Companion to give me an account of his Trial and Execution; for as to
the previous matters of his actings in the Petropolitan Service, I told him I
was already sufficiently acquainted with them. This my Request he readily
granted, and informed me, that at his Trial before the great Albonian Tribunal,
being charged with High Treason against the King and Government, his Papers
that were before seized by Phileroy, were produced in Evidence against him, by
which it appeared that he had on the behalf of his great Master held a strict
correspondence with the Confessor of the Franconian Monarch, to prevail with
that Prince for moneys to carry on the Petropolitan Designs, and by keeping off
the Great Senates Sitting, to preserve the Great Dukes title undisturbed until
such time as they could rid the King out of the way, by the contrivances of
those that were designed to do it; That it was farther proved against him, that
to expedite the taking off the King, and to encourage the Design, he gave money
himself, and promised great sums in the behalf of others, to such as should
attempt it; for which, and several other acts of the like nature, which he
thought to be highly Meritorious, in respect it was for the Petropolitan Cause,
he was by the Judgment of the Court condemned to suffer as a Traitor; which
Sentence was shortly after accordingly Executed upon him, although he depended to
the very last gasp upon the kindness of his Great Friends to free him from it;
but how he was rewarded for these his sufferings and services, he was yet to
seek.

At the Conclusion of this Discourse I heard a crackling noise, and perceived
the glimmerings of some fiery irruptions ascending as 'twere out of the Earth,
which made me think we might be now again at (the place we lately came from)
Strombolo, and so it was as it happened; for as we drew nearer, I perceived the
passage into the Purgatorian Confines, where a Scout standing ready presently
seized upon the Secretary, and hurryed him into it: I was my Self so secured by
the Magic of my Visions, that I dreaded no dangers either from Flesh or
Spirit, and so boldly ventured in after him, where in the Great Room where the
Consult was formerly held, I perceived a company of Sooty Feinds like Lictors,
or Officers of Justice, with Whips, Chains and Fetters, walking up and down the
Room, expecting Orders: For it seems there was a Court held there; At this time
Rhadamanthus, the Judge of that Place, sitting in great State at a Table in his
fiery Purple, to Try the Prisoners that should be brought before him. At the
same Board I saw the Great Bishop (with some of his Scarlet Senate, all now in
black) sitting in a very melancholy and dumpish posture, I imagined it was for
that their Designs succeeded no better in Albonia. The Officer bringing up his
Prisoner to the Board, he imagined, I suppose, that they were holding another
Consult, and so was going to take his place as Secretary, and sit down amongst
them: But the Lictor pulling him back, carried him before Rhadamanthus, telling
him, the case was now altered; and that he was not there now as Secretary, but
as a Prisoner; and that he must answer to the Judge there such Questions as he
should be demanded; who presently demanded of him for what Cause he came
thither, he told him, for being over-credulous in confiding to his deceitful
friends, but he hoped the Great Bishop (turning himself toward him) would not
prove one of them, having performed such signal duty in the services he was
employed in, and for which he was rewarded as a Traitor, with a bitter and
severe Martyrdom; the accounts of all which to the purpose of what is before
related, he fully gave them, and hoped, that upon the merits of the same, he
should be condignly rewarded, as he was all along made to believe he should, if
ever Fate brought him to that Condition: The Great Bishop shook his head a
little in way of compassion, telling him, he was sorry for his sufferings, and
that thereby they had lost the benefit of his future services, but that he
might thank his own Folly in being so over-credulous in trusting to the Faith
of Man, when he knew the Petropolitans used theirs no farther than their
Interest served: However, knowing him to be one of an ambitious humor, he
would in requital of his past-services, desire of Rhadamanthus the Judge, to
prefer him, and that he might be promoted to the place of Secretary in Chief to
Don Lucifero, which at the Grand Viccars Request was accordingly granted; and
thereupon he was led away by the Officer toward the Sulphurian Palace, to
take possession of his New Office.

No sooner was the Secretary carried off, but in comes another (led by a
L^ctor) who I perceived was the Gentleman I first met in the Regions of the
^ead, champing the Bit (with his Tongue betwixt his Teeth) as when I first saw
him: Rhadamanthus demanding of him whence he came, he told him, from the
Tiburnian Trident, where he received his Martyrdom for the Petropolitan Cause:
The Great Bishop then asked him, what services he had done them, he answered,
that he confessed that the greatest services he had done, was with his t, t,
Tongue, in treasonably speaking his intentions of Cutting off the Albonian
King, that it was that cursed t, t, Tongue that said it. In pronouncing which,
he g^^shed his Tongue with his Teeth so vehemently, that he could not speak
without stammering: But the Viccar replied, That his service was so slender, as
no great reward could be due to it; and that tho he was to be commended for his
Zeal, yet he deserved to be punished for his folly, for looking to his Tongue
no better; and therefore left him to the sentence of the Judge, who presently
ordered him to be carried down to Purgatory, which was done accordingly.

Next after him were brought up the three bloody Murderers of the Albonian
Justice. They gave in a large account of their Services and Sufferings, in so
much that the Great Bishop himself began to plead in favor of them; but
Rhadamanthus was so incensed, that the Violence was done to a Magistrate, that
he resented it as an affront to himself, being one in that place, and therefore
ordered their Lictors to carry them away, and to punish them severely as
Contemners of Justice; upon hearing their Sentence, they all fell a howling
most terribly, and hung an arse, as loath to leave the place; but Volentes
Nolentes, the Lictors hurried them away: For they must needs go whom the Devil
drives.

The Great Bishop seemed somewhat displeased at the severity of this Sentence
but Rhadamanthus told him, that if he suffered his Martyrs to come to receive
their Rewards from him, they should expect no better.

Afterward came up three other Ruffians, Tiburnian Martyrs also: Their names,
as they gave them in to the Judge, were Bogland, Ringepick, and Wood. These
were the Villains that undertook to take away the sacred Life of the Albonian
Prince; two of them viz. Bogland and Ringepick were Priests, the other a
Layman. The account they gave of their Services, was to this effect: That at a
Grand Consult held in Londinopolis, a Resolve being there drawn up by the
Petropolitans for the killing of the King, they three had subscribed the same,
and resolved to attempt it: Bogland being to contrive the way of doing it, and
the other two to execute it; for which Services (when performed) one of them
was to receive 1500 l. the other 30000 Masses, amounting to the like value.

That in pursuance of this Resolve, they two having armed themselves with short
Guns, fit for the purpose, did once attempt to shoot the King walking in his
Park near the Palace of St. Jacques; but the party that was to fire, perceiving
theflint of his Carabine to be loose, durst not attempt it, for which neglect
as it was esteemed, the party was pennanc'd by his Superior with twenty or
thirty stro^ks of Discipline, yet they resolved to proceed with their Design,
but could never find an opportunity to do it.

That they afterward were taken by Phileroy, who being revolted from the
Petropolitans, had now discovered their Designs and Parties concerned in them
to the King himself. Pox take him (quoth the Viccar, biting his nails for
madness) that Rogue has undone us all.

That being brought to their Trials before the Tribunal of Justice, Phileroy
and one Lobed a Renegade Discoverer, both of them formerly Messengers to the
Consults, appeared against them, and gave in full proof of the aforesaid
particulars, upon which (notwithstanding they did in vain endeavor to
invalidate their Evidence by slanders raised against them) they were by the
Justice of the Court condemned as Traitors, and were accordingly executed;
Bogland and Wood first, and Ringepick some time after, by strangling and
dismembring.

That at their Deaths they were so careful not to betray the Cause they dyed
for, that they rather ventured upon the Displeasure of the great Jehovah, by
dying with a Lie in their Mouths, in denying the fact, than to incur His
Viccarship's Displeasure, or to prejudice his Cause by an untimely Confession;
and therefore hoped His Unholiness would grant them the rewards of Martyrdom,
and give them the turn of his Key to let them into Paradise.

The Viccar, who could hardly forbear smiling under his Hat, to see the folly
of his deluded Martyrs, told them gravely, that indeed he was sorry to see them
there; for that they had mistaken their way, and instead of Paradise they were
come to Purgatory; but however neither could he make use of his Key if they
were at the Gates of Paradise; for that the Wards of the Lock that should open
them were lately altered, upon some distaste taken there at their violent
proceedings against the Christians, so that he could not open them, till such
time as he could procure another Key.

-- Which Key His Viccarship will find
When Rome turns honest, or the Devil blind.
However he told them that as they had lost their Rewards on Earth, by their
not performing what they had undertaken; so they could not expect to be
otherwise rewarded here than as Bunglers, in betraying a Design which they
should have executed, Thus right or wrong the Viccar saves his Bacon,
By telling all his Friends they are mistaken.
and so leaves them to the Judgment of Rhadamanthus, who presently orders his
Ianizaries to convey them to the Fiery Garrison, where he told them there was a
very warm room provided for Regicides, and they should have Entertainment
accordingly, besides the Society of some of their Albonian Country men, as
Guido Faur, Ravillaie, and others of the King killing crew, who had been long
his Prisoners, and, he questioned not, would be glad of their Company. This was
all the Comfort they could get in this place; so they were carried away after
their fellows.

However it was no small pleasure to me to see my old acquaintance, these
Strombo^^^^s returned hither in this manner instead of making their public
Orations at Petropolis, as they expected.

Some small time after these, was produced another crippled Martyr, one of the
Hangman's jointed Babies, whose Limbs hung about him like wire works, by reason
of his late dismembring at his Execution, yet a grave comely person to look on:
upon view of his Countenance I knew him to be the Petropolitan Advocate. At his
coming up, seeing them sit in form of a Court, and that he was to be tried
before them, he began like a Lawyer to put questions to them, demanding of them
Quo Warranto they sat, and what Jurisdiction they claimed, and that if they
had any thing there to charge him with, he had already made satisfaction upon
Earth, upon an Execution executed upon his Body, Limbs and Members, and
therefore demanded the Judgment of the Court, si ulterius implitetur, with such
like canting terms, which the judge Rhadamanthus heartily laughed at, who told
him, that though they had several of his Profession in that Place, yet they
used no other Law there but their own, by which he was now to be tried; and
therefore without more ado required him to give an account for what cause he
was brought thither.

The Advocate turning his head, and seeing the old Viccar sitting at the other
end of the Board, enquired if he were in Commission as a Judge there, or no;
Rhadamanthus answered him no; he was only an Associate, and that he himself was
the sole Judge in that place, and that he must direct his Speech to him, which
the Advocate after a formal cringe accordingly did, beginning thus.

May it please your Lordship (or) Devilship, if it please you. I was, while
upon Earth, Advocate to the Petropolitans, and retained by them at the Consult
here lately holden, to be assistant to them in their present Designs; pursuant
to which, since my return into Albonia, I performed them these Services; as
namely, by contriving Settlements of such Estates as they had purchased, in
such Dispositions as they might be secured of the same; by, holding
Correspondence with the Franconian Confessor; by encouraging the Designs and
Agents employed for the killing of the King; by taking care of delivering out
the Commissions granted by His Viccarship to the Petropolitan Lords, and others
of Places and Offices conferred upon them; by procuring 6000 l. of the
Benedictine Fraternity for carrying on of the Cause; in the interim of these my
Endeavors, the Plot being discovered by Phileroy, I was upon his Information
seized, and brought to my Trial, when upon his and other Witnesses, fully
proving the aforesaid matters against me, I was, according to the Albonian
Laws, condemned to suffer the penalties of High Treason, which was executed
upon me accordingly; yet at my Death I stoutly denied the fact, as I heard
those that had gone that way before me had done.

These were my services, and these have been my sufferings; for which I hope
and expect by your gracious suffrages, to receive the honorary Fee of Martyrdom.

Out upon it, cried Rhadamanthus, laughing heartily, a Fee for your Folly! we
have many Lawyers that are punished here for their knaveries done in the other
World, but none that I know for being thrust out of it by their own folly, as
you have been, and therefore for that, if not for your knavery, you must be
punished; so look to him Jailer, and then he was carried off.

At last to make up the full complement of Martyrs, were brought up the five
great Worthies of the Ignatian Order, who had been the most active and
stirring, in carrying on this Conspiracy, of all others (viz.) The Provincial
Blancpain, Father Courthar, Father Vanga, Father Wickefen, and Father Tornero,
all of them, as appeared by the tales they told there, were lately Executed
together at the Tyburnian Trident; I could but think with my self how gay and
jocund these Gentlemen were when I saw them last here consulting upon their
Designs, and now how pitifully they looked; they would fain have made their
application to his Viccarship, who at their coming up gave them a formal bow,
for old acquaintance sake; but Rhadamanthus perceiving it, angrily called to
them to come before him, looking at them the while, as they say the Devil looks
over Lincoln, as if he would devour them: For the Truth is, the Devil (however
sometimes they juggle together for their own ends) loves Priests and holy Water
both alike (i.e.) he cares not a Fart for either of them; as appears by the
sequel; for after they were forced to come before him, Father Vanga began in an
elegant discourse (as he was one indeed with a good stock of Eloquence) to set
forth the privileges of P^iesthood, and that as they were Spiritual Persons,
they ought to be tried by none but the Spiritualty, and therefore they appealed
to his Viccarship: Why, What the Devil do you make of me (says Rhadamanthus)
an Ass, or an Hobbyhorse? I will maintain it, I am more Spiritual than you, or
your Viccar himself; And where, I wonder, lies this precious Spirituality of
yours? in the Metaphysical embraces of your Beloved Courtezans in the
Seraphique pleasures of delicious drinking and feeding, or in the refined
morals of bloody and villainous practices, such as makes Hell it self to blush
at you for out-doing them in wickedness: Well, you see what your Spiritual
practices have brought you to; but indeed, had you been as truly Spiritual as I
am, you had saved your selves a Martyrdom, and cheated the Hangman of your
Quarters; but I will not be trifled with Gentlemen, and therefore come to the
business, and tell me plainly for what you came hither.

They seeing there was no trifling with this Angry Devil, did then severally
give accounts to him of their practices and Sufferings; which Practices, though
in some particulars they differed, yet in the main were complicated together,
as being joint Associates, that had the management and direction of the
inferior Undertakers. Blancpaine confessed (or rather boasted) that (as he was
Provincial) it was by his Authority and Order, that their grand Consult was
holden at the Blanc-cheval, where they jointly subscribed an Instrument of a
Resolve to take away the life of the King: Courthar alleged, that he was the
man that gave 80 Guinies to the Ruffians that were to Assassinate the King,
besides one Guiny to the Messenger that carried them to drink the Secretary's
health with? And that he did also give 2000 l. to the Physician that was to
poison the King; Vanga insisted upon his great Zeal, in stirring up, and
encouraging Villains to prosecute the King's Murder; and as soon as the Deed
was done, to charge it (as they have endeavored all along in other their
practices to do) upon the Christian Dissenters. The other two acknowledged they
were all along assisting and contriving with the rest for the carrying on of
the Design to Murder the King; that for these and the like practices they had
been apprehended and tried; and the truth of the aforesaid facts being
particular, and proved against them by several Witnesses, they were therefore
condemned and executed as Traitors; yet that at their Deaths they all stoutly
denied the Facts, that the Cause might not suffer by their doing otherwise; for
which act of courage at last they hoped they should be rewarded accordingly.

And that you shall, I assure you, quoth Rhadamanthus, ho, ho, ho, you are pure
Spiritual Villains a-faith, to think, because you can cheat the world with your
lies and Equivocations, that you can cheat the Almighty, who is Truth it self;
or dare to provoke his angry Vengeance with a dying Falsehood; or did you think
your Cheating Viccars Dispensations could reach to the other World? or that
Heaven would renew them? Poor Souls! how miserably are you cheated! I have no
more to say to you, but to pronounce your Sentence, that you be carried from
hence to the place where all Liars and Murderers have their portion. And so
farewell.

And now ye Petropolitans behold,
You that on Earth for Empire act and Gold,
What your Rewards will be,
On Earth the Fatal Tree,
Hereafter, horror, pain, and misery.
CHAP. VIII.
The Author leaves Strombolo. The Designs of the Petropolitans to cast the Plot
upon the Dissenters. The Author in the disguise of a Petropolitan scouting
abroad, meets with Phileroy, is like (by mistake) to be seized by him. Phileroy
taking him to his Lodging, gives him an account of several Plots laid against
him, and the success of them. Phileroy relates the Practices of an Advocate
against Captain Lobed, to corrupt his Evidence, who discovers the Design, and
brings the Advocate to condign punishment for it. The Death of Captain Lobed,
and his Confirmation then of the truth of his former Evidences. A Narrative of
Daravers sufferings, and his four years Imprisonment in the Royal Tower,
released thence by means of the Grand Senate. The coming in of Fitz Janny a
Discoverer. The Trials and Temptations he met with from his Relations, by
reason thereof, with some other passages relating to that story.

THus was the Exeunt of the poor deluded Petropolitan Martyrs, whose Delusions,
had they not been wilful, might have been the more easily excused; but, Si vult
populus decipi, decipiatur. They made pitiful rueful faces at their carrying
off, and Vanga nodding his head at the Old Fox, the Orand Viccar told him, that
as they had been his Friends upon Earth, he hoped this would be no long
parting, but that they should shortly have his company with them; to which his
Viccarship replied, That he did not desire it, and so they parted indeed for
this time, but for how long I know not* I perceived the Viccar was strangely
moved at the affronts Rhadamant is gave him, and that his pretended Power and
Authority should be so much contemned by him in the presence of his ^assals;
but not knowing which way to help himself, he was forced to endure it. The
Court staid some considerable time after, expecting others to be brought in;
but none appearing, Rhadamanthus calling his Officers to attend him, adjourned
the Court, and drew off, giving the Great Bishop, as he passed by him, a slight
Salute, telling him, that he hoped he would shortly come and give his friends a
Visit in his Territories, to which the other made no answer; but wishing his
Devilship good night, drew off also with his company, and departed: Whereupon
my Visions in this place being likewise finished, my Airy Genius, which was
always so much a friend to me in these Discoveries, as to transport me when,
and whither I pleased, did in the tenth part of a moment (according to the
flight of Spirits) bring me safe again to my own habitation at Londinopolis,
where, methoughts, conversing abodt the Town at the Exchange Coffee-houses, and
other places of Intelligence, out of Curiosity to hear how matters had passed
in my absence concerning the present Plot, I found by all reports, besides
Printed Papers, that my last Discoveries at Strombolo were real matters of
Fact, and true in all their Circumstances.

But for my better Information, till such time as I could meet with my old
friend Phileroy, who was my best Oracle in this affair, I fancied a Design to
walk sometimes in the dusk of the Evening incognito, under the disguise of a
Petropolitan, with a Rosary of Beads and Crucifix at my Girdle (the same that
Phileroy had bestowed upon me at Strombolo) to such places as I knew the
Petropolitans used to meet at, where, under this disguise, I got free
admittance into their companies, and understood their Designs; which
notwithstanding the late Discovery and Execution of the aforesaid Traitors, I
perceived they still carried on as vigorously as ever, only they were fain now
to alter their Scenes, and to act in Masquerade (hiding their Cloven Feet) and
pretending themselves to be Albonian Christians; when if their Designs should
chance to be discovered, they were to charge it upon the Dissenters, it being
now their chief Endeavor by Libelling in Print, by the means of some
Booksellers Fitz Tom Ekoot, and others (whom they had procured to serve them)
to take off the Plot (which was now so much noised through the World) from
themselves, and to charge it upon the Dissenters, as their sole and proper
Design and Practice.

One Night, as I was in my Fancy walking toward one of their haunts with my
Beads and Crucifix dangling about me, as I used to appear at such times,
methoughts I met my old Friend Phileroy, attended with his Royal Guard about
him, who, I suppose, was at his old Trade of Priest-hunting, so that I was
unwilling at this time to be taken notice of by him^, and therefore would have
avoided him by crossing the way; but he (by that little light that appeared)
perceiving the Trinkets at my Girdle, bobbing out at the waving of my upper
Coat, presently took me for a Petropolitan, and thereupon stopped my farther
motion, by laying hold on my Arm, and saying, Sir, you are my Prisoner. I was
troubled at the Surprise, not that I feared Phileroy, but because of his
Company, that upon these words began to draw about me, and whose presence, had
I been really such a one as I was taken for, I should have feared more than all
the Devils in Strombolo.

But Phileroy was as much surprised as I, when looking nearer in my face, he
perceived who I was; wherefore upon the sudden, to make the best of the matter,
he gave me an Embrace, putting one hand under my Coat, with which he privately
snatched off my Petropolitan baubles and put them in my Pocket; and then
turning him to his Guard, he told them I was indeed, and must be his Prisoner
for that night, but neither for Felony nor Treason, but upon the account of
Friendship, I being an old Friend of his and a good Christian; to which they
replied, God bless me; that if I was a Friend of his, they were sure I was no
Cnemy to the King or State, and had no more to say to me.

Phileroy had finished his Expeditions for this day, and was now returning to
his Lodgings in the Royal Palace, where for that night he would needs have me
to bear him company, which I did pretty willingly assent to, that I might after
a long absence recruit my self from him, of some farther particulars relating
to the present Plot.

As we walked along, Phileroy whispering me in the Ear, asked me for what
purpose I wore my Rosarie so openly, and whether I was in Jest or Earnest. I
told him I was no Heraclitus, neither in Jest nor Earnest, but betwixt both, of
which I would acquaint him farther at a more convenient opportunity.

Being arrived with him at his Lodgings in the Palace, and his Guards
dismissed, he and I sat down seriously over a Bottle of Wine that he had
ready, to discourse of the passages that had happened in this now overgrown
Plot since our last meeting: And first at his request I gave him an Account of
my late dreaming Voyage into Strombolo, and the passages I observed there in
the Trials, before Rhadamanthus, of the Albonian Traitors, that I understood by
them were here lately executed; as also the accounts they gave in of the
particular facts for which they suffered, asking Phileroy, he being (I
perceived by them) the principal Witness that was used against them, whether
their Informations were true as to the principal heads they delivered of the
causes of their sufferings; and he informed me they were; but wondering withal
what kind of Enthusiastic Spirit or Genius I was possessed with, that should
inform me so truly of things in Vision, which were really acted, and the
present Subject of all men's discourses.

I was, said Phileroy, (raised by providence to this grateful, though hazardous
office) the principal Witness made use of against them, which hitherto I have
managed with that success as has cleared the Truth, confounded their Designs,
and brought them to exemplary punishment.

Yet have I not managed this Province without apparent dangers and
difficulties, by means of the revengeful Petropolitans Designs against me,
interweaving their grand Plot against the State with others against me, (as
their most offensive Enemy) to invalidate my credit, by raising such malicious
Slanders upon me, as should render me a person not fit to be believed or
trusted.

To this End they had tampered with a Priest, being then a Prisoner in one of
our Town Gaols, and acquainted with the Petropolitan Lords, to endeavor to
corrupt (with promises of large Sums of Money) some particular persons, named
by them, to swear against me and Capt. Loved, such things as should be dictated
to them, which were in effect to oppose our Evidence, to scandalize us with
odious Crimes, and to charge the Plot on the dissenting Christians, as if they
were the principal Authors and Contrivers of it. The Name of this Priest was
Vile-Netter a Boglander, who was influenced and directed in this project by
another of the Fraternity, who lay committed in the same Gaol by a strange Name
that he had assumed for his Concealment; but was indeed Dominieo, one that has
been since discovered to have had an hand in the Murder of Sir Edmond.

The Persons they would have corrupted were two Gentlemen of good Repute, the
one an Alderman, and the other a Captain in Bogland, who having some former
acquaintance with this Vile-netter, when living there, and hearing now since
their being here, of his Imprisonment, went sometimes out of civility to see
him; to whom the crafty Priest, imagining their occasions for Money, by reason
of their Expense about their business, might make them greedy of the bait, did
at times break his mind of the business to them severally and apart, that one
might not know of the others being concerned, under promises of great Sums of
Money, if they did effectually proceed in the Design.

The Cant. (an honest Gentleman and a Christian) abhorred the Design, and
scorned their Rewards; yet that he might get a farther Insight into their
Designs, he seemed to adhere, and proceeded so far, that he learned from whose
hands he was to receive his Reward, and a promise of a Paper to be drawn up,
containing the particulars of the things he was to swear to, saying, [That if
they could but turn off this Plot, there was no fear of effecting their
business.]

The honest Capt. from time to time made his Discoveries of these Passages to
one of the Royal Secretaries, yet holding in still with them, till he should
come to find out the bottom of the Design.

In the mean while we came to get a Discovery of Dominico, by a strange
accident; for having wrote a Note to one of the Fraternity to come to him, and
got the Alderman to deliver it, he had so far forgot himself, as to leave out
his feigned name, and to subscribe his true, and withal to send it open; by
which means it became presently known, that he was the person concerned in Sir
Edmond's Murder: whereupon Capt. Lobed and I, taking with us a worthy
Magistrate that succeeded Sir Edmond, as well in place, as Loyal and Hearty
Endeavors in prosecuting the Plotters, went to the Prison to take an
Examination of the business. But the crafty old Fox Dominico finding himself
likely to be noosed, had gnawed the Snare in two that held him, and got loose:
For having procured two fellows for 10 s. a piece to become bail for him, he
thereby having got himself at large, took his Flight, and is not since to be
heard of.

The Information of these passages upon promise of Pardon, we got from
Vile-Netter, but hereby it happened, we prevented a farther Discovery, which
the Boglandian Captain would have made in the business; but Vile-Netter
suspecting that he had discovered the Design to us, would now treat with him no
farther.

Another Design yet more devilish than this has been since laid against me, by
the means of one Knoxius, a Retainer to the Grand Tashier, who, at the
instigation of the said Cashier, and other Petropolitan Lords, on purpose to
hinder my Evidence against them, had corrupted two persons that had been my
servants, Bornos and Elan, by feigned Letters and Papers contrived to their
hands, to defame me in the most horrid manner imaginable, charging me with vile
words, that I should use against the King himself, and several of his Nobility;
as also that I should contrive with Capt. Lobed upon a way of swearing falsely
against the Grand Casheir; and to complete their malice, that I should attempt
to commit (that not to be named sin) sin of Sodomy, with one of the Villains,
who was so far Reprobate in his wickedness, as to swear it against me before a
Magistrate. These were the batteries laid against me, yet I thank God my own
Innocence was a sufficient Sconce to me against them all, -- Murus hic aheneus
Esto,
Nil conscire sibi -- Horat.
-- The best Defense
Against Slander, is a man's own Innocence.

This Design I was well assured, was encouraged by the Grand Casheir himself,
who upon the hopes of its succeeding, after having some time absconded himself,
did now venture to surrender himself up to the hands of the Senate; and the
same day this Servant Knoxius made his Instruments again to swear to stand to
their Information.

Having now fully understood their Contrivance against me, I made my Complaint
thereof to the Royal Council, who sending for the Conspirators, and taking
their Informations; Bornos and Elan freely confessed that they had been
suborned by Knoxius, who in the Grand Cashier's Name, promised them great
Rewards to swear against me and Captain Lobed; dropping a Guinney to them in
Earnest, and maintaining them with Meat, Drink, and Lodging for their Service;
that to oblige them the more, he had given them the Oaths of Secrecy, and
swore, they should be killed if they offered to discover. But now they freely
confessed the falsity of those things they were to swear against me, and gave
sufficient proof of my Innocence, and how I had carried my self while they were
my Servants.

Yet they being for some time retained in Prison upon this matter, were
afterward tampered with again by some new Agents of the Petropolitan Lords to
revive their Evidence upon review and alterations made in the former Papers; to
oblige them to which cursed Apostasy, they first made means to discharge them
of their Imprisonment, and then taking them into their own keepings,
entertainments and Rewards so far prevailed, as to repeat their former Designs
against me; which having tinker'd over their faces with a new Stock of B^^ss,
they (notwithstanding their former Confe^sions to the contrary) did now proceed
to do, and did exhibit a Bill of S^d^n^y against me to the Grand Jury; but
they being sensible of their Designs against me, and withal perceiving the
slightness of their Evidence, and the in^^^y of the Witnesses themselves,
refused to admit their Indictment, but threw it out with Detestation of such an
horrid practice.

They having thus foiled themselves in their Undertaking, I thought it time as
well for the better clearing of my own Innocence, as to punish such unheard of
Villainies, to proceed against the Authors of them by due course of Law;
wherefore having brought in a Bill of Conspiracy against ^noxius and Elan,
(Born^s being fled) I had a Trial in the supreme Cover of justice, called the
King's Court, where, in the presence of many Noble Peers and persons of honor,
that were desirous to hear my Trial, I cleared my own Innocence, and by full
proofs detected their practices to their Shame and Confusion, who were
afterward punished according to their Deserts.

As God had hitherto raised Witnesses (many besides my self) by their several
Discoveries to detect the Policies and Designs of these cursed Plotters, so the
Devil has (as a Countermine) raised not a few persons of corrupt and villainous
principles, by various and subtle ways of management, to endeavor the
baffling of our Evidence, and to render it ineffectual, either by slandering us
with such horrid Crimes as should take away the Credit both of our Persons and
Testimony (as they did to me in the case beforementioned) or else by Bribes
and Promises of Rewards to endeavor to corrupt them, as in the case I shall
now tell you concerning my worthy friend Captain Lobed, whose Evidence (having
himself been so long acquainted with their practices) they feared (next to
mine) above any man's living: And therefore as it related to some Petropolitan
Lords, and others, whose Preservation they more particularly esteemed, they
endeavored to cause him either to abate the rigor of it against such Persons,
or to say nothing to the purpose, when he should be called as a Witness against
them.

The Instrument they employed in this Affair was an Advocate at Law, a great
Friend to their Party, and one that did business for many of them, and amongst
the rest, some of the Petropolitan Lords; on whose behalf, and by them, he was
engaged thus to tamper with Captain Lobed, with free expressions of
encouragement for the present, and large promises of future Rewards, if he
should herein effectually serve them.

Lobed intending to out-craft them, if possible, did seem for some time to
comply with the Advocate in the design; and as a proof of his compliance, did
omit some things in his Evidence against Blancpain and Wickfen at their Trials,
thinking such an omission not to be of so great consequence, as the loss of an
opportunity in making a further Discovery of this Design would be: upon which
account having settled a belief of his fidelity in the Advocate, he was now the
more pressed to the like faithfulness to them in the greater Service. And for
his encouragement, besides several sums of money which the said Advocate paid
him beforehand, he promised at such a time to come to Captain Lobeds Lodgings,
and bring with him the final Answer of the Petropolitan Lords what rewards they
would give him for his Service. But Lobed, cautiously to prevent any Traps that
might be laid for him, did before the time, acquaint some of the Albonian
Nobles, (viz.) the Noble Prince of the Rhine, and other Christian Lords, of the
Design on foot, and procured a Friend of his (at the time appointed) to plant
himself behind the Hangings, and making a hollow place in his Bed, laid his Man
there covered over smooth with a Rug, that they might over-hear what passed,
and not be descried. At the hour appointed the Advocate came, and acquainted
him in the hearing of the aforesaid Witnesses, that the Petropolitan Lords had
ordered him to draw Blanck Deeds, both for sums of Money and Estates, which
they would settle on him, and that one of them was felling Timber to raise
money for him.

So sweet is Life, so impudent is Vice,
That to preserve their Breath there is no device
So base but they will attempt it; and they will Fee
Their whole Estates to set their Persons Free.
A little after this; the said Advocate and Captain Lobed, drew up in a Paper
the substance of what matters the Captain had to charge against the
Petropolitan Lords, which being carried to them, for their perusal, and after
they had pulled out all the stings of it, that might hurt them, and made it as
harmless as they could for their purpose; returned it back again so much as was
left undefaced in his own hand writing.

The business being now ripe for a Discovery Captain Lobed acquaints the Secret
Committee appointed by the Grand Senate to examine such matters, with the
Proceedings of it: who finding it a matter of great weight and consequence,
acquaint the whole Senate, therewith leaving it to their Wisdoms to consider
what farther should be done about it.

The Senate by their Address, acquaint the King with the business, and pray his
Commission to call a Court of Justice for the Trial of the Advocate; which the
King graciously grants. And at his Trial the aforesaid practices were fully
proved against him by Captain Lobed, and those other ambuscade Witnesses that I
before mentioned. Upon conviction of which, the Judge sharply reflecting upon
him as an Advocate to dishonor his Profession with such base and illegal
practices, did for his punishment award this Sentence [(viz.) That he should be
Fined 1000 l. be imprisoned for one Year, and stand one hour in the Pillory in
the Yard of the Palace before the High Courts of Iustice] which last part of
the Sentence was presently after executed upon him in the presence of thousands
of People, who were not any of them so commiserate of his Sufferings, as to
pity him, but on the contrary, were so enraged, that had it not been for a
strong Guard placed about him to keep them off, he had certainly perished by
their fury.

-- No better fare all those
That once declare themselves the Peoples Foes
The Law keeps Bounds, but the unbounded Crew,
Think what they can inflict on such is due.
The latter part of his Sentence, as to Fine and Imprisonment, after he had
continued some little time indurance, was by I know not what sinister means
remitted, and he freed.

Here I may not omit to acquaint you with another Design of theirs against
Captain Lobed, acted by the Grand Cashier himself, with whom the Captain having
some business about getting in of moneys which he was to receive out of his
Office; the Cashier knowing who he was, began to sift or rather to trappan him
with questions, as, Whether he was not hired by some Christian Lords to give
evidence against the Petropolitans? Which he denying, as well he might, the
other then began to try him another way, by promises of great Preferments and
Rewards, to corrupt him to fail in his Evidence. But this neither being taken,
at last he proceeds (the Devils usual method) to Menaces; threatening, That if
he would not serve them at home, a Vessel was ready, which should transport him
far enough from doing any service against them. The effect of this threatening
Captain Lobed soon after found (though not in specie) the Grand Cashier
maliciously misrepresenting him to the King, so that the Guards that were
allowed him for his Protection, were now set over him as Spies: of which
discouragement Lobed gave an account to the King, who graciously took the same
into consideration, and ordered a remedy.

Many good Services (said Phileroy) notwithstanding all these discouragements,
did this worthy Captain Lobed perform in the discovery of this Plot, and would
have done more, had not Death prevented him, by cutting him off in the midst of
his days and of our hopes, in the Wes^ parts of Albonia, a thing which the
Petropolitans at first rejoiced at, but with little reason, as afterward
appeared, when they understood, that by his dying attestations (of a thousand
times more credit than any of their treasonable Martyrs) he did before an
eminent Judge of Albonia and one of the Royal Council, upon Oath assert the
truth of all that ever he deposed against the Petropolitans, in relation to the
present Plot: and at the same time his loyal Spirits (then expiring) were
passionately affected with the resentments he had of the danger he should leave
the King in, by the means of this cursed Conspiracy; with hearty Prayers to God
to protect him against it.

But to proceed with my Narrative; There was one other of the Witnesses or
Discoverers, that came not off so happily with them as I and Captain Lobed did;
one Darever a Gentleman, by Birth a Scote-britain, who being in Franconia at
the time when our Noble Cambrian Duke (the Flower of Chivalry at this day)
commanded the Albonian Forces that were sent over to assist that King in his
Wars. The said Darever was employed as Agent for the Albonian Militia at the
Franconian Court: and at the same time getting an acquaintance with an Albonian
Lady, a zealous Votary of the Petropolitan Religion, she acquainted him with
the present designs of introducing Petropolitanism into Albonia, and of making
the great Albonian Duke King of that Country, upon taking off our present
Sovereign, whom God preserve. And hereupon engaged him by his Interest to
introduce one Peter, titular Arch Bishop of L^^dub in Bogland, to the
Franconian King, which he did; Peter presenting him with a Letter and other
Papers, had private conference with him, for half an hour. The substance of
which, Peter afterward told him, was to propose ways to the Franconian Prince
to relieve the persecuted (as he called them) Petropolitans in Albonia, but
more especially in Bogland, by undertaking their Protection, furnishing them
with Arms, and securing one of their principal Ports for his own use.

Darever being now acquainted with their treasonable Designs, to which before
he was a Stranger, discovered the same to an Albonian Knight then at the Court,
for his assistance to communicate it to the King of Albonia; but he revealing
the matter to a Brother of the titular Bishops, a Petropolitan, and Colonel in
the Army, and of Darevers intention to discover it at his return to Albonia;
the Colonel and his Party hereupon threatened him, that if he ever attempted
such a thing, he should be certainly committed to the Great Tower at
Londinopolis, or some other Prison, by their Procurement.

Notwithstanding the Loyal Gentleman (though with much difficulty) escaping
their revengeful hands, got safe into Albonia, where he intended to acquaint
the Cambrian Duke, who is esteemed a great Enemy to the Petropolitans, and was
now likewise returned from Franconia with this Design, but before he could get
an opportunity to speak with him, the Petropolitans had made their interest at
Court against him: whereupon being had up before one of the Royal Secretaries,
he was without any Examination, or proof of any crime against him, sent to the
Great Tower, where after some Months stay, he was examined by the Lieutenant
of that place, to whom he discovered what he intended to have said to the
Cambrian Duke concerning this Design. But this was so little satisfactory to
the Lieutenant (how prepossest, or how much a Friend to the Petropolitans, I
know not) that he charged Darever, himself with a Design against the said Duke,
and threatened to torture him if he did not confess it. This was, and is one
Artifice of the Petropolitans by their powerful interests to gain so firm a
possession of credit in persons, perhaps (otherwise unbyassed) as the defense
of an Innocent person, whose Interest shall not bear weight with theirs, shall
not be able to remove it.

Most mighty Slander (one said well)
What is it thou can not do!
Can change the place of Heaven for Hell,
And make a Friend a Foe:
A Foe to Treason make a Malefactor,
And the Discoverer himself the Actor.
Under this suspicion yet unproved, of an Enemy to the State, and the same
suspicion kept warm by the interest of his malicious Adversaries, this poor
Gentleman was continued a Prisoner in a dark and uncouth Dungeon within the
Tower (a place assigned only for the worst of Malefactors) for the space of
four years; in which time (as it is Romanced of St. George in his seven years
Imprisonment in the Persian Court) he became so savage in his looks, overgrown
with hair; and mean in apparel, that they that were acquainted with him before,
could now hardly know him.

But from these miseries, he was at last released by the happy Convention of
the Albonian Senate. The two Grand Estates thereof, being both informed of
their Proceedings against him, and his Sufferings, did take upon them the
Examination of the business, and being sufficiently made sensible of his
innocence, and the wrongs done him, did obtain of his Majesty a discharge for
him: and he has since his releasement, been very instrumental in making
farther Discoveries of this present Plot.

One more instance I shall give you (said Phileroy) of another Witness, whom
God raised to confirm the truth of this Plot, one Fitz-Ienny a Gentleman of
good Extract and Quality; but himself and Family all Petropolitans. And though
the Principles of that Religion, in which he had been educated from his
Childhood, did engage him to the Interest of that Party, yet he had so much
reason and judgment yet left untainted in him, as to see into the horrid
wickedness of rheir Practices, and so designed to leave them, and make a
Discovery.

But this was not to be done without the difficulty of losing his Relations,
who, as I said, were all Petropolitans, (besides what advantages, as to his
Estate, he might expect by them) Bogland, one of the two Priests that were
lately executed for conspiring against the Life of the King, was his near
Kinsman, and his Elder Brother, a person deeply concerned in the present Plot,
for which he was after put into the Den of Thieves, about the time that this
Fitz-Ienny was about to make his Discovery. Whereupon the Petropolitans
grounded this malicious report of him, that he had betrayed, and would
prosecute his Brother merely to get the Inheritance of the Estate from him, by
incapacitating him to enjoy it. But the Vanity of this Slander he easily made
out, by his generous declining all such selfish advantages, in that he would
not deliver in his Informations, till such time as he got a promise, from the
Lords of the Royal Council to obtain the Kings Pardon for his said Brother.

His Kinsman Bogland did, both at his Trial and at his Death, like (a true
Petropolitan) deny a necessary circumstance in the Evidence against him, which
was material to his Conviction, as namely that he was at Londinopolis upon such
a day acting in the Design, when at the same time he affirmed with solemn
Protestations that he was remote off in the Country. This Circumstance for a
time, the Petropolitans did much glory in. But this his Kinsman Fitz-Ienny
knowing the truth of the matter, being called upon to attest the same at the
Trial of some other Priests afterward, did honestly declare that he was with
the said Bogland at the same time mentioned in the Evidence, at Londinopolis,
by which means the truth of that particular was cleared, and the Petropolitans
defeated of their design.

Thus see (you Cheats) what truth the dying words
Of your pretended Martyrs now affords,
What credit's to such dying sayings due,
That live and act so wickedly as you.
This was the first proof of the integrity of this worthy Confessor, after
which he proceeded to discover several other of their Practices, both at home
and abroad, as namely, that being at Petropolis, he heard the Ignatians affirm,
as a Canon of their Religion, that the Grand Viccar had Power to depose Kings;
and that Princes being by him once excommunicate (which in their sense is not
only to Unchristian them, but to Vn-king them) it is not only a thing lawful,
but meritorious for their Subjects to kill them.

And by the way (said Phileroy) this Doctrine of theirs (known to be allowed
and approved by them in their most authentic writings) may serve to un-riddle
that mysterious Salvo, so formally used by them in their dying Speeches, and by
which the over-credulous Vulgar are so easily amused into a persuasion of their
Innocence viz. [That they are Innocent of any Design or Endeavor to kill the
King.] For according to this Doctrine, and in their Petropolitan sense, Our
King is no King, being deprived both of Name and Office by the Judgment of the
Chair.

But to return to our matter; this worthy Fitz-Ienny being more true to his
Country and Conscience, than regardful of his dearest Interests has spared
neither Friend nor Foe in these his Discoveries: A Narrative of which he has
since published to the World, and therein informed us, how his Kinsman Bogland
offered to forgive him a Debt of 20 l. if he would be assisting to them in
taking off the King; which he absolutely refusing, the other then pressed him
to acquaint him (if he knew of any) with some Boglanders, Petropolitans, that
were fit for that (devilish) purpose; Fitz-Ienny then named three to him,
besides one Fitz-Will an Albonian, who were the four Ruffians (first approved
by Bogland) that were after employed to kill the King at his Palace in the
Country; the names of whom particularly he mentioned in his Discovery, upon
which the Royal Proclamation was afterward issued out for their seizing.

It was no small temptation to this worthy Confessor, that during this while he
was continually attacqued by the most passionate and importunate Letters of his
nearest Relations, urging him as a Rebel to his own Blood, with the necessity
of bringing a certain ruin upon his whole family, if he went on in his
proceedings; but these powerful Suada's had so little Influence upon the
Constancy of his mind, and prevailed no more to reduce him to his former (but
now abandoned) Principles, (the thing they principally aimed) than that they
produced the quite contrary effects, both to confirm him in his Resolutions;
and the Consideration thereof, together with the Conviction of the (now clearly
detected) Villainy of that Party whose profession he had owned, did so far
prevail with his aged Father, that (abjuring his own) he became a Proselyte to
the Christian Religion; and farther, to make the Triumphs of his Testimony and
the truth more illustrious, he gained another Convert out of his Fathers
Family, a Secular Priest, and Retainer to it in that Office, who, by this
means, was taken from performing Idolatrous Worship in a private Family, to the
service of (more than one Tribe in Israel) his King and Country.

This Person, by name Smithus, since his Conversion, has gratified the World
(as an Evidence of his sincerity) with some excellent Treatises of his own
penning, evincing the inconsistency of Petropolitan Principles, with the Peace
and Security of States and Kingdoms; a thing, said Phileroy, which if Christian
Princes were sufficiently sensible of, they would no more suffer any of that
viperous brood to harbor within their Dominions, than they would known
Traitors and Murderers to dwell within their Palaces: Besides, having in
those Treatises exposed their Villainies in this present Design, (according to
those Principles) he has justified the Honor and Justice of the Albonian
Tribunals, in their procedures against the Plotters, and also vindicated the
Testimony of Fitz-Ienny, particularly by manifest Demonstration of passages
relating to it, whereof he himself had been an ocular Witness.

And now you Petropolitans dare you vie
The Glories of a cursed Obstinacy,
In dying Traitors to the Constancy
Of this brave Man, that for his Countries good
Trampled on all the Ties of Flesh and Blood,
And braved your Malice with a well fixed Zeal,
What you durst act, he dared to reveal;
And whiles your traitorous Breaths with lies expire,
His Breasts inflamed with the sacred Fire
Of Truth, such Truths as the Preservatives
Of our Religion, Properties and Lives
Against your Treasons, in the Rolls of Fame
Shall be recorded to your lasting Shame;
And Spite of all your damned Treachery
Justice and Truth shall gain the Victory.
And thus, said Phileroy, (having ended his poetical Rapture) I have given you,
my dear Philopatris, a summary Account of those Witnesses, that it pleased God,
in his gracious Providence, to raise for the farther Discovery, and better
Confirmation of this cursed Plot, and next to the Divine Favor that honored
me so far, as to make me the first Discoverer of it. I am obliged to that
goodness of God, that has raised so many to bear their Testimony with me, that
I have no reason to complain with Elijah, That I only am left: God has yet
reserved many and many ways for the carrying on of this great work of his
Providence, to the Confusion (as we hope) of his and his Churches Enemies;
although you may perceive by these last Narratives, that they have not been
wanting, by all the treacherous ways they could think of, both to defeat our
Evidence, and to ruin our persons, if it lay in their Power; so that one
Witness should be too many to survive amongst us, if they could help it.

CHAP. IX.
St. Omers Lads sent for over; their impudent Practices to defeat the Evidence
of Phileroy, but to no purpose. Dagdule comes in a Witness against the
Plotters; their practices to suborn him defeated. An account of the Trial of
the Physician that was to poison the King; his unexpected acquittal upon it. An
Account of their Designs of firing the Towns and Cities in Albonia; what
Progress they made, and the Discovery of their Designs. A Relation of the
Proceedings (in the Grand Senate) against the Petropolitan Lords; and the
Trial, Condemnation and Execution of the Lord Fordstaff. The Author in a Vision
discovers the Meal-tub-Plot; meets then with Ovi-pellupus ^ Sham-plotter, who
at a retirement, acquaints him with the Design of that Intrigue, and the
Discovery of it by Camperil a Renegade Discoverer. Camperil, engaged by the
Petropolitan Lords, in several Services relating to the Plot. An account of his
Treaty with Gad the Astrologer about it.

YEt now it comes into my mind, I will, (before I leave this Subject) acquaint
you with another help they had at a dead lift, to assist them in baffling our
Evidence. You know we heard when we were at Strombolo, that St. Omers in
Franconia was assigned them as the chief place of Rendezvous: and also for a
College or Nursery for training up their young Fry, and instructing them in
the sacred mysteries of King-killing and destruction of States and Kingdoms.

Here a Party of them have kept their Consults, and hence as occasion has
required, they have from time to time sent over Supplies to their
Correspondents in Albonia, in which Negotiations I and Captain Lobed have
several times been sent over thither, while we were of their Party, and there
the Younkers got some acquaintance with us, which their Friends here have made
an opportunity now of a Design against us. For the Old Foxes having had so bad
Success in following their Game that they were continually taken in our Toils,
and defeated of their prey. Not knowing which way better to help themselves,
they sent over to St. Omers for a Litter of those Cubs, that by this time had
been so well instructed in the Game, that they could follow the scent of Blood,
and imitate the Old Reynards in their wily ways of Lying and Equivocation
pretty dexterously. No sooner was this Litter come over, but their Game was
showed them, I it was that they were to worry. Indeed I had got some of the Old
Foxes in a Noole (Blancpain and the rest of his Gang, being now upon their
Trial) and these young Cubs were to gnaw asunder the Cord (if they could) to
unsnare them, that is, to thwart and contradict my Evidence. I had sworn that I
was present in the Month of April at a Consult in Londinopolis; their Lesson
was, that I was then, and some Months after with them at St. Omers; yet they
had not so well conned their Lesson, but when came to say it, they faltred
pitifully.

And though they opened wide and yelped amain, yet all was little to the
purpose; for it was perceived, that while they built the Babel of a mighty
confidence upon these Younkers undertaking, they had sent amongst them the
Confusion of Tongues, so that Hammer and Mortar were there as relative to one
purpose, as their Evidences one to another: For some of them would make me to
leave St. Omers in May, others would have me not to leave it till June, but one
Gentleman, whose tongue had got the start of his wit, retched it as far as
July, which the Court taking notice of, told him that his Evidence was wide of
all the rest, who agreed upon either the latter end of May, or the beginning of
June. But to help the matter, he told them, if he failed in any thing as to the
punctuality of the time, yet he was sure I staid at St. Omers till the Consult
was over. This was the Mark they aimed at, (shoot high or low) to prove that I
was not at the Consult at the time I alleged, and so could not be a Witness of
what passed there. But this confident Lad, though he and the rest had mistook
their Proofs, yet he remembered the Text, to prove that I was not at the
Consult, for he was sure, (right or wrong, when or when not) that I staid at
St. Omers, till the same was over. The observation of this passage caused some
laughter in the Court, but more satisfaction to them; when after these Whelps
had done mouthing their idle tales and falsehoods) I brought in six or seven
credible Witnesses to make good my own Allegation, that I was all the Month of
April here in Town. This, as it was full satisfaction to the Judge and Jury, so
it proved such a defeat to the Younkers, that upon the discouragement thereof,
they have not since appeared so publicly to confront Evidence.

Yet still privately they endeavor (if possible) to corrupt them, as lately
one Dagdule a Witness lately come in against them, having published his
Informations of their Practices, they procured a man and a woman with proffers
of great and certain Rewards, to tempt him to retract what he had said or
written; and had drawn up a Paper ready for him to sign to, to that purpose.
But though out of a design to try how far they would proceed with him, he kept
them for some time in suspense about it; yet in that time having acquainted
some Magistrates with it, he (by Virtue of their Warrant) took a convenient
opportunity to seize them, and has laid them both in Prison till such time as
they shall be called to their Trial to answer for their Subornation. This has
been the success (and no better) that they have hitherto met with in tampering
with our Witnesses, and this has made the Wheels of their Motion to go on so
heavily hitherto. And may they never move swiftlier till they be overwhelmed
with the torrents of a deserved Vengeance.

Phileroy having given me these accounts of the Witnesses, which were very
pleasing and satisfactory to me, I desired him (having first drank a Glass of
Wine to recruit his Spirits) to inform me of some other matters relating to the
Plot, as they should come into his mind, for that all late passages were News
to me, being come over so lately from Strombolo. Phileroy told me, that in a
Design so confused, and that tended to nothing but confusion, as this did, it
was impossible for him to observe any order or method, in his Discourses. And
therefore he would rather I would hint to him what matters I would desire to be
resolved of, and he would give me the best satisfaction he could about them.

I thanked him for the kindness, and the first thing I desired him to satisfy
me in, was about the Devils Drugster, the Physician that was employed to poison
the King, whether since his imprisonment he had been brought to his Trial.
Phileroy informed me, that he had; together with two Benedictine Monks and a
Lay-Brother of that Order, who were all tried before the Supreme Justice of the
Kings Court. But (said Phileroy) although I then sufficiently proved what I
told you I had formerly charged him with before the Royal Council, of his being
hired to kill the King by a Letter which I proved to be of his own
handwriting, by a Note entered in their Registry, under the pretended Rector
of Londinopolis Courthar's own hand, of his acceptance of 15000 l. for that
Service. And although it was farther proved by Captain Lobed that the said
Courthar at one time gave him a Bill for the receipt of 2000 l. in part of
payment; and at the same time that the Physician should declare that the
business must be closely followed, and that if they should miss doing of it in
one place, they must do it in another; yet notwithstanding all this Evidence,
the Twelve Men (who according to the Albonian Laws, are the proper Judges of
matters of Fact) brought in a Verdict for him of Not guilty; and did the like
by the other four that were tried with him, though it was apparently proved
that they were all Abettors of the Plot, and consented to the giving of 6000 l.
for the carrying of it on, to be raised out of the Stock of their Society;
notwithstanding which, they also were brought in Not guilty; so they were all
acquitted. It is thought that the Purse of Gold that the Physician received
from the Grand Viccar, had so strong a Charm in it, as to render him
invulnerable against any penalties of Law or Justice.

Now sure Astraea's fled unto the skies,
Or she would punish such damned villainies.
Cursed be that Gold, and cursed that Sentence be,
That bribed the Judge, and set such Traitors free.
The next thing that I desired to be informed of, was concerning one part of
their Design which I heard given them in charge at Strombolo, of firing our
Towns and Habitations. In this Phileroy told me they were not idle; for that
besides that dreadful Conflagration that laid this great City in ashes in the
year 1666. which Captain Lobed, who was after in the year 1676. engaged by the
Benedictine Monks at Paris on the like Designs, has in a Narrative (since
published to the World) made out to be begun and carried on by the
Petropolitans, with a considerable booty of many thousand pounds value, which
they got to themselves as Plunder, out of the Goods of the distressed Citizens.

They have since carried on the Design as hotly as before, by firing several
other Towns and Corporations in Albonia, and particularly lately a great part
of a famous and populous Borough on the South side of Londinopolis.

This Design is carried on by a particular Committee, who have sub-divided
themselves into several Parties, according to their various managements, to
contrive the most likely means and places for the carrying on of their work. It
is said they have been contrived no less then twelve several distinct ways to
cause and promote these Fires; One of which is by bribing Servants to fire the
Houses of their Masters. The Manager of this part, was one Father Giffordus, a
Villain that has been a principal Actor in most of the former Conflagrations,
who had engaged one Nicholas to play the Devil in his room. This Nicholas, as a
proof of his skill, having some acquaintance with a Servant-Maid living with a
Lawyer in the West parts of this City, insinuated himself by his subtle
Arguments so far with her, as upon promise of 5 l. and half a Crown in earnest,
he procured her to set fire on her Masters Papers, which set fire on the House;
but Watchmen coming by (it being late at night) prevented its spreading and
seized her; when carrying her before a Magistrate, she confessed the Fact, and
who it was that employed her. Whereupon Warrants were issued out against the
said Nicholas, who was likewise taken, and upon his Examination, vouched over
Monsieur le Priest, the aforesaid Giffordus, as the principal imployer; whose
Maxim he said it was, That it was no sin to fire all the houses of the
Heretics and Hugonots (meaning the Christians.) Besides this, he being now
upon the Stool of Repentance, and willing to have the honor of a Discoverer,
did so largely set forth the merits of his Patron Gifford in several other
Exploits of the like nature, some already acted, and some only in design:
besides some goodly Treasons of no small size, that the said Gifford went very
big with, and waited to be delivered of; that for the sake and service of this
Discovery, he obtained his pardon, and the Maid likewise. After which a
Proclamation was issued out for the taking of the said Gifford.

Thus we may see how Rome against us conspires,
By deeds of darkness and destructive Fires.
Let them proceed, but at their peril know,
Our Fires above will kindle theirs below.
I perceived after these long Discourses, that Phileroy began to be heavy-eyed,
and so (methoughts) for all I was sleeping and dreaming all this while, I was
too; but my Fansic did so violently work upon these matters, that I could not
rest till I were satisfied in one thing more; which was, how matters stood with
the Petropolitan Lords, who I understood by Phileroy, were now imprisoned in
the Royal Tower. I desired him only to give me some short accounts of the
proceedings against them, and then I would give him no farther trouble at this
time. Phileroy willing to gratify my curiosity to the utmost (rubbing his eyes
a little) began thus:

I have already, said Phileroy, in some of my former Discourses with you about
these matters, acquainted you how these five Lords came to be drawn into the
Plot, and the nature of their Crimes; which as they are complicated together,
would be tedious to recite to you. But for these Crimes being imprisoned in the
Royal Tower, they had afterward an Impeachment drawn up against them by the
Lower Senate, consisting (as you know) of the Commonalty of the whole Kingdom,
wherein they were severally charged with High Treason, for conspiring with the
Secretary and the other Traitors (whose Facts and Trials have been already
mentioned) to subvert the Christian Religion, and introducing Petropolitanism,
to murder the King, to alienate our Estates, to seize our Garrisons, to
introduce foreign Arms, and to that end receiving Commissions of Places and
Offices by allowing Contributions out of their Estates to carry on the Designs
of their Treason, with several other particulars, too tedious to enumerate;
which Impeachment, according to custom, was carried up to the Senate of Lords,
before whom the matters therein charged were to be tried.

To this Impeachment, the said five Lords being called upon to give in their
Answer, made a Demurr, (a Phrase you know used in their Forms by our Lawyers in
Albonia) which they gave in in Writing; for that the Facts alleged in the
Impeachment, were so general, and the times and places (wherein they were
mentioned to be done) so uncertain, that they could not with safety give any
direct answer to them.

But, by the Votes of the Lower Senate, this Demurr was overruled, and they
Ordered to plead according to form of Law to the matters of Fact charged
against them; and then they put in their Pleas severally, the substance of
which in general was only Protestations of their Innocence, and submitting the
Trial of their Peers.

And now great Expectations were of their being brought to a speedy Trial, and
Scaffolds for that purpose erected in the midst of the High Courts of Justice.
But in the mean time the Grand Cashier whom the Lower Senate had now likewise
impeached for Treason, but had for some time absconded, did now unexpectedly
come in and surrendered himself, insisting upon a Pardon, which he had obtained
(although as yet there was no Crime proved against him.) But this the Lower
Senate Voted illegal; upon which, and upon another point (of the right of the
Spiritual Lords to be Judges at those Trials) which they denied, such
misunderstandings arose betwixt the Lower Senate, and the Senate of Lords, that
the King was forced at last to dissolve the Session: After which the Grand
Cashier was secured a Prisoner in the Royal Tower, where he and the rest of the
Petropolitan Lords, except the Lord Fordstaff, are yet remaining: Although
several Senates have been since called, but their Sittings so short, by reason
of some unhappy Misunderstanding amongst those Grand Estates about the
Proceedings against the Great Duke, occasioning their sudden Dissolution, that
they have not had opportunity to proceed upon their Trials; only the Last
Senate that has been since called, saving one, the aforesaid Lord Fo^dstaff was
brought to his Trial before the Senate of Lords, where the Lower Senate as
Prosecutors appeared against him, charging him particularly with Design to
murder the King, and offering Money to have it done: This horrid Fact was by
two Witnesses fully proved against him, whereupon after several days Trial
(which the Senate in favor allowed him) he was convicted of High Treason, and
had the Sentence of Traitors passed upon him, but by the Mercy of the King,
that Sentence was mitigated only to the taking off his Head, which Death he
has since suffered upon the Hill adjoining to the Royal Tower, dying like a
true Petropolitan, by justifying his Innocence, and denying the Facts charged
upon him, which he formally read out of a Paper, supposed upon good grounds to
be drawn up for him by some of the party, as the like has been proved in other
cases; some Petropolitans about the Staffold were observed to dip their
handkerchiefs in his Blood, which no doubt was esteemed by them as a precious
Relic.

Phileroy having thus far obliged me, by giving me in so large an Account of
the matters I desired to be satisfied about, I thought I could do no less than
gratify him in that which I perceived Nature and his Weariness required, by
suffering him to take a Repose, it being now late at Night, or rather morning,
when our Discourse was finished, so we lay down together, at least I fancied
so; for no sooner was I laid down, but the Magic of my Fancy (still in
continual motion) transported me to a place, where nolens, volens, I was forced
to stay (being now a mere passible subject to my own imagination) and expecting
to meet with some adventure, I staid not long before I perceived some Persons,
that I knew to be Petropolitans, to enter into an house just over against me,
and amongst the rest, one that I had observed at Strombolo to be of the crew of
Sham-plotters, attired in one of these habits which I observed were there wore
by them: This Person coming over with us in the same Ship, had there so much
knowledge of me, and I of him, that I resolved at this time to renew
acquaintance with him, that I might thereby understand what Designs they were
then upon; Whereupon taking my Ticket (that is) my Rosarie and Crucifix out of
my pocket, I hung them at my Girdle, that I might appear no other than a
Petropolitan. I made up to him, and saluted him with a Salve mi Frater: He
hereupon looking wistly upon my face, stood still, not knowing whether he had
best own his own knowledge of me or no, lest I should prove a Trappan; But my
rattling my B^^ds at my Girdle drew his Eyes off to that place where (and only
where.) I was a Petropolitan; this served to removed his Suspicion, and
thereupon without farther scruple (telling me he was glad to see me) he took me
by the hand, and drew me into the House, telling me by the way, that we should
now understand the Results of their Sham-Plot. I durst not presume to ask him
what Sham he meant, lest I should appear to be as ignorant as indeed I was, and
so incur a new suspicion; but told him, I longed my self very much to
understand the Consequence of it. So we proceeded and came into a Room where
the Managers were; a pretty Company there was of them, all sitting in a very
disconsolate posture, and amongst the rest a Woman in a Matron-like dress,
looking with a very rueful Countenance, and often wringing her hands in a
passionate manner. I heard her often repeat, [Never was so hopeful a Birth
spoiled for want of due Care and Management; since the time that I have
practiced Midwifry I never met with the like Miscarriage.] By this I understood
she was a Midwife, and one that perhaps might be employed to obstetricate in
this present Plot; The rest of the Company were mute as Fishes, and their
clothes and visages besmeared with something white, like Meal or Flower; I
concluded this was the Reason they were so mealy Mouthed: And in the midst of
the company I perceived a Tub of Meal standing, but what the conceit of it
should be I knew not, except it were some Grist of the Seminaries grain,
prepared to send over to Petropolis to make Norfolk Dumplings for the Albonian
Cardinal; I understood nothing of their Design by all this, and durst not ask
questions for fear of being suspected for a Novice or Intruder: But my old Mate
that introduced me, gave me some light by the question, that I overheard, put
to one of the Company, to whom he applied himself, asking him what was become
of the Book of the Model of the Plot, and whether there had been any Discove-to
whom the other replied, yes, and that the whole Design was discovered by means
of that Apostate, Renegade Camperil, who violating his Trust, had disclosed the
whole Design to the Londinopolian Magistrates; and for the Books and Papers
wherein the Model of the Design was contained, and were hid in the Meal-Tub
there before them for more security; the same (upon some unhappy notice thereof
given) had been seized by a Magistrate, Sir Edmond's Successor, and carried to
the Royal Council. By these short hints I perceived that their Sham-Plot (of
what nature soever it were) was defeated.

And that their Meal, though wrought and kneaded so.
Their Cake ill baked was, and proved dough.
Alack and welladay, this was all the language now amongst them, though some
sat in a sullen discontent, and said nothing; I confess I had no inclination
to sympathise with them in their Sorrows, but on the contrary had a violent
temptation upon me to laugh it out, and my spleen was already so tickled with
the pleasure of their defeat, that I had certainly done it, if I had not by
force changed my looks into another posture, by making as well as I could, an
ugly and whining kind of face as they did.

Dolores ingentes stupent, the trouble of this defeat had so dampt their
Courages, that they sat together like the Friends at a Quakers silent Meeting,
looking one upon another, as whist as Mice, until their unsociable silence
began to make their company wearisom to each other, so that some of them
beginning to rise up, the rest did the same; and having made their complements
to the Midwife, who I perceived was Mistress of that house, they then took
leave one of another, and departed to their several quarters; only I and my
Companion, who called himself Ovipellu^us, took a way by our selves. For,
methoughts, I was very unwilling to part company with him, till I had got from
him some farther Informations of this present Design. As we passed the Streets
I perceived a Tavern on the other side of the way, into which I invited my
Strombolian to accompany me, that we might drink a condoling cup, and wash away
our Sorrows; he easily accepted my offer, and we went in together; it was as I
remember at the Myter near to the St. Dunstan, a house much frequented by the
Petropolitans; to avoid suspicion, Ovipellupus (as the rest did) had left his
Sham-Cloak at the house we came from, and now appeared in querpo like a
Gentleman of the Town: I had also put my Bead-banbles into my pocket, that I
might be as unsuspected as he; being fixed in a room together, I contrived with
my self how I should do to pump him, I perceived he had no mistrust of me, that
I was other than I pretended, and therefore I was fain to carry my self
accordingly, beginning with a very solemn groan as he did; but on my part
nothing in the Earth could be ever more feigned, telling him how deeply I
resented the miscarriage of a Design that had been so carefully managed;
Carefully (said Ovipellupus) no, there you are mistaken, had it been so
carefully managed as it ought, it had never miscarried: But a pox upon that
Rogue Camperil, had not he played the knave with us all had been well; but we
may thank our selves for admitting such Knaves into our Society; (and I wonder)
thought I with my self, were all such removed from you, what a mighty Number
there would be of you.

I tell thee Brother (said he) we have a Company of Traitors amongst us, (true
still thought I) that lie lurking for opportunities to betray us: I fear so
too, said I, but we must be the more wary for the future whom we trust; for my
part I was always afraid that this Camperil would prove treacherous. It is
proved too true, replied he, and the old proverb is made good in him; that
tells you, [Save a Chief from the Gallows, and he will cut your throat if he
can.] I will maintain it, we had better have gone to Hell for an Instrument to
have served us, than to have robbed the Goal of such a Rogue as he is. It was
mighty pleasant to me to hear the Religious Knave speak the truth so
ingeniously, out of a Design to rail down the Honesty of a Discoverer.

Before he proceeded farther, he would needs know of me what my Office or
Employment was; I told him, I was a Masquerader (or Brumingham, as the moderate
term is used) for that Party. That is an Employment, said he, much like to
mine; (nothing thought I, but honesty makes the difference.) But being earnest
to enter upon my enquiry into this business, I could not tell which way better
to excuse my ignorance, and to get an Information from him, than to acquaint
him, that though I understood the Design in general, yet as to the particulars
I was a Stranger, having been for some time absent from Albonia, in parts
beyond the Seas. He asked me what Parts? I told him Strombolo, at a General
Court of Assize there holden by the Sieur Rhadamanthus. His next Question was,
Whether any of our Friends were tried there? I told him, Yes, and named
several, as Blancpain, Courthar, Wickfen, etc. all which were (notwithstanding,
the merit of their Services) by the Judges Sentence committed to Purgatory.
With that, fetching an heavy figh, he replied, That he was afraid the Grand
Vicar had deluded them all; and that that would be the place they should all go
to. But, said he, rather than I will be hanged up like a Dog for my Services,
and then be roasted in Purgatory after that, I am almost in the mind to try to
get to Heaven the new way, and turn Renegade my self. I told him that would be
his surest course, and mine too, for that there was but little dependence to be
had upon the Grand Viccar, I having my self heard him declare, that his Clavis
Coeli was become useless, for that the Wards of the Locks had been altered
since this Plot was designed, which I presumed was upon some distaste taken in
Heaven at it. I hoped by this discourse of mine, that I should fetch the Devil
of Rebellion out of him; but in the mean while, I desired him to give me some
short account of their late proceedings; which he did with the Exordium of an
Insandum (frater) jubes renovare dolorem: Virg. Aeneid.

You are not ignorant, said he to me, what provisions the Designers of this
Plot have made in case of Discovery, by shamming off our Designs upon the
dissenting Parties of the Albonian Christians; and to set up them for the
Criminals in our own room. And having been of late so often detected by the
Renegade Discoverers, we thought it high time to set our Designs on foot.

To this end we acquainted some of the Petropolitan Lords (now in the Royal
Tower) with our intentions, who have since their restraint been serviceable to
us in many of our designments.

The Instrument we pitched upon as most fit for our purpose, was this Renegade
Camperil, a person (though of broken Fortunes, yet) of ingenious parts, a
subtle head, and profligate enough to attempt any Villainy he should be put on.

Our Design was broke to him by the Midwife, at whose house you found us, the
Wife of a Franconian Merchant, and so zealous a Votary to the Petropolitan
Religion, that she declared a courage and resolution beyond what is usual in
her Sex, in all her actings. This person was a great Confident of the Lady
Wispo's, Wife to one of the Petropolitan Lords, and as zealous in this Cause as
her self. By whose advice and assistance, the aforesaid Camperil, after some
petty trials had of his abilities, was employed in the Service.

He was then a Prisoner in the Den of Thieves, but upon confidence of the great
Services that (when at large) he might do them, the Midwife procured his
Liberty; and when afterward he was again clapped up in the Debtors prison for
Debt, she got him removed into the Royal prison, where he enjoyed more liberty,
and allowed him 20 s. a Week for his maintenance. In this place he was employed
to trappan some Prisoners by hard drinking, to get something out of them
against Captain Lobed, which came to nothing; but finding him dextrous in his
attempts, they resolved to free him, that he might be wholly at their devotion;
when having compounded his Debts for 700 l. The Midwife paid down the money for
him, and so discharged him out of Prison. And upon his release, he is by her
brought acquainted with the Lady Wispo, who well approving of him, provides him
Lodging and Money, with promises to raise his Fortunes. Then acquaints him with
the Lord Maincastle, who likewise approves him.

Then they employ him to get some Petropolitan Priests discharged out of Prison.

After that, he is sent by the Lady Wispo with a Packet to a Priest in the
Country, from whom he receives back some Papers, which he was to deliver to the
said Lady containing the Groundwork of the present Plot, That Pamphlets should
be writ, and persons employed in places of public Entertainment, to rail
against the dissenting Albonian Christians.

Some other Services in which he was employed by them, before they engaged him
in this Plot, were namely these:

To be Tutor under the Lord Maincastle (who was their Grand Instructor) to the
Youths of St. Omers, who were for some time kept in close Pickle in the
Midwifes house, ready for use when occasion should require.

To get two Villains, Knoxius and Elan discharged out of Prison, and to corrupt
them to swear false matters against Phileroy, the Renegade and Grand Enemy to
our Party, namely Sodomy and Buggery. But this Design would not take, but
Phileroy, after a Legal Trial, was acquitted.

He was farther to write some Pamphlets, and dispose others in the most
public Coffee-houses and places of Entertainment, tending to raise Sedition
amongst the People, and especially to incense them against the Dissenters. And
besides this, he is employed in transcribing Letters, and forty Lists of the
Names of Persons, each List containing above 800 Names: which were privately to
be dispersed by our Agents all over Albonia, in the houses of the Christian
Dissenters, and then Searches were afterward to be made in those houses upon
other pretenses; and upon finding these dangerous Papers, the Masters of those
houses were to be seized for Treason.

He is afterward sent for to one of the Petropolitan Lords in the Royal Tower,
and by him tampered with for a great reward to kill the King. But this he not
having courage enough to undertake, he was then (for the reward of 500 l.) put
upon killing the little Earl Anthony, a great Enemy to our Party; but this
Design, though he undertook, yet never effected.

He is then employed by the Midwife, in the company of some persons of Quatity,
to go to one of the Devils Counselors, one Gad a Petropolitan Stargazer, who
was to be consulted by his Art to find out, whether the King should outlive the
Great Duke, or the contrary. If it happened the King should survive, then we
were to proceed in our Design to dispatch him. And the Conjurer told them that
he had discovered by his Scheme, that the Stars had allotted the King the
Survivorship, if some violent Fate did not determine his days sooner; and
blamed Camperil very severely that he refused himself to kill him, being a
person, as he said, who (upon calculation of his Nativity) he found to be very
fit for that purpose.

And here Ovipellupus paused a little to refresh his spirits with a Glass of
Wine, and I in the mean while standing in a profound amazement at these
mysteries of iniquity, especially at the treachery of this impudent Wizard,
diverted my fancy with these Distichs on him, and the passages of the Treason.

To find the Fates of two Great Brothers, he
Was to inspect the Book of Destiny.
The Stars must be made Parties to the Plot;
And Heaven, called in to do what Hell cannot
Flectere si nequeo, etc.
If the Possessors life held longest date,
He must dispatched be by some dire Fate,
To let in a Successor; but let Rome,
And all such Wizards fall, ere that day come.
CHAP. X.
Ovipellupus relates at large the management of the Meal-Tub Plot, designed
against the principal of the Albonian Nobility, and the manner of its Discovery
by Camperil: The Authors Vision of the meeting of the Grand Senate at Minerva's
City, where meeting with Phileroy, he receives an account from him of some
passages relating to the Plot, particularly of the Libel published by the
Midwife: Her sentence upon it of a Fine, and to stand three several days in the
Pillory; She is afterward (upon new matters) indicted of High Treason: The
attempt of the Petropolitans to assassinate Arnoldus a Magistrate: The
Assassinates discovered and punished: An account of the Bogland Plot: The
impeachment of Fitzar, and the difference that arose in the Grand Senate about
it: The Senate Dissolved: The Grand Cashier accused by Fitzar of the murder of
Sir Edmond: A Shamplot contrived upon it, and its discovery: The Ghost of Sir
Edmond appears to the Author, gives him an account of the Design. The
Conclusion.

WHile I was mumbling over these lines (as they came into my mind) softly to my
self, I perceived by the fixing of his eyes upon me, that my Companion took
notice of it; wherefore to blind the matter, I fell a rattling over my Beads,
that he might think I was at my prayers, which put him into the same humor; so
that he began also to jumble his Trumpery, and mutter over his Paternosters
very devoutly. Whosoever had seen us in these postures (upon such a Subject as
our last was) would have thought that the Spirit of Conjuring had invaded us
likewise.

Well after our Devotions were over, I desired Ovipellupus to proceed in hi^
Story: which he did thus;

Having, said he, given you in short some accounts of the Exploits of Camper^
in this Service, I come now to the mai^ business, which has so unhappily
succeeded.

This Shamplot was intended to be fixed chiefly upon the Dissenters, b^^ was
withal to take in the principal Parties of the Christian Nobility and Gentry,
against whom we had prepared those that by confident swearing should infallibly
maintain our cause against them, and make them the Plotters.

Our Instrument Camperil, having, as I told you before, prepared the way to our
design by scattering seditious Papers abroad in the name of the Dissenters, was
now (for the perfecting of it) introduced to the Great Duke, to whom (according
to the Model of the Design) he related the names of several of the Christian
Nobility (the Cambrian Duke being one) that should be concerned in this present
Plot.

The Great Duke having rewarded him for his Discovery, brought him to the King,
to whom he gave in the same account, and had by his Majesty 40 l. ordered him
for a gratuity; after which he sent a Letter to the K. (being at one of his
Country Palaces) with another Wheedle, that the Dissenters held a great
correspondence with his Enemies of Belgia.

All this while the management was carried on well, and all things promised
fair; there was now no more to do but to make an actual Discovery of the
treasonable Papers in some of the Dissenters keeping, and to put the stolen
Goods into some honest men's Pockets, that should therefore be charged with
them, and clear the Thief of the suspicion. And this was contrived by the Lady
Wispo to be fixed upon one Colonel Selman, a Christian Gentleman and inveterate
hater of our Party. Camperil having found out his Lodgings, goes to take one
himself in the same house; and looking up and down amongst the Rooms, takes his
opportunity to fix some of his treasonable Papers behind a Beds-head, and then
goes and informs some Officers belonging to the Kings Customs, that there were
some prohibited Goods concealed in the house, to the value of 2000 l. and
taking the opportunity of the Colonels absence, brings them to the place, in
order to seize them.

The Officers suspected nothing of Plats or Treasons, but being busy in their
Search, and Camperil pretending to be as busy as they in ransacking the Rooms,
finds out (what he need not have looked for) the treasonable Papers in the
place where he left them, and then makes a hideous outcry of Treason. The
Officers being to search for Goods, and not for Treasons, take the Papers for
the prohibited Goods, and carry them to their Office.

After which Colonel Selman returning to his Lodgings, and being acquainted
with these passages, suspects the Design, and enquiring after Camperil, finds
that he lodged at the Midwifes house, and thereupon gets on Order to bring him
before the Royal Council, who examined the business, and found by the
attestations of the Witnesses, that the Design was forged by Camperil, who as
stoutly denied it, and persisted to charge the Colonel, but to no purpose.
Afterward a Letter was intercepted, which Camperil had writ to the Lady Wispo,
giving her an account of these passages; by which it appeared that she also was
a Party concerned in the Design.

The Model of our Design, and some other Papers relating to it, were hid by the
Midwife in the Meal Tub that we saw l^tely, but upon some unhappy notiee given
thereof to a Magistrate, the same were soon after found out and seized* wherein
Commissions were feigned to be given out to the Chief of the Christian Nobility
for raising a Rebellious Army, and other treasonable matters; all which now
signified nothing against them: for Camperil finding himself now trapt in his
Designs, went before some Magistrates of the City, and voluntarily made a
Discovery of the whole Design.

This (the sad Catastrophe of our business) I understood by one of the Company
where we were, and you see how it has dampt them: for my own part if our Shams
succeed no better than they have yet done, but that we must be contented to be
the Traitors our selves still, and at last be hanged up for our Roguery: I am
resolved to do as Phileroy and the rest have done, and turn Discoverer too:
Hang it, it is better venturing at Preferment in an honest way, than to hazard
an Halter by the contrary; and with that, filling a brimmer of the consolating
Liquor, he drank to me upon it; and I freely pledged him, telling him, I was
clearly of his mind; for I perceived by the bad Successes we have had in all
our Attempts hitherto in this Plot, that we did but fight against Heaven, which
plainly took part against us, and would certainly ruin us if we still
proceeded; wishing him to persist in his Resolution, and that when ever he put
it into Execution, I my self would accompany him; and upon the same account I
answered his Glass to me with another to him; and so washing down our Sorrows,
and having emptied our Bottle, we called for a Reckoning, and departed, not
without mutual Assurances of a farther Correspondence to be had betwixt us, (so
confident was the Shammer of my faithfulness to him;) but I was resolved to be
wary my self how I trusted him, lest I should bring a Sham upon my self. And
now my Fancy being released from this Adventure, while I was studiously musing
upon the Occurrences of it, I was suddenly attacqued by another Ecstasy, by the
force of which, I was rapt into a most pleasant Country, and within that, to
one of the goodliest Towns that ever mine Eyes beheld; Situate upon the Banks
of a large and pleasant River; I understood upon enquiry, that this was
Minerva's City, our Albonian Athens, and one of two Seminaries of Learning
belonging to this Country. I was glad (methoughts) by this opportunity to
satisfy my Curiosity with the Delights of this place, which I had never before
seen; and to that end, entering at one of the Gates, I went on, gazing upon the
sumptuous and stately Structures of the Colleges and places of Learning; but
wondered that I saw so few Scholars in them, but instead of them, to see them
filled with great numbers of Illustrious Persons of the Nobility and Gentry,
walking with their Swords by their Sides, and Lacquies after them: Many of them
had Papers in their hands, which I perceived, that they were busily discoursing
about; and the whole Town, I perceived, was very full of People of all Ranks
and Qualities. I could not imagine the meaning of this great Convention, till I
was soon after resolved by this accident; for happening (in my perambulations)
upon a pleasant Garden belonging to one of the Colleges, I entered into it, and
taking a private walk within a Grove of Trees, whom should I meet there, but my
old Friend Phileroy, who admiring to see me there, and to find him out in that
solitary place: I resolved him that I came hither I knew not how, and met here
I knew not who; but desired him (as he had hitherto been my Intelligeneer) to
satisfy me what was the meaning of this great Assembly; this he promised to
do, but before he did that, would needs know of me, what News I could tell him
from Londinopolis: To gratify him in which, I told him what I had heard and
seen of the late Adventure of the Meal-(...), and of my Discourse with O^^^
(...), all which, he told me, he understood before he left Londinopolis, and
some other passages relating to that Design he acquainted me, which I knew not
before; as that after Camperil had fully made out his Discovery, and thereby
detected the several parties concerned in the Design; the Lady Wispo was
examined by the Royal Council about it, and upon substantial proofs being
convicted of having an hand therein, was by their Order sent a Prisoner to the
Royal Tower; Gad the Conjurer was sent to the Den of Thieves, where he
pretended to make a Discovery, impeaching some Persons of quality as concerned
with him, and so (said he) by what means I know not, he got at last his
Discharge: And as for the Petropolitan Midwife, said P^^^crey, she so
obstinately persisted in Justification of her Practices, that she published a
Book in Vindication of them, and reflecting too much upon the Justice of the
Government, in matters relating to this Discovery, she was for this (upon a
Trial had for the same) fined the Sum of 1000 l. and sentenced to stand three
days in the Piliory, which Sentence was accordingly executed upon her in the
midst of Thousands of Spectators; who (besides whole vollies of Curses spent
upon her) had it not been for a Board that she held in her hand to defend her
self with, had certainly brained her before she was taken down; but being by a
strong Guard at last delivered from the fury of the Rabble, and carried back to
Prison; but a worse misfortune than this soon after befell her; for Camperil and
others making out some new Discoveries against her, of a more dangerous
consequence, she was thereupon continued in Prison, under no less charge than
that of High Treason against the King and Government. But, said Phileroy,
(leaving this) heard you nothing in Town of one Arnoldus? I told him no; why
then, said he, I will acquaint you with a new Design of the Petropolitans
lately acted: This Arnoldus a Magistrate in the Cambrian Countries a Loyal
Gentleman and great Enemy to the Petropolitans, coming up to Londinopolis to
make some Discoveries against them to the Royal Council, was one night late set
upon in a narrow Lane by a crew of Ruffians, (Petropolitans all of them) who
got him down, and with their Knives had certainly murdered him, had not a Boy
with a light accidentally past by, which caused them to fly, and leaving him
weltring in his Blood, having cut his Throat from Ear to Ear, but not so
mortally, having escaped his Windpipe, but that he afterward recovered: Two of
these Dillains were afterward discovered and brought to Trial; and fined in a
great Sum of Money; besides the punishment of standing in the Pillory near to
the place where the Fact was committed, where the Guards about them had much a
do to preserve him from being torn in pieces by the People, before they could
get them back to Prison; their durance for some time in which, was to make up
the Consummation of their Punishment.

And now, said Phileroy, I shall proceed to satisfy you concerning the great
Convention you have observed here.

Here are at this time (by the King's Royal Order) assembled the three grand
Estates of the Senate, by him lately called to consider of the arduous affairs
of this Kingdom; the former Senate being upon the account of some unhappy
differences, arising upon their Proceedings to exclude the Succession of the
Great Duke to the Crown of this Kingdom, some time since dissolved; but most of
the old Members of that Senate being chosen by the Countries to serve again in
this, it is much feared if as their Dictator has declared, (They are not given
to Change) lest they should fall upon the same measures they did before, which
if they do, will inevitably cause another Dissolution; and all our great hopes
of their Proceedings in the Discovery of this Plot, and to bring the
Petropolitan Lords to Judgment will be utterly defeated.

And I the rather fear, (said Phileroy) that (notwithstanding all the great and
sumptuous Preparations made here for their Reception) their stay here will not
be long upon account of another matter which has unhappily fallen out.

For, said he, you cannot but know, that there has been a great noise made, for
some time, of another Plot like to this (if not the same) carried on by the
Petropolitans in Bogland, to kill the Viceroy of that place, to massacre the
Inhabitants, and to cause an Invasion of that Country by the Franconians;
several Persons have been seized upon this account, and Informations given to
the Royal Council by Witnesses that have come over from that place to give in
Evidence against them, who have fully proved the truth of the said Plot;
notwithstanding the Petropolitans, according to their old wont, have
endeavored several ways to Shain it off upon the Christians, tho without
effect.

Amongst others that have been seized for this Plot, there was one Fitzar
notoriously concerned in it, and now a Prisoner in the Royal Tower, who ('it is
said) has, since his being there, discovered things of such a dangerous
Consequence to some great Persons, that Endeavors have been made to prevent
his farther Proceedings on that kind, by bringing him to speedy Justice, to
which end they have obtained the Royal Commission for the trying him by Judges
therein specially deputed.

But the Lower Senate having now notice of it, have endeavored to prevent that
Proceeding by having the matter brought to be examined before themselves, and
to that end have preferred an Impeachment against him in the Senate of Lords
before whom he appears to stand now chargeable.

And this way of proceeding appearing, as it were, designed to prevent the
other, it is much feared, may occasion such misunderstandings as may cause the
breaking up of the Session.

And according as Phileroy had prognosticated, it unhappily fell out. For
within a little time after, I perceived the bright Glory that had for some days
made this place Illustrious, to set in a black Cloud of Grief and Amazement;
especially to the Townsmen of Minerva's City. The Senate being dissolved, and
the Senators all in a bussle preparing for a departure, my nimble Genius out
stripped the greatest have they could make, and lodged me again in fancy at
Londinopolis, before any of them could be one foot on the Road toward it.

^apists hireing Serve (...) fire houses



Stafford beheaded



Parham Return fram Oxford



Mealtub Plott defeated.





These airy flights so expeditious were,
Thought I a place, then I was straightways there.
We had been so long dreaming over this Plot with long Halts and Pauses, that I
perceived many of our Townsmen fansied their apprehensions of it to be no other
than a Dream indeed. So that, methoughts, I have been fain (when I have been in
company with such) to pinch them hard, and rub their eyes for them, to make
them believe themselves to be awake.

Yet one passage, suddenly after this late Discovery, brake out with so great a
noise, as made our Gentlemen to open their Eyes indeed, and look about them;
being a new Discovery made out to confirm the truth of the Original action in
this multiform-Plot the Murder of Sir Edmond.

The Circumstances of which, as I had them from Phileroy, and the last
Intelligence that I ever had from him, were these:

Since the dissolution of the last Senate, Fitzar was brought before the Judges
of the Kings Great Tribunal, to be there tried for his Treasons, but he refused
to own the Jurisdiction of that Court, as standing impeached in the Great
Senate, who were a Superior Jurisdiction.

This Plea of his (though strongly urged) by his Advocates) was overruled by
the Judges, who affirmed their own Jurisdiction, and so proceeded to try him,
and caused him to answer in Court to the Charge against him.

Which having done Fitzar requested of the Judges that he might be examined by
some of them in private concerning some matters that he had to reveal to them
of this Plot. This his request they granted, and thereupon Fitzar informed them
that he had been one concerned in or at least acquainted with the Murder of
Sir Edmond; and that besides other persons, the Grand Cashier himself was a
Party concerned in it.

And having taken his Oath of the truth of this matter before the Inquisitors
of that Court, they presently drew up a Charge of Murder against the Grand
Cashier, who, it is expected (it being his own desire) will very suddenly be
tried by his Peers upon it, although at the same time he stands impeached in
the Grand Senate, for Crimes, according to the Albonian Laws, of an higher
nature.

But now to blind this Discovery, another piece of Villainy is contrived to sham
off the credit of it, by hiring one Maegar, a Petropolitan Boglander to give
out a Report that Sir Edmond was not murdered (contrary to what the World had
hitherto believed) by any but himself, that he had hanged himself with his own
hands, but that to save his Estate (which according to the Albonia) Laws in
such cases is forfeited) Sir Edmonds Brothers had procured him to run him
through with his own Sword, and leave him in such manner as is at first
mentioned. This Tale he must needs tell first to the Grand Cashier himself, who
gets the Constable of the Royal Tower to have the hearing of it; who thereupon
sends him to the Royal Council to be examined about it: Before them, at first
he very stubbornly persists in affirming the Reports. But while he was in
Custody, having leave given him to write a Letter to one of the Royal
Secretaries, he together with that, slips a Letter into the Messengers hands
directed to the Petropolitan Midwife (the famous Instrument of of these
Designs) acquainting her with what he had done, and desiring to receive new
instructions from her. This Letter was by the honest Messenger conveyed to the
Royal Council, who upon Examination, charging him with it, he presently owned
it; and withal made a free, and (if I may call it so) ingenious Confession of
the whole Intrigue, and how he was hired, and by whom, to carry on this sham
and Villainous Design.

I was now (methoughts) diverting my self in a solitary place not far from the
City, musing upon these matters, when it came into my mind, that as the finding
out this execrable Murder was the very Groundwork of our Discoveries, and
belief of the Plot; so now we may plainly see the Policy of the Petropolitans,
after so many Discoveries made, and their Shams to overthrow them defeated,
that they should go about to weaken thi^ foundation, so to render our
subsequent Informations of the less credit.

But could not these Execrable Villains (thought I with my self) be content to
take away the life of that Innocent Gentleman, but they must take away his good
name too, by making him guilty of their Murder. O Impudence! O Villainy in the
Abstract! Whilst I continued in this Thinking Fit, I was on the sudden
diverted by the approach of an Apparition toward me; it was different from
those infernal ones that I had hitherto been conversant with, being incircled
with a Glory that spread it self round about like the Rays of the Sun, and the
Luster thereof rendered its Form (which was that of a comely tall person) not
only awful but amiable; its looks were Angel-like, full of Gaiety and
Sweetness: but withal I perceived a Sword run through his body. He glided
toward me with a leisurely motion, and upon a convenient approach stood still,
and in a sweet and delightful air (far more tunable than any mortal breath can
express) he spoke to me in these Disticks.

From blissful Shades and Springs of Joy^ come
(Bearing the Signal of my Martyrdom;)
To thee, (O Mortal;) I was once the Man
That first opposed the Petropolitan
Design against Albonia, and for that
Became the Object of their vengeful hare.
For that by their accursed hands I fell
A Martyr for the King and Commonwealt
This Sword they then ran through my guiltless side,
To make men think by mins own hands I di'd:
Not satisfied to take away my breath,
But as it were to kill me after Death,
They wound my name, and by prodigious lies,
They make of that another Sacrifice;
This they attempt now by a new Design
To make my Murder not their own, but mine*
But (Mortal) Go and tell the World that I
Deserve to have my dying memory
Better esteemed. Some guilty blood they have
As Victims offered upon my Grave;
But I Am not yet appeased, my Blood yet cries
For theirs, by whom I fell a Sacrifice.
Tell the World this, and let a Statue be
S^^ up to vindicate my memory.
Upon the close of this I heard a melodious Chore of Ravishing Voices; wh^
while I was attending to, I perceived t^ Apparition with a brisk Levatto, to
ascend the Air in a triumphant manner, and then I waked out of my Dream, and
fell to my Devotion.

Kind Heavens defend our Gracious KING, till he
Shall livingly refute Gad's 'Strology,
And all the other Romish Calculations,
Predicting the KING's ruin and the Nations.
Lord let him live beyond the Scheme they set him
I wish, and longer too than they would let him.
Yea let him live so long, so long, till we
His famed Successor shall desire to see,
Then shall he live unto Eternity.
My Dream is out, I wish the Plot were so,
And that my Dreaming might no farther go:
But if provoked by these designing men*
It Is ten to one but I shall dream again*
FINIS.

