A PLEA For the Late Accurate and Excellent Mr. Baxter, And those that Speak of
the Sufferings of Christ as he does. IN ANSWER TO Mr. Lobb's Insinuated Charge
of Socinianism against 'em, in his late Appeal to the Bishop of Worcester, and
Dr. Edwards.

With a Preface directed to Persons of all Persuasions, to call 'em from
Frivolous and Over-eager Contentions about Words, on all sides.

(...).
Non agimur Partis Studiis --.
LONDON: Printed for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, 1699.

TO THE (Whether Dissenting, or Consenting) Readers.
THough the Concealment of my Name might (perhaps) be some Security to me,
supposing any one should be offended at the following Papers; yet have I not
thereupon allowed my self a Liberty (too commonly taken) to reflect upon and
censure those, whose Sentiments are not the same with mine: I have indeed taken
the Freedom to expose their Notions, as they deserve; but without reproaching
those that hold 'em. There is scarce any thing more common, than for Persons to
maintain such Principles, the necessary Consequences whereof they do abominate;
but either through Ignorance, or Inadvertency, they discern 'em not: Many
through weakness cannot, others for want of due attention do not apprehend the
Connection there is between 'em: In both which cases it is not allowable, nor
have we allowed our selves to charge such invidious Consequences upon 'em
(which are not owned, but especially which are disowned by 'em); but to argue
from 'em against their mistaken Principles, is what no one can reasonably
disallow. -- And this is what is Principally blamed in our Accuser, That he has
laid us under the Imputation of Socinianism, at least of Socinianizing (Crimes
which we do from our very Souls detest!) Had he attempted to prove it, as a
Consequence upon One or Other Principle advanced by us, we should very
thankfully have accepted his Endeavors to undeceive us; but having so
injuriously Reproached us, we are necessitated to Vindicate our selves; should
we be silent under the Impeachment, we should too far participate in our
Accuser's guilt: That same Law of God not permitting us to bear false Witness
against our selves, which Obliges us not to do it against our Neighbor. But
though from this very Consideration the general Design of these Papers be
Justifiable, that is not enough; nor yet tho the management and manner of
writing be so too: That may be justifiable, that is not greatly useful or
commendable: We have therefore endeavored that the ensuing Pages may do real
service.

In order whereunto, we have not only avoided all unbeseeming Reflections, upon
any Person or Party, by reason of their differing Sentiments from us; but have
also studiously declined all mere Logomachies, all Contentions about mere Words
and Phrases, carefully distinguishing (upon every occasion) real from merely
Verbal Differences; and as to the latter, even where the Words have been less
Apt and Expressive, we have not thought Rent worthy of a Debate, being more
sollicitous to find out the Sense in which one or other Person uses them, than
concerned about Phrases or Expressions on one side or other. And were this one
Rule more universally observed, how greatly would it contribute to the Ending
most of our Controversies; not to make mere Phrases and forms of speaking, the
matter of a dispute either way; but to allow every one the liberty of their own
expression, provided they can but agree in sense.

It Is hardly to be conceived, of how pernicious Consequence this one thing has
been, the making necessary what God has never made so: should we take the
freedom to instance in Self-devis'd Notions, and Ceremonies (some, as amongst
the Papists, wicked and intolerable; others, almost amongst all other
Persuasions that profefs Christanity, needless, and (at the best) but
tolerable) which yet have been imposed with like rigor as if all Religion had
dain in 'em; how black and dismal a Tragedy would it introduce! how great a
part of that Christian blood, which has been spilt, would be found chargeable
hereupon! But I shall confine my self to the Point before us, the insisting
upon Terms and Phrases (such as are merely of Humane Stamp,) as if so Necessary
that Orthodoxy in the Faith, that Christianity itself could not subsist without
'em.

Such a Spirit as this has long been growing upon the Church; and in our
Accuser it seems to have arrived to full Maturity: His whole Zeal and Strength
and Time is, in a manner, taken up in Collecting, and heaping together, out of
various Authors, certain words, and forms of speaking (without any fixed
determinate sense); and (though they have no certain meaning) the man will
needs force some upon us, that we must by no means leave out, unless we will
fall under his Resentments; and another set of Phrases, we may not use (let our
sense be what it will) but, by virtue of I know not what (Papal or Patriarchal)
Authority, he will say, we do Socinianize.

At this rate of magisterialness does he talk, in the Preface to his Appeal, p.
3. If any one that comes after shall use the same Expresions (meaning, the same
that Mr. Baxter uses) -- I say (and who then dare gainsay it?) He does
Socinianize! And immediately after (speaking of such words, as He with others
shall put into your Theses) he adds, much less may I be censured, though I
express my Resentments against him, whosoever he be, that is for leaving such
words out. One would have thought it had been no excess of modesty, if he had,
at least, excepted his Superiors in State, Age, Gravity, Learning and Piety:
If the King should Convene an Assembly of the most Pious and Judicious Bishops
and others, to draw up Theses to avoid Socinianism and Arminianism, and they
should leave out such Words, as this Dictator would put in, they are like (for
what I see) to feel his Resentments, whosoever they be, without exception;
though those worthy Persons, to whom he has Appealed, should be amongst 'em,
they are to find no favor; nay, though the King Himself should preside in the
Assembly, the Beams of Majesty will not be a sufficient Security to Him.

In the mean time, it is to be observed, what a mighty stress this man lays
upon Words and Expressions; these are all he talks of; not one Syllable about
the sense or meaning of 'em: Men may mean what they will, so they do but use
his Phrases; and let their meaning be never so sound, they must not escape his
Censure, unless they speak his Words. What degree of Necessity he puts upon
'em, as well as what the particular Words and Phrases are that he would impose,
may, the better appear if we also cast our eye upon the Letter he prefixed to
his late Defense: there we are told, that the Phrases are those, that they of
the greatest Character for Learning -- have both used, and judged necessary --
not only as a fence about the received Faith, and a Barrier against Irruptions
upon common Christianity: but as such Phrases, without which the Doctrines of
Christ's Satisfaction, and of our Justification could neither be Orthodoxly,
nor Intelligibly expressed.

You see it is not enough, that He may use 'em himself, but they must be imposed
as Necessary: Nor is be satisfied, to have his Words accounted a Fence about
the received Faith, a Barrier against Irruptions upon common Christianity; but
they must be admitted as the standard of Orthodoxy: Nothing will serve the
turn, but they must be esteemed Necessary, so Necessary, as that without them
the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and of our Justification can neither be
Orthodoxly, nor Intelligibly expressed. And what these so invaluable Phrases
are, he tells us afterward in his Defense it self, p. 13. and passim. They are
the very same that run through his Appeal, viz. a Commutation, or change of
Persons between Christ and us; Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners, and
Suffering in their Person; His coming under the Bond and Obligation of the
Violated Law, etc. These Forms of Speaking are not, by any means, to be
omitted; we forfeit our Understandings, our Orthodoxy, our Christianity, if we
dare to alter 'em.

And (perhaps) all the guilt of this kind does not lie at the Door of this
Accuser, and others of his way; it were well, if there were not a Participation
of it on all sides: And therefore, as one earnestly desirous of the more
Healthy and Peaceful State of the Church amongst us, I will here adventure to
lay my Hand upon the Contenders of all Denominations; and whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear, I will (at least, so far as relates to the
Matter in hand) interpose a few Seasonable and Healing Advices.

1. Distinguish carefully betwixt such Words or Terms as the Spirit of GOD has
made use of, and such as are of our own devising.

2. As to the latter, distinguish again betwixt Obscure and Improper Terms, and
such as are Apt and Expressive of what is intended by 'em.

3. Distinguish betwixt what you are obliged to use your selves, and what you
may expect from others.

4. As to others, you will find a difference (which should be allowed for)
betwixt such as are acted for one or other Party, by Ignorance or
Prepossession, and Men of more large and free Understandings.

5. But especially (as to the Expressions of other Men) distinguish betwixt
what they Say, and what they Mean.

Whereupon I add,

(1.) It should be no Matter of Debate amongst Christians, Whether Scriptural,
or other Terms, be to be preferred; the very Words of Scripture being Sacred,
as well as the Sense. Though this will not altogether hold true, as to one or
other Translation; yet of the Original Text, it is most certainly true, the
very Words being Dictated by the Divine Spirit. And this (perhaps) is what
principally distinguishes it from the best of other Writings: And even as to
Translations themselves, by how much the nearer they approach (in their
respective Languages) to the Original Text, and by how much the more exactly
they express that, so much the greater regard is to be had to the very Words
that are found in 'em. Thus far it may be hoped, such as are Christians will
readily be agreed. I say not this to Countenance any in their Ignorant
Mis-applications of Scripture-Phrases; I would only have it to refer to an
Understanding, and Apposite Use of 'em.

(2.) As to merely Humane Phrases, or Forms of Speaking, there are none (upon
any pretense) fit to be imposed; the most plausible Pretenses commonly made use
of, for that purpose, are either on one side, [Our Phrases are of Venerable
Age, what the Church has long been in possession of]: Or, (perhaps) on the
other side [Our Terms, though New, are most Clear and Expressive of the Truth,
and render it easily Intelligible to every considering Mind]: Now, granting
either the one or the other to be true, or (in some Instances) that they are
both Old and Significant; yet all that can follow thereupon is, Therefore they
are fit to be used; not, therefore they may, or ought to be Imposed. How weak
would such a Method of Reasoning as this be, Such a Word the Ancients used,
therefore we must use no other; such a Father, or such an Eminent Reformer used
it, and therefore he is a Heretic, or a Man of very dangerous Principles, that
varies from it]! Or again, should it be admitted on the other Hand; [Such a
Word is very significant, therefore no other should be us'd]! Yet upon no
better bottom do Multitudes suffer the Churches Peace, and their own Charity to
be reasoned away.

(3.) When we either speak, or write our selves, we are obliged to make use of
such Terms as have a most clear and agreed Sense, and are best adapted to
express to others, what it is we mean: the very end of Speech it self proves
this. And hereupon we ought, out of how great Variety soever offers, to choose
the fittest for our own use; but we are not hereupon empowered to choose for,
or prescribe to others, [In these Words, and no other, shall Ye Pray to GOD, or
Speak to Men, etc.] Those seem fittest to one Person, which do not so to
another.

(4.) Amongst Men that do not Religiously tie up themselves to the Phrases of
one or other Party (but, placing their Christianity only in those Great and
Necessary Things about which all Parties of Professors are agreed, as to other
Matters, have a greater Latitude and Freedom, both of Thought and Speech) we
may indeed expect the last mentioned Rule will be observed: But we should not
wonder, if some do Tenacionsly adhere to the Terms and Modes of Expression,
that are peculiar to their own Party, how Obscure and Improper soever; some out
of Weakness cannot, and many out of Prejudice and Prepossession will not vary
from 'em.

(5.) Now even as to these, there is room to hope (at least), they may not mean
altogether so bad, as their Words would seem to import: we should therefore (in
such cases) do what in us lies, to find out the sound Sense they aim at, and
approve of that, though not of their uncouth, and unintelligible Phrases. But,

(6.) By no means seek to impose upon others, one or other self-devised Phrase,
or Form of Expression, as if Truth could not be maintained without it; neither
lay so great a stress upon mere Words, as if Orthodoxy or Heresy did depend
upon 'em. And surely we should have little disposition so successively to cry
up, and contend for our respective modes and forms of speaking, if we did
consider,

I. What a trifling Spirit it argues, wherever it has place! a Mind empty of
every thing that is more great and manly! a childish Spirit that can find
leisure for, and pleasure in such little, inconsiderable things!

II. Especially, if we also add, (and I pray let it be added) How disagreeable
it is, to a Spirit rightly Christian! and that on many accounts: particularly,

1. As it manifests too little Veneration for the sacred Scriptures; how boldly
are these impeached of insufficiency, when Words and Phrases not to be met with
here, are obtruded upon the Church as Necessary, so Necessary as that without
them, the most important Articles of the Christian Faith can neither be
Orthodoxly nor Intelligibly expressed. With modest minds it should surely
suffice to say [they are apt, and may be useful]: but if their Necessity be
pressed upon us, they are at least equaliz'd with, if not preferred to those of
the Divine Spirit. And can any one that has the Spirit of Christianity in him,
deliberately agree to this [my words, my Phrases are as Necessary as those the
Holy Ghost has chosen]! He knew not how to convey his sense to the World so
well as I! If any will thus insolently set up themselves and traduce the sacred
Oracles of our holy Religion, my Soul, come not thou into their secret!

2. Nor will Christianity suffer, that the Perogative of God should be thus
invaded: his Sovereign Rights are hereby usurped upon: for as much as it is one
of his Peculiarities, to impose any thing upon the Church as Necessary. He
claims it, as what belongs to him, not only to be a Lawgiver, but to be the
one, the only Lawgiver in reference hereto: and who are we, that we should
justle him out of his Throne.

3. How disagreeing to the Spirit of Christianity is it, to give way to and
countenance such uncharitable censures; [that such an one is unsound,
Heretical, no Christian; because he dos not use my Words.] How common a guilt
is this! And by how much the more lately such an Over-magnifi'd Phrase was
introduced, so much the farther does the censure reach: For Instance, Christ's
Suffering in our Person, etc. If no one may be allowed for Orthodox, that uses
not this Phrase; the whole Christian Church is laid under Censure, except an
inconsiderable bandful within this last Age. But can it consist with
Christianity (whereof Charity is a most Essential and inseparable part) to
reproach, and unchristianize (in a manner) the whole Christian Church? Besides,

4. We do not only hereby revile Christians, (and so offend against the
Generation of God's children); but we do also debase Christianity it self: how
contemptibly mean, and vile is it rendered in the eyes of Bystanders, when
they see us with so unproportionate beat and Zeal contend for and against
insignificant words and Phrases; and laboring to proselite men to these, as if
the Kingdom of God was in these Letters and Syllables: How do they hereupon
ridicule, and break their Profane Jests upon Our Holy Profession! and how are
they fixed in their Prejudices against it! And is it nothing to us, that the
Name of Christ, and Christianity, is Blasphemed through us, by our means.

5. Besides, How are we hereby diverted, our Minds diverted from intending the
most amazingly great and awful Things that relate to Christianity: Those
Principles and Practices that do most truly Essentiate and Constitute it: Those
Truths which are according to Godliness, and which are adapted to advance and
promote it; which do both tend to make the Temper of our own Spirits better,
and to excite us to do more good to Others. These are forgotten, and
overlooked: hereupon (being diverted from what should Animate and Nourish us)
what a Ghastliness and Languor appears in the Face of Our Profession! How are
we become as dead Men! How little of the Life and Power of Godliness is to be
found amongst us! And should not this (will it not) be laid to Heart by such as
have any serious Regard to the Welfare of Christianity, or of their own Souls?
Will it not henceforward render Strifes of Words less Grateful and Relishing to
such, that they are likely to be attended with so pernicious Effects. We cannot
surely deliberately consent, that One or Other Phrase should be to us instead
of our God, our Redeemer, our Faith, our Hope, our Love, Holiness, and our
Heaven; nor place out the Zeal on that, which should be reserved for these.

But again,

III. If this Spirit were not so disagreeing to Christianity; it is no way fit
to be indulged, on the account of those perpetual Quarrels, it must necessarily
introduce amongst us: It would endlesly be Contested (without the possibility
of being ever decided) what particular Phrases shall be admitted as necessary?
By what Rules their Necessity, or no-Necessity shall be adjusted? Or, with whom
the Judgment of this grand Affair shall be entrusted?

And IV. It would greatly tend (should it obtain) to discourage all
Improvements in Knowledge: Every increase of Light will require more or less
Alteration to be made in the old and customary Modes of Expression; and
consequently endanger a Person's Reputation. At how much easier Cost, may Men
learn a set of Phrases, that they do not understand; and save their Pains, and
their Orthodoxy at once.

V. And Lastly, It has not the least Advantage attending it, to compensate for,
and set against all its mischievous Effects. That which is commonly pretended
for it, is, that it may be a Security against Error. But how utterly
insufficient is it for any such Purpose! How possible, nay, how common a Case
is it, for Persons to use the same Phrase, and yet not mean the same thing. So
vain, and so Pernicious does it generally prove, when we leave the Methods God
has prescribed, and will needs prevent or remove the Churches Maladies by Ways
and Means of our own devising.

But to draw to a Close, there is one thing farther that I would add (to avoid
Offense) and it is in Reference to the mention of Mr. Cross's Name, in the long
Marginal Note: When I wrote what you find there, I was in hopes of his second
Thoughts upon that Text; and the Papers were out of my Hand sometime before I
heard of his Death (I not having seen 'em for several Months past): Nor, till I
saw it in Print, did I remember there was any thing in which he was concerned;
otherwise I should at least have suppressed his Name, if not all that relates
to him -- for I cannot but be averse to every thing that looks like trampling
upon the Ashes of the Dead.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 26. r. nostra, p. 15. l. 8. r. as Errors, p. 20. l. 16. r. allege,
p. 28. l. 26. r. surely, p. 45. l. 2. r. that, p. 75. l. 14. r. strictius, p.
92. l. 2. add it, p. 114. l. 4. r. pursuing.

Introduction.
NOT knowing whether that Right Reverend and Worthy Bishop, or the other very
Learned Person (in the great and constant Cares of a more public Nature that
attend their Stations) may not account it rudeness for us to break in upon and
disturb 'em with our petty Quarrels; I have not thought fit so directly to
apply to them; and for this only Reason it is, that I have not joined in the
Appeal to 'em. Their Determination is not hereby intended to be declined; there
being no Reason to fear the Issue should they think fit to publish their
Judgments to the World.

But whether their leisure from greater Affairs will permit 'em (or indeed,
whether they shall account it worth their leisure) to interpose in this Matter,
or not; the Nature of the Charge is such, that (how groundlesly soever it be
advanced) it is not fit to be silent under it.

That which is apprehended more especially to require that this invidious
Reflection be taken notice of, is, That this way the Reputation of that most
excellent Person is undermined, and his most valuable Writings (as well as the
Ministry of those that in this Matter are of his Judgment) are (so far as in
this Accuser lies) blasted, and rendered odious and useless. And such as either
have wanted opportunity to look into the Socinian Writings, or have not
Judgment sufficient to distinguish betwixt Appearances and Realities, may be so
far imposed upon, by the Confidence of this Accuser, as to believe the Charge
advanced against us.

For their sakes therefore, and our own; to prevent their Guilt, as well as to
preserve our own Reputation and Usefulness (and, if possible, also to undeceive
this Accuser and his Brethren) we think it fit and necessary that it be made
appear, There is no sufficient ground whereupon to Censure Mr. Baxter, or
(those whom he calls) his Followers, as Socinians, in that Great and Important
Article of Christ's Satisfaction.

For the clearing whereof, we shall, with reference to the suspected Passages,
(First) manifest their Agreeableness to Truth. And then show the no-advantage
hereby given to the Socinian Cause.

Now the Passages this Accuser, and his Brethren, are so much afraid of, and
grieved at (as he pretends) we shall set together, that we may see what they
will in the whole amount to; and they are these:

1. Christi perpessiones quoad rationem reifuere malum natural perpessum ex
occasion and causalitate remota peccatorum generis humani. (He should have
added) and proxime ex sponsionis and consensus proprii obligatione. Bax.
Method. Theol. Pars III. Cap. 1. Determ. 5. p. 38. This will be the better
understood, if it be observed, that the Question he had before him, was,
Whether the Suffering of Christ was properly and formally a Punishment? For the
Determination whereof, he does define Punishment (properly so called) a Natural
Evil (that is, an Evil of Suffering) inflicted for, or on account of a Moral
Evil (i. e. the Evil of Sin.) And (besides other Distinctions which he had
premised) he distinguishes betwixt the Suffering of the Delinquent himself, for
his own Sin, in which case his Sin is directly, immediately, and per se, the
cause of his Suffering; and this (he tells us) is Punishment in the Primary and
most Famous Sense of it: and the Suffering of another by reason of the
Delinquent's fault; in which case, though there be a Suffering for Sin, yet
that Sin is more indirectly, mediately, and per accidens the cause of the
Suffering; and therefore though it be Punishment, yet it is only in a Secondary
and Analogical Sense to be so called.

And this Secondary sort of Punishment is twofold; it is either Natural or
Voluntary; the Natural Punishment for another's Sin, he calls that which
follows upon the nearness of Relation in Nature betwixt the Sufferer and the
Sinner; as when Children suffer for their Parent's Sins; the Voluntary is, when
there is a free consent and undertaking to suffer on the behalf, and in the
stead of the Sinner, though there was no previous Relation to the Sinner from
whence he should naturally be obliged to suffer for him.

Now he does (and surely with very just Reason) conclude the Sufferings of
Christ to be of this last kind, for that they were not the Sufferings of the
Delinquent himself, and so not Punishment in the Primary and most Famous Sense
of the Word; they could therefore only be Punishment in a Secondary and less
proper Sense. And since, even in his Assuming our Nature, Christ was conceived
miraculously by the Power of the Holy Ghost (and did not descend from Adam by
ordinary Generation) therefore in that Secondary Sense, his Punishment could
not be the natural Effect of Adam's Sin. It remains then, that Christ only was
punished as a Voluntary Undertaker, and the Analogical Punishment He underwent
was inflicted on him as a Sponsor in our stead; our Sins were the ground and
reason of his Sufferings, yea the meritorious Cause (but not so nearly and
immediately as they would have been of our own Sufferings;) for that his
Sponsion and Consent did necessarily intervene; so that they may not unaptly be
called Punishments, though not so fully and properly as the Sufferings of the
Sinners themselves might have been so called. To this Sense does that excellent
Person speak, and this is little else than a Translation of his Latin Words,
as will appear to any one that is capable and willing to consult the place
referred to. And this being the Substance of what he afterward quotes from
him, I shall need to be at no farther trouble than only to recite the Words.

2. And thus he goes on; Peccata nostra fuere causa remota passionis Christi.
And again, Culpa nostra non erat causa proxima ejus passionis, sed tantum
remota and occasio. Once more; At sensu improprio (i. e. not in that most
proper and primary Sense in which they are imputed to the Sinner himself, as
may be collected from the immediately foregoing Words) per meram Connotationem
dici potest, peccata nostro Christo imputata fuisse, viz. quoad reatum paenae
(and culpae ut ad paenam, at non in se) idque tantum remote: non quasi peccata
nostra paenas Christi merita essent, sed quia nisi nobis paenas merita essent,
ille paenas non dedisset. Et quia paena nulla est formaliter nisi propter
peccatum, ideo quatenus Christi passiones fuere paenae Analogice fic dictae,
peccatum (non suum, sed nostrum; non causam meritoriam, sed quasi procausam
meritoriam and occasionem) connotabant. Ibid. Determ. 7. p. 40, 41.

3. He quotes him again in English, thus: Man's Sin was an occasion of Christ's
Sufferings, as being Loco causae meritoriae, for properly there was no
meritorious Cause. The Law's Curse, or Obligation, was another occasion, as
being Miseriae causa removenda. Christ's voluntary Sponsion or Consent, was the
moral obliging Cause. Universal Redempt. p. 7. Again, We must distinguish
betwixt Suffering Ex obligatione legis, and merito peccati, as we should have
done if we had suffered our selves; and Suffering ex obligatione solius
sponsionis propriae, as Christ did, without any Merit, or Legal Obligation, his
own Sponsion being instead of both, and our Sin and Obligation being but the
occasion, or Loco causae meritoriae, Ibid. p. 25. Again, The Law, as binding us
was the great occasion of Christ's Death, and Loco causae obligatoriae; but not
the obligatory Cause it self: Christ's own Sponsion, and his Father's Will,
were the only proper Obligations, P. 34. Again, Christ did not suffer from the
Obligation of the Law, but from the Obligation of his own Sponsion, on occasion
of the Law's obliging us to suffer, P. 48. Once more, Christ's Sufferings had
no real, proper, meritorious Cause; but yet Man's Sins were the pro-causa
meritoria, he undertook to bear that Suffering which for them was due to us
(not to Him) and therefore when I say, He bore the Sufferings due to us, I mean
it materialiter only; such Sufferings for kind and weight He bore, but his
Obligation to bear 'em was only from his own Sponsion, and not the Law, P. 91.

These are alleged by the Accuser, as some of those Passages which move him
and his Brethren to fear, etc. Appeal, P. 4. But these being but some of 'em,
he adds the rest, P. 10. 11, 12. and what he further transcribes is this:

4. We must not say that Christ died nostro loco, so as to Personate us, or
represent our Persons in Law-Sense, but only to bear what else we must have
born, P. 51. And, As for your Objection, That no other way but Representing our
Persons could suffice to Save us by the Satisfaction of another, it is a gross
Mistake, and naked Affirmation, without Proof: And for them that say, Christ
suffered in persona nostra, but not satisfied, or merited so: I Answer, They
speak Inconsistencies, P. 76. To which he adds his Explication of that Phrase
of Christ's Suffering loco nostro; as it signifies, Suffering that which
another was obliged to suffer toward the freeing him from it; being materially
the same, but not formally, from the same Obligation, but from the Obligation
of a voluntary Sponsion; and this not in the Name, or as representing the
Person of that other, but in a Third Person, viz. in the Person of a Mediator,
Redeemer, or Friend, P. 22. 23. I need not mention what he next adds, for that
it were exceeding strange if any one should (with this Author) Traduce a Person
as Socinianizing, for distinguishing betwixt Christ's dying in our stead, and
his dying for our good.

Now to what purpose have we all these Passages Transcribed by him? with what
design? what, can it be imagined the Man will make of 'em! (unless he have a
mind to bring some of his Friends into a better Acquaintance with that most
excellent Person.) What has he to except against any of the Recited Clauses?
For my part, I was not able to guess, what Evil it was that he would charge
upon 'em; nor could I have been more surpised, if any one had Cavill'd against
the plainest Theorem in Euclid; Mr. Baxter's Theses in this Case, being as
plainly demonstrable (upon Scripture-Principles) as any of Euclid's are (upon
Principles of Common Reason:) nor is it fit (perhaps) that any thing should be
admitted into the rank of Christian Doctrines, but what is so. But what
dangerous, what pernicious Error has he found in these Passages! Why, he dreams
at least, that he is aware of a Design (bad enough, you may be sure) against
the Doctrine of a real, full, and proper Satisfaction to God's Justice for our
Sins, P 4. Risum teneatis. Well, but how must this Design be carried on? Why,
don't you observe it, here is left out a Change of Persons between Christ and us
all along? I Am well aware of it; and what then? Why, and then there is not a
Word of Christ's Sustaining our Person, nor of Christ's Suffering in the Person
of Sinners; and a Design there is on foot (I smell it at a distance) to turn
[Christ's Suffering in the Person of Sinners] into [his Suffering in the Person
of a Mediator.] Why surely, though one cannot yet guess what hurt there should
be in it, yet (if it be kept so very close, as this Man's way of Expression
would intimate) one would be ready to suspect, there was some ill design in it;
but (upon further Enquiry) it appears, there was no need of so great Cunning to
find out that this was designed; it is what Mr. Baxter proclaimed openly (in the
hearing of the whole World) near Forty Four Years ago; for thus he spoke in
his Confession of Faith, P. 152, 153. Christ, as the public Sponsor, did bear
the Punishment deserved by the Sins of the World, and made to his Father a
Satisfaction sufficient for the Sins of all: but this he did in the Person of a
Mediator, that undertook to bear the Penalty, and not in the Person of the
Elect, or of any particular Sinner, etc. Nor has he at any time since made a
Secret of it; but upon every befitting occasion this has still been his
constant Language. So in the Catechism, at the end of his Family-Book, P. 447.
Christ suffered for our Sins, and in our stead, because it was to free us from
Sufferings; but yet He suffered in the Person of a Mediator, who indeed is one
that undertook to suffer in the Sinner's stead, but never was, nor consented to
be esteemed the Sinner himself. And a little farther; Christ suffered in our
stead, but not as our Delegate, nor in our Name and Person properly, but as a
voluntary Mediator, etc. -- So also in his Treatise of Justifying
Righteousness, Part I. P. 55. Christ suffered and obeyed in the Person of the
Mediator, between GOD and Man, and as a Subject to the Law of Mediation. The
like again, P. 24. as indeed frequently in that Book. So in his Meth. Theol. P.
III. P. 42. Christus in Persona Mediatoris passus est -- non in Persona --
offendente. And in his Cath. Theol. Part II. P. 38.. 41. Christ did not take
upon Him strictly and properly the (Natural or Civil) Person of any Sinner,
much less of all the Elect, or all Sinners, but the Person of a Mediator
between God and sinners. See also. 43. And P. 66.. 142. He (God) judges Christ
to have been the Sponsor and Mediator, and in that Person to have done and
suffered as He did; because it is true: but He judges Him not to have been the
Legal Person of the Sinner, -- because that is not true. It were almost endless
to refer you to all the other places where he thus speaks -- Now after all, is
it not very pleasant, to have this Man come and whisper it (as if it had been
some mighty Secret) That he was aware this great Man had a design to turn
[Christ's suffering in the Person of Sinners] into [his suffering in the Person
of a Mediator.] P. 12. If it be a Plot, it is surely a very innocent one, that
he should carry it on (for so many Years) so openly, and in the view of all the
World; 'twas what he never was ashamed to own; and what was known to be his
Sense of the Matter (for ought I know) before this Informer was born.

But to proceed, Suppose he was for Christ's Suffering in the Person of a
Mediator, and not of Sinners, (as, though it is by this Accuser only hinted as a
remote Design, yet we have (if that will do him any kindness) given him very
full and plain Evidence of it) what hurt is there in it? -- What! why then
Christ was never by virtue of the Sanction of the Law obliged to suffer for us;
that is, as he often tells us, the Original Law, the Law which we had
transgressed did not oblige Christ to suffer. Well, it is granted! pray go on;
And then, He suffered not a proper Punishment [but only the same Sufferings we
were obliged to materially, not formally:] This is the Design he (the Reporter)
was aware of, and so suggested it, P. 12.

The Reporter (if all Reports be true) has been aware of other kind of Designs
which yet he has not thought fit to suggest; and if he be so good at an
Intrigue himself, as he is commonly famed to be, no wonder if he be jealous of
every one else: It would incline one (that is of no very surmising Temper) to
fear his Thoughts run much upon Designs and Plots when he is awake, that he
cannot sleep but he must Dream of 'em, and like one delirous cry out in his
sleep, Oh! they have a Design, a Cursed Design, I Am aware of what they aim at!
And when he is perfectly awake, he can tell of no more that they design, than
only to turn [Christ's suffering in the Person of Sinners] into [his suffering
in the Person of a Mediator] who was never by virtue of the Sanction of the
Law, obliged to suffer for us, and who suffered not a proper Punishment, but
only the same sufferings we were obliged to materially, and not formally;
though in his Dream he had talked of a Design against the Doctrine of
Satisfaction. -- Whereas these two things do so widely differ, as that the one
may be designed, where the other is not, as shall hereafter be made appear;
yea, that it is as consistent, as for a most sincere Anti-Socinian to be as
heartily engaged against Antinomianism; and that nothing but his Ignorance can
disprove this Accuser's being engaged in a design to promote either the one or
the other, Socinianism, I mean, or Antinomianism; though whether of the two may
hereafter more evidently appear, if ever he should have either less Policy, or
more Integrity than now.

In the mean time, as a Vindication of that
(Not-without-just-veneration-to-be-Nam'd) Mr. Baxter, and those who (with my
self) Bless God for him, and his Excellent Labors, (though we, as the Servants
of Christ, dare follow no one farther than he is a Follower of our Lord;) I
say, as a Vindication of him and our selves, I shall undertake these Two Things
in the following Papers, viz. to prove, That what is here Transcribed from Mr.
Baxter is the Truth, that must secure us from the Impious and to be abhorred
Blasphemy of Antinomianism: And afterward, to make it appear, That the equally
horrid Opinions (on the Socinian Extreme) are (not only not-countenanc'd, but
also) most effectually refell'd upon these Principles.

To which I shall apply my self, when I have only added, That what is here
said, is not intended as an Anticipation to the Just Defense that may be
expected from that other worthy Person, whom this Accuser does also by Name
traduce; and therefore I do not meddle with any of those Passages wherein he is
personally concerned.

PART I.
. 1. THIS Accuser having throughout his Appeal Insinuated that the
before-recited Passages are Unsound, and Socinianizing at least, if not
Socinian, has made it necessary in order to our Defense, that we make it
appear, they are not chargeable Errors, much less as Socinianism: The former of
these we shall begin with, viz. That there is nothing Erroneous or Unsound in
the Particulars he has Transcribed from Mr. Baxter.

. 2. In order to which we shall consider 'em distinctly, according to the
several Heads, to which he seems to have reduced 'em; though for want of Method
in his Book (or through the Intricacy of it at least) it is not easy to find 'em
out -- But the Principles he seems to Extract from the abovementioned
Passages, and to expose to Censure are these, viz.

I. That Christ Suffered by Virtue of the Law of Mediation, not by Virtue of
the Sanction of the Violated Law.

II. And consequently that he Suffered in the Person of a Mediator, not in the
Person of Sinners.

III. And that thereupon his Sufferings were only Materially, not Formally the
same we were obliged to.

IV. And that our Sins (though they were the Impulsive Meritorious Cause of
Christ's Sufferings) yet it was only more remotely that they were so, and not
so nearly and immediately as they would have been of our own.

V. And therefore, though his Sufferings may not unaptly be called a
Punishment, yet not in that full and proper Sense in which the Sufferings of
the Sinner himself might have been so called.

CHAP. I.
That Christ did not suffer by Virtue of the Law which we had Transgressed, but
only by Virtue of the Law of Mediation.

THIS is so far from being a pernicious Error, as that it is a very Important
and most Useful Truth; for the manifesting which I Will set my self to hint the
absurd Consequents of the opposite Notion, and to obviate the seeming
Reasonings of this Accuser against it.

. 1. Suppose we for a while that this Notion of Mr. Baxter's is false, as this
Accuser would have it; now if it be so, then the Proposition contrary to it
must needs be true; and if it were true, nothing but what is so could naturally
and necessarily flow from it. We will therefore consider some of the direct
Consequences of that opposite Notion, and they are such as these.

. 2. 1. If Christ did suffer by virtue of the violated Law, then it must needs
be, either that he was a Violator of the Law Himself, or that Law must be
disjunctive; [Thou, or thy Surety, shall obey, otherwise, Thou, or thy Surety,
shall suffer.] That one of these Consequents must be allowed, cannot (with any
appearance of Reason) be denied: He could not suffer by virtue of that Law,
unless He were under the reach of it; and how could He be any other way under
the reach of that Law, than one of these two:

Either as having violated it Himself; or, being bound, when the Law was given,
as a Surety in the same Bond with us.

There is indeed a third way pretended by this Accuser, and that is, That by
his own Sponsion, and by the will of the Father, He came under the Obligation
of the Violated Law, and so stood bound by this Law to suffer, Ap. p. 5, 6. But
it is strange, that a Person so well acquainted with Laws, as he would be
thought to be, should need to be told, that if the Obligation Christ laid
Himself under to suffer, was as exactly the same, with that we lay under, as it
was possible to be; yet the Change that was made in the Person obliged to
suffer, did alter the Form of it, and make it truly another Law, another
Obligation, and not that of the Original Law, otherwise than Materially only.
We are willing to allow, That Christ suffered the same for Quantity and Quality
that we should have suffered, so far as there is but probable Proof. Baxt. of
Univers. Redempt. p. 78, 79. But if it were most strictly the same thing that
we were obliged to, yet it is not sufficient to prove, He suffered under the
Formal Obligation of the Violated Law, or that He stood bound by that Law to
suffer; for that another Person may, in the stead of a Criminal, suffer the
very same kind of Pain, or Loss, That the Criminal himself was Condemned to,
and this by his own Sponsion, and the Will of the Prince: In which case I dare
appeal to all the Learned in the Law, whether the Obligation be not another;
whether the Law by virtue whereof He suffers, be not differing from that which
Condemned the Malefactor himself.

So that if Christ did (as this Accuser of him, as well as us, says) suffer by
virtue of the Violated Law; it is not to be conceived, how the threatening of
that Law could reach Him, unless He were (as we have hinted)

Either a Violater of that Law Himself, or an Antecedent Surety with and for us.

Which either of these he shall say, it will equally be subversive of the whole
Gospel.

. 3. (1.) Should he have the Front to say, That Christ was Himself a Violater
of that Law, what more Egregious Blasphemy could he utter against the Author of
our Holy Religion? How should He be the Redeemer of Sinners, that was a Sinner
Himself! The whole Gospel does depend upon, and necessarily presuppose his
Innocence (yea, which is more, his Divinity) as the Foundation of it, John 1.
1. Hell it self cannot Foam out greater Rage and Nonsense than to call God a
Sinner; and while we are so expressly assured, That our Lord Jesus was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. That He knew no sin, 2
Cor. 1. 21. Heb. 4. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 22. 1 John 3. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 19. We shall not
so much as suspect, that any one Professing the Christian Name will imagine,
that Christ suffered as being a Violater of that Law Himself.

2. If then He suffered by Virtue of the Sanction of that Law, it remains that
He was an Antecedent Surety with and for us; otherwise the Obligation of that
Law could never reach Him; and then the Law as given to Adam, must be supposed
to run [Thou shall obey, or thy Surety for thee; otherwise, thou shall die, or
thy Surety for thee.] Now if the Original Law did thus take in a Surety, how
plain is it, that it was never violated! Our Surety did obey, did fulfill all
Righteousness; if then it only obliged either Him, or us disjunctively to obey;
what ground is there left, whereupon either Christ or we should suffer!

Obj. But I presume some will allege, His Suretiship did only respect the
Sanction, not the preceptive part of the Law; that the Law did not oblige Him
to obey; but only (supposing our Disobedience) either He or we must suffer.

Repl. To which it might be replied, The Surety's Name is not more Legible in
the Penal; than in the Preceptive Part of the Law; and we find He did Obey, as
well as Suffer; and therefore have reason to think He was equally obliged to
Obey, as He was to Suffer. But yet we will suppose it to be (as they would have
it) that Christ was only obliged in case of our Disobedience; that He was only
a Surety with reference to the Penalty; and that the Sense of the Law was [Thou
Adam shall obey, otherwise, thou or Christ, shall die.] And thus far at least
He must be obnoxious to the Original Law, otherwise He could not possibly
suffer under the Obligation of that Law; He could not be said to be (as this
Accuser would have it thought He was) in the same Bond with us, and obliged to
suffer by virtue of the Sanction of the same Law that obliged us to suffer.

. 4. Now this Notion in the Consequences of it, is equally subversive of
Christianity with the former,

For 1. If the Original Law (as to its Penal Part) was disjunctive, viz. either
that the Offender should suffer, or Christ for him, then the Gospel had not
been the bringing in of a better Covenant, but a performance Of the Sufferings
of Christ, last Edition, p. 14.
of the Old. Thus does that Right Reverend Person, to whom this Accuser has
Appealed, argue against him. Upon this Principle, what the Apostle had so
carefully distinguished, are confounded together, and made one and the same
thing, when upon a comparing 'em together, he does once and again give the
Preferrence to the latter Covenant, (as Heb. 7. 22. -- 8. 6.) it is plain he
supposes the one is not the other; or, if the Apostle in that Discourse had a
more immediate Reference to the Mosaic Law, his Argument will hold a fortiori
from hence, in reference to the Original Law. But there is one thing farther I
would add under this Head, which perhaps will be of weight with this Accuser
and his Friends, and that is, That hereupon the Gospel must needs be a Law, the
very Old, Original Law, and not so much as a Law of greater Grace; what can
there possibly be left to distinguish the Old, Original Law, and the Gospel, if
this Principle be admitted?

2. If the Original Law (as to its Penal Part) was disjunctive, it would also
follow, That we are Justifiable, according to the utmost Rigor of that Law;
for supposing the Penalty to be already borne, what has that Law further to
Charge upon us? The Psalmist (surely) had much differing Apprehensions of the
Matter, when he cried out, If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities, O Lord, who
shall stand? Psalm. 130. 3. The Reverend Dr. Owen's Words upon this place, are
very remarkable: But (says he) may not an Intercessor be obtained to Plead on
the Behalf of the guilty Soul? Eli determines this matter, I Sam. 2. 25. If one
Man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him? There is not, says Job, between us, (...)
one that might argue the case, in pleading for me, and so make up the Matter,
laying his hand upon us both, Job 9. 33. We now (as he immediately adds)
consider a Sinner purely under the Dr. Owen, on Psalm. CXXX. p. 48.
Administration of the Law, which knows nothing of a Mediator. So that
(according to him, and indeed according to the Truth of the thing) the Original
Law did not admit or appoint any Mediator, any Christ to suffer and plead on
the behalf of the guilty Soul; and consequently left no place for hope. But
upon this Supposal, That that Law only obliged either Christ, or us to suffer,
what reason was there for so dismal Apprehensions? though God should mark
Iniquities, resolve to Animadvert upon 'em with utmost Rigor, we may yet
stand; for that the very rigor of the Law does (according to them) require
only, that either Christ, or we should suffer, not that both should, now then
where is the danger the Psalmist was so apprehensive of? And whence is it, that
he does elsewhere so earnestly deprecate God's Judicial Process, Psalm. 143. 2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified. It must needs be, either that the Psalmist, or these Men, have
very greatly misapprehended the Sense of that Law; for that according to him,
if God should judge us by that Law, no man living could be justified; whereas
according to them, though God should judge us by that Law, we cannot but be
Justified; for when the threatened Penalty is inflicted, the most rigorous
Justice can go no further; we are Recti in Curia, when the Law is satisfied; no
further charge can have place against us.

3. Yea further, it follows, That we never had (as indeed we could never need)
a Pardon. The Case will be very plain by a familiar Instance: Suppose two
Persons jointly bound for the Payment of a certain Sum of Money, or for the
performance of any other Condition or Contract; if either Party pay the Money,
or discharge the Bond, the other is quit in Law, and the Creditor cannot be
said to have forgiven him. Justice it self is so far from requiring, that it
would not admit of double Payment. Now then, if Christ was in the same Bond
with us, if either He or we suffer, the Debt is Paid, the utmost Demands of
Justice are answered; what place is there then left for Forgiveness? Can a
Penalty be said to be forgiven, that was not due? or can it be yet due, when
it is already paid? and is it not in Law paid, if either the Principal or Surety
pay it? Upon this Principle then it is plain, That God cannot be said to have
forgiven us, to have been gracious to us (...): For though Socinus did (as
Grotius has manifested) Argue from those Terms, with great weakness, against
all Satisfaction; yet nothing can, with greater force and evidence, disprove a
full and proper Solution. What shall we then say to those numerous Texts, where
we and our Sins are said to be forgiven? Hereupon the Gospel Covenant, as
offering Remission, Luke 24. 47. and the Sacraments of the Gospel, as Sealing
it to Sincerely Penitent Believers, Acts 2. 38. Mat. 26. 28. are rendered mere
Impertinencies; and can it be thought these Persons do ever pray for Pardon; or
that they do account themselves beholden to God for it? how they can
consistently with this their Opinion, I see not.

4. Moreover, this Doctrine renders our Repentance, and all Obedience of our's
needless; and a continued course of the most enormous wickednesses would
hereupon be unhurtful to us. If these Persons will be consistent with
themselves, it seems necessary for 'em to say (as Dr. Crisp) that Sin can do us
no hurt, and Holiness can do us no good. Upon this Principle, what hurt can
Sin, the grossest wickedness do us? Suppose a Person an Atheist, a Blasphemer,
an Adulterer, that he live and die such; in this case it can only be said, The
Law was violated, and therefore the Threatening must take place: But if this
Notion be true, that the Law threatens only, that either the Sinner or Christ
shall die, it cannot touch such a Creature as this, it having been already
executed.

And alike needless must it needs render Holiness and Obedience in all the
Instances of it; for to what purpose is it, can it be supposed to be needful,
if he may be accepted with God, if he may be Rectus in curia without it.

5. Again, If this Principle be admitted, none of our sufferings would consist
with the Justice of God: for that according to them, the Law did oblige only
Christ, or us, to suffer; if either suffer therefore, full Payment is made; the
Law has no farther demands to make; how is it then, that we notwithstanding
suffer? that we are subjected to any Sufferings, Spiritual or Temporal (not to
make any mention here of Eternal ones) Whence is it that God with-draws the
Quickening, or Comforting Influences of his Spirit from any? Whence is it, that
He gives up any to their own Hearts Lusts? Whence is it that any are exposed to
the fiery Darts of the wicked one? Or yet, that the Arrows of the Almighty do
wound, do stick fast in any Soul? Or, if we should yet come lower, how
unaccountable were it, that we should groan under pining Sicknesses, noisome
Diseases, racking Pains, and at length yield to Death?

It will, perhaps, be pleaded, That God may inflict all these Evils, and many
more at pleasure, as being Absolute Lord of his Creatures; but it should be
remembered, That having given us a Law, He is become our Ruler; and thereby He
does declare, That He will not, however (antecedently thereto) He might have
Arbitrarily inflicted any Evil upon us: The very giving out a Law, in and by
which it is Enacted, That such certain Evils shall be inflicted upon the
Transgressors of it; how plainly does it indemnifie-the Non-violaters of it
from such Sufferings? Such Threatenings otherwise could answer no End; if it
were intended, That whether they violated the Law, or not, they should be alike
obnoxious. Now if we consider God as a Governor, the Evils He inflicts come
under another Consideration; they are not merely Afflictions or Sufferings, but
they are also Punishments, and therefore they are not dispensed Arbitrarily,
but according to a Stated Rule; He does not punish any but such as by the Law
are obnoxious; hence is it that we read of his Righteousness in Reference to
this Matter.

And as this does more generally evince, That all Evils inflicted by a Ruler as
such, are Punishments; so (with Reference to the particular Instances
abovementioned) it might be distinctly made appear, that they are, in the most
strict and proper Sense, Punishments -- In the last (which is not the least
doubted) Case, how plain is it! that the Separation of Soul and Body is Penal;
that it is a natural Evil no one doubts, as such it is abhorred of all; and that
it is inflicted for, or by reason of Sin, is as unquestionable, if the Apostle's
account of the Matter may be allowed; for so he tells us, Romans 5. 12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned. So that Death (amongst Men) has the nature of a
Punishment in it, but how then comes it to be inflicted, if it be not due? If
we be not obnoxious to the Sentence of the Law, it cannot be said to be due to
us; if the Threatening was disjunctive, both Parties Bound could not be
obnoxious, if Sentence be executed on either, the other is clear; how comes it
then that we are punished and Christ too! What shall we say? Is God unrighteous
that takes vengeance? Romans 3. 5. Or is not this rather an unrighteous
Doctrine, that would reflect the Imputation of Injustice upon the Holy God?

6. Yet again, According to this Notion, How can the Eternal Damnation of any
Soul consist with Divine Justice? This Surety is a Punishment with a witness;
but how can it be a righteous one if it be not due? And it cannot be due to any
Man, if it be already paid; and every Man has paid it, if his Surety have done
it. I see not, upon this Principle, how God can, in Justice, Damn any
individual Soul: Here then is Universal Redemption, and Universal Grace, beyond
the utmost stretch of Arminianism it self. What! is it then not only possible
that they may, but is it also certain that all shall be Saved from Everlasting
Perdition! Is there not only a Sufficiency of Grace afforded to all, but that
Efficacious Influence that will secure the Effect! Is God not only unwilling to
Damn any, but is He also unjust, unrighteous if He do! It Is strange then, that
we should read of a (...), Romans 2. 5. and an (...), Heb. 2. 2. Certainly a
Threatening us with Wrath, because of God's righteous Judgment, and with
Remediless Ruin, as a just Recompense of Reward, cannot but intimate, That God
would be Righteous and Just, though careless obdurate Sinners should finally
perish.

Nay, while we are assured, That Sodom and Gomorrah, Jude, v. 7. and many
others, suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire, and that God has not only (...),
Power, Ability, Mat. 10. 28. but also (...), Power, Authority, Luke 12. 5. to
cast into Hell: those, and many like Texts, cannot be more true, than this
Opinion is false, that would infer God cannot Punish, cannot cast into Hell,
were unjust if He should do it; yea, such a Notion must needs be false, that
these Sacred Scriptures may be true.

7. I Will add but one more absurd Consequence of this Opinion (though many more
might be subjoined) and that is, That the Patrons of this Principle do hereby
greatly obscure, and lessen that Free Grace in Christ, which they so highly
pretend to Exalt and Magnify. When they have seemed to advance Free Grace
beyond all others, to cry up Gospel Grace, and Gospel-Preaching, they do at
length subvert all Purely-Gospel-Grace at once, and necessarily resolve the
Whole of Divine Grace into the Constitution of the Law of Works: For, supposing
(with them) that Christ's Name was put into the Original Bond; supposing that
Law did take in Christ as Surety with us; it is not of Grace, but Justice, that
God is reconciled to us, or that we are accepted with Him; it should not be
said that we are Justified freely by his Grace, but that the Rigor of the Law
did exact nothing more, and therefore our Justification was a due debt, 'twas
what was owing to us by Governing Justice; the Righteous God could not Condemn
us, having already exacted the threatened Punishment at our Surety's Hands. Now
is it so Adorable, so Surprising Grace, that God should be just to his own Law!
Is it so very Astonishing and Wonderful a thing, that God should be true to his
Word! Thus, after all their Pretenses of a more exalted Admiration of, and
Value for Divine Grace, they do by this Notion shrink it into so narrow a
Compass, as the Framing the Original Law; and as for all that which the Gospel
magnifies as Grace, they render it nothing other than pure Justice; all Gospel
Grace should (with them, if they will consist with themselves) be nothing
differing from a due Debt, though the Apostle does so carefully
contra-distinguish and oppose 'em to each other, Romans 4. 4.

5. (2.) If Christ did suffer by Virtue of the violated Law, then his
Sufferings were most strictly the same that we were obnoxious to; this is as
plain, as that the Sanction of the Law was the same with it self. But is it to
be admitted, that our Lord Jesus Christ was alienated from the Life and Love of
God! that He was dead in trespasses and sins! deserted of the Spirit of
Holiness! was his Soul overrun with outrageous and impetuous Lusts! All which,
under one consideration, is our Punishment, though under another respect it be
also our Sin. Or was the Lord Jesus hated, abhorred of the Father! Did He lose
all right to, and Interest in God's Favor and Kindness? Did He bear the
stinging Reflections of a guilty Conscience, the horrors of a despairing damned
wretch in Hell? This is but part of the Punishment included in the Threatening
against us; but what Pious Soul would not rise with Indignation against any
one, that should so far Blaspheme the Holy and ever-blessed Redeemer, as to say
this was his Case, his State? And if He did not suffer what that Law threatened,
it cannot be said that He suffered by virtue of that Law. It remains then, that
He did only suffer by virtue of the Law of Mediation, as before.

. 6. (3.) Then the Law obliged him to suffer; whereupon it would follow, that
neither He could refuse the Undertaking; nor God refuse to accept it as
Punishment; but this I shall but mention here.

. 7. We are next to obviate the seeming Reasonings of this Accuser against this
Truth; and what he does loosely (and immethodically enough) offer here and
there to this purpose, we shall endeavor to reduce into some Order, that it
may appear, with all the force it has, against us; and be more capable of
receiving a just Reply. And,

(1.) He does insinuate, That Christ's Sufferings cannot otherwise be an Act of
Rectoral Justice; but only Acts of Obedience and Dominion. Take his own Words:
We are of Opinion, That Sufferings which are not from the Obligations of a
Violated Law, cannot be an Act of Rectoral Justice, which does Essentially
respect the Law in its Distributions. -- If a Rector sentenceth any to
Sufferings, without a regard to Sin, it is Unjust. Appeal, p. 7.

And again, If Mr. B. resolve Christ's Sufferings wholly into a Conformity to
the Precept of the Mediatorial Law, -- they can be but Acts of Obedience and
Dominion, not Acts of Justice, p. 50, 51. So he goes on, p. 52. They affirm 'em
to be but Acts of Obedience, and consequently Acts of Dominion, not of Punitive
Justice. So again, p. 54. The Sufferings of Christ -- could not be a Judicial
Act of God: He (Christ) could not be Condemned, nor could Sentence pass upon
Him; nor according to any Sentence could He be executed; for where no
Obligation to Punishment by the Sanction of the Law, there no Guilt in any
Sense; where no Guilt, no Condemning, no Passing a Sentence justly, no
Execution, etc. And P. 56. His Sufferings could be but an Act of Dominion.

Now to all this we Answer.

1. That He is so Confused, and Unsteady in the Forming this Objection, that we
can hardly so much as guess what it is he means: Sometimes he speaks of the
Sufferings of Christ as an Act of Rectoral Justice, and a Judicial Act of God;
where one would think he considers 'em as inflicted by God; and yet in other
places, he speaks of 'em as Acts of Justice, where it is not certain, but he may
refer to 'em as undertaken by Christ: Now these two are far from being the same
thing, That Christ was not unrighteous in undertaking, and undergoing those
Sufferings; and that God was not unrighteous in inflicting and laying 'em upon
Him.

Again, he thus confounds, an Act of Dominion, and Acts of Dominion; whereas
the former may import, That the Father (as Dominus Christi, as his Lord) might
enjoin Him to suffer; and the latter may signify, That Christ (as Lord of his
own Acts) might offer, might consent to suffer.

Besides, he confounds Sufferings inflicted by virtue of the Sanction of the
Law, and Sufferings inflicted, with a regard to Sin, and makes the latter
signify as much as the former, whereas we constantly (and with the justest
Reason) distinguish betwixt 'em; and allow that in the Sufferings of Christ,
there was a regard had to Sin, to our Sin, as what had offended, highly
incensed the Divine Majesty against us, and rendered it necessary (for the
Reputation of his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, and the support of his
Governing-Authority) that his Displeasure should in one way or other be
manifested against Sin, if He should (and that He might) remit the Penalty due
to the Sinner. And hereupon it was agreed betwixt the Father and the Son, that
Christ should Suffer; the Divine Wisdom this way at once providing for the
Honor of God, as Governor, and for the Redemption of Apostate-Man. So that we
readily grant, there was a respect had to sin, in the Sufferings of Christ;
yea, that it could not have consisted with the Justice of God as Rector, to
Sentence Him to suffer, without a regard to sin. But it does not, cannot thence
follow, that He suffered by virtue of the Obligation of the Violated Law; that
that Law obliged Him to suffer; unless you will also say, That that Law obliged
God to Save Sinners, and to appoint this Ransom for 'em. But,

2. Supposing him to mean (as his Reference to the Bishop of Worcester's Letter
would intimate) That unless we will allow Christ's Sufferings to have been by
virtue of the violated Law, they could not be inflicted by God as a Ruler, but
only as an absolute Lord. We deny the Consequence: neither is it to be allowed,
unless he can make it appear, that this is the only Law, by virtue whereof
Christ could be obliged to suffer.

And therefore also, it might be (and was) a Judicial Act of God, an Act of his
Rectoral Justice to inflict Sufferings upon Christ, because the Law of
Mediation rendered him obnoxious to Sufferings: and being hence obliged to
suffer (and, in that general Sense, having guilt upon Him) He might have
Sentence justly passed and executed upon Him; and accordingly we find (in that
Prophetical Psalm, 22. 3.) Christ Justifies God the Father under the very depth
of his Sorrows.

Nay, Christ's Sufferings did not only consist with the Justice of God as a
Rector; but did also declare and demonstrate it to the World, Romans 3. 25, 26.
God set Him forth, set Him in view of all the World, by Him (by his Blood) to
declare his Righteousness, that He might be, and appear to be just, though He
was a Justifier of sinful Men. As we shall (God willing) more fully clear, when
we come to deal with the Socinian Adversaries, in the Second Part of this
Discourse.

(3.) Whereas he argues from their being Acts of Obedience (in our Opinion)
that consequently we must hold, that they are only Acts of Dominion, etc. We
again deny the Consequence; nay, rather think the direct opposite should have
been inferred, viz. That because we do consider the Sufferings of Christ, as
Acts of Obedience to a Law, therefore God is not, in reference hereto, to be
looked upon as a mere Lord or Owner, but also as a Ruler.

And we are the less afraid of having any ill consequence proved upon us, as to
this, because (which yet this Accuser, as if he very little conversed with the
Scriptures, seems not to know) it is consecrated Language as well as Divine
Truth; it is not only the sense, but also the words of the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.
19. Phil. 2. 8. Heb. 5. 8. So that the Sufferings of Christ were Acts of
Obedience, and consequently we may infer, did correspond to the Precepts of a
Law, and what other could it be but that of Mediation: Accordingly, in
reference to these very Sufferings, our Savior himself tells us, That he acted
herein pursuant to a Command he had received of his Father, John 10. 17, 18. He
says not, this I was obliged to by the threatening of one or other Law; but a
Command I have received to this purpose, and I Am ready to obey; for thus also
in the Volum of the Book it is written of him, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O
God; for to the offering of his Body, the Apostle does apply those words, Heb.
10. 7 -- 10.

(4.) And lastly, To close this head, we add, That if indeed we had said, that
the Sufferings of Christ had no respect at all to the violated Law, he might
then (with some force of Reason) have inferred upon us, that we thereby
rendered 'em, with the Socinians, a mere Act of Dominion upon Christ, and not
(in any sense) an Act of Justice: But he cannot but know, that we willingly
grant, that they had some Reference even to the Sanction of that Law, and that
both as, The Law, obliging us to suffer, was the ground and reason of his
Undertaking to suffer. His Sufferings did in great part answer the Ends, for
which that Sanction was annexed to the Law.


(1.) The Law, as obliging us to suffer, was the Ground the Reason of Christ's
Undertaking to suffer; but his Sufferings themselves, were by reason of that
Undertaking; had it not been that we were under sentence of Death by that Law,
we had not needed a Mediator; Nay further, could that Sentence have been
remitted without any satisfaction made; Could the Threatening have been
absolutely recalled (so as that no severe Marks of Divine Displeasure should
have been left upon Sin) and this without weakening his Authority, and rendering
the Majesty of Heaven cheap: Christ had never suffered, never undertaken to
suffer -- But these things are vastly differing; to say that upon this Reason
Christ undertook to suffer; and to say, that that very Sanction obliged him to
suffer; in the former Case, it is no more than loco causae Obligatoriae; in the
latter, it would be the Obligatory Cause it self.

(2.) Christ's Sufferings did, in great part answer the Ends of that Sanction;
as will appear, if we consider for what purposes a Sanction was added to the
Law; and amongst others, such as these do readily occur, viz. thereby to
express God's hatred of Sin; to secure the Law and Lawgiver from Contempt; and
to enforce Obedience, etc. Now these Ends of the Threatening were answered as
well (perhaps better) by the Sufferings of Christ, than they could have been by
the sufferings of Sinners themselves. Yet it cannot therefore be said, that the
Threatening it self was executed upon Christ. In short, some respect the
Sufferings of Christ had to the violated Law, as is above said, but not such,
as that it can be said with Truth, either that that Law obliged Him to suffer,
or that it was fulfilled in and by his Sufferings.

(2.) He does next Insinuate, As if Christ could not be a Mediator, at least,
not suffer as such; unless He suffered by Virtue of the Violated Law. This
(surely) must be his Sense, if he have any, P. 25. where he says, That though
Christ came not under the Obligation of the Law of Works, but by the Father's
Will, and his own Consent -- Yet (on his Entering into the Office of a Mediator)
the Obligation to suffer for Sin, is immediately by Virtue of the Sanction of
the Law. I take him to mean, That though He was not a Mediator, without the
Appointment of God, and his own Consent, yet upon his very becoming a Mediator,
the Obligation of the violated Law must immediately lay hold upon Him; so that
though He might have avoided Suffering, had He declined his Mediatory
Undertaking; yet supposing Him to Mediate, the Violated Law immediately seizes
on Him, and obliges Him to suffer. To which we Answer,

1. The Violated Law did indeed oblige the Sinner himself to suffer; but that
it did or could oblige any one else, is what (how often soever it be said) has
never yet been proved.

2. Nor does Christ's merely entering into the Office of a Mediator, necessarily
(and in the nature of the thing) oblige Him to suffer; for it is conceivable,
(as a thing very possible) that He might have Mediated for a mitigation of our
Sufferings only. Suppose (for instance) that instead of the Torments of Hell
for ever, we might only endure those Tortures for a determinate Number of
Years. I would not be mistaken: I am not saying Christ did so, being well
assured He did otherwise; nor am I devising a better Method, or one equally
good with that which took place: It Is not without inexpressible Delight and
Gratitude, that I do own and adore the Infinitely excelling Wisdom and
Goodness, that is conspicuous in the Gospel-way of Mediation. All I say is,
That in the nature of the thing 'twas not impossible, there might have been a
Mediation set on foot to this purpose; in which case I ask, how it does appear,
that the Mediator Himself must needs suffer? And this with a design to convince
Our Accuser, his Argument can have no force in it; for that it must according
to all Rules of Logic, proceed upon this Indefinite and Unlimitted
Proposition, Whoever Mediates for an obnoxious Criminal, shall suffer. Which
Proposition is not to be allowed, unless every one that Mediates (in what way
soever) for such an one must needs suffer: An Assertion so weak, that barely to
mention it is sufficiently to expose it; yet if he should limit it to this, or
any other special Case, 'twould there only be a naked Assertion, and no
Argument.

3. But supposing Christ was (as I willingly grant he was) upon his entering
into the Office of a Mediator obliged to suffer for Sin; yet still, it appears
not that He is so, immediately by virtue of the Sanction of the Law. That the
Sufferings of the Mediator had a Respect to the Sanction of the Law (as before)
we grant; but that He was properly obliged by that Law to suffer (whether
mediately, or immediately) is what we believe this Accuser can never prove. The
violated Law never said, If Christ Mediate for Sinners, He shall die; but
another Law that was peculiar to Himself, and which we therefore call the Law
of Mediation.

(3.) But he proceeds, If Christ's Obligation to Suffer did not result from
this Law (i. e. the Violated Law) our sins were not the Impulsive Cause of his
Sufferings, Ibid. p. 25. And he adds, p. 41. It Is impossible Sin should be
their Meritorious Cause. And again, p. 50. If Christ's Sufferings be not -- by
virtue of the Penal Sanction of a violated Law, our Sins cannot be their
Meritorious Cause.

The Answer to this we must defer to the Fourth Chapter, where we shall have
occasion to speak fully to it. Again,

(4.) He does also suggest, in the last quoted Pages, That Christ's Sufferings
could not otherwise be a proper Punishment -- The Consideration whereof is also
to be reserved for the Fifth Chapter of this Discourse. Moreover,

(5.) He does next intimate, That it was either by virtue of that Sanction (i.
e. that of the Violated Law) or by virtue of no Sanction at all, that Christ
was obliged to suffer: For that according to us, the Mediatorial Law had no
Penal Sanction; and thereupon he challenges us to show, by virtue of what
Sanction Christ was obliged to suffer, Vid. p. 26. In Answer whereto,

We distinguish betwixt a Sanction In a more Loose and General Sense; In a more
Strict and Proper one.


Accordingly we say,

1. In the strictest Sense, as it does import the Threatening that is annexed to
a Law, we see not how it can be said, that Christ was obliged to Suffer by
virtue of any Sanction; for that we know no Law that threatened Him. But,

2. If we understand the Word in a looser and more general Sense, as signifying
only an Ordination at large; we may say, Sancitum fuit, it was Ordained,
Enacted by the Law of Mediation, that He should suffer for Sin; and so He was
obliged to suffer by virtue of that Sanction.

6. In the last place, He does advance a very formidable Argument against us,
viz. That (upon the forementioned Principle) we cannot hold Christ's
Sufferings to have been in our place and stead, otherwise than as it signifies
only for our Benefit and Advantage. This he inlarges upon, p. 29, 30.

To which we Reply, First, and more generally, That all that make use of that
Distinction, are not agreed upon one and the same Sense; and therefore the
Sense of the Terms should be fixed, before they can signify any thing in an
Argument. It Is possible such a Sense may be affixed to one, or other of the
Terms, in which it may be true, that we cannot hold Christ's Sufferings to have
been in our place and stead, or to have been otherwise so, than as it signifies
for our good. Who knows what Secret Sense this Accuser may understand these
Phrases in, by which he may prove his charge against us.

We should therefore know, what it is he means, both by Christ's Suffering in
our place and stead, and by his Suffering for our benefit and advantage: For by
knowing only his Sense of one of these Phrases, we cannot possibly Conjecture,
whether the other (with him) import less or more, or just the same thing. Yet,

2. And more particularly, though we cannot (in his declared Sense) hold that
Christ suffered in our place, yet it will not follow, that we do not (or
cannot) hold that He suffered in our stead, otherwise than as it signifies for
our good only. But what we do, (and consistently with our selves can) maintain
his Suffering in our stead, in such a Sense in which the Socinians ever denied
it, shall (through Divine Assistance) be made appear in the Second Part of this
Discourse.

CHAP. II.
That Christ did not Suffer in the Person of Sinners, but in the Person of a
Mediator.

. 1. THIS also he would have to be accounted amongst our Errors, as appears not
only from several Passages in his Appeal, but also from his objecting this,
amongst other faults, against the Third Paper (in his Report) viz. That it was
so worded as to be calculated to their Meridian, who hold, That Christ suffered
only in the Person of a Mediator, not in the Person of Sinners.

. 2. That Christ was a Mediator, and did suffer as (or in the Person of) a
Mediator, I will suppose is no part of the Controversy betwixt the Accuser and
us: All that can then remain as questionable, is, Whether he suffered as (or in
the Person of) a Sinner -- which being affirmed, should also have been proved
by this Accuser: We being only Doubters or Deniers in this Point, have nothing
to do but only to hear his Proofs: No Rules I have yet met with, oblige us to
any thing more.

. 3. Yet since he has not (as might have been expected) done his part; or
perhaps, could not do it; we shall more than do our own; that it may appear,
what it is we do herein deny, and upon what Reasons we do it. And

. 4. In order to a better understanding the state of the Case, it should be
considered, That the Phrase it self is what the Scriptures are utterly a
Stranger to: We no where read in those sacred Oracles, either of Christ's
sustaining, or suffering in the Person of Sinners; and it is but reasonable for
us, when Articles of Faith are proposed to, nay pressed upon us, to hesitate
about 'em (can we be blamed, if we also deny, renounce 'em) unless
Scripture-Evidence be produced for 'em. If their sense of this (or any other)
Phrase appear in the Scriptures, we shall readily own that sense; but the
Phrase it self cannot be thought necessary, while it is not there.

. 5. But besides, This is not only an Humane Phrase, but a very obscure and
ambiguous one; and it is hard to conceive (amongst the many senses it is capable
of) any one sense, in which it may be tolerably applied to the present Case --
We shall briefly mention some of the more remarkable Notations of the Word
[Person:] And passing by several others, I shall only take notice of the vastly
differing sense in which the Word is used by Metaphysicians, and by Civilians.

. 6. The word [Person] as made use of by Metaphysicians, is designed to express
an individual, complete; intelligent Substance. Thus every Man, and every Angel
are distinct Persons; and Christian Philosophers transfer this account of the
word [Person] to Christ as God-Man; yea, and to the Godhead it self, when they
use that Term with reference to the Sacred Three, Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
But in this sense it is not to be admitted, that Christ suffered in the Person
of Sinners; for that in order to his suffering in any Person (one or other) it
was first necessary he should assume that Person; Now, however he did assume
the Nature of Man, yet he did not, 'twas not possible that he should, in this
sense, assume the Person of any Sinner. Surely this Accuser himself will not
dare to assert, That Christ was the individual Substance of Peter, Judas, etc.
if not, he was not their Person; and if not their Person, then he did not
suffer as such.

. 7. Or if they should refer us to Civilians for the sense of the word, it is
amongst them a very perplexed and un-agreed Term. Sometimes they do only in
general contradistinguish Persons to Things, and make the word Person to be
aequivalent to the word Man. Thus Zouch, Res sunt de quibus homines agunt;
Personae quae agunt in se; i. e. Viri and Elementa Jurisprud. p. 1.. 7, 8.
Mulieres: qui Hominis appellatione continentur. Yet according to others, this
Term of Person is not so extensive as that of Man. So Lexic. Jurid. Sub Tit.
Personae.
Calvin tells us, Personae appellatio cum hominis appellatione non est eadem;
haec enim quam illa est generalior -- Omnis Persona est homo, sed non vicissim.
Inde Persona definitur Homo, qui caput habet civil. By caput civil habens. he
does not (as some apprehend) mean one that has a Civil Head, or a superior in
the State; then indeed (as they infer) a King would be no Person; but what he
and other Civilians intend by it, is one that has the liberties of a Freeborn
Subject in the State; and so is designed only to exclude Prisoners of War,
Bondslaves, etc. from being Persons. Thus Sub Tit. Caput.
he explains himself at large, Qui in eum (scil. liberorum) ordinem cooptatur,
caput jam habere dicitur: Unde servus, qui pro lihertate pretium persolvit,
pretium pro capite solvere dicitur, apud Plautum and J. consultos
frequentissime, i. e. ut liceat illi caput in ordinem libertorum habere: Qui,
si postea liberate mulctetur, capite minutus dicetur; and thus also the
Learned Pufendorf explains it: Persona apud J. Consultos praeprimis, Elementa
Jurisprud. p. 19.
illa dicitur, quae caput (i. e. libertatem personalem) habet. But this
distinction is not to be admitted with reference to the Sufferings of Christ;
in dying he had a respect, not only to Jews, but to Gentiles; and amongst them
not only to the Learned Greeks, but also to the more uncultivated Barbarians
and Scythians; not only to such as were free among 'em, but also to the very
bond slaves, Romans 10. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11.

. 8. Again, sometimes they do by the Term [Person] intimate (not absolutely the
Man himself, but) the Man respectively considered, with Reference to the
Quality, State or Condition, in which he stands. So Calvin, ubi supra. Persona
tam hominem, quam qualitatem hominis and conditionem significat. De jure
naturae and gentium, lib. 1. cap. 1. 12. To the same purpose he also speaks.
Elem, Jurisp. lib. 1, Def. 4.
And more fully, Pufendorf, Personae morales -- sunt homines -- considerati cum
statu suo aut munere, in quo in vita communi versantur.

Now will this Accuser say, That in this Sense Christ did sustain, and suffer
in the person of Sinners? Was He every one of those very Men for whom He died?
Did He possess the place, state, condition, quality of every individual Sinner.

. 9. But amongst Political Persons (to omit other Sub-divisions) there is one
special kind, which they call Representative Persons; and this I suppose may be
intended, when it is said, That Christ suffered in the Person of Sinners. Under
this rank the Civilians do commonly reckon Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries,
Viceroys, etc. as acting in the Person of the Prince that Commissionates 'em:
Members of Parliament, as Personating or Representing those that do Elect 'em:
Advocates or Attorneys, as Pleading in the Person of their Clients: Tutors and
Guardians, acting for, and in the Name of the Pupils and Minors, with whom they
are entrusted: a Servant, or any other Delegate, whom we Authorize and Appoint
to pay Money, or Transact any other Affair for us; so far as any one does with
Authority manage any of our Affairs, he may in some Sense be said to Represent
us, or to do it in our Person. Now if in any tolerable Sense it may be said,
That Christ suffered in the Person of Sinners, it must (I conceive) be in this,
that He did suffer as their Representative.

. 10. And therefore, that it may the better appear, how far He did, and wherein
He did not Represent, or personate us in his Sufferings, we should carefully
distinguish,

1. Betwixt Christ's Representing us in his Sufferings; and representing us in
his Obedience.

2. Betwixt his Representing, or Personating a Sinner in his Sufferings, and
his Representing or Personating Sinners therein.

3. Betwixt his Representing, or Personating sinners when He suffered, only in
some very limited and restrained Sense; and his Representing 'em therein simply
and absolutely.

4. We may also distinguish betwixt a Representative, that is deputed and
delegated thereto by us; and one that is appointed and authorized by God.

. 11. Whereupon I add, I. He did not so far Represent, or Personate Sinners in
his Holiness and Obedience, as in his Sufferings; it is (as we shall immediately
show) in some Sense allowable to say, Christ suffered in the Person of a
Sinner, or Sinners; but I know no Sense in which it may be said, That He obeyed
in the Person of a Sinner, or Sinners. He did not Personate a Sinner, much less
Sinners, in his sinless Obedience; this were as grossly absurd (as Mr. Baxter
himself Treatise of Justif. Righteous. Part I. p. 58.
hints) as it would be to say, In the Person of Sinners He never sinned. Now
this we the rather take notice of, because this Accuser extends Christ's
Personating us indifferently, and equally, to both his Obedience and his
Sufferings; for thus he speaks in his late Defense, p. 28. Christ's thus
suffering and obeying in the Person of Sinners, it is to all intents and
purposes as effectual, as if they did it themselves. And what any Libertine or
Antinomian would say more than this, I know not; or which way he will ^can,
make this consist with the necessity of Faith and Repentance, in order to our
actual Discharge from Punishment (which yet he largely asserts, Appeal, p. 8.
9.) I cannot imagine.

. 12. II. It is more allowable to say, That Christ suffered in the Person of a
Sinner, than that He suffered in the Person of Sinners: for that the former of
these signifies no more, than that He suffered as a Sinner. Now that may be
supposed to intimate, either that Christ, in the inflicting Sufferings upon
Him, was dealt with like a Sinner; or also, that therein He was reputed and
declared a Sinner, suffered under that Imputation and Charge: And both these
are true; the former, whether we consider Him as suffering under the Hand of
God or Men; and even the latter also, so far as Men were concerned in 'em; He
died by their Sentence as a Blasphemer.

. 13. III. Yet in a very Limited and restrained Sense it may be said, That
Christ suffered in the Person of Sinners; that is, so far as that He suffered
in our room and stead, He stood before God as an Undertaker to suffer for our
sins, and accordingly became a Sacrifice for us: If any one will say He was our
Representative, or suffered in our Person thus far, I shall not contend with
him. Nor would Mr. Baxter neither, as is plain from such Passages as these --
When we are agreed, That the Person of the Sponsor, Treat. of Justifying
Righteous. page 56.
and of every particular Sinner, are diverse; and that Christ had not suffered
if we had not sinned; and that He, as a Sponsor, suffered in our stead, and so
bore the Punishment which (not He, but) we deserved: If any will here, instead
of a Mediator or Sponsor, call Him our Representative, and say that He suffered
in all our Persons reputatively, -- not representing our Persons simply, and in
all respects, and to all ends; but only so far as to be a Sacrifice for our
Sins, and to suffer in our place and stead. We take this (says he) to be but
lis de Nomine -- and will not oppose any Man that thinks those Words fittest,
as long as we agree in the Matter signified.

Again, Christ suffered in our stead, and Ibid. p. 58.
in a large sense, to certain uses, and in some respects, as the Representer,
or in the Person of sinners.

Yet further, Though the Person of Ibid, p. 56.
the Mediator be not really, or reputatively the very Person of each sinner,
yet it does belong to the Person of the Mediator, so far (limitedly) to bear
the Person of a sinner, and to stand in the place of the Persons of all
Sinners, as to bear the Punishment they deserved, and to suffer for their Sin.

I Will mention but one more, though there be several other Passages to this
purpose -- It belongs to Him (Christ) as Mediator, to undertake the Sinner's
Punishment in his own Person; and if any will improperly call that, the
Personating and representing of the sinner, let 'em limit it, and confess that
it is not simply, but in tantum, so far, and to such uses, and no other; and
that yet Sinners did it not in and by Christ, but only Christ for them, to
convey the Benefits as He pleased; and then we delight not to quarrel about
mere Words, though we like the Phrase of Scripture better.

. 14. IV. So far as He did Represent, or Personate us in his Sufferings; He did
it not as our Deputy, or Delegate; we did not order, nor could we authorize Him
thereunto; not being capable either of obliging Him to suffer, or of impowering
Him in such Sufferings to represent us, and stand in our stead: But, He
voluntarily consenting to suffer for us, God authorized and appointed Him
thereunto; and from that Divine Appointment his Sufferings become efficacious
for us; and therefore from thence it is, from that Appointment of God, that it
must be adjusted how far, and to what ends and uses, He should suffer as the
Representative, or in the Person of Sinners; and in what way and method, and
upon what terms his Sufferings should be of Saving Benefit and Effect to 'em.
Christ did not represent us as far as we please; or to what ends and uses we
please; nor will his Sufferings be effectually Saving to us in what way and
method we please, upon any, or no terms, as we think fit; but all this is
(according to Divine Pleasure) unalterably Determined and Fixed, by that
Appointment and Law of God, by which it was also ordained, That Christ our
Mediator should be Sacrificed for us. He could not Personate us farther than He
was allowed and empowered of God; and how far therefore his Commission did
extend, or with what Limitations it was attended, is only to be Collected from
the Oracles of God; so far then, as it shall appear by the Sacred Scriptures,
that Christ suffered in the Person of sinners, or as their Representative, we
shall readily agree, and no farther.

. 15. V. and Lastly, The Veneration we have for those Sacred Oracles, will not
admit us (without any limitation) to say, as this Accuser does, that Christ
suffered as the Representative, or in the Person of sinners: The Reasons
whereof will the better appear, if it be first agreed what is the exact and
proper Notion of such a Person, a Representative Person: and in this Matter, I
suppose, our Accuser is not unwilling (and for my part, I am most willing) that
the Learned Pufendorf should be our Instructor. This therefore is the account
he gives us of it, Peculiaris species Personarum politicarum est, quas dicere
possis Representativas, De Jure Not. and Gent. lib. 1, cap. 1.. 12.
ideo quod Personam aliorum referant: quae scil. potestate and authoritate
agendi ab aliquo instructae, hujus vice negotia expediunt eodem cum effectu, ac
si ab illo ipso essent confecta.

So that according to him (and indeed according to the truth of the thing) so
far as any one is allowed to Represent another, they are both in Law reputed
one Person; and thereupon, whatever he has, does, or suffers as a
Representative, it is (eodem cum effectu, i. e. as this Accuser well enough
Englishes it) to all intents and purposes the same thing, as if it were had,
done, or suffered by that other whom he Represents.

. 16. Now, if it be the same thing, then it is neither more or less, than if we
had so suffered our selves; there are therefore two things that we have to
plead against Christ's thus Personating, or Representing us; and they are, that
such a Representation of us by Christ, is in differing respects, both too much
and too little to answer the Exigencies of our case, and the Scripture-account
of this matter.

. 17. And (1.) In some respects, Such a Representative personating of sinners
in and by Christ's Sufferings, would render 'em too little to answer the
Exigencies of our Case, and the account which the Scriptures give of 'em: For
if Christ in his sufferings was looked upon as properly, and most strictly our
Person or Representative, his sufferings (as has bin hinted) would be but the
same thing, and no more in Value or Virtue, than if we our selves had so
suffered: But if we our selves had suffered as Christ did, would it have been
effectual to the great and necessary purposes of obtaining Redemption,
Reconciliation, Pardon, the Holy Spirit, and Eternal Salvation for us! Can any
one think? Dare any one say, Our own suffering what Christ did, Our own dying
as he did, would (by way of merit) have procured such consequent Blessings as
the Death and Sufferings of Christ did!

Such as the mentioned Blessings we needed, our Case called for; and these
Blessings we find attributed to the Death of Christ, as what did
(meritoriously, and by way of a price) procure 'em for us -- So the Apostle
tells us, we have Redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. He
obtained it for us by his own blood, Heb. 9. 12. so 1 Pet. The word (...) in
the Greek, as also (...) and (...) in the Hebrew, do admit of two very
differing Senses; they signify either sin it self, or a sin-offering, a
Sacrifice for Sin; as cannot be unknown to any that are conversant with the
Scriptures of the Old Testament and the New, in the Languages in which they
were endited by the Inspired Penmen; the Instances to that purpose are too
numerous to be overlooked; I Will name a few, Isa. 53. 10. When he shall make
his soul (...) an offering for sin; So we read it there, And in Lev. 7. This is
the Law (...) (not of the sin, but) of the sin-offering, verse 1. So verse 2.
They shall kill, (...) the sinoffering, the blood thereof shall he sprinkle,
etc. So Verse 5. (...) it is a sin-offering. Once more, 1 Samuel 6. 3, 4. If ye
send away the Ark of the God of Israel, send it not empty, but in any wise
return Him (...) (not Sin but) a Sin-offering -- then said they (...) what
shall be the sinoffering; which you find afterward specified in that Verse.

So for the other word (...) how promiscuously is it used in that one Chapter,
Lev. 4. If any one of the common People, (...) there it is commit a sin, verse
27. And so again, ver. 28. If (...) his sin which he has sinned, come to his
knowledge, then he shall bring his offering [a kid, etc.] for his sin which he
has sinned; there you have the same Word again. Yet in the very next Verse the
Sense of the Word is changed, and that very Kid which is offered, is called
(...) -- So verse 29. And he shall lay his hand upon the head (...) ('it is not
now to be read of the sin, but) of the sin-offering: and slay (...) the
sin-offering: The very Word that, but the Verse before, signified Sin it self.
The same Word you have again twice for a sin-offering, ver. 33. And again, the
Priest shall take of the blood (...) of the sinoffering, ver. 34. It would be
endless to refer you to the many other places of Scripture, where the same
Observation would occur; I Will therefore only mention one Text more (which may
help to evince the Usefulness hereof in interpreting several difficult Texts of
Scripture) and that is, Hos. 4. 8. They eat up (...) the sin of my People; so
we read it; but it were scarce possible, to devise any tolerable Sense that the
Words could be capable of, according to that reading; yet what we have
observed, renders 'em exceeding easy and plain; all the Difficulty dis-appears
when you read, They eat up the sin-offering of my people; And by this Reading
of the Words, the latter part of the Verse may be also most satisfactorily
accounted for; they set their heart on their Iniquity; i. e. they rejoice at,
or are pleased with it.

Thus does the very ingenious and Reverend Bishop of Salisbury Comment upon the
Words:

That corrupt Race of Priests (says he) attended still upon the Temple, and
offered up the sin-offering, and Feasted upon their Portion: -- And because of
the Advantage this brought 'em, they were glad at the abounding of Sin, etc.
Discourse of the Pastoral Care, p. 23. (A Tract so very valuable and useful,
that having mentioned it, I could not forbear to recommend it, though I could
wish what is said of Praying by the Spirit, p. 199, 200. were re-view'd by the
very Reverend Author, and somewhat more distinctly Explained; that he might
not seem to reflect upon Praying by the Spirit it self, when (I suppose) he
only intends to animadvert upon some Persons mistaken Apprehensions of it; The
same I could also wish in reference to one or two Passages in that Book which I
may not now stay to mention.

Now the words that the LXX. use in those places, are (...), and (...), and
(...) -- but we shall only take notice of the second of those Words, [(...)]
and sometimes indeed by a reduplicated Article, or by a Preposition, they
plainly refer to some or other Word that is understood. So we read in that 4th
Chap. of Leviticus, sometimes (...), and (...), and chap. 6. ver. 25. (...) --
Where the Word immediately foregoing is most probably referred to, i. e. in
one place (...), the she-goat, in another (...), the be-goat; and in the third,
(...), the burnt-offering; sometimes the Phrase is (...), vel (...), for sin,
where the Word (...), Sacrifice, is plainly enough intimated, though not
expressed: yet sometimes again there is nothing more than the bare Word (...),
Sin, expressed, where yet a Sin-offering must needs be meant; for instance,
Lev. 4. 21. (...), it is (not a Sin, but) a Sin-offering for the Congregation.
And Lev. 6. 25. (...), This is the Law (surely not that they should Sin by, but
that they should Sacrifice according to) the Law of the Sin-offering. So also
in that mentioned Hos. 4. 8. (...), they eat (not the Sins, for how could that
be done, but) the Sin-offering of the People.

And the New Testament Style is generally conformed to the Septuagint: thus you
read here also, (...), Heb. 10. 6. in burnt-offerings, and for Sin (i. e. and
in Sacrifices for Sin, as we render it) Thou have had no pleasure. And Romans 8.
3. we are told, That God condemned Sin in the flesh of Christ; but how, which
way? by sending Him in our likeness, to die a Sacrifice for Sin. And since the
Word will as well signify a Sacrifice for Sin, as Sin it self, it should
surely be readily agreed to intend only a Sacrifice for Sin, in that 2 Cor. 5.
20. He made Him to be a Sin-offering for us, etc. Nor does any thing in the
Context discountenance this Reading -- He that knew no Sin, was not a Sinner,
what should hinder but He might be (nay, for that very reason was He the fitter
to be) made a sin-offering for us: I could not therefore read Mr. Cross's
Objection, without a Smile, when he alleges against our thus Interpreting Sin
for a Sin-offering; that then Sin would be used Equivocally in differing
Senses; and suppose it be, what would the ill Consequence be? Why, he tells
you, The Apostle then would bring a Sophism instead of an Argument. He knew no
Sin properly, ergo, He was made Sin. Cross 's Two Sermons on Justification and
Imputed Righteousness, p. 32. Now what if this Text be a naked Assertion, and
not designed for an Argument, what Sophistry would there be in it, if the
Apostle barely tell us, He that was no Sinner Himself, was yet made a Sacrifice
for our Sin. But if he will have no Argument of it, 'twill be as weak and
impertinent, though the Words should be Interpreted according to his Mind: He
knew no sin properly, ergo, He was made Sin; I see no Consequence in it,
whether the Phrase bare his Sense or ours. As to what he next alleges, p. 33.
from its Opposition to Righteousness, it signifies as little; for that the
Apostle is not here (there is no appearing proof that he is) Critically
Contradistinguishing Christ's being made Sin, and our being made Righteousness;
nay, the contrary is plain, for that he uses differing Words in reference to
Christ and us to intimate that he did not intend, Christ was made sin, in the
same way, or sense, that we are made Righteousness; nor can he for that
Alteration, be justly charged again as Sophisticating, whilst he only designs
to acquaint us, That our being made Righteousness (take it in one Sense or
other) did pre-require, and derive from Christ's having been made a Sacrifice
for us. As to his Third Allegation against us, I cannot guess what he produced
it for. And for his Fourth, that the Word made is sometimes used for Imputed,
if that should be granted him, yet still it must be added, That it is where
other Words are found in the Greek Text; for I remember not (nor do I think our
Opposer can produce) one single Instance where the Word (...) (which is made
use of in the Text) does carry that Sense: it does most plainly intimate the
work of an Effective Agent; and therefore does strongly argue for our Sense of
the Text, That He was made a Sacrifice for Sin, made sin in such a Sense as
that GOD might be the Author and Efficient, without being chargeable as the
Author of Sin. And for his Fifth and last Objection, That Critics distinguish
betwixt (...), and (...), and say the latter is used for a Sacrifice, not the
former: I think we have already made the contrary sufficiently appear from the
LXX. to whom he refers us. So that I see not what further can be pleaded
against this Interpretation of the Text.


1. 18, 19. So also our Reconciliation is the purchase of his Blood; this
account we have of it, Romans 5 10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to
God by the Death of his Son. And having through several Verses before spoken of
this Reconciliation, he at length tells us, that God made him to be sin, i. e.
a sin-offering for us, to intimate to us which way that Reconciliation was
procured and brought about, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He made him to be sin, etc.

And in that, Ephesians. 2. 16. we are said to be reconciled to God by the Cross. And
Col. 1. 20. Christ is said to have made peace through the Blood of his Cross;
but would our Death have availed to any such purpose? If not, how can he herein
be said strictly to have Represented us --

The same might be also pleaded in reference to the procurement of our Pardon,
Mat. 26. 28. And the Holy Spirit, Heb. 10. 10, 14. -- 13. 22. with Eternal
Salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. 10. These are Blessissings that we could not have
procured by our own dying (this, to Christians surely, I shall not need to
prove): Now, if Christ died strictly in our Person, his death had signified no
more than ours: A Representative, so far as he represents another, is in Law
looked upon no otherwise, than as that other whom He represents; whatever
Excellencies he may otherwise have above that other, yet do they not come under
Consideration here; as a Representative, He does but personate that other Man;
and what He does or suffers as a Representative, is but the same thing, as if
that other Man had done or suffered. So far as there is any difference allowed
in Law, it is plain the Law looks upon 'em to be two distinct Persons; so far
the one does not, cannot Represent the other. Either therefore these Benefits
were not procured for us by the Sufferings of Christ, or He suffered otherwise
than as our Representative, or in our mean and vile Person, viz. in the most
highly dignified Person of a Mediator. To this Sense Mr. Baxter had pleaded
long since, in the forecited Treatise of Justifying Righteousness, P. I. p. 96.
If Christ (says he) suffered but in the Person of sinful Man, his Sufferings
would have been in vain, or no Satisfaction to God, etc. See also Baxter's Life
of Faith, p. 322. Thus therefore such a Representation of us by Christ, would
have been too little for us.

. 18. But again, (2.) If the matter be considered under other respects,
Christ's strictly personating or representing us in his Sufferings, would be
too much for us. For (as we have before observed) betwixt a Representative and
that other whom he represents, the Law makes no difference: Whatever the
Representative does as a Representative, in the sense of the Law, that other
does whom he represents.

(1.) If then Christ suffered strictly and properly in the Person of Sinners,
or as their Representative, they did, in the account of the Law, suffer
themselves; and whatever is the Moral Effect (i. e. whatever the Law under
which Christ suffered has annexed, by Promise, as a Consequence) of his
Suffering, it being the Effect of our Representative's Sufferings, may be
attributed to us whom He did therein represent; whatever is in Scripture
ascribed to the Sufferings of Christ, as an Effect of 'em, if He suffered in
our Person, would be to be ascribed to us: so we should be our own Redeemers,
our own Saviors, we should have merited our own Peace, our own Pardon, etc. as
truly as I pay Money, which one that in the strict Sense of the Law represents
me, does pay in my Name; or Purchase Land, which my Legal Representative
Purchases for me.

. 19. (2.) If Christ had Suffered strictly in our Representative Person, we
should have had an immediate and absolute right to all the proper Results and
Benefits of his Sufferings: Indeed, if Christ in his own Person, as Mediator,
purchased these Blessings by Suffering for us, He may confer 'em on us at what
time, in what measure, in what order, and upon what terms He pleases, as we
find He does: But supposing Him to have been our proper Representative therein,
our Right in Law, to all the Benefits of his Sufferings, would have been
absolute (as His now is) and have immediately resulted from his having so
suffered; so as that no place could have been left for the introducing and
imposing upon us any Terms or Conditions in order to our enjoying such
Benefits: there could be no room for such a Constitution afterward, if thou
[Sinner] Repent, Believe in Christ, etc. thou shall be saved: For according to
this Principle, the Sinner has purchased Salvation by the Sufferings of Christ
[as his Representative] He has thereupon an absolute and present right to the
Salvation so purchased; to deny or suspend his right, or withold him from
Possession, would be injurious to Him, as keeping Him from that which is his
own: How then will this consist with the Justice of God, who does not give
Sinners immediately the full of what was purchased by the Sufferings of Christ!
God does not give 'em an immediate and absolute Pardon, present freedom from
all sin and sorrow, present possession of the Heavenly Inheritance -- If
Sinners have an immediate absolute right to these Blessings, it would be a
wrong done to 'em, for God to keep 'em out of Possession as He does; and such a
Right we should have, if He Suffered (strictly) as our Representative -- So
that this way considered, it does as much exceed, as the other way it fell
short of Answering the Exigencies of our Case.

. 20. And we may add, as a farther Consequent hereupon (3.) If Christ had
Suffered (strictly) as the Representative Person of Sinners (indefinitely, as
it is expressed) it would follow, that every Sinner equally has a right to the
forementioned Benefits of Christ's Sufferings; why then have not all equally a
Pardon? Why are not the Influences of the Divine Spirit equally diffused? Why
are some (yea, even of the truly sanctified) more freed from Sin and Sorrow,
than others? Some but babes, while others are strong Men in Christ? Nay, why
are not all in Heaven (whom Christ did represent) as well as some there?

. 21. Moreover (4.) If Christ had thus suffered as our Representative (and we
had thus Satisfied and Merited in Him) what room would there have been left for
His Holiness and Obedience to bestead us, or be of any advantage to us. We are
most expressly assured, That by the Obedience of One (i. e. of Christ) we are
made righteous, Romans 5. 19. Suppose his Sufferings and Death to be included, as
it cannot be denied, yet it is as they were instances of his Obedience, Phil. 2.
8. and (according to that known Rule, a quatenus, ad omne valet consequentia)
if his Sufferings did meritoriously procure our Pardon, Peace, etc. as they
were instances of his Obedience to the Law of Mediation, then whatever was an
instance of such Obedience, had an influence upon the same effect. His
Habitual, Active and Passive Obedience, are therefore to be considered as one
entire Meritorious Cause, one entire Purchasing Price of such Blessings. -- But
upon this Principle, That Christ in suffering did strictly Personate, or
Represent us, where can his Habitual Holiness, and Active Obedience be taken
in! what room is there for 'em! what need is there of 'em! when we have merited
a Pardon, acceptance with God, Eternal Salvation already, by the Sufferings of
Christ as our Representative; what further need can we have of his Obeying for
us?

Or shall we say, That He was our Representative, in his Obeying, as well as in
his Suffering? So indeed our Accuser would have it, in his Defense, P. 28.
Christ (says he) thus Suffering and Obeying in the Person of Sinners, it is, to
all intents and purposes, as Effectual, as if they did it themselves. But
besides, that these two Parts of the Assertion are inconsistent with each
other, had He Obeyed in our Person, He needed not to have Suffered in our
Person; or had He Suffered in our Person, He needed not so to have Obeyed. I
say, besides that, the Notion carries a manifest Inconsistence in it -- If it
were admitted, it would infer all those Seven Absurdities mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, with many more, that I cannot now stay to mention.

. 22. In a Word then, since his strict Representing, or Personating us, would
intimate, That Christ and we are, in the Sense of the Law, but one Person; and
thereupon his Suffering in our Person (our Representative Person, properly so
called) would intimate either that He (in his Sufferings) was (in the esteem of
God and the Law) depressed to the mean, and vile, and sinful State of us, whom
He did Represent; or else that we are (in the account of God and the Law)
exalted to the Dignity and Perfection of his State who Represented us: and
neither of these are to be admitted. Not the former, for that it would render
Christ's Sufferings unavailable to the great purposes that were to be served of
'em; not the latter, for the Reasons last mentioned: It follows, That He cannot
(otherwise than very improperly, and with great Limitations) be said to have
Suffered in the Person (the Representative Person) of Sinners.

CHAP. III.
That Christ's Sufferings were only Materially, not Formally the same we were
obliged to.

. i THIS our Accuser charges also upon us, as a Branch of that Design, that
Plot he impeaches us of; a Socinian Plot, a Plot to introduce Socinianism: That
we have such a Design, he once and again insinuates, and thereupon Brands us as
Episcopians, Socinianizing Arminians, etc. He had signified his Apprehensions,
his fears of a Design against the Doctrine of a Real, Full, and Proper
Satisfaction to God's Justice for our Sins, P. 4. but by that time we are got
to the 12th. Page, those Surmizes are improved into clear Evidence, he is now
aware of the Design; nay, twice together we are told it, to intimate (no doubt)
that he is thoroughly aware of it; and to make Proof of it, he does allege,
amongst other Matters, That (according to us) Christ's Sufferings were the same
we were obliged to, only Materially, and not Formally. Now the Design he
suggests, is what we do from our Souls abhor; and if this Accuser were himself
a Socinian, he could no way more effectually serve their Interests, than by
persuading the World (as he here endeavors) That all must be Socinians, at
least Socinianize, that are not Antinomians.

Sect. 2. But for the Principle he charges upon us, we are not ashamed to own
it; and cannot but wonder, that our Accuser should never once attempt to prove
the contrary; it lying upon him here again, as being the Affirmer, to produce
his Evidence: Surely this, That Christ's Sufferings were Formally the same we
were obliged to, is not to be reckoned amongst those Propositions which carry
their own Light along with 'em, and engage our Assent at the first Hearing: Why
then has he only mentioned our denial of it, as if that alone, were sufficient
to expose us to the severest Censures.

Sect. 3. But we cannot satisfy our selves (though we be on the Negative Part)
to deny, and Dispute against Words that have no meaning, or (which is, in
Effect, the same thing) Words that have an unagreed and uncertain one: And
therefore though he has not told us his meaning, we shall, with greatest
plainness, tell him, and the World, ours; that it may be understood what we
intend, when we deny, That Christ's Sufferings were Formally the same we were
obliged to.

Sect. 4. Now there are two Things that (we apprehend) may be meant, when it is
Asserted, That Christ's Sufferings were not only Materially, but also Formally
the same we were obliged to, viz. Either that they were not only in a more
loose and general way of Speaking, but strictly and fully the same kind of
Sufferings that we were obliged to: Or, also it may intimate, That they were
not only the same kind of Sufferings, but even the very same thing in Law, as
if we our selves had Suffered. And the former of these we dare not admit, much
less the latter.

Sect. 5. 1. Not the former, viz. That Christ's Sufferings were strictly and
fully of the same kind with those we were obliged to. That they were not, could
not be so, I think was sufficiently made appear, Chap. I. Sect. 5. of this
Discourse. And Mr. Baxter has yet more distinctly and fully cleared it, by an
Enumeration of several Particulars, in which his were not the same with ours,
under these Three Heads;

I. Christus nullas tulit penas, quae etiam peccata sunt.

II. Nullas tales paenas dedit, quae sunt tantum naturalia peccandi
consequentia.

III. Nullas Deus ipse paenas in Christum inflixit, quae ex displicentia
(adversus Christum scil.) vel amoris diminutione aliqua proveniunt. Vid.
Method. Theol. P. III. Cap. 1. Disp. 4. P. 36, 37.

Sect. 6. 2. Much less can we agree to it in the Latter Sense, as it intimates,
That Christ's Sufferings were the Idem, the very same thing in Law, as if we
our selves had Suffered; for that this it could not be, unless He Suffered
(most strictly) in our Person; and that too, by virtue of the Law, which we had
Transgressed: Both which have been abundantly Disproved by us in the Foregoing
Chapters. What has been there alleged against the one, or the other of those
Errors, may also have place here again. To which I shall only add;

1. The Inconsistency hereof with the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. For if
Christ's Sufferings should be allowed to be strictly the same thing that the
Law obliged to, then they could not be a Satisfaction for our Non-Payment, but
would themselves have been the proper Payment: Now these two things are vastly
differing, to pay a Debt; and to offer somewhat instead of Payment, that is
accepted as Satisfaction for Non-Payment. Since the Word [Satisfaction] was
borrowed from the Civilians, from them it is that the Import of it may be best
understood; And they do carefully distinguish betwixt Solution and
Satisfaction. Solution is when the very same thing is paid, to which the Law
obliged. So Vinnius, -- Solutio, specialiter accepta, denotat In Notis ad
Justini. Instit. Tit. 30. p. (mihi) 494.
naturalem praestationem ejus quod debetur. Which is agreeable to the account
Grotius gives us of it, with whom Solutio stricte sumpta, is Solutio rei plane
ejusdem, quae erat in obligatione; Solutio rei ipsius debitae. Now this, as the
Bishop of Worcester tells us, in De Satisf. p. 123, 126
the Sense of the Law is never called Satisfaction, but strict Payment. This is
what cannot be P. 13.
refused, when offered in Payment. But Christ's Sufferings might have been
refused: God was not obliged to accept of them, but might have insisted upon
the Sufferings of Sinners themselves. Therefore Grotius tells of another sort
of Solution, cum aliud, quam quod in obligatione est, Solvitur. When somewhat
else, and not strictly that which the Law required, is paid; and this, if
accepted, is peculiarly called Satisfaction. Talis autem solutio (says he) quae
aut admitti, aut recusari potest, admissa; in Jure, speciale habet nomen
Satisfactionis; quae interdum Solutioni Ib. p. 124.
strictus sumptae opponitur. So that by a Satisfaction, it is plain they intend
a valuable Consideration offered instead of what was due, which the Creditor in
Pecuniary (and the Rector in Criminal) Cases, may accept or refuse at pleasure.
Under this Notion do the greatest and best of our Divines maintain the Doctrine
of Christ's Satisfaction, in Opposition to the Socinian Adversaries; nor can it
be Defended upon any other bottom. To make the Controversy betwixt the
Socinians and Us (in the Point of Satisfaction) to be not (as it has been wont
to be stated) whether Christ's Sufferings were an Equivalent (a valuable
Consideration) offered and accepted, instead of what was due from us to Divine
Justice; so far as that upon account thereof, we have Reconciliation, Pardon,
and Eternal Salvation, in the Order, and upon the Terms of the Gospel? I say,
to make the Question in difference, not to be what is abovesaid, but whether
Christ's Sufferings be the very same thing, the All, that the Law required,
obliged to, the very Execution of its Threatening? How plainly is this to betray
the Cause into their Hands!

If the Bishop of Worcester has any Judgment in this Controversy (and while
the Learned World has so universally approved what he has wrote in it, they
cannot themselves be thought to have much, that deny, or doubt his through
Acquaintance with it; and of all Men living, our Accuser, who has appealed to
him, surely does not suspect it; I say, if that Right Reverend Person has any
insight into this Matter) the Socinian Cause can scarcely any way be more
effectually befriended, than by such as pretending to be their Adversaries, do
thus State our Controversy with 'em: For with these remarkable Words does he
close up his most Convincing Reasonings against Christ's Sufferings having been
the very same thing which the Law required: When (says he) our Adversaries
(meaning the Socinians) Dispute against this Opinion, no wonder if they do it
successfully; but this whole Opinion is built upon a Mistake, that Satisfaction
must be the Payment of the very same; which while they Contend for, they give
our Enemies too great an advantage, and make 'em think they triumph over the
Faith of the Discourse of the sufferings of Christ, P. 17.
Church, when they do it only over the Mistake of some particular Persons.

2. Neither could the Sufferings of Christ be strictly (and individually) the
same thing that the Law threatened; for it threatened the Death of the Offenders
themselves: In the day Thou eatest, Thou shall die, Genesis 2. 17. The same
Individual that sins, shall die: Thus does the Prophet express it, The Soul
that sins, it (that very Soul) shall die. Ezekiel. 18. 4. (...) The very
sinning soul it self, that very soul shall die. The Sense of the Holy Ghost
could not have been more fully expressed to this purpose. And so also the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not, etc. It Is
denounced against no one but the Sinner himself? since then the Law mentions no
Surety or Substitute; the Sufferings of Christ could not be the Execution of
its threatening, unless He was the very Soul that sinned, that very individual
Soul.

And hence we may be assisted in that only Difficulty, with which our Accuser
(at the second hand) does seem to press us: For in the Passage he quotes from
his Brother Ferguson, (P. 5.) amongst other Attributes of GOD that were to
influence the Grand Affair of our Redemption, he mentions the Divine Veracity:
God's Truth (as that Gentleman says) and his Immutability must be evidenced in
proceeding according to the Interest of Reason in Religion, p. 536.
Penal Law He had at first Enacted. And this being presupposed, he would
naturally enough iufer, That Man (having sinned) could not be received into
favor, but in such a way as might evidence that Truth of God, etc. Now indeed,
if the Truth and Immutability of GOD did require, that He should proceed
(exactly) according to the Penal Law He had Enacted, it must be granted then,
That Christ's Sufferings could not otherwise bestead us, then as being the very
Execution of that Penal Law, the very Penalty therein threatened.

And this Objection I shall the rather take notice of, because (whatever
Character our Accuser, and this Brother of his deserved) I find some of
greatest Name (and deservedly too) both for Learning and Piety, speak as if
they did apprehend, That the Truth of GOD did engage Him to Execute the
Threatened Penalty; that unless the Punishment due by that Law had been
inflicted, his Veracity could not have been Justified.

But (how much soever I reverence the Names of some that speak thus) I dare not
agree, out of respect to any Man, so far to expose the Veracity of the Holy
GOD, as to suspend it upon any thing that is not certainly True, much less upon
what is evidently untrue.

1. Supposing it only to be uncertain, whether He was obliged formally to
Execute the Threatening of that Law, it is no way fit the Veracity of God should
be suspended upon an Uncertainty: May I not be sure that GOD is true, though I
were not sure, that his Threatening must needs be executed!

2. And especially, when we have full and clear Evidence, That He has not
Executed that Threatening; we should surely be afraid to say, His Truth obliged
Him to Execute it; He has falsify'd his Word in Not-Executing it. Though we
could not see which way GOD's Veracity could be reconciled with the
Non-Execution of his Threatening; yet when He has Relaxed or Dispensed with his
Threatening (as in this Case He manifestly has) we may be assured, it is not
inconsistent with his Truth. The Law threatened the Delinquent himself, and
every Delinquent; another (who was no Delinquent) dies for us: Here is not then
an Execution of the Threatening; is the Truth of GOD therefore violated? GOD
forbid. Yet had his Truth obliged Him to inflict the Threatened Penalty at all,
it would as well have obliged Him to inflict it on the Offenders themselves.
That GOD has inflicted Death for Sin, is not therefore because of his Truth,
but for other Reasons that have been already hinted. And this is that which
does difference Threatenings from Predictions: That Threatenings do only
constitute the dueness of Punishment, and make the Offender obnoxious, without
determing certainly whether (eventually) it shall be inflicted, or not; but
Predictions do primarily respect a certain Event. So that the Truth of GOD is
indeed concerned to accomplish a Prediction; but not to execute a Threatening; a
mere Threatening does only render the Transgressor liable to suffer, but GOD is
afterward at liberty to inflict, or not inflict the Penalty incurred, as his
Wisdom shall see fit; indeed if a Prediction should also be added to the
Threatening, GOD's Word is then past for its Execution, and his Truth obliges
Him accordingly -- They that are otherwise Opinionated in this Matter, may do
well to consider, which way the Veracity of GOD (upon their Hypothesis) can
possibly be maintained: When the Law was at first given to Adam (as our Accuser
himself expressly owns) Christ was not in its obligation; it did not run [Thou,
or thy Surety for thee.] Hereupon the afteradmission of a Surety, and the
Transferring our Punishment upon Him (supposing He had undergone, as far as was
possible, the same that we should) was an Act of Soveraign-Dispensing-Power:
The Threatening was so far relaxed, or dispensed with; not Executed. But if GOD
had engaged his Word (by an absolute Prediction) to punish the Offender, there
had been no place for a Dispensation; In that case, as indeed in every case
where the Divine Truth is concerned, the Event will infallibly, and in every
respect be answerable to what GOD has fore-declared. Since therefore the Event
did not answer in this case, the very sinning Soul it self did not die, but
Christ for him, it must be concluded, That this was not a Prediction of what
eventually should be, but a mere Threatening of what legally might be inflicted;
importing only what the Sinner was obliged to undergo, not what GOD was obliged
to lay upon him. And therefore his Truth was no way violated, though Christ's
Sufferings were not strictly the same Thing that the Law threatened. To which I
might add,

3. That if Christ's Sufferings had been the very same thing that the Law
required, we must thereupon, ipso facto, have enjoyed present and perfect
Deliverance; if the Idem, the all (and that it must needs be, if it was the
same) that the Law threatened, was endured in the Sufferings of Christ, what
further Penalty could remain upon us? Justice it self could require no more
than the Idem quod debetur. To this purpose the Learned Grotius speaks, Ipso
facto liberat, solutio Grotius de Satisfact. Cap. 6. P. (mihi) 123
rei plane ejusdem, quae erat in obligatione. Upon which account he does
determine, That the Death of Christ was not Solutio rei ipsius debitae. And so
also P. 126.
that very Judicious and Right Reverend Person (the Bishop of Worcester) to
whom this Accuser has Appealed, does not only deny, but does also very largely
and nervously disprove, Christ's Sufferings to have been the very same that the
Law required; we shall only transcribe what he offers to the purpose we are
Arguing upon -- If (says he) the Discourse of the sufferings of Christ, P. 15.
very same had been paid in the strict Sense, there would have followed a
Deliverance ipso facto; for the Release immediately follows the Payment of the
same; and it had been Injustice to have required any thing further, in order to
the Discharge of the Offender, when strict and full Payment had been made of
what was in the Obligation. But we see that Faith and Repentance, and the
Consequences of those two, are made Conditions on our parts, in order to the
enjoying the Benefit of what Christ has procured; so that the Release is not
immediate upon the Payment, but depends on a New Contract, made in
consideration of what Christ has done and suffered for us. This is but a small
part of his most clear and invincible Arguings against Christ's Paying (in his
Sufferings) the very same that we were to have paid. And therefore we add,

4. Had Christ's Sufferings been the very same thing that the Law threatened,
there had been, there could have been no such thing as Pardon; we must have
been discharged, set at liberty as before; but we could not afterward have
been said to be Pardoned. To remit a Debt or Penalty, is a Phrase that is never
used but in reference to such from whom the one or other was due; and does
import a Gracious Discharge of a Person (either in whole, or in part) from what
in Justice might have been required. The Civilians therefore explain it by
Relaxatio, Indulgentia, etc. And this is most manifestly the import of the
Greek Term [(...)]. Proper Remission that cannot be, that is not an Act of
Grace and Favor, but what in strict Justice we are obliged to. Therefore
Grotius does accurately distinguish betwixt Liberation and Remission; allowing
(as he needs must) That all Remission is a Liberation, or Discharge; but not
that every Discharge is or may be so called, Remission: The Law it self does of
course acquit and discharge a Person (Debtor or Criminal) that fully answers
its Obligation; but when a Discharge is granted, by the Rector or Creditor, out
of mere Pleasure, to one that according to the Rigor of the Law could not lay
claim to it, here is proper Remission. Ubi idem Solvitur (scil. quod debetur)
aut a Debitore, aut ab alio, nomine debitoris, nulla contingit Remissio -- Si
quis poenam pertulerit quam debet, Liberatio hic Ib. p. 123.
erit; Remissio non erit. Remitti aliquid recte dicitur, etiam ubi solutio
accedit, sed talis quae sine actu voluntatis vim non habeat pariendae
liberationis. Where there is a Payment of what was owing, there Ib. p. 133.
is no Remission, no place for Forgiveness; the quondam Debtor or Criminal now
neeeds it not, nor can the Creditor or Rector be said to have granted it; the
same Debt cannot be both Paid and Forgiven. It is impossible (as the Bishop of
Worcester further urges) to reconcile the freeness of Remission, with the full
payment of the very same, which was in the Obligation. Ib. p. 16.


Sect. 7. For the close therefore of this Head, let it be considered, That Mr.
Baxter (in that very Book to which our Accuser refers us) thus Explains the
Question before us: It is not (says he) de materia debiti that we enquire, but
de forma; whether it was the same formally which we owed, and the obligation
required? Or, only the value, and not the same full Debt? Also, you must know,
That though we may well use the Word [Debt] in this case, because the Scripture
does, yet we must acknowledge it but a Metaphor, and the proper Terms are,
whether Christ's Sufferings are the same thing that the Law in its Threatening
required, i. e. obliged to, and made due; and so a fulfilling of that
Threatening? and this with great Aversness he does (and very justly sure) deny.
Now therefore if our Accuser will not Baxt. of Universal Redempt. p. 79.
own Christ's Sufferings to be formally the same we were obliged to, in the
Sense in which Mr. Baxter denied it, why does he quarrel with him? If he will,
it is but reasonable to expect, he should either disown and disprove the
Doctrine of Satisfaction, of Pardon of Sin, etc. Or, else make it appear, we
have not justly charged these Consequences upon him.

CHAP. IV.
That though our Sins were the Impulsive, Meritorious Cause of Christ's
Sufferings, yet it was only more Remotely that they were so; and not so nearly
and immediately as they would have been of our own.

. 1. SInce our Accuser bears so hard upon this Point, and seems most plausibly
from hence to insinuate his Spiteful and Unchristian Surmizes of us, I shall
endeavor with all the Freedom and Plainness possible, to deliver our Thoughts
about this Matter; that it may appear what we Deny, and what we Own; and that
herein we do not in the least vary from the Common Faith of Christians, or make
the least Approaches toward the Socinian Tents.

Sect. 2. We do therefore distinguish (in reference to the Controversy,
Whether our Sins were the Meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings) betwixt the
Name, and the Thing intended by it; as every one surely will do, that does not
prefer Strife before Truth. If we can agree in this, or other Controversies, in
Sense, Words are not worthy of a Contention on either side: It Is strange that
what the Apostle has said of such Contentions, that just account he has given
of their so base Original, and sad Effects, should not Awe the Spirits of all
(at least) that make any Pretensions to the Christian Name, 1 Timothy 6. 4. For
(according to the Order in which the Apostle has placed it) this doting about
Questions, that are but a strife of words, a [(...)] does presuppose the Person
to be Proud, puffed up with Arrogance and Self-Conceit, as the Word imports;
and withal extremely Ignorant, (...), one that knows nothing, that has no
Skill, no Judgment, one that has never Penetrated into Things, that has looked
no further than their outside; and therefore is he so exceeding Sollicitous
about Words, for that he is acquainted with nothing more valuable about which
to be concerned; he is sick, nay, he does insanire, if his Word may not be
allowed [such a Sense the Term (...) seems to carry in it]. Neither are the
Effects of this Logomachy less fruitful; thereof (as the Apostle adds) comes
envy, strife, railings, evil-surmizings, perverse disputings, (...), such as
are nothing to the purpose, that can serve no good End. I would requite all
this Accuser's hard Speeches of us, with a serious Admonition that he would
carefully look into the Text last mentioned, and if to that he adds, what does
occur, in The Carnality of Religious Contentions, p. 39, 40, 41, 42. (A Tract
well worthy of its most excellent Author.) Perhaps, it may minister toward the
Cure of his so sickly Mind; and he may not hereafter so far dote upon an
Unscriptural Word or Phrase, or turn it to our Reproach, that we are not alike
fond of 'em.

Sect. 3. But to proceed, We challenge this Accuser to instance any one
particular thing plainly intended by the Orthodox (Grotius, the Bishop of
Worcester, etc.) that use this Phrase against the Socinians; I say, Let him
instance (if he be able) any one thing they intend by it, that is not readily
agreed to by us. We have reason to suppose, That he himself may intend
somewhat more by it, than we are willing to allow (and which in due place may
be taken notice of): But we cannot find that they thereby design (in general)
to express any thing more, than that the Sufferings of Christ had a respect to
sin, to our sins, as the ground or reason of 'em; they were the assumed Cause
of 'em; He suffered for, or on the account of our sins. Now, whereas it may be
difficult to conceive how, or which way our Sins could influence his Sufferings
in such sort, as that He should be said to suffer for our sins, to die for our
sins: What they say for the clearing this Relation that our Sins had to the
Sufferings of Christ, as an Antecedent, procuring Cause (for we meddle not now
with the other Respect they bear to 'em as a final Cause; though He also
suffered for our Sins, so as in a proper Sense to Expiate, and make Atonement
for 'em) I say, the whole of what they offer, for the clearing the Relation our
Sins had to Christ's Sufferings, as their Antecedent Procuring Cause, may (so
far as I have yet observed) be reduced to the following particulars, viz.

Sect. 4. I. Our Sins, both in the nature of the Thing, and according to the
Constitution of the Divine Law, deserved Death, Eternal Death, Romans 1. 32. This
was what they had rendered our Due; they were (in the strictest and most proper
Sense) Meritorious of our own Sufferings. Had we lain Eternally under the
Avenging Wrath of GOD, it could not have been said, with Truth, that He had
done us any wrong; it would have been but the Wages we had earned, Romans 6. 23.
And what Apostate Angels do actually undergo.

II. Hereupon (Death being the demerit of our Sin) it follows, That we must of
necessity suffer, unless we be forgiven; for no one (surely) will, or can
imagine, That it might be avoided by our own Power or Policy (whether alone, or
in Conjunction with any other Creature, or Creatures): Is it possible we should
either hide from GOD's All-seeing Eye, or prevail against his All-powerful
Hand! We cannot therefore escape against, or without the Divine Pleasure. Now,
a Liberation, a Deliverance from deserved Wrath, that does depend upon, and
derive from the Divine Will and Pleasure, is most Proper Remission, as has been
before said. And, how is to be conceived, that the Miseries which the Law
threatened, and we had deserved by our Sins, could otherwise possibly be
avoided, than by virtue of such an intervening Act of the Divine Will, whereby
the Penalty is graciously remitted.

III. Several things concurred to render it unmeet, that GOD should merely
Pardon; that He should so forgive the Sinner, as not to leave (one way or
other) any severe marks of his displeasure upon sin. He did retain (in the
height of his Displeasure) such a Love of Benevolence, as did incline Him to
commiserate the case of lapsed, sinful Man; and (in some befitting way) to
re-admit him into favor. But it was highly fit and necessary, it should be in
such a way as should both duly provide for the Honor of GOD, and be most apt
to deter and affright Men from sinning. Due regard must be had to both these;
the Sinner could not be forgiven, unless (consistently therewith) the Honor of
GOD could be secured, and sin rendered frightful, and to be dreaded by us. Now
in reference to

The Former; the Honor of God did require, That if He Pardon Sinners, it
should be in such a way, as should manifestly vindicate and acquit Him, from
the Reflections that are not uncommon upon such occasions. It Is a very usual
and known case, in Humane Governments, that the Sovereign's Reputation suffers
by too easy Pardons: In the case before us, it is exceeding plain, That the
Honor of GOD's Power and Wisdom, but specially of his Holiness and Justice,
were to be provided for; whilst He magnified his Mercy in our Forgiveness.

1. Whereas nothing is more common, than for too easy Pardons to be imputed to
a Governor, as an Evidence of his Weakness and want of Power; it was a most
condecent and becoming thing, That GOD should Pardon in such a way, as yet
should manifest his Power; that it might appear, He was not afraid, or unable
to vindicate his injured Law; That He did not forgive, through a mere want of
Power to punish.

2. It was equally fit and necessary, That He should also vindicate the Honor
of his Wisdom, and not by a light and easy Pardon tempt the World to impeach
Him of Levity and Folly; as if He had rashly and unadvisedly made a Law, of the
Consequences whereof He was not aware; and therefore was afterward obliged to
change his mind, and indemnifie the Transgressors, without any Compensation.

3. Yea, a mere Pardon would also have reflected upon his Holiness; it was
therefore necessary that GOD (for the Vindication of his Essential Purity)
should make it appear, that He hated sin, though He loved the Sinner; that Men
might not look upon Him to be a GOD that has pleasure in Iniquity (the direct
contrary to what He has declared of Himself, Psalm. 5. 4.) neither yet, as if He
was indifferently affected toward it. He is (as we are assured) of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity, i. e. So as to allow, or not to be displeased at it,
Hab. 1. 13. This Holiness of his, is that which gives a most adorable and
conspicuous Beauty and Luster to all his other Perfections, He is Glorious in
Holiness, Exodus 15. 11. And therefore it could be no way meet, that the Honor
of this Attribute should be neglected, or post-pon'd to our safety: 'Twere
better that Ten Thousand Worlds should perish, than that the Glory of GOD's
Holiness be stained: But how shall it be vindicated, if Sin be absolutely
remitted! That Connection we find betwixt his Holiness, and his not forgiving
sin, Josh. 24. 19. does very plainly intimate, That the Holiness of God is a
Bar that lies in the way of Pardon, that does (as it were) oblige GOD not to
give out Pardons too easily; not to Pardon absolutely, or without due Provision
made for the demonstrating his Antipathy against Sin; that in his Eye (as well
as in its own nature) it is an abominable thing, what his Soul hates, Jer. 44. 4.

4. It was further necessary, That the Reputation of his Governing Justice,
should also be consulted. GOD (considered as a Governor) is necessarily Just,
cannot but be so: How monstrous a sound would these two Words conjoined carry
in 'em [an unjust GOD!] they do mutually destroy and subvert each other; He
that is GOD cannot be unjust; and that Being that is unjust, for that very
reason cannot possibly be GOD. Now this Justice of GOD, not only has place in
the conferring Promised Rewards, but also in the executing threatened Penalties:
Of the former, no one makes a doubt; it is the latter therefore that only needs
to be cleared: And how plain is it that even the Punishment of Sin is still
mentioned as an Act of Justice, Romans 3. 8. -- 2. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Heb. 2. 2.
Rev. 16. 5. 7. -- 19. 2. But though in the nature of the thing, and from these
Texts it is most evident, That when GOD punishes Sin, He does it justly; it may
yet be a doubtful Case with some, Whether, or how far his Justice obliges Him
to punish it? And that it does oblige Him in some Cases, surely should be
agreed; for that we cannot form a Notion of Rectoral Justice, that does not
import and carry in it a difference betwixt the Righteous and the Wicked in its
Distributions; it will not admit, that all be alike treated: The Wise Man
therefore complains of this, as one of the great Evils of our World, That there
be Righteous Men to whom it happens according to the work of the Wicked, and
wicked Men to whom it happens according to the work of the Righteous, Eccles.
8. 14. But is certain it shall not (at last) be well with 'em, v. 13. GOD has
declared this Justifying the Wicked in Humane Judicatures, to be an abomination
to Him, Prove. 17. 15. and has accordingly denounced a Woe against it, Isa. 5.
23. and therefore surely it can have no place with Him. Besides that in
reference to Himself, we are assured, that He is no Respecter of Persons in
Judgment, Romans 2. 11. which Text is the more considerable, for that the Apostle
does there allege this as an Argument to Evince, That GOD will render to every
man according to his works, and thereby manifest his Judgment to be Righteous,
v. 5. 6. Intimating that his Justice does consist therein, viz. In rendering to
every one according to his works; his Justice obliges Him thereto: Now, that we
may not mistakingly imagine, that He intends it only of the good that is their
due, He carefully distinguishes betwixt Good and bad, and applies this Exercise
of Justice to both -- Not only will He (as Justice obliges Him) render glory,
honor, and peace to every man that works good, but also (as the same Justice
obliges) tribulation and anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil, ver. 9.
10. Not upon one, or two, but every one; for there is no respect of persons
with GOD. And (to give this yet the greater force) we find it conjoined with
the denial of any Iniquity in GOD, 2 Chronicles. 19. 7. There is no iniquity with
the Lord our God, nor respect of persons. Signifying thereby, That should GOD
(as a Ruler) deal unequally with Persons, whose cases are the same; or deal
alike with Persons, whose cases are differing (either of which ways there would
be a (...), a Respect of Persons) He would be chargeable with Iniquity: It Is as
certain therefore that GOD cannot but severely Animadvert upon Sin, as that
there can be no Iniquity in Him. But what need we further Proof, while Crellius
himself owns it, That the Justice of God in some cases oblige Him to punish.
Nec illud negamus, rectitudinem ac justitiam Dei, nonnunquam eum ad peccata
punienda movere; eorum nempe, etc. -- Quales sunt homines non-resipiscentes,
atque in peccatis contumaciter perseverantes, etc. -- Maxim, si ipsum peccati
Genus in quo persistunt, insignem animi malitiam, aut apertum Divinae
Majestatis contemptum spiret. And he not only grants this (which yet, as we may
hereafter make appear, does plainly infer the whole of what he had been
pleading against) but he does also nervously prove it in the immediately
following Words, Si enim hujusmodi hominibus venia concederetur, facile supremi
Rectoris Majestas (ex qua Ordo Universitatis pendet;) and Legum, ab Crell.
Resp. ad Grot. Cap. 1.. 78. p. (mihi) 98.
ipso latarum, Authoritas evilesceret; and gloria ipsius, quae praecipuus
operum ejus finis est, minueretur. To the same purpose he speaks again: Non
resipiscentes paena non liber are -- Positis quibusdam finibus quos C. 2.. 29.
p. 198.
Deus sibi in regendis hominibus prefixit, factu necessarium, etc.

Now upon these Concessions of Crellius, it may be inferred, That supposing GOD
to rule us by his Laws, we must conceive of Him as necessarily obliged to
punish the Impenitent; But, why is He so necessitated to punish? That the
Honor of his Majesty, and the Authority of his Law may be maintained: And that
Principle (as we may call it) that in God which obliges Him for these Ends to
punish the Impenitent, the Contumacious, he allows to be his Justice. Now
therefore if Crellius will consist with himself, I think he needs must own,
that unless GOD Govern the World so, as to attain the great Ends of Government,
he would not be Just; and that those Ends cannot be attained, unless Sin be
punished, will easily be made appear, if any one should make a doubt of it; but
the further Consideration of this, is more properly to be reserved, till we
meet with it in the Second Part of this Discourse.

In the mean time, let it be observed, how far we have proceeded; and these
things seem to be very plain, viz. That GOD is (in a most proper Sense) the
Governor of Intelligent Creatures; That (as such) He is most necessarily Just;
That his Justice does respect the Distribution of Rewards and Punishments, and
that however in Reference either to Rewards or Punishments, it may not always
oblige Him to execute strictly what the very Letter of the Law imports; yet
will it not admit, either in reference to the one or other, of any such
Relaxation or Change, as would not well consist with, and secure the great Ends
of Threatenings or Promises. This Governing Justice therefore was a further Bar
in the way of a mere Pardon; GOD could not (consistently herewith) absolutely
Pardon: If the very Penalty threatened be not inflicted, Justice it self
required that an Equivalent should, i. e. such Sufferings as should as well
attain the ends of the Law, as the threatened Penalty it self should. Thus, in
respect of GOD, his Honor, the Honor of his Power, Wisdom, Holiness, and
Governing Justice, did necessarily require, that if GOD Pardon the Sinner, He
should yet (one way or other) leave such marks of his displeasure upon Sin, as
should as effectually support the Authority, and secure the Ends of his
Government, as if the Sinner himself had suffered according to the utmost
rigor of the Law. And in reference also,

To the Latter Thing mentioned, i. e. That we be discouraged and affrighted
from Sinning; in order thereto, it was alike necessary, that Sin should with
great Severity be animadverted on; if no Punishment was inflicted, or none
proportioned to the Offense, what should keep the World in awe, or make 'em
afraid of Sinning yet again? Crimes unpunished are too much countenanced at
least, if they be not thereby authorized. We see the mere delay of Punishment
is very frequently abused to this purpose, Eccles. 8. 11. Because Sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons
of men is fully set in 'em to do evil. And if mere Forbearance have this
effect, what (may we suppose) would have been the consequence of absolute
Forgiveness? So that we conclude GOD could not (consistently with either his
own Honor, or our Safety) Pardon Sin without a Satisfaction; it was necessary
that Sufferings should be insisted on; and such Sufferings as should be
Equivalent to what was Threatened, Sufferings that were adapted to answer the
ends of the Law and Government, as well, or better than the Sufferings of
Sinners themselves. Hereupon,

IV. In order to our Remission, the Sufferings of Christ were insisted on by
the Father, and agreed to by the Son; by his Sufferings it was effected,
brought to pass, that Sin might be remitted, without either reflecting any
Dishonor upon GOD, or (in the least) encouraging any to Sin. His Sufferings
did fully answer all the Exigencies of our Case; and therefore this
Constitution is mentioned by the Apostle as a very condecent and becoming one,
Heb. 2. 10. Supposing so Gracious an Intendment toward us, That GOD designed
to put us into the Hand of Christ, that He might bring us to Glory, it was what
well became God, to make the Captain of our Salvation perfect through
Sufferings. But what Condecency or Becomingness would there have been in it; if
Sin might have been pardoned, and the Sinner saved as well without it? Nay, the
Death of Christ was therefore insisted on, that thereby GOD's Justice might be
demonstrated, Romans 3. 25. (...); it is doubled to give it the greater Emphasis.
GOD would have been Just, and sufficiently have demonstrated himself to be so,
if He had infficted upon us the Vengeance that was threatened; but supposing
that He Pardon us, that He Justify Sinners (though Penitent Believers) his
Justice might well be called in Question, unless Satisfaction be first made for
our Sins; therefore does the Apostle so industriously urge and inculcate this
over and over, as what he would not, by any means, have overlooked -- Christ
therefore was a Propitiatory-Sacrifice, that GOD's Justice might be
demonstrated, that it might clearly be demonstrated to the World; and the next
Words rise yet higher, (...), that He might be (and not only that He might
appear to be the) Just, as if, upon the supposal of his Justifying Sinners, He
could not otherwise be Just. So that though mere Remission would have well
consisted with Mercy alone; or the Damnation of all Apostate Sinners with
Justice alone; yet if GOD would be merciful to Sinners, He must also be Just;
and that He could not be, unless He so far, and in such a way punish Sin, as
will suffice to keep up his own Honor and Authority, and effectually to
discourage Sin: And hence it was that Christ became the Propitiation for our
Sins. -- Wherefore,

V. And in the last place, The Sufferings of Christ being thus insisted on, in
order to his being a Successful Mediator with GOD for Sinners, He is therefore
said to have died for us, and for our Sins. Our Sins rendered Suffering
necessary: GOD thereupon insists on Suffering, without shedding of Blood He
will allow no Remission: Hereupon Christ consents to die, and accordingly dies
a Sacrifice for us, bears our sins, carries our griefs, etc.

Sect. 5. And this is that relation betwixt our Sins and the Sufferings of
Christ, which is intended to be expressed by Grotius, and others, when they
say, Our Sins were the Meritorious Cause of his Sufferings, i. e. they deserved
Death, and so bound us over to it, as that we could not be exempted from it,
without a Satisfaction, without somewhat Equivalent to our dying; in which
Exigency Christ dies for us. I cannot find that they (or, which with every
Christian surely should yet be of greater weight, that the Scriptures
themselves) do mean any thing more. Thus Grotius, Causa altera, quae Deum movit
sunt peccata nostra paenam commerentia. He does not mean that they deserved
Christ should be punished; but they so bound us over to Punishment, that unless
Christ die for 'em, we could not Salva Divinae Justitiae demonstratione, a
paena mortis aeternae liberari, as he had a few Lines before expressed himself.
And therefore having mentioned that Text a few Pages forward, Gal. 2. 21. If
righteousness be by the law, then Christ died (...), without a cause, he adds,
Locus ipse Pauli, de quo agimus, aliam (quam antecedentem) causam intelligi non
patitur -- And a little further adds; Causam propriam, cur se tradiderit
Christus, mortuusque sit, hanc esse, quod nos per legem justi non essemus, sed
rei paenae; nostra ergo (...) De Satisf. cap. 1. p. 9, 10.
causa est antecedens mortis Christi. To which he adds, p. 36. Non potest
alicujus actionis causa impellens esse Meritoria, nisi and finis sit (...). And
cap. 5. p. 113, 114. Merebantur peccata nostra ut paena exigeretur: quod vero
paena in Christum collata fuerit, hoc ita ad Dei and Christi voluntatem
referimus, ut ea quoque voluntas causas suas habeat, non in Merito Christi (qui
peccatum cum non nosset, a Deo peccatum factus est) sed in summa Christi
aptitudine ad statuendum insigne exemplum, etc. So that whoever allows, that
our Sins deserved Punishment, and so bound us over to Eternal Death, as that we
could not be exempted from it, with safety to the Divine Justice, unless
Satisfaction be made; that Christ died for this end, by satisfying Divine
Justice to procure our Remission; and that his Death therefore was antecedently
thus caused by our Sin, and was inflicted for an example, to deterr us from
Sin; I say, whoever agrees to this (so far as I can find) admits of all that
Grotius ever designed, when he calls our Sins the meritorious Cause of Christ's
Sufferings. And so also the Bishop of Worcester; Our Sins, as an Impulsive
Cause, are to be Discourse of Christ's Suff. p. 69.
considered, as they are so displeasing to GOD; that it was necessary for the
Vindication of his Honor, and the deterring the World from Sin, that no less a
Sacrifice of Atonement should be offered, than the Blood of the Son of GOD.

Sect. 6. And to all this we do readily agree; yea, how fully has Mr. Baxter
spoken to this Sense, particularly in his Reasons of the Christian Religion,
Part I. Cap. 15. Sect. 9. P. 161, 162, 163. So also Part II. c. 4.. 6. P. 232.
and c. 5.. 10. P. 253, 254. The Passages are too large to Transcribe. But he
has there very plainly intimated, That GOD neither has, nor could Pardon
Sinners without such a Sacrifice, or substitute-means, as might preserve the
Honor of his Law and Government, and the future Innoceney of his Subjects, as
well as their Punishment in the full Sense of the Law would have done.

Sect. 7. Now when the whole Matter or Thing is agreed to, all that the
Orthodox intend by that Phrase, it is a very insipid thing for any one
vehemently to contend what Word or Name to call it by: What if one call our
Sins the Meritorious Cause, another the Promeritorious Cause, another the
Occasion of Christ's Sufferings; whilst they are all agreed as to the Reference
they had to 'em: But if any one by a Meritorious Cause intend more than what is
abovesaid, or by an Occasion intend less, it may with just Reason be concluded,
they are mistaken with the Antinomians in the one, or with the Socinians in the
other Extreme.

Sect. 8. We blame no one therefore merely for calling our Sins the Meritorious
Cause of Christ's Sufferings; nay, Mr. Baxter himself sometimes calls 'em so,
the Meritorious, or Pro-meritorious Cause. Confession of Faith, p. 153. the
Remote, or assumed Cause. Life of Faith, p. 311. and p. 321. he allows, that
our sins lay on Christ as the assumed Meritorious cause of his Sufferings. So
in his Methodus Theologiae -- Ad peccatum Relationem habent (speaking of the
Sufferings of Christ) ut ad occasionem, and ut ad causam meritoriam remotam,
and si non proximam. P. III. c. 1. Determ. 5. p. 38. And in that other Book to
which our Accuser refers us, he thus expresses his Sense, at his very entering
upon this Point? When He (Christ) is said to die [for our Sins] it may be
understood -- for our Sins as the Pro-meritorious procuring Cause of his
Suffering, through his own Undertaking to bear what they deserved: Or, if any
think it fitter to call 'em the Occasion, than the Meritorious Cause, they may.
Universal Redempt. p. 5. And the very last Words that I have observed him to
use of this Matter (in that last-mention'd Tract) are these: The strictest
Sense in which He (Christ) is said to die for Men, is, to die in their stead;
or to die for their Sins as the Procuring Cause, on his own Undertaking: yield
this once, and we shall much easiler agree, etc. Ibid. p. 91. Which Two
Passages do so enclose and explicate all the rest, that for a Person to
represent any of the intermediate Passages to adiffering and disadvantageous
Sense, is what deserves a Censure so severe, as we did not think fit to
express, otherwise than by a significant Silence.

Sect. 9. But though we allow others their Liberty, yet (accurately speaking)
it must be said, That all that Reference that our Sins had to the Sufferings of
Christ, does not amount to a Proper Meritorious Cause: Nor did Grotius ever
think it did; whatever our Accuser may imagine; For though he does affirm (as
is intimated, Appeal, p. 6.) that Praeter Dei and Christi voluntatem, datur
Causa Antecedens Legitima mortis Christi: yet he distinguishes once and again,
betwixt Punishment taken Personally, and taken Impersonally: By Punishment
taken Personally, he intends the Sufferings of Christ, considered as his; by
Punishment taken Impersonally, he means the Sufferings of Christ considered
only as Sufferings: And he expressly tells us, That our Sins were only the
Meritorious Cause of the Sufferings of Christ in this latter Sense. For thus he
speaks, Illud quoque reprehensione indiget quod dicit Socinus, Praeter Dei, and
ipsius Christi voluntatem non posse ullam legitimam Causam reddi mortis
Christi, nisi dicamus Christum meritum fuisse ut moreretur: Nam inest quidem in
antecedente Causa meritum, ut supra diximus, sed Impersonaliter; merebantur
enim peccata nostra ut paena exigeretur, etc. Cap. 5. p. 113. Our Sins only did
deserve Sufferings, and those of such a value, and could not be remitted,
unless such a Compensation was made to Divine Justice for 'em; but they never
did deserve that Christ should die; they made it necessary, supposing we be
Redeemed, that it be by such a Price; but they did not deserve that we should
be Redeemed with his Precious Blood: All that Grotius asserts is, That Death
was deserved, he no where says that Christ's Death was so.

. 10. And this is the true Reason why we are not fond of the Phrase [a
Meritorious Cause] because it would intimate, Christ's Sufferings were
deserved: Now if they were deserved, it must either be allowed, that they were
the very thing that the Law threatened, or we (by our Sins) deserved God should
Save and Ransom us by such Sufferings. If either of these be true, our Sins may
then be said to be the Meritorious, the proper meritorious Cause of Christ's
Sufferings, as our Accuser would have 'em; but cannot be strictly and truly so,
otherwise than upon the one, or the other of these Principles. In that they
deserved such Sufferings for weight, and could not be remitted without such
Sufferings, and Christ hereupon consented to suffer for 'em, they may be called
the Meritorious Cause of his Sufferings, or, much more fitly, the ground, the
reason, the assumed cause, the pro-meritorious, or quasi-meritorious Cause of
his Sufferings: But the real, proper meritorious Cause of 'em they could not
be, unless they in a strict and proper Sense deserved that Christ should die.
Now the Death of Christ is considerable under a twofold Notion, either as a
Curse or Blessing. As inflicted upon Him, 'twas a most dreadful Curse: As it
was our Ransom, the Price of our Redemption, it was and is a most invaluable
Blessing. If our Sins therefore deserved the Death of Christ, it must be either
in the one, or the other of these Respects: But no one surely will dare to say,
That our Sins deserved such a Ransom; that GOD in giving his Son to be the
Savior of the World, gave us no more than we deserved; this were egregious
Blasphemy, against the brightest and most amazing Instance of Love, with which
God ever blessed the World.

. 11. It remains then, that (supposing our Sins the Proper Meritorious Cause of
Christ's death) they did deserve it as a Curse to be inflicted upon Him, though
not as a Blessing influential upon us. And it is not conceivable how our Sins
could so deserve the death of Christ, unless this be supposed to be the very
thing threatened in the Law; [if thou sinnest, Christ shall die]: And this our
Accuser sometimes seems to intend; what else can he possibly mean, when he
tells us, Appeal, p. 25. If Christ's Obligation to suffer did not result from
this Law (i. e. the Law which we had violated) our Sins were not the Impulsive
Cause of his Sufferings: Or, if it did not immediately, our Sins were but the
Remote Cause, or Occasion; not a mere Impulsive, or Proper Meritorious Cause of
'em. And p. 50. If Christ's Sufferings be not ex obligatione Legis (we suppose
he means the same Law as before) our Sins cannot be their Meritorious Cause.
And p. 41. Whence its impossible (i. e. if Christ's Sufferings arise not from
the violated Law, but from the Mediatorial Law, its impossible) Sin should be
their Meritorious Cause. So that his Sense should be, That Christ's Sufferings
were not, could not be, 'twere impossible they should be from our Sins, as the
Proper Meritorious Cause, unless they did result, and immediately result from
the violated Law. And this is what we also say; and therefore while he pleads
for our Sins being so properly, so immediately, the Meritorious Cause of
Christ's Sufferings; he must needs mean, that they did result, immediately
result from the Law when violated; i. e. so soon as ever the Law was violated,
so soon as we had sinned, the Law immediately lays hold on Christ, binds Him
over to Death; and that it could not do, unless he was threatened by it.

Here therefore I would have manifested that the Death of Christ was not
threatened by that Law, but that I have already largely done it, both in the
first and third Chapters of this Discourse: And our Accuser himself has
rendered it the less needful, by giving it as his true Sense, That when the Law
was at first given to Adam, Christ was not in the Obligation: it did not run
[Thou, or thy Surety for thee] p. 5. of this very Appeal. We shall therefore
(instead of perusing the Matter further) allow him leisure to bethink himself
how these things will be made to consist together, That Christ's Obligation to
suffer did immediately result from the Law, and that yet the Law did not
include a Surety: Humanity it self (and much more Christianity) obliging us to
show some pity, and not to press too hard a Person that labors under the
hardships of Self-contradiction.

. 12. To sum up this Head then, Orthodoxness does not consist in Words and
Phrases; 'twould be egregious weakness to imagine, That the Controversies
betwixt us and the Socinians are only whether this, or the other Word, or Form
of Speaking, be most apt and expressive of that Truth about which there is no
difference: That which the Bishop of Worcester has observed, with a more
particular respect to a Change of Persons, will admit a much more extensive
Application. It is not (says he) the use of the Words, but the Sense of 'em is
to be inquired into. See his Lordship's Letter to Mr. W. inserted in the Answer
to the Report, p. 57. It Is not the bare Word [Trinity] that divides betwixt
them and us in that point, or the term [Person] or [Satisfaction] or
[meritorious Cause] etc. But it is the Sense designed to be expressed by those
Terms, in which they will not agree with us; would they allow the Truth we
plead for, that is wont to be expressed by those Words; they would no longer be
Socinians; nor would any wise Man perpetuate the Contention with 'em, though they
should yet be unsatisfied as to the forementioned Phrases.

Our Accuser therefore does not (to use that Right Reverend Persons Words
again) discover his profound Knowledge in these Matters, if he think, as he
says, Ap. p. 39. That the Heart of the Controversy lies in Asserting or
Denying our Sins to be the Properly Meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings:
And if He know otherwise, and to design to impose upon those that do not, where
is his Ingenuity. It Is so far from being true, that the Heart of the
Controversy lies here, that so far as I have yet observed, this very Man is
the first that ever asserted, Our Sins were the Properly meritorious Cause,
etc. Grotius, Vossius, and the Bishop of Worcester, do indeed speak of 'em as
the Meritorious Cause; but how they explain themselves we have before
manifested as to two of 'em. Nor does Vossius intend any thing more, than only
that they are truly Meritorious of Sufferings, that they could not be remitted
without 'em; and that in this Exigency, Christ consents to suffer for us;
whereupon he calls 'em the Meritorious Cause of his Sufferings; though he (as
Grotius) means it only of the Sufferings he underwent, not of those Sufferings
as undergone by Him. To this purpose we find him explaining himself; Punitio
omnis qua talis, sive Impersonaliter spectata, causam (...) habet Justitiam Dei
(...) Procatarctica vero causa sunt peccata, itidem Impersonaliter, and in
genere spectata, sine determinatione, etc. Punitio vero, quae pro alio est,
plane misericordiae Divinae opus est: procatarctica vero causa sunt peccata
nostra Satisfactionem Exigentia. Vossi Responsum ad Judicium Ravensperg. Chap.
12. So that though they call 'em the Meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings,
yet they plainly manifest, that they intend only they were meritorious of the
Sufferings He underwent (abstractly considered) and therefore may improperly be
said to be meritorious of his Sufferings; but I no where find 'em asserting our
sins to be the properly meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings, much less
fixing that as the Point in Controversy betwixt the Orthodox and the
Socinians, whether they be to be so called, or not.

Nay, it is not only not needful to use the Phrase our Accuser would impose upon
us, but (unless carefully explained) it is very unsafe; for that if the Words be
taken as they sound, they would import that (in a strict and proper sense) Our
sins deserved that Christ should die: an Assertion, that in a sense very
obvious does amount to blasphemy, and (without a manifest force put upon the
Words) cannot possibly be a Truth.

CHAP. V.
That though Christ's Sufferings may not unaptly be called a Punishment, yet
not in the full and proper Sense in which the Sufferings of the Sinner himself
might have been so called.

. 1. IN this Point also, our Accuser is as Clamourous, as in the former; and
what has been said in the foregoing Chapter will furnish out a just Answer to
all his Cavils upon this Head. He represents us, as if we did allow the
Sufferings of Christ to be the Punishment of Sin, only so far, and in the same
Sense as Crellius does, Appeal, p. 27. but denied 'em to be a Proper
Punishment; and that therefore we are against the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction, Ap. p. 4. 10. And lest this should not be enough to leave us
under the Reproach of Socinianism, he represents this as the very parting Point
betwixt the Orthodox and the Socinians; the Heart of the Controversy
(according to him) lies in the Asserting or Denying -- Christ's Sufferings to
be properly Penal, p. 39. and (if he be not mistaken) Grotius, Vossius, and the
B. of Worcester, are of the same mind.

. 2. But after all, what if it should appear, That the Phrase is Ambiguous;
that in one Sense (and which is plainly the Sense of that very Judicious and
Learned Bishop, and others, that use the Phrase) it is true, That the
Sufferings of Christ are a Proper Punishment; and yet in another Sense (which
shall appear to be the Sense of Mr. Baxter, and those whose Sentiments agree
with his in this Matter) it is as true, That Christ's Sufferings are not a
Proper Punishment, but Analogically only to be so called: That the Bishop never
owned it, nor any Person of note, in the Sense in which we deny it; and that we
do not, Mr. Baxter never did deny it, in the Sense in which the Bishop, (and
other Famous Defenders of the Catholic Faith against Socinianism) Assert and
Plead for it.

. 3. To Evince this, there needs nothing more than a Just Representation of
their Sense; what the one and the other intend by a Proper Punishment, and this
they themselves were best able to express: Now then to constitute a Proper
Punishment in the Bishop's Sense, there is no more needful, than that there be
Sufferings inflicted on the account of Sin, to deter Men from Sinning, and to
assert GOD's Rights as a Sovereign, and vindicate his Honor to the World.
Whatsoever Sufferings do answer all these ends of Divine Punishments, and are
inflicted on the account of sin, have the proper notion of Discour. of the
Suff. of Christ. P. 59.
Punishments in 'em. And again, Whatever is inflicted on the account of sin,
and with a design to show God's severity against it, and thereby to deter
others from the practice of it, has the proper notion of Punishment in it. Ib.
p. 73.
This is plainly the Sense of that Right Reverend Person, he means no more when
he calls the Sufferings of Christ a proper Punishment, than what is abovesaid.
And to all this we cheerfully consent.

. 4. But Mr. Baxter, when he denies the Sufferings of Christ to have been a
proper Punishment, it is plain, he takes Punishment in the strictest Sense, as
it does connote the suffering Person to have sinned; and intends no more by it
than that Christ was not himself a sinner. Poena in sensu primo and famosissimo
est Ipsius Delinquentis malum natural. -- concludendum est. Christus non-fuit
rever a peccator; ideoque; Meth. The. P. III. c. 1. determ. 5. P. 38.
poenam sensu primo and famosissimo sic dictam non dedit. And this is no more
than what every one must agree to; that supposing it be taken into the Notion
of Punishment, that the Snffering be inflicted upon one that has sinned,
Christ's Sufferings were not a proper Punishment. Nor was Mr. Baxter the only
Person that apprehended this to be the most strict and proper Notion of
Punishment, the Learned Pufendorf (after Grotius, and other Civilians) does
upon this very Principle assert, That however one Man may suffer, yet he cannot
(properly speaking) be punished for another's Sin. Paenae vocari nequit dolor
ille aut damnum, qui in Pufendorf. Element. Jurisp. Univers. Lib. 1. def. 21..
7. p. 237.
illos redundat, qui nihil deliquerunt -- and qui in altero paenae rationem
habiturus est dolor aut damnum, delictum proprium tanquam causam respicere
debet. Unde Paena non est dolor ille, quem quis ex paenae propinqui aut amici
sui capit, nisi ipse fors ad istius delictum concurrerit, etc. To the same
purpose he also speaks in his larger Tract; Illos quidem, qui revera de reatu
delicti participant, pro ratione influxus ad facinus aliquod puniri posse,
extra dubium est; cum iidem non alienum, sed proprium delictum luant. De Jure
Naturae and Gent. Lib. VIII. c. 3.. 28. p. 831. But. 30. p. 834. he adds, De
coetero firmum manet istud, in foro humano, ob delictum alienum, de quo nulla
ratione quis participavit, recte aliquem puniri non posse, etc. And the Famous
Dr. Ames includes it expressly in the Notion of Punishment, not only that it be
some Evil inflicted for or on the account of Sin, but also that it be inflicted
upon the Sinner himself. Paenae est malum Peccatori propter peccatum inflictum.
Amesii Medulla Theol. Lib. 1. C. 12.. 10. p. (mihi) 56. And therefore he adds,.
14. Paena igitur proprie dicta non habet locum, nisi in Creaturis
intelligentibus, in quibus etiam peccatum reperitur.

. 5. This therefore is the only Question that can lie betwixt us and our
Accuser, Whether Christ was really a Sinner, or not? If not (which we hope our
Accuser himself will not scruple to say with us) then his Sufferings were not a
Punishment, in that most full and proper Sense, in which the Sufferings
inflicted on Sinnners themselves are so called. We willingly allow, That they
were as properly Punishments, as it was possible the Sufferings of one, who was
himself no Sinner, could be; but we dare not say, that Christ was a Sinner: And
therefore, though He suffered for Sin, yet the Sin (since it was not his own)
did not so nearly and immediately render Christ liable to Suffering, as it did
the Sinner himself. Death was not due to Christ immediately upon our having
sinned; the Law did not threaten Christ [if Men sin, thou shall die]: After we
had sinned, there was no one obnoxious to Suffering for it besides our selves,
'till Christ voluntarily undertook to suffer; he was not antecedently obliged,
but (when he might have refused) he freely chose to die for us, He gave Himself
for our sins, Gal. 1. 4. He gave Himself a ransom for us, 1 Timothy 2. 6.

. 6. So that here is a vast difference betwixt the Sufferings of Christ, and
the Sufferings of a Sinner. The Sinner, and Christ do indeed each suffer on the
account of Sin, so far they agree; but the Sinner suffers for his own sin,
Christ for the sins of others; the Sinner suffers deservedly, he receives the
due reward of his deeds, Luke 23. 41. but Christ's Sufferings were undeserved,
he having done nothing amiss: The Sinners sufferings were threatened by the Law;
but where do we find any threatening against Christ: The Sinners Sufferings are
inflicted without and against his Consent; but Christ's were the matter of his
free choice, what He might have refused, etc.

. 7. Upon which, and other like grounds, how plain is it, That the Sufferings
of Christ are not in all respects Commensurate to the Sufferings of Sinners;
and that however they have such a respect to sin, on account whereof they may
not unaptly be called Punishments (as Mr. Baxter himself asserts, Method.
Theol. Part III. p. 38.) yet they have not altogether the same respect to Sin,
as the Sinners own Sufferings have, or would have had (as appears before) and
therefore when we call 'em Punishments, we must not take so much into the
Notion of Punishment as when we call the Sinners own Sufferings by that name.

. 8. So that when the Sufferings of Christ are compared with those of Sinners,
we say, they are less Properly and Analogically called Punishments not in that
Primary and most Famous sense in which the Sinners own sufferings are so
called: and yet when we compare the same sufferings with mere Calamities, that
have no relation to Sin, or guilt; we say, they are not unaptly, but properly
enough to be called Punishments, for that they had such a respect to Sin, as
has been before-said. In this Mr. Baxter Baxt. Two Disputat. of Original Sin,
p. 156.
is plain: and therefore elsewhere Asserts, That his (i. e. Christ's) sufferings
were truly Punishments because for sin, though not for his own; yet not
Punishments, in so full and strict a Sense as ours, who suffer for our own sins.

. 9. And hence it appears, that our Accuser has with no just reason,
represented Mr. Baxter as agreeing with Crellius in this matter: Crellius (says
he) says the same, only with this Explication, viz. that it must be taken
materially and Improperly which is the sense in which Mr. Baxter -- takes it.
Appeal, p. 27. But besides that Mr. Baxter (so far as yet appears) no where
says, that the sufferings of Christ are Punishments materially only, (as this
Accuser intimates) nay, on the contrary, he argues from their participating in
the formal Reason of Punishment, that they may properly enough be so called,
Quoad nomen vero, non inepte poena dicuntur, dum ad Peccatum habent, relationem
etc. Baxter ubi supra. I say, besides this, any considering and unprejudiced
Reader will easily see, cannot but observe, that if at any time they happen
both to use one and the same Term, they yet intend it in a vastly differing
Sense. So if Crellius allow Christ's sufferings to be Punishments improperly so
called; it is most evident he thereby excludes that respect they had to Sin, to
our Sin, which we have in the foregoing Chapter asserted and cleared, and in
reference to which Mr. Baxter with the Bishop of Worcester, and all the
Orthodox are agreed: and so also when he calls our Sins the Occasion of
Christ's Sufferings, he means it not as Mr. Baxter does, of such an Occasion as
was (so far as the Nature of the thing will admit) a meritorious Cause of 'em
also.

And it may as well be said that Crellius says the same with Grotius, and the
Bishop, because he sometimes calls our Sins the Impulsive cause of Christ's
sufferings; and that his sense is the same with their's, because sometimes his
words are so; and therefore also, that their sense is the same with his, and
thereupon that they are Socinians: I say, there is the same Reason why they
might also, as well as Mr. Baxter, be thus represented by our Accuser, for that
they also sometimes use Crellius's words without any scruple.

. 10. Nor is it any uncommon thing, for several Persons, to use the same words
in differing senses: Our Accuser himself affords us a most convincing Instance
to this purpose, in reference to the very matter before us. The sufferings of
Christ are to be considered as a Punishment of sin, a Proper Punishment. In the
Expression the Bishop of Worcester, and our Accuser are agreed; but that
notwithstanding, the sense intended by the one, and the other is not the same.
He pretends indeed p. 38. that it is not the Words and Phrases, but his
Lordship's sound sense, that he contends for; but if that were all he would
have, there was no occasion for him to contend at all; that having never (by
those he Accuses) been called in Question: where he apprehended a difference
betwixt his Lordship and Mr. Baxter at the most, it could be but a Verbal one,
that their sense, when they explain themselves, does well agree, has been
already manifested; and since Mr. Baxter did, and we do most Entirely agree,
that Christ's suffeings were a Proper Punishment, according to the Notion his
Lordship, gives us of such a Punishment, we may surely hope for an End of this
Contention.

. 11. Only for a Close, I would remark it to our Accuser, That whilst (either
through Prejudice, or Inadvertency) he groundlesly charges us as differing from
that Judicious and Right Reverend Person; he does himself give Occasion, for
any one to return back the Charge, with greatest Justice, upon him. For under
the pretense, That Christ's Sufferings were a proper Punishment (for which he
alleges the Bishop of Worcester) he would have 'em to be the very Punishment
we had deserved, the very Punishment the Law threatened, Punishment inflicted by
virtue of the Sanction of the violated Law. V. p. 23, 26, 28, 29, etc. This
Notion almost runs throughout his Appeal. But this is so far from being the
sound Sense, in which his Lordship has used this Expression, that it is what he
does most directly dispute against.

. 12. And whereas he does once and again Insinuate, That it is necessary
Christ's Sufferings should be truly and properly Penal (we must suppose he
means it in his own, not in the Bishop's Sense) in Order to their being a
proper Satisfaction to God's Justice for our Sins: it is (as has bin already, in
some measure, manifested) utterly subversive of the True, and Universally owned
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, to assert his sufferings to have been Penal,
in any such Sense, as would infer or include their having been inflicted by
virtue of the violated Law, undergone in the proper Person of Sinners, their
having been formally the same we were obliged to, and most immediately and
properly deserved by our Sins; while yet this is what he every where pleads
for: But of this Point of Satisfaction we design (God assisting) to treat more
distinctly and at large hereafter.

FINIS.

