A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. Jos. Glanvil, Late Rector of BATH, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty: Who dyed at his Rectory of Bath, the
fourth of November, 1680. and was Buried there the Ninth of the same Month. By
Ios. Pleydell, Archdeacon of Chichester.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1681.

REVEL. XIV. Ver. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
THe more attentively we consider the Christian Religion in any of its parts,
we find greater grounds for the confirmation both of its Author and excellency;
so infinitely does it surpass all those writings of that nature, which the
great Sages of the World, have, with so much superciliousness on their part,
and admiration from their respective followers, I may add too (all things
considered) not without meriting due praise from us, delivered to their
Scholars.

And this will appear evident and undeniable if we but parallel them in any of
the chief heads; for instance, in the principles upon which our Religion does
proceed, the precepts it contains, and the rewards it appoints; which division
will comprize the sum of what we profess: In all which the great Masters of
Heathen wisdom, do plainly discover, either a great deal of Ignorance, or
malice, in prevaricating that light they had reflected upon them from Jewish
tradition, so that it may be well doubted whether their Symbolick Divinity were
not designed rather to conceal their own Ignorance in what they pretended to,
than to secure the rites and mysteries thereof from the vulgar's profanation.
For example:

1. Take first the Principles, those truths that are the Basis and foundation
of our Religion; such as are the Being and Nature of God, the Creation of the
World, the Fall of man, and his Redemption by a Messiah, the Immortality of the
Soul, and the Resurrection; it is plain the whole Philosophic world had none,
or but a very imperfect knowledge of almost all of them; However some, of their
lavish Charity, have endeavored to squeeze as much from their writings: Nay,
that they were not without some knowledge of our greatest Mysteries, viz. of a
Messiah under their Daimono-Latria, and even of the Trinity in Plato's Triad,
and the Resurrection of the body, under the Indians Palin-genesis: But no body
that has any veneration either for the Scriptures, or but for Truth in general,
but must see and acknowledge that all this is but tortured from them.

Nor may we deny this further, that whatever Notions of this kind they had,
were but traditional in respect of their Origin, and conjectural in reference
to their ambiguity and uncertainty.

2. The like is to be said of their Rules and Precepts of virtuous living. For
we may not detract thus much from them, that they have recommended many
excellent Institutes to their Sects. You shall collect among them many very
admirable sayings, such as these;

To know our selves; to abstain from vice; to bear afflictions: to do justly,
and speak truly (...). do as we would be done by; and many more.

Indeed for that kind of Divinity which was deducible from the Rules of common
prudence and observation, and depended not chiefly or solely upon Divine
Revelation, they have done extraordinary well: And if they had not furnished us
with so many famous examples of Virtue too, it would not reflect so much upon
the Professors of Christianity, which in the spirituality of its precepts has
as far exceeded all that they have writ, as some of their Lives have most of
ours; though that be not to be imputed to our Religion, unless it were justly
chargeable upon the vitiosity or defect of its Principles or Rules.

Thus miserably however do we compensate the Divine culture; and as if Nature
abhorring so great a disparity betwixt mankind, would thus balance the Heathen
with the Christian World; by opposing their Imperfect Knowledge, but severer
Virtue, to our diviner Laws, but greater licentiousness in Practice: Many of
them having, by as great proportions exceeded us in their endeavors after
goodness, as we do them in the knowledge and other means of it.

3. Last of all (which brings it to our present subject) Christianity propounds
nothing but upon the fairest and surest encouragement imaginable. For the
happiness of our Religion is both transcendently superior to their discoveries
and accounts of it; and then also we are sufficiently and unquestionably
assured hereof, i e. it is not recommended to us upon plausible persuasions and
inconclusive arguments, but in the genuine sense of St. Paul's expressions, 1 Corinthians. 2. 4. in demonstration of the Spirit and Power.

So that we see there is a kind of peculiar excellency in the Holy Scriptures,
above all the Systems of the greatest Moralists; the foundation of our
Obedience being laid upon clearer and better principles, the practice of our
obedience being carried higher by the spirituality of its commands, and the
rewards of our obedience being incomparably greater, than what we can conceive,
much less could they promise or bestow.

It Is the last of these that is contained in the Text, and for which I am to be
further accomptable to ye in the prosecution of the words I have read. And I
heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed, etc. Wherein we have
these following particulars principally to be observed.

1. The happiness of good men described by its general nature, they are
blessed, and by its integral parts, they rest from their labors, and their
works do follow them.

2. The Security and Evidence upon which this happiness is promised and
asserted, yea says the Spirit.

3. The time of its perfection and accomplishment, partly in this life, but not
fully nor completely till death, saying, Blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord.

4. And lastly, the Influence which the consideration of these premises ought
to have upon us, both in Life and Death, in reference to Obedience and
Patience. And

I. To begin with the description of that happiness, those rewards, which are
propounded to us for the encouragement of our Obedience and Patience: Which are
so great, that I am utterly ignorant by what measures to describe them to ye.
The nature of that Celestial bliss as far transcending all our present
felicities, by which we should judge of it; as it does the very capacity of our
meriting it.

Sir Francis Bacon has observed, We can have but a very imperfect account of
those things, which receed any whit near those extremes of Nothing and
Infinity: because either by their parvity or immensity, they elude or confound
our knowledge.

And especially the latter, which choke the understanding; and is like the
beholding of the Sun, whose light and luster, by which we discern other
objects, marrs, and dimms our sight.

Such is the transcendent excellency of our future bliss, at once the delight
and amazement of our Intellectuals.

In the description whereof our highest expressions are so far from being
hyperbolical, that they amount but to a Litotes; so that after our utmost
endeavors we must content our selves with St. Paul's account of it, in his
First and Second Epistles to the Corinthians, 1 Ep. c. 2. v. 9. 2 Ep. chapter 12.
v. 4.
his (...), and his (...), unutterable, for that I take to be the meaning (and
not as we render it unlawful) of (...), and also unconceiveable.

So inevitably should we diminish the Glory of Heaven, by any expression,
illustration, or parallel whatever.

Which happiness of ours consists of, and is integrated by these two parts.

The total privation of all evil.

And the aggregate enjoyment of all good.

Both which as they are necessarily requisite to the nature of the thing, so
are they contained in the very notion of the word.

For as the plurality of the Hebrew word (...) [ Ashrei] ostendit omnigenam
beatitudinem; so more expressly does the Etymology of the Greek word answer
hereunto, (...) either from (...) immunity from evil, or (...) extremity of
joy; and accordingly it is described in my Text, first Privatively, and then
Positively.

1. For the privative part, Rest from their labors, or which is all one,
Immunity from Evil, by which this happiness is oft-times described: for though
the privation hereof simply and absolutely signify no part hereof, the absence
especially; for by that reason you might call a stock or stone or any other
insensible creature happy, as by the other a Horse or Dog might be said to be
so when dead: yet inasmuch as it is more than a negation, namely the being
delivered from a world of misery wherewith we are now infested, and more which
we had deserved, and were once obnoxious to, which we also then behold in
others of the same make and nature with us; the contemplation hereof, by which
it so widely differs from both the Instances, must needs fill our mind with an
ineffable delight and satisfaction.

Or at least if this indolency be no part of our happiness, yet is it so
absolutely needful to it, that we cannot tell well how to conceive of it
without this; and much less can such a thing be as perfect happiness and
degrees of misery conjoined together.

Nor did ever any Sect of Philosophers think otherwise, but those fullen and
self-willed Stoics. That ever any body should be so mad to cry out in the
extremity of pain and misery, Quam suave, quam dulce hoc est, quam hoc non
curo! And I cannot but laugh at Possidonius his Rant, Nil agis, O Dolor, etc.

There are diverse instances of such who have born most exquisite miseries even
to admiration, as well out of a kind of hardiness of nature, as greatness of
mind; and in that they were less miserable than the delicate and impatient: but
whence was it? either from necessity, or hope, or both; this is Christian-like,
but that is brutish, if it were sufficient without the other, but it is not, for
perpetuity would certainly render any evil intolerable.

So that we are so far from being completely happy as long as any disease or
inquietude of mind or body does attend us; that the hope of being delivered is
the only argument that can afford us any solid and rational comfort in our
afflictions: For as to fatality, hoc ipsum est, said Augustus when one urged
it; and for the disease of Impatiency, it is (as one has excellently observed)
no proper consideration of comfort, but only an art of managing our trouble; so
as not to make it greater than really it is.

2. The other part of our happiness, and indeed the main, we call positive, and
consists in the enjoyment of all good; and is what St. John intends by their
works following them; i. e. they shall then receive all those glorious rewards
that God has promised to good and righteous men for all their service and
obedience. We should in vain go about to recount them, they are so many and so
great.

In two things the Scriptures chiefly place it; in the vision, and in the
fruition of God. This is life Eternal, says this very St. John in his Gospel,
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ; Joh. 17. 3.
and again in his 1 Ep. Chapter 3. v. 2. It does not yet appear what we shall be;
but we know that when he does appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him
as he is. The other is called the being with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.
and the being united to him. St. John 17. 21. That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. But this
is not to exclude the other instances of our happiness, indeed it comprehends
all the rest.

For what are all the pleasures and contentments of the World, but as so many
rays of that Sun and emanations of that fountain?

They are all contained with much more perfection in God, than they were
created in their own natures: Whereupon it follows that they which are admitted
into his presence, have all the goodness and perfections of all the creatures
in the world united in God.

So that whatever can delight either body or mind, there it is; nor will there
be any room to wish for or imagine more than what we have; there being in him
(as an ingenious man expresses it) such a various Identity, that the fruition
of him at once satisfies and creates desires, that without fatiety, this
without disquiet.

3. To which if we add the eternal duration of this state, we attribute unto it
a kind of complication of Infinities, a potential Infinity in the subject,
actual in the object, and eternal in the continuance of it:

Which single consideration is sufficient to advance it to an infinite
preference above all earthly things imaginable; because these things being
founded in matter, and that being in continual flux and motion, here can be
nothing permanent and lasting. Nor indeed would that be any addition to our
present felicity. It Is variety that makes these things appear excellent; their
mutability, is both the life and death of all present delights.

A few repetitions make us abhor our food; in less than a night and a day we
grow weary of our Beds; and it is so in all the other instances of our Nature,
and it is more so in those of our corruption.

But it is otherwise in the attainment of the ultimate end, where all our
appetites are arrested and detained.

Indeed we no sooner experience these things in the fruition, but we
straightway nauseate them; finding them so pitifully allayed with mixtures of
evil, and prove so miserably short of what we desire and expect from them. But
it is otherwise there, the excellency of those Celestial Objects will disappoint
our expectation by their transcendency, as much as in all other fruitions their
emptiness is wont to do.

So that Eternity, though but a circumstance which does only superinduce a kind
of extremity or perfection to what it is conjoined with; and may as well be
drawn in to enhanse our misery, (for what more than this makes the condition of
the damned so horribly dreadful, whereby they are excluded from all hope, the
very seed and lowest degree of felicity?) Yet is it so necessary to what we are
speaking of, as that without it those joys of Heaven, though otherwise absolute
and infinite, would suffer a contradiction, and become imperfect: And that not
only for the future, but the present, by introducing such passions as must
needs debase and allay the highest delights.

So that by being thus secured in the possession of our happiness, we receive
thereby an unspeakable addition to it.

II. Proceed we next to show you the Security and Evidence, upon which this
happiness is promised and asserted, and whether it bear any proportion to our
duty and the Rewards of it, for so we are allowed to call them; though not upon
the account of merit, yet by reason of their necessary connection with,
dependence upon, and that kind (such a one as it is) of proportion they bear to
each other.

There is a twofold evidence God Almighty has given us, for the strengthening
of our hope, and confirming of our faith, in the belief and expectation of the
other World. The first moral, grounded upon the testimony of the Spirit; the
other I call natural, and is grounded in the things themselves.

1. The first evidence of our future bliss, is the testimony of the Spirit,
express in the Text, Yea, says the Spirit. But then we must have a care of
what kind of Testimony of the Spirit we understand it: for, understand it as
it is vulgarly taken, for some act or operation wrought in and upon us, besides
the Enthusiasm of it, fain would I be satisfied, what validity can there be in
such a testimony, as it self needs something else to confirm it? for so this
testimony of the Spirit is to be tried by its concordance and agreement to the
word of God, nor do I know any other way to distinguish it from a motion or
suggestion of the Devil's besides. And though to err thus in this single
instance may not be very pernicious, for I am not mighty solicitous, how it was
wrought, so there be a firm persuasion in us of this truth; yet in other cases
I know how dangerous it is, nor is it safe in this, for it leaves a passage
open and unguarded to downright Atheism.

By the testimony of the Spirit therefore I understand the word of God; or the
Scriptures as made known and proved to us to derived from this Divine Spirit,
which we may call the outward testimony thereof: for though St. John knew this
by the other way, as most certainly all others did who received any Revelation;
yet never was any other than the person himself assured that way.

Nor do I make degrees of more or less certainty in the way or manner of the
Spirit's revealing a thing; for the Apostles were as well assured of the
infallibility of their doctrine before they wrought any miracles, as we are by
them: but we were not nor could be so.

But this notwithstanding, in respect of us we must admit of such degrees; for
no body I hope will be so blasphemous to equal such private dictates they have
in their own breast to the divine authority of the Holy Scriptures.

So then I make this to be the moral evidence of future happiness: God has
said it in his word. And this I call a moral certainty, not in opposition to
divine and infallible; as they are sometimes contradistinguish'd; but only to
natural: for we can desire no greater evidence, we cannot have a higher
confirmation of any truth, than the veracity of Heaven to attest it.

I do not know any proposition that carries greater self-evidence than this,
That God ought to be believed in what he says; and therefore though we may
question the truth of the Revelation, it is impossible to do so of any thing we
acknowledge to be so revealed.

So that the stress of this point lies upon that great and necessary
praecognitum in our Religion; namely, the Divine authority of the Holy
Scriptures. Upon which postulate if we proceed, there is as great certainty of
the truth of this proposition, That good men shall enjoy eternal happiness
after this life; as if we should again hear that Daughter of voice, and God
himself should sensibly attest it.

2. But there is another ground or evidence of our future happiness which I
call natural, because it depends upon that Intrinsic Relation and consent
there is between goodness and it; the difference between them being only in
degree, like the dawning of the Morning to the luster of the Noon. For what is
it to be happy but to be united to God? and what does unite us to God but Love?
and what is the love of God but Religion? And if you remove but all inward
imperfections, and all outward impediments, there remains no difference at all.
So that Virtue and Piety do not only dispose and prepare us for Heaven and
Salvation, but we thereby receive and experience the very beginnings and
anticipations of it.

And though in respect of the mutability of our will and affections toward God
and goodness in this world, we cannot be infallibly assured of it as to our own
particulars; because every alteration in the one produces a like answerable
effect as to the other: Yet in the general we may, even from hence, be very
well assured hereof; because there is nothing more required to the completing
of our essential happiness, than an advance and progression in the same
virtuous tract.

And however it looks in a Divine, if we will speak rationally to the thing, we
must allow the love and hatred of God to be the true natural causes of our
salvation and damnation, even of their very eternity; it being naturally
impossible to be other than happy while we love God, and contrariwise if we
hate him; and this is the only instant cause of its continuation through all
the durations of Eternity. And to remove your astonishment, see, how in this
lower world, many stupendous and admirable works are daily produced which were
mean and unnoted while they lay hid and contained in the seminal beginnings;
after the same wonderful manner by diverse minute gradations does this divine
Creature grow up from its first formation in our trembling and unstable
desires, to the stature and perfection of Everlasting Glory.

And yet there remains less doubt if we take in the Consideration of the Divine
nature. How else will you vindicate the Justice of God in all the odd and
confused occurrences of this World? Where Is your infinite goodness and bounty,
that suffers its servants always to be neglected? what will become of an
almighty and omniscient Justice if sinners are never called to an account? Or
one, or the other cannot be.

III. It Is true indeed the completing of this bliss (which brings us to our
next head) is neither promised, nor to be had in this life. It Is at Death these
rewards become due and payable.

-- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera possit.
It has been the constant method of Divine providence, to cause the most
excellent things to follow and arise from the most uncouth and unlikely. Thus
in the Creation order springs from confusion, and the Light is made to attend
the darkness.

Contrary to the methods observed by Nature, where the causes are ever more
worthy than their effects from their first beginning downward.

Now as he is pleased to transcend and deviate from the tracts and capacities
of natural Agents, thereby to assert his Prerogative, and render his
omnipotency more conspicuous to the world: So is he no less delighted to use
the same recesses in displaying his Grace; evermore ushering in his mercies
with the Black Rod, thereby inhansing and endearing our subsequent refreshments.

And though the goodness of those celestial inhabitants, and the happiness of
their condition, need neither foyl nor artifice to render that or their
acknowledgements of the Divine favor greater: Yet however if we consider these
things as a reward and encouragement of our obedience, the proceeding thus is
but regular and necessary; that we should do our work before we receive our
wages, and finish our undertaking, before we demand satisfaction.

Earnest and Security Heaven has vouchsafed us, but to deposite the whole in
hand, this were, not to encourage but bribe our Obedience. This were to destroy
Morality, and turn Virtue into Nature.

Nor yet is the Divine goodness less communicable in this life, but we are not
so capable of receiving it.

For look as in Nature neither the single excellency of the Object or the Agent
alone is sufficient to produce any notable effect, but both are required: So
likewise in Religion, all the effects of the divine grace and bounty (though
that be free and infinite) are limited and determined by our capacities and
reception.

So that while our Appetites, those (...), as they are called in Scripture,
that are to be the receptacles of all this Glory, are, either replenished with
the vain and sinful objects of this Life, or, are straightened and contracted by
the weakness and imperfection of this dull and lumpish matter, they must be rid
of the one and divested of the other, and then, we should be instantly happy.

You have seen the happiness of the Christian man; there are indeed
encouragements of another nature, namely, earthly blessings and temporal
rewards, our whole present interest, unless it happen to interfere at any time
with the other. Religion has descended to the securing of these too, and that
not only by moral designation, but by a proper and natural efficiency; so that
we cannot better prosecute our present interest, than by the methods of
Religion. And by this gracious and happy complication of the (...) and the
(...) together, they are made to become helpful and assisting to each other,
serving reciprocally as a means or motive either to other.

But this encouragement is neither proper nor adequate to Christianity; since
it may be as well pursued by natural, as by divine rules, better perhaps by
diabolical arts than either, nothing experimentally so enriching men, as
sordidness, oppression, and other violences and frauds. The Devil in all
likelihood, giving the fairest prospect, and most likely possession of the
Kingdoms and glory of this world.

But they are things, I have shown you, of a nature infinitely more sublime,
that Christianity propounds to its observers; The rewards of our Religion,
exceeding as well the capacities of our Nature, as all those other things. To
the attainment whereof, as all vicious practices are extremely contrary; so
have all the others Philosophic transactions been miserably vain.

Some weak and glimmering light the Heathen had of these things; which it is
not certain whether they collected from some fragments of tradition, or
extracted from the principles of natural reason; but which way ever it came, it
was so weak and imperfect, as served to shadow, not help to discover, but
eclipse the transcendent excellency of that State; till, as the Great Apostle
of the Gentiles says, 1 Timothy 1. 10.
Life and Immortality were brought to light by the Gospel.

And indeed without this all other proposals were unsuitable to its professors,
and disproportionate to the difficulty and severities of Religion. Cicero
says, None ought to be deemed a virtuous or a just man, that will be allured
affrighted from his duty, by any advantage or disadvantage whatever: But who,
trow ye, would abide both these, upon no other consideration, than barely to
have acted according to the sentiments of right Reason, or in hope to acquire
an insignificant fame of Virtue, of which they could have no knowledge or
remembrance after death?

And for this cause I judge the Stoics more absurd in their morals, than the
Epicureans, considering the principles that is upon which they built. For it is
the premise and not the inference of theirs, that is so urged by the Apostle,
Let us eat and drink, 1 Cor. 15. 32. But now the Christian Religion propunds
such overtures to our Obedience and Patience, as may justly and reasonably
encourage us thereunto.

IV. For a Conclusion, let us take in the Importance of that Phrase of [ dying
in the Lord] which relates primarily to Martyrdom; but must also be extended
to as many as live and dye in the faith of the Holy Jesus.

The result of all is this: That we would so consider this happiness, as every
of our great interest, that we forfeit not our propriety therein, by a vicious
and sinful life. There Is nothing else can render it hazardous or doubtful, but
that, which indeed in the very nature of the thing renders it impossible. Let
us not repeat Esau's folly, sell our birthright for a trifle; and for the sake
of some pitiful lust proscribe our selves out of our celestial inheritance.

Neither let us contemn our happiness for being feasible. Were wilful poverty
and certain Martyrdom, part of our duty, and inseparable appendages of our
Religion, there is tentation enough in the proposals, to make us conflict with
the greatest difficulties, and overcome them.

When Christianity was thus attended, and had nothing else to recommend it self
to the world, besides the reasonableness of its injunctions, with what holy
violence did those blessed Saints storm Heaven, and with a strange eagerness
pursue Martyrdom! But now as if the fervor of our Devotion were only kindled
and maintained by Antiperistasis: Now I say the Impediments are removed, and
Religion is become a part of our Civil obedience, and made necessary to our
secular interests, and guarded with a great many other temporal Phylacteries,
men are yet more hardly wrought upon to be Religious, the consideration of a
single lust shall be able to weigh down all.

And if any would seem to have a greater zeal for it than ordinary, as if they
were in love with the troubles of Religion, and not the thing; they suffer
their heat to spend it self in little piques and contentions, and about things
of none or ill moment, in maintaining of parties, and opposing their
Superiors, and not in Devotion, Obedience, Charity, Humility, and the like, as
they ought.

In short, Christians, let the thoughts of this blessedness, excite our
affections Heavenward, and quicken our endeavors: Let it animate us against
all difficulties, and buoy us up above all adversities; Let it cheer us in our
duty, quiet us in affliction, and comfort us in death. That so living unto
Christ, we may at last dye in him, and in the end be for ever blessed.

And now to accommodate all to our present case. It has pleased God to take
away this extraordinary man, for such, considering all things, we must needs
allow him; and because 'twas somewewhat early, I think of Dr. Hammond's notion
of (...) in the Text, the sooner the better, the better for him, no doubt.

I had once thought to have given you his Character, but I am not ashamed to
tell you, I found me not able to do it worthy of him. And calling to mind a
saying of one of the Roman Historians, I soon desisted from any further attempt
of it; who when he was reckoning up some of the great men of that age, Virgil
and Ovid, Livie and Salust, and going to commend them, stops, and concludes
thus: But of men of Eminency, as their admiration is great, so is their censure
full of difficulty.

As to those Relations that are more nearly interessed in this solemnity; I
would beseech them to remember, that all Indecency and excess of Grief, for our
deceased friends, must needs reflect upon the memory of the dead, or the
discretion of the survivers. God enable them to bear it: And supply this loss
to them by his Grace and Providence: Let me say, and to the Church of England,
by increasing the number of such men, of no worse Learning, Integrity, and
Courage; that are able, and dare defend her against the encroachments of Popery
and Fanaticisme.

Now to God only wise be Glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

