PLOVVDENS Quaeries: OR, A Moot-Book Of Choice Cases, useful For the Young
Students OF THE Common Law: Englished, Methodized, and Enlarged,

By H. B. Esquire of Lincolns-Inne.

LONDON, Printed for Chapter Adams, J. Starkey, and Tho. Basset, at their shops in
Fleet street. 1662.

To the Reader.
THIS Piece which now entertains your Eye, was originally (if I may so term it)
a Rhapsody of Cases, wherein the Author did not so much consult his Method, as
the choice of his Matter: for as they proceeded from his hand they had no
Coherence amongst themselves, except such as were voucht to warrant the Reasons
of others: and most of them too more naturally referring to their own proper
Heads and Divisions, under which it was necessary to reduce them, according to
that form I had propounded to my self. So that it was not difficult to presage
how great a Trouble must be encountered in the Attempt to contrive so great a
Confusion into any considerable Order. But imagining the effects of my labor
might reward my pains, I was easily prompted to undertake it for my own private
accommodation, and not out of any vain glorious design to obtrude it upon the
world; for it is very well known I opposed a three years importunity to render
it public; yet in fine considering that my own Reputation stood responsible no
further, than for giving it this shape into which you now see it formed, I
thought I might with the greater freedom comply with the desires of those who
so long, and so earnestly, had invited it to the Press.

For the work it self, it has gained a very fair reputation; For I know no
book that depends merely upon the strength of its own reason as this does, that
ever was entertained with so great an esteem as this has been by all persons
that pretend to the knowledge of the Law. But the most signal mark of its worth
was set upon it by that person who in the Fabric of those everlasting
Monuments of his Fame, his Reports and Institutes has vouchsafed to honor
this Treatise so far as to make himself indebted to it for many of his
Materials, as will be obvious and visible to any man's observation that has the
least acquaintance with them.

You will find upon a serious perusal, that few of the Cases herein contained
are any where else to be found, unless they were borrowed from hence. That the
Author was a person of a most refined Theory: And that the work it self is a
Systeme of the sublimest speculations in the Law; wherein there is nothing
Vulgar, Trite, or usual, and yet every thing useful. You will perceive that
in the Cases that are controverted, as some of them be, the Arguments on both
sides are derived from such apt and natural Topics, and the Contest managed
with so even and equal a strength of Reason, that it is often left a measuring
cast.

Besides the General Benefit, this Piece will oblige the Students of the Law
with a more particular Advantage; for out of it they may furnish themselves,
not only with Quaeres and Moot Points for their Exercises in their respective
Societies, the want whoreof is so generally lamented; but they will also find
many of these Problemes debated upon either side. So that they are not only
accommodated with Subjects for their quarrels; but are also armed with weapons
both offensive and defensive.

It would too much resemble flattery for any man to assert the infallibility of
his Treatise in every particular. It is a prerogative to which few books in the
Law, I had almost said none, ever arrived; For Littleton who no doubt, as he
writ in the quality of a Father, was most accurate in his Composition, lest the
Judgment of his Son might derive a blot from his own pen. And notwithstanding
the work is considered as the most accomplished piece of that nature that was
ever yet extant, and his honorable Interpreter makes his name and the Law
Equivocall; Yet he himself shuts up that Discourse with so modest an
Epiphonema, that it plainly implies his own esteem of it was very different
from that which the World has since bestowed upon it: And the same Learned
Commentator, although he was sufficiently positive and peremptory in
vindicating the Authority of his Author: yet when he comes to reflect upon his
own Labors, he is found to make use of the same Epilogue for those Truths
which depend merely upon Fancy and Opinion, without the assistance of any
known Principle to support them, as many Cases in the Law do; have a certain
fatal period beyond which they seldom survive: and from hence it is, that what
was reason an Age since cease to be so now: And some Decisions have a shorter
Date; for the Judgments that are given in one Court, and that too upon the
most solemn Debates, are often times Reverst in another before the breath is
cold that pronounced them: For when the Determination of a case must be fetched
out of its self, there is nothing so uncertain and mutable as the Conclusions
that are made thereupon. And thus it fares with many of these cases, being
governed by some particular circumstance which leads them out of the common
Road, and distinguishes them from others. So that when I consider the Niceties
that are contained in it, and how critically they are decided, I cannot but
admire so many of them are reputed for Law. I confess you will meet with some
passages that are not agreeable to the received opinions of this Age, but most
that are, which puts me in mind of a Character that was given it by an
ingenuous and intelligent person in the Law, That there are in it multa falsa,
plura vera, plurima ingeniosa.

To conclude, although my particular Interest in this piece be so
inconsiderable, that I cannot rationally affect any reputation by it: Yet if
there be any thing that relates to my own endeavors that may accidentally
purchase a generous reception from any ingenuous spirit, it shall be an ample
compensation for the labor and pains that have been bestowed upon it.

Farewell.
Errata.
Page 2. l. 23. after life add the remainder for life. p. 25. I. 12. r. parol.
l. 32. add for. p. 70. l. 14. dele not. p. 75. l. 10. r. pur auter vye. l. 16.
r. pur. p. 77. l. 26. for confirmation r. freehold, p. 85. l. 12. r. did. p.
99. l. 5. r. his p. 122. l. 21. r. estovers. 141. l. 6. r. acre. p. 160. l. 12.
r. by. p. 171. l. 9. r. some think. p. 185. 23. dele If. l. 24. for heard r.
hard. p. 23. l. 7. for deluge r. delayed. p. 230. l. 18. for suing r. saving. p.
232. l. 7. r. vested. p. 89. for Disablement r. Disability.

An Alphabeticall Table of all the Principal Heads contained in this Book.
A
Page ABsence. 1 Acceptance ib. Administrator. 4 Advantage. 5 Agreement. 6 Aid.
7 Alien. ibid. Annuity. 9 Appendant. 10 Apporcionment. 11 Arrerages. 16 Assent.
ibid. Assetts. 17 Assignee. 18 Attainder. 19 Atturnment. 24 Avoid. 29 Avowry.
31 Authority. 33

B
Bar. 34 Bargain and Sale. ibid. Baron and Fem. 35 Bastard. 44 BonaFelonnm,
etc. 51 Borough English. ibid.

C
CHarge. 52 Claim. 57 Capacity. 59 Cessavit. ibid. Cessante causa, etc. 60
Common, vide Apporcionment. Condition 61 Confirmation 72 Continual Claim. 78
Covenant, vide Use.

D
DAmages 80 Daughter ib. Deed 82 Debt. 84 Devastavit, vide Executor. Devise 86
Disablement. 89 Disagreement 90 Discharge 91 Dissent 94 Discontinuance 97
Disceisor 100 Divorce 102 Dower. 104

E
ELection 112 Emblements. 116 Entry 117 Escheat 119 Estate 120 Estoppple 121
Estovers 122 Exchange 123 Execution 124 Executors. 126 Extinguishment 131

F
FEoffment 132 Fem Covert 134 Fem Sole 135 Fine ibid. Forfeiture 136
Frankmarriage. 138

G
GRant 139 Gavel kind. 141

H
HAbendum 142 Harriot ibid. Heir 144

I
INcertainty 148 Infant 149 Joinder in Action 152 Jointenants 156 Judgment 161

L
LEease 161 Limitation 166 Livexyy and seisin 169

M
Market overt 171

N
Nuisance 172

O
OBligation 172 Occupant 173 Outlawry 174

P
PArceners and Partition 175 Particeps Criminis 182 Payment 184 Place ibid.
Pleas ibid. Possession 185 Possessio Fratris. 186

Q
Quaere Impedit 188

R
REcognizance, vide statute. Record 189 Relation ibid. Release 190 Remainder
217 Remitter 220 Rent 227 Reservation 25 Reversion 253 Reviver 257

S
SEisin 260 Severance of the Jointure ibid. Statutes ibid. Surrender 263

T
TAil 264 Tenants in Common 269 Tenant by the Courtesy 272 Tenures 274
Testament 281

V
VIllain 281 Voucher 285

W
WAst. 292 Warranty. 295



Absence.
IF one in the absence of I. S. disseiseth another to his use, or in his
absence surrenders to his Steward, or gives goods to him in his absence; his
subsequent agreement will make all good. But a disagreement cannot be in his
absence.

Acceptance.
TEnant in tail grants a Rentcharge in Fee, and then makes a Lease for forty
years rendering a Rent, and dies. The Issue, after his death, accepts the Rent;
the Grantee shall have the Rent during the Lease, and also during the life of
the Issue; though the Lessee surrenders Q. for the Reversion is discharged.

A. makes a Lease for life, rendering a Rent, with a clause of re-entry; after
he has title of entry he accepts the Rent: now he cannot enter for the
condition broken; for, when he accepted the Rent, he did not receive it as a
debt; (for an Action of Debt would not lie in that case) but as a Rent. And it
cannot be a Rent unless the Lease continues. So if a Woman, Issue in tail, or
an Infant accept a Rent reserved by the Husbund, etc. But in the principal
case, if the Lease had been for years, there the Rent is said to be a Debt
during the Lease as well as after.

A Fem sole, being Lessee for life, takes Husband, then they make a Lease to I.
for his life, rendering a Rent; the Husband dies, the Wife accepts the Rent in
Pais; the Lessor may enter, and she is barred of her Cui in vita; for, by her
acceptance she has agreed to the forfeiture.

If the Issue in tail accepts the Rent, with a Proviso, that it shall not be
prejudicial to his entry to avoid the Lease, yet he shall never defeat the
Lease.

The Husband and Wife make a Lease for life, reserving a Rent; the Husband
dies, the Wife accepts the Rent from the Lessee: she shall not avoid the
Remainder; for they are both but one Estate, and an Agreement cannot be to
parcel of an estate. So if a Lease be made to two by Husband and Wife for their
lives, rendering a Rent during the life of one of them: If the Wife, after the
death of her Husband accepts the rent, she shall not oust the Survivor.

The Husband and Wife, being tenants in tail, the Husband makes a Lease for
years, reserving a Rent, and dies, the Wife dies also. Quaere, if the
acceptance of the Rent by the Issue will make the Lease good?

A man makes a Feofment upon condition; the Feoffee makes a Lease for life, and
grants the reversion to the Feoffor. If he has cause to have a Writ of Right,
or other real action, he cannot have it against the Lessee for life; for the
Reversion is in him by his own acceptance.

A gift in tail is made to the Donee, and the Heirs males of his Body: and for
want of such Issue, the remainder to him and the Heirs females of his body; the
Donee makes a Lease for years, reserving a rent, and dies without Issue male.
If the Heir female accepts the rent, she shall be bound; for the Lease issued
out of both the estates. But if the Heir male had made the Lease, the Heir
female cannot make it good by acceptance.

If Tenant in tail dies, his Heir within age, and the Guardian avoids it during
the minority; yet the Heir at his full age, by his acceptance, may affirm it.
So if the Wife of Tenant in tail avoids a Lease by a Recovery in Dower; yet,
after her death, if the Issue accepts the Rent, he has made good the Lease.

Administrator.
AFter the death of the Intestate, A: gets the goods, and gives them to B: and
after Letters of Administration are granted to A: he shall not take the Goods
out of the possession of B: for the Law says, by the first taking the Goods,
he had them to the use of the Intestate; for he shall be charged as Executor de
son tort. And he is to have the Goods in the same capacity. But it is otherwise
if A: takes the goods of B: tortiously and gives them to C: and then B: makes
A: his Executor. But in the principal case, if A: releaseth to a Debtor of the
Intestate after administration committed to him, he may have an Action; for of
a chose in action a man cannot gain a possession. If a Lease is made to begin
at Easter, and before Easter A: grants it over, and before Easter the Lessee
dies, and A: takes administration to the Lessee, and grants it over to another,
the second Grantee shall enjoy it. If a Rent charge is granted for years, and
A: compels the Tenant to pay it to him, and then he grants it over, and takes
Letters of Administration to the first Grantee, he shall avoid his own Grant:
for the possession which he had usurped shall not be esteemed the possession of
the same term; but it shall be said a voluntary payment of the Tenant: for none
can be said to have the Rent but he that had right to it.

Advantage.
THree joint-tenants, one gives his part to his Daughter in Frank-marriage to
one of his Companions, and makes Livery. This is a good Frank-marriage; for,
though one Joynt-tenant cannot enfeoffe another, yet his Companion, and a
stranger he may; because it is for the Advantage of a third person; and the
Livery being made to the third person shall vest the estate in both, 7 H. 6. 3.
21 H. 7. 41. But others think the contrary: for, the Husband cannot take it
immediately from his Companion: therefore, for him it is void, and good for the
Wife. As if a Feofment be made to a stranger, and the Wife of the Feoffor.

The Husband is bound in a Statute, and after he and his Wife levy a Fine of
the Wife's Land to A: the Husband dies. The Statute shall not be extended
during the Wife's life; for nothing passed from the Husband, but the estate
which he had in right of his Wife: And A: shall have the same Advantage which
the Heir of the Wife should have had.

Tenant in tail enfeoffs one Daughter within age, and dies: she is remitted;
but the other Daughter shall not take Advantage of it.

Agreement.
IF I disseise one to the use of my self and A: who after Agrees to the
disseisin, we are joint-tenants, 21 Ass. 49. If one sister in tail enters upon
the Discontinuee of her Father, claiming to her and her sister; and the
Discontinuee ousts her, and she recovers in an Assise, the other sister shall
have the moyty by her Agreement. But if I disseise one to the use of A. after
twenty pounds received by me of the profits; or to the use of my self for life,
and after to his use in fee; there he shall have nothing by his Agreement: for
I cannot apportion the wrong. If I disseise my Tenant for life to the use of A:
he shall have but a Freehold by his Agreement. If the Issue in tail within
age, by covin commands A: to disseise the Discontinuee of his Father. A:
disseises him to the use of B: for life; and after to the use of his own right
Heirs. B: agrees, A: dies, B: dies, the Heir of A: enters, and enfeoffs the
Issue, he is remitted because of his minority.

An Agreement cannot be to parcel of an Estate.

Aid.
IF Coparceners make partition, and one has the Seignority, and a Tenancy
escheats, and she is impleaded of that; she shall not have Aid of the other
Coparcener; for Aid cannot be granted but of Land descended.

If one Acre is given to the eldest Daughter in Frank-marriage, and another in
fee descends to the youngest; if she shall have Aid is the question?

Alien.
IF a Reversion be granted to an Alien, and after he is made a Denizen, and
then the Tenant atturns, he shall not take to his own use.

A Lease for years is made to an Alien upon condition to have Fee; he is
indenized, and has License to purchase, and then performs the Condition. The
King shall not have the Fee, for it has not a Relation as to the devesting of
the Fee, further than the performance; although that for Charges and
Encumbrances it has a larger Relation.

If an Alien Disseisor be made a Denizen, the King shall not have the Land, if
the Disseisee does after release unto him; but if an Alien had been the Feoffee
of a Disseisor, it had altered the case, for it is a new purchase in one case,
and but an extinguishment of a right in the other: and it seems that the Issue
of such an Alien born within the Realm shall be in ward for Land descended to
him on the part of the Mother, during the life of the Alien, if he be not Heir
apparent. And a man born in England cannot make himself heir in special tail to
a Baron and Fem, whereof one is an Alien, neither shall he have an Appeal for
the death of such a Father or Mother Alien.

If Land be devised to an Alien, and he is made a Denizen, and after the
Devisor dies, there he shall take by the Will; for all takes effect by the
death of the Divisor. But in the case above, if when the Office is found the
Lease should be adjudged in the King from the beginning, then it takes away the
Condition, and then he could not acquire a fee by his performance.

If a man seized in fee marries an Alien, and makes a Feofment, and she is made
a Denizen, and the Husband dies, she shall not recover her Dower.

Annuity.
IF an Annuity be granted for the life of I: and the Grantee releaseth all
Actions of Annuity to the Grantor; it seems he shall not have an Action of Debt
for the arrerages after the release, and after the death of I. for when they
were due he had no remedy.

If a Rent charge is granted out of Land in Fee, the Heir of the Grantee shall
have his election to bring his. Writ of Annuity, and so shall the Executor of
the Grantee, if the Grant were for years. And if the Wife brings Dower, the
Heir shall not say, that he will take it as an Annuity; for it must be
determined by the bringing of his Action: and if she be once endowed, the Heir
shall not have an Annuity of the other two parts; for his Writ ought to be
grounded upon the Deed, and that for all, or for none: for there can be no
apporcionment of an Annuity, or personal thing.

Appendant.
IF an Advowson be Appendant to a Manor, and the Advowson is granted to one
for life, and then the Grantee is enfeoffed of the Manor cum pertinentiis; yet
the Freehold of the Advowson is not Appendant. But if the Grantee had
regranted it to the Grantor, it had been Appendant. But if A. makes a Lease of
his Manor for life, saving the Advowson, and after grants the reversion of the
Manor una cum Advocatione, the Advowson shall never be Appendant to the Manor
again.

Husband and Wife make a Feoffment of the Manor of the Wife, to which an
Advowson is Appendant; the Feoffee makes a Feofment of one Acre with the
Advowson; the Husband dies, the Wife recontinues the Manor; she shall present
without any recontinuance of the Acre: for it was not appendant to the Acre;
for if a man makes a Feofment of an Acre, parcel of a Manor, cum pentinentiis,
nothing of the Advowson, which is appendant to the Manor, passes.

If one has a Manor, and makes a Lease for life of all the Manor, except one
Acre; now the Fee of the Acre is divided from the Manor during the Lease for
life, but after the determination of the Lease it shall be appendant again.

Apporcionment.
TWo Joint-tenants by Twelve-pence, the one grants what belongs to him upon
condition; the Lord grants the services of one, and Atturnment is had: the
Condition is broken, the Grantor enters; he shall hold by Twelve-pence also,
for by the Grant no Apporcionment is made, and then by the Grant Twelve-pence
passed, and Twelve-pence remain.

If tenant for years enfeoffs the Lord of one Acre, the Seignory shall be
Apporcioned.

A Rent is granted in Fee out of Land in Borough-English, and at Common Law;
the Grantee dies, leaving two Sons, the eldest shall have all, for the rent
being entire cannot be Apporcioned, and the eldest, being Heir, shall have all.

If a Rent charge be granted in Fee, and the Grantee dies, and his Wife
recovers her Dower of the third part of the Rent, the Heir cannot have an
Annuity of the two parts; for it must be for all, or none, for it cannot be
apporcioned.

If the Obligor for twenty pound makes the Obligee his Executor, and leaves but
ten pound, he may retain that ten pound, and sue the Heir for the rest. So that
a Duty may be apporcioned by act in Law.

If a Lease be made of two Acres for years rendering a Rent, and the Reversion
of one of them is granted over, the Rent shall be apporcioned: for as the
Contract is made in respect of the Reversion, so it shall be severed in respect
of the Reversion. If a Lease be made of two acres, rendering a Rent, with a
Clause of re-entry into one for not payment of the Rent, it seems reason that
the Rent shall be apporcioned: And so if the Condition had been that he should
have fee in one Acre. And if a man makes a Lease of a flock of sheep, and land,
rendering a Rent, if either of them be evicted, the Rent shall be apporcioned.
But if I have a term of twenty years, and I grant it over with a stock of
Cattle, rendering a Rent by Indenture, and if the rent be arrear that I shall
distrein; there, if the stock be recovered, the Rent shall be apporcioned; for
before my Recovery my remedy was by distress, and not by Action of Debt, and so
no apporcionment for a Chattle divested.

If one enters lawfully upon Tenant for life, by title Paramount, into one
Acre, for a condition broken, though he has the same title to all the Land; or
enters into one Acre by a title upon an alienation in Mortmain, or consent to a
Ravisher, etc. or if the Lessor himself enters into one Acre, by reason of a
Condition broken, or because he was within Age at the time of the making the
Lease, and peradventure part is good by Custom which enables an Infant to make
a Lease; or if the Lessor takes a Surrender of parcel, or recovers parcel in
Wast. 21 H. 6. 48. or if one Joint-tenant enters, for a Condition broken, into
his moity: in all these cases the Rent shall be apporcioned. But if the Land at
the time of the Lease was discharged of a Rent, which after revived, so that
the value of the Land is impaired to the Lessee, there the Rent shall not be
apporcioned; for the Land out of which the Rent issues, remains entire to the
Lessee. But if one has title to enter upon his Tenant for life into twenty
Acres in two several Counties, and he enters but into one Acre only, Quaere if
the Rent shall be apporcioned?

There is no apporcionment upon the Grant of a Seignory, but only by the
Feofment of the Tenancy.

If I disseise one to the use of A. after twenty pounds advanced by me out of
the profits, or to the use of my self for life, and after to his use in fee;
he shall have nothing by his agreement, for the wrong cannot be apporcioned.

If a man has Common Sans Number granted to him in tail out of two Acres, and
he purchases one Acre and dies, which descends to his Issue in tail, there can
be no apporcionment; for either it is gone in all, or revived in the residue
for all; for Common Sans Number is a thing entire which cannot be severed. But
if it were Common certain it were otherwise. But being the Common was intailed,
the Act of the Tenant in tail shall not prejudice the Issue, where a rent is
suspended in part there can be no apporcionment during the suspention, but
afterward there may.

If the Tenant holds of the Lord by Fealty, and twenty shillings of the Manor
of Dale, and the Lord makes a Lease of the Manor, reserving forty shillings
with Atturnment, and after releaseth to his Tenant all his Right. If the Rent
of forty shillings shall be apportioned? First it seems by the Release the
Tenant is discharged of twenty shillings, as well against the Lessee as against
the Lessor, because now the Tenant holds it of the Lord Paramount, and so not
of the Lessee. Also the Rent of forty shillings was as well payable for the
services as for the Demesns, although a Distress cannot be taken in the
Demesns. But yet being the twenty shillings is lost, not by a Title Paramount,
but by the Lessor, if now it shall be apportioned or not? 21 H. 7. 6.

There be three Daughters, two by one venture, and the third by another. The
youngest being seized of three Acres of equal value, grants a Rent of three
shillings to the Father in fee, and makes a Feofment to the second Daughter of
one Acre, who dies without Issue, so that it descends to the eldest, the Father
dies: by this descent the Rent shall be apporcioned. If a man has a Rent of
twenty shillings out of twenty Acres of equal value, and one Acre descends to
his Wife, the whole Rent is suspended; for it cannot be apporcioned when he is
seized of part of the Land in auter droit. But if she dies, and he is tenant by
the Courtesy, it shall be apporcioned; for the Land continues in him by act in
Law, which is equal to a descent: and if the Rent be in tail, and part of the
Land descend in fee; or if the Rent be in fee, and part of the Land descend in
tail, there shall be no apporcionment.

Arrerages.
IF a Seignory be granted for years, upon Condition to have Fee, and after the
Fee is vested by the performance of the Condition; the Arrerages due before are
extinguished, for the term is extinct.

Assent.
IF the Patron and Ordinary give leave to the Parson to grant a Rent in Fee, it
will bind the Successor, 7 H. 4. 18. for an Assent may be before the Act is
done.

If the Patron assent to the charge of the Parson upon condition, it is good:
but if he had the Patronage but for life, etc. after his estate ended, the
Assent will not bind the second Patron.

If a Parson be Patron of a Church, and the Parson, with the Assent of the
Ordinary, grants a Rent Charge, or makes a Lease for years; the Assent will
not make it to endure, no more than the Assent of a Bishop who is Patron,
without the Assent of his Chapter. Nor the Assent of Tenant in tail, or for
life, who is Patron cannot make it endure for ever.

If the Bishop grants in Fee to the King by Deed, confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter, and the Deed of the Bishop is enrolled, and the other not, it seems
it shall bind the Successor; for the Assent is to the Deed of the Bishop, not
as a Confirmation. As the Abbot may make livery where it is the Deed of him and
his Covent, so in this case the Bishop may deliver the Deed of him, and of the
Dean and Chapter.

Assets.
LAnd is given to two Women Quam diu simul vixerint, the remainder to the Heirs
of her that first dies: One has Issue, and dies; it seems this remainder shall
not be Assets in the Heir in a Formedon, or Debt; for the remainder was never
in the Mother; for it commenced after her death. But if a Rent Charge be
granted to I. to commence after his death, it is otherwise, for the Heir takes
it by descent.

If Executors have a Villains in right of their Testator, and enter into Land
purchased by him, it shall be Assetts although they have a Fee, as Land
descended to the Heir shall be Assetts to a Chattle, viz. to a Debt of a
Stranger.

The Grantor of a Rent Charge in tail einfeoffes the Grantee of the Land, who
makes a gift in tail of the Land, rendering so much of the Services as he pay^
over to the Lord Paramount: it seems that these Services shall be Assetts in
the Heir; for they are particularly reserved for the Land.

Assignee.
IF a Feoffment be made with Warranty to the Feoffee, his Heirs and Assigns, if
he makes a Feoffment over, and the second Feoffee re-enfeoffes the first
Feoffee, he shall vouch; for he may be Assignee of his Father, being he does
not claim as Heir. And the Lord by Escheat, or Mortmain, or of a Villain, or
who enters for a Consent to a Ravisher, shall not be said Assignees, and yet
they shall Rebutt.

If Tenant in tail be with Warranty to him, his Heirs and Assigns, his Feoffee
in Fee shall not be said Assignee; for he has no part of the Estate tail.

If Land be given to One and his Assigns for ever, and it is ganted to him and
his Assigns, that they shall have twenty Load of Wood yearly for ever, Tenant
for life grants over his Estate, and dies; the Assignee shall not have the
Wood, because his Estate is now determined.

Attainder.
A. Dies, leaving two Daughters, the one is attainted of Felony, a Lease is
made the remainder to the right Heirs of A. the other shall not take the
Daughter (that was attainted) being living, for one is not Heir alone; but if
the Father dies seized of Land, a moity shall escheat.

If the Mesne grants the Mesnalty upon condition, that if the Grantee pays a
certain sum of Money to the Grantor, that he shall have Fee; and before the Day
the Grantor is attainted of Felony and executed; yet the Grantee shall have
Fee, for the Condition is become impossible to be performed by the act of the
Grantor. But if a Jointenant makes a Lease for five years, upon Condition,
that if the Lessee does such an Act, he shall have it for twenty years; and
before the day the Lessor dies: now the Condition is void by the Surviver.

If a man grants a Rent Charge to begin at a day to come, and before the day
the Grantor is attainted of Felony, yet the charge is good. If a Remainder be
limited to the right Heirs of A. who has a Daughter, and dies, who enters, and
after a Son is born, and attainted; yet the Remainder shall not be divested out
of the Daughter.

The Son endowes his Wife Ex Assensu Patris, the Son is attainted of Felony, it
seems that the Wife should not retain her Dower, for it is the Dower of the Son,
for she claims it from the Son, and if she brings a writ of Dower of it, Ne
unques accouple in loyal Matrimony is a good Plea, and if there had been a
disseisin of it, a Collateral Warranty shall be no bar to the Wife, for she
pretends no Title to it but by the death of her Husband, and then the Warranty
descends before her Title, for if it descends after her Title it shall be a
good bar. And if she, after her Dower so assigned, be attainted of Felony, and
after has her Charter of pardon for her life, and after the Husband dies, she
shall retain her Dower; for her Interest in it commenced after her Pardon. And
yet by her Attainder she forfeited all her Inheritance, Free hold and Chattles
Real.

If an Attainted person be enfeoffed to the use of another, the possession
cannot vest in the other, but must escheat; but he which is Attainted may be an
Atturny.

Grandfather, Father, and Son, the Father is Attainted of Treason and dies, and
after the Grandfather dies seized of Land, the Lord of whom the Land is holden
shall have it by Escheat, and not the King: For the Father had it not at the
time of Attainder; And being that the Grandfather dyed without Heir the Land
shall Escheat. So it is if the Father be Attainted of Treason, and the
Grandfather dies leaving the Father.

The Issue in tail is Attainted of Felony, and is pardoned, and his Father,
dies, and a Stranger having cause of Action; against whom he shall bring his
Action, is the Question? Some say that the Donor has the Freehold in Law; as
if Tenant in tail dies leaving his Wife Enseint. Others say there is none
against whom the Action may be brought; as if Tenant for Life grants over his
Estate to B. who dies, now before Entry there is none against whom the Action
may be brought.

Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment within Age, and is Attainted of Felony, his
Issue shall not enter, for he is disabled in blood to take advantage of the
Infancy, because the Infant had no Heir.

A. Covenants upon a Marriage to stand seized to the Use of another, and before
the Marriage the Covenantee is Attainted of Felony, yet upon the Marriage the
Use will rise; as a Lease for life with a Condition of Accruer, if the Lessor
be Attainted, yet the Estate shall enlarge.

Tenant is tail is disseised, and releaseth to the Disseisor with Warranty, and
then is Attainted of Felony, and has a Pardon and dies: this is a
Discontinuance; for if he had purchased Land after his Pardon, it should
descend to his Heir; then the Warranty being in Esse at the time of his death,
there is no Impediment but that it should descend. But if Tenant in tail, who
has a Warranty annexed to his Estate, be Attainted of Felony and Executed, his
Issue shall not Inherit the Voucher by reason of the Warranty, although he has
the Land; for the Warranty is our of the Statute de Donis, etc. which speaks of
Lands and Tenements. But some think that by the Equity of the Statute it is
preserved as well as Charters, 21 H. 6. 2. p. Markham and 9 H. 6. 60. Cott. p.
Charters.

Tenant in tail makes a Lease not warranted by the Statute, and dies: the Issue
accepts the Rent, and is Attainted of Treason; if the King shall avoid it,
Quaere?

If the Grandfather be Tenant in tail, and the Father is Attainted of Treason,
and Executed, yet the Son shall Inherit as Heir to the Grandfather.

If A. commits Felony, and the Lord grants his Seignory, and after A. makes a
Feoffment upon Condition, and is Attainted, and has a Charter of Pardon, and
after reenters for breach of the Condition, and dies. If an Occupant shall
have the Land, the Issue, or the Lord, is the Question?

Atturnment.
TEnant in tail holds by Rent, the Donor grants the services, the Donee
atturns; nothing passes, for the Rent cannot pass, but as a Rent Service; and
the Atturnment shall not prejudice him, for the Law will not have Land to be
holden of two several persons.

Tenant for life grants a Rent in Fee, and then he and the Reversioner join in
a Feoffment; by the delivery of the Deed the Tenant did Atturn

If the Lord grants his Seignory by Fine, and before Atturnment the Tenant
makes a Feoffment of the Tenancy; if the Feoffee Atturnes it is well enough,
and yet he is not compellable: So if Tenant in tail Atturns it is good, and yet
he was not compellable.

If a Lease be made for years, and the Lessor makes a Lease to another for life
to commence after the Term: Atturnment will not make the second Lease good; for
the Freehold cannot pass out of any one who has a greater Estate, reserving
to himself a Mesne Estate.

If a man makes a Lease of a Manor which is ten pound in Demesnes, and ten
pounds in Service, rendering twenty pound Rent, if the Tenants do not Atturn he
shall pay but ten pounds in Rent, being he has no remedy to compel them to
Atturn.

Tenant for life of three Acres, and the Reversion of them is granted, and
Tenant for life surrenders one Acre to the Grantee that countervails an
Atturnment for that Acre only; for it is but an Atturnment in Law, but an
Atturnment for one Acre by Parcel is good for all; So if he had Atturned to
one Grantee it had been good to both. If one brings a Quid Juris clamat, and
pending his Writ he enters into one Acre, he has not abated his Writ for the
Remnant.

If a Fem sole makes a Lease for life, and then grants the Reversion to two,
one dies, and she marries the other. Tenant for life pays a penny to the
Bayliffe, of the Grantee in the name of Atturnment, and dies, the Husband
enters and makes a Feoffment and dies, she brings her Cui in Vita.

If a Seignory be assigned in Dower Ex assensu Patris, there needs no
Atturnment.

A Reversion is granted by Deed to a man and a Fem sole, they marry, the Tenant
atturns, the particular Estate life determines: the Husband and Wife shall take
it by moities; for the Atturnment is grounded upon the Deed, and reduces the
Inheritance according to the course of Deed. If a Reversion be granted to on
Infant, and Atturnment is had at his full age, yet when he is in possession he
may disagree to the Estate, being the grant was during his Infancy, which is
the Principal.

A Reversion is granted to one for life, and before Atturnment it is granted to
him in Fee; the Tenant Atturns, the Grantee may choose which Estate he will
take. But if a Reversion be granted to one, and after to another, and the
Tenant comes to both, and says I atturn unto you, neither of them shall take
for the incertainty. If a Reversion be granted to one and his Heirs, and after
it is granted to him and his Successors, and the Tenant Atturnes, Quaere in
what capacity he shall take? If the Reversion of black Acre or white Acre be
granted, Quaere if Atturnment will make it good? some think it is void for the
incertainty.

A. makes a Lease for life and grants a Rent out of the Reversion, if the
Grantee Grants it over, the Grantor ought to Atturn, and not the Tenant for
life; for it has no Relation to him: for a Release made to him by the Grantee
will not extinguish the Rent.

The Reversion of Tenant for life with the Rent is granted; Tenant for life
grants his Estate to another, to hold of the Grantee: this is an Atturnment;
for when he granted it to hold it of him, the Tenant for life took notice of
the Grant.

If an Atturnment be upon Condition, which is broken, yet the Reversion is not
divested, for he does not claim the Reversion from him that atturned, and an
Atturnment cannot be upon Condition.

If the Reversion be granted to Tenant for life and another, or a Signory be
granted to the Tenant and another, this Acceptance shall be a sufficient
Atturnment. But if there be two Tenants for years, and the Reversion is granted
to one of them, Quaere if he takes but a moity without Atturnment of his
Companion, for the Jointure is severed by the Grant.

If a Fem Tenant for life takes Husband, who atturns to the Grantee of the
Reversion, and after is devorced, yet the Atturnment shall bind the wife, and
if a Feoffee upon condition atturns to the grant of a Seignory, and the Feoffor
enters for the condition broken, yet the Atturnment stands good. If a Mulier
Atturn to the grant of a Signory, though the Bastard dies seized, so that the
Mulier can never be Heir, yet the Atturnment remains good. If the Reversion of
Tenant in tail, or for life, the remainder for life is granted, and the Issue
in tail, or he in Remainder Atturn, (having nothing but the possession in Law)
it is void. But he that has but a possession in Law may Atturn to the grant of
a Seignory, for none can Atturne but he that was Tenant at the time of the
Grant.

The Lord grants the Seignory, the Tenant is disseised, and after Atturns, that
is good; But if the Lord grants the Rent saving the Seignory, and she is after
disseised and Atturns, that is void; for it is now a Rent Seck, in which there
is no Attendency, but a Charge of the Land. If a man grants a Rent reserved
upon a Lease for Life, saving the Reversion, that is a good Rent Seck, if the
Tenant Atturns.

Grandfather, Father and Son Jointenants, the Grandfather grants a Rent Charge
in Fee to the Father, upon condition, who grants it to his Son and his Wife;
the Grandfather releases to the Father and Son, the Son dies, the Condition is
broke, the Grandfather claims the Rent; the wife shall hold it discharged of the
Condition, if the possession of her Husband shall be an Atturnment in Law; but
it seems it is not, for his Atturnment alone without the Atturnment of the
Father (who was a jointenant) is not sufficient, for both ought to Atturn. But
if the Grandfather should have the Rent by the Condition, then he shall be in
of his own Grant, and be both Grantor, and Grantee. But if the Father had died
in the Life of the Son, then that had been a good Atturnment in Law.

Avoid.
TEnant in tail makes a Lease for forty years, and dies; the Issue in tail
marries and dies, if she shall avoid the Lease by her Recovery in Dower Quaere?

If Tenant in tail makes a Lease for years to commence at Easter, rendering a
Rent, and dies; the Issue in tail enters and makes a Feoffment before Easter,
the Feoffee shall not Avoid the Lease, for the Lease was not avoided by the
Entry of the Issue. So if Baron and Fem make a Lease to begin, etc. and before
the time the Baron dies, and the Fem makes a Feoffment, the Feoffee shall not
avoid it. So if an Infant makes a Lease ut supra, and before the time (he being
within age, or at full age) makes a Feoffment, the Feoffee shall never avoid
the Lease, etc. But many are of a contrary opinion; for they say that an
Infant, or Issue in tail, by their own, or the Acts of their Ancestors, shall
never be prejudiced by any thing that is Executory; for if he shall not avoid
it by his possession before the commencement of the Term, he has no means to
Avoid it, etc. before, etc. But it is clear enough, that if Tenant in tail dies
after he has discontinued, and the Discontinue makes a Lease for years to
begin ut supra, and dies; the Heir in tail, being his Heir who enters, and he
enters and makes a Feoffment, there the Lease is avoided, because the Issue is
remitted, and has another Estate than the Discontinuee had, and not any
privity of that Estate which is avoided.

If an Infant delivers a Writing, as an Esorowle, to be delivered as his Deed
when he arrives at his full age, and receives the Money of the Party to whose
use the Deed was to be delivered, yet he shall avoid the Deed.

If Husband and Wife make a Lease, or grant a Rent Charge in Fee out of the
Wives Land, and then they join in a Fine to A. he shall not avoid the Lease or
Charge, because they are executed, but otherwise of things executory as a
Statute, etc. before Execution.

Avowry.
LAnd is given to one Habendum, a Moity to him and his Heirs, and the other
Moity to him and the Heirs of his body, the Remainder to his Right Heirs; the
Land is holden by two pence, the Donee dies without Issue, and his brother
enters, several Avowries must be made upon him, one for one penny, and another
for the other. But if Land be given the one Moity in tail, the other in Fee,
there shall be but one Avowry, for that inures as a joint Gift, but in the
first case it did inure severally at the Beginning. If there be three
Jointenants, and one Releases to one of his Companions, and he to whom the
Release was made has the part of the other by Survivor, yet for a third part
one Avowry shall be made upon him; In the principal case the Fee simple was
never severed, if it had, the Donee should hold each Moity by two pence a
piece, and the Avowry shall be made upon the collateral Heir for two pence in
one Moity.

A. makes a Gift in tail of one Acre which he holds in Socage, and of another
which he holds in Chivalry, saying nothing, the Donor shall make several
Avowries, although he has but one Reversion; for the Law makes the Avowry in
respect of the tenure over, and the several Acres must severally escheat.

If a Disseisor makes a Lease for life and dies, it seems the Lord is
compellable to Avow upon the Heir of the Disseisor. But if he had made a Gift
in tail, and the Donee dies and his Issue enters, there he shall not Avow upon
the Donor.

If one Parcener makes a Lease for life, yet the Lord shall Avow upon them
both, but if one Jointenant makes a Lease for life, the Lord must make several
Avowries upon them, for the Jointure is severed. If there be two Fem Parceners
Mesnes, and one marries the Tenant, yet the Avowry of the Lord is not severed.
But if there had been two Jointenants, it had been otherwise, for by the
Marriage the Moity of the Mesnalty is suspended, and cannot be in Jointure with
the other Moity which is not in Esse. And if one holds a Manor of another, and
makes a Feoffment of all, except one Acre, now the Fee of the Acre is
disappendant from the Manor, and the Lord ought to make two several Avowries.

Authority.
IF I devisethat my Executors shall sell my Land, and one sells one Moity, and
another the other; this is not warranted by the Authority, for it was to be
jointly executed; As a Letter of Atturny to two to make Livery, it ought to be
performed jointly. But if the Land had been devised to them, then such a Sale
had been good, for they had an Interest, and the intent was performed. If one
makes two Atturnies conjunctim, or the King makes two Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, if one dies, the Authority of the other is determined, 35 Ass. p. 1.

Two Jointenants make a Feoffment with a Letter of Atturny to deliver Seisin,
and the one delivers Seisin in person, this is a Countermand of the whole
Livery, for the Authority was not several for either of them, but joint for
both, and therefore being countermanded for one it shall be void against the
other.

Bar.
IF the Plaintiff be Barred in an Entry sur Disseisin, yet he shall have a
Cessavit, if he had cause to have it at that time, for it is another Title. If
the Heir brings a Formedon in Descender and is nonsuite, Quaere if he shall
enter, because he had Title of Entry for a Condition broke. If a Woman has
cause of Dower of one and the same Acre, as Wife to A. and B. If she be barred
of it, as Wife to A. yet she shall have it as Wife to B. If Baron and Fem make
a Feoffment upon Condition, if the Wife be barred in her Cui in vita, yet she
may enter for the Condition broken. 27 E. 3.55, 56. P.72.

Bargain and Sail.
A Bargains and Sells Land to B. and after they both grant a Rent Charge to C.
and then the Deed is enrolled, the Rent is gone; for it is the grant of A. and
the Inrolment has relation to the Delivery, which avoids the grant, though it
was the Confirmation of B. for he had nothing at that time.

The Issue in tail within age takes from the Discontinuee a Bargain and Sale.
He shall not be remitted; for he is in, by reason of the Possession conveyed to
the Use, and so he must have it in the same Degree as he had the Use. And so if
he were within age at the time of the Bargain and Sale, and the other dies, and
after the Deed is Enrolled, he shall not be Remitted. If the Bishop makes a
grant to the K. in fee, confirmed by the Dean and Chapter, and the Deed of the
Bishop is Enrolled, and the other not, it shall bind the Successor; for it is
but as an Assent, and not a Confirmation.

Baron and Fem.
IF a Fem Lessee for life marries, and she and her Husband make a Lease for
life, rendering a Rent, and the Fem avowes, for the Rent after the death of her
Husband, the Lessor may enter; for by her Avowry she has agreed by matter of
Record, and so it had been if she had entered for a Condition made by her and
her Husband.

If A. infeoffes his Wife and a Stranger, it is void as to the Wife, and good
to the Stranger, though the Livery were made to the Stranger in the name of
both. Three Jointenants, and one gives his part with his Daughter to his
Companion in Franckmarriage, and by the same Deed releases to them in
Frankmarriage, and makes Livery, this is a good gift in Franckmarriage by some,
for notwithstanding one Jointenant cannot enfeoffe his Companion, yet he may
enfeoffe his Companion and another, and the Livery made to the other shall vest
the Land in both, and that is for the advantage of a third person. As in
Gascoignes case, 7 H. 6.3. It was not a surrender for the advantage of the
third; Neither in 21 H. 7. 41. for the advantage of the Husband; So it shall
not be void here for the advantage of the third person. But others are of a
contrary opinion, and they say the Husband cannot take it immediately from his
Companion, and therefore it is void as to him, and good as to the Wife, and the
other part of the Deed, viz. the Release, will inure to the Husband. And here
both the things make the Frankmarriage good, for the Livery and the Deed may be
delivered both at one time.

If the Husband be Tenant for life, and the Reversion be granted to him and his
Wife, the Fee remains in them in Jointure; for there be no Moities between
them. Land is let to Baron and Fem Habendum, the one Moity to the Husband, the
other to the Wife, the Land is confirmed to them in special tail, rendering a
Hawk, the Lessor shall have two; for the Baron shall have one Moity of the
Inheritance; for his possession was severed from the possession of the Wife,
viz. in the one Moity; So that of that Moity the Husband is seized in special
tail, and the Wife has nothing. Of the other, whereof the Wife was Tenant in
Common with the Husband, the Baron was thereof seized, in Right of his Wife,
then he had a sufficient Estate, whereupon a Confirmation might inure jointly
to them. If Land be given to the Baron for life, the remainder to the Wife for
life; and their Estates are confirmed in tail. The Baron shall have one Moity
in tail only, he and his Wife the other Moity, and yet the Tail is not executed
for any part. Quaere, for this is a good case.

If Husband and Wife make a Lease of the Wives Land, rendering a Rent, the
Husband distreins, and Avowes, and dies, the Cattle are discharged; for they do
not belong to the Executor, being they are but a Pledge, and the Wife is to
have the Duty, and therefore the Executor cannot detain the Pledge, and it is
not like the case where the Husband recovers upon an Obligation made to him and
his Wife, 33 H. 6. 48.

Although the Husband can give nothing to his Wife immediately, yet if a
Disseisoress makes a Lease for life, the Remainder to her self in tail, the
Remainder to A. in Fee, and after marries the Disseisee, who Releases to the
Tenant for life, this shall inure to the Wife.

A Reversion is granted to Baron and Fem and to a single man and woman in Fee,
the single persons marry, and the Tenant atturns, then the single Man and Woman
are divorced, the Baron and Fem shall have but a third part. If a man makes a
Feoffment to A. and a Fem sole, With a Letter of Atturny to deliver Seisin, and
before Livery they entermarry, they shall take by moities. Land is given to A.
and B. his Wife, and to another Baron and Fem in Fee, they are disseised, and
A. releases to the Disseisor, and then A. and B. are divorced for cause which
has Relation. B. and the Baron and Fem bring an Assise, leaving out A. and
some think it is maintainable; for when A. and B. are divorced, yet the other
Baron and Fem shall hold the Moity to them; for being the purchase took effect,
and vested by the Livery, and at that time the Baron and Fem not being
divorced, took a Moity, that remains still; for to all Strangers A. and B.
shall be said to continue Husband and Wife; for if a Stranger had bought the
Goods of the Wife, and then they had been divorced, yet he shall retain the
Goods, as it is held in 26 H. 8. And if the Husband had made a Feoffment, the
Wife could not have an Assise against the Feoffee, but must bring her Cui ante
Divortium.

A Reversion is granted to a man and a Fem sole, and they marry, and the Tenant
atturns, they take by Moities, for the Atturnment does operate upon the Deed;
so if they marry before Livery is made.

If Baron and Fem make a Lease for life, and pray to be received, and the
Husband makes Default, and upon his Default the Wife is received, now she
admits the Discontinuance, yet if she be barred she shall have her Cui in vita,
for she had not Title then to have a Cui in vita; for that accrues by the death
of her Husband. If a Feoffment with Warranty be made to a man and a Fem sole,
and they marry, and are impleaded, and Recover in Value, the Husband dies, they
did not take by Moities. If Land be Bargained and Sold to a man and a Fem sole,
and they marry, and the Deed is enrolled, there they take by Moities, for it
has Relation. But if Baron and Fem, Tenants for life, before the Coverture,
recover in value, by reason of the Reversion with the Rent, they shall take the
value by Moities. But if a Lease be made to a Man and a Woman for life, upon
Condition to have Fee, they marry, and after perform the Condition, they shall
not have Moities in the Fee, If a man be seized of Land in right of his Wife,
and Warranty is made to them, and the Heirs of the Husband, and they recover in
value, there shall be no Moities; for the Recovery in value must be according
to the nature of the Estate.

If a Fem, being Tenant for life marries, and the Husband atturns to the grant
of the Reversion, and then he is Divorced, yet it will bind the Wife.

If a Woman has a Lease for twenty years, and the Lessor confirms to the
Husband for forty years, who dies, she shall have the Residue of the twenty
years.

The Husband has a Term in right of his Wife, and grants so many years as
shall be behind at the death of him and his Wife, Quaere if this be a good
Grant?

The Husband is bound in a Statute, and after he and his Wife levy a Fine of
the Land of the Wife to A. the Husband dies, the Land shall not be extended in
the hands of A. for nothing passed from the Husband, but the Estate which he
had during the Coverture, and A. shall have the same Benefit the Heir of the
Wife should have had. But if the Husband had made a Lease for years, or
granted a Rent Charge, before the fine levied, there the Conisee should never
have avoided it, because they had been executed at the time of the levying the
Fine. If Husband and Wife accept of a Fine sur conusans de dvoit come ceo, etc.
from B. of the Wives Land, and they render it to him in tail, yet the Reversion
is in the Wife only, and the Husband has nothing but by reason of the
Coverture, 40 Ass. p. 4.

A Fem covert is infeoffed, the Husband being beyond Sea, who, upon his return,
disagrees; yet the Freehold shall not be divested without an Entry; and if the
Husband dies before his Entry, the Wife is Remitted, and the Title of Entry
which the Feoffor had is taken away.

If a Fem tenant for life marries, the Husband makes a Feoffment, the Lessor
enters, the Husband dies, she cannot avoid the Forfeiture. If a Fem covert be
infeoffed, and disseised by a Stranger, the Husband disagrees to the first
Estate, and dies, the Wife may enter, and retain against the first Feoffor, for
the Disagreement was frivolous, the Wife having only a Right Quod not a.

If a Fem Jointenant for years marries, the survivor shall have all the Term.
So if an Obligation be made to a Fem sole and another, and she takes Husband
and dies, the survivor shall have all; for it is a Chose in action. If a Fem
has a Term, and marries, and dies, the Ordinary may commit Administration of
it to a Stranger. But the Law seems to contradict this; for the marriage is a
Gift in Law, the Wife dying first.

If a Fem has a Lease for years, and marries the Villain of the Lessor, he
may enter into the Land as a Perquisite.

The Husband is Tenant for life, the Remainder to the Wife for life, the
Remainder to the Husband in tail, how the Husband might discontinue the Estate
in tail, without barring of it, was the Question? The intention was this, that
the Husband and Wife should make a Lease to A. for the life of the Husband and
Wife, and the Survivor of them, and that A. should grant his Estate to the
Husband, and then he should make a Feoffment, and that would prove a
Discontinuance.

Land is given to A. and a Fem sole, and to the Heirs of the Body of the Woman
begotten by A. They marry, and have Issue, the Husband aliens a Moity, and
dies, the Issue dies without Issue. If the Woman may enter into the Moity for
the forfeiture? being she could not enter at the time of the Alienation. And
also she is Tenant in tail after possibility, etc. in which case she has but a
Freehold in Remainder, as she had before; But otherwise, if it had been an
Estate in tail, in remainder after the Estate vide 45 Ass. 6.

The Husband makes his Will and devises out of his Manor of Dale a certain
Rent to his Wife, for her life, in consideration, that she should not have her
Dower, and dies. The Wife recovers by Default in Dower the third part of the
Land, she shall have the whole Rent out of the two parts; for the Recovery is
upon a good Title. And a Devise cannot be averred to be a Jointure within the
Statute; for at that time, neither Land, nor Rent were Devisable, and therefore
she was discovert when the Devise took effect: and so both out of the words of
the Act, and also out of the Equity; and then from that time the Title of the
Land relates Paramount, the Title to the whole Rent shall remain.

Vide Leases, Atturnment Remitter.

Bastard.
IF the Bastard enters into the Manor, and recovers in a Cessavit, being the
Mulier dis-approves the Estate of the Bastard, he shall not take benefit of the
Recovery. If the Bastard dies seized, the Mulier within age, some think the
Right is gone, no more than if the Mulier had been born after the Descent. So
if the Bastard enters, and the Mulier dies, his Wife enseint, and before the
birth the Bastard dies, and his Issue enters, the Mulier is not bound by that,
and others think the contrary.

If a Bastard dies, seized of Land, his Wife enseint, and before the birth the
Mulier enters, the Issue of the Bastard; when he is born shall be bound; for by
a dying seized only without a descent to the Issue, his right of Entry was not
taken away: For if a Disseisor dies without Heir, the Disseisee may enter upon
the Lord by Escheat, because there was no Heir to make it a Descent: So in this
case.

If a Bastard Puisne enters into Land in Borough English, and dies seized, and
his Issue enters, the Mulier is bound. But such a Bastard Puisne, is intended,
where the first Wife, by whom he had the Mulier, dies, and then he has a
Bastard, and marries the same Woman; For if a man marries the woman by whom he
has a Bastard, and she dies, and after he has a Mulier by another Wife,
though they be not by the same Mother, yet such a Bastard gains the
Inheritance to his Issue, if he dies without Interruption: By the same reason
the Bastard Puisne. If the Mulier outs the Bastard, who recovers against him in
an Assise, where the Mulier pleads Ne unques seize, etc. and after dies, that
descent shall take away the Right of the Mulier; for the possession which he
had is defeated by the Recovery: For he shall have an Assise of Mortdancester,
or Scire fa^ias, where such a Possession is removed. But otherwise it had been
if he had entered.

If a Bastard dies, living the Father, and leaves Issue, his Issue shall be in
the same case against the Mulier, as the Father should have been, if he dies
seized without Interruption. If the Heir of the Bastard be in by descent, he
shall gain the Land from the collateral Heir, or against the Lord by Escheat,
as well as against the Mulier Puisne. If the Issue of the Bastard be the first
that enters, and dies seized, his Issue shall retain against the Mulier. If the
Bastard dies, and his Issue endowes the Wife of the Bastard, Quaere, if the
Right of the Mulier be bound? But if the Wife of a common Ancestor be endowed,
the dissent of the Reversion shall be to the Mulier. Quaere.

If a Remainder be directed to the Right Heirs of A. and he dies, and the
Remainder vests, and after the right Heir is proved a Bastard, or is made so by
Act of Parliament, yet he shall hold the Land for ever, because he takes by
purchase.

If there be Bastard eigne and mulier puisne, the Father makes a Lease for
years, and dies, the years expire, the Bastard enters, and dies seized, his
Issue enters, the Right of the Mulier is not bound; for the possession of the
Lessee for years, was the possession of the Mulier; and being that he was once
seized, so that he may have an Assise, or Mortdancester, his Right shall not be
taken away. If there be Bastard Eigne and Mulier Puisne, and the Father dies
seized of a Manor, the Bastard enters, and gets the Services of all the
Tenants, and after one of the Tenants makes a Lease for life to the Bastard,
who dies seized, and the Issue enters into the Manor; the Mulier may distrain
the Tenant who made the Lease for life, for all the Services due after the
death of the Father, for his Entry was not taken away, as to the Services of
that tenancy, the Seignory of that tenancy being suspended in the estate for
life, and so no Descent; but if there had been a Lease for years it had been
otherwise.

Grandfather, Father, and Son, the Father a Bastard, the Grandfather seized in
tail. Quaere if the Son shall Inherit?

If there be Bastard Eigne and Mulier Puisne, and the Father is disseised and
dies, the Bastard enters upon the Disseisor, and dies seized: being there was
no possession in Law descended from the Father, but only a naked right which
vests in the Mulier, therefore the Descent of the Bastard shall not take away
the right of the Mulier. But if the Father had died seized, and a Stranger had
abated, upon whom the Bastard had entered, and died seized, there the Mulier
shall be barred, because the possession in Law descends: Tamen Quaere, for the
entry of the Abater vests a right of Action in the Mulier, which cannot be
divested by the Entry of the Bastard.

If there be a Son Bastard Eigne, and Daughter mulier Puisne, the Father dies
seized of a Rent, the Daughter having a Husband the Bastard gets the Rent, and
thereof dies seized, and that descends unto his Issue, yet the Husband shall be
Tenant by the Curtesy, and the Mulier shall not be bound by it, for the Rent
was vested in the Daughter at the time of the Descent, and being the Daughter
may choose whether she will admit her self out of possession, or no; therefore
it is at her Election whether she will suffer any wrong to be done to her self,
or no. If a man dies seized, having a Son a Bastard eigne, and a Daughter a
mulier Puisne being married at that time, the Bastard enters and diesseised,
his Issue enters, and the Husband dies, perhaps the Wife shall not be bound no
more than an Infant in that case. But if the Bastard had entered, and after she
had taken Husband, etc. it had been otherwise. If a man has a Daughter a
Bastard eign, and a Son a Mulier Puisne, perhaps the Maxim does not hold, for
she had no color by the Law.

If there be two Daughters, Mulier and Bastard, and they make Partition, and
the Bastard dies seized without Issue, the Land shall not Escheat, for if the
Lord will say she was a Bastard, and so it ought to Escheat, the Mulier shall
say that she her self is a Mulier, and therefore it belongs entirely to her,
and if the Lord will say, they made partition, by which the Mulier had admitted
her inheritable, then the Mulier shall say, by that I did admit her to be my
Sister, and so I am her Heir, thus the Lord is estopped every way.

Lord Mesne and Tenant by equal Services, the Tenant fore-judges the Mesne,
the Lord dies, having a Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne, the Bastard has Issue
and dies seized, after he had married with the Tenant, the Wife dies, the Mesne
reverses the Fore-judger by error; the question is, if the Mulier shall have
the Rent of the Seignory? It seems the Maxim holds place as well of a Rent, as
of Land, as it is holden in 14 E. 2. Bastard 26. And though the Rent was
suspended by the Marriage, yet the Maxim holds place, as to the dying seized
of a Rent without interruption; for if a man has a Rent in Fee, and becomes
Tenant by the courtesy of the Land, and dies, his Heir shall have a
Mortdancester of the Rent, which he could not have, if his Ancestor did not die
seized.

Vide Release.

Bona Felonum, etc.
THe Goods of those who are attainted by Verdict, or Outlawry, or Confession,
are said Cattalla Felonum, and if a man flies for Felony, the Goods which he
has at that time are Bona waiviata, and though he be Attainted after, yet they
are so still. But if a man flies for Felony, and after he is taken, and
acquitted, there his Goods are forfeited, as Catalla Fugitivorum: but in all
the cases the property must be in him that flees. But by some Bona Waiviata are
those which are stolen by a Felon, and left. v. 29. E. 3. 12 E. 4.6.

Borough English.
A Man dies without Issue, seized of an Acre in Borough English, having two
Uncles, the youngest who enters into the Acre, by reason of the possession is
voucht with the Eldest, by reason of a Warranty entered into by the Nephew, they
lose, the Tenant who voucht them having recovered, dies, leaving two Sons, the
eldest sues Execution, and the youngest outs him, vide 11 H. 7. 12. A.

Charge.
GRandfather, Father, and Son, the Father disseises the Grandfather and dies,
the Son grants a Rent Charge, the Grandfather dies, the Son shall not avoid his
own Charge by the accession of this new Right. If the Son disseises the Father,
and grants a Rent Charge, and the Father grants a Rent Charge, the Land shall
be charged in Perpetuum; but if the Son had been dead first it had been
otherwise, and his Son should have holden it discharged.

If a Stranger disseises the Father, and grants a Rent Charge, and infeoffs the
Son, and the Father dies, the Son shall hold it discharged. If the Father
disseises the Grandfather, and dies, the Son enters, and grants a Rent Charge,
the Grandfather dies, he shall hold it discharged, although he was of full age
at the time of the Charge; [vide Sect. preced. cont.] As if Tenant in tail
infeoffs the Issue within age, who grants a Rent Charge at full age, after the
death of Tenant in tail the Son shall hold it discharged, for in both cases he
is in of another estate. If a Disseisor grants a Rent Charge, and is disseised,
a Release is made to the second Disseisor, the Charge remains.

If two Jointenants grant a Rent Charge, Provided that it shall not charge the
person of one of them, some think he shall not charge the other.

Tenant in tail grants a Rent Charge in fee, and makes a Lease for forty
years, rendering a Rent, and dies, the Issue accepts the Rent: some think the
Grantee shall have the Rent during the Lease, and the life of the Issue, though
the Lessee surrenders; Quaere, for the Reversion is discharged. The Father
disseises the Son, and grants a Rent Charge, the Son endowes his Wife, ex
assensu patris in the same Land, the Father and Son die, the Wife enters as
Tenant in Dower, she shall hold it charged; for she does not claim from the
possession in Law, but from the possession charged. If Tenant in tail grants a
Rent Charge, and dies, the Abator shall not hold it charged. But by many the
Rent in the first case is avoided, for the freehold was discharged. The Father
disseises the Son, and grantes a Rent Charge in fee, and then makes a Lease for
years, the Son confirms the Lease, the Father dies, the Rent is extinct. So if
a man grants a Rent Charge in Fee, and makes a Lease for years, and grants a
Reversion to the King, or to the Grantee, the Rent is gone.

If there be two Disseisors, and the one grants a Rent Charge, the Disseisee
releaseth to the other and his heirs, he shall hold it discharged, for he
claims merely from the Disseisee. But if one has two Sons by diverse venters,
and dies, and before entry the Eldest grants a Rent Charge, and dies without
Issue, the youngest has the Land from his Father, yet he shall hold it
charged, for the eldest has such an estate as he might charge; for if the
eldest had died without Issue, and the Land had gone to the Uncle, and from the
Uncle to the Father, though the Father cannot be Heir to the Son, yet being the
Land was charged he shall hold it charged; so in the other case, Quaere, for
there is a Mesne descent.

Tenant for life, the Remainder in Fee makes a gift in tail with a Remainder in
Fee, he in the first Remainder releases all his Right to the Donee in tail, not
saying to his Heirs, and after he grants a Rent Charge to a Stranger out of the
Remainder in Fee, and dies, the Donee dies without Issue, the Heir of him in
Remainder enters, if he shall hold it charged? For if he be remitted to his
ancient Right, then the Land is discharged against him. And some think the
Release could not give the Right in Fee, which the Releasor had to the Releasee
himself, for then in a manner he might Release to himself, and if the Release
inures but as a Confirmation, then without question the Heir shall be remitted,
and shall hold it discharged; but if the Remainder had been appointed in tail
to him who had it before in fee, the Remainder over in fee, then the Release
ought to inure to the first Estate in tail, and also to the Fee, and then if
the last fee be fortified, the mesne Remainder is established, and so the
Release inures to himself.

The Son makes a Lease to the Father for life, who makes a Lease for life to A.
the Remainder in fee simple to the Son, the Son grants a Rent Charge out of the
Remainder, and after Releases to A. and his Heirs all his Right in the Land,
the Father and A. die, if his Issue shall hold it charged? first, it is clear,
that the Right Fee is divested, and a tortious Fee settled in the Son all at one
Instant, as if Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life, the Inheritance of the
estate in tail is divested, and a fee simple vested all at one moment. So if
the Husband makes a Lease for life of the Wives Land, the fee which the Husband
had in right of his Wife is divested, and a new foe in himself in his own right
vested at the same time. So in the first case; then when it is granted out of
the Reversion, it is all one as if it had been granted out of the Remainder,
because a Reversion and Remainder agree in substance, viz. Terra revertens;
then when the Son released unto A. and his Heirs all his Right, that shall not
inure as an Entry and Feoffment, for A. was in by Title without Disseisin; then
it does not give to him the Remainder; as if he had Released to him all his
estate in the Land, or as if he had released all his Right, Habendum the Land
in fee; for there the fee passes, but here he has both the Right and the
Estate, and then a Release of the Right does not reach the Estate. Others are
of opinion that the Right in fee cannot drown in the Estate for life, and in
the Remainder it cannot merge; for then in truth he releases to himself. But if
a Fem Disseisoress make a Lease for life, and after marries with the Disseisee,
who Releases to the Tenant for life in Fee, the Fee will Merge in auter droit
for the benefit of the Estate in Fee in Reversion, then if the Release do not
perfect the Remainder, if the Grant of the Rent which is an Assent to the
Remainder does so inseperably unite the Remainder, the Rent and the Right, so
that the Right shall be drowned in the Estate for the preservation of the Rent?
and some think it shall not; for if a Disseisee takes an Estate in Fee from him
who has the Land by descent, he agrees unto it; and yet if he dies seized, his
Heir shall be remitted, and so the Rent charge avoided. But others think, that
in as much as by the grant of the Rent charge he has agreed to the Remainder,
and so to the Livery, he cannot now enter upon the Tenant for life, and then
the Release gives the Remainder, and so the Land continues charged.

Claim.
IF a Reversion be granted upon Condition which is broke, the Reversion shall
be adjudged in the Lessor without Claim, for the Grantee was privy to the
Condition: as if a Condition be annexed to the Feofment, that if the Feoffee
does not perform such an act, that then he shall have it but for life; if he
does not perform it, the Estate in Fee is presently vested in the Feoffor
without Claim, for he was privy to the Condition. But the Lord shall not have a
Reversion granted to his Villein, or aliened in Mortmain, or to his Mother, who
consents to a Ravisher without claim, for there is no Privity. But, in these
cases, if the particulartenant has an Action of Wast brought against him by
the Lord, or his Son, perhaps the using of the Action will countervail a Claim:
And note that he ought to come upon the Land and make a Claim, and he shall not
be punished for it, no more than the Lessor, who comes upon the Land to see if
Waste be committed; for it is a Condition in Law annexed to all the Cases. The
Heir makes a Feofment upon Condition, the Mother recovers Dower, the Condition
is broke, Quaere what course he must take to recover the Reversion? for, if the
Mother recovers her Dower against an Abator, the Heir shall not gain the
Reversion by Claim. And if Tenant for years be outed, and the Disseisor dies
seized, and the Terinor enters; many are of opinion, that the Disseisee shall
not have the Fee by Claim.

If there be a Disseisor of twenty Acres, and the Disseisee enters into one,
saying nothing, he may have an Assise for the rest; for the Possession shall
not be divested by the construction of the Law without a particular Claim of
the party.

Capacity.
LAnd is given by Deed to A. and a Dean and his Successors, and Livery is made
to A. in the name of both, the Dean takes nothing, for they take in several
Capacities, and in common, and not jointly. But if the Discontinuee enfeoffs
the Issue in tail within age, and another, and makes Livery to the Infant in
the name of both; though the Infant be remitted for a moity, yet the other
moity vests in the other, and they are Tenants in common, for their Capacities
are not several, but they take severally by the operation of the Law.

Cessavit.
IF the Tenant ceases for twenty years, a Cessavit cannot be maintained but for
the two last years before the Writ. And therefore if the Tenant ceases for two
years, and marries, and the Lord recovers in a Cessavit, and the Tenant dies,
the Wife shall be endowed against the Lord; for the Cessavit cannot be
maintained for the Cesser before the coverture, and so the Title of Action
shall not have Relation, etc. but is grounded upon the Cesser two years before
the Writ purchased, and part of it was during the Coverture, and then the
Cesser of the Husband, during the Coverture shall not prejudice the Wife of her
Dower. But Quaere if the case be not ^alsly put? for it should rather have
been, that the Baron ceases one year before the Coverture, and another year
after, and then the Cessavit is brought.

Cessante Causa, etc.
THe Seignoress seises the Body and Land of the Tenant, and after marries the
Villain ingross of the heir, and they commit wast, the Heir brings an Action of
Wast, it is clear that his body is out of Ward, and being that the Land is in
Ward, because an Infant cannot perform Knight Service, and so the cause is
executory, and in consideration that the Signory remains and now the Signory
during the Coverture by the intermarriage with the Villain is determined in the
Tenancy, and so the Freehold and Inheritance of the Seignory is merged in the
Tenancy by Act in Law, notwithstanding, that the possession of the Seignory is
suspended by reason of the chattle in the Tenancy, viz. the Wardship of the
Land, because that the Husband shall be Tenant by the Curtesy, and may be
granted over notwithstanding the suspension, by reason of the Chattle in the
Tenancy, and by the same reason it shall be a Release in Law to the Lord of the
Villein by Act in Law, and therefore the land shall be out of Ward for Cessante,
etc.

If the Lord of a Villain gives Land in ancient Demesne to the Villain and
afterward the Lord reverses the Fine by disceit, the Manumission is gone, for
the conveyance by the Fine, which was the cause of the Manumission being
vacated, the Effect falls to the ground.

Common, v. Apporcionment. Condition.
A Having two Sons, makes a Gift in tail to the Eldest, the Remainder in see to
the Youngest, on condition, that the Eldest shall not make a Feoffment with
warranty, to the intent to bar him in Remainder; and if he does, that then the
youngest and his Heirs shall enter, the Eldest makes a Feoffment with Warranty
the Father dies, and the Eldest dies without Issue, the youngest may enter, for
the entry given to the youngest is void, and then the Heirs of the Feoffor are
to enter; then the Father having cause to enter, and he being dead, the
Condition is in suspense in the Eldest, and revived by his death ( v. 41. E. 3.
21.) and given to the youngest; for the Condition was not extinguished by the
Feoffment; and the Warranty does not bind Titles of Entry. But if the Feofment
had been after the death of the Father, then the Condition had been extinct.

If I am Lessee for the life of C. and grant my estate to D. upon Condition
that if D. dies living C. that it shall be lawful for me to re-enter, Quaere if
this Condition be sufficient for me to enter upon an Occupant?

The Mesne grants the Mesnalty upon Condition, that if the Grantee pays, etc,
by such a day, that then he shall have Fee, before the day the Grantor to whom
the money was to be paid is attainted, yet the Grantee may perform the
Condition, and enjoy the Fee.

A Lease for life is made upon Condition, that if the Lessor grants the
Reversion, the Lessee shall have it in Fee. The Lessor grants the Reversion by
Fine to one for life, the Grantee shall have it for life, and the Lessee shall
have it after the death of the Grantee, and not before; But if the Condition
had been, that if the Lessee pays twenty pounds, etc. there he shall divest the
possession out of the Grantee. Note the diversity.

If the Husband having a Lease for twenty years in right of his Wife, grants
two years upon Condition, that the Grantee shall not grant over his term, and
if he does, that he, his Executors and Assigns may re-enter; the Husband dies,
the Lessee grants over his term; the Executors of the Husband cannot enter, for
it is a Condition annexed to the Reversion, and if they do enter they defeat the
Wives Reversion. The Eldest Son cannot enter where the Reversion descends to
the youngest Son by Borough English, or special tail. Nor the Heir on the part
of the Father, where the Land goes to the Heir on the part of the Mother, nor
the Executor of one Jointenant where the Testator made a Lease upon such a
Condition, and died, for then he should divest the Reversion out of the other,
which cannot be. And in the principal case the Wife cannot enter; for she is
not privy to the Condition, neither does she claim under the Estate of the
Husband. As if one Jointenant grants his part for years upon such a Condition,
the Survivor cannot take advantage of it. But if the Husband had granted over
all the years upon such a Condition, or the Father had made Feofment of the
Land in Borough English, he should enter, for he claims by the Father. Some
think the Condition is extinct, as if a man makes a Lease for years, upon
Condition, ut supra, and dies, having a Son and a Daughter by one Venture, and a
Son by another, the Eldest takes the Rent and dies; now the Sister shall have
the Reversion, and the Condition is gone; for she is not Heir. And a Rent is
incident to a Reversion, and passes by the Grant of it, but so does not a
Condition.

A Feoffment is made upon Condition, to re-infeoffe, the Feoffee charges the
Land, the Grantee brings a Writ of Annuity, and Recovers, the Feoffor enters.
44 E. 3. 9.

If A. be bound to pay ten pound to B. and he releases ten pound which he ought
him; yet this is no performance, for there ought to be a payment in Fact. And
therefore if one be bound to Release a Rent Charge which he has out of the
Manor of D. and he purchases an Acre, now the Rent is extinct, and yet the
Condition is not performed; But If I am bound to enfranchise my Villain, and I
bring an Action against him, the Condition is performed. So if I am bound to
discharge an Obligation in which I am bound to A. if I purchase the Manor to
which A. is a Villein regardant, the Condition is discharged; for the word
Discharge refers to all manner of Discharges. If I am Infeoffed, upon Condition
that I shall not Alien to A. and I suffer him to recover it Feintly, or if I
cease, so that he being my Lord recovers in a Cessavit, or if I acknowledge my
self to be his Villein, or if I make a Feoffment with Warranty, so that that
Acre is recovered by him in Value, yet the Condition is not broke; for it
extends only to Alienations in Fact. If I make a Gift in tail, upon Condition
that the Donee shall not suffer a Feint Recovery, if it be not to the benefit
of his Issue, and after in a Feint Writ he vouches, and a Recovery is had
against him, and he recovers in Value, and has Execution, and that is to the
just value only, the Condition is not broke. But if the Donor had been voucht,
it is clear be should not have entered, for he shall not say that the Recovery
was Feint when he was voucht, and made a party to the breach of the Condition:
and he cannot enter into Warranty, saving the Condition which is not broke, for
it is but a possibility.

Land is given in tail to the Heirs Males of the body of the Donee, upon
condition, if he dies without Heirs Females of his body, that the Donor shall
re-enter, the Condition is void, for he cannot have Heirs Females so long as he
has Issue Male.

A Lease for years is made upon condition, that the Lessee shall not Alien
without the consent of the Lessor, he gives him leave to grant over his Estate
upon Condition, and so he does, and enters for the Condition broke, he may
after grant it over without his consent; for the Condition is performed 32 H.
6. 10. a.

A Rent charge is granted upon Condition, the Grantor makes a Feofment of the
Land, the Condition is broke, the Rent is arrear, if the condition be
extinguished by the Feofment, being the Feoffor cannot have it in the same
manner as he might when the Grant was made? But if the Grant had been upon
Condition, which if not performed to cease, the Feoffee shall have Benefit of
it.

If a Feoffment be made upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall make a gift in
Frankmarriage with the Cosen of the Feoffor, this seems to be a void Condition,
Quaere if he must not make an estate for life? So if it had been to make such a
Gift to a Religious person.

If a Feoffment be made upon Condition, the Feoffee makes a Lease for life, and
dies, and the Reversion dessends to the Feoffor. Quaere if the Condition be
extinct?

The Mortgagee enfeoffs the Heir of the Mortgagor in Mortgage also to be first
paid, after the first day the first Mortgager dies, the Heir tenders the money
to the first Mortgagee at the day, and he refuses, and he tenders the money to
the Heir, etc. and he refuses. Some think the Son may perform the Condition,
for it is not suspended, being a Collateral Condition ( Vide 21 E. 4. the case
of a Corody) and the payment ought to be made to the Mortgagee (though he has
made a Feoffment of the Land to the Executors, and not to the Heir, as it shall
be and 17 E. 3. 2. is not Law. And upon the first refusal the heir is not
remitted, for he shall not be remitted upon a Title.

If the Tenant atturns upon Condition, which is broke by the Grantee, yet the
Reversion is not divested; for the Assent cannot be conditional, for he does
not claim the Reversion from him that atturns, neither can it be made
conditional by the Act of a Stranger to the grant: for if Tenant in tail makes
a Lease for years, rendering a Rent, and dies, and the Issue accepts the Rent
upon Condition that it shall not prejudice his Entry to avoid the Lease, yet he
shall avoid the Lease; for the Assent is a thing executed, which will not suffer
any Condition performable. But if the Condition be precedent to the Assent, the
Condition is good. But a Release of Right may be upon Condition, as a Release
of the Seignory to the Tenant upon condition, So of a Release upon condition
from one Jointenant to his Companion, for there the thing vested in his person
is divested, unto which a Condition may be annexed. But otherwise of an Assent.
And if the Patron assent to the charge of the person upon Condition, that is
good, because the Assent is an Interest in Law.

If a Gift in tail be made upon Condition, the Donee shall make a Feofment,
which is done accordingly, yet the Issue shall have a Formedon; for if the
Condition be not performed the Donor could not have entered, and when it is not
performed, yet the Estate of the Issue shall not be defeated. If a Lease for
life be made with such a Condition, yet the Lessor may enter for the
forfeiture, if the Feofment be made. So if the Lease had been made upon
Condition that he make a Feoffment, all is one. If an Infant be infeoffed, upon
Condition to enfeoffe another, which is done accordingly, yet the Infant may
enter, for he has performed the Condition.

If two are infeoffed, upon Condition to infeoffe A. if one does infeoffe him
of the one Moity, and the other of the other Moity, the Condition is performed,
for the Intent is fulfilled.

If a Lease for life be made, with a Condition of Accruer, if before the day
the Lessor be attainted, yet upon the performance of the Condition the estate
enlarges.

If a man has Land, by descent on the part of his mother, and makes a
Feoffment upon Condition, to be performed on his part, or the Heirs, on the
part of his Father, and the Father dies, so that the Land descends to him, the
Condition is extinct, although he dies without Issue; for notwithstanding he
had the Land from his Mother, yet the Condition goes to the Heirs on the part
of his Father, being a new thing. As if a Feoffment be made upon Condition of
Land in Borough English, the eldest Son shall not enter for the Condition
broken, as the Heir male must do where a Condition is descended upon the Heir
Female. But on the other side, if the Son makes a Feoffment to his Mother, of
Land descended to him from his Father, and after the Mother dies, and the Son
dies without Issue, the Heir on the part of his Father must perform the
Condition, and the Heir on the part of his Mother shall have the Land in the
mean time, and if the Condition had been broke in the life of the Mother it had
been all one, and the Heir on the part of the Father should have entered; for
the Son is not remitted by the Descent. The case was; after the entry the Son
granted a Rent Charge, and died without Issue, if the Heir on the part of the
Father shall hold it discharged? and some think he shall.

If A. makes a Lease for years upon a collateral Condition, and the Lessee
makes a Lease for 20 years, and then surrenders to the Lessor, it seems to
some that the Condition for the rest is extinct; for he has part of the estate
by his own Act, so that if he should re-enter, he could not be in, in the same
manner as he was before; for he cannot avoid all the estate.

If a Feoffee upon condition make a Lease for life, and after the Feoffor
releaseth the Condition to him in Reversion, the estate for life is discharged
of the Condition, and it seems to them all one, viz. a Release in Deed, and in
Law. And Note if Feoffee upon Condition makes a Lease for life, a Release of
the Condition to Tenant for life shall extend to all the Condition against the
Feoffee. And it is clear if there he Feoffee upon Condition of two Acres, and
the Feoffor releases the Condition in one, it remains in the other, as it shall
be of a Warranty annexed to two Acres, for the Condition is several as the
Right is, and shall remain in part of the Land, as the Right shall do. But if
the condition had been by two, or to two, there a Release by one, or to one,
discharges all the Condition, as it shall do a Warranty: but if a man has two
Acres, one to him and his Heirs Males, and the other to him and his Heirs
females; and makes a Lease for years of both of them, rendering a Rent upon
Condition, and dies, having a Son and a Daughter; the Condition remains for the
Son in one Acre, and is extinguished for the other. And if Lessee upon
Condition surrenders one Acre, it remains for the other.

Tenant for life makes a Lease for years, upon Condition to have it for the
life of Tenant for life, the Lessee dies, and his Executors perform the
Condition, yet the Freehold shall not accrue to them. For when the Lessee for
years died, the Condition was gone; for the Executors are not capable to
perform the condition to increase a Freehold, although they may to increase a
term; for the one is testamentary, and the other not.

Vide Infant, Fem Covert, Entry, Rent.

Confirmation.
LEssee for life makes a Lease for years, rendering a Rent, the Lessor confirms
the Estate of the second Lessee, Tenant for life dies within the term, and the
Lessor distrains and avowes for the Rent, some think he cannot.

Tenant for life grants a Rent charge in Fee, the Lessor joins in a Feofment of
the Land, the Rent shall endure for ever; for it is the Feoffment of the Tenant
for life, and the confirmation of the Lessor.

If a Disseisor takes a Confirmation of the Lord to hold by lesser Services,
and the Disseisee releases to him, yet he shall take advantage of the
Confirmation.

If there be two Tenants in Common for life, and a Confirmation is made to them
and their Heirs, they are Tenants in Common of the Fee, as they were of the
Freehold; for a Confirmation inures according to the nature of the estate upon
which it inures, and a Confirmation does not alter the estate. If Land be given
to two men, and the Heirs of their two bodies, and the Donor confirms the Land
to them in Fee, they are not Jointenants of the Fee.

If a Disseisor grants a Rent Charge to the Disseisee, and he grants it over,
and after reenters, he shall hold it discharged, for it cannot inure as a
Grant, and as a Confirmation.

If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, each by Fealty and twelve pence, the Lord
confirms the estate of the Tenant to hold by one penny, that Confirmation is
void, for want of privity; for there ought to be an immediate tenure where it
is to be abridged. As if Tenant for life makes a Lease for years, and the first
Lessor confirms the estate of the Lessee for years, that is void for want of
Privity. So if Tenant in tail makes a Lease for his own life, and the Donor
confirms, that will not enlarge his estate.

Lord, Mesne and Tenant, each of them holds by twelve pence, the Mesne is
outlawed in Felony, the Lord confirms the Estate of the Tenant to hold by one
penny, the Heir of the Mesne reverses the Outlawry by Error, and distrains and
avows for twelve pence.

There is Diversity, viz. if the Tenant dies without Heir, the Law cast the
possession of the Tenancy upon the Lord, so that he has the possession in Law
before Entry. But if the Tenant be attainted of Felony, there the Lord has not
the possession either in Fact or in Law before Entry; for if the Tenant
continue twenty years in possession after the Attainder, he shall be said to be
Tenant, then here the Law does not cast the possession of Mesnalty upon the
Lord, and so there wants that privity between the Lord and the Tenant which is
requisite to the deminishing of the Services. Then here the Confirmation inures
to prove his Agreement to the Escheat, or otherwise, it shall be void, which
the Law will not suffer. If the Mesne grants the Mesnalty to the Lord Par auter
uge, and after the Lord had confirmed, ut supra, and after cesty que vye dies,
there the Mesne shall hold according to the Confirmation; for the Fee of the
Seignory was not in suspense, because he had it but par auter vye.

If a Fem has a Lease for twenty years, and the Lessor confirms to the Baron
for forty years, who dies, the Fem shall have the residue of the twenty years,
Quod nota.

If a Disseisor makes a Gift in tail, or Lease for life to A. to whom the
Disseisee confirms, yet after the estate determined he shall enter upon him in
Reversion; for the estate is only fortisied, but if the Confirmation had been
to the disseisor, he cannot enter upon the particular Tenant. But if the
Disseisor had given, etc. to A. and B. and to the Heirs of A. and the Disseisee
confirms the estate of B. Quaere. But it is clear, if he had confirmed the
Estate of A. he should never enter upon his Heirs; for if a Disseisor gives
Land to C. in tail, the Remainder to the right Heirs of C. and the Donor
confirms the estate, that shall go to the Fee. And if a Disseisor gives land to
A. for life, the remainder to B. for life, and the estate for life to A. is
only confirmed, Quaere.

If a Disseisee, where his entry is taken away, and a Stranger enters upon the
Heir in by descent, confirms the Estate of the Stranger, though his
confirmation gives no possession of the Freehold, yet his ancient Right is gone
for ever. But if the Heir who is in by descent were disseised by A. who makes a
lease for life to B. and the first Disseisee confirms his Estate, and the Heir
enters, the Disseisee has no remedy during the life of B. for the Confirmation
continues so long, and no longer. And the Heir has the Right of B and so the
Disseisee cannot have an Action against B. and by the same reason he cannot
have an Action against him that has his Estate, in respect of the first
Disseisee. So if the Heir in by descent, had made a Lease for life to the
Disseisee and a Stranger, and the Disseisee confirms the Estate of the
Stranger, there the Disseisee has no Remedy, during his own life, though the
Heir reenters, Causa qua supra, but his Heir shall have Remedy; for it was but
a conclusion. And some say that the confirmation in the first case shall not
extend to the Right that was suspended, as a Release will do, no more than if a
man has a Rent Charge, and he and another disseise the Tenant of the Land, and
he which has the Land confirms the Estate of his companion, the Disseisee
reenters, the Rent is revived; for as the Rent was not grantable, being
suspended in the Inheritance, no more may the Confirmation extend to it, or
touch it.

Two Jointenants for life of two Acres, the Land is confirmed to them in Fee of
one Acre to the use of one, and of the other Acre to the use of the other in
fee, they are several Tenants of the Freehold of the several Acres, for the
Confirmation is drowned by the Confirmation in Fee to the Use, and the Freehold
made according to the Use, as if it had been before the Statute of 27 H. 8.

The Parson makes a Lease for twenty years, the Ordinary confirms for ten,
being it is an entire thing, it cannot be confirmed in part, as a Confirmation
to the Disseisor, Tamen Quere; for the Assent of the Patron cannot be like to
that.

The Husband is Tenant for life, the Remainder to the Wife for life, a
confirmation is made to them in tail, how it shall inure? Some think that they
shall take the Estate by Intireties, and not by Moities. It may be said that
the estate for life to the Husband, the remainder to the Wife continues, but if
not, then to the Wife for one Moity, and a Moity in the Freehold shall be
extinct, etc.

Vide Baron and Fem, and Wast.

Continual Claim.
LAnd is given to Baron and Fem and a third person, and to the Heirs of the
Bodies of the Baron and Fem, they have Issue, the Baron dies; Tenant for life
aliens a Moity in Fee, the Wife makes Continual Claim, the Issue dies without
Issue, the Wife may enter upon the Heir of the Feoffee, who dies within the
year after the Continual Claim. Quere. It seems though at the time of the
Continual Claim she had a Right of Entry, yet now the Estate is changed, and
she shall not enter. Quaere how Continual Claim may be made by Tenant in
common for the possession pro Indiviso. If the Disseisee dies after he has
made Continual Claim, and within the year a Descent is cast, the Heir of the
Disseisee cannot enter, for it gives only a Title for the advantage of the
person who durst not enter. But if the Descent had been in the Life of the
Disseisee, then the Heir of the Disseisee may take Advantage of it. For a Title
of Entry descended. If Tenant for life, with a Remainder over, be disseised,
and makes Continual Claim, and dies, he in Remainder shall avoid a Descent
happening within a year after the Claim, for his Interest was reduced.
Otherwise of a Son, in the life of his Father he has no Interest. If two
Jointenants are Disseised, and one makes Continual Claim, and then dies, and
after a Descent is cast, Quere.

If the Grandfather be a Disseisor, and dies seized within a year after
Continual Claim made, and after the year, and before Entry, the Father dies,
and the Son enters, the Disseisee may enter upon him, Quaere, for some think
the contrary.

Covenant, vide Use.

Damages.
LAnd is given to Baron and Fem in Fee, the Husband dies, the Wife waives the
possession, and recovers Dower against the Heir, she shall have Damages; for
when she refused, the Husband shall be said to die seized, and so within the
Compass of the Statute. If the Husband makes a Feofment, and takes an Estate to
himself and another in Fee, the Husband dies, the Wife shall not recover
Damages; for she recovers her Dower of the Estate which he had before, and not
of the Estate whereof he died seized: So if he had retaken in Fee upon
Condition, etc. For the Law says she is endowable of the First Estate, and not
under the Condition.

Daughter.
A Man makes a Lease for years, and dies, having a Daughter, his Wife Enseint
with a Son, the Daughter confirms the Estate of the Lessee to hold to him for
life with Warranty. The Son is born, and dies without Issue, the Daughter
enters upon the Lessee, and upon a Re-entry she brings an Assize, some think it
maintainable. But if the Son had Entered upon him an Ejectione Firmae lies.

A. has two Daughters, the Eldest disseises the Father, the Father dies, she
has Issue and dies; the other Enters, claiming her part of the Moity, and she
brings her Assize, that was a Moot case.

If Tenant in tail discontinues, and dies, having a Daughter, his Wife Enseint
with a Son. The Daughter Recovers in a Formedon, and dies before Execution
without Issue, the Son born after shall not enter, nor sue Execution.

If the Daughter recovers in value, by reason of a Warranty of the Ancestor
before the Birth of the Son, the Son when he is born shall enter upon Her, for
he recovers as Heir, and it comes in Lieu, and so shall be in the same Degree
as the first Land was.

A man makes a Lease for years, rendering a Rent upon Condition, and dies,
leaving a Son and a Daughter by one Venture, and a Son by another, the Eldest
Son gets the Rent, and dies, the Daughter shall have the Reversion, but the
Condition is gone, for she is not Heir.

If a Daughter enters by purchase, or for Alienation in Mortmain, she shall
retain against a Son born after.

A man has a Park by Prescription in Land in Borough English, and dies, having
two Daughters, the Question is, which of them shall have it? Some think the
youngest; for a Park is nothing but Land enclosed, and a Liberty in Land shall
ensue the nature of the Land, also a Park may be by Prescription, 18 H. 6. 21.
a. 1. H. 4. 4. One may have the Liberty of a Park without Allowance. Then if
Prescription can make a Park, there is no doubt but that it may be of the
nature of Borough English; for the Comencement of it is not known, 10 H. 7. 6.
per Keble.

Vide Parceners.

Deed.
A. makes a Feoffment of the Manor of D. to which an Advowson is appendant, by
Deed, and makes a Letter of Atturny to make Livery, the Advowson shall not
pass by the delivery of the Deed before Livery be made. If the Manor of D. be
given by Deed, with all the Woods, and within the Deep there is a Letter of
Atturny, to make Livery, if Livery be not made, yet his Executors shall have
the Wood. But if Livery be made, then the Wood shall go along with the Land.

If A. requires another, orgives him authority without Deed, to write, seal,
and deliver a Grant of a Rent Charge out of the Land of the Grantor, in the
name of the Grantor, which is done, the Grant is good; for if I make a Grant,
and command one to deliver it, it will be good without Deed. So if I by Paroll
deliver it him as an Escrowle, to be delivered as my Deed, upon Condition to be
performed, that is good, But an Authority to make Livery must be by Deed.

Neither shall a Woman aver the Assent of the Father for Dower, Ex Assensu
patris, without Deed. Neither can the Lessor Authorize the Lessee to commit
Wast without Deed.

If an Infant delivers a Deed which bares date two years after, and at the end
of the two years he is of full age, he shall not be Estopped to show the
delivery before the date, no more than a Fem Covert, otherwise every Infant may
be deluded.

Debt.
LEssee for forty years makes a Lease for ten years, rendering a Rent, the first
Lessee surrenders, the Lessor brings Debt against the second Lessee, Quaere.

A man shall not have Debt for Releif or Escuage granted unto him; for it is
mixed in the Realty, but his Executors shall, but he must distrein. So the Lord
shall not have an Action of Debt for Aid pur file marier, or pur fair fits
Chivalier. But if he dies before it be levied, the Tenant shall be discharged
of it.

An Action of Debt shall not be brought against the Heir, and his Brother in
Borough English, where the Eldest has nothing by descent, as it shall be
against the Heirs in Gavel Kind; for there he may have a joint judgment
against all, and not against the Eldest in the other case, for he has nothing
upon which it may be levied, Quod nota.

An Action of Debt brought by Executors shall be in the Detinet only, although
it be for Arrears of Rent incurred after the death of the Testator. So it shall
be against a man acccomptable to the Testator.

A Seignory is granted for years, the Rent is Arrear, and the Tenant dies, the
years expire, if the Grantee shall have an an Action of Debt against the Heir,
because it was due in the time of his Father, and also some was due in his own
time, or if he shall have an Action of Debt against the Executors, for that
which was due in the Testators life time, or is without Remedy? Some say that
the Heir, shall not be charged in Debt, if the Father die, not oblige himself
and his Heirs expressly, and the Executors shall not be charged, for they were
not chargeable by the death of the Testator, for at that time the Grantee could
not have an Action of Debt, but his remedy was by distress; for then the years
were not expired, and so no remedy. 9 H. 7. 17. a. Co. 4. 49.

An Annuity is granted for the life of A. the Grantee releases all Actions of
Annuity, he shall not have an Action of Debt for the Arrerages, although that
A. dies afterward.

Devastavit, vide Executor. Devise.
A Woman has Issue a Son, and by another Husband has Issue another Son, the
second Husband devises Land to the Wife for life, the Remainder to the next of
the blood of the Wife. The youngest Son shall take in Remainder, although it be
true that one is not nearer of blood to the Mother than the other, and the
Eldest is of the most worthy blood, yet he is not nearest, and so it is
uncertain who should take, according to the letter of the Will, yet the Intent
(which is always to be considered in Wills) shall be construed in Favor of the
youngest, because he was Issue of the Devisor, Pasc. 5. Eliz. A great Case was
argued in the Exchequer. There were three Brothers, the second brother
purchased Land, and devised it to his Son in tail, and if he died without
Issue, that then it should remain to the next of the Kindred of the Lineage of
the Father, the Eldest Son was then dead, having a Son, it was adjudged that
the Son of the Eldest should have the Land, for he is next of the Lineage. For
Lineage shall be taken in a Lineall descent, which is the most worthy Line, Die.
333. pl. 29. A Devise to the next of Blood, the Son of the Eldest Brother shall
have it before the younger Brother.

If Land be devised upon Condition, or rendering a Rent, that is void; for it
cannot be good in either case, except the Reservor might take advantage of it,
and the Heir cannot have that which his Ancestor could not. And if a man devise
Land with Warranty, that is void, because the Father was not bound. But to some
there seems a Diversity; for in the last case there is a Charge to the Heir,
and in the first it is for his advantage.

If the Lord devises Land to his Villein, this is an Infranchisment against the
Heir, and yet he was the Villein of the Heir when the Devise took Effect.

A man having three Daughters, devises to them hundred pound a piece for their
marriage Portions, and if any of them die before their Marriage, then the other
should have her Portion by Survivor, one dies in the life of the Father, the
other shall have three hundred pound after the death of the Father, and yet
nothing survived, for she had nothing in possession, yet they shall take it by
the, intent of the Devisor; for when he says, that if any of them die before
their Marriage, that the other shall have her Portion, this makes it in nature
of a Remainder, and then though the first Devisee does die in the life of the
Testator, yet he in Remainder shall take the Estate per Manwood, Die. 127. P.
59. As a Devise to a Monk, the Remainder to another, the Remainder is good.

A. Devises Land upon Condition, and if the Condition be broke, that his
Executors shall sell the Land, the Devise as to the Executors is void; for the
Heir must enter for the Condition broken, and then he shall hold it discharged
of all Conditions.

A. Devises twenty pound to B. when he arrives at the age of six and twenty
years, and if he dies before, he Devises it to C. B. releases to the Executors
of A. before he attain^ (...) age of six and twenty years, if it shall be a
Bar? Quaere.

If A. Devises twenty pound yearly for twenty years, the Devisee has no Remedy
for his not Is^uing out of any Land; for he can not take it as a Legacy, and an
An^^^^y does not lie against Executors, for the Testator was never charged.

A Jointure cannot be made by Devise, for Land was not then Devisable, and the
Wife was discovert when the Devise took effect.

If Land be Devised to an Alien, and he is made a Denizen before the Devisor
dies, he shall take by the Devise; for all takes effect after the death of the
Devisor.

Disablement.
IF I grant an Annuity upon Condition that the Grantee shall promote me to a
Benefice within seven years, within which time I marry, and my Wife dies within
the Term, yet the Grantee is discharged; for I had once Disabled my self to
accept of the Benefice, and he had the Liberty to have tendered it at that
time, and I being then Disabled to receive it, it countervails a T^^^^^r and
Refusal. So if I am bound to marry a woman by such a day, and she marries
another, and the Husband dies before the day, yet I am discharged of my
Obligation. But if he who was to be promoted, or married had been a Stranger to
the Obligations, it had been otherwise. If I am bound to enfeoffe the Obligee
before a day, and before the day he takes a Lease for years of the same Land,
which expire before the day, yet I am discharged; but it had bin otherwise if
there had been no day limited; for there it is not to be done before request.

A Feoffment is made to Re-infeoffe, the Feoffee grants a Rent Charge, the
Grantee brings a Writ of Annuity, and recovers, if this be a Disablement to
Re-infeoffe, Quaere?

Disagreement.
A Lease is made to Baron and Fem for the life of the Baron, the Remainder to
the Right Heirs of the Husband, the Husband dies, the Wife cannot Disagree, for
the Estate is determined. But if the Estare had been made to them by a
Disseisor, she might disagree to save herself from Damages. If Land be given to
Baron and Fem in Fee, and the Baron makes a Feoffment, and an Ancestor
collateral of the Wife Releases with Warranty, and dies, the Husband dies, the
Wife cannot disagree and claim her Dower, for her Estate was bound, and her
Right determined by the Warranty.

If the Husband be remitted to an Estate, the Wife may disagree, and claim her
Dower.

An Atturnment is good, although he that Atturned does after disagree.

Vide Dower, and Baron and Fem.

Discharge.
IF the Disseisee enters upon the Heir of the Disseisor, end grants a Rent
Charge and dies, the Issue shall hold it discharged, for he is remitted to his
ancient Right. So if the Heir of the Disseisee enters upon the Disseisor, and
grants a Rent Charge, and the Disseisee dies. But if the Son disseises the
Father, and A. and the Father dies, he shall hold it charged, for he is not
remitted. If the Father disseiseth the Grandfather, and grants a Rent Charge,
and dies, the Son shall hold it discharged, for he claims from the Grandfather.
Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant aliens in Mortmain, the Lord enters, and
grants a Rent Charge; and after his Title is come, viz. the year is past, and
the Mesne has not entered, the Lord shall hold it discharged, and his Issue
also; for he shall not be remitted for a Title, as he shall be for a Right
accrued.

If the Father disseises the Grandfather, and dies, and the Son enters, and
grants a Rent Charge, and the Grandfather dies, he shall hold it discharged,
although he was of full age at the time of the Grant. As if Tenant in tail
infeoffes his Issue within Age, who grants a Rent Charge at full age, and then
the Tenant in tail dies, the Issue shall hold it discharged.

If the Disseisor grants a Rent Charge to the Disseisee, who grants it over,
and after enters, he shall hold it discharged. So if Tenant Pur auter vye
grants a Rent Charge, and the Reversion descends upon him, and cesty que vye
dies, he shall hold it discharged. If a Stranger disseises the Father, and
grants a Rent Charge, and infeoffes the Son, and the Father dies, he shall hold
it discharged.

Land is given to A. and B. for their lives, the Remainder to the Right Heirs
of him who survives. B. grants a Rent Charge in Fee, A. dies, if the Heir of B.
shall hold it discharged, Quaere. If it had been given to them, Quam diu simul
vixerint, and to the Heirs of him who first dies, the Heir shall not take the
Land by descent, but by purchase.

A. having a Wife, makes a Feoffment upon Condition, and dies, the Wife is
endowed by the Feoffee, and then grants her Estate to the Feoffee, reserving a
Rent by Indenture, the Heir enters for the Condition broken, he shall hold it
discharged of the Rent, Note her Title to the Land was Paramount to the
Condition, but Puisne to the Rent.

If a Dean has a Rent Charge in Fee, and the Tenant aliens the Land to the
Dean in Fee, the Lord enters for the Alienation in Mortmaine, he shall hold it
discharged of the Rent, for when he entered for the Alienation in Mortmain, he
did not avoid the Livery, but affirmed it by his Entry. So if the Dean before
the Entry had entered into a Statute, the Lord should have holden it discharged
of the Execution. But if Tenant for life aliens in Fee to him that has a Rent
Charge issuing out of the Land, and the Lessor enters, for the forfeiture, he
shall not hold it discharged: for the Lessor has the same Feesimple he had
before the making the Lease, and has his own Estate, and not the Estate which
the Lessee gave to the Feoffee. Many think the contrary in the first case; for
his Estate in the Land was always defeasable.

Vide Charge, Rent, Execution.

Descent.
A Disseisor infeoffes his Wives Father who dies, so that the Land descends
upon the Wife, if the Disseisee may enter, Quaere?

The Husband surrenders the Freehold of his Wife to him in Reversion, who dies
seized, if the Wife may enter after the death of her Husband? for there seems
to be a descent.

If a Gift in tail, or Lcase for life be made, rendering a Rent with a Re-entry,
for default of payment; the Lessor has cause of Entry, and the Estate in tail
expire, or Lessee for life dies, after a Disseisin, or Descent, yet the Lessor,
etc. may enter, for the Land was recontinuable at all times. And if Tenant for
years, with a Condition be outed: after the term and a Descent cast, the Lessor
shall enter for the Condition broken.

Lessee for years, the Remainder in tail, he in Remainder grants in Fee, the
Lessee at turns, the years expire, the Grantee enters, and dies seized, Tenant
in tail dies, the Issue may enter, for the Grant was but for the life of Tenant
in tail, and then he died not seized in Fee, and if the dying seized had been
after the death of Tenant in tail. If it will take away the Entry, Quaere: But
if the Issue of the Issue of the Grantee had entered and died seized, the Entry
had been taken away. If Tenant in tail infeoffs his Donor, who dies seized, the
descent will take away the Entry of the Issue, Quaere?

If there be two Sons, and the youngest has two Daughters, the Grandfather
seized of two Acres at Common Law, and twenty in Borough English, gives the two
Acres with the youngest in Frankmarriage, the youngest Son dies, the
Grandfather dies siesed, the twenty. Acres shall descend equally to the two
Daughters, and the two Acres shall not be put in Hotch potch; for the Custom as
well as the descent makes the Title.

The Disseisor dies without Heir, his Wife enseint, the Lord enters, a Son is
born, the Disseisee enters upon the Lord. If the Entry had been before the
Birth it had been Lawful, and he Remitted. If a Stranger abates, the Disseisor
having Issue, or if after abatement a Son had been born, the Disseisee could
not have entered; for the Abator may say that the Land descended to the Issue
whose Estate he has.

If the Tenant makes a Feoffment, Pending the Praecipe against him, the
Plaintiff Recovers, then the Feoffee dies seized, the Plaintiff cannot enter
upon the Heir; for the dying seized was after the Judgment, and Tanta mount,
as if the Feofment and Descent had been both after Judgment, and then it had
been clear that the Entry had been taken away; for the Descent is the Title,
and not the Feoffment. But if the Descent had been hanging the Writ, that would
not have taken away the Entry. But if a Recovery be had against Tenant for
life, and he dies, and he in Remainder Enters, and dies seized, that shall not
take away the entry of the Recoveror; for all the Estate is recovered, and he
in Remainder is as privy as if the Action had been brought against him
immediately, so of him in Reversion. Br. Ent. Cong. 116.

The King being seized, A. intrudes, the King Grants it away, A. continues in
possession, and dies seized, this Descent will not take away the Entry of the
Grantee, for then he were without remedy, as if Land be devised, and a Stranger
Abates, and dies, that shall not toll the Entry of the Devisee.

Discontinuance
IF Land be given to two, and to the Heirs of the body of one, and he which
has the Estate in tail makes a Feoffment, and both die, this is no
Discontinuance, for any part; for he was not seized of the Estate in tail at
the time of the Feoffment.

If Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life, the Remainder for life, and after
Releases to him in the Remainder, and his Heirs, this is a Discontinuance. If
the first Tenant for life dies in the life of Tenant in tail. If Tenant in tail
makes a Gift in tail to A. and after Releaseth to him in Fee, and dies, and A.
dies without Issue, the Issue in tail may enter upon the collateral Heir of A.
for the Fee was not Executed in the life of Tenant in tail, though it passed
out of him. Quaere of all these cases.

If the Grandfather be Tenant in tail, and makes a Gift to Baron and Fem in
tail, the Husband dies without Issue, the Grandfather dies, the Father Releases
to the Wife, being Tenant after possibility, and to her Heirs, and dies, the
Wife dies, the Issue cannot enter upon the Heir of the Wife; for though it be
no Discontinuance, yet when the Wife came to the Fee simple, the Fee was
Executed, and then she died seized in Fee, and the Descent takes away the
Entry. But if the Wife had been Tenant in tail, and then she had died without
Issue, it had been otherwise; for then she had not died seized, but of an
Estate tail in possession, and a Fee in Reversion, and that will not take away
an Entry.

If Tenant in tail infeoffes the Wife of the Donor, that is a Discontinuance.

If Tenant in tail infeoffes the Donor and a Stranger, that is a Discontinuance
of all for the benefit of the Stranger. If Tenant in tail of a Rent grant that
in Fee, that is no Discontinuance, for the Grant endures no longer than for his
own life.

If Tenant in tail makes a Lease for the life of the Lessee, and then disseises
him, and makes a Feofment in Fee, the Lessee dies, and Tenant in tail dies,
that is no Discontinuance; for the Fee was not Executed by lawful means.

So if Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life, and grants the Reversion, the
Grantee disseises Tenant for life, Tenant for life, and Tenant in tail die,
this is no Discontinuance, for the Fee was not executed according to the Grant.
But if Tenant in tail makes a Lease for her own life, and disseises Tenant for
life, and makes a Feofment, that is no Discontinuance; for by the Disseisin he
was seized in Fee, and the Fee was divested out of the Donor, and then he was
not Tenant in tail. The first case seems cleerer, if Tenant in tail dies,
living Tenant for life. If Tenant in tail makes a Lease for the life of the
Lessee, who is disseised, and Tenant in tail Releases to the Disseisor without
Warranty, Tenant for life, and Tenant in tail die, this is a Discontinuance in
Fee; for the Disseisor had the same Fee executed in the life of Tenant in tail
which was first made, as if he had after Released to Tenant for life, which
would have countervailed an Entry and Feofment.

A. makes a Gift in tail to B. who makes a Gift in tail to C. who makes a
Feoffment, and dies without Issue. Nothing made a Discontinuance to the Issue
of B. but the Livery of B. for by that the Reversion of the Donor was
discontinued. But when C. died without Issue, that Livery is determined, and
the Discontinuance purged; and the Feofment of C. being a Stranger to the first
in tail, cannot be a Discontinuance, especially when there was but a Right of
the Intall discontinued by the Feofment of B. and a Right cannot be
discontinued.

If Tenant in tail be disseised, and Releases to the Disseisor with Warranty,
and is attainted of Felony, and has his pardon, and dies, that is a
Discontinuance; for if he had purchased the Land after his pardon, it should
have gone to his Issue, which proves that the blood between him and his Issue
is not corrupt, as it is between him and his Ancestor; then seeing the Warranty
was in being at the time of his death, there is no Impediment but that it
should descend.

Disseisor.
LORD and Tenant of twelve Acres by twelve pence, the Tenant makes a Lease of
one Acre for years, the Lessee enfeoffs the Lord, he may avow for eleven pence,
for though he is a Disseisor by the Statute, yet to another intent he is in by
Feoffment; for if Lessee for years infeoffs two, a Release to one will inure to
both.

If there be two Disseisors of a house, to which Estovers are appendant, and a
Release is made to one, the Estovers Remain for part, for the Release does not
countervail an Entry and Feofment.

If the Lord procures one to disseise the Tenant, and then the Disseisor
Cease, and the Lord Recovers, he shall retain against the Disseisee; for the
procurement does not make him a Disseisor, 50 E. 3. 2. v. Lit. in Remit. cont.
If the Issue in tail procure one to Disseise the Disseisor of his Fa^ther,
whose Heir is in by descent, against whom the Heir recovers, the Issue shall
retain it.

If the Disseisor makes a Feoffment, and marries with the Disseisee, he may
enter in his Wives Right.

After a Dissent, if the possession comes to the Disseiso^, the Disseisee may
enter, for the Action remains to him after the descent.

If one Disseises Tenant for life to the use of him in Reversion, and he
agrees, if he shall have the new Fee, or the ancient; for now he is a Disseisor
ab initio. If he had been a Disseisor immediately he had gained but a Freehold
by Tort, but now he Agrees to that which another has, and that is a Fee.

If one Jointenant makes a Lease for years of his part, a Stranger enters,
claiming the Moity of the other, who waives the possession, that is a Disseisin
to him, though the Termer continues in possession; for they were Tenants in
Common. Otherwise, if the Termor had waived the possession, and the other had
continued in; for the Reversioner cannot be out of possession when his joint
companion held in.

Divorce.
A Reversion is granted to Baron and Fem, and to a single man and Woman in Fee,
the single persons marry and the Tenant Atturns, then the single man and woman
are divorced, the Baron and Fem shall have but a third part.

Land is given to I. and A. his Wife, and to another Baron and Fem in Fee, they
are disseised, and I. releases to the Disseisor, and then I. and A. are
divorced, for cause which has relation. A. and the Baron and Fem bring an
Assise, leaving out I. Some think it is maintainable; for when I. and A. are
divorced, yet the other Baron and Fem shall hold the Moity to them; for being
the purchase took effect, and vested by the Livery, and at that time the Baron
and Fem not being divorced took a Moity, which remains still.

A Lease for life is made to a Fem sole, she marries, the Lessor grants the
Reversion, the Husband atturns, and after they are divorced, yet the Wife
cannot avoid the Atturnment.

A woman is divorced, upon a surmise made by the Husband, of a Precontract upon
her part: the Wife being seized of Land makes her Will, and devises it away, an
Appeal then depending by the Husband to defeat the Divorce. Quaere, if the
Appeal be not void, being sued by the Baron; for he is not the party grieved;
for he was the first Agent in the Divorce, and therefore it ought to have been
sued by the Wife, and so the Devise stands good. 2 R. 2. Quare Impedit. 143.
Die. 140. P. 46.4 H. 7. Peckams case, 10 H. 7. 12. 24 H. 8. Ravishment. 11. 39.
E. 3. 33.

A man marries an Insidel, the Wife commits Adultery, and then becomes a
Proselite to the Christian Religion. Quaere, if this Adultery, committed before
her Conversion, be a sufficient cause whereupon the Husband may sue a Divorce?

Dower.
LAnd is given to Husband and Wife in special tail, reserving a Rent, the Wife
of the Donor brings Dower against the Heir of the Husband, for the third part
of the Rent.

A. having a Daughter dies, his Wife enseint, with a Son, the Daughter
disclaims, the Lord Recovers, in right of the Disclaimer, a Son is born, the
Lord dies, and the Land descends to his Son, the Wife of the Lord brings Dower
against him.

A. grants a Rent Charge in Fee, to commence after the death of the Grantee,
who dies, the Wife of the Grantee shall not be endowed, and yet the Son takes
as Heir. But it was not in the Father, and it shall not be Assetts in the Heir.
But if the Rent had been granted upon Condition, that if the Grantee, or his
Heirs die, their Issue within age, that the Rent should cease until the Issue
comes of full age, if the Grantee dies, his Issue within age, his Wife shall be
endowed. but the Execution shall cease until the heir be of full age. As if the
Tenant be in Ward to the Lord, and the Lord marries, and dies possessed of the
Ward, his Wife shall be endowed of the Seignory, which was in suspense; for the
Freehold was in the Husband, so in the last case before, 24 E. 3. the Wife of
the Father brought a Writ of Dower against the Heir within age, and Recovered,
but cessat Executio until, etc.

If the Heir does Improve the Land, the Wife shall recover her Dower of it as
it is. But if it be by building, or other collateral Improvement, it is
otherwise. Quaere, if the Heir suffers the Houses to decay upon the Land, if
the Wife shall be endowed according to the value it was in the possession of
her Husband, or as it is now, and shall be allowed in Damages?

The Son of the Disseisor endows his Wife Ex assensu patris, the Disseisee
releaseth to the Disseisor, if the Dower shall be avoided?

The Tenant Ceases for two years, and after marries, the Lord Recovers in a
Cessavit, the Tenant dies, his wife shall be endowed against the Lord.

If a Rent be reserved upon a Lease for life the Wife shall not have dower; for
he has not a Fee, neither shall the Heir have an Assize of Mortdancestor.

If a Disseisor grants a Rent Charge, and is disseised, and a Release is made
to the second Disseisor, the Wife shall not be endowed, for her Dower is
Executory.

If a Woman has cause to have Dower of one and the same Acre, as Wife to A.
and B. If she be barred as Wife to A. yet she shall have it as Wife tp B.

If a Lease be made to Baron and Fem for the life of the Husband the Remainder
to the Heirs of the Husband, who dies, the wife shall not have Dower; for she
cannot disagree to an Estate determined. If Land be given to Baron and Fem in
Fee, the Husband makes a Feoffment, an Ancestor collateral of the Wife,
releases With Warranty, and dies, the Husband dies, the Wife cannot disagree,
and claim her Dower where the Estate was bound, and her Right determined by the
Warranty.

If a Villain purchase ^an Estate in tail, the Lord enters, and dies, his Wife
shall not have Dower; for being the Law gave unto him his Entry, the Law will
not give more to him than the Villein might lawfully give, which was an Estate
for his own life. If Tenant in tail, the Reversion in the King be disseised,
the Disseisor dies, his Wife shall not recover her Dower, no more than if a
Discontinuance takes away an Entry.

If there be two Tenants in Common, and one has a Wife, and the Reversion is
granted to both of them, and he which has the Wife dies, the Wife shall be
endowed of a third part of a fourth part, if the Reversion passed severally;
for then the Reversion and the Fee are Executed for the fourth part.

A Gift in tail is made rendering, during the life of the Donor, Socage tenure,
and after his death Knight service, the Wife shall be endowed of the Knights
service.

If a Rent be granted for life, and after by another Deed the Grantor releases
all his Right in the Rent, and if it be behind, that the Grantee and his Heirs
shall distrain, the Wife shall not be endowed; for it is still but a Rent Seck,
and the distress a Penalty, 8 H. 4.18.

A Disseisor having a Wife makes a Lease for life, the Lessee makes a Lease to
the Wife for her life, the Husband accepts the Deed, and agrees to it, the
Husband dies, the Wife disagrees to the Lease, the Lessor Enters against whom
she brings Dower. It is clear, if a Disseisor, having a Wife, makes a Lease to
A. for life, who makes a Lease to B. for life, and the Disseisee releaseth to
B. the Wife of the Disseisor shall be endowed; for the Release does not
countervail an Entry and Feofment. If a Disseisor be Disseised, and the
Disseisee releaseth to the second Disseisor, that takes away the Dower of the
first Disseisors Wife. But in the first casethe Husband is remitted, and no
possession in the Wife whereupon a Release may operate, and so she may disagree
and claim her Dower.

If an Estate be confirmed in a Rent Seek, and if it be behind, that it shall
be lawful for him and his Heirs to distrain, the Wife shall not have Dower;
for it is still but a Rent Seck, and the Distress but a penalty.

Tenant in tail of a Rent discontinues it with Warranty, the Issue having a
Wife, is barred in a Formedon by the Warranty and Assetts, yet his Wife shall
be endowed; for the Grant was void by the death of Tenant in tail, and the
Issue had possession in Law, and might have distrained, and though he
determined his Election, yet it shall not prejudice his Wife.

If the Husband disagrees to a Remainder, the Wife shall not be endowed,
otherwise to a Dissent. If a Rent Charge is granted, the Grantee dies, the Heir
cannot prevent the Wife of her Dower by bringing his Writ of Annuity.

The Son endows his Wise Ex Assensu Patris, the Son is attainted. If she shall
retain her Dower? Some think she shall not; for she claims from the Son, and Ne
unques accouple in loyal Matrimony is a good plea.

If Tenant for life surrrenders upon Condition, and the Lessor marries and
dies, the Wife is endowed against the Heir, the Lessee enters for the Condition
broken, the Wife shall not have the Reversion; for the Freehold which was the
Wives Title is taken away by the Entry. If the Grandmother recovers Dower
against the Mother, she has taken away all the estate of the Mother; for she
comes in upon an Eigne Title. But otherwise if the Father had been infeoffed.
So if the Lessor disseiseth his Tenant for life, and marries, and dies, and the
Wife is endowed by the Heir, the Lessee enters etc. And if Lessee for life had
died before the Wife had been endowed, she shall not be, endowed; for the Heir
was Remitted, or if she had been endowed, and the Lessee had died, the Heir
shall out her. If the Mother recovers Dower against the Son, and the
Grandmother recovers Dower against the Mother, and dies, the Son shall enter and
not the Mother. But if the Dower of the Mother had been by Assignment of the
Heir, it had been otherwise. For he shall be concluded by his own Assignment,
Quaere? For some think the Reversion is not taken away from the Mother in Casu
penultimo.

If a Feoffment be made to A. to the use of B. the Wife of A. shall be endowed.

A. marries and fells his Land, his Wife arrives at her age of nine years, the
Husband dies, she shall be endowed; though the Husband had no possession when
she was nine years old: For if the Husband aliens his Land, and after the Wife
is attainted and pardoned, the Husband dies, she shall recover her Dower. If a
woman Elopes, the Husband aliens his Land, and after they are Reconciled, she
shall have her Dower; for in these cases the Title of Dower is not consummate
until the death of the Husband. But if a man marries an Alien, and then sells
his Land, and she is Endenized, and the Husband dies, she shall not have her
Dower.

If a Tenancy Escheats, the wife of the Lord shall not be endowed of the
Seignory.

A woman Entitled to have Dower, disseiseth the Tenant, and she is disseised by
another, to whom the Disseisee releaseth, she shall not have her Dower; for her
Dower was suspended in the possession of the Disseisor as well as if it had
been in her own possession; for the Disseisor is in as the woman was, and
though her Dower should have been Revived if the Disseisee had entered; yet this
Release does not amount to an Entry and Feoffment.

If Land be given to A. and his Heirs Males as long as he has Issue Female of
his body, A. dies having a Daughter, the Wife is endowed, and the Daughter dies
without Issue, the wife loses her Dower; for there is a difference between a
Condition in Deed, and in Law; for if the Issue of Tenant in tail dies without
Issue; yet his wife shall keep her Dower; for it is a Condition in Law. And yet
if an Estate tail be made upon Condition, that if the Donee dies without Issue,
that it shall be lawful for the Donor to re-enter, the Wife of the Donee shall
not lose her Dower; for the Condition does not take effect until the estate be
determined by the Condition in Law, upon which determination she is endowable.

A. seized in Fee grants a Rent Charge, and aliens, and takes an Estate in
Feesimple, or in tail, and dies seized, the Wife Recovers in Dower, and then
she surmises that her Husband died seized, and prays a Writ of Enquiry of
Damages, 14. H. 8. 6. She shall hold it charged; for she has admitted her self
dowable of the second Estate.

A. has a Wife, and is seized of four Acres, and makes a Feofment of three of
the Acres with Warranty, and dies, the Wife brings her writ of Dower against
the Feoffee, and he vouches the Heir. Now if the Wife may stop the Judgment,
viz. That she shall not recover immediately against the Heir is the question;
for then she has lost her Dower of the fourth Acre, as some think she has,
because it was her own folly that she did first recover her Dower of that.

Election.
IF a Rent be granted in Fee, and the Grantee grants it over for years, the
Grantee for years has no Remedy, if it be denied him; for he shall not have a
writ of Annuity; for the Election is given only to the first Grantee and his
Heirs, and the Election runs only in privity. If two Acres are given to A.
Habendum, the one in Fee, and the other for life, and A. grants both over, viz.
the one in Fee, and the other for his own life. If the second Feoffee shall
have Election? If A. had committed wast in both, or had made a Feoffment of
both, the Lessor might have entered into which he had pleased. If I give two
Acres, the one in Fee, the other for life, and the Donee dies without Heir,
Quaere, if the Lord shall have Election? If a Lease be made of two Acres, the
Remainder of one to A. and of the other to B. and makes no certain description
of either. He who first enters after the death of Tenant for life, shall have
the Election.

If a Lease be made of two Acres, Habendum the one in Fee, and the other for
life, reserving a Rent, Quaere how the Lord shall avow? But his Executor has
no Remedy by the statute of 31 H. 8.

If A. grants to another one of his horses, the Grantee dies before his
Election, his Executor shall choose; but yet there was no property in the
Grantee before Election. If two Acres are granted, the one in tail, and the
other in Fee, the Heir of the Donee shall make his Election.

If twenty shillings, or a Robe is yearly granted at the Feast of Easter, at
the day, or before the day, the Grantee has Election. If it had been by
Obligation, the Obligor shall have the Election after the day. But if one
grants to another twenty loads of wood, or twenty Oaks yearly at the day or
after, the Election is in the Grantee, for it lies in Prender, so that there is
a a Difference betwixt a thing in Payment and in Prender. 13 E. 4. 4.

If a Lease for life be made, reserving a Rent, or a Robe at the day, it is in
Election of the Lessee, but after in the Lessors.

A Reversion is granted to one for life, and before Atturnment it is granted to
him in Fee, the Grantee may choose his Estate.

If an Acre is given Habendum in Fee, or in tail, the Donee shall choose. If
one be bound, or Covenants to infeoffe B. of the Manor of D. or S. the
Obligor, etc. has the Election; for he is the first Agent. But if I give my
black horse, or white Horse, there the Donee has the Election; for there he is
the first Agent. But otherwise if the words had been that I should deliver
also. If I infeoffe A. and B. and warrant the Land to the one or the other,
there is no Election given to either, and therefore void. But if one be bound
to me to pay to A. or B. there the Obligor has the Election; for he is the
first Agent, but in the other case it ought first to be demanded. A. gives two
Acres, Habend. the one for life, the other in Fee, reserving a Rent or a Robe,
and does not distinguish which he shall have for life, and which in Fee. B.
makes a Feoffment of both, the Rent is behind. A. distrains in one only, and
makes an Avowry for the Robe in that Acre. Quere bien.

If a Rent be issuing out of two Acres, the Tenant grants one to another, the
Grantee may choose in which he will distrain for all.

A. disseises B. of twenty Acres in. C. B. brings a writ of Entry sur Disseisin
in ten Acres, and recovers, and comes upon the Land, and enters into one Acre
in the name of all he recovered, and thereof presently infeoffs D. who enters
into the other nine Acres, A. brings an Assize for those nine Acres, and it is
maintainable; for by the entry of B. into one Acre in the name of all he
recovered, nothing vested in him but that Acre; for it was a determination of
his Election which nine Acres he would have, for it was uncertain, and then
nothing passed by the Feoffment but that one Acre, for the Feoffee being a
stranger shall not make Election, which runs in Privity.

Emblements.
A Woman has Title to have dower of three Acres, and after the Heir sows one
of the Acres, and she has that Acre assigned to her in dower. Quaere if she
shall have the Emblements; for, no folly can be imputed to the Heir; for the
possession was cast upon him by the Law, and when he did sow the Land it was
uncertain to him whether ever the wife would recover her dower, neither could
he guess which Acre would be assigned her in dower. and the Heir shall take
advantage of this incertainty. As if the Condition be performed by the
Mortgagor, yet the Mortgagee shall have the Emblements. If a man devise that
his Executors shall sell his Land, and before the sale the Heir sows the Land,
and then the Executors sell it, yet the Heir shall have the Emblements, 36 H.
6. 36. If the Heir sows the Land, and is disseised before severance, and the
Disseisor endows the wife of the Father. Some think the Heir shall not have the
Emblements; for she is supposed to be in, in the Post by the Disseisor, Quaere.

Entry.
GRandfather, Father, and Son. The Father disseiseth the Grandfather and dies,
the Son endows the Mother, the Grandfather dies, the Son may enter upon the
Mother; for he has a new Right descended to him from the Grandfather, for the
Grandfather might have entered upon the Mother, so shall his Heir. But if there
be Great Grandfather, Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the Grandfather
disseises the Great Grandfather, and the Father dies, and the Son endows the
wife of the Father, and the Great Grandfather dies, the Son shall not out the
Tenant in Dower; for the Great Grandfather could not enter by reason of the
descent, no more can his Heir.

If a disseisor makes a Lease for life, the Remainder in Fee, and the disseisee
purchases the Remainder, and grants it over, he cannot enter upon the Lessee
for life, for then he should defear his own Grant.

A Feoffment is made, upon Condition to re-infeoffe, the Feoffee makes a
Feoffment to his use. If the Feoffor may enter without Request? If A. makes a
Feoffment, reserving a Rent, and if it be behind a Re-entry, after he releaseth
the Rent when he has Title or Entry, he cannot enter after, or if he granted
the Rent over after his Title of Entry.

The Eldest Son cannot enter where the Reversion is descended to the youngest
by the Custom.

A Seignory is granted in tail, the Tenant aliens in mortmain, the Grantee dies
within the year without Issue, the donor shall enter, as well as he in
Remainder; for there is a Privity of Estate.

If two Acres descend to A. and a stranger abates into one, and A. enters into
the other in the name of both, that shall not gain the possession of the other.
But otherwise if he had entered into that Acre wherein the Abatement was in the
name of both.

Tenant for life of a Seignory, a Tenancy Escheats, a stranger intrudes, Tenant
for life dies before Entry, he in Reversion may enter, as upon the Disseisor of
his Tenant, but if he dye and his Heir in by Descent, he cannot enter.

After a Descent the Disseisee abates, the wife of the Disseisor recovers dower
by confession, if the disseisee may enter?

A Lease for life is made, rendering a Rent, with a Re-entry, for default of
payment, the Lessor has cause of Entry, the Lessee is disseised, and a descent
cast, the Lessee dies, the Lessor may enter; for the Land was always
recontinuable by Entry. If Lessee for years upon Condition be outed after the
term, and a dissent cast, the Lessor shall enter for breach of the Condition.

Escheat.
IF Lessee for years makes a Feoffment, and the Lessor dies without Heir, the
Lord shall not enter for the Escheat; for it is a good Feoffment against him.

A. infeoffs B. so long as Paul's Steeple shall stand. B. dies without Heir, if
the Land shall Escheat?

Vide Attainder and Bastard.

Estate.
IF a Lease be made so long as A. and B. shall be Justices, if one of them be
removed, the Estate is determined; for the time was in the Copulative, and a
Collateral determination. But if it had been during their lives, and one of
them had died, the Estate had continued.

A. has Issue a Son and a daughter, Land is given to the daughter, and to her
Heirs Females of the body of the Father begotten, she has not Estate tail but
for life only. Inst.

If a lease be made to a Dean and Chapter for their lives, they shall have a
Fee; for they never die.

If a Rent of twenty shillings a year be granted until the Grantee shall
receive twenty pound, the Grantee has an Estate but for twenty years; for it
is certain. So if it had been granted until A. shall arive at his full age, he
takes but for years. If Land of twenty shillings a year value be granted until
he shall receive twenty pounds out of the Issue and profits, and Livery be
made, he takes an Estate for life, by reason of the uncertainty of the profits.
If A. makes a Lease for life, reserving a Rent, and if it be behind, that he
shall enter and retain, til he has received the Rent out of the profits of the
Land, all the Estate of the Lessee is defeated. 30 E. 3. 7.

If A. has two Daughters, and the Eldest gives Land to the youngest, and to
the Heirs of the body of the Father begotten, there passes but an Estate for
life; for the donor is one of the Heirs, and it cannot be an estate tail in her
self of her own making, and it cannot inure to the other; for she is not Heir.
But if it had been given to the youngest, the eldest being born out of the
Realm, it shall go to him.

Estopple.
IF a Praecipe be brought against the Father of the Sons Land, and he loses,
and the Son after the decease of the Father brings a Writ of error to reverse
the Recovery, and Judgment is affirmed, the Recoveror may enter upon the Son;
for by bringing his writ of Error, he is Estopped to say, that his Father was
not seized.

If an Infant delivers a deed Which bears date two years after, and at the end
of the two years he is of full age, he shall not be Estopped to show the
delivery before the date, neither shall a Fem Covert.

Husband and Wife seized, and to the Heirs of the Husband, the Husband makes a
gift in tail, the Wife recovers against the donee in a Cui in vita, supposing
that she has a Fee, and dies, and the donee dies, and the Issue of the Husband
and Wife brings a Forme^on in Reverter and though he was Heir to the Wife, he
shall be Estopped to say, that he had a lesser estate than in Fee, yet the
Issue, who claims by the Husband shall not be Estopped.

Vide Dower.

Estover.
A. seized of an house on the part of his Mother, and Estovers are granted to
him in Fee, and he dies without Issue, the Estovers are extinct. If there be
two disseisors of a house, and they have Estovers granted to them to be
employed in the same house, and the disseisee releaseth to one, the Estovers
remain for part.

If one has Estovers in certain in ten Acres of wood, and five of them descend
to him, he shall not take the whole out of the residue.

Exchange.
IF A. exchanges twenty Acres with B. for ten of equal value B. is impleaded,
and loses ten Acres, vouching A. and recovering in value, she shall have all
the ten Acres again which he gave to A. and retain the ten Acres Residue
without Warranty for the folly of A.

IF A. exchangeth Land with B. in Fee, who infeoffe a stranger, one enters into
the Land of A. by Title Paramount, he cannot enter upon the Feoffee of B; for
the privity of the Exchange is determined by the Feofment. If A. and B.
exchange Land, and A. makes a Lease for life, B. is impleaded, and recovers in
a Warrantia Chartae, and has execution of other Land, the Tenant for life
dies, A. enters, upon whom a stranger enters by Title Paramount, he has no
remedy for the Land rendered in Value; for that does not go in privity as the
Exchange does. If A. and B. exchange Land, and A. dies in a Praecipe against B.
he vouches the Heir of A. who enters into Warranty, and cannot bar the
Demandant, by which he recovers; and B. over in value, the Demandant enters, if
B. may enter upon the Heir, or is chased to his Habere facias ad valentiam?
Some think he may enter; for a descent is not material against a Condition, as
this is; for if there had been an express Condition, he might have entered, and
so he may now. But if part of the Land exchanged had been recovered against B.
he could not have entered, for he shall not be his own Judge of the portion. But
where all is recovered, the whole Exchange is avoided, and therefore he may
enter. If one Exchangee makes a Feofment of his part, the other shall not enter
upon the Feoffee, for the Condition is determined and dissolved. But Quaere, if
after the Feofment the other may vouch? If two Acres are exchanged for a
Manor, and a stranger enters by title Paramount into one Acre, he shall enter
into all the Manor, for it is an entire thing. And Quaere if he shall retain
the other Acre?

Execution.
IF Tenant in tail with a Remainder over with VVarranty recovers in value, and
dies before Execution, he in Remainder shall sue Execution; because he is
privy. If Tenant in tail dies without Issue. If a man Recovers in value Land in
Borough English. Quaere, if the youngest Son shall sue Execution? But if the
Issue in tail recovers in a Formedon, and dies without issue before Execution,
the Donor cannot enter, or have Execution. If tenant in tail discontinues, and
dies leaving a daughter, his Wife Privement Enseint with a Son, the daughter
recovers in a Formedon and dies, the son born cannot enter, or have Execution.
But if the Issue in tail recovers against the Discontinuee, and after is
attainted of Felony, his Issue shall enter, or sue Execution, for he is privy
in Estate. Tenant in tail recovers in value by Voucher of the donor, and is
attainted of Felony, his Issue shall not have Execution.

If the Son has the Land of the Father, and of another in Execution upon a
Statute, and the Land descend from the Father to the Son, the whole Execution
is discharged.

In Judgment for debt the party shall not have Execution, but of that Land
only which he had at the time of the Judgment, and not at the time of the
purchase of the Writ. But in debt against the Heir, if he aliens hanging the
Writ, it shall be liable to the Execution, although the alienation was before
the judgment; for the Action was conceived against him in consideration of the
land; but in the first case it was in respect of the person.

The Conisor of a Statute is in Execution, and his Land also, the Conisee
releases to him all debts, the Execution is discharged by this Release; for the
debt was in being, until it was levied of the profits, but though the Execution
be discharged by the party, yet until it be discharged in fact, if the Jailer
had suffered him to go at large, he could not have said but that he was in
Execution.

Executors.
IF a Lease for years be made, reserving a Rent upon Condition of Reentry for
not payment. If the Executor breaks the Condition, so that the Lessor
reenters, it is a Devastavit in them, otherwise if the Condition were
performable on the part of the Lessor, Br. Extinguishment 54. for every
voluntary act of the Executor, by which, the Goods of the Testator are consumed
without any benefit to the Testator, is a Devastavit. But if an Executor having
such a term as Executor purchases the Reversion, that is not a Devastavit; for
the Term, as to Assetts is in being still. If a man Mortgages his Term and
dies, and his Executors do not redeem it; some think it is a Devastavit. If
they have Assetts in their hands wherewith to redeem it, and the Term be better
than the price of the Redemption, so if an Executor sells a term under the
value, by which the Creditors lose their Debts, this, some think, is a
Devastavit. But if a man be possessed of a term, and devises it to his Executors
to be sold Meliori modo quo possunt for payment of his Debts, they sell it
under the value, that is no Devastavit; for it may be it was the best price
they could get.

If Husband and Wife make a Lease of the Wives Land, reserving a Rent, the
Husband distreins and avows, and has a Return and dies, the Cattle are
discharged; for the Executors cannot have them; for they are but as a Pledge,
and being the Executors cannot pretend any Right to the duty, they cannot
detain the Pledge; for the Wife is to have the Duty. Vide 33 H. 6. 48.

If a Rent Charge be granted in Fee, the Grantee dies without Heir, the
Executors shall not have an Action of Debt for the Arrerages. But if the
Grantee had brought a writ of Annuity, and Recovered, then the Executors should
have an Action of Debt for the arrerages; for if the Inheritance of a Rent
determins, the Arrerages are extinct, otherwise of an Annuity.

If a Grant be made of a Robe, or twenty shillings, and the Grantee dies before
Election, his Executors cannot demand the Arrears.

The Executors of a Grantee for years of a Rent Charge shall have Election,
either to have an Action of Debt, or Annuity.

If a man be bound in twenty pound, and his Executors have but ten pound, an
Action of Debt lies against the Heir for all; (...) if he chooses the Executor
he cannot sue the Heir for the Remnant. If an Obligor in twenty pound has
Goods to the value of ten pounds only, and makes the Obligee his Executor, he
shall retain that as parcel of the Duty, and for the rest bring his Action
against the Heir; for it is by the act of the Law that the duty is apporcioned.

If A. by Deed gives the Manor of D. with all the Woods to B. if Livery be not
made, the Executors shall have the Woods.

If there be two Wills, and the Executor of the last refuses before the
Ordinary, yet the first is revoked by the intent of the Testator. If the
Executor Releases a duty of the Testator, this is so much an Administration, so
that he cannot after refuse, but yet if he does after avoid the Release, he may
refuse.

A Lease for life is made, rendering a Rent at Mich: and the Annunc: the Land is
sown at Mich: and the Lessee dies, if the Executors shall have the Land until
the Corn be ripe, if they ought to pay the Rent? Some think the Lessor may have
an Action upon the case; for the Executors have the profits of the Land, etc.
and no fault in the Lessor: As if a gift in tail be made, Reserving thirty
Shillings, and the Donee dies without Issue and the Wife is endowed, she shall
pay ten shilshillings, and yet the Estate is determined, but she claims under
the Estate of the Husband.

A man makes a Lease for life reserving a Rent, upon Condition that if the Rent
be behind, that the Lessor shall enter, and retain until he be satisfied of
the Arrears, he enters and dies, his Executors shall not retain; for the
Arrears were not Chattles at the beginning, and therefore they shall not ^etain
the Land as a Gage, as they shall do for the double value; for that was a
Chattle at the beginning. But in the first case the Arrears are given to the
Executors by the Statute of 32 H. 8. Yet being the Arrears were no Chattles at
the first, and so not due to them by their own nature, therefore they shall not
retain. As in 15 E. 4. 10. In Rescous there it is said, if the Defendant in a
Replevin avows for a Rent due to him and his Wife, and upon that he has a
Return and dies, the Tenant shall have his Cattle back again without any
Agreement, because the Executors could not have the distress, being they could
not have the Rent, but the Wife was to have it.

If an Executor delivers a Legacy upon Condition, it is no good delivery.

The Debtee and another are Executors to the Debtor: the Debtee recovers
against the other, and after Administers with the other, and then sues
Execution by Scire facias: If the other shall have an Audita Querela? and in
whose name it shall be sued, or if the property shall be altered in the
Recoveror? or if Execution be discharged? but some think that Execution cannot
be stopped, but the Recoveror shall have it to the use of the Testator.

Vide Condition and Debt.

Extinguishment.
THe Tenant holds ten Acres by ten pence, and makes a Feofment of one, the Lord
grants the Rent, reserving the Fealty, the Tenant Atturns, the Grantee
releaseth all his Right in the Land to the Tenant, yet he shall have one penny.

If the Tenant devises, that the Lord shall make a Feoffment of the Tenancy,
which is done, yet the Seignory is not extinct, no more than the Rent Charge
shall be where the Grantee makes Livery as Atturny to the Tenant of the Land,
because he does it in auter droit.

A Rent Charge is granted upon Condition, the Grantor makes a Feofment, the
Condition is broke, the Rent is arrear, if the Condition be extinct by the
Feoffment; for the Grantor cannot have it in the same manner, etc. But if the
Condition had been that the Rent shall cease upon the Non performance, there
the Feoffee shall take advantage of it; for the Rent does ipso facto
extinguish, as a Lease for years upon Condition to be void.

The Lord having the Ward of the Mesne enters into the Tenancy for Mortmain,
the Seignory and Mesnalty are extinct.

If the Tenant infeoffes the Lord to the use of A. or if the Lord infeoffs the
Tenant of the Manor to the use of A. if the Seignory be extinct? Note the case.

Vide Condition, Release, Estovers, Arrerages.

Feoffment.
TEnant for life, and he in the Reversion join in a Feoffment of all their Land
and Tenements lying in the Town where the Land lies that is in Lease, and make
a Letter of Atturny to make Livery, this is a Grant of the Estate for life, and
also of the Reversion. But if they had made a Feoffment of the Land of the
Lessee only, then it will be the Feofment of Tenant for life, and the
Confirmation of him in Remainder.

If a man makes a Feoffment to a Stranger and to his own Wife, and makes Livery
to the Stranger in the name of both, it will be good to the Stranger, and void
as to the Wife.

Tenant for life infeoffs the Wife of him in Reversion, with a Letter of
Atturny to the Lessor to deliver seisin, who does it. Quaere if he be seized in
his own or his Wives Right? For he is remitted by the Forfeiture. If Tenant in
tail infeoffs the Wife of the Donor, that is a Discontinuance.

A Feoffment is made by one Deed in Fee, and by another in tail to the same
person, and Livery made according to both Deeds, it shall inure by Moities; For
otherwise the Livery cannot inure upon each deed: For if he should have all the
Land in tail, the Remainder in Fee, then the Livery shall have only operation
upon the Estate tail, and the other shall be but a Confirmation, and then it
shall not inure upon both the Deeds, but upon one. And if Livery had been made
only upon the Deed in tail after the delivery of both deeds there should be
Tenant in tail, the remainder in fee.

If one Jointenant enfeoffs his Companion and a stranger, the stranger takes
all. If Tenant in tail enfeoffs the donor, he does not give him the Fee.

Vide Extinguishment.

Fem Covert.
A Man conveyes Land to a Fem sole upon Condition, that she pays a sum or
money by a day, she marries, and the money is not paid, whereby her Estate is
defeated, this will bind her after her Husbands death. But if the Fem be
Tenant for life, and the Husband makes a Feofment, and the Lessor enters, yet
the Wife shall have the land after the death of her Husband; for it is but a
Condition in Law: but if the Condition be by Statute, as in a Cessavit or Wast,
where there is a Recovery, there it will bind her after the death of her
Husband. But if the Condition be given by Statute and no Recovery, as in
Mortmain, then the Wife shall not be bound. Some Conditions in Law shall bind
the Wife if the Husband breaks them, as a Condition annexed to the Grant of a
Park, an Office, or a Liberty.

If a Fem Covert delivers an Obligation bearing date two years after, and at
the end of the two years her Husband is dead, she shall not be Estopt to show
that the Delivery was before the Date.

Fem Sole.
IF a Fem sole Tenant in a Praecipe marries, pending the Writ, all the rest of
the pleadings and process shall be against the Wife only.

If a Fem sole at Mich: makes a Writing dated at Christmas, and before
Christmas she marries and the Husband dies, she may say that at the time of the
date she was a Fem Covert, and he shall not aver the delivery before.

Fine.
TEnant in tail levies a fine, and takes back an Estate in Fee upon Condition,
and dies, the Heir enters, and is remitted, the Proclamations pass; if that
shall take away the Remitter, and if the Condition remain?

If the Wife levy a fine as a Fem sole, and the Husband enters, all the
Inheritance is revoked.

Forfeiture.
LEssee for years is received by the Statute of Gloucester, a Stranger recovers
against him in a Praecipe, and confirms the Estate of the Lessee for life, the
Lessor avoids the Recovery by Error, and Enters upon the Lessee, some think he
cannot.

A. makes a Lease for life and dies, leaving his Wife enseint with a Son, the
Tenant makes a Feoffment, the Son is born, if he shall enter for the
Forfeiture. Quaere?

A Lease is made upon Condition, that if the Lessee commits Wast, that his
Estate shall cease, if a Stranger commits wast it is no Forfeiture of his Lease.

If Tenant for life infeoffs the Wife of the Lessor with a Letter of Attorney
to the Lessor to deliver seisin, which is done accordingly. Quaere, if this be
a Forfeiture? some think it is.

A Lease is made to E. and F. for their lives, F. grants to a stranger for the
life of E. that is a Forfeiture of his Estate; for he had not an Estate for the
life of E. but in respect of the Jointure, and an Estate for the life of E.
does not pass from the Lessor in the Moity, but upon Condition in Law, that
the Jointure remains, and now he has given it for the Life of E. absolutely:
But if both of them had made a Lease for the life of E. that had not been a
Forfeiture, Causa patet.

If a Lease for life be made upon Condition, that the Lessee shall infeoffe A.
which is done, the Lessor may enter for breach of the Condition in Law,
scilicet the Forfeiture.

Tenant for life grants over his Estate upon Condition after Title of Entry,
the Grantee makes a Feoffment, the Lessor enters for the Forfeiture, some think
the Lessor may enter upon him for the Title of Entry; for the Forfeiture is by
the Common Law, which shall not destroy another Title coming in respect of the
Estate.

Land is given to a man and a Fem sole, and to the Woman in special tail, they
marry and have Issue, the Husband aliens a moity and dies, the Issue dies
without Issue, if the Wife may enter into the Moity for the Forfeiture? For now
she is Tenant in tail after possibility, in which case she has but a Freehold
in the remainder, otherwise if her Estate had been in tail.

Land is devised to A. for life, the Remainder to him that shall be his first
Son, the Remainder in Fee, A. aliens in Fee, if he in the Remainder may Enter
for the Forfeiture. Quaere?

Frankmarriage.
THree Jointenants, one of them gives his part with his Daughter in
Frankmarriage to one of his Companions, and by the same Deed releaseth to them
in Frankmarriage, and makes Livery, some think that is a good gift in
Frankmarriage for this reason, that although one Jointenant cannot infeoffe his
Companion, yet his Companion and another he may, and the Livery made to the
other shall vest the Land in both, and that is for the advantage of the third,
as in Gascoigues case, 7 H. 6. 3. It was not a surrender for the advantage of
the third. Nor in 27 H 7. 41. for the advantage of the Husband, so it shall not
be void here for the advantage of the third person. But others think the
contrary, because the Husband cannot take it immediately from his Companion,
and for him it is void, and good for his Wife. As if a man makes a Feoffment to
a stranger and his own wife, if livery be made to the stranger it will operate
but to the benefit of the stranger, and will be void for the Wife. So here it
is good for the wife, and the Release is good for the Husband. Further, if one
Jointenant cannot infeoffe his Companion, as it is holden in 10 E. 4. then it
will inure severally, viz. to his Companion as a Release, and to his wife for
life; for if it be no good Frankmarriage, then, it is the Estate for life, and
so it was resolved between Webb and Porter in 24 Eliz. And then they take in
Common, and severally and no Frankmarriage.

Grant.
TEnant in tail holds by a Rent, the Donor grants the services, nothing
passes; for the Rent cannot pass but as a Rent service. Lord and Tenant by
Rent and Fealty, the Lord grants the services of the Tenant saving the fealty.
Nothing passes by that Grant; for the Rent cannot pass but as a Rent service;
for a Rent Charge; or Rent Seck will not pass by those words.

The same words cannot be a Grant and a Confirmation too. If a Disseisor grants
a Rent Charge to the Disseisee and he grants it over, and after reenters, he
shall hold it discharged, Causa qua supra.

If the Lord marries the Tenant, or by any means has as high an Estate in the
Tenancy as he has in the Seignory, he cannot grant the Seignory over. If the
Tenant be in Ward, or disclaims, the Lord may grant over the Seignory. But if
the Tenant be Tenant for life of the Seignory, and the Seignory is granted to
him in Fee, he cannot grant it over; for he never had possession of it. But if
he had possession, and it is suspended by taking an Estate for life, yet he may
grant it over.

If the Parson and Ordinary grant a Rent Charge to the Patron, the Successor
shall avoid it; for the Assent of the Patron ought to be express, where the
Successor shall be bound. But if they had all granted it to A. who had granted
it to the Patron, that had been good.

If a Rent be granted for life, and by another Deed it is granted, that it
shall be lawful for the Grantee and his Heirs to distrain for the same Rent,
it must be a Rent of the same value; for the Rent determins by his death. So if
the King grants to the Mayor and Commonalty of D. the same Liberties which the
Mayor, etc. of L. has. It shall be intended such Liberties.

A. makes a Lease for life, reserving the first four years a Rose, and after a
yearly Rent of twenty shillings, the Lessor grants the twenty shillings to
commence after the end of the four years, the Grant is void; for it is all but
one Rent, and then if the Grant should be good the Grantor should have a term
in the Rose for four years, whereas before it was a Freehold; and then it is no
more but that a man has a Rent in Fee, and grants it after four years, that
Grant is void, otherwise of a Rent created de Novo. 8 H. 7. 3.

A. seized of a Rent in Fee grants it to one for twenty years from the time of
the Atturnment of the Tenant, and dies, the Tenant Atturns, if this be a good
Grant. Quaere?

Gavel kind.
A Lord in Gavel kind has two Sons, the Tenant aliens in Mortmain, the Lord
dies, the eldest Son enters into both parts, the Seignory shall descend as the
Tenancy. But now the Land (admitting a License had been obtained) being aliened
in Mortmain, the Custom is extinct.

A. seized of Gavel kind Land is impleaded, and vouches, the Vouchee enters
into Warranty, the Tenant dies, having two Sons, if the Eldest alone shall sue
Execution. Quaere?

Habendum.
A Rent is granted to two Habendum, to the one until he be married, and to the
other until he is advanced to ten pounds per annum. Quaere, if they be Tenants
in Common or Jointenants, and when one performs the Condition, if the other
shall have all? So if a Rent is granted to two Habendum, to the one for his
life, and to the other for his life, if they be Tenants in Common?

Vide Baron and Fem. Harriot.
A Fem Lessee for life by the Custom of a Manor marries by license; the
Husband dies, the Lord shall not have a Harriot, for there is no change of his
Tenant. So if Land be let to Husband and Wife for their lives, and the Husband
dies, the Lord shall not have Harriot for the same reason. If a Fem lessee for
life marries, and she dies, the Lord shall not have a Harriot, for she had no
Chattles: And the Custom may be reasonable, if in such case the Husband dies
where the Wife is seized, that he shall pay a Harriot, for if the Wife dies,
there is none due. If the Tenant devises all his Goods, yet the Lord shall have
his Harriot, for the devise takes effect after the death. If a man has two
Horses at the time of his death, one is a young one, and the other worth forty
shillings, and the Lord does not seize until two years after the death of the
Tenant, and the youngest becomes worth five pounds, the Lord shall not have
him; for he had a property presently by the death of the Tenant in the other. A
Cow has three Calves before the seizure of the Lord, the Lord may seize them
with the Cow. Quaere.

Husband and Wife and the Son purchase to them and to the Heirs of the body of
the Son begotten, the Husband dies, the Lord shall not have a Harriot. 24 E. 3.
Husband and Wife purchase land, to them and to the Heirs of the Husband, who
dies, the Lord shall not have a Harriot.

Heir.
A Rent is granted to commence after the death of the Grantee the Heir shall
take it by Descent.

A. makes a Feossment upon Condition, and if it be broke, that it shall be
lawful for him to reenter during his life, he shall enter by express
Reservation, and after his death his Heir shall enter by the provision of the
Law.

If an Encroachment of Services be made upon the Husband, if the Wife be
endowed she shall not be contributory, but the Heir cannot avoid it.

A Seignory is granted for years, the Rent being behind, the Tenant dies, the
years expire, if the Grantee shall have Debt against the Heir of the Tenant for
the Rent due before and after the death of the Tenant? Some say the Heir shall
not be charged, unless the Tenant had bound himself and his Heirs by express
words, and it shall not be esteemed the proper debt of the Heir.

If A. has a Daughter, who has a Son, a Remainder is limited to the right
Heirs females of the body of A. the Son shall take the Remainder, for he is a
purchaser; but he shall not have the land by descent which was given to A. and
the Heirs females of his body, 20 H. 6. 43. P. Newton.

Lessee for life the remainder to the right Heirs of A. who has a Son, who
dies without issue, the land shall descend to the Heirs on the part of the
Father, for the Son takes by purchase, and as Heir to A. so that the Heir of A.
must take it. If land be given to a man and to his Heirs on the part of his
Mother begotten, and his Mother is dead, and he dies without issue, the Heir on
the part of his Father shall take. Quaere?

If a man makes a Gift in tail of Land on the part of his Mother, reserving a
Rent, and dies without Issue, the Heir on the part of the Mother shall have the
Rent as incident to the Reversion.

If a man binds himself and his Heirs in twenty pounds and dies, and his
Executors have ten pounds only, an Action of Debt lies against the Heir for
all; for if the Creditor makes choice of the Executor he cannot have any remedy
against the Heir for the rest. If the Obligor makes the Obligee his Executor,
and leaves ten pound and the Debt was twenty, he may detain that and bring an
Action of Debt against the Heir for the rest; for it is a apporcioned by the
Act in Law.

If Land be given to one and the Heirs males of his body, the Remainder to the
Heirs Females of his body, the Daughter of the Son shall not have the Land. If
Land be given to one, and the Heirs males of his body, and to the Heirs females
of his body, if he has Issue male and female, they shall take by Moities by
descent severally. If a Woman has three Sons by several Husbands, and Land is
given to her and to the Heirs of her body by the first and second Husband
begotten, the two Sons shall take severally by Moities, and yet the Mother had
an Estate.

A. having two Daughters, one is attainted of Felony, a Remainder is limited to
the Heirs of A. the other shall take nothing. If a Remainder be limited to the
Heirs of B. who has a Son who is attainted, the Remainder is void, and the Fee
rests in Lessor.

Land is given to A. for life, the Remainder to B. for life, the Remainder to
the Heirs of A. who dies, B. enters and dies, a Stranger abates, the Heir of A.
shall have a Writ of Right upon the possession of A. and if Land be given to C.
and D. and to the Heirs of C. who dies, and a Recovery is had against D. and he
dies, the Heir of C. shall have a Writ of Right of all the Land.

A. binds himself and his Heirs in twenty pounds, and dies, the Executors have
Assetts, the Obligee releaseth to the Heir all Actions of Debt, the Executors
pay the Assetts to other Creditors, The Obligee may have an Action of Debt
against the Heir; for at the time of the Release he was not entitled to have an
Action against him, but if the Executors or the Heir had no Assetts at the time
of the Release, and after the Heir recovers Assetts, the Release will bar him.

If A. makes a Feoffment of Land which he has on the part of his Mother, to
the use of himself and his Heirs, it shall be to the use of the Heirs on the
part of his Father, if he dies without Issue.

A Fem sole has a Rent Seck, and marries, the Tenant of the Land grants to the
Husband and his Heirs to distrain for the Rent, the Husband and Wife die
without Issue, the distress is extinct; for the Heirs of the Husband are only
privy to distrain.

A Condition does descend upon the Heir at Common Law.

Incertainty.
IF one inseoffs another of twenty Acres, viz. of one to the use of A. and does
not show of which Acre, A. takes nothing by the Feoffment; for the possession
cannot be executed; for it was not certain which are passed to A. and A. cannot
have Election, for he is not privy.

If a Reversion be granted to one, and after to another, and the Tenant atturns
to both, neither of them shall take for the incertainty.

If Land be given to a Man and a Woman upon Condition, that which of them first
marries shall have in Fee, and they intermarry, neither of them shall have Fee.
If the Reversion be granted of black Acre, or of white Acre, if Atturnment be
good. Quaere for the incertainty.

A. gives two Acres to B. Habend. the one for life, the other in Fee without
Deed, rendering a Robe or a Rent, and does not show which he shall have for life.

A. lets two Acres, rendering a Rent on Condition, to be performed by the
Lessee, that he shall have Fee in one Acre, not showing which, and makes Livery
of both. Quaere.

Infant.
IF an Infant inseoffs two, and at his full age releaseth to one, it inures to
both.

If an Infant be forejudged he is bound for ever, but if he makes a Feoffment
of a Manor, and the Feoffee is forejudged, yet the Infant may enter into the
Manor, and distrain for the Mesnalty, the reason is, because in the first case
he was party to the Record, and in the last case the Forejudger was against the
Feoffee, who had a deseasible Title. A Recovery in Wast against an Infant will
bind him, but so it will not against his Grantee; for he had a Title to defeat
his Estate, so in a Cessavit.

Conditions and Forfeitures that will bind a Fem Covert will bind an Infant.

If an Infant makes Livery within view he shall not have an Assize if the
Feoffee enters; for it is more than a Livery in Law.

If an Infant Disseisor makes a Feoffment, and a Dissent is cast, and the
Disseisee releaseth to the Heir, yet the Infant shall have a Dum fuit infra
aetatem; for he demands the possession to which he had more right than the
Disseisee had. As if the Heir, who is in by Descent brings an Assize against
his Disseisor, it is no plea for him to plead the Release of the Disseisee,
Causa qua supra.

If a Reversion be granted to an Infant, and the Tenant atturns at his full
age, yet he may disagree; for the Grant which was the principal was in his
minority.

If an Infant makes a Lease to commence in futuro, and after makes a Feoffment,
being either at full age, or under age, the Feoffee shall not avoid the Lease.

If an Infant delivers a Deed bearing date two years after, and at the end of
the two years he is of full age, he shall not be Estopped to show the delivery
before the date.

If a Fem Tenant in tail marries an Infant, who aliens and dies, the wife
cannot enter upon the Feoffee; for she is not privy in blood to the Infant, and
privy in Estate only will not do. As if there be two Jointenants, and one is a
Minor and they are disseised, and a Dissent cast, the Infant dies, the Survivor
cannot enter as the Infant might. Neither shall a Lord by Escheat or Donor take
advantage of Infancy. If Land be given to an Infant and his Heirs Females, and
he has a Son and a Daughter, and aliens and dies, his Daughter cannot enter;
for she is but a special Heir, Quoad hoc. In the principal case if the Wife
had been Tenant in Fee simple, the Heir of the Infant shall not enter upon his
alienation, as Litt. says; for the Wife had the Right, and a Title of Entry
which was in Right cannot descend to the Heir of the Husband: but in this case,
being the Husband has given a Fee simple, and had but an Estate in tail, in
Right of his Wife, so that more is given than he had in Right of his wife,
makes this case more doubtful than Litts. but yet it seems the Heir may not
enter; for he cannot have the same Estate which his Ancestor had, and the Right
of the Estate tail survives to the Wife; for if Land be given to an Infant in
tail, who aliens and dies without Issue, his collateral Heir cannot enter; for
the Estate is determined which the Infant had at the time of the Gift; for if
an Infant be Tenant Par auter vye, and aliens, and Cesty que vye dies, the
Infant himself cannot enter, 5 E. 4. 5. But in the principal case, if the
Infant had made a Gift in tail his Issue might have entered by reason of the
Reversion, but otherwise where no Estate descends to the Heir. If Tenant in
tail to him and his Heirs Females aliens and dies, leaving Issue a Son and a
Daughter, the Son shall not enter, no more shall the Daughter, so of the
youngest Son in Borough English. If Tenant in tail infeoffs within age, and
after is attainted of Felony, his Issue shall not enter, for he is Disabled in
blood.

If an Infant be disseised, and a descent cast during nonage, and after he
comes of full age, the Heir of the Disseisor dies before his Entry; the Infant
may enter, for the Heir was never possessed; for he had but a possession in Law.

Joinder in Action.
IF two Parceners dye before Partition, and a stranger abates, the Issues shall
not join in a Mortdancester, for the Stat. of Gloucester ca. 17. is only when
one Right descends to diverse, but every issue claims her right from and by her
Mother, so that several Rights descended to them, and so out of the Stat. and
is as it was at the common Law, and therefore if Parceners are disseised, their
issues shall not join in a Writ of Entry, but shall have several Writs in
respect of their several Rights, as they shall have several Formedons. If one
has cause to have a Writ of Ayel, another of Besayel they shall not join; for
they have cause to have several Writts; But where one is entitled to have a
Writ of Mortdancester, and another Ayel, or Besayel, there they shall join. But
if none of them may have an Assize, then there is no Remedy by the Statute, 2
E. 3. 34. 48 E. 3. 14. 24 E. 3. 13.

If I recover in an Assize, and after I am disseised by the same person and
another, I shall not have a Redisseisin; for it must be against the same
person. If two Parceners make partition upon Record of an Advowson, the Eldest
presents first, and after the youngest, and the Eldest and a Stranger present
in the turn of the youngest, the youngest shall not have a Scire facias against
them; for the Stat. of Westminster. 2. does give it against those that were parties
to the Record, but she may have it against her Sister: But in the first case a
Redisseisin does not lie against the Redisseisor; for he may plead Jointenancy,
but in the last case it is no plea that another presented with her; for she may
have a Quare Impedit against both, or several Actions, as a man may in
Trespass made by two. So if the Lord distrain his Tenant, and he sues a
Replevin, and after the Lord distrains the beast of a stranger and another
beast of his Tenant, the Tenant shall have a Recaption. But if the Lord had
distrained again the beasts which his Tenant and the stranger had in common,
there he could not, because for the last distress they ought to join, and the
stranger cannot join in the Recaption.

If a stranger makes a Rescous to the Lord, the Lord shall not have an Assize
against him alone without the Tenant, because he cannot be said Tenant of the
Rent, but against the Pernor he may have an Assize only. And if there be Lord,
Mesne, and Tenant, and the Tenant makes Rescous to the Lord, ^an Assize is not
maintainable only against the Tenant. And if there be Lord, two jointenants,
Mesnes, and Tenant, and one of the Mesnes, and the Tenant makes Rescous the
Lord shall not have an Assize against one only, but he ought to name both the
Mesnes.

Two Fems Jointenants in Fee have Husbands, who make several Feofments of
their Moities, and die, the Wives shall not join in one Writ of Right; for
their Right was discontinued at several times. So if one Jointenant disseiseth
the other and makes a Feofment within Age, and dies; or if two Infants
Jointenants make several Feofments, and one dies, the other has no Remedy for
the Moity; but otherwise if wrong had been made to them at one time, though
several ways.

If there be issue of two Parceners, one dies, and the other endows the Wife,
one Action shall be maintained against both, v. 9 E. 4. 14. against Tenant by
the Courtesy, and the other Parcener, 21 E. 3. A Scire facias brought against
Tenant by the Courtesy, and the other Parcener, and good.

Land is given to four, Habendum, one Moity to the first two, the other Moity
to the other two, the first two are Jointenants with themselves, and Tenants in
common with the last two, and so e converso, they are Jointenants of a Moity,
and Tenants in common of the whole, and two Praecipes shall be sued against the
four, and by the four, but for the two joint Praecipes for and against them.

Jointenants.
TWo Jointenants in Fee, one a Minor makes a Lease for life, he of full age
dies, the other recovers a Moity in a Dum fuit infra, etc. Tenant for life
dies, the Heir of the other Jointenant enters, the Infant outs him, he brings
an Assize, some think it is maintainable. For when he brought a Dum fuit infra,
etc. and recovered a Moity, now he defeats the Lease for his moity, and makes
it, as if the other had made the Lease for life only, which makes a severance
of the Jointure.

Two Jointenants by twelve pence, one grants all that belongs to him upon
Condition, the Lord grants the Seignory of one with Atturnment, the Feoffor
Enters for breach of the Condition, he shall hold by twelve pence, and the
other by twelve pence also; for there is no Apporcionment.

Though one Jointenant cannot infeoffe his Companion, yet his Companion and
another he may, and the Livery made to the other shall vest the Estate in both.

If a Reversion be granted to Tenant for life, and a stranger, the Jointure of
the Fee is severed; for Tenant for life has a Fee in the moity Executed. If
the Reversion be granted to Tenant in tail and a Stranger, the Fee remains in
Jointure, And if the Husband be Tenant for life, and the Reversion is granted
to him and his Wife, the Jointure remains; for there is no Moities between
them. If a Lease be made to two, Habendum one Moity to one, the other to the
other for life, and after a Confirmation is made to them and their Heirs, the
Jointure of the Fee is severed; for the Confirmation inures according to the
Nature of the Estate. But if the Reversion had been granted to them in Fee they
had been Joyntenants; for the particular Estate had been drowned. If there be
two Tenants in Common for life, and the Reversion is granted to two Jointly,
and one Purchases the Estate of one Tenant for life, and the other, of the
other: The Jointure is severed; For the Purchase being at several times,
presently upon each purchase the fee was executed. If a Seignory be granted in
fee to two, one takes an Estate of the Tenancy pur auter vye, cesty que vye
dies. The Jointure remains, because they were Jointenants at the beginning.

Two Jointenants for life, and one is bound in a Statute, and then grants his
Estate, yet it is liable to execution, during his life,, but it is otherwise of
an Estate for years, for in the one the Land is bound by the Statute, in the
other not.

If a Recovery be had against one Jointenant, his Companion shall not avoid it,
for the Right was bound, but it is otherwise of Charges, for the possession is
only chargeable. If one Jointenant in Fee takes a Lease by Indenture of his
Moity from a stranger, the Survivor shall avoid it.

Land is given to two and the Heirs of their bodies, the remainder to their
right Heirs, they are not Jointenants of the Fee.

If one Jointenant makes a Lease for five years, on Condition that the Lessee
does such an Act by a day, he shall have for twenty years, and he dies before
the day, the Condition is void as to the Survivor.

If there be two Jointenants for life, one makes a Lease for years and dies,
the Survivor shall not avoid it; for the same Estate which he had continues
now, and there is no difference if they had a Feesimple, some think the
contrary; for the Survivor has not the Freehold of his Companion, as he has
the Fee where they are Jointenants in Feesimple; for his Estate determins by
his death. But all agree that if A. and B. be Jointenants for the life of C.
and A. makes a Lease for life and dies, B. shall not avoid it; for the Estate
which he had continues.

Two Jointenants in Fee are disseised by the Father of one, who dies, and the
son enters, he is remitted to all the land, and his Companion shall enter with
him. And it is not like the case where two are disseised, and a Dissent cast
during the Nonage of one, and he enters, and is remitted for a Moity, his
Companion shall not enter, because that this privilege is given him in respect
of his person more than in respect of the Land. Neither is it like the case
where Tenant in tail enfeoffs one Daughter, and she dies, she being within age,
she is remitted, and yet her Companion shall not have Advantage of it, because
the Right was not in them before.

If a Fem Jointenant for years takes Husband, and she dies, the Survivor shall
have all.

Two Jointenants of two Acres, the Land is confirmed to them in Fee, of one
Acre to the use of one, and of the other to the use of the other, they are
several Tenants of the Freehold of the Acres; for the Freehold is drowned to
the Confirmation to the use.

Tenant for life makes a Lease for life, the remainder to his Lessor and a
Stranger, they are not Jointenants, but the Stranger shall take all; for he
could not give a Fee to him that had it before. As if Tenant in tail infeosfs
the Donor, or if one Jointenant his Companion and a Stranger, the Stranger
takes all.

If two Jointenants makes a Lease for life, and one grants his part of the
Reversion during the life of the Lessee, some think this is a severance of the
Jointure.

If one Jointenant makes a Lease for years, the Remainder to the right Heirs of
A. if the Lessor dies in the life of A. the Survivor shall have the Reversion;
for the Lease for years was no severance of the Jointure, neither could it
support the contingent remainder.

Judgment.
IN Debt upon a Recovery in trespass, the plaintiff recovers there where the
action was brought, a Writ of Error depending in B. R. upon trespass, and after
the Judgment given in debt the Judgment in trespass is reversed. Quaere what
remedy he shall have for the debt recovered? for it is a Recovery in the C. B.
which he cannot reverse in another Court, and though he might, yet the
Execution of the debt being past; he cannot be restored to that by the
Reversall in the first Writ of Error in the trespass.

Lease.
IF a Lease be made for years, and after the Lessor makes another Lease for
life to commence after the end of the term, the second Lease is void although
there be Atturnment; for a Freehold cannot pass out of any person that has a
greater Estate, reserving an Estate until the Freehold commences: but if the
Lease had been but for years it had been otherwise, and in the mean time the
Lessee shall have the Rent reserved upon the first Lease, for a Lease for years
is nothing but a Contract. If a Lease be made for ten years to commence at
Michaelmas, and after he makes a Lease for twenty years to commence at Easter,
the second Lease is good for ten years, though the first Lessee surrenders
before; for it was void for ten years at the first: by the same reason if one
makes a Lease for life, and after makes a Lease for years to commence
presently, the second Lease is void although the first Lessee dies within a
year after.

If Lessee pur auter vye makes a Lease for twenty years by Indenture, and after
purchases the Reversion in Fee, and Cesty que vye dies, the Lessor may enter
upon the Lessee although the years continue; for he has a new Estate and may
confess the Conclusion, and avoid it. But if A. lets Lands in which he has
nothing, and after purchases the Land, the Lessee may Estop him although he
had not any Estate at the time of the Lease, so he cannot confess the Lease
and avoid it, as he may in the other case; for in this case the Lease took
effect by way of Estopple, but in the other case there was an Interest conveyed
at first.

If the Patron grants the next avoidance, and after he, the Ordinary and
Incumbent make a Lease of the Rectory for twenty years, the Incumbent of the
first Grantee shall avoid the Lease, but if he dies during the Lease, the
Lessee shall enjoy it during the rest of the years against the Successor. And
if Land be given to Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs of the Husband, he makes
a Lease for years and dies, after the death of the Wife the Lessee shall enjoy
the Residue of the years against the Heir of the Husband; for the Lease did
once take effect. But where a Lease for life is made, and a Lease for years to
begin presently, that was void at the beginning against all persons, and
therefore can never take effect. If the Donor disseiseth the Tenant in tail and
makes a Lease for years, and the Tenant in tail dies without Issue, the Lessee
shall have the Residue of the term against the Donor; but if Tenant in tail
makes a Lease for years, and the Donor confirms, and the Issue outs the Termor
and dies without Issue, the Lessee shall not enjoy his term; for in the one
case he claims from the Donor, and in the other from the Donee.

If a Lease be made to A. for life, and twenty years over, he shall have the
years although livery be not made of the Land.

If a lease be made for the lives of A. and B. and A. dies, the lease shall
continue for the life of B. But if two make a lease for sixty years, if they
two shall so long live, if either of them die the Estate is determined; for
that was not a limitation but a Condition. But if a lease be made during the
time that A. and B. shall inhabit within London, and one of them dwells in
another place, the lease is determined, for it is a collateral determination.

If I license one to occupy my land until the Corn that is growing upon him is
ripe, that is a good lease.

Lessee for twenty years makes a lease for ten years, and then makes a lease to
the same lessee for ten years to commence after the determination of the first
ten years, the last ten years are not out of the first lessee, and therefore
the second lessee shall have the Rent which was reserved by the first lessor
during the first ten years. Quaere.

A. makes a lease for twenty years, and then makes another lease for forty
years to C. to commence after the expiration of the first lease, and then he
makes a lease to the first lessee for thirty years, the lease of C. shall not
begin presently; for nothing extinguishes and avoids the lease but the taking
the second lease. And then the lease to C. is an impediment that the second
lease cannot commence, and therefore the first lease is not determined.

Tenant in tail marries, and makes a lease for years, the Wife endowed shall
avoid the lease for her time, but after her decease the lease will stand good
against the Heir if the Heir accepts the Rent. If Tenant in tail makes a lease
for years, and marries, and dies without issue, the Donor avoids the lease, and
the Wife recovers her Dower, the Lessee shall enjoy it against her.

A. makes a lease for forty years, Provided, that if B. dies within the term,
that it shall be but for twenty; A. dies at the end of four and twenty years,
the lessor brings an Action of Waste, for waste done between the three and
twenty and four and twenty years: some think it is maintainable in the tenuit,
for the term continues until the death of B. If a Rent had been granted for
forty years with such a Proviso, and he dies, ut supra, the Tenant of the Land
may have an Action of Account for the Rent received after the twenty years; for
now upon the matter the Grant ended at twenty years.

If a Lease be made of Land to me during my life, and the life of B. that is
but an Estate for my own life; for the greater drowns the lesser. If a Lease be
made to two for forty years, if they shall so long live, and one dies, the
Lease determins; for it is a Condition and not a Limitation. So if the Lease
had been so long as A. and B. shall be Justices, etc. A. lets during the life
of Baron and Fem, the Lessee grants during the Coverture.

Limitation.
IF Land be given to one and the Heirs males of his body, the Remainder to the
Heirs Females of his body, the Daughter of the Son shall not take by this
Limitation. If Land be given, Habendum to him and the Heirs males of his body,
and to him and the Heirs Females of his body, if he shall take it as a
Remainder? Quaere. But Litt. faith in the last case but one, that the Warranty
of the Father shall be lineal to the Daughter. If Land be given to one and the
Heirs Males of his body, and the Heirs Females of his body, if he has Issue
Male and Female, they shall take by Moities severally by descent. So if a Woman
has three Sons by several Husbands, and Land is given to the Woman and to the
Heirs of her first and second Husband, some think the two Sons shall take
severally by Moities, and yet it was but one Estate in the Woman.

A Feoffment is made to the use of I. and after to the use of the Feoffor and
his Heirs, the Feoffor does not take it by Remainder; for the Limitation to
himself is void; for the Law says as much, but it is in him as a Reversion.
But if the Feoffment had been to the use of the Feoffor for life, there the
Feoffee shall have the Fee to his own use.

If a man makes a Lease for life to the use of A. and his Heirs, there A. bath
a Fee determinable.

Land is given to a man and to two women Cousins of the Donor in Frankmarriage,
or to a man, and to two women, and to the Heirs of their bodies begotten, or to
two men and to two women, and to the Heirs of their bodies begotten, in every
of these cases each has an Estate tail in one part, and shall be Jointenants
of the Freehold, and in none of these cases there shall be a special tail. So
Land given to three, one Moity to Baron and Fem in Frankmarriage, or in
special tail, and another Moity to the same man, and another woman in special
tail, or when it is given to a man, and to two women, or two men and two women,
and the Heirs of their bodies, this is as much as to say, to the Heirs of all
their bodies, so that by the words, the Heir that must inherit must be Heir of
all their bodies, which is impossible: and being the words cannot be performed
literally, the Law will make the best Construction, and make them several
Estates tail in every of them, and joint Freeholds, Quod nota.

If Land be given to two, to the one for life, and to the other for years, they
are Tenants in Common. But if a Gift be made to Baron and Fem, and to a third
person, that is, to the third person for life, to the Husband in tail, and to
the Wife for years, if the third shall take the moity? Quaere how the Husband
and Wife shall take jointly, or severally, or how much severally?

If Tenant for life makes a Lease for life, the Remainder to the Lessor and a
Stranger, some think the Stranger shall take all; for he cannot give a Fee to
him that had a Fee before; as if one Jointenant infeoffs his Companion and a
Stranger, and if he had made a Lease Pur auter vye, the Remainder ut supra,
there perhaps it would inure jointly, but the limitation of the Fee here works
by wrong, and it is better for the Lessor that the Stranger takes all; for then
he may have his Action for all.

Livery and Seisin.
IF a man makes livery of one Acre in the name of that and another, which he
has for life in tail in right of his Wife, or of his Parsonage, or Bishopric,
all pass. But if it be in the name of an Acre, which he has for years, or as
Guardian, or by reason of an Execution, it is otherwise.

If a man makes a Feofment to A. and the Mayor and Commonalty of London, and
makes livery to one in the name of both, none takes, but him that took the
livery.

If Tenant for life enfeoffs the Wife of the lessor, and the lessor makes the
livery, yet it is a Forfeiture.

If a Feofment be made of a Manor with an Advowson appendant, if livery be not
made the Advowson will not pass in gross by the delivery of the Deed.

A Disseisee cannot make a Letter of Attorney to deliver seisin, for he has
not possession: but if he delivers the letter of Attorney as an Escrowl, to
deliver seisin after his Entry, it may be good. If a man makes a lease for
life, and after makes a Feofment with a letter of Attorney, etc. and after
Tenant for life dies, if he may now make livery?

If a Feofment be made to A. and a Fem sole, with a letter of Attorney to
deliver seisin, and before seisin they intermarry, and then seisin is
delivered, they shall take by moities.

A. makes a Feofment of three Acres, and after purchases another Acre, and
delivers seisin in that Acre in the name of the rest, if the other shall pass,
Quaere?

If two Jointenants make a Feofment with a Letter of Atturny to deliver seisin,
and one makes a Feoffment and Livery in person, it is a Countermand of the
whole Livery; for he that took the Livery has no privity with the other as to
that.

Livery made to the particular Tenant within view is not good to him in
Remainder; for it can benefit none but him that took it; And if there be two
particular Tenants with a Remainder over some, that Livery made to one will not
transfer the Remainder. And if a Lease be made to A. and B. upon Condition,
that if A. does such an Act, that he shall have Fee, and Livery is made to B.
only, that will not enlarge the Estate of A. for he that took the Livery has
no privity with the other as to that.

Livery cannot enlarge an Estate if the determination of it be certain.

Market overt.
IF my Goods are stolen, and I sell them in Market overt for a certain sum,
the Vendor has no Remedy for his money; for the Contract was void; for if one
buys goods in Market overt knowing them to be stolen, the property is not
changed, no more is it here; for the Vendor knew they were stolen from himself.

If he which knows the Goods were stolen, and another buys them in Market
overt, and the Stranger dies, he shall have all the Goods, and the property was
not altered at the first, but for a Moity.

If Goods be stolen and are sold in a Market overt, and after he that sold them
buys them again, yet the first Owner cannot take them; for the property was
altered by the first sale.

Nuisance.
IF one has a Mill or House which falls down, and in the mean time a Nuisance
is levied, and then it is rebuilt, he shall not have an Assiz^ of Nuisance, nor
abate it; for it was not made to the Nuisance of his Frank Tenement; for it was
not then in being, but the Nuisance is elder than the Freehold. Some think all
is one, if the Nuisance had been levied in the time of the old house.

Obligation.
IF A. has two Daughters, and binds himself and his Heirs in an Obligation to
the Eldest, and dies seized of Lands, and leaves Assetts to his Executors, the
Obligation is discharged; for it cannot be apporcioned.

If two are bound jointly, and one delivers the Deed at one time, and the other
at another, yet it is a good joint Obligation.

If an Obligation be made to a Fem sole and another, and the Fem marries and
dies, the other shall have the whole duty; for a Chose in action does survive.

Occupant.
A Lease is made to one for the lives of A. and B. the Lessee makes a Lease for
the life of A. only, if the second Lessee dies, living A. the Occupant shall
have it.

If Land be given to two, to one for the life of A. and to the other for the
life of B. if one dies, the other shall make himself a Title against an
Occupant.

If a Lease be made upon Condition, that if the Rent be behind, the Lessor
shall enter and retain, and the Lessor enters and dies, his Heir shall have it
against an Occupant.

If I am Lessee for the life of C. and I grant my Estate to D. upon Condition,
that if D. dies, living C. that it shall be lawful for me to re-enter. Quaere,
if this Condition be sufficient for me to enter upon an Occupant?

If a man commits Felony, and the Lord grants his Seignory, and after the man
makes a Feofment upon Condition, and is Attainted, and obtains his pardon, and
after Reenters for ^reach of the Condition and dies, if the Occupant shall
have the Land, or the Lord, or the Issue, is the Question?

A. makes a Feoffment to B. Habendum to him so long as Paul's Steeple shall
stand, B. dies without Heir. Quaere if the Lord may enter by Escheat, or an
Occupant shall have it?

Outlawrie.
IF a man grants to another one of his Horses, until the Grantee has made
Election there is no property vested in him, neither shall he forfeit it by
Outlawry.

Parceners and Partition.
A. seized of two Acres has a Son and a Daughter by one venture, and a Son by
another, grants a Rent out of one Acre to the Son, who dies, the Father dies,
the Daughters make Partition, the Land charged is allotted to the youngest, she
shall hold it charged with all to the Eldest, 34 Ass. P. 15.

A. has Issue two Daughters, and holds Land of the Eldest by Suite and an
Hawke, and dies, the Daughters assign a third part to the Mother in Dower, and
then makes Partition, Tenant in Dower shall not be contributory for any part of
the Services; for the Reversion remains in Parcenary between them two: for they
cannot make Partition thereof, and then the whole Seignory is in suspense, and
also the youngest Daughter shall be discharged of the Tenure; and yet if Land
holden by an Hawk descend upon the Seignoresse and her Sister, and they make
Partition, the Seignoresse shall have the Hauk, but there no suite; for by the
Stat. of Marlbridge ca. 9. the Eldest ought to do it, and the youngest is to be
contributory, but she being Seignoresse cannot do it to her self, ergo, etc.
But the Reason in the principal case why the youngest shall be discharged, is,
because the Seignory is in suspense for parcel, and it cannot be in esse for
the rest: But if a Tenant has two Daughters, and the Lord seises the youngest
within age, he shall distrain the other for the Moity of the Seignory and the
Act of Law shall not prejudice him. Quaere, for the Seizure is his own Act.

If one Sister be Seignoress, to whom the Tenancy is descended, she shall not
have the Rent nor other Charge before Partition, but if she had the tithes she
should have had them after severance from the nine years before Partition; for
they lie in Prendre, and she takes them as Parson.

Before Partition one Parcener makes a Lease of an Acre to I. S. for twenty
years, and they after make Partition, so that that Acre is allotted to her, it
seems she shall out the Lessee; for the Partition has relation from the death
of theAncestor, and yet at this time she had full power to make a Lease of the
Moity of it. So it seems she shall avoid a Rent Charge granted by her Sister.
If the Husband makes a Lease of an Aere which is after assigned to his Wife by
a Recovery in Dower upon a Title which she had at that time, she shall avoid
the Lease, etc. forall. Quaere in both cases. If one Parcener recovers pro rata
against her Companion, she shall avoid the Charge made by her in the Land
recovered as an Exchanger shall do.

Land recovered in value after Partition by one Parcener shall be rateable.

A. seized of two Acres has two Daughters, and grants a Rent Charge out of one
Acre to the Eldest and dies, they make Partition, the Eldest has the Land
Charged, and the other being impleaded Recovers against the Eldest pro rata,
she shall hold the Land Recovered in value pro rata with the portion of the
Rent.

If Parceners make Partition, and one aliens in Fee, a Stranger by a Title
Paramount enters upon the other, she shall not occupy the Land with the
Feoffee; for the privity is dissolved; for she cannot recover pro rata; If A.
be seized of one Acre in tail, and of another in Fee, has two Daughters, they
make Partition, the younger has the Acre in tail, the Lord of whom the Acre in
Fee is holden shall take notice of this Partition, it seems otherwise for a
Donor of an Acre in tail; for he shall not be bound by that Partition unduly
made, no more than the Issue in tail shall be, but the parties that made the
Partition, being of full age are concluded; but if one Acre in tail be allotted
to one, and the other Acre in tail to the other, the Donor is concluded.

If Partition be of Land in tail, and a Rent is granted for equality of
Partition, that Rent shall be in tail, 2 H. 7. 5. But if there be Parceners of
two Acres, one in tail, and the other in Fee, and she which has the Acre in
Fee grants the Rent to the other for Equality, that Rent shall be but in tail,
but if that Rent had been granted to her which had the Fee, it shall be in Fee;
for if she dies without Issue her Heir shall have it so long as the other has
Issue of her body; for til that ceases thePartition stands: but if there be
four Acres, three in Fee, and one in tail, and she which has the third Acre
grants a Rent for equality, thatshall be a Fee Quia sequitur magis principale.

Three Parceners in tail make a Feoffment with Warranty, the Eldest first, and
the youngest after dies without Issue, the second has Issue and dies, the
Issue brings a Formedon, she shall recover a Moity of the part of the eldest,
and a moity of the part of the youngest, and no more; for the Warranty of the
Eldest was collateral to the second for the part of the second; for the other
part she could not make her self Heir to her that made the Warranty, but yet
for the part of the Eldest, the Warranty is Lineall to the second and youngest
Daughter; for they might Inherit as Heir to her, and for the part of the
youngest as to her self and her Heirs, for their third part the Warranty of the
Eldest is collateral; for the youngest or her Heirs could not make themselves
Heirs of that third part to the Eldest who made the Warranty, so that the
Warranty of the Eldest shall enure, as aforesaid. Then as to the youngest, who
died last, her Warranty as to the second Sisters part is collateral, and to
her Issue; for they cannot make themselves Heirs to her who made the Warranty,
etc. But as to a Moity of the Eldest, it is Lineall, and as to the other Moity
collateral; for by possibility the youngest and the second might have had the
part of the Eldest by Descent, if the Eldest had died first, as she did, then
if the youngest dies without Issue, the Moity of the third part which descends
to her from the Eldest, descends to the second as Heir to the youngest. Then as
to the other third part of the Eldest, the Warranty of the youngest is
collateral to the second; for the second as to the Moity of that third part
could not have been Heir to the youngest, who made the Warranty, but ought to
have been as immediate Heir to the Eldest, and as to her own part her Warranty
as the second is Lineall; for by possibility she might have had that part as
Heir to the youngest, then being the youngest is dead without Issue, the
Warranty of the Eldest as to a Moity of the part of the youngest is Lineal, and
as to the other part of that part it is collateral1 to the second; for by
possibility the youngest might first have died, and then her part descends to
the Eldest and the second, and so a Moity of that might descend from the Eldest
to the second, and therefore the Warranty of the Eldest shall be Lineall for
one Moity of the part of the youngest, and for the other Moity of the part of
the youngest it is Collateral, and so the Warranty of the Eldest which upon the
descent was Collateral to the youngest; for the part of the youngest, is now
changed for the Moity, and made Lineal for the Moity. v. 9. H. 5. 12. 4 H. 7.
18. Three Parceners make Partition, the Eldest has one Acre in Fee, the second
another Acre in Fee, the third one in tail, all being of full age, the Eldest
dies, her Issue enters upon the youngest (as she may) the second may enter
also, and the Partition is defeated; for when the youngest is outed, the second
shall have part of that to which the Issue of the Eldest is remitted, as she
would if she had recovered in a Formedon, if the second may not enter it will
be a mischief; for she cannot have Aid, being the other holds pro indiviso.

A. has two Daughters by one Venture, and a third by another, the youngest is
seized of three Acres of equal value, and grants a Rent of three shillings to
the Father in Fee, and then infeoffs the second of one Acre, who dies without
Issue, so that it descends to the Eldest, the Father dies, the Eldest shall
have the Rent, but if the second had infeoffed the Eldest of the Acre, then she
should have nothing; for in the first case she has the Land by descent, and
the Rent also, and therefore the Rent shall be apporcioned, but in the other
case she has the Land by purchase, in which case the Rent shall be extinct,
though she has the Rent by descent, or not, and though the purchase was before
the descent or after. And if a man has a Rent of twenty shillings out of
twenty Acres of equal value, and one Acre descends to his Wife, all the Rent
is suspended; for it cannot be apporcioned when he is seized of part of the
Land in auter droit; but if she dies, and he is Tenant by the Courtesy it shall
be apporcioned; for the Land continues in him by the Act of the Law, which is
equal to a descent; And if a Rent be in tall, and parcel of the Land descends
to him in Fee, or the Rent be in Fee, and parcel of the Land descends to him
in tail, there must be no apporcionment.

I. dies having two Daughters, one is attainted of Felony, a lease is made for
life, the remainder to the right Heirs of I. the other shall take nothing in
remainder, because she which is attainted is living.

Particeps Criminis.
IF the Lord procures one to disseise the Tenant, and the Disseisor cesses, and
the Lord recovers against him, he shall retain it against the Disseisee; for by
the procurement he is no Disseisor, as it appears, 50 E. 3. 2. But see
Littleton contra in his Chapter of Remitter; for he had cause to recover de
puisne temps: but otherwise if he had title of Cessavit at the time of the
procurement and disseisin, Quaere, if he had ceased one year before the
disseisin and another year after? as if the Issue in tail procures one to
disseise the Disseisor of his Father, whose Heir is in by descent, against whom
the Father recovers and dies, the Issue shall retain: but if he himself had
recovered against the Disseisor upon a title then in being to him at that time,
he shall not be remitted. If one has Title of Formedon, and he procures one to
out the Tenant, to the intent that he may recover against him, and a stranger
outs him, and after I S. recovers upon a Title puisne to the procurer, and the
other recovers against him by a Formedon, he is there remitted. And if two
Jointenants have a Title of Action, where their entry is taken away, and one
procures a stranger ( ut supra) against whom they two recover, and he which was
party dies, the other is remitted to all, but if he which did not procure had
died first, the other should not be remitted but to a moity, Quaere?

Payment.
A Rent charge is issuing out of two Acres, the Tenant of the land makes a
Feofment of one, the Grantee may distrain in one, or the other for all; but if
one Tenant pays to him the Rent, if the other be distreined he shall plead the
payment by his Companion, for it discharges the whole Tenancy.

Place.
IF A. leases land in two Counties, rendering a Rent, it is one entire Rent, and
he may distrain in one County for all, but he must have several Assizes, and
in every County make his plaint for all the Rent: but it seems that upon a
Rescous in one County he shall have an Assize in the other, Quaere.

Pleas.
IF a man has a Wife, and makes several Feofments with warranty, and dies,
the Wife brings Dower against one of the Feoffees, he may plead that the Heir
has endowed her having regard unto all the land; for there is a great privity
betwixt the Tenant and the Heir, for the Tenant may vouch the Heir, and it
seems that he might plead that one Feoffee had endowed the Wife, for it goes in
discharge of the Tenancy.

Some think that Guardian in fact in Dower shall not plead detinue of the body
of the Heir, for none can plead that but he whose title commenced when the
Title of Dower commenced: but the Guardian in droit may plead it, and if the
Heir make a Feofment, the Feoffee shall not plead detinue of Charters in dower.

If an Obligation be delivered in owell maine to I. who breaks the seal, In
detinue If he should not plead a release to the Obligor if it would be heard,
and yet Paston in 9 H. 6. 19. b. says, that the Jailer cannot plead a Releafe
made to him that escapes.

Possession.
IF the Tenant dies without Heir, the Law casts the possession of the Tenancy
upon the Lord before Entry, but if the Tenant is attainted of Felony, he shall
not have the possession in fact or in Law before Entry.

If one Jointenant leases his part for years, a stranger enters, claiming the
moity of the other, who waives the possession; it seems it is a Disseisin to
him, though the Termor continues in, for they are Tenants in common, and though
the possession of the Lessee be the possession of him in Reversion, sc. his
Companion: but e contra if the Termor had waived the possession and the other
continues in, it seems that he in Reversion cannot be out of possession, for
his Joint Companion held it.

Two Jointenants in Fee of a Rent Charge, a Stranger takes it to the use of I.
one releaseth to the Pernor, the other to the Tenant, if by the last release he
shall be said in possession ab initio, then the first release to the pernor is
void; for the possession of one is the Possession of both.

Possessio fratris.
A. Makes a Lease for life, and dies, having a Son and a Daughter by one
venture, and a Son by another, the Eldest Son grants the Reversion in tail, the
Tenant atturns, and he dies, the Grantee in tail dies without Issue, Tenant for
life dies, it seems the Daughter shall have the Land, not the youngest Son.

The Disseisee dies having a Son and a Daughter by one venture, and a Son by
another, the Son after the descent enters upon the Heir of the Disseisor, and
dies without Issue, the Daughter shall not have the Land; for his possession
was tortious, if the Father dies seized, and the Eldest Son makes a Lease for
life, the mother recovers Dower against the Lessee, the Son dies, the Daughter
shall have the Reversion, and not the Son. But if Tenant for life dies after
the death of the Son, and during the life of the Tenant in Dower, Quaere, who
shall have the Reversion, the Son or Daughter? If A. makes a Lease for life,
and dies, his Eldest Son disseises Tenant for life and dies, Tenant for life
dies, the Son shall have the Land from the Daughter, which is put in the book
of Ass. and the principal case is, the Eldest Son endows his Mother and dies,
if the youngest Son, or the collateral Heir of the Eldest shall have the Land.

The Father dies seized of two Acres, theSon enters into one saying nothing, if
that shall be a sufficient possession of the other Acre, to make the Sister to
be Heir. Quaere. Some think it shall not. If a Disseisor or Feoffor on
Condition enter into one Acre saying nothings there no more shall be gained by
that Entry; but in the principal case, if the Acres had descended one from the
Father, and another from the Mother, then the Entry into one is an Entry but
into that only. So if it had been on a Title for several Conditions, 9 H. 7.
25. So the Entry of the Bastard into one Acre shall divest no morethan that;
for the Mulier had a possession in Law. Quaere.

If a man makes a Lease for years and dies, this possession in Law of the
Reversion is sufficient to make the sister Heir.

Quare Impedit.
IN a Quare^ Impedit against the Patron and Incumbent it is no plea for the
Incumbent, to say, that he has been in six months upon the presentation of the
Patron; for none can plead Plenalty, but he who by such plea may gain the
Patronage, and against whom a Writ of Right of Advowson is maintainable, Quod
vide in 16 E. 4. 11. But in a Quare Impedit against the Ordinary and Incumbent,
the Incumbent shall say, that he has been in six months upon the Collation of
the Bishop by reason of Laps, because no Patronage is gained by that, so note
the Diversity, 2 R. 2. Encumbent 4. 18 E. 3. Quare Imp. 4 8. 13 H. 8. 14. 14 H.
8. 31. 39 E. 3. 30.

Recognizance, vide Statute. Record.
IF a Record in the C. B. be pleaded in any other Court of the King, where it
is requisite to be produced, it must be exemplisied under the Great Seal of
England, and the Seal of the Court is not sufficient, but if he pleads it in C.
B. there if he shows the Exemplification under the Seal of the Court it
suffices; for in the one case it is Test meipso, and in the other, Test the
Chief Justice.

Relation.
IF a Feoffment be made of a Manor when Atturnment is had the services pass
ab initio. If a Lease be made for life the Remainder to the King, and Livery is
made, and after th e Deed is enrolled, now the Remainder passes to the King, as
a Remainder, ab initio.

If Land be given to Baron and Fem in Fee, he dies, and the Wife waives the
possession, and recovers her Dower against the Heir, she shall recover Damages;
for by her refusal the Husband shail be said to die seized. Keylway 104. p. 14.

If a man who has a Villein delivers an Escrowl of Enfranchisement, to be
delivered to his Villein seven years after, and before the end of the seven
years he dies, and the Deed is after delivered, that will be a good
Enfranchisement by relation.

Vide Barg. and Sale.

Release.
LOrd, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant holds in Socage, and the Mesne in
Chivalry, the Tenant makes a Gift in Frankmarriage, the Mesne releaseth to the
Donor, the four degrees pass, the Donor seiseth the Ward of the Issue, and
enters into the Land, and he brings an Action of trespass, some think it is
maintainable.

If Lessee for years makes a Feoffment to two, a Release to one shall inure to
both.

If Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life, the Remainder for life, and
releaseth to him in Remainder, and his Heirs, if the first Tenant for life dies
in the life of Tenant in tail, it is a Discontinuance.

The Tenant holds ten Acres by ten pence, and makes a Feoffment of one, the
Lord grants the Rent, reserving the Fealty, the Tenant Atturns, the Grantee
releaseth all his Right in the Land to the Tenant, yet he shall have one penny;
for the Feoffment severed the Seignory, and by the Grant two Rents passed, and
but one is extinct by the Release, viz. the Rent of Nine pence.

Two Disseisors make a Gift in tail to hold in Chivalry, the Disseisee
releaseth to one, the Donee dies; some think this Release will inure to both.

Two Women disseise another, and make a Feofment to their Father, who dies, so
that the Land discends to them, the Disseisee Releaseth to one, it shall inure
to both; for betwixt themselves they are in by Title. If a Disseisor dies
seized having two Daughters Bastards, and the Disseisee releafeth to one of
them, that shall inure to both.

A. makes a Feoffment to two upon Condition, which is broken, the Feoffor
releaseth to one, it shall operate to both; for they are not in by wrong, and a
Release where it countervails an Entry and Feoffment does not extend to Titles,
If a Disseisee enters upon two Disseisors, and they recover falsely in an
Assize, and he Releaseth to one, that shall inure to both; for between
themselves and the Disseisee also they are in by Title. If an Infant infeoffs
two, and at his full age releaseth to one, it goes to both. If two Disseisors
make a Feoffment, and take back an Estate, a Release to one inures to both; for
though in Respect of the Disseisee they be Disseisors, yet in Relation to
themselves they are in by Title. So if a Disseisor makes a Feoffment, and takes
back an Estate to himself for life, a Release to him will go to him in
Remainder.

If a Disseisor makes a Lease for life, and the Lessee makes a Feofment, and
the Disseisee releaseth to the Feoffee, the right of Entry which the Disseisee
had is taken away; for a Release of the Disseisee will avoid all rights of
entry, but not Titles.

If a Disseisor grants a Rentcharge, and is disseised, and a Release is made
to the second Disseisor, the Charge remains, but the Dower of the Wife not; for
the one is executed, and the other executory only. If two Disseiors make a
lease for life, with a Remainder in fee, the Disseisee releaseth to the Tenant
for life, the Wife of the first Disseisor shall be endowed. If my Tenant for
life is disseised by A. who is disseised by B. to whom I release, the Wife of
A. shall be endowed; and if Tenant for life dies, A. may enter upon B. and
retain for ever.

After the Vouchee has entered into Warranty, an Ancestor collateral of the
Demandant releaseth to the Vouchee with warranty and dies; now the Vouchee
cannot plead this Warranty against the Demandant, for the release was void; for
though the Vouchee shall be Tenant to the Demandant, yet he shall not be so to
a Stranger, for if a stranger will release to him after he has entered into
Warranty, the Release is void. But if an Ancestor collateral had released to
the Tenant after the Entry of the Vouchee into Warranty, the Vouchee may plead
it. Quaere in the first case, though the Release be void, yet if the Warranty
shall not be good?

A Feofment is made rendering a Rent, and upon default of payment a re-entry,
the Rent is behind, and then the Lessor releaseth the Rent.

There is a difference between a Releafe in Fact and in Law. If the Tenant
makes a Lease for life, and the Lord releaseth to the Tenant for life, all his
right in the Seignory is utterly extinct. But if the Lord distrein the Tenant,
and makes a Lease for life, he has not extinguished his Seignory for ever, for
a Release in Law is taken most favorable.

If a Rent be granted for life, and by another Deed theGrantor releaseth to the
Grantee all his right in the Rent; and if it be behind, that he shall distrain
for it, yet it is but a Rent Seck.

If two are disseised, and one releaseth to the Disseisor all his right in the
one moity, his right is gone in al^, and yet his right was per my and per tout;
but being he has released all his right in one moity, which extends per my and
per tout, that is the reason why, etc. So if there be two Disseisors, and one
Disseisee releaseth to one, for he was seized per my and per tout. But if he
had released all all his right to one, viz. in the moity of that one, and not
in a moity generally, the Law had been otherwise, viz. that his moity remains
in the moity of the other moity.

A Disseisor having a Wife makes a Lease for life, the Lessee makes a lease to
the Wife, for the life of the Wife, the Husband accepts the Deed, and agrees to
it, the Disseisee releaseth to the Wife, the Husband dies, the Release is void;
for, by the Lease to the Wife the Husband had title of Entry for the
Forfeiture, and then he is remitted, and though he agrees that the Wife shall
take the Estate, yet it is no Estopple, then the Husband being remitted there
is no possession in the Wife upon which the Release may operate. If a Disseisor
having a Wife makes a lease for life to A. who makes a lease to B. for life,
the Disseisee releaseth to B. the Wife of the Disseisor shall be endowed, for
the release does not countervail an Entry and Feofment. If a Disseisor makes a
Lease for life, the Lessee makes a Feofment, and the Disseisee Releaseth to the
Feoffeo, that takes away the Entry of the Disseisor; For such a Release takes
away all rights, but not Titles, as Conditions or Dower. But if a Dis seisor be
disseised, and the Disseisee releases to the second Disseisor, that takes away
the Dower of the first Disseisors Wife.

Tenant pur auter vy, the Remainder to I. for his life, I. releaseth to the
Lessee, that Release is good, and inures by way of Fezance de Estate, for if a
Remainder had been limited to the Tenant for the life of I. that had been good,
therefore here he has a sufficient Tenant for life, and a possession whereupon
a Release may operate, but if the first Lessee had had an Estate for his own
life, then the Release had inured by way of Extinguishment; for the first
Estate was greater having regard to the Lessee. If a Lease be made for forty
years, the Remainder for ten years, and he in Remainder releaseth to the Tenant
for forty years, he shall have it for fifty years; for the forty years cannot
be drowned: If the Remainder had been a lease for an hundred years; for one
Chattle cannot consume another, for it is all one as if Lessee for forty years
should make a lease for ten years, and after will release to the Lessee, he
shall have it for forty, and not for thirty years. If a lease be made for
years, the remainder to A. for life, the remainder to B. for life: if B. will
release to the Lessee, that is clearly Good; for there is sufficient privity
between them although he has not the next immediate Estate.

But if the Lessee will release to his Lessor, that is void; for the Lessee was
in possession. So if the Guardian Releaseth to the Heir, that is void. If two
Disseisors make a Lease for life, and the Disseisee releaseth to one, that will
inure to both; for of necessity it will inure to Lessee for life: and so by
consequence to them in Reversion, and that is to two. If Tenant for life is
disseised by two, who are disseised by another, the Lessor releaseth to the
last Disseisor, the first Disseisors may enter notwithstanding the Release; for
the Releasor had no Title of Entry. But if his Entry had been lawful, as if his
Tenant for life had infeoffed a Stranger, who had been disseised, and the
Lessor had released to the Disseisor the Lessee could not have entered; for the
Entry of the Lessor (who had a Title Paramount) was congeable. As if a
Disseisor makes a Lease for life, and the Lessee makes a Feofment, and the
Disseisee releaseth to the Feoffee, the Disseisor cannot Enter. But if the Heir
of the Disseisor, who is in by descent makes a Lease for life, the Lessee makes
a Feoffment, and the Disseisee releaseth to the Feoffee, the Lessor may enter?
for the Disseisee could not, 9 H. 7. 25. pet Fineux. If an Infant makes a Lease
for life, and the Lessee grants his Estate with Warranty, the Infant brings a
Dum fuit infra Etatem, and the Tenant vouches the Grantor, who enters into
Warranty, and loses, the Demandant Releaseth to him and his Heirs, some think
the Release is void; for he is Tenant only to answer the Action, but a Release
which is to enlarge an Estate must inure upon a privity of Estate. And
therefore a Release made to Tenant by the Courtesy in Fee after he has granted
over his Estate is void, and yet an Action of Wast shall be maintainable
against him by the Heir, and he shall Atturn. If a Lease be made for life, the
Remainder for life, the Tenant for life dies, and before the Entry of him in
Remainder the Lessor Releaseth to him in Fee, that shall inure according to the
words. But in a Writ of Entry in the Per, if the Tenant vouch him, by whom,
etc. who enters into Warranty, and the Demandant Releaseth to him, that inures
by way of Extinguishment. If a woman who has cause of Dower Releaseth to the
Guardian, that takes away her Title and Estate, though the Guardian had but a
Chattle, and the Heir shall Advantage of it. It was said in the case of the Dum
fuit infra aetatem, if he had Released in tail a greater Estate should not have
passed; for though it does not appear by the Dum fuit infra aetatem what Estate
he claims (for the Writ is general) yet when he enters generally into the
Warranty, he shall not be said to have a Fee against the Demandant, but the
Demandant shall make an Averment, that he did not make the Devise but only for
life. A Release made to the Patron when the Church is full does not extinguish
an Annuity, otherwise if it had been in the time of vacation, 21 H. 7. 41. but
a Release to the Ordinary peradventure will not avail; Tenant for life grants a
Rent Charge, a Release to him in Reversion will not extinguish it, no more than
if he in Reversion grants a Rent Charge, a Release to Tenant for life will
extinguish it.

If there be two Disseisors, and one makes a Lease of a Moity for years,
reserving a Rent with a Re-entry for not payment, the Disseisee releaseth to
the other who did not make a Lease, he shall have the whole Freehold of all the
Land, and the Lessee shall not pay the Rent to him; for he comes to the
Reversion by Title Paramount, and not by any Privity.

A. ours his Termor for years, and then makes a Lease for years, the first
Termor releaseth to the second, the first Lessor may enter and have the Land
against them both; for by the Release the Right of the first Termor was
extinct. As if a Rent Charge be granted to the Disseisor, etc. and it does not
fortify the Estate of the second Lessee during the first Term; for if the
first Lease had bin for twenty years, and the second but for a year, yet by the
Release of the first Lessee to the second, all the first Estate shall be
extinguished. But if he had been Tenant for life, and the Disseisee Releaseth
to the Disseisor, now during his life the Lessor cannot enter, otherwise if he
had been Tenant for years; for in one case the Disseisor had a Freehold in him
which might be fortified, and in the other case but a Chattle.

Although the Husband cannot give any thing to the Wife immediately, yet if a
Disseisoresse makes a Lease for life, the Remainder to her self in tail, the
Remainder to A. in Fee, and marries the Disseisee, who releaseth to Tenant for
life, that will inure to his Wife.

If an Infant Disseisor makes a Feoffment, and the Feoffee dies seized, and his
Heir enters, to whom the Disseisee releaseth, yet the Infant shall have a Dum
fuit infra aetatem, and shall recover; for he demauds the possession to which
he had more Right than the Disseisee, and the Tenant ought to answer to the
Demise, and not to the Right: As if the Heir of the Disseisor, who is in by
Descent, brings an Assize against his Disseisor, it is no plea for him to plead
the Release of the Disseisee; for he demands the possession to which he had
more Right than the Disseisee. So if the Disseisor recovers in an Assize by
erroneous Judgment against his Disseisor, and the Disseisee releaseth to him
that has recovered, and the other brings a Writ of Error, it is no plea for
him to plead the Release; for the intent of the Suit was to correct the Error
upon the Record. If a Disseisor makes a Lease for life, and the Lessee makes a
Feoffment to A. who obtains a Release from the Disseisee, the Disseisor brings
a Consimili Casu, some think he shall recover; but if the Heir of the Feoffee,
who is in by Descent, etc. gets a Release, it is clear the Disseisor may have
an Action, and the Tenant ought to answer to the Demise, and not to the Right
of the Land in both cases. If a Disseisor enters upon his Feoffee for breach of
a Condition, the Feoffee shall not have a Writ of Right, though the Right of
the Disseisee be released to him before the breach of the Condition. So if the
Disseisee enters upon the Heir, who is in by Descent, and makes a Feoffment, or
releaseth of such an Heir, and the Heir reenters, or if one who has a Title
brings a Formedon in Remainder against an Abator, and recovers by default. See
the rest of the case in 9 H. 7. 25. In all these cases he to whom the Release
was made, or the Right was given, shall not have a Writ of Right, but it shall
go in advantage of him that Removes the possession; for being one has a right
in possession, and recontinues it, that draws the very right to it, and the
Right by it self shall not be left in the other. Note that in all these cases,
the Right comes after the possession; but if the Right were before the
possession, and then the possession is removed, the Right remains in the person
to whom it was given. As if the Heir of the Disseisor, who is in by descent,
enfeoffs A. and several other Feoffments are made, and after the Land comes to
the Heir again, and the Disseisor enters upon him, and he outs him. Now if the
Disseisee brings a Writ of Right upon his first possession, he shall be deluge
by vouching of the Feoffees; but he may have a Writ of Right upon the last
possession which he had by Disseisin, and that is beyond all the Vouchers, and
though the possession was removed, yet that is not material; for Littleton
says, the effect of the Writ is the mere Right. the Husband discontinues in
Fee, and takes back an Estate to himself and his Wife for their lives, the
Husband makes a Feoffment and dies, the Wife Releaseth to the second Feoffee,
yet the first Feoffee may enter for the Forfeiture, and she has no Remedy, and
this case is supposed before the statute of 32 H. 8. But if the wife had not
released, but the first Feoffee had entered upon the second for the Forfeiture,
the Wife (the Husband being dead) might enter upon him; for she may claim by
the Lease, and then the Entry for the forfeiture had avoided the
Discontinuance, and so she may enter by virtue of the Lease made by the first
Discontinuee. If Tenant for life be disseised, and the Disseisor is disseised,
and the Lessor releaseth to the second Disseisor, and the first Disseisor outs
him, he has no Remedy by Writ of Right, or otherwise, Quod nota.

A Gift in tail is made with Warranty, the Donee releaseth the Warranty to the
Donor, the Reversion is granted, the Donee atturns, if the Issue in tail be
impleaded, he shall not vouch; for the Release has extinguished the Warranty
for ever; for the Statute is of Tenements, etc. and this is no Tenement, but a
Covenant real, which is Extinguished by the Release. As if an Annuity be
granted in tail, a Release from the Grantee discharges it. If a false Verdict
passes against Tenant in tail, a Release made by Tenant in tail of all his
Right shall not bar the Issue of his atttaint, but if he releaseth all false
Oaths to one of the Petit Jury. Quaere, if the Issue shall have an Attaint? And
a Partitione facienda is maintainable by the Issue in tail, by the equity of
the Statute de donis, etc. and contra form. Feoffam. and Contributione faciend:
and a Release of them will not bar the Issue; for it is of the Land, and an Use
in tail is taken by Equity, and Tenant by Copy, etc. shall be taken by Equity
to have an Estate tail, and shall have a plaint in nature of a Formedon. So by
some the Release in the principal case is no bar; but Tenant in tail by his
Release may extinguish an Accquittall granted by the Donor. And Execution of a
Recovery in value by reason of a Warranty, and not a Recovery pro rata against
his Coparcener.

If a man binds himself and his Heirs in twenty pound and dies, his Executors
having Assetts, the Obligee Releaseth all Actions of Debt to the Heir, the
Executors pay the Assetts to other Creditors, some think the Obligee shall have
an Action of Debt against the Heir; for at the time of the Release the Obligee
was not entitled to have an Action of debt against the Heir, but if neither the
Heir nor Executors had Assetts, and then the Debt is released to the Heir, and
after Assetts come to the hands of the Heir, it seems the release will bar him.
If Tenant for life commits Wast, and grants over his Estate, the Lessor
releaseth all Actions to the Grantee, yet he shall have an Action against the
Grantor; for he was not entitled to have an Action against the Grantee. So if
Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy, who have granted over their Estates,
otherwise of a Release of Land.

A. makes a Lease for life, and grants a Rent out of the Reversion, a Release
made by the Grantee to Tenant for life will not extinguish the Rent: so if a
Rent be granted by Tenant for life, a Release to him in Reversion will not
extinguish the Rent.

A Lease is made for life, the Remainder for years, he in Remainder Releaseth
to Tenant for life all his Right in the Land, the years are drowned; but if the
Release had been, Habendum the Land during the years, then the term for years
had continued. As if a Lease is made for life, and after a Release is made to
Tenant for life, Habendum to him for forty years after the Lease for life
ended, there he shall take it as the words direct: And some say, that a Release
made by Tenant for years to the Lessor extinguisheth the Term, orherwise of a
Release by Tenant for life. And if a Lease for years be made to commence at
Easter, and before Easter he releaseth all his Right to the Lessor, the years
are Extinguished. If Lessee for years be ^jected, and Releaseth to the
Disseisor, the Lessor may enter, but otherwise of a Release made by Tenant for
life.

If one makes and delivers an Obligation at Michaelmas, which bears date at
Christmas following, and at the Feast of All Saints he releaseth to the Obligor
all Actions, and after Christmas he brings an Action of Debt, he shall plead
the Release, and say the Obligation was delivered at Michaelmas, and that the
Release was delivered at All Saints, according to the date.

If the Disseisee releaseth to the Disseisor all Actions, and dies, and the
Disseisor dies, and his Heir Enters, and the Land discends to the Heir of the
Disseisee, it seems by the Release of all Actions, which he has, or may have
afterward by the same Right, are discharged. So of Actions which his Heir might
have for the same Disseisin. So that a Writ of Entry in the Quibus is Released,
although his Heir had no cause of Action at that time, then it is in a manner
as if he had released after the descent as to the Extinguishment of the Action,
then being he had a Right notwithstanding the Release, so that he might enter,
that Right is not taken away by the descent after. Some think a Release of
Actions is but a Conclusion, which goes in privity of blood, and not of Estate:
and therefore after such a Release to the Disseisor, if he aliens over, the
release is not pleadable by the Alienee; for he is not privy, and it does not
go with the Estate. So if a Disseisor makes a Lease for life, with a Remainder
over, and the Disseisee releaseth all Actions real to the Tenant for life, who
dies, he in Remainder cannot plead it, as if it had been a Release of Right,
and therefore if a Release of all Actions had bin made to him in Remainder,
that had been void to all other purposes, so such a Release of Actions shall
not extinguish a Right, if the Entry be taken away, otherwise than by an
Estopple, which being removed by the descent in Law, the Release cease to be
a Conclusion after. Some think if the Heir of the Disseisor infeoffs two, and
the Disseisee releaseth all Actions to one of them, and he dies, the other
shall not plead it, and so if two are Disseised, and one releaseth all Actions
to him that is in by descent, and dies, the other, as Survivor shall have an
Action for all the Land.

If Tenant for life commits Wast, and grants over his Estate, in Wast brought
against him he may plead a Release in the Land, and yet he has nothing in the
Land.

A Conusor of a Statute Merchant is in Execution, and his Land also, the
Conusee releaseth to him all his debts, afterward the Jailer lets him have his
Liberty, it seems that the Execution is discharged by the Release; for the Debt
is in Esse until the profits satisfy it, or else the Execution could not
remain, as the Heir is in Ward until he be capable to perform his Services, but
if the Seignory be released to the Tenant, he is out of Ward for body and Land.

If he in Reversion of a Seignory releaseth to his Grantee for years, and to
the Tenant of the Land, and to his Heirs. Quaere how it shall inure? but if it
had been to them two generally, then the Estate for years and all the Seignory
had been extinct; for though it inlarges his Estate for life, and no more, yet
without those words, His Heirs, all the Reversion is extinct, and consequently
the Estate for years, Quod non negatur. 8 H. 6. 24. But if it had been of a
Rent Charge, and the Release had been to them, the Grantee shall have it all
for life, and the other the Fee, and so it shall inure to both.

Tenant for life and he in Reversion grant a Rent Charge, the Grantee releaseth
all his Right to the Reversion, if the Rent be extinct? Some think not; for
their Estates being several so are their grants, and then a Release to the
Reversioner will not extinguish a Rent issuing out of the possession. And if it
shall be taken to be the Grant of Tenant for life, and the Confirmation of him
in reversion, yet such a Release will not extinguish it; for though he
purchases the reversion yet he shall have the Rent during the life of Tenant
for life, and if it were several grants, a Release to Tenant for life will not
extinguish a Rent issuing out of the reversion; for to this Charge the Tenant
need not atturn.

The surviving Parcener may release to the Husband of the other being Tenant by
the Courtesy. And if one Parcener has twenty Daughters and dies, the other may
release her whole part to either of them. But if Jointenants be of twenty
Acres, and one makes a Feoffment of all his part in eighteen, perhaps the other
can release his right but in two Acres. But if Husband and Wife, and a stranger
are Jointenants, the stranger may release all his right to the wife only.

Tenant for life, the remainder in Fee, makes a gift in tail, the remainder in
Fee, he in the first remainder releaseth all his right to the Donee, not
saying, and to his Heirs, and then grants a Rent Charge to a stranger out of
the Remainder in Fee, and dies, the Donee dies without Issue, the Heir of him
in remainder enters, if he shall hold it charged? Some think the release does
not give the right in Fee, which the Releasor had, to the Releasee; for then in
a manner he does release to himself, but if the remainder had been in tail to
him that had the remainder in Fee, then the release had inured to the first
Estate in tail, and to the Fee, and then if the last Fee be fortified, the
Mesne remainder is established, and so the release inures to himself. But as to
the other point which may be moved. If the remainder be good to him that had
the remainder before? being it is out of him and in him at one and the same
instant, it is good enough.

If one be disseised to the use of A. the Disseisee releaseth to the Disseisor,
yet A. may agree to the Disseisin; for a release does not take away a Title any
more than it does a Condition, Or a Rent Charge granted by him; or if he
covenants to stand seized to an Use Executory upon marriage, such an use cannot
be taken away by such a release. But if there had been two Disseisors to the
use of A. and the Disseisee had released to one of them, that will take away
all the Title, Causa paret. So if Tenant for life releaseth to his Disseisor,
that does not restore the Reversion; but if he had released to one of the
Disseisors, it had been otherwise.

Land is holden of the Manor of Dale by Fealty and twenty shillings, the Lord
makes a Lease of the Manor for years, rendering forty shillings with
Atturnment, after the Lessor releaseth to the Tenant all his Right, if the Rent
of forty shillings shall be apporcioned? by the Release the Tenant is
discharged of twenty shillings as well against the Lessee as the Lessor; for
the Tenant holds it of the Lord Paramount, so he does not hold it of the
Lessee; for he cannot hold the same Land of two several Lords, and the Rent of
forty shillings is as well payable for the services, as for the demesnes,
although he cannot distrain, etc. as in the case of Sheep, 21. H. 7.6.

If Feoffee upon Condition makes a Lease for life, a Release of the Condition
to the Tenant for life will extend to the Feoffee, as it will do of a Right or
Rent. If there be Feoffee upon Condition of two Acres, and the Feoffor
releaseth the Condition in one Acre, if it be collateral, it remains in the
other; as of a Warranty annexed to two Acres, a Release in one, yet it remains
in the other; for the Condition is several as the Right is; But if the
Condition had been made to two, or by two, a Release to one, or by one
extinguisheth all, as it shall do a Warranty.

Tenant for life of a Seignory purchases the Tenancy pur auter vye, if the
Lord releaseth to him and his Heirs all his Right in the Tenaney, some think it
shall inure by way of Extinguishment. But if he releases to him and his Heirs
all his Right in the Seignory, that inures as an Enlargement of the Seignory.
So the Mesne being a Fem marries the Tenant, the Lord reseaseth to the Fem and
her Heirs all his Right in the Seignory, that inures to extinguish the Seignory
only, and not the Mesnalty. But if he had released to the Husband all his Right
in the Seignory, or Tenancy, the Seignory, and Mesnalty are extinct. But a
Release to the wife of all his right in the Tenancy had been void. But if the
Lord had released all his Right in the Seignory to Husband and Wife. Quaere,
but some think it inures to extinguish the Seignory, and not the Tenancy.

Two Jointenants in Fee of a Rent Charge, a Stranger receives it to the use of
A. one releaseth to the Pernor, and the other to the Tenant: If by the last
release he shall be said in possession ab initio, the first Release to the
Pernor was void; for the possession of one is the possession of both. If two
Disseisors grant a Rent Charge, and the disseisee releaseth to one, he shall
hold it discharged; for the Grant of the other by the Release is discharged,
and the Grant being but by one is discharged as to all. And the Pernor shall
hold it subject to the Agreement of A. for some think there shall be an
Election after, as if he had granted his part to a Stranger.

A Release to one Tenant in Common will not inure to his Companion for want of
privity.

A. seized of an House on the part of his Mother, is disseised by two, and they
have Estovers granted to them in the same House, the disseisee releaseth to
one, the Estovers remain for part; for as to a Stranger the Release does not
countervail an Entry and Feoffment. As if a disseisor takes a Confirmation to
hold by lesser Services, and after the disseisee releaseth, yet he shall take
advantage of the Confirmation. If the Son endows his Wife, Ex^^assensu patris,
and the disseisee releaseth to the disseisor, if the dower shall be avoided or
not? A Warranty made to the disseisor is not gone, by a release made by the
disseisee.

If a disseisor having a Wife makes a Lease to A. for life, who makes a Lease
to B. for life, the disseisee releaseth to B. the Wife of the disseisor shall
be endowed; for the Release does not amount to an Entry and Feoffment.

Two Fems disseise one, one marries, the disseisee releaseth to the Husband in
Fee, that goe^^ by way of Extinguishment to both the women; for it cannot inure
as an Entry and Feofment to one Woman, for she is not privy to the Deed, and as
an Entry and Feofment to the Husband it cannot inure; for he was in by title:
and if the Release had been to the other Woman, that should not have divested
the possession of the Husband.

The Lord disseiseth the Tenent and is disseised, the disseisee releaseth to
the disseisor of the Lord, the Seignory is extinct; for it does not countervail
an Entry and Feofment in respect of the Lord, but extinguisheth the right of
the Lord to the land, in which right to the land, the right which he had to the
Seignory was suspended. But if the Lord and a Stranger disseise the Tenant, and
the Tenant releaseth to the Stranger, the Seignory is revived, for there it
inures as an Entry and Feofment against the Lord, and the Lord had not the
right to the land: So if the Lord dies, and the other has that by survivorship.

Remainder
LAnd is given to Husband and Wife, and to the Heir of the Husband begotten on
the body of the Wife; and if the Husband dies without Issue by the Wife, then
the land to remain to A. in Fee; the Husband and Wife die without Issue, A.
enters, upon whom the Feoffor enters, and A. brings an Assize; some think it is
maintainable, 14 H. 6. 25. such a limitation good.

Tenant in tail makes a Feofment and dies, the discontinuee makes a Gift in
tail, the remainder in fee to the first Issue in tail, the second Tenant in
tail dies without Issue, his Wife Enseint with a Son, the Issue of the first
entail enters, and after the other Issue is born, and enters upon him, and he
brings an Assize; some think it is not maintainable.

A Fem Lessee for life marries, a Confirmation is made to them two for their
lives, that is a Remainder in the Husband, by reason of the joint-Estate of the
Wife. So if land be given to A. and B. for the life of B. and after a
Confirmation is made to them two for their lives, that is a Remainder in A. and
the Jointure remains.

Land is given to Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs of the body of the
Husband, the Remainder to Husband and Wife in special tail; the Remainder is
void. If a lease be made for the life of the Lessee, the Remainder to the
Lessee for the life of A. that Remainder is void.

If land be given to one, Habendum to him and the Heirs males of his body, and
the Heirs females of his body, he shall have it as a Remainder.

Land is given to two Women, Quam diu simul vixerint, the remainder to the
right Heirs of her who first dies; one marries, and has issue and dies; it
seems the remainder is good notwithstanding the incertainty. But if the Land
shall be Assets in a Formedon or Debt against the Heir, Quaere? some think it
is not, for it was never in the Mother.

The Donor disseises Tenant in tail, and dies, and the Heic who is in by
descent makes a Lease to the Issue within age, the Remainder in Fee, Tenant in
tail dies, though the Issue be remitted yet the Remainder is good, because it
was a Livery once, and the Remitter was subsequent, as if the Lessor disseiseth
his Tenant for life, and lets for the life of the disseisee, the remainder in
Fee, the disseisee enters, yet him remainder shall hold it: but in both cases
it is a reversion, and not a remainder. Quaere of the first case.

If a Lease be made for life upon Condition, that if the Lessee shall not have
Issue during his life, that then it shall remain in Fee to A. and he dies
without Issue, the remainder is void; for although a remainder may be limited
upon Condition, yet the Condition ought to be performed during the life of
Tenant for life. But if the Condition had been that if he had Issue during his
life, that then it should remain, the remainder had been good, if he had Issue,
7 H. 4. 6. A rent granted to one for the life of A. the remainder to the right
Heirs of A. that cannot be during the life of A. and yet thought to be a good
remainder; for it vests in the same instant that the first Estate determines.

A remainder may be good to him that had the Remainder before.

Tenant for life makes a Lease for life, the remainder to his Lessor, and a
Stranger in Fee, some think the Stranger shall take all; for he cannot give a
Fee in any part to him that had a Fee before.

Remitter.
TEnant in tail makes a Feoffment and dies, the Discontinuee makes a gift in
tail, the Remainder to the Issue in Fee, the second Tenant in tail dies without
Issue, his Wife enseint with a Son, the Issue in the first intail enters, the
Son is born, and enters upon him, and he brings an Assize, it is maintainable;
for the remainder is limited to the Issue in the first intail, and he by virtue
of his remainder enters, then he is remitted, but Die. 129. makes it a Quaere,
but Bendlows 195. he is remitted, and so is the Inst. 357. 11 H. 4.1.

If the Disseisee enters upon the Heir of the Disseisor, and grants a Rent
Charge and dies, the Issue shall hold it discharged; for though he has the
Right form the same Ancestor that granted the Rent Charge, yet he is remitted
to another possession than descended to him. And if the Heir of the Disseisee
enters upon the Disseisor, and grants a Rent Charge, and the Disseisee dies,
because a new Right is come to him, he is remitted, and the Grantor shall hold
it discharged. But if the Son disseises the Father, and grants a Rent Charge,
and the Land descend to him, the Son shall hold it charged; for he is not
remitted; for the Right descended to him from the same person to whom he did
the wrong, and he shall be disabled to claim a right from him whom he
disseised. But in the other case he claims the Right from another. If the
Father disseiseth the Grandfather and dies, after he has granted a Rent
Charge, and the Grandfather dies, the Son shall hold it discharged; for he
claims from the Grandfather, Quaere; for the Entry of the Grandfather was taken
away, and then when the Right of one, who cannot enter, descends, the Tenant is
remitted. Quaere, but if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Tenant
aliens in Mortmain, the Lord Paramouns enters, and grancs a Rent Charge, and
after his Title is come, viz. the year past, and the Mesne has not entered,
the Lord shall hold it discharged, and his Issue too, as it seems, for he shall
not be remitted for a Title, as he shall for a Right accrued; but it seems he
may bar him upon whom he enters, if he brings an Assize, and that by his Title.

Grandfather, Father, and Son; the Father disseises the Grandfather and dies,
the Son endows the Wife of the Father, the Grandfather dies, the Son may enter
upon the Tenant in Dower, for he has a new right descended from the
Grandfather, and the Entry of the Grandfather was Congeable upon the Tenant in
Dower, so shall the entry of his Heir. But if the Son had granted a Rent
charge, and the Granfather had died, he should hold it charged, and should not
be remitted; for the entry was not lawful upon him, and when a right descends
from the Grandfather, he shall not be remitted.

If the Issue in tail procure one to disseise the Heir in by descent, against
whom the Heir recovers, and dies, the Issue shall retain; but if he himself had
recovered against the Disseisor, upon a Title in Being to him, he shall not be
remitted. Quaere, If his Father disseisee dies, and he recovers a against the
Heir, or the Disseisor, by a Formedon, If he shall be remitted; for the wrong
was made to the Estate tail at that time: And if one has title to a Formedon,
and he procures one to out the Tenant, to the intent that he may recover
against him, and the Stranger outs him, and a Stranger recovers by a puisne
title to the procurer, and the other recovers against him by a Formedon, he is
remitted.

If two Jointenants have title of Action, where their Entry is taken away, and
the one procures a Stranger, ut supra against whom they two recover, and he who
Was party dies, the other is remitted to all; but if he which did not procure
had first died, the other had not been remitted, but to a moity, Quaere?

If the issue in tail within age by Covin commands A. to disseise the
Discontinuee of his Father, A. disseises him to the use of B. for life, and
after to the use of his own right Heirs, B. agrees, A. dies, B. dies, the Heir
of A. enters, and enfeoffs the Issue; he is remitted, because he is now within
age.

Tenant in tail levies a Fine, and takes back an Estate in fee upon condition,
and dies, the Heir enters, and is remitted, and after the Proclamations pass,
if that takes away the Remitter, and if the Condition remains? Quaere.

If two Jointenants are disseised by the Father of one of them, who dies
seized, and his Son enters, he is remitted to all the land, and his Companion
may enter with him: And it is not like where two are disseised, and a descent
cast during the nonage of of one, and he enters, and is remitted to a moity,
his Companion shall not enter; for the advantage is given him more in respect
of his person than of the land. Neither is it like where Tenant in Tail
enfeoffs one daughter, and dies, she being within age, she is remitted, and her
Companion shall not have advantage of it; for the right was not in them before.
Nor where they have a joint Title of Formedon by descent, and the land descends
to one only, his Companion peradventure shall not take advantage of it, for the
Estate tale was taken away, but here it was not. But if the Grandfather had
disseised, etc. and the land had descended to the Father, and from the Father
to him, it will be otherwise, for his Companion shall not have advantage, for
the Entry was taken away before.

If the Discontinuee makes a Lease to the Issue in tail and another, with
Livery to the other, and after grants the Reversion to the Issue, and the other
dies, so that the Freehold is cast upon the Issue without his folly, yet he
shall not be remitted; for he assented to the Reversion upon the Lease for life.

A Disseisor dies without Heir, his Wife enseint, the Lord enters, a Son is
born, the Disseisee enters upon the Lord: If the Entry had been before the
birth, it had been lawful, and he had been remitted, and the birth after would
not have avoided the Remitter: As if the Discontinuee makes a gift in tail to
one, the Remainder to the Issue in tail, if the first Donee dies without Issue,
his Wife Priviment enseint, now the Issue in the first intail is remitted, and
though the issue of the second Donee be after born, the Remitter continues; but
here the Entry is not till after the birth of the Son, for if a Stranger had
abated, the Disseisor having Issue, or if after abatement a Son had been born,
the Disseisee could not enter.

A Disseisee, releaseth all Actions to the Disseisor, and dies, and after the
Disseisor dies, and his Heir enters and dies, and the Land discends to the Heir
of the Disseisee, if he be remitted? Some say there can be no Remitter where
there is a cause of Action, so that without his folly he has not any body
against whom he may bring his Action, but though he has no Action here, yet he
has not lost it by the Law, but by his own Act, and the Right remains, which
is the cause of his remitter, and in many cases a Right shall remain without an
Action, as if there be Tenant for life of a Seignory, and a Tenancy Escheats,
and a Stranger intrudes, Tenant for life dies before Entry, he in Reversion
cannot have any Action, but may enter, as upon the Disseisor, of his Tenant;
but if he dies, and his Heir be in by descent, there he cannot enter, and yet
he has a Right, and shall be remitted upon a Descent.

If a Fem Tenant in general tail marries an Infant who aliens and dies, and
his Heir enters upon the Feoffee, the Wife reenters, she is not remitted.

Tenant for life, the remainder in Fee makes a gift in tail, the remainder in
Fee, he which had the first Remainder releaseth all his Right to the Donee,
without saying to his Heirs, and dies, the Donee dies without Issue, the Heir
of him in Remainder enters, if he be remitted?

If the Disseisee takes an Estate in Fee from him who had the Land by descent,
he agrees unto it, and yet if he dies seized, his Heir shall be remitted.

The Issue in tail within age having a Title to bring a Formedon, accepts from
the Discontinuee a Bargain and sale enrolled, he shall not be remitted; for he
is in by the Statute. Tenant in tail, the Remainder to his right Heirs, makes a
Lease to the Issue within age, upon Condition to have Fee at full age, during
the Term he performs the Condition, he shall be remitted; for the Contract was
during his Minority. As if an Infant delivers a Deed as an Escrowl, to be
delivered as his Deed when he comes of full Age, and receives the money, yet he
shall avoid the Deed.

Vide Release and Condition.

Rent.
LEssee for life makes a Lease for forty years, rendering a Rent, the Lessor
confirms the Estate of the second Lessee, and then Tenant for life dies within
the term, the Lessor distrains and avows for the Rent, some think it is not
maintainable.

Lord and Tenant by Homage, Fealty, and Rent, the Lord grants his Homage upon
Condition, reserving the Rent, the Condition is broken, he has no Remedy for
the Arrerages due before.

Tenant in tail discontinues in Fee, and takes back an Estate in Fee, and
grants a Rent Charge in Fee, and dies, the Lord seiseth the Ward, the Grantee
distrains for the Rent, and the Lord makes Rescous, and the Grantee brings an
Assize, some e think it is maintainable.

Lessee for life makes a Lease for ten years, rendering a Rent, the Lessee for
years makes a Feofment, he shall hold the Land discharged of the Rent, though
it binds the Lessee for life; for the rent cannot endure longer than the
reversion; and though he had granted it to a Stranger, yet had it been gone,
and so it differs from the other, which is not in respect of the reversion. And
if a man makes a Lease for life, reserving a rent to the use of A. and Tenant
for life surrenders, the rent is gone, 1 Ass. 10. If the Mesne grants the rent
of the Tenant, and the Tenancy Escheats, the Rent is gone.

A. makes a Lease for life, and grants a Rent Charge, out of the reversion; the
Grantee purchases the Estate of Tenant for life, who dies, and the Lessor
enters, if the Grantee may distrain for all the Arrerages from the time of the
Grant?

A Rent is granted to commence after the Death of the Grantee, who dies, if his
Wife shall be endowed?

The Father dies seized of a remainder, having two Sons by two venters, the
Eldest Son being Tenant in tail of the particular Estate grants a Rent Charge
in Fee, and dies without Issue; the second Son enters, and an Avowry is made
upon him for the whole Charge. If a man has two Daughters by two venters, or
by one, he dies, and the Eldest grants a Rent Charge, and dies, before Entry
into the Land, some think the youngest shall hold all the Moity charged; as if
one Jointenant grants a Rent charge and dies, the Survivor shall hold all
difcharged.

If Land be devised, reserving a Rent, that is a void reservation; for the
reservation of the Rent cannot be good; but in respect the Reservor might take
advantage of it by possibility; and the Heir cannot have that which the
Ancestor could not; for if a Re-entry be reserved to the Heir it is void.

If Tenant in tail holds by Rent, and the Donor grants the Services of the
Donee, nothing passes, though there be Atturnment; for the Rent cannot pass
but as a Rent Service; For if there be Lord and Tenant by Rent and Fealty, and
the Lord grants the Services saving the Fealty, nothing passes; for it must
pass as a Rent Service; for it is granted by the name of Services; for a Rent
seck, or Rent Charge cannot pass by that word. Quaere, if the sueing be not
void for the Repugnancies, and as a Rent Service it cannot pass; for then the
Donee should pay one Fealty to the Grantee, and another to the Donor for the
reversion, and so the Donor should charge him with two Fealties, which cannot
be, no more than the Lord can grant the Moity.

Tenant for life grants a Rent Charge in Fee, and after he and the Lessor make
a Feoffment of all their Land in such a Town where the Land lies, and make a
Letter of Atturny to make Livery, yet the Rent indurcs but for the life of
Tenant for life; for it is but a Grant of the Estate of Tenant for life, and
also of him in Reversion. But if they had made a Feoffment of that Land only,
then the Rent should endure for ever; for it is the Feoffment of Tenant for
life, and the Confirmation of him in Reversion. Quaere, for the Deed is first
delivered; and after the Livery is made, and the reversion passes by the
delivery of the Deed; for it is an Atturnment of the Tenant for life by the
delivery of the Deed.

If a man reserve a Rent upon a Lease for life, he has not a Fee in it; for
his Wife shall not be endowed, but if Lessee for life grants a Rent in Fee, a
Fee passes: for by possibility it may endure for ever; that is, if the Lessor
confirms it. But if Tenant for life grants a Rent in Fee to the Lessor, who
grants it over, yet he shall avoid it after the death of Tenant for life; for
it cannot be a Confirmation though it were granted by Dedimus and Concessimus;
for the Grantee had not possession of it before, and one and the same word at
the same time cannot amount to a Grant and a Confirmation also. And therefore
if a Disseisor grants a Rent Charge to the Disseisee, and he grants it over,
and after reenters, he shall hold it discharged. If Tenant pur auter vye grants
a Rent Charge in Fee, and after he has the Reversion by descent, or release,
and Cesty que vye dies, he shall hold it discharged; but if after the Fee was
vehe had made a Feoffment, the Feoffee should not have avoided it after the
death of Cesty que vye.

A Seignory is granted for years, the Rent being arrear, the Tenant dies, the
years expire, the Heir shall not be charged as Heir in Debt, if the Father did
not bind himself and his Heirs by express words, and the Executors shall not
be charged; for they were not chargeable with it at the death of the Testator;
for at that time the Grantee could not have had an Action of Debt for it; but
he must have Distrained, and so the Lessee is without remedy.

If a Rent be granted to one and his Heirs, and if it be behind, that he shall
distrain for the life of A. during the life of A. it is a Rent Charge, and
after a Rent seck, and some think that Seisin of a Rent Charge is sufficient to
have an Assize for a Rent se^k. If a Reversion be granted rendering a Rent.
Quaere, what Rent it is during the particular Estate, but after the particular
Estate be determined, it is a Rent Service. If a Rent be granted out of two
Acres, and if it be behind, that he may distrain in one, that is but a Rent
seck; for it is but one Rent which cannot be wholly a Rent Charge; for the
other Acre is not charged, and the Distress is but a penalty. And if a Rent in
Fee be granted, and if it be behind two years, that the Grantee may distrain,
now it is not a Rent seck during the two years, but a Rent Charge distrainable
after the two years. And if a Rent be granted to one, and if it be behind, his
Heirs shall distrain, the distress is void; for there is not any such person in
Rerum natura, and it shall never be a Rent Charge because it was not one at the
beginning, but if the distress had been limited to a person in Esse, then it
should have been a Rent Charge, as 46 E. 3. 18.

If the Lord grants his Seignory, reserving a Rent, the Seisin before will not
be a sufficient Seisin of it. If a Rent be granted to two, and if it be behind,
that one may distrain, that is a Rent Seck for one Moity, and a Rent Charge for
the other Moity, because one has another benefit than the other. If a Rent be
granted for life, and by another Deed the Grantor releaseth all his right in
the Rent to the Grantee, and if it be behind, that he and his Heirs shall
distrain, although the Heir shall have it by distress, as it is adjudged in 8
H. 4. 18. yet the Wife shall not be endowed; for it is yet but a Rent seck, and
the distress but a penalty, and it is no new Rent which commences after the
death. For if a Rent be granted for life, and by another Deed the Grantor
grants, if the rent be behind he shall distrain the remainder in Fee, the
remainder is void; for he does not take such an Estate which will support a
remainder. If a rent be granted our of the Manor of D. and if it be behind he
shall distrain in the Manor of S. the Grantee purchases the Manor of S. yet
the rent remains, and if he does not purchase all the Manor the distress shall
remain in the rest, and yet the penalty was a thing against common right.

Tenant in tail makes a Lease for forty years, reserving a rent, and after
dies, the Heir suffers the Lessee to continue in two or three years, and then
outs him, he has no remedy for the rent arrear after the death of Tenant in
tail, no more than the Lessee has for the arrears incured after the breach of
a Condition, where he has entered for the breach of the Condition, and it seems
he shall not have an Action of account against him as Bailiff of the Land.

A rent seck is granted for life, and after the Grantor confirms his Estate,
and if it be behind, that he and his Heirs shall distrain, it is a rent seck
still for life, and the Grantee has the rent charge in Fee in remainder; for he
has not two rents. As if the Lord of a Manor grants the Homage and Fealty of
his Tenants, saving the rent, it is a rent seck, and shall be parcel of the
Manor, now if the Tenant will grant to the Lord, that he and his Heirs shall
distrain for that rent, yet the rent is parcel of the Manor, and the distress
but a penalty, but if it were a rent charge, it shall not be said parcel of
the Manor, because it shall commence but now. If the Lord grants the rent of
his Tenant to one for life, saving the Seignory, and then grants the Seignory
and reversion of the rent to the Grantee, yet it must be a rent seck during the
life of the Grantee, and after a rent service; for the reversion of the rent,
which was a rent service cannot drown the Freehold of the Rent, which was of
another nature, no more can the Reversion of the Rent Charge drown the Freehold
of the Rent Seck in the principal case. But in the last case, if the Grantee
had re-granted the Rent Seck to the Grantor, who had the Reversion, that will
operate as a Surrender. Quaere, what diversity where the Reversion comes to the
Freehold, or the Freehold to the Reversion? If a Rent be granted out of two
Acres, and if it be behind, that he shall distrain in one, that is not a Rent
Charge in any part; for the distress is not limited out of all the Land. If
twenty shillings be granted out of the Manor of D. and if it be behind, that
he shall distrain for that twenty Shillings, and another twenty Shillings out
of the Manor of S. the first twenty shillings is but a Rent Seck, and the
distress a penalty, and the last a Rent Charge in the Manor of S. But if one
grants a Rent out of the Manor of D. and if it be behind, that he shall
distrain in D. and S. that is a Rent Charge in the Manor of D. and a penalty
in the Manor of S. If a Rent be granted to one for the life of A. and after
the Grantor grants by another Deed, that he shall distrain for his life, with a
Remainder in Fee, that is a good Remainder, if the first Rent be determined,
but if the distress be appointed for the life of A. or B. it is otherwise; for
it is but a penalty, but in the other case the Estate is given also, though it
be a penalty during the time of the appointment of the Determination of the
first Rent. If twenty Shillings is granted out of D. and that the Grantee and
his Heirs shall distrain for that twenty Shillings, and other out of the Manor
of D. and S. For the first twenty Shillings it is a Rent Charge in D. and a
penalty in S. and for the other it is a Rent Charge in both. If a Rent be
granted out of two Acres, with a distress in one, and after the other is
recovered by an Eigne Title, it shall be a Rent Seck, as it was before; for it
cannot be now a Rent Charge, if it were a Rent Seck before. If a Rent reserved
upon a Lease for life be granted over, and after a recovery is had in Wast, yet
the rent remains, as if the Lord grants the rent, reserving the Homage, the
Rent remains after the Escheat.

A rent is granted in Fee out of Land in Borough English, and at common Law the
Grantee dies, having two Sons, the Eldest shall have all; for the rent is
entire, and so not apporcionable, then the Eldest, being he is Heir at Common
Law shall have all, as an Assize at Common Law is maintainable for a rent
granted out of Ancient Demesue, and other Lands, 35 H. 6.4. p. Ashton.

If a rent be granted in Fee, and the Grantee grants it for years, the Grantee
has no remedy if it be denied; for the Election to have an annuity is only
given to the first Grantee and his Heirs, and the Election runs in privity,
which fails in the second Grantee.

If a rent, incident to a reversion, be granted for years, saving the
reversion, the Grantee has no remedy; for he shall not have an Action of debt,
though the Lease out of which the rent issued was for years; for there wants
privity. If a Lease be made to two, Habendum the one Acre in Fee, and the other
for life, reserving a rent. Quaere, how the Lessor shall avow, but his
Executors are not aided by the Statute of 31 H. 8.

If a Lease be made of two Acres, reserving a rent for years, and then the
reversion of one Acre is granted, the rent shall be apporcioned; for as the
contract is made in respect of the reversion, so it shall be severed in respect
of the reversion.

A rent charge is granted in tail to the Use of A. and his Heirs, the rent is
behind, the Donee dies without Issue, A. brings an Action of Debt for the
Arrerages.

If the Parson and Ordinary grant a rent charge out of the Glebe to the Patron,
the Successor shall avoid it; for the assent of the Patron ought to be
express, and of the Ordinary also where the Successor must be bound, and it is
but implied here, but the best way had been to have granted it to A. and he to
have granted it to the Patron; and in the first case if the Patron grants it
over, that is no full assent, but the Successor shall avoid it.

If Tenant in tail grants a Rent Charge in Fee, and makes a Lease for forty
years, and dies, and the Issue accepts the Rent, the Grantee shall have the
Rent during the Lease and the life of the Issue, although the Lessee
Surrenders, Quaere, for the Reversion is discharged. If Tenant in tail grants a
Rent in Fee, and dies, and the Issue having a Wife dies before Entry, his Wife
is endowed, she shall hold it discharged. If the Father disseises the Son, and
grants a rent Charge, and the Son endows his Wife Ex Assensu Patris in the same
Land, the Father dies, the Son dies, the Wife enters, she shall hold it
charged, for she claims from the possession charged. And if Tenant in tail
grants a rent charge, the Abator shall hold it charged. If the Father disseises
the Son, and grants a rent charge in Fee, and makes a Lease for years, and the
Son confirms the Lease, and the Father dies, the rent is gone. So if a man
grants a rent in Fee, and makes a Lease for years, and grants the reversion to
the King, or to the Grantee, the rent is gone.

If a Lease be made of two Acres in one County, rendering a rent, and Livery is
made in both severally, yet it is but one rent, though one Acre passed by the
Livery before the other.

Lessee for twenty years makes a Lease over, and makes a Lease of other Land,
in which he has an Estate in Fee simple for twenty years, reserving a Rent,
without Deed, the whole Rent does issue out of the Lands in which he has an
Estate in Fee; for being he has granted all his Right over in the other Land,
it cannot be a reservation out of that.

If a mangrants a Rent for life, and after by another Deed grants, that it
shall be lawful for the Grantee and his Heirs to distrain for the same Rent,
that shall be intended a Rent of the same value; for that Rent is determined by
the death of the Grantee. As if the King grants to the Mayor and Commonalty of
D. the same Liberties which the Mayor and Commonalty of London have, that shall
be construed Liberties of the same nature, If a man grants to me, that whereas
he has made a Lease for forty years to A. that I shall present to the Advowson
which the Lessor has during the same term. If A. surrenders the Manor, yet I
shall present; for when my Grant was during the same term, that is to be
understood during the like time.

If the Patron and Ordinary give license to the Parson to grant a Rent in Fee,
if he does it, that will bind the Successor according to the opinion of 7 H. 4.
18. But if a Confirmation had been made to the Grantee before the Grant, that
had been void; and the Diversity is this; for in the first case there was
nothing requisite but an Assent, which may be before the Act is done, and
therefore it is said, that if a Bishop makes a Gift in tail by Deed, and the
Dean and Chapter confirm the Deed, Et omnia quae in eo sunt, according to the
usual Confirmation in those cases, and after Livery is made, that was holden
by all the Justices to be a void Confirmation; for the Assent was not but to
the Deed, but the Confirmation ought to be after the Estate made, and so a
Diversity.

If a Rent Seck be granted to A. for life, and after it is granted, that he and
his Heirs shall distrain for it during the life of the Grantee, it is still a
Rent Seck, though he may distrain for it, but the Heir shall distrain for it
and take it by descent.

A. makes a Lease for life, reserving a Rent in Fee, and then grants the
Reversion with Atturnment; and reserves the Rent in Fee, and dies, the Rent is
gone; for it is reserved out of an Estate for life only. So if Tenant in tail
of a Rent grants it in Fee, that is no discontinuance; for it is granted but
during the life of the Grantor.

If A. makes a Lease for life, reserving a Rent, the remainder for life, the
Lessor grants the reversion to him in Remainder, the first Tenant for life
atturns, he shall not have the Rent; for the Fee simple drowns the remainder to
some purposes, but as to this it is in Esse.

A. grants a Rent Charge in tail, and enfeoffs the Grantee of the Land, who
gives in tail, reserving to him so many services as he pays over to the Lord
Paramount, and dies, the Issue shall not have a Formedon of the Rent, being he
has the Reversion; for the Land is discharged at the time of the Gift in tail,
31 E. 3. Scire fac.

Lessee for twenty years makes a Lease for ten years, who purchases the
Reversion with Atturnment of the Lessee, the Executor of the Lessee for ten
years, shall not have the residue of the term, but the Heir; but he shall pay
the first rent reserved to the Lessee for twenty years in nature of a Rent
Charge granted by him; for the Term is in Esse as to that purpose, but it seems
the first Lessee may distrain.

If two Parceners are seized in tail, and one grants a Rent to the other for
Equalty of Partition, she shall have an Estate tail in the Rent, 2 H. 7. 5. and
note that the Estate in the Rent shall be of the same nature of the Estate
received, and not of the nature of the Estate out of which it issues. As if
there be two Parceners of one Acre in Fee, and of the other in tail, and upon
Partition she which has the Acre in Fee grants a Rent to the other, that Rent
shall be in tail, and not in Fee, but if she which has the Acre in tail grants
a Rent to the other, that shall be in Fee; for if she dies without issue, her
Heir shall have it as long as the other has issue of ber body. But if there be
four Acres in Fee, and one in tail, and she which has the four Acres in Fee
grants a Rent to the other, that shall be in Fee, Quia sequitur magis
principale.

If the Lord grants the Rent, saving the Seignory, and the Tenant is after
disseised, and atturns, this is void, for it is now a Rent Seck, in which there
is no Attendancy, but a Charge to the Land. If a man grants a Rent, reserved
upon a Lease for life, saving the Reversion, it is a good Rent Seck, if the
Tenant atturns. But if there be Lessee for years, rendering a Rent, and the Rent
is granted over, saving the Reversion, that is void; for debt cannot lie by the
Grantee, and he cannot have any other action.

If the Feoffec upon Condition pays twenty shillings to the Lord, whenas the
Tenure was by Fine, the Feoffor after his Entry for breach of the Condition is
bound in a Replevin. So if Lessee for life with Condition to have Fee, and the
Lessor pays more Rent to the Lord than he ought, and after the Condition is
performed, the Lessee is bound in a Replevin. So if a Seignory of twenty
shillings is granted over by Fine, and the Tenant aliens over, and after pays
forty shillings to the Lord, the Feoffee is bound.

If a Lease be made for life, rendering the first four years a Rose, and after a
yearly Rent of twenty shillings, and the Lessor grants the Rent of twenty
shillings to commence after the four years, this Grant is void; for the Rose
and twenty shillings are all one Rent, and if the Grant should be good, the
Grantor should have the Rose for four years, whereas before he had the
Freehold, and then it is as if one had a Rent in Fee, and grants it over after
four years, that Grant is void, otherwise of a Rent created de novo.

If a man has a Rent in Fee, and becomes Tenant by the Courtesy of the Land,
and dies, his Heir shall have a Mortdancester of the Rent, which he could not
have had if his Ancestor had not died seized. So if an Assize be brought
against the Pernor of a Rent, and after the Plaintiff is nonsuited, the
Disseisee of the Rent is chased to his Action for the Rent; for the dying
seized takes away his Entry, viz. where the Pernor had an Estate for life in
the Tenancy.

Lessee for twenty years makes a Lease for ten years, reserving a rent, and
after makes a Lease to the same Lessee for ten years, to begin after his first
Estate ended. It seems that the first Lessee shall have the rent during the
first ten years, as a rent service, and distrain for it; for the last ten years
are not out of the first Lessee, nor vested in the other, neither shall they,
until the beginning of the Term, and in the mean time he has but a right or
Title to the Term.

If Tenant for life, and he in reversion grant a rent charge, and the Grantee
releaseth all his right to him in reversion, if the rent be extinct Quaere.

If a Lease be made of two Acres, rendering a rent upon Condition to be
performed by the Lessee, that he shall have Fee in one Acre, not saying in
which, and Livery is made of both, the Lessee performs the Condition, what rent
the Lessor ought to have? Quaere, or if it shall be apporcioned, being part of
the reversion to which the rent is appendant is in the Lessee, and by an Act
that had relation: So that it may now be said, that the rent was never reserved
out of that Acre, which seems to be of the same effect as if there had been a
gift made of two Acres, the one in Fee, and the other for years, rendering a
rent, in this case it shall be of one only Acre; for he may distrain of common
right, and out of the other Acre no remedy until after Seisin. Also in the said
cafe if the Lessor will distrain in one Acre, the Lessee shall take his
Election, viz. he shall say that he has Fee in that Acre, and so exclude the
Lessor.

The Son makes a Lease to the Father for life, who makes a Lease to A. for
life, the remainder in Fee to the Son, the Son grants a rent charge out of the
remainder, and releaseth to A. in Fee, the Father and A. die, if his Issue
shall hold it charged? First, it seems that the right Fee is divested, and a
tortious vested all in the same lastant. As if Tenant in tail makes a Lease for
life, etc. or the Husband makes a Lease for life of the Wives Land, etc. then
in the first case, the Rent being granted out of the Reversion, it is the same
as if it had been granted out of the Remainder; for they differ not in
substance. And when the Son releaseth to A. and his Heirs all his Right; that
does not inure as an Entry and Feoffment, because A. was in by Title, without
Disseisin, then that does not give unto him the remainder, as if he had
released all his Estate in the Land, or all his right, Habendum the Land in
Fee, but here he had the right and the Estate, and then a Release of right does
not inure to the Estate, then if the release does not perfect the remainder, if
the Grant of the rent, which is an assent to the remainder, does so inseperably
unite the remainder and the Rent, that the right shall be drowned in the Estate
for the preservation of the Rent? and some think not; for if the Disseisee
takes an Estate in Fee from him who has the Land by Descent, he agrees to it,
and yet if he dies his Heir shall be remitted, and so the rent charge avoided.
But others think that being by the Grant of the rent charge he has agreed to
the remainder, and so to the Livery, he cannot after enter upon the Tenant for
life, and then the release gives the remainder, and so the Land is charged.

Where a Woman shall be endowed of a rent, Vide Dower.

If a rent seck be granted, and after it is granted that he may distrain in the
same Land, and after the Grantee brings a writ of Annuity, if he may dristrain
after. Quaere, viz. if there be one or two rents?

A rent charge is granted out of two Acres, the Tenant of the Land conveys away
one, the Grantee of the rent may distrain in one or the other: But if one
Tenant pay the rent, if the other be distrained he may plead payment by his
Companion.

A Fem has a rent seck and marries, the Tenant grants to the Husband, that he
and his Heirs may distrain for the rent, the Husband and wife die without
Issue, the distress is extinct; for the Heirs of the Husband are only privy to
distrain, and they cannot distrain so ^^ rent due to another. But if a man has
a rent on the part of his mother, and the Tenant grants that he ^^ his Heirs
may distrain for the rent, and he dies without Issue, there the distress shall
go to the Heirs on the part of his Mother, and if they grant the rent to
distranger the may distrain. But if the Tenant grants to the Lord of the Manor
that he shall distrain, ut supra, and he aliens the manor, the Alience shall
not distrain out of the Manor, and in that case the penalty of the distress
is gone, but in the other case, the Grante being of a distress in the same
place out of which the rent issues, this is now a rent charge, and by
consequeuce the distress shall pass to the Grantee: but if the Grant of the
distress had been in another place, then it had been but a penalty, and could
not have gone to the Heir on the part of the Mother, non to the Assignee of the
same rent, and therefore the penalty being severed from the principal by Act
in Law, or in Deed, the penalty shall cease.

Vide Parceners, Lease, Atturnment.

Reservation.
IF a rent be reserved to the Lessor, he shall have it but during his life; for
it was not reserved longer. And if it had been ceserved during forty years he
should have had it no longer. But if the rent had been reserved generally, and
not expressed to whom, that shall be to the M^^ssoc and his Heirs; for the Law
will direct it. If Lessee for twenty years makes a Lease for ten years,
reserving a rent to him, his Executors shall have it; for they represent the
person of the Testator.

If a Gift in tail be made reserving, during the life of the Donor a Socage
Tenure, and after Knights Service, that is a good reservation, and it shall be
according to the words, and his Wife shall be endowed of the Knight Service.

If a Lease for life be made, rendering a rent for the first seven years, he
shall have an Assize for it; for it is adjudged in 7 E. 3. 10. That an Action
of Debt will not lie for the rent. Die. 23. a. Spilman cont.

Although Littleton says a man cannot reserve a rent but to the Lessor or his
Heirs, yet if a man makes a Lease, rendering a rent to his Heir, that is a void
reservation; for his Heir shall take as a purchase, and is as a Stranger. But
Littleton is to be understood so, that the Disjunctive must be taken for a
Copulative.

If a Feoffment be made of a Manor, reserving to the Feoffor an Acre for
twenty years, the Feoffor has a Fee in it, and nothing passes of it; for it
cannot pass by the Livery, and he cannot pass it to himself, or reserve It
for a certain time; for then he should have a lease for years without a Lessor,
which cannot be.

If a Dean and Chapter make a lease, reserving a rent to them, their Successor
shall have it because they never die.

If a man upon a Gift in tail reserve Socage tenure the first ten years, and
after Knights service, within the ten years the Donee dies, his heir within
age, if he shall be in Ward during the first ten years, or after, if they
expire during his Nonage?

If a Feoffment be made of a Manor, reserving one Acre, that is a good
reservation; but if a Feoffment be made of twenty Acres, reserving one Acre,
that is void. If a lease be made of land and wood for life, rendering twenty
shillings rent, viz. ten shillings for the land, and ten shillings for the
wood, the rents are made several.

If there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and twenty shillings rent, and the
Tenant makes a Gift in Franckmarriage to hold of him by Fealty only, until the
fourth degree be past, and after that by twenty shillings, and Knight Service,
in that case, after the four degrees he shall neither have the twenty
shillings, nor the Knight Service; for though he reserved but Fealty until the
four degrees were past, yet it is an entire reservation presently, and the
Services be in him although they be not to be performed until the four degrees
be past, and seifin of Fealty shall be a Seifin of the remnant, wherefore being
the Reversion is entire, that is the reason that it is void. For all cannot be
reserved upon the gift in Frank-marriage.

If a man makes a Lease to two, Habendum the one Moity to one, the other to the
other, reserving one Hauk, or a Lease pur auter vye to A. and a Dean and
Chapter, reserving one Hauk, or if the Land the beginning goes two several
ways, and but one Hauk, is reserved, he shall have no more.

Reversion.
IF one Acre be given in tail, which is holden in Socage, and another Acre
which is holden in Chivalry, saying nothing, the Donor shall have several
services, and make several Avowries, though he has an entire Reversion; for
the Law makes the Avowries in respect of the Tenure over; and he holds the
reversion of one Acre of one, and of the other Acre of another, and they shall
Escheat severally.

If a Reversion be granted to Tenant for life and a stranger in Fee, the
Jointure of the Fee is severed; for the Tenant for life has a Fee simple in
the moity vested presently, but if the Reversion had been granted to Tenant in
tail and a stranger, there the Jointure remains. But if the Husband be Tenant
for life, and the reversion be granted to him and his wife, the Fee remains in
Jointure; for there is no moities between them.

A Lease is made for the lives of A. and B. the Lessee makes a Lease for the
life of A. only, he has the reversion notwithstanding the Lease; for he has
given a lesser Estate than he had, if the second Lessee dies, living A. an
Occupant shall have it, but others think the contrary; for he had not before
but one Freehold, and by the Lease to the second Lessee he has departed with
the Freehold, and the reversion of the same Freehold cannot be in him. But if a
Lease is made to me for the life of A. the remainder to me for the life of B.
and I make a Lease for the life of A. only, I have a Reversion for the life of
B. for they were two Estates, but here was but one Estate, and all that Grant
was irrecoverable if A. survived, then the possibility of the surviving of A.
does not make a reversion in the first Lessee. But it is as if I am Lessee for
the life of C. and I grant my Estate upon Condition, that if D. dies, living C.
that I shall re-enter. I have no Reversion notwithstanding this Condition; for
if the Condition be sufficient for me to enter upon an Occupant. Quaere.

If the Bastard endows the wife of the common Ancestor. Quaere, in whom the
reversion shall be?

If Tenant for life surrenders upon Condition, and the Lessor marries, and
dies, and the Wife is endowed against the Heir, and after Tenant for life
enters for breach of the Condition, and not by the Wife, and no default in the
Heir, yet the Wife shall not have the reversion of the Land after the death of
Tenant for life: for the Freehold which was the cause of her Dower was taken
away by an Eign Title.

If a Lease be made for life, reserving a Rent, and the reversion is granted to
the Lessee for his own life, the Grant is void, and he shall pay the rent; but
if the grant of the Reversion to another for the life of the Lessee, that had
been good; for he shall have the rent and take a Surrender without Livery.

A lease is made to A. and B. fortheir lives, and after the Reversion is
granted to C. during the lives of A. and B. they make partition and A. dies;
the Question is, if the first Lessor shall have his part after his death, or C?
some think the Grant of the reversion was good; for if the Tenant for life had
entered into Religion C. should have the Land, Quaere, of this foreign
Intendment; but if the Reversion does pass, the Rent shall pass as a Rent
Service. And if the first Estate had been upon Condition, to cease, C. should
have had it during their lives, then it seems the Partition severs the
Reversion; for though by the first Grant he was entitled to have the Reversion
so long as either of them lived, that was in respect of the Jointure, and when
that is severed, so is the reversion, so that the first Lessor shall have it
after the death of Tenant for life, and not C. Quaere? If a Lease be made for
twenty years, rendering a Rent, and the reversion is granted for ten years, that
is a good Grant, and he shall distrain for the Rent, Quod nota.

If Husband and Wife accept a Fine, Sur conusans de Droit come ceo etc. of the
Wives Land from B. and they render it to him in tail, yet the Reversion is in
the wife only; for the Husband had nothing but by reason of the Coverture.

If the Donor confirm the Estate of the Donee in tail, that is a Grant of the
Reversion in Law.

A Recovery is had against Tenant for life upon a false Oath, he in Reversion
dies without Heir, Tenant for life brings an Attaint, and reverseth the
Judgment: To whom the Reversion is recovered, is the Question?

Vide Remainder.

Reviver.
IF the Tenant makes a Lease for years to the Lord, and he makes a Lease for
life, and the Tenant enters, the Seignory is revived after the death of the
Tenant for life, notwithstanding there was a Disseisin, and the Lord was the
Disseisor by the Statute.

If the Tenant enfeoffs the Lord upon Condition, and enters for the Condition
broken, the Seignory is revived. But if the Lord grants his Seignory in Fee to
one who has the Tenancy with a Condition, and after the Feoffor enters for the
Condition broken before or after, the Seignory is gone in both cases.

If the Lessor recovers in Wast against the Lessee for life, who comes to the
Seignory after the Wast committed, the Seignory shall be revived: but otherwise
if Wast had been made after the Seiguory accrued.

If after a Dissent the Disseisor comes to the possession again, the Entry of
the Disseisee is revived. If a Bastard dies seized, leaving Issue, who endows
his mother, the Mulier may enter; for the Wife is endowed by an Eign Title, and
so the right is revived. If a Disseisee enters upon a Dissent, and dies seized,
and the Heir endows his Mother, the Entry of him who was in by Descent is
revived.

If the Tenant enfeoffs the Heir of the Lord upon Condition, the Lord dies, the
Condition is broken, the Seignory is revived.

If the Grantee of a Rent Charge in Fee grants to one, that if he pays to him
or his Executors twenty Shillings by such a day, that he shall have Rent in
Fee, the Grantee dies without Heir, the second Grantee pays the money to the
Executors according to the appointment, the Rent is revived.

A. having Common Sans number in tail in two Acres, purchases one Acre, and
then has Issue, and dies; so that the Common in one Acre desdescends to the
same Issue, if the Common shall be revived in the other? If the Issue had
recovered one Acre against the Grantor by a Title before the Grant, there it
shall remain in the other Acre; for then it is as if but one Acre had been
charged at the first; but upon a Dissent there can be no apporcionment; for it
is gone and suspended for all, or revived in the residue for all; for Common
without Number is entire, and cannot be severed, but Common certain may be
apporcioned upon a Dissent.

If the Lord disseises his Tenant, and is disseised, and the Tenant enters, the
Seignory is revived.

If Tenant for life aliens in Fee to the Grantee of a Rent in Fee by his
Lessor, and the Lessor enters for a forfeiture, the Rent is revived.

Seisin.
LOrd and Tenant, the Lord having a Son dies, the Tenant makes a Feoffment, the
Son has Seisin of the Rent by the hands of the Feoffee; if this Seisin be
sufficient for the Son to maintain an Assize against his Disseisor after?

Severance of the Jointure.
IF Two Jointenants make a Lease for life, and after one grants his part to a
stranger for the life of the Lessee, some think it is a severance of the
Jointure.

If two Women Jointenants be Mesnes, and one of them marries the Tenant, the
Moity of the Mesnalty is suspended, and the Jointure severed.

Vide Jointenants.

Statutes.
THe Husband is bound in a Statute Merchant, and after he and the Wife levy a
Fine of the land of the wife to A. the Husband dies, the Statute shall not be
extended in the hands of A. for nothing thing passed from the Husband but the
Estate which he had during the Coverture, which is determined by his death; and
A. shall have the same benefit which the Heir of A. should have had, or as he
should have if the Wife had been discovert, and had granted it; for it is
lawful for a Fem covert to grant her Estate by Fine, and then it would be
against reason, that the Grantee of the Wife should not have it with the same
advantages which the Wife should have. But if the Land had been in Execution,
then it had been unavoidable, because it had been executed. If Tenant for life
and he in reversion levy a Fine, it shall be liable to the statute of Tenant
for life during his life only, and never shall be liable to the Statute of him
in reversion; for though the words of the Fine be joint, yet he may avoid it by
showing the truth of the matter. So in the principal case he may show that the
Estate of the Husband was during the Coverture only.

If the Grantee of a Rent Charge dies without Heir, the Land shall be bound
with a Statute Merchant entered into by him; for though it be determined, yet
the determination shall not have relation; for if the Tenant be bound in a
statute, and dies without Heir, it shall be extended against the Lord by
Escheat. And if one manumits a Villain, a Statute in which he was bound shall
be executed upon him, if the Writ of Execution did issue out against him before.

Land whereof a man has only Seisin in Law shall be liable to a Statute.

The Conisor of a Statute is in Execution and his Land also, the Conisee
releaseth to him all his Debts, the Execution it discharged; for the Debt
remains until it be levied of the profits.

If the Son be Tenant in tail, the remainder to the Father in Fee, the Father
is bound in a Statute, and dies, and the remainder descends upon the Son, he
aliens in Fee, or suffers a Common recovery, the Land is liable to the
Execution presently. As if the Lord had recovered in a Cessavit against Tenant
in tail with a remainder over, being charged, the Land in the Lords hand shall
be liable to the Statute of him in Remainder presently, as it shall be to the
Grant of a Rent by him, though as a remainder it was not liable.

Surrender.
LEssee for forty years makes a Lease for ten years, rendering a Rent, the first
Lessee surrenders, and the Lessor brings Debt against the second Lessee. Quaere.

If Lessee for years makes livery, as Atturny to the lessor, it was ruled in 34
Eliz. in C B. to be no surrender.

Tenant for life cannot surrender to him in Remainder for years; for he has a
Freehold in possession, which cannot drown in a Chattle.

If a lease be made to commence at Easter, and before Easter the lessee takes
another lease to begin presently, If that be a Surrender? Some think it is.

A lease is made for ten years, and after another lease is made to begin after
the first lease determined, the first lessee Surrenders, the second lessee may
enter, otherwise if the Reversion had been granted for ten years.

A lessee cannot make an Actual surrender before Entry.

If a lease be made for years, the remainder for years, the remainder to the
first Lessee in Fee, he in remainder may surrender to him, and yet he has
nothing in possession. So if there be lessee for years, the remainder for years
and the Fee descends to the first Termor, he in remainder may surrender

If A. makes a Lease for years to B. to begin at Michaelmas, and before the day
he enfeoffs B. B. dies before the day, and his Son enters, if the Executor may
enter upon the Heir is the question?

Tail.
A dies leaving Issue, two Daughters, Land is given by Deed in tail to the
youngest, and to the Heirs of the body of the Father begotten, and she has
Issue and dies, and the Issue brings a Formedon against the Eldest Daughter:
the question is what Estate the Daughter took?

Tenant in tail in Use, the remainder unto his right Heirs, enters upon the
Feoffees, and makes a Feoffment, and takes back an Estate in tail, the
remainder to his right Heirs, and after the Stat. of 27 H. 8. is made, and he
dies, how the Issue may avoid the second Estate tail, and take the first is the
question? It seems he cannot take the first Estate in Tail by no means; for
when he entered upon the Feoffees, and made a Feoffment, then the remainder in
Fee was not in him, yet by his Feoffment a Fee simple passed not determinable
by his death, but defeasible by the Entry of the Feoffees, then the Fee simple
must needs pass being he had the Use to his right Heirs, then when the Stat. of
27 H. 8. was made, the Use not being in Esse, but the right of an Use, the
possession is executed according to the right of the Use, and then when he dies
there is no Remitter to the Estate; for that was not in Esse.

A Gift in tail is made with Warranty accordingly, the Donee releaseth the
Warranty to the Donor, and after the reversion is granted, and the Donee
atturns. If the Issue in tail be impleaded he shall not vouch; for the release
has extinguished the Warranty for ever; for the Statute speaks of Tenements,
and a Warranty is no Tenement, but a Covenant real which is extinguished by
the Release, As if an Annuity be granted in tail, a Release of the Donor
extinguisheth it.

If Tenant in tail makes a Lease to begin at Easter, reserving a Rent, and
dies, and the Issue in tail enters, and makes a Feoffment before Eastar, the
Feoffee cannot avoid the lease; for the lease was not avoided by the Entry of
the Issue.

A lease is made for years, the remainder in tail, he in Remainder grants it
over in Fee, the Lessee atturns, the years expire, the Grantee enters, and dies
seized, Tenant in tail dies, his Issue may enter; for the Grant was not but for
the life of Tenant in tail, and then he did not die seized in Fee, and if the
dying seized had been after the death of Tenant in tail, it should not have
taken away his Entry. Tamen Quaere. But if the Issue of the Issue of the
Grantee had entered, and died seized, there his Entry had been taken away, and
if Tenant in tail enfeoffs the Donor, who dies seized; by most, that Dissent
will take away the Entry of the Issue.

Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment, and dies, the Feoffee makes a lease for
life, and grants the Reversion to the Issue, he shall not have a Formedon
against Tenant for life; for he has assented to the reversion. But if Tenant
in tail makes a lease, Pur auter vye, and dies notwithstanding the Dissent in
Fee of the reversion, the Issue shall have a Formedon; for the Reversion is
waived by using the Action.

If Donee in tail to him and his Heirs males, the Remainder to him and the
Heirs Females of his body, makes a Lease for years, reserving a Rent, and dies
without Issue Males, if the Heir Female accepts the Rent she shall be bound;
for the Lease was derived out of both their Estates, and she comes in by
descent, but if the Heir male had made a Lease and died without Issue, the Heir
Female cannot make that good by acceptance.

If Tenant in tail of a Seignory, to which a Villain is regardant, makes a
Lease to the Villain for one and twenty years, according to the Statute, and
dies within the Term: If the Issue being Remitted to the Freehold of his
Villain may enter into the Manor, and out the Villain?

Tenant in tail of a Seignory purchases the Tenancy, and before the Stat. of
Quia empto makes a Feoffment thereof, reserving a new Rent and dies, having
Issue, the Issue of necessity ought to have the last Seignory; for that
suspends the first. As if the Lord being Tenant in tail purchases the Mesnalty
in Fee, the Issue of him in whom both are suspended) cannot distrain for the
Rent of the Seignory, and choose to have that by descent; for the Mesnalty by
descent cast upon him is not waivable; for notwithstanding any act that he can
do to wave it, yet the Freehold and Fee remains in him before which another
has that by pernancy, but it seems if any takes it before the Issue makes an
Act to show that he will descent to it, then he may distrain for the Seignory.
As if Tenant in tail of a Seignory purchases the Tenancy and dies, the Issue
may distrain if another enters into the Land before him, but if he enters, and
after another enters upon hi^ he cannot distrain after.

Tenant in tail, the remainder to his own right Heirs, makes a Lease to the
Issue within age, upon Condition to have Fee, and at full age, during the Term
he performs the Condition, and after grants a Rent Charge, and the Grantee is
seized, and disseised, and brings an Assize, and pending that Tenant in tail
dies, the Assize is now abated by the Remitter, though the performance of the
Condition was at full age; for the contract was during the Minority, which is
the ground, and the Issue shall avoid the charge.

The Donor disseiseth Tenant in tail and dies, Tenant in tail and the Heir, who
is in by descent make a Lease to the Issue within age for life, the remainder
in Fee: Tenant in tail dies, although the Issue be remitted, yet the Remainder
is good; for it was once executed, and the remitter comes after.

Tenants in Common.
IF the Reversion be granted to Tenant for life and a Stranger in Fee, the
Jointure is severed; for the Tenant for life has the Feesimple in the Moity
executed presently. But if the reversion be granted to Tenant in tail and
another in Fee, the Jointure in the Eee remains, but if the Husband be Tenant
for life, and the reversion is granted to him and his wife, the Fee remains in
them in Jointure; for there are no Moities between them. If a Lease be made to
two, Habendum the one Moity to one, and the other moity to the other for life,
and after a Confirmation is made to them and their Heirs, the Jointure of the
Fee is severed and they are Tenants in common thereofasthey were of the
Frehold; for a confirmation inures according to the nature of the estate on
which it inures, and does not alter the Estate, 9 H. 6.9. But if the Reversion
had been granted to them in Fee they had been Jointenants of the Fee presently;
for their Fee in Jointure drowns their several Estates of Freehold. But if
there be Tenants in Common for life, and two Jointenants of the Reversion, and
one of them purchases of one Tenant for life his Estate, and the other of the
other, the Jointure is severed; for when one of them purchased the Estate of
one Tenant for life, he had the Moity of the Fee executed to the Moity of the
Freehold, and by that the Jointure was presently severed, but in the other case
they come to the Reversion at one instant, and that is the diversity. Land is
given to Baron and Fem, Habendum the one moity to the Husband, the other moity
to the Wife, and after the Land is confirmed to them in special tail,
reserving a Hauk, the Donor shall have two Hauks, for the Husband had the one
moity of the Inheritance, because his possession was severed from the
possession of his Wife, so that of that Moity the Husband is seized in his own
right in special tail, and the Wife has nothing in it. Then of the other
moity whereof the Wife was Tenant in Common with her Husband, the Husband is
seized in right of his Wife, which is a sufficient Estate, whereupon a
Confirmation may inure. If Land be given to the Husband for life, the remainder
to the Wife for life, and their Estates are confirmed in tail, the Husband
shall have one moity in tail only, and he and his Wife the other moity: and yet
the Estate tail is not executed for any part. Quaere, for it is a good moot
case. If Land be given to two, and the Heirs of their bodies begotten, and the
Donor confirms the Land to them in Fee, they are not Jointenants of the Fee:
for the Estate tail was executed to such purpose, and so the confirmation
inures severally. If Tenant pur auter vye be of a Tenancy, and the Seignory is
granted to him and another in Fee, the Jointure is severed presently, and if
Cesty que vye dies, yet the Seignory is not in Jointure; for it was so at the
first. But if a Seignory is granted to two in Fee, and after one accepts the
Tenancy, pur auter vye, and Cesty que vye dies, now the Jointure remains,
because it was Joint at the beginning.

If Land be given to A. and a Dean and Chapter, and his Successors, and Livery
is made to A. in the name of both, nothing vests in the Dean because they take
it severally, and in common, by reason of their several capacities, and so no
privity between them; for a Release to one Tenant in common will not inure to
his Companion, but if the Discontinuee in tail enfeoffs the Issue in tail
within age and another, and makes Livery to the Infant in both their names,
though the Infant shall be remitted for a moity, yet the other takes a moity,
and they shall be Tenants in common; for their capacities are not several, but
they take severally by operation of the Law; for first it vests, and then he is
remitted.

Tenant by the Courtesy.
IF there be Tenant by the Courtesy of an Advowson, and he in reversion is
presented by a Stranger, his Heir shall not avoid it; for it was during the
life of Tenant by the Courtesy, and he shall not be said to be Tenant for life,
and the stranger has gained the Patronage, and he was not but an Atturny to
convey it to him.

If the Tenant marries the Seignoresse, or the Seignoresse takes an Estate for
life of the Tenancy, and after marries, the Husband shall not be Tenant by the
Courtesy; for the Freehold of the Tenancy was in suspense, and then he could
not be Tenant by the Courtesy of such a Reversion. But if she had taken an
Estate for years, or the Tenant had been her Ward, and after she had married,
and died, during that Estate he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy; for the
Freehold was not in suspense, but the possession for years only.

Land is given to two Women Quant diu simul vixerint, the remainder to the
right Heirs of her who first dies, one of them takes Husband, has Issue, and
dies, the Husband shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy; for she had not the sole
possession.

Tenant by the Courtesy of a Seignory, and a Tenancy Escheats, and he makes a
Feoffment with Warranty of it. If that shall be a bar to the Issue without
Assetts? is the Question.

If one has a Son which is a Bastard Eign, and a Daughter Mulier Puisne, and
dies seized of a Rent, the Daughter having a Husband, and after the Bastard
gets the Rent, and thereof dies seized, and that descends unto his Issue, yet
the Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy; for the Rent was in Esse (at the
time of the Descent) in the Daughter, and she may choose whether or no she will
admit her self out of possession.

Tenures.
IF there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant holds by four pence, and the
Mesne by twelve pence, and the Tenant makes a Gift in tail, saying nothing, and
the Reversion Escheats after that, some think the Donee shall hold by twelve
pence, so if the Mesnalty descends to the Donor, the Donee shall hold by twelve
pence, and if the Mesne had released to the Donor, the Donee shall hold by
twelve pence. As if the Tenant had made a gift in tail, the remainder in fee,
and the remainder had escheated, the Donee shall hold by twelve pence; for the
first Services which he paid, and the first Tenure is extinct by the unity of
the remainder to the Seignory, so it is clear the Mesnalty is extinct, viz. the
four pence, then the Donee shall hold by twelve pence, and it is all one as if
the Mesne had released to him in remainder, and the reason in the principal
case why the Tenure of the Donee shall be charged, is, because the Law makes
the Tenure of the Donor in respect of the Mesnalty, and when the Mesnalty is
extinct, the Tenure between the Donor and the Donee is extinct also, and then
by the same reason that theDonee shall take advantage, if the Donor by release
or Dissent had held by lesser Services, he shall be prejudiced when he holds by
greater Services. And some think if the Wife of the Donee in tail, of which the
Law makes the Tenure be endowed, and after the Estate is extinct, she shall
hold by Fealty only, otherwise if the Tenure had been reserved by express
words, and if the Wife of the Tenant be endowed, and after the reversion
Escheats, the Wife shall hold by Fealty only. If the Tenant who holds by four
pence, makes a Gift in Frankmarriage, and after the Donor dies without Heirs,
so that the reversion is held by twelve pence, Quaere, how the Donees shall
hold? whether by such services as the Donor held when the Gift was made? or by
such as the reversion is now held by? If a Gift in Frankmarriage be made, the
Donees (after the fourth degree) shall hold as the Donor holds over. If a Gift
in tail be made, rendering two pence during the life of the Father of the Donee,
during his life the Issue shall hold by the Reservation of the party, and after
his death by reservation of the Law. If an Encroachment of Services be made
upon the Husband, the wife endowed shall not be contributory, and yet the Heir
shall not avoid it.

A man has issue two Daughters, and holds Land of the Eldest by Suit and a
Hawk, and dies, the Daughters assign a third part to the mother in Dower, and
after make Partition. Tenant in Dower shall not be contributory for any part of
the Services; for the reversion remains in Parcenary between them; for they
cannot make partition thereof, and then the whole Seignory is in suspense. And
yet if Land holden by a Hawk descend upon the Seignoresse and her sister, and
they make Partition, the Seignoresse shall have the Hawk, but there is no Suit;
for by the Statute of Marlebr. cap. 9. the Eldest shall perform it, and the
other shall be contributory, then if she be Seignoress she cannot do it her
self. But the reason in the principal case why the youngest shall not be
charged, is, because the Seignory is in suspense, and it cannot be in Essc for
another parcel.

The Tenancy, being a Manor, is holden by twelve pence of another Manor,
which is the Mesnalty, and holden by six pence, and the Mesne enfeoffs the
Tenant of the Manor, which is the Mesnalty, now he shall hold both the Manors
of the Lord by one Joint tenure of six pence, and the Lord shall avow upon the
Tenant, because the two Manors are holden of him by six pence, so had it been
if the Tenancy had escheated to the Mesnalty, and the one Manor is parcel of
the other, there the Tenancy has not lost the name of a Manor; for the Land
which was held of the Tenancy is not held of another Manor which was the
Mesnalty, but as it was before, 39 H. 6. 9. b. where one Manor may be parcel
of another.

If the Tenant who holds by one Hauk makes a Feofment of a Moity to a stranger,
or of the whole to a Mayor and Commonalty and A. now the Lord Paramount shall
have two Hawks; for they are several Feofments; for if livery had bin made to
one in the name of both, nothing passes but to him who took the Livery, and
the Lord shall be compelled to make several Avouries, which proves that he
shall have several Hawks. If the Tenant who holds by two several Hawks makes
a Gift in tail to two several persons, reserving a Rent, Habendum the one Moity
to one, and the other Moity to the other, so that they have several Estates in
tail, the Donor shall have two Hawks; for the Law makes the Tenure, and
reservation, but if the party had reserved it by special words, As if a man
makes a Lease, Habendum one Moity to one, the other Moity to the other,
reserving one Hawk, or makes a Lease, Pur auter vye, to A. and to a Dean and
Chapter, reserving one Hawk, and the Land goes two several ways, and he does
reserve but one Hawk, he shall not have more than he reserved.

If a Reversion at the beginning goes several ways, yet they shall not have
more than is reserved, if it were special reservation by the party.

Land is given to two, and to the Heirs of their two bodies begotten, the
remainder to their right Heirs, and the Land before was holden by one Hawk, the
Lord shall now have but one Hawk, and yet they are not Jointenants of the Fee
simple, but there is no apporcionment by Moities, but if a Lease be made for
life of two Acres, the remainder in Fee of one to A. and of the other to B.
there he shall have two Hawks.

Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant makes a Gift in tail, the remainder in
Fee, the remainder Escheats, upon whom the Lord shall avow, and of whom the
Donee shall hold is the question? So if the Tenant makes a Gift in tail to the
Mesne, the remainder in Fee, or makes a Gift in tail to a stranger, the
remainder in Fee to the Mesne, how the Tenure shall be now is the Question? But
in the first case, if the Mesne had released to him in remainder, or to the
Donee in tail, it seems the Donee ought to avow upon the Donee in tail, and
that the Donee shall hold immediately of the Lord Paramount after the release.
Quaere, if there be any difference?

The Tenant who holds by Homage and ten shillings Rent, makes a Lease for life,
the remainder in tail, not speaking of any reservation, the Tenant for life
(although he does not hold by Homage) yet he shall hold by Fcalty and ten
shillings Rent, being both the Estates, now are but one: But a Gift had been
made in tail, the remainder for life, after the Estate tail determined, the
Tenant for life shall not hold by the same services as the Donee held, Causa
patet. If there be two Jointenants, and to the Heirs of one of them ( who hold,
ut supra) make a Gift in tail, the Donee shall hold of them both by the like
Services, and yet the Freehold is no cause of the tenure. Quaere, for some say
that he that has the Fee shall have the whole Tenure; for the Inheritance
passes only from him. If Tenant for life, and he in reversion make a Gift in
tail, Quaere how he shall hold? If a Lease be made for life, the remainder in
Frankmarriage, some think the Tenant for life shall hold by Fealty only, until
the fourth degree be past.

If there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and twenty shillings, and the Tenant
gives in Frankmarriage, to hold of him and his Heirs by Fealty only until the
fourth degree be past, and after by twenty shillings and Chivalry, in that case
after the fourth degree be past, he shall not have the twenty shillings, nor
the Chivalry; for though he reserved but Fealty until the fourth degree be
past, yet it is an entire reservation presently, and the services are in him
although they be not to be performed until the fourth degree be past, and
Seisin of the Fealty shall be a Seisin of the rest, and therefore the
reservation being entire, that is the reason that it is void for all, because
all cannot be reserved upon the Gift in Frankmarriage.

Testament.
IF a man makes several Wills, of several dates, and dies, and the Executor
of the last Will refuses before the Ordinary, yet the first Will is clearly
defeated, and yet the refusal is peremptory: but it is not so if there be two
Executors, and one refuses before the Ordinary. If a Fem sole makes her Will,
and then marries, and he dies. Quaere, if the Will be revoked.

Villain.
IF the Lord devises Land to his Villain, he shall be enfranchised against the
Heir, and yet he was a Villain to the Heir at the same time the devise took
effect; but being the Lord had a power to enfranchise him, he shall be
enfranchised. As if one delivers an Escrowl of Enfranchisement to be delivered
seven years after, the Lord dies, and then the Deed is delivered to the
Villain, it is a good enfranchisement. If a man makes a Lease for life, the
remainder to the right Heirs of A. who has Issue, a Son who is a Villain by
Confession to the Feoffor, and the Feoffor dies, and A. dies, and the Tenant
for life dies, the Son of A. enters, he shall be enfranchized, and yet he was
not enfranchized in the life of the Feoffor, but now he shall be said in by
him. So if a man devise that his Executors shall sell his Land, and they sell
it to the Villain of the Testator, he shall be enfranchised against the Heir;
for he comes in in the Per by the Testator.

If a Fem be endowed of a Villain in gross, and the Tenant in Dower and the
Heir enter together into Land purchased by the Villain. Quaere in whom the
Freehold shall be. So if he had been a Villain to an Abbe and a Secular man;
for his body is entire to every of them. And if the Grantee for life of a
Villain, and he in reversion of a Villain enter together into Land of the
Villain, it seems that Tenant for life shall gain all, but some think that he
in reversion shall disable him in an Action.

If Executors have a Villain that the Testator had, and enter into Land
purchased by the Villain, it shall be Assetts notwithstanding they have a Fee,
as Land in Fee descended to the Heir shall be assetts to a Chattle, viz. a Debt
to a Stranger. And the reason why they shall have it to the use of the Testator
is, because they had it in auter droit, and so it shall be a Perquisite unto
the same right. So if a Guardian in Socage of a Manor to which a Villain is
regardant, enters into Land purchased by the Villain, it shall be to the use of
the Infant. So if a Bishop enters into Land purchased by a Villain, which he
has in right of his Church, the Land shall be to the same use, so is 42 E. 3.
24. But if one has a Villain for years in his own right, he shall have a Fee
in the Land purchased by the Villain. It was said if a man be entitled to be
Tenant by the Courtesy of a Villain, and enters into Land purchased by him, he
shall be seized of the Land to his own use, and not in right of his Wife,
because he has the Villain in his own right; but, Quaere, if he were not
entitled to be Tenant by Courtesy?

If the Lord of a Villain gives Land by Fine to the Villain, which is Land of
Ancient Demesne, the Lord reverseth the Fine by Disceit, some think the
Manumission is destroyed; for it does not appear upon Record; otherwise if he
enfeoffs his Villain upon Condition, and enters for the breach. And if a
Villain acknowledges an Action brought by Baron and Fem, that is no
Enfranchisement against the Fem; for it is but an Enfranchisement in Law upon
which she is not examined.

The Tenant enfeoffs the Villain of the Lord and a Stranger, upon Collusion,
the matter is how the Lord may obtain the Ward without Damages? For if he
brings a Writ of Ward, the Villain shall be manumitted, and if he enters upon
the Villain he avoids the Collusion for ever, and shall retain the Land, but
then he shall be Tenant in Common with the other, and so he can have no Writ of
Ward for the other Moity.

If Tenant in tail of a Manor to which a Villain is regardant makes a Lease
for one and twenty years to the Villain, rendering a Rent according to the
statute, and dies within the term, if the Issue being remitted to the Freehold
of the Villain may enter into the Manor and out the Villain?

Upon a plea in Bar of an Assize the parties are adjourned, and after the
Tenant pleads a Release made after the Darrein Continuance, bearing date in a
foreign County, and after at the Venire fac. returned, the Tenant pleads that
after the Darrein Continuance he has purchased the Manor to which the
Plaintiff is a Villain, he shall not have this plea; for he shall not delay
the Plaintiff by his plea, but once, where the matter of fact happens de puisne
temps; for he is at no mischief if his plea be true: But in showing a Record
after he shall plead it if it be in the same Court. And here the Villain shall
not be enfranchized; for the Plea was pleaded before, which now he ought to
maintain: but if he answers his Villain de Novo, that is an Enfranchisement.

Voucher.
THe youngest son of an Abator has Land by descent by the custom of Borough
English, or by reason of an Estate tail made to his Father and a second Wife,
in a Mortdancester brought against him he shall vouch, notwithstanding the
Counterplea given by the Statute; for the Statute extends but to Heirs at
common Law; and therefore if an Abator has Issue, two Daughters, and makes a
Feoffment and dies, and one of them takes a Feofment, and an Assize is brought
against her, she shall vouch; for she is not sole Heir: but if she had been
sole Heir, then clearly she shall not vouch, though she does not come to it as
Heir. And if an Abator and a stranger being Tenants in a Mortdancester, vouch,
they shall have the Voucher.

If Feoffee with Waranty to him, his Heirs and Assigns makes a Lease for life,
the Tenant for life in a plea vouches the first Feoffor, and recovers in value
Land held of the Feoffee, if the Feoffee shall have his Seignory? For if the
Reversion of the Land recovered be in the Feoffee, then he shall not avow, and
if he shall not. Quaere, if Lessee for life shall vouch as Assignee, being that
he has not all the Estate; And it is clear if the Feoffee had made a Lease for
life, the remainder in Fee, the Lessee shall vouch as Assignee, and if he
recovers in value, the remainder shall be in him in whom it was before. 28 Ass.
p. 18. 11 Ass. p. 3.

If the younger brother and a Stranger abate, and the Stranger dies, now a
Mortdancester does not lie; or if an Abator makes a Feoffment, and retakes an
Estate to himself and another, and the other dies, the Voucher does not lie for
him; and yet before, an Assize of Mortdancester and Voucher did lie.

If a Feoffment be made with Warranty to one, his Heirs and Assigns, the
Feoffee makes a Feoffment over, the second Feoffee enfeoffs the Son of the
first Feoffee, he shall vouch; for he may be Assignee of his Father, being he
does not come in as Heir. Lord by Escheat, Mortmain, or of a Villain, etc.
shall not be said Assignees.

Land is given to Husband and Wife, and to the Heirs of the Husband, he makes a
Feoffment with Warranty and dies, the Wife brings her Cui in vita, the Feoffee
vouches and recovers in value by reason of the Warranty, after the death of the
Wife he shall vouch again by reason of the Warranty aforesaid. So if a Woman
brings a Writ of Dower, and the Feoffee vouches by reason of the Warranty, he
shall vouch again after the death of the Wife, because the Voucher and Recovery
in value was only in respect of the Freehold; but if he had once recovered in
value of the Fee, he should never vouch again by reason of the first Warranty;
for he has the effect of it, and also the Warranty is gone with the Estate.
But if Tenant in Frankmarriage recovers in value, he shall vouch again; but it
is otherwise of Tenant for life. If Tenant in tail, to him and his Heirs
Females, the remainder to him in Fee, makes a Feoffment with Warranty and dies,
the Heir Female recovers, and the Feoffee recovers over in value, he shall
vouch again after the Estate tail is spent by reason of the first Warranty.

If the Tenant vouches, and at the Sequat. sub suo periculo the Tenant and the
Vouchee make Default, whereupon the Demandant has Judgment to recover against
the Tenant, and after he brings a Seire fac. against the Tenant to execute the
Judgment, if the Tenant shall have a Warrantia Chartae against the Vouchee?
But if a stranger brings a Praecipe quod reddat against the Tenant, some think
that he shall vouch; for by the first Voucher and the Judgment given against
the Tenant the Warranty was not defeated, nor the possession of the Tenant; but
if the Tenant had judgment to recover in value against the Vouchee, he shall
never vouch again by reason of this warranty: for the warranty has lost its
force, being he had Judgment to recover in value by reason of it; for if he
should recover again, he should have 2 Recoveries upon one warranty. It was
holden clearly, that if the tenant has Judgment against the Vouchee, he shall
recover no land in value, but that the Vouchee had at the time of the Judgment.
And note upon a Summoneas ad Warrantizand. if the Sheriff returns the Vouchee
warned, and he makes default, the Tenant shall have a Cap. ad val. and recover
in value, but if he returns, that he has nothing, then after the Sicut alias,
and pluries, a Sequatur sub suo periculo shall issue, and there if the Vouchee
makes default he shall not have Judgment to recover in value; for the Warranty
is not confessed, and it is uncertain whether he had any thing, but in the Cap.
ad val. it appears that he has Assetts.

A. seized of two Acres at Common Law, and one in Borough English, and makes a
Gift in tail to a Stranger of one of the two Acres, and dies, the Donee, is
impleaded, and vouches the eldest Son, and recovers in value the other Acre out
of his possession (as he shall do in this case, being he vouches him alone, and
not the youngest, where the eldest has assetts) the question is if he be
impleaded for that Acre he has recovered, if he shall vouch the eldest and the
youngest? If that Acre in Borough English shall be liable by reason of the said
Warranty in Law, being it is not the Warranty which descends, but the Warranty
in Law commenceth first in the Eldest Son; for the Recovery in value shall be
said in lieu of the first Land given, yet it is always to be intended (having
regard to the estate of the Reversion descended from the Father) the Reversion
left in the Eldest Son, and then the Acre of the youngest is not liable to that
Warranty. So if the Father had given a Seignory to the Eldest Son in tail, and
died seized of Land in Borough English, which descended to the youngest Son,
and after the Tenancy escheats, the Eldest being impleaded vouches himself to
save the Intail; but if the Land of the youngest shall be liable, is the
question?

Lessee for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of A. who is dead, having a
Daughter, his Wife enseint with a Son, the Lessor warrants the Land in forma
praedicta, the Son is born, the Daughter cannot vouch by reason of the
Warranty; for the Warranty is a thing executory which cannot be deraigned, but
by the right Heirs of A. For if a Feoffment be made to the Son with Warranty,
and he dies without Issue, and the Land comes from the Uncle to the Father, he
cannot take advantage of this Warranty as Heir to his Son; so if Possessio
Fratris makes the Sister Heir, she shall not vouch, 35 H. 6. 34. Danby; but he
shall be voucht as Heir for the possession, so shall the Father, so shall the
youngest Son in Borough English, but shall not vouch, Vide Fitzh. Voucher 94.
35 H. 6. 33. If Land be given to two brothers in Fee with Warranty to the
eldest, the eldest dies having Issue, and the youngest dies without Issue, the
Issue of the Eldest being his Heir, and he enters, he shall not take advantage
of this Warranty by Voucher or Rebutter; for the Warranty was void, having
regard to the Survivor, because his Title has relation before the Warranty.

If the Eldest Son is voucht as Heir to the Warranty, and the youngest as Heir
in Borough English, and the Eldest voucheth over, if the Eldest or the youngest
shall have the Recompense in value? It would be unreasonable, that the eldest
should have it, for he lost nothing, for by the law the tenant cannot sue
Execution against the Vouchee, until the demandant, has sued execution
against him, and in this Case execution was never sued against the Eldest, for
he has no land, and the youngest has not the warranty by descent, (though he
has the land) and so he cannot vouch, and therefore it is hard he should be
bard by it.

Wast.
LAnd is given to Baron and Fem, and to a third person, the third person
releaseth the Fem all his right, and the Baron and Fem makes a Lease of the
whole for years, and brings a writ of Wast against the Lessee.

The Lessee is not punishable in Wast if a house falls that was ruinous at the
time of the demise, and he may cut Trees to repair it, so he may do if the
Lessor covenants to repair it, vid. 12, H. 8. 1. If a house with land is let,
upon which is a Wood without impeachment of wast for the house, yet if the
house becomes ruinous, he may cut timber for the reparation, and a Lessee may
take timber for fier-boot, if there be no other wood. quod vid. 21. H. 6. 47.
If a man makes a lease upon condition, or that the Lessee is bound in an
obligation not to do wast, and that his estate shall cease: If a Stranger
commits Wast, that is no forfeiture of the Lease, for the condition extends
only to the person of the Lessee. vid. 3. H. 6. 17. But if a stranger commits
Wast upon the Lessee for years, or Guardian in Chivalry, they shall render
treble and shall lose the ward, but Guardian in Socage shall not be punished for
wast of a stranger, for the heir himself shall have an action.

If a Lease is made for life, the Lessor dies having two Sons by diverse
venters, the eldest grants to the Lessee that he shall be dispunisht of wast,
yet that shall not bind the youngest, for he does not claim as heir to his
brother, but as an heir to his father, who was last actually seized.

Fem tenant for life, the remainder for years to I. S. who marries with the
Fem, and Commits wast. quaere, if the land be lost? If tenant for life makes a
lease for years, and after enters upon the termor, and commits wast, and the
Lessor recovers, the Lessee shall lose his term. A man shall not be punished
for coming on the land to see if wast be committed.

The heir makes a Lease for years, wast is committeed, the wife recovers in
Dower, the heir shall have an action of wast in the tenuit.

A man makes a lease for twenty years without impeachment of Wast, and the
Lessor confirms for forty years, the Lessee shall be dispunisht for twenty
years

A man makes a lease rendering rent on condition, that if the rent be behind,
that the Lessor shall reenter and retain until he be satisfied the rent out of
the profits, the Lessor does enter and a stranger commits wast, and then the
Lessor is satisfied of the rent, if the wast be punishable.

If one does devise his lands which he has for years and dies, the Executors
commits wast, and then agree to the devise, an action of wast lies against
them, notwithstanding the relation; So if Lessee for years grants his term upon
condition, and the grantee commits wast, and the Lessee for years enter for the
condition broken, yet wast lies against the grantee.

Where a man has election to take two estates, his committing of wast will be
a determination of his election.

If there be Lessee for life, the remainder for life, and the Lessor grants the
reversion to him in remainder, quaere, if he shall have an action of wast? If
Tenant for life makes a lease for years, and enters and commits wast, the
tenant for years leases his term, wast by the assignee of an infant or fem
Covert shall take away the special right of Infancy Coverture or condition, but
otherwise if it had it been made by themselves.

Warranty.
GRandfather Father and Son, the Grandfather makes a lease of an Acre for life,
and dies, the Father being tenant in tail, discontinues it in Fee with
warranty, and dies, the tenant for life dies, the Son enters into the Acre
after his death, and brings a Formedon, the warranty of the Father with this
Assets seems no bar.

The discontinuee of a tenant in tail makes a Feofment on condition, and a
warranty collateral is made to the Feoffee of the discontinuee, the
discontinuee enters for the condition bro ken, the issue has no remedy against
him.

If a Collateral Warranty descends within a year upon him that has Title to
enter for Mortmain, he cannot enter after; for if he himself had re leased he
could not have entered, and the Warranty will bind him as well as his Release:
but Quaere, if a collateral Warranty extends to a Title of Entry?

If a man devises Land with Warranty, that is void; because the Father himself
was not bound.

A Warranty made to a Disseisor is not destroyed by the Release of the
Disseisee.

A Collateral Warranty shall not bar Execution of a Recovery in value; for it
is but a Title, to which a Warranty does not ex^end no more than to bar a Title
of Entry; for consent to a Ravisher or Mortmain, also Conditions and Titles are
always said to be in possession as a Rent is, and then a Warranty to the Tenant
of the Land will not extinguish them.

Lord by Escheat shall not vouch by reason of a Warranty, if a Seignory be
granted with Warranty, and a Tenancy Escheat, the Warranty shall not extend to
it. Vide Fitzh. 18. Voucher.

Father and Son and a third person are Jointenants, the Father makes a Feofment
of all with Warranty, and dies, the Son dies, the third shall have an Assize of
but one part by some, and yet the warranty commences by Disseisin, as to the
Son, but yet the Survivor cannot deny but that this Warranty is collateral;
for he comes not under the estate of the other. If a Lease be made for years to
the Grandfather, remainder to the Father for life, remainder to the Son in Fee,
the Grandfather enfeoffs with Warranty, it comences by disseisin to theFather,
and collateral to theSon; for the Feofment was not a disseisin to the son. If
the Father be Lessee for years, remainder for life to the son, remainder over
for life, remainder in Fee to the Son, the Father enfeofs with Warranty, it
comences by disseisin as to the son for theFreehold, but for the Fec it is
collateral. Quaere by some in all cases every man shall a void a Warrantywhich
comences by disseisin. vid. Fitz. War. 28.

If a Lease for life be made, remainder for years with Warranty. Quaere, if
this Warranty will benefit him in remainder, being the precedent estate is of
another nature.

If a man makes a Lease for life on Condition that if the Lessee does such an
act, that the Lessee shall have Fee, and warrants the Land in forma, praedicta,
that Warranty extends to the Fee, but if the Feoffor dies, and then the
Condition is performed, then if it be available is the Question? being the
Lessor was not bound to Warranty during his life, and then the Warranty which
was annexed to the Freehold is gone; for the greater estate drowns the lesser.
And to provethat the greater drowns the Warranty, it was said if Tenant in tail
be with Warranty to him, his Heirs and Assigns, hisFeofee in Fee shall not
besaid assignee, nor vouch, because he has not any part of the Estate tail. It
was also said, that if the condition had been performed in the life of the
Lessor, that the Warranty would not extend to it; for it must be annexed to
something in possession. But some take a difference, that if in the first case
the firstLease had been for years, that the Warrantycould not extend to the
remainder, because the first estate was but for years, and of another nature,
but it would be otherwise in a Lease for life. And it was said if a Lease for
years be made, remainder in Fee with Warranty, he in remainder cannot take
advantage of the Warranty, because he Was not privy to the first deed, and
thenhe cannot take as an immediate Warranty, because the first Estate was of
another nature, a reversion descends to Barow and Fem Lessees for life as to
the Issues of two parceners, theHusband dies, thewife shall have the
wholeFreehold asSurvivor, and the Fee shall be executed for a moity, because
the other moity goes another way, sc. to the Heirs of the Husband, and he shall
dereign the Warranty annexed in Fait to the first estate for the moity, and not
for the other moity, because the Fee is executed. If Land be bargained and sold
by Indenture in Fee with warranty, and the Indenture is delivered, and after
enrolled within six months, if he shall vouch, Quaere, because the nature of a
Covenant is, that it ought to take effect presently by the delivery of the
deed, and then the Warranty was void, because the Land did not pass at that
instant, and though the Inrollment makes it to pass ab initio, yet the relation
shall not make a void Warranty good. To which it was said, if one makes a
Feofment with a Letter of Atturny, and warranty is in the deed, by the delivery
the Warranty shall be good, and yet the deed was delivered before.

If a gift in tail be made with warranty to a man, his Heirs and Assigns, and
he makes a Feofment and dies, with Issue in a Formedon in Reverter, the
warranty shall not be a bar, not with standing the book of the 39 and 45 E. 3.
4. If the Lord confirms the estate of the Tenant with warranty, and after the
Tenant ceases, the warranty shall not be a bar in a Cessavit, notwithstanding
the Seignory which was in Esse before the warranty made was the conveyance to
his action, because the action a rises upon an after cause. Tenant by the
courtesy of a Seignory whereof a Tenancy escheat make a Feofment with warranty,
if it shall be a bar to the Issue without Assets? Quaere.

A Fem which has a Rent Charge in Fee marries with the Tenant of the Land, a
stranger release to the Tenant with warranty, the warranty cannot extend to the
Rent, because theRent was suspended by act in Law, and the wife if the Husband
dies, nor the Heir of the wife, living the Husband, cannot have any action for
the rent upon a Title before the warranty made; for if theHeir of the wife
brings a Mortdancester, that is de puisne temps, and after the warranty; so if
the Grantee of a rent grant it on condition to the Tenant, who makes aFeofment
of the Land with warranty, thatwarranty cannot extend to the rent and yet
theLand was discharged of the rent; but all the actions shall be took as the
cause of action arises afterward; for if the condition be broken, and after an
action be given, that shall arise after the warranty made: but if a Fem which
has a rent marries with the Tenant, who makes a Feoffment of the Land with
warranty and dies, and the wife brings a Cui in vita of the rent, there the
Feoffee shall vouch as of Land discharged. So if Tenant in tail of a rent
purchases the Land, and makes a Feofment, and the Feoffee aliens with warranty,
or if Tenant in tail of a rent releases to the ter Tenant who aliens over with
Warranty, if the Issue brings a Formedon he shall vouch as of Land discharged.
So if an Infant has a rent, and disseises the Tenant, and is disseised by
another, who aliens with warranty, that warranty shall extend to the rent,
because in all these cases the Land is discharged of the rent at the time of
the Feofment in Fee; and the action is conceived upon a Title Paramount to the
warranty. But if a man grants a Rent Charge out of Land to commence at Mich.
and the Tenant makes a Feoffment with warranty, or if a rescous be made, and
after the Tenant makes a Feofment of the Land with warranty, as it is in 31 E.
3. in a Warrantia chartae, there the warranty shall not extend to the rent,
because the rent was not in esse at the time, but if upon a rescous she brings
an Assize, and after is nonsuited, and after the Tenant makes a Feofment of the
Land with warranty, that warranty will extend to the Rent, Quod nota.

A man dies seized of an Acre in Borough English in tail, having three Sons,
the youngest enters, and makes a lease to the second for years, who makes a
Feofment with warranty, and dies without Issue, the youngest dies without Issue,
the eldest brings a Formedon, if he shall be barred by the warranty? It seems
though the warranty descends upon the eldest where it was a disseisin to the
youngest, yet when the right of the Land comes unto him he shall say that the
warranty comences by disseisin, because he is now privy to the warranty, and to
the estate; for if the Father seized in fee makes a lease to the Grandfather
for years, who makes a Feofment in Fee with warranty and dies, and the Father
dies, that warranty shall not be a bar to the son, because it comenc'd by
disseisin to him whose Heir he is. And if a man has Issue two Sons, the
youngest makes a Lease for years to the Father, who makes a Feofment with
warranty and dies, and after the Eldest dies without Issue, and the warranty
descends upon the youngest, that shall be no bar, because it comences by
disseisin; and though the Land does come immediately to him upon whom the
warranty descends, as it was in the principal case, or although the warranty
does not descend upon the Tenant of the land immediately as heir to him
thatmade the warranty, yet all is one Warranty which ommences by disseisin, and
wrong is made to him in the interim, upon whom the warranty descends after,
although that wrong was not a dissesin to him, yet it is a warranty which
commences by disseisin; As if an Ancestor Collateral to the Donor, desseise the
Donee, to the intent to make a feofment, with warranty, which is done
accordingly, and the warranty descends upon the donor, and after tenant in tail
dies without issue, in a formedon in reverter, the warranty shall be no bar,
because it commences by disseisin to the tenant in tail, at which time wrong
was made to him in reversion, and therefore he shalsay that the warranty
commences by desseisin, tamen vid. 30. E. 3. 12. But if a man makes a feofment
with warranty and dies, which is a disseisin to a stranger, the heir of the
Feoffor(if he has not the right of the land descended to him after) shall be
vouched for the warranty, then in the principal case, if the eldest cannot say
that the warranty commences by disseisin, yet it shall be lineal against him,
for by possibility he might have made himself (...) to him that made the (...)
for the land does descend to the youngest heir, as well as to the youngest Son,
and so to the youngest uncle, for the reason is all one, for the young'st
brother shall be in as youngest Son to the common Ancester: but some say there
is not any reason in these two cases.

If tenant in tail is desseised, and release to the desseisor with warranty,
and after is attained of felony, and has a Charter of pardon and dies; it
^^^ms it is a discontinu^^ce, for if he had purchase^ land after his Charter,
it would descend to his heir, which proves that the blood betwixt him and his
he^ ^^^ot corrupt, as it is between him and his Ances(...) then the warranty
being in esse at the time (...) death there is no i^pediment, but that (...)
descend: But if t^nant in rail, who has a (...) annexed to h^s estate, be
attained of sell(...) executed, many think his issue (...) not i^herit the
voucher for the warranty (...)th the land; for the warranty is out of (...) de
Donis Condit, which (...) of (...)ements which are given upon addition (...)
sowd. thinks the contrary for by the equity (...) statute, it is pres(...) as
well (...) Charters (...) 1. H. 6, 20. per M(...) 60. b. C. (...) for Charters.

Feoffee with (...) by the Feoffor who dies sell (...) he issues who brings a
w^^^ of (...) ^oyned upon the mecre (...) the (...) barred, for if the Feoffee
(...) ^^mpleaded (...) ^^ranger, shall arraine the w^^^ (...) aganist (...)
Issue, is the question.


