A Pleasant Discourse by way of DIALOGUE, between the OLD and NEW JACK CATCH,
Occasioned upon the Latters being Whipped from Rosemary-Lane to the Hermitage,
on Thursday the 21th. of January, 1685. for Scandalous Words, etc. or The
Hangman turneing Tumbler-Shower.
Old Catch, HA -- my Old Friend, how luckely have I found you this Morning;
methinks you look a little muddy about the Gills: Prithee Man, how fares it
with thee?


New Catch, But very indifferent, such a Journey as I had the other day, must
needs, you may well think, put a man of my Profession into a Sweat; little did
I think, I should be put upon such a Ramble.


O.C. I heard indeed, that you was turned Ambler, and was put upon running a
Race, from Rosemary-Lane to the Hermitage; but it seems, you was so dull, that
had you not been spurred to it, it is Ten Crowns to a Nutshell, but you would a
declined it.


N.C. Come, come, Jack, mocking is catching: It little becomes you to Scoff at
your Friend; it may be your own Case another day, and if I am not misinformed,
you have been within a Spit and a Stride of it already.


O.C. But was so cunning, you see, to shift it off to him that would needs be
taking my Trade cut of my Hands -- Why, it was a considerable hansel Man, and
worthy of Remembrance; a thing so remarkable, to know the time of your
Advancement, that it is Ten to Ohe, if some Wag or other, don't make Coments on
it.


N.C. You seem very pleasant, though indeed it is very unfair at this time,
considering the Pickle, my Journey as put me into.


O.C. It was a Journey it is true, to which you was driven with much ado; and
those that saw you, say thao you Traversed your Ground very odly, and often
looked back, as if you had no mind to come to the end on it; but it seems, by
the help of driving and leading, you did it at last, though with some
reluctance, as appeared by the blushing of your Backside.


N.C. Right; but methinks, after such handling, you should Pity him that
succeeds you, in the Dignity of the Triple-Tree.


O.C. O! by no means -- what Pity you, for learning part of your Trade, that is
a good one indeed; what Pity a Man, for becoming experimentally acquainted with
that, on which his Profession chiefly depends: No, no, consider experience is a
great Master, and rest your self satisfied. But prithee what was the occasion
you was so soon put to your Trumps, I heard something on it confusedly, but
seeing we are upon the Subject, let us have't out.


N.C. Prithee cease that inquiry, I would forget it, as a thing no ways
pleasant to my Remembrance.


O.C. (...)



