AN ADDRESS OF THANKS TO A Good Prince.

Presented In the PANEGYRIC of Pliny, upon Trajan, the Best of Roman Emperors.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Tho. Fickus, Boo^^seller in Oxford. 1685.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN the peevishness of petitioning was universally improved into the more
generous humor of Address, when Remonstrance to all public Conduct was
happily succeeded with Resignation to Royal pleasure, when the murmurs of
Faction were gagged, and Loyalty had leave to be loud: It was obvious to reflect
on this gratulatory Speech of Pliny, and to conclude that nothing penned at so
wide a distance came so nearly up for an application to our own times. For sure
a gratitude for the comforts of an easy Government, and a recognisance of the
merits of a Gracious Prince were never more requisite, never more opportune.
And would our Supreme Master be as patient to a just Harangue, as he has been
to the most insolent Libels: Would he put up a seeming compliment with as much
of unconcern, as he has done many substantial affronts: No question somewhat of
this nature had been attempted. But we live so pure from a compulsion of
inventing shams for flattery, that we must stifle some truths for fear of their
being thought so. And thus long silence where there have been so many
temptations to be Eloquent, can upon that caution only be accounted for.
However what we dare not imitate, we may at least rehearse: And may apply a
Translation, where we must not venture at a like Original.

The occasion of this dutiful Address was a motion in the Roman Parliament
that there should be some solemn presentment of their thanks to the Emperor
for his most Excellent manage of Affairs. This Form of their Allegiance they
assign to be drawn up and in public delivered by their most Honorable Member
the Consul Pliny. He accepts the Province, and in a full House, the Emperor
himself being present, makes an elaborate Speech, and at the expense of three
days in recital, sets it off with an admired elocution. This fluent draught he
afterward on more composed thoughts reviewed, corrected and enlarged, giving it
up to a more spreading publication in that model, we have it now conveyed to
us. The intent of it he assures us, was first a deserved commendation of the
good Trajan, and then the offer of a kind of winning Lecture to future Princes,
(not by way of assertory instructions, which he was sensible would have looked
saucy and pedantick) by recommending the best of Precedents to insinuate upon
their imitation, which had a more taking semblance of modesty, and promised a
stronger influence.

The style of it in the primitive Latin (except in some more obscured passages,
which in all likelihood the transmission only has corrupted) is incomparably
correct and elegant, and so aptly garnished with unaffected figures, that
Instructions concerning the Art of Oratory. Oxford 1682. 8o Second Edit. Sect.
3. p. 19.
one of our best Instructours for Oratory illustrates and exemplifies most of
his ornamental tropes by instances drawn from this single Tract. In his method
of descant he husbands each particular circumstance to the most complete
advantage, and gently strains most of his occasional hints beyond their natural
tendence, which, though an uncomely excrescence in familiar narration, is a
confessed embellishment to a more free discourse. Our charity has motives to
believe that his inducement hereunto was no jolly heat or rant of Loyalty, but
a generous releasement of his very thoughts, a handsome Exercitation upon what
matter of fact prescribed, and every honest tongue could freely vouch. Yet some
strokes are so flourishing that should they be transferred to a more justifying
occasion, a disaffected moroseness would censure them for thick and luscious
daubing.

It is certain both the Subject and Language have been so well approved, that
its consinement in the Roman dialect was long since envied, and a discovery to
the English Reader made by the most ingenious Sir Robert Stapylton, Oxford. 4o
1644.
whose ashes can resent it as no affront, that we cast by his decent dress, and
reinvest it (as presumed) in a more modish garb. That learned Gentleman was a
Critic at Translating, as the humor then prevailed, which was a religious
adherence to the turn of each original period, and a preferring the integrity
of being close and exact before the tempting regards of a smoother cadence. But
I think the measures of Rendering are by a practiced consent since altered, and
allowance is given as well for insertions to connect, where the sense would be
otherwise abrupt or incoherent; as for omissions to exclude what, though
copious in one tongue, would be redundant in another. A respect to the
observance of these rules may justify this new attempt: For with nothing of
reflection on that honorable Person we may modestly enough affirm, that he
conforms so devoutly to the same phrase, deviates so little from the same
dimensions of each sentence and expression, that he is sometime diffuse and
copious, where it would better dispense with the smartness of being more acute;
and is at other times blunt and concise, where the memory by struggling to
recollect the obscured sense would rather have it more express and
intelligible. But farther, since that too accurate and precise performance, the
Latin copy by the emendations of the Sheldonian Press is vindicated from so
many abruptions and entangling chasms, that it is far more fluent and easy,
than any of the correctest Impressions could ever before absolve it. And
therefore if some passages in the Original were harsh and corrupt, it was more
excusable, though not more pleasing, that the transcript in those several
fractures should be more rough and ambiguous. Add to this, the range and
disposure of the former was one undivided continuance of delivery without any
intermitting partitions, whereas here in compliance with the Oxford Edition
(which did not first start the invention, but borrowed the contrivance from In
his Edi. of Panegyrici veteres Illustrated with Notes for the use of the
Dauphin, Paris, 1676. 4o
Jacobus de la Baune) there be interposed at each convenient distance such
numerary Sections, which render the matter more methodical, and gratefully
relieve the patience of the Reader.

The affinity of this Subject with the happy circumstances of our own times
seemed to invite a Parallel. And indeed there is no one virtue here ascribed to
a Roman Emperor, but what we can completely match in a British Monarch. Nay
the odds would be vastly ours: For in the experience of afflictions, in the
fortitude of sufferance, in moderation, lenity, prudence, and some other Royal
Ornaments, we want a precedent of past ages, and can dare the longest posterity
to produce and offer a Comparison. So that an endeavor of making the Parallel
run exact would be an injury to him, who is proposed to complete it: For to
bestow on him all these Elogies would scarcely fill up one half of his
character, and should we pursue a rehearsal of whatever might be fairly
imputed, the design would be suspected not to rival, but outvie, not to equal,
but excel: Which, though a Justice on the one part, would be a seeming
derogation on the other. It is therefore thought more convenient to refer the
task of comparing for an exercise of recollection to the Reader. And indeed we
may challenge the most unthinking to run it over so slightly, as not to be
reminded of several home instances extremely like to what he here observes. Can
he read of the immediate Predecessour's being assaulted and imprisoned by the
rudeness of Factious Mutineers; and not reflect on the more barbarous villainies
against our latest Martyr? Can he glance on the remark of Trajan's adoption to
compose all differences, and to settle the tottering Empire; and not consider a
well timed Restoration to heal up the mischiefs of Anarchy, and redress the
ruins of a sinking Nation? Can we find the young Hero trained up for a
Soldier under the conduct of his own Father, and forget a Prince educated in
like Military service, at the same age, under the same Instructour? Can we
dwell on the description of Trajan's entrance into Rome at his first advance to
the Empire; and not resemble it to the solemn march of a returning Sovereign
through his spacious Imperial City? Can he hear Trajan extolled for an open
liberality; and not think on the more generous bounty of a Prince, who has
bosomed and warmed his most inveterate enemies? Can he listen to the character
of a gentle forgiving humor; and not look to a goodness, that has outdone the
mercies of Heaven it self in the sealing of pardons without repentance? In a
word, can he shuffle over any one material passage without gaining a hint of
some domestic occurrence, that bears a near relation to it?

There is indeed one odd kind of virtue in Trajan which we care not should be
honored with imitation, and that is his wheedling of the Mobile by several
little less than sneaking insinuations, which betray a too violent ambition of
being popular, and imply that he chose rather to be a Fondling than a Master of
his Subjects, which, however specious and alluring, tastes of a low soul, and
unhinges all Government, makes obedience and submission precarious, animates to
claim as a debt whatever is in a good humor granted, and is in effect a
resignation of all authority on the one hand, and a dispensation for resistance
on the other. A main specimen of this easiness in Trajan is his fine bravo
Sect. 67.
at the delivery of a Sword to the Captain of his Guards, Take this, and if I
Govern well, use it for me: But if ill, against me. This generous charge two
Republican Commentators are so much affected with, that one Johannes Maria
Catanaeus. Genev. 1643. 4o, p. 128.
of them thinks it a concession never enough to be commended; and the other,
Justus Lipsius Oxon. 1662. 12o p. 196, 197.
good man! is angry with the dull Pliny for being no more rhetorical on so
inviting a Topic, that he should give so slight a touch on an action, which,
if set off to its due advantage, would alone suffice for a complete Panegyric.
That all commissioned Officers should draw their swords in their Supreme
General's defense, if he would be honest and orderly: But if imperious and
abusive, should brandish them to his Execution; Ay! this was a piece of the law
of nature, and always an inherent liberty of the Subject: But former Princes
had been too shy and surly to own it, it was Trajan the Best, who would first
make the concession: Nay pass that into an avowed command, which in its atmost
improvement before had been but a tacit allowance. This passage with other of
like tendence were pertly cited, and very lovingly applied by that virulent See
Dr. Peter Heylyn's Cyprianus Anglicus: Or, the History of the life and death of
William Laud Arch. of Canterbury, etc. London 1674 in Fol. Part 1. l. 2. under
the year 1622. p. 88, 89. Histeria and Antiquitates Universitatis Oxoniensis.
Oxon. 1674. fol. lib. 1. under the year 1622. p. 326, 327, etc.
Preacher in King James's Reign, who borrowed his Notions of subjection from
David Paraeus, and so brought on the Commentaries of that Author the mockery
of Martyrdom. And the Reformed Brethren of Scotland, who were never much
addicted to admire any thing that came from a Prince, were yet so mightily
taken with this complement of the Emperor's, that in the minority of a late
Prince they stamped on their Coin the Impress of a Sword with that Motto. It
was a more gudely precept for liberty than any their barren Gospel would
afford: And though it was a Heathen rant from one Prince to a particular
Subject, they would adopt it for an universal Christian duty, and in such a
case, devout souls, for once they would obey for conscience sake. Nay there has
scarce been any one pestilent Libel teemed to promote Anarchy and justify
Steph. Junii Bruti Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, etc. Ursellis 1600. 12o quaest.
3. p. 158. Anonymous Treatise De jure Magistratuum in Subditos, etc. p. 217.
annexed usually to the former; both which very scandalous and pernicious pieces
have been almost generally reputed to have been penned by Theod. Beza; although
some, I know, have fathered the latter on his Comrade Francis Hottoman, the
great Civilian. Grot. De jure belli ac pacis, etc. l. 1. c. 4. Sect. 6.
Johannis Miltoni pro Populo Anglicano defensio, etc. Londini 1651. 12o P. 176,
177. With many other.
Rebellion, but what has gloried in this Quotation and built upon it the
consequence of an Arbitrary Submission, not longer to be practiced than while
no Oppressions or Grievances could be plausibly or indeed possibly complained
of. Yet it must be confessed that Joannis A dami Osiandri Jus belli ac pacis Hug.
Grotii illustratum Tubingae, 1671. 8o ad l. I. c. 4. These. 6. Observatio, P.
552. Sam. Botharti Epistola Domino Morley adjecta Geographiae Sacrae, etc.
Francof. 1674. 4o p. 54. Dr. William Falkner's Christian Loyalty, etc. London,
1679. 8o b. 2. c. 5. Sect. ^. Para. 8. Dr. Gabriel Towerson's Explication of
the Decalogue, etc. London, 1681, Fol. On the 5th. Com. Part 7. p. 259. Sir
George Mackenzie's Jus Regium, etc. Land. 1684. 8o p. 50. Dr. Will. Sherlock's
Case of Resistance, etc. London, 1684. 8o c. 5. P. 171, 172. Besides Dr.
William Howel, who barely mentions it; Institution of General History, etc.
London, 1680. Fol. Second Edit. b. 4. c. 5. p. 883.
Learned Authors of a Calmer temper have constantly given for more sober
interpretations of this so unwary and inconsiderate a flourish. But whether
this expression of Trajan were only the stretch and effort of a complaisant
humor; or no more than a figure to dress up his confidence of that Person's
integrity to whom it was applied: Or whether (what is indeed the most plausible
Salvo, yet argues a flight of generosity beyond discretion) it was a
declaration of his fixed Resolves to govern well. We are sure if it be
interpreted for a Serious instruction, for any practicable advice, nothing
could more proclaim the unadvisedness of that Prince, because nothing more
evacuates all the ties of Allegiance. For if Subjects must in truth no longer
submit, than they confess themselves unopprest and honestly dealt with: But as
soon as a little teas'd with any imaginary wrong (for they themselves are to be
sole judges, or the principle has no consequence) may fly in the face of that
authority, which gives 'em the affront, and depose that power which they
suspect will be too hard for 'em, is so rank a Tenet, that Treason, Tumult,
Anarchy, Confusion, and all the licentious mischiefs of Earth and Hell would be
its damning inference: The Prince being crushed into the most helpless of
slaves, and every peevish Incendiary preferred his Supremer Lord. It hurries on
so violently to Seditions and Rebellion, that did the Romans believe they might
do what this direction to the Captain implied, and yet permit the Emperor,
who authorized 'em with that privilege, to pass his one and twenty year^ Reign
without any mutiny or insurrection: I say did the Romans suppose it to be
serious advice, and yet never pervert it to the prejudice of him, who bestowed
it, nothing less can be inferred than (what is not handsome to own) that the
Loyalty of Heathens surmounts that of the precisest Christians, since the one
could be steadily obedient where they had in a manner leave to resist: And yet
the other be so apt to rebel, where they have all the restrictions of Nature,
Religion, and National Laws to submit and be quiet.

Nay had this soothing Prince delivered it as a license to have himself
chastis'd, yet by the frankest concession he could not have authorized the
Captain's revolt. For it is even beyond the Prerogative of Supreme Powers to
Legitimate Resistance, or endow their Subjects with a Charter to Rebel.
However valid unextorted Resignations and voluntary assents to deposition may
be, yet it is certain no Sovereign Authority, while so continuing, can dispense
any liberty for disobedience, or absolve from the crime of Treason, any more
than my saying to another, I Will give you leave to kill me, would in justice
acquit him from the guilt of Murder.

So that what ever acceptance it will bear, there is nothing more illogical,
impertinent, or absurd than to allege it as an authentic plea for Subjects by
force to amend the suspected irregularities of their Governors: Yet to this
use have a great many late Demagogues most pertly applied it in challenge and
defiance to all the evident restrictions of Nature's and Religion's Laws. Some
from hence inferring a right of Resistance as a property of each the most
inferior member of Societies: Others by a modester (though no less
mischievous) retrench confining it to the subordinate Magistrates, whose Office
is pretended to empower 'em for a defense of the peoples liberties, though in
express opposition to that Superior, who deputed 'em.

After all, the most natural deduction, which I conceive this passage capable
of, is this, that such flashes of good nature in a Prince may be of very
hurtful consequence, they prostitute his honor, alienate his Authority, and
make all the rabble an execrable High Court of Justice. Hence I wondered at
always and condemned the inconfiderateness of those Authors, who, though they
would interpret it to no disloyal tendence, yet have winked at the consequence
they are presumed to detest, and have only extolled this saying for the noble
sally of a resolute, undaunted, and Heroic Soul. Whereas it is at the best but
an unwary vapor, an indigested slant of popularity, to the quest whereof this
Prince was too abundantly addicted, as is farther conspicuous in several other
of his demeanours remarked in the following harangue: Particularly in the 65th
Sect. where Pliny seems to intimate that Trajan had submitted himself to Govern
upon the strange and unheard of terms of the Prince not being above the Laws,
but the Laws above the Prince: Which destroys the prime and fundamental
Prerogative of Princes, their being unaccountable to any but God, and was the
very Principle our late Regicides proceeded on. It is true, if that specious
Maxim be meant only of the preeminence of the Laws in a bare directive and
regulative power, it is what sober men have always owned, and wise Princes have
as duly practiced; but if it must be understood (as the occasion and coherence
in Pliny intimate) of a coercive, and vindicative power to be exercised on
Supreme Governors; whenever their Subjects shall adjudge 'em guilty of the
breach of those Laws, which they have obliged themselves by oath to observe: It
debases the Prince beneath the vilest Malefactor, and exposes his Person to
the worst of Butcheries: For though it proclaims not an impunity to a private
Assassinate, yet it ascertains the Murder, and enhances the ignominy, by
justifying a formal execution.

These strictures upon the uncautious humor of Trajan I have thought fit to
premise from an hearty aversness to whatever plausible pretenses may instigate
to Sedition. Such little improvident deliveries are as poisonous as the rankest
of downright positions, nay they be more fatal, because tricked up in a more
specious guise, where the venom in being less discerned is the more palatably
imbid'd, and spreads its infection with the greater defiance to Art and
Antidote. So that if this censure obviate all farther contagion, it is what my
honest endeavors sincerely aim at, and what my prayers shall never be wanting
to promote.

Yet after this reflection on the easiness and indecent compliances of Trajan I
must do him so much justice as to confess, that he was judicious enough to
foresee the mischiefs of his hanging on the peoples courtesy; and therefore
whenever any impendent danger threatened, he vindicated his dignity from all
encroachments, and sharply quelled all the assaults of faction, as is evident
in several occurrences of his Reign, more eminently in his exemplary justice on
those Rebels, who disturbed his Predecessour's peace, Casperius and his
Pretorians, who protested against Nerva's pardon of Domitian's Murderers, and
Covenanted to bring 'em all to a condign punishment: Yet without any injury to
the Person of their Prince; but for all this winning and pious pretext, Trajan
sends for 'em, and amidst their hopes of excuse and preferment, executes the
Leader and principal followers: To which just vengeance the happiness of his
remaining years is more to be attributed than to any Clemency or sparing
Indulgence.

And now I ask the Reader no other mercy, but that when he has run through this
Character of a Roman Emperor, he would bless the Divine Providence for living
under the protection of a more Gracious Monarch, who wants nothing but the
united Allegiance of his Subjects to make him Happier than Augustus, since
Heaven's and his own goodness have already made him even Better than Trajan.

November. 1. 1684.
Postscript.
SINCE the delivery of these Sheets to the Press, so eminent an alteration has
sadly happened, as were it not too late, might have occasioned some different
measures of Application in the Preface: Which being drawn up while we enjoyed
that Prince, we now lament, I refrained from a Parallel with our Roman Hero,
chiefly because the merits of the living are never celebrated without a
suspicion of flattery, though the strictest regards be had to simplicity and
truth. This objection being now dearly removed, it seems opportune to attempt
what before was improper. But the discouragements, which even yet remain, are
too affrighting to be dispensed with: For characters can never be tolerably
given, where deserts exceed description: Where the Subject is too big for
Language, it is discretion to be silent: And when virtues want words to
represent them, it is not only safer but more just to admire than to commend.
In such a case to praise would be to derogate, the most lively draught would be
disfiguring, the briskest flourish but a Libel: No justice can be paid to such
an argument, but a complaint of its being inexpressible, a dumb submission is
the most mannerly respect, and amazement the only eloquence. This motive has
alone deterred me from offering any other Tribute to the Memory of our late
Blessed Sovereign: For to represent such inimitable Glories were as much a
vanity, as to daub the luster of the Sun, nay to draw such a Prince were no
less irreverence than to paint a God. Therefore I humbly desist, where it is
worse than presumption to proceed; and disclaim all attempts, where it is not
more my weakness than my duty to be unable.

That surprising change since the dismission of the foregoing Papers may
however have presented us with this advantage, that the Parallel might now be
doubled. Our Trajan can be completely matched, nay beyond comparison outvied,
not only by a deceased, but by a Reigning Monarch. A Monarch who by submission
while a Subject taught others to obey, and himself to command: Whose Patience,
Generosity and Courage were never more the envy of the factious, than the
triumph of the Loyal. Whose Auspicious Entrance on a Throne, assures the
happiest progress, and merits the longest Establishment on it. A Monarch whose
accomplishments are in each respect so admirable, that they surmount flattery,
and desie the rankest malice: Whose Virtues are every way so Illustrious, that
they dazzle as much as enlighten, and (what his piety abhors) they even threaten
to eclipse the Glories of his Royal Predecessor.

March 3. 1684/5.
THE LIFE OF Caius Plinius Caecilius Secundus.
THAT the Lives of illustrious Authors should be a Preface to their Works,
custom has not made more fashionable, than use does requisite: For after all
the Philosophic advice to weigh the value of what is said, without any poize
from the authority of the Speaker, a reception (though not the Nature) of
truths depends much on the Character of him, who delivers them: So that the
same Argument, managed to the same advantage, shall by a respect to the Writer,
be obliged with attention and caress, or else by a misconceit be prejudged to
scorn and neglect. The consequence of this must farther be, that those drudges
for the public, whose names and repute are yet obscure, ought in policy to lie
concealed, lest their meanness, when discovered, prejudice their attempts:
While of such again, whose open esteem can secure an acceptance of whatever
they deal in, it is their prudence to own their endeavors, and it is their
interest, as much as honesty, to legitimate their Issue, where the dignity of
the Parent will be entailed on the offspring. This justifies our brave Roman,
that while living he dared Father what ever was the result of his manly wit;
and this accounts for the greater convenience of prefixing his Life, since a
knowledge of his deserts will be sure to put an estimate on his labors. Most
of the learned Worthies of past generations have by a later piety been thus
revived, as far as a groping after their relics would permit: But alas many
were interred so deep, so dark, that even their ruins were perished, and the
utmost diligence could recover but few of their remains. This unhappiness is
abundantly redressed in the memory of our present Author, who in his Epistles
has left us such copious memorials of his life and temper, that from thence
alone there wants nothing but a method to collect as full an account of him, as
is necessary to bestow, or natural to desire.

He was born An. Chris. 62. U. C. 815. At Novo-Comum a Town of Italy, eminent
for nothing so much, as for being the place of nativity to so great a Man, who
we presume esteemed it afterward no scandal to have peeped into the World from
so obscure a part of it, but thought it rather noble to shed a luster on his
birth place, than to derive a glory from it. However by his grateful
munificence it was soon made more populous and remarkable, by the encouragement
he there gave to Inhabitants, in the Erecting of a public School liberally
endowed, with a Library adjoining so competently furnished, that no question it
invited a choice resort.

He was the Son of L. Caecilius by a Sister of Pliny the Natural Historian. He
lost his Father while young, who, for ought we know, left him no other Legacy,
but that of a good example. His widowed Mother destitute of the helps of
Education delivers him up to his learned and wealthy Uncle, who yet resolved,
if degenerate in virtue, not to own him allied in blood: This trial was soon
made, and our Eaglet stood the test. For by a vigilant observance of his
inclinations and deportment, the old Gentleman was so well satisfied, that by
the custom of their Laws he adopted him into a nearer Relation, and at his
death (occasioned by the eruptions of Vesuvius) left him heir of his Name and
fortunes. But before this casualty he had been very provident for the breeding
his Nephew. He assigned him first to Quintilian that Master of Eloquence, who
transfused into him all those precepts, which hitherto so richly oblige the
World, and he found him so quick, so tractable, that he never saw reason to
spur his industry or amend his apprehension; he had in him the luscious comfort
of a docile learner, and the only danger was lest his jealousies might have
curbed that forwardness he was surprised at, and made him inclinable to
suspect, that from his Scholar he would soon commence his Rival. But he
preferred his duty before any envious regards, and, it is certain, did not only
initiate him in the Elements of that Art he professed, but laid him in directions
for the methodizng of all his future studies, which the obedient Pupil so
embraced, that when emancipate from his more immediate discipline, he still
copied his prescriptions, and conformed to that model, which was set him by so
able an Architect: As appears particularly from his so often running through
the Decads of Livy, which was a task no question advised him by his great
Instructor, who always betrayed a singular affection for this Author, and in
his most excellent Institutions recommends him as most worthy of a repeated
perusal.

When thus lectur'd in Rhetoric, he was now ripe for a course in Philosophy,
and to enter upon this under as expert a guide, as he had attained the former,
he was given up to the tuition of Nicetes a learned Priest, who was to make him
both honest and devout; such was the discipline of that polite age, that a
being principled in Religion was one of the chief accomplishments of a
Gentleman; and though all was no better than Idolatry and Romance, a being
verst in their sacred rites was not esteemed a fit knowledge for an Augur
only, much less was the being molded into strict and pious thought
prejudicial in the depressure of their spirits, in the souring of their
humors, or in the spoiling of their complaisance.

Under his government he made so good a proficience, that his Uncle with joy
perceived he was fitted both for years and learning to reap the advantages, and
conquer the inconveniences, of a foreign travel, which he knew well was a
completing piece of Education, if the Itinerant was of age and discretion not
to hug novelties, not to ape customs, but to collect remarks, and then digest
them, to observe, to reflect, to compare, and to better his judgment by a
residence abroad, rather than burden his memory for ostentation at return.
With these hopes he dispatched him to Syria, which was then as much the common
Mart of Literature, as Egypt had been before. Yet here the wary old Uncle would
not trust him with a disposal of his own time, but lest too great a leisure
might expose him to such temptations, which he should be too idle to resist, he
provides him an employ, and lists him a young Volunteer; where yet he served as
if arms were to be his diversion, not his; and therefore he was often allowed
leave to retire from the camp to his studies, in which he had the most eminent
Directour those Countries could afford, the famed Euphrates, whose Lectures he
devoutly heard, and was possibly the greatest encourager, if not the sole
motive, of his after remove to Rome. Him he honored, and admired, and gives
him this Character to a friend, that his aspect was all gravity, without the
slightest dash of sourness, whish commanded a respect, yet imposed no terror;
in discourse he was both copious and acute, in his instructions strict and
serious, yet always easy, affable, and skilled at such a winning force, that
he could lead the rational, and even draw the obstinate, he could chastise an
error without correcting the deluded, he could reform without censure, and
amend without reproof: Nay he had such an obliging knack at persuasive, that
the mistaken took a pleasure to be his Converts, and even wished to be again
satisfied, after they were fully convinced.

When by a visit of the most remarkable places, an observance of their policy,
and a mastery of the language, he had completely answered the design of his
mission, he prepares to depart, and laded with those accomplishments, which are
the richest Cargo of a Traveler, he returns to his expecting Friends; but ever
a long abode with his Mother and Uncle, he looses the latter, and thereby at
eighteen years of age succeeds to a plentiful estate. Among other Legacies,
that which he most prized was 160 Volumes of his Uncle's Works, filled up in
the margent, and wrote on the very covers all by his own hand, for which when
their number was somewhat less, he had in Spain been offered four Hundred
Thousand Sesterces: The compiling of these argued him an indefatigable Student,
and being so severe an accounter for his own time, he might less invidiously
urge others to an improvement of theirs, which his Nephew assures us was his
constant humor; he was always a Lecturing him into industry, and was so
impatient of his least remissions from study, that seeing him one day walking
(and possibly intent on a recollection of what he had lately read) he chid him
for so idle a diversion, and sharply told him he might be better employed. So
that this method of a sedentary intensness might probably first have been taken
up by our young Student out of a design to oblige the old man, till it past
from a constrained custom to a voluntary habit, from an assiduous practice to
a settled inclination. It is worth the pains to relate that he gave one
notorious instance of it: When his Uncle at Micene in a surprise at the
inflammation of Vesuvius was sailing out to take a nearer prospect of the
danger, he comes and asks his Nephew to accompany him in that, which proved his
last Voyage, but he bluntly waves the invitation, and very fairly tells him, he
had rather continue at his Books: Though he durst not without doubt have been
so rough to one, whose years might suppose him peevish, and yet whose favor it
was so much his interest to retain, if he had not foreseen it would be so far
from being resented as a contempt or affront, that it would be the most taking
complement, he could possibly return.

He had not been long entered upon his new inheritance, before his resolves of
settlement were directed to Rome, where he fixed his residence, not because the
Town and the Court might be most opportune for a stage of pleasure and
diversion, but that he thought here the most advantageous platform to build up
his future fortunes. And therefore he would not be flushed into Spark nor
Gallant, but sensible that the best husbandry of his Revenues, would be the
purchase of a good name, he toiled so hard in retirements, and relaxed himself
so well in company, that he soon gained the repute of a smart and solid
Gentleman. The most early specimen of his parts he had given in the composure
of a Greek Tragedy at fourteen years of age, wherein he so happily approved
himself in the proper Genius of sublime, in the true Air of the buskin, that he
superviv'd his years, and in his nonage wrote man by the best Periphrasis. A
success in this soon heated him on to fresh attempts, and in his Voyage from
Cyria about seventeen he falls upon Latin Elegiacs on the Icarian Sea, which we
need not doubt were soft and smooth. But he knew these were juvenile sports,
which it would be fatal to be addicted to, and therefore when he had enough for
bare accomplishment, resolved to make no employ of what had poverty and
affectation entailed for a curse, he was not so fond of the Beggar or the Fop,
but that he steered his endeavors to a more honorable Port, and applies
himself to a study of the Civil Law: In this he soon commenced so hopeful a
Proficient, that upon a short preparation he was ripe for the Bar, and before
twenty appeared for his Client in the Roman Forum, where his pleadings were so
connect, and his delivery so becoming, that there was scarce afterward any
cause of moment, wherein he was not by one of the parties retained.

From the Forum he advanced to the Senate, and could argue before that august
assembly with as much courage, as he had done in the more Inferior Courts. And
here he was engaged in several of the most important concerns, as the
management of the Spaniards charge against Bebius Massa, the prosecuting
another of their informations against Caecilius Classicus, the defense and
acquitment of Julius Bassus and Varenus, and what was the most eminent, he
opened the impeachment of Marius Priseus Proconsul of Africa, charged by his
province of bribery and extortion, in the urging of this he was so brisk and
resolute, nay so eager and intent, that the kind Emperor more than once
ordered the Freeman to whisper and advise his Master that he should not injure
his Lungs, nor drain his Spirits, nor overcharge his constitution, however with
humble thanks for the caution, he zealously proceeds, and so exposes the case,
that the Senate confessed themselves infinitely satisfied, and the Criminal was
sentenced to perpetual banishment.

He was too eminent to be thought useless, and therefore his Country soon
proposed to experience his abilities in some more public Station. Hence he was
honored with a Commission to supervise the repairs of the AEmilian way. He was
a splendid Praetor for the City: A zealous Tribune for the people: A faithful
Questor for the Emperor: A Prefect of the Treasury for the State: And an Augur
for the Gods. But his most active preferments were his Proconsular dignity in
Pontus and Bithynia, and his Consulship at Rome. In the former (which was last
executed) he held a constant correspondence with his Imperial Master Trajan,
and took all his measures from his advice, which he conformed to, with so much
of resolution and dispatch, that he won on the affections of his Province,
countermin'd the malice of his Enemies, and for ever secured the favor of his
Prince.

It was from hence he dated that generous Testimony and Character he gave the
Christians. For it being the mistake of Trajan, that this growing Sect would
interrupt and disturb the peace of his Empire, he had given instructions to all
his Ministers to suppress them by a smart persecution. Our Proconsul knew these
orders must be obeyed through the extent of his Jurisdiction; yet he thought it
not impertinent to give his honored Lord some account of the humors and
behavior of the Men, before he went on to the extremest rigor. In this
description we may be sure he spoke as a candid Relatour, not as a biast
Friend: And indeed the danger of being partial was on the other hand; for he
abhorred the scandal of leaning to that new superstition, and he wrote to one,
whom it was manners to sooth, which yet he could not better do, than by
confirming that prejudice, he had so devoutly enterain'd. But maugre these
inducements, it was his honor to speak the truth, and it was his Loyal
Master's Virtue to hear it. He therefore declares, that their only crime, or
rather mistake, was that they assembled before day to sing a form of devotions
to Christ their God, where they bound themselves by Sacrament, yet not to
violate the Roman Laws, not to perpetrate any villainies, but to avoid Theft,
Robbery, Adulteries and breach of Faith. When they had done this, they never
spent their thoughts to Conspire, or Caball; but marched quietly off to their
respective homes. And this so much calmed the exasperated Trajan, that he
remitted his passion, and return d answer, that they should not be held in, nor
inquired after, but if by others prosecuted should have Justice, and a fair
Trial. Yet was this a concession he would never have made, had he not been
fully convinced that they were neither seditious, nor disloyal, as he at first
surmis'd. For indeed there was no one Emperor more provident in crushing the
growth of Faction: As will appear by this single instance. Pliny had petitioned
him, that there might be a Corporation of Mechanics founded by Charter at
Nicomedia: But the prudent Prince, though it seemed but a trivial boon, and
asked by such a favorite, whom he was not wont to deny, yet he gives him this
one repulse, and assigned no other reason, than that such Societies were always
prone to Faction, and were the common nurseries of riotous and discontented
spirits.

When he had discharged his government with no unhappiness but that of envy, he
comes back to Rome, and is comforted with an humble Address from his
dependants, an hearty welcome from his Friends, and a Gracious Reception from
his Prince. But precedent to this honorable employ abroad had been his
Consulship at home; an Office which his tasted art of conduct had proclaimed
him worthy of; so that, with no pause from his Prefectship of the Treasury, to
this the Emperor recommends, and the people in duty accept him. And to sweeten
the enjoyments of it, he was blessed with a Colleague, who was Partner of his
thoughts, as well as of his dignity, the good Tertullus. It was in these
circumstances that he delivered his Panegyric, in a full Senate, with a
reverend aspect, and deliberate voice, it costing him three days to rehearse.

It was not from this instance only, but from a long Series of Loyalty, that
he was so ingratiate with his Prince, as upon an humble motion to procure any
reasonable act of Grace. Yet he made use of this power not to advantage
himself, but to prefer his Friend. And the Emperor, as sound a Politician as
any that flourishing State was ever Crowned with, thought it no reflection on
his manage to have a potent favorite, and therefore let him command what
courtesies he pleased to entreat. His opportunities to serve his Dependants
were by this means frequent, and the grants considerable. He got for his
Physician Harpocrates, for Crysippus, and other Aliens, a freedom of Rome. He
obtained for the children of Antonia, and other hopeful persons, the name and
privilege of Gentlemen. He advanced Sura to the Pretorship, and his
Chamber-fellow Voconius to several successive dignities.

Nor was it only at the Emperor's cost, that he maintained his Friends; but
where they were indigent and ready to accept, he would as freely spend from his
own stock; wherein his bounty was always unconditionate, he never hooked by
civilities, nor tampered with his favors; yet were his Largesses precious and
munificent. He settled on his decayed Townsman Caninius Rufus, a handsome salary
for encouragement and support in a studious life. He allowed Martial a
comfortable pension to board him in a Country retirement. Metilius Crispus he
sent to a good military employ abroad, and gave him a round sum at departure to
bear his charges. To Voconius Romanus he gave three thousand Sesterces to make
him up a Gentleman's Estate; and to his Master Quintilian, at the Marriage of
his Daughter, he sent fifty thousand Sesterces, as a portion for the decent
Bride.

And those he embraced for Friends were not his Neighbors and Relations only,
but all the most eminent of each faculty or science. Of Poets he had Martial
and Silius Italicus, the first a Prince in Epigram, the second a Peer in
Heroic. Of Historians he had both Tacitus and Suetonius, he took the former for
a confident, and admitted the latter for a Companion. Of Civilians he picked
out Pomponius Saturninus, Arrianus, and what others were the most celebrated
Oracles of the Law. To these he opened his Soul, and was as privy to all their
concerns. He loved their persons, courted their society, and espoused their
interest, without any dirty reserves of craft or design.

His Estate was so conspicuous, and his conditions so endearing, that he was
sure to be courted from the selfishness of a single life, an alteration of
which was possibly more a compliance with the importunity of others, than any
hurry of his own inclinations; howeverhe had choice of proffers and judgment to
select the best. Of his first Wife we have but an obscure mention; his second
was Calphurnia, whom Dowry and Parentage rendered an equal match: Her he
admitted to his heart as well as bed, and for an instance of his fondness, has
left us a pair of uxorious yet chaste Epistles. It was the only misfortune he
ever complained of, that he could have no issue by either of them.

This unhappiness he contrived by the most availing method to repair; for
indeed (as far as this side of vanity would allow) he seemed in nothing to
betray a stronger impetus of desire, than to have his name and memory outlive
his funeral, and therefore he got not only a grateful celebration from
Martial, and by a hint of his own an honorable mention from Tacitus; but
tempted eternity with many of his own Works, which deserved a longer duration,
than most of them have met with. Beside his Greek Tragedy, and Elegies in his
Voyage from Syria; he wrote a Tract of Hendecasyllables. Another of
Demonstrative Orations. Some reflections on the selfmurther of Helvidius. A
Catalogue of illustrious Men: (which yet some have thrown upon C. Nepos, and
others (perhaps with most of justice) ascribe to Aurelius Victor.) A Collection
of Epistles, and a Panegyric on the Emperor. Of which the three last only
are rescued from that eating oblivion, which has swallowed the other.

When he was cloyed with the flatteries of the Town, he would often retire to his
Country seats, of which he had two most deliciously situate, the one his
Laurentine, the other his Tuscan Farm; where in imitation of the primitive
Consuls, and Dictatours, he read Nature in the cultivations of husbandry; and
thought his Gentility so little solid hereby, that he gave a Wagon for his
Coat of Arms.

We have better proofs how he lived, than when he died: We have a moral
certainty for the one, but must be content with conjecture for the other. His
last Epistles seem to be those from Pontus to the Emperor, and after his
giving up this honorable trust, we hear nothing considerable of his actions
from himself, or any other Historian. It is recorded that his Royal Patron
resigned to death, about the year from our Savior's birth (if Eusebius compute
aright) 119. whom, it is likely, he had no great ambition to survive; and
therefore we may presume he left the World soon after the loss of that comfort,
which had been most effectual to have detained him in it. Yet some (I fancy on
more presumptuous grounds) date his death in the 12 of Trajan's Reign. It is
sure that Eusebius then mentions the decease of a Pliny, but implies it of the
Seniour.

After this prospect of his actions and employs, it will be a piety toward his
ashes, and a diversion to the virtuous, to present a more apparent view of his
personal endowments: Especially, since from an easy pursuit of his own
discoveries, there lies such an open road to meterials; that there wants
nothing, but a natural disposure, and a naked repetition.

In Rhetoric it is enough that he was Scholar to Quintilian, whose precepts he
so well digested, that all his after composures were but a varied rehearsal of
his Master's instructions. He gained not only a fluent style, and a plausible
delivery, which are but the Mechanism of Oratory; but he had such an accurate
Idea of things, knew so well their apt representment by words, and understood
so completely the influence of each period on the soul; that he still married
his expressions to his argument, always reconciled his Auditory to his subject,
and never spoke, but to those passions he raised. He could instruct a Friend,
that an invention copious and a free elocution might happily be the talents of an
illiterate considence; but an orderly disposure, a due turn of figures, a
critical mode of transition, and such other secrets of art, were only
acquirements of the laborious and learned. Yet it was one of his Maxims, that
Use was the best Rhetorician, he having known many, who had neither parts nor
reading, yet by assiduous practice, had talked often, till they spoke well.

He was such an Artist at the variance of expressions, that almost in the same
breath, he could be fuller and more acute, grave and flourishing, so that his
cadencies made a dissonance of Music being always unequal. His endeavors
herein, by confession to a Friend, were that he might so contrive it, that by a
different turning of periods he would have somewhat to affect the most singular
relish of each peculiar palate. Yet where his subject required a steady, even
pace, he would never range, but keep devoutly to each Scheme of language, which
is only proper to each distinct composition. Undoubtly he was an accurate
Master of all styles, and seemed most happy in the most difficult, that of
sublime; for the exercise of which he had that argument, which the great
Longinus implied to be most suitable, Panegyric: Wherein he completely shunned
those vices, which so nearly adjoyn, affectation and flatness. He could fly
without soaring, and again walk without creeping. He could reach where it was
proper, and stoop where it was more becoming. Laying down this as a measure and
remark, that as in picture the darker shadowing sets off no less, than the
gaudier strokes; so in Oratory the seeming blurs, as well as flourishes, do
proportion and adorn. In others works (where he could prevail on his good
Nature to censure) he would check the presumptuous, and chastise the coward,
yet of the two, he more inclined to excuse the bold and daring, than the
timorous and wary writer; and would forgive the too licentious torrent of a
lofty, sooner than the stagnating shallows of a mean, style: Illustrating his
judgment herein by this most ingenious Metaphor, that it was safer indeed to
tread the humble valley, than to climb the craggy mount; yet a slip was more
unpardonable beneath, than a fall from above. And therefore on a cold
indifferent Orator of his own times he past this facete jirk, that he had no
fault but one, and that was, that he had no fault. His meaning he implied to
be, that he had better have mounted, though with some tumbles, than tamely have
swept the ground for a caution of falling no lower. Or that a bold occasional
sally, though with misadventure, had been more laudable, than a continual sculk
within the bounds of a safer refuge.

He was inclinable, yet not addicted, to Poetry, which tendency some of his
graver Friends stomach'd as a levity; and were so kind, as to let him know
their dislike. In reply whereto he was soon provided of excuse; which yet he
would not urge from the nature of the thing it self; either its innocence as a
diversion; or its use, as an exaltment of the fancy: but he fled to example, as
the modester, if not the more justifying method: And rehearsed a Catalogue of
noble Romans, who, in their vacation from more serious affairs, had set the
President: And with such company to err he thought no scandal: Especially since
they were so eminent, that to imitate their recreations was no less a credit,
than it was a duty to copy after their graver employs.

He was so inquisitive of past, and so well acquainted with his own times; that
he was accomplished no doubtas much for a Politician, as his Uncle was for a
Natural Historian. And to this Province he was invited by one, who knew his
abilities. Him he answers by Letter, and first confesses it a good office to
record the illustrious; betrays a desire of perpetuating himself, by the
eternizing of others: gives a taste of his being a Critic in Historick style;
is cautious what times were most convenient to venture on, Ancient or Modern;
the first were obscure, and more hard to account for; the latter were ticklish,
and more hazardous to expose. However diligence should supply the one
difficulty, and a good conscience the other: He would have the industry to be
exact, and the courage to be faithful. He therefore refers the choice to his
Friend; and as he determined, he implies a resolve for either undertaking. But
whether his Friend were too coy to impose him a task, or he himself was
diverted from prosecuting his first intentions; we hear of nothing to this
purpose, but a small Tract of Men famous for Military and Civil Government,
which yet (if ourfaith hang upon some Critics) we must not believe to be his,
and indeed the imputation need not be envied any other.

In whatever he wrote, he was correct almost to superstition. He would not
thrust, but send; not pour, but drop into the world all the messages of his
pen. And indeed that nothing should come from him, as finished, but what was
absolute and unexceptionable, is the less wonder, if we reflect what a
judiciary trial all his pieces stood the verdict of, before they were dismissed
to a good deliverance. For whatever he composed, he first himself perused and
reviewed: Then to bring the cadence and euphony to the test of his ears, he
sounded it distinctly; and lest his own voice might flatter him, he got it to
be pronounced by another in his own Audience. After this he advised with two or
three particular Friends: He then augments the club, and engaged them all to
except: Their corrections he again propounds to some few of the most judicious;
and as they agreed, he altered and amended. After this discipline he rehearsed
in a full Assembly; When upon the issue of their free reproof, and his own new
discovery, he gave the completing strokes, and left them proof against the
virulence of teeth and tongue: Professing always to consider, what a concern of
moment it was to deliver any thing (as he phras'd it) into the hands of the
public, and therefore he thought it a prudence often to consult many, about
what he desired might always please all. This practice of imparting our
attempts to so severe a scrutiny would either the ingenuousness of Friends, or
the submission of writers, allow to be revived: The Press would not be an
Amsterdam of medley whimsies, or be abortive of so many crude and shapeless
lumps; the modest would be confirmed, the conceited restrained; and so many
men's labors would not be among their sins, to be repented of.

The entertainment of his best Visitants was this reading to them some of his
last composures, wherein their good humor thought him neither fulsome nor
affected; but took it as the most gentile treat, the most complaisant
reception. Yet in this cursory rehearsal to his Friends, he was sensible, he
lay under this disadvantage, that his crudest fancies might soonest raise the
attention, and feed the appetite, of his hearers: While his best digested
thoughts were either from inadvertence passed by unobserved, or for want of
recollection left unrelish'd. The ear and eye being such different judges of
composures, that an applauding Auditour would be a reading Critic, and what
was heard with oscitance and disgust might on review have all its just features
discovered. His intent in these recitements (as before hinted) was not to bribe
an approbation, but to invite, and even to extort, a censure; being patient at
contradictions, and thankful for reproof. Tho he would never take another's
judgment, till he had reconciled it with his own; well knowing, that to lean
too much on the sentiments of others betrays a want of strength to support our
selves. As in our own language, the reason why a soft head is the denoting
Metaphor of a little wit, is because the being too ductile, waxen, and
impressive to the Dictates of others is the property of good nature in its
worst acceptance.

Though so much delighted with society, he was averse to that brutish cement of
it, drinking. All his invitations were to consults, not frolicks, and he had no
great opinion of those parts, which must be oil'd into Eloquence, and flushed
into any tolerable delivery of their thoughts. He was sober to such a degree,
that even a Poet could remark and praise this abstinence, a virtue those Wits
are seldom very forward to commend. Thus Martial, in the Embassy of his Muse to
wait on him at his house in the Esquilian Mount, gives her this caution,

-- Ne tempore non tuo disertam,
Pulses ebria januam, videto:
Totos dat tetricae dies Minervae, etc.
Go soberly attend his Gate,
And for admission humbly wait;
He Is chained whole days to toilsome Books --
This is that Martial, from whom a late smooth Biographer, in a compare with
the preferred Catullus does disingenuously detract, and puts as wide a
difference betwixt them in their mode of writing, as between the sordid
drollery of a Buffoon, and the ingenious railery of a Gentleman. A bluntness
that nothing will excuse, but his partiality to Catullus for the dedication To
Cornelius Nepos.
of his Poems. Catullus, who may be allowed indeed to be more soft and
passionate, and the better tuned for Elegy: But for the lucky turn and
smartness of Epigram, at least for the terminating a thought by a surprising
word, Martial had much happier hits than he, or any other Rival.

It was one of his rules to read much, rather than many. And though his
voluminous Uncle had bequeathed him this Memento, That there was no piece so
trivial, or insignificant, but from whence somewhat of pertinence might be
extracted: Yet he thought it more compendious to glean where most lay
scattered, and he would willingly fall on no Author, where it was like his
appetite or his patience might be affronted.

He was so cautious, that he scarce ever entertained any Notion, which he found
reason to dismiss; yet if happily through too kind a reliance on the wisdom of
others, or too hasty a sealing up his own thoughts, he had imbibed any
sentiments, which he found afterward noxious, or unsavory; he would reject it
with as much abhorrence, as he had with innocence received it. For he well knew
it was so far from being a brand of inconstancy, sometime to profess an
alteration of judgment, that it was the best token of a generous and
unenslav'd reason. For otherwise were a fixed adherence to all conceits the
only test of a rational head, a blundring Bigot should outvie the most settled
Philosopher, and obstinacy would be the alone right and truth.

He was as sedentary at his Books, as his more active avocations would possibly
allow. Yet he would at any time intermit his Studies for the more edifying
entertainment of Friends, whose visits he was so far from repining at as
chargeable, or impertinent, that he courted them in retirements, and could
dispense with them amidst the most urging affairs; being so exact an improver
both of solitude and company that he made these the most comfortable stages, to
think with himself, and to talk with a Friend.

This made his acquaintance so much coveted by the ingenious, that with a great
deal of comfort he could tell a correspondent, None had a love for Learning,
but what had a kindness for him. Nay he had so wide a Soul and so open of
access, that all his acquaintance were immediately familiars, and all his
familiars friends. Yet though numerous, they were all select; they must have
parts as well as humors, to recommend them; and therefore he was in the
estimate of their deserts as impartial, as integrity and circumspection could
possibly provide: Though perhaps his charity might sometime trespass on his
judgment. However he was more coy in the choice, than in the continuance of a
Friend. He would pry into infirmities before he entered any League, but after a
confederacy he would wink and look beyond. And certainly if in the offices of
friendship he was at all to blame, it was for too much of good nature, too fond
an indulgence: And this one acquaints him he had heard him censured for; while
as a bold Delinquent, he frankly owns the charge, and hugs the fault, replying
there could be little of guilt where goodness erred; it was not only a charity
toward others, but a pleasure to himself, to believe the best: Some might think
it grave to reprove, and judicious to correct, but for his part he should rest
content, there could be no weakness to love in excess. Though it is possible he
was afterward brunted with some unlucky occasion to repent of this humor, for
he once with feelingness confessed, it had been an error (though an honest one)
in many otherwise discreet that by too great a sondness they overvalued the
merits of a friend.

He scorned Ceremony, and was above Complement. He might be squeamish at
engagements, but was greedy at performance. His only pressure was to lie under
a promise without opportunity to discharge it. When he petitioned Votes for his
Friend Naso, he so heartily espouses his Cause, that he assures, The glory of
Success should be entirely his Friend's, but the scandal of Miscarriage purely
his own. He never let his good Offices be screwed or wrung from him, but
whenever a craving occasion required, he would not stay the formality of
Address, but gloried to prevent the asking. Nay he would resent it as a
grievance to be entreated, where the relief of an indigent Friend was
concerned. Thus to a Person, who by Letter advised him of the distress of
Corellia, and importuned him to appear in her defense, he returned this
ingenious answer, You inform me of the hard fortune of Corellia, and entreat me
to patronize her Cause; For your Information I thank you, but your entreaties I
am angry at: To have notice was necessary, that I might have the opportunity of
doing good, but it is an affront to be prayed and urged on to that, which I am
always in charity obliged to do. He would therefore solicit for those that
sought, and as often thrust on those, who shrunk and recoiled: Though indeed he
would allow for the behavior of each, and remember that in the discharge of
any promise, there is a different judgment to be made of him, who forwardly
offers his assistence, and him, who is unwillingly importuned to accept; the
first is unpardonable except he do as he ought, but the latter excusable if he
do but as he can. He thought it no better method to secure a gratitude for
past obligations than to feed them with a fresh supply. Yet he would neither
make his bounty cheap, nor himself lavish; and therefore seldom repeated his
good turns, but where a provident use of the former had given in caution for as
prudent a manage of the future. To all his good Offices he added this gentile
endearing sanction, that he would never be his own Echo, never be a Herald of
his own favors: Nay if they were slighted or abused, he would glibly swallow
the affront; and even the dirtiest ingratitude he would have no courage to
upbraid. He framed this Virtue into a Maxim, That those who loved to dwell on
a rehearsal of their good deeds, might be suspected to have done well, that
they might after talk of it; rather than seem only to talk of it, because they
had before done well.

He was more especially a Mecaenas to the studies and endeavors of hopeful
young Men. And this he thought a necessary as well as generous charity: For he
observed that no parts were so extraordinary as very soon to appear with
advantage, unless countenanced and recommended by some powerful and peculiar
Patron. Growing abilities without such incitements might either languish into
sloth, or after some ineffectual struglings die into despair.

Though he was scarce ever shockt by any one misfortune, but that continued one
of being childless, yet he betrayed a Soul, that could bear their assault, and
less dreaded their approach. It being one of his own Lessons that to endure a
misery was more tolerable than to expect it, for of sufferance there would be
once an end, but never of fear; we suffering no more than what has actually
happened, but fearing whatever may possibly fall out.

He would sooner condemn his own than even examine others actions; or if at any
time he hap'd to be inquisitive, it was neither an itch of intermedling nor the
petulance of exposing a nakedness, but an honest intention, a cordial humanity.
However he would not judge of any occurrences either by their appearance or by
their issue. The observation being first his, that with a great deal of hard
usage the same counsels were often esteemed rash or deliberate as they thrived or
miscarried, and the very same undertakings from a difference of event were
extolled for discreet because prosperous, or vilified for imprudent because
unlucky.

How easy he was to remit the offenses or excuse the infirmities of his
Neighbor, needs no other proof than a recital of that great Lesson, which he
lived no doubt as well as taught That we should so forgive others, as if we
daily committed the same faults our selves; and yet so to pass judgment on our
selves, as if we would never forgive he same fault in another. Than which
(abate from the exalted Morals of him who came to fulfill the Law) there is not
among all Authors any one Aphorism, that tends more to a just, honest, nay
devout and religious life. And indeed he was very sententious in many sober and
pious directions: This one instance is very remarkable, upon the recovery of a
friend, reflecting on the proneness to resolves of amendment on a sickbed, and
the neglect of executing such intentions upon a return of strength to perform
them; he said he could epitomize whole Volumes of Philosophy into this one
Memento, That in health we remember to be such as in sickness we promised to be.

His integrity was so guarded that he kept it no less free from fault than from
suspicion too: Which in an envious age had not been so feasible, if the motives
to this Virtue had been a Stoical scorn of pelf, a pride of being above the
reach of bribes, or at best a prudential abstinence to escape the penalties of
Law, and not (what they really were) an honest mind and a well principled
conscience. So that he not only abhorred the extortion of compacts and
conditional rewards; but where engaged as a Judge he refused the very presents
of his friends, and rejected their customary annual gifts, though he knew no
sinister design of the donors, and could have accepted without biassing his own
intentions. So rigorous would our Roman be, and so far would even our Heathen
abstain from all appearance of evil.

In a word without flattery or ostentation, he was Learning's Patron, Virtue's
Friend, his Prince's Favorite, and even Nature's Darling: For though it be
easy to observe, that there have been no persons so unexceptionably
accomplished, but who have had some allay of failures to curb that
conceitedness, which might be apt to arise from a sense of their otherwise
complete qualifications: Yet as far as we can learn, our great Man had no one
imperfection, that either the candidness of a friend could ever allege, or his
own Modesty betray, which yet were such impartial Censors of his actions and
endowments that had there been the least handle, we are sure to have had it
offered by the suggestion of others or by the confession of himself.

PLINY'S Panegyric.
My Lords,
1. 'T WAS well and wisely ordered by our provident Forefathers, that as our
actions, so our speeches should both be ushered in by the attendance of Prayer:
Since weak Mortals can undertake nothing with any prospect of success, without
the favor, and countenance of the Divine Beings. Which pious and commendable
custom to whom more proper, than to me, who am a Consul, or when more
seasonable and requisite than while by the command of the Senate, and Authority
of the Commonwealth, we are encouraged to a solemn return of thanks to the best
of Princes? For what indeed is a more acceptable, more generous gift of Heaven,
than a Prince who is Just, Religious and in all accomplishments allied to those
Gods, who gave him? So that were it yet a matter of debate, whether Kings owed
their Original to chance or compact, or not rather to the more creditable title
of Divine Right: were this (I say) any subject for contest; yet that our Prince
at least may justly claim a Divine Right is beyond all color of dispute. For
he was instated in his Empire not by any blind hit of fate or fortune, but by
the more regular conduct of an all-wise providence, and brought, as it were, by
the hand of God himself to be happily Crowned and enthroned before the Holy
Altar, that place, which (if any) is a heaven upon earth; for it is there that
Omnipotence does more especially reside. Upon this account duty and devotion
prompt me to address my self to you, most potent Jove, the best and greatest
God, heretofore the Founder, and still the Preserver of our Roman Empire, to
beg of you, so to direct my heart and tongue, that I may deliver nothing
unbecoming a Consul to speak, nothing improper for a Senate to hear, and
nothing unworthy of that Prince, who is to be the Subject of my following
Discourse: Grant that in all I mention, I may pay a respective deference to
freedom, faithfulness and truth; and let this thankful acknowledgment of the
benefits of a good Prince seem as far from flattery, as it really is from force.

2. In the first place, I think it ought to be the caution, not only of a
public Magistrate, but of every inferior Subject, to speak nothing of our
Prince, which may in the least measure be applied to another. Let us therefore
banish such expressions which a just resentment did heretofore extort: Let us
make no wonted complaints, because we labor under no wonted grievance: let us
not in public proclaim the usual harangues, because in private we whisper not
the usual Oppressions. Let the altered tenor of our speeches betray the happy
change of times; and from the form of our thanks let it now appear, that we can
dare to speak of our Prince, as of no more than a Man, though his Predecessors
have been heretofore fawned into the title of Gods. We speak not now of a
Tyrant, but of a tender Patriot, not of an imperious Lord, but an indulgent
Father of his people. His humility bends him into a compliance of being thought
as one of us (and herein does he commence the more our Superior, because his
modesty would stoop him into no more than our equal) nor does he less forget
that he himself is a man than that he is advanced to Reign over men. Let us
therefore become sensible of our own happiness, and let our improved Loyalty
render us in some measure worthy of such a blessing: While we honestly reflect
how much more a cheerful obedience we owe to such Supreme Governors who
assert the liberties, rather than to those who attempt the slavery of their
people. Rome indeed has had her choice of Princes, but with the same joy that
she was wont to commend one for beautiful, she admires this for valiant, and
with the same acclamations she was wont to extol the voice of one, and gesture
of another, in this she adores his Piety, his Temperance, and his Clemency. To
what straits and difficulties, alas, are we drove? We must needs waver in
suspense whether, amidst the transports of joy, we shall rather insist on his
Grandeur, and Godlike Majesty, or on his obliging sweetness, his affable
deportment, and most endearing courtesy. Now, what more just, what more
becoming than that surname of Best, which our Senate did jointly confer upon
him? And which the extravagant pride and ambition of former Princes has made
his peculiar title. Farther, how reasonable, how equitable is it, we should
conspire to make him happy, who has already made us so? Thus let him do, and
this let him hear, as sensible that we would not speak these things, except
they were the same he had first acted: And yet at the rehearsal of them, his
modesty constrains him to reply in tears, being sensible, the commendation is
directed to the Man, not to the Prince.

3. The same temper we observed in our first unpremeditate shouts of joy, the
same let us full maintain in this more studied delivery of our thanks. For we
may well suppose that no gratitude can be more sincere and acceptable, than
where it is expressed in the nearest resemblance to those Extempore acclamations,
which have no leisure to be otherwise than natural and unfeigned. For my own
part, I shall endeavor through the whole Sequel of my speech to make a due
allowance to the modesty and moderation of our Prince. Nor shall I less
consider what will make him blush to hear, than what the merit of his virtues
might claim to be spoke. An excellent and rare accomplishment this in a Prince,
that in the return of thanks I am now prepared to offer, there is more danger
he should think me too lavish than too thristy in his commendation: That I give
no offense this way must be the greatest of my care, this my only caution. For
it is indeed otherwise easy to return thanks to a Person who really deserves
it, there being no danger that when I mention his humanity he should suspect I
give a rub at his pride; when his thrist, that I glance on his luxury; when his
clemency, that I slily upbraid his cruelty; when his generousness, that I
reflect on his avarice; when his temperance, that I jirk his excess; when his
industry, that I condemn his sloth: Or lastly, when I proclaim his valor, that
I do but tax his cowardice. Nor do I fear the rallying my self into frown or
favor according as I shall be too profuse, or too sparing in my Character of
him. Lastly, I shall guide my measures by this observation, that the Gods
themselves are better atoned by the holiness and innocence, than by the
accurate and neatly dressed petitions of their respective Votaries, and sooner
accept of him who brings to their Altars an humble and an honest heart, than of
him, who accosts them with a well penned harangue.

4. But an Order of Senate must be obeyed, whereby, (for the public good) it
was reasonably decreed that by the mouth of the Consul, under the title of
Thanks, good Princes might be reminded of what they have, and bad ones informed
what they ought to have, done. Which ceremony is at this time more especially
requisite, because the modesty of our Prince has discountenanced all private,
and would have waved their public thanks, but that he is so obliging, as not
to resuse what the Senate has so unanimously resolved. In either (most sacred
Sir) you acquit your self to glory and admiration, as well that elsewhere you
will not accept of thanks as that here you will. The honor hereby done you is
far from the quest and aim of your own ambition, it is the free and undesir'd
grant of those, who confer it on you. Your part herein is no more than a
compliance with our importunate requests; and the compulsion is on your side to
hearken to your deserts, not on ours to proclaim 'em. My Lords, It has often
cost me many a silent and serious thought, what excellent qualifications that
Person ought to be endowed with, who is invested with the Government of Land
and Sea, empowered with the management of Peace and War. And yet after a
creating to my self the Idea of one the most absolutely accomplished for the
discharge of this Royal Office, I could never (no not in wish) propose a person
more excellent, than him we are now infinitely obliged with. One indeed has
glistred in War, but then he has grown moldy in Peace: Another has gained
repute in his Robes, but lost it in his Armor: One has frowned his Subjects
into an awful respect, another has wheedled them into love by a popular
submission: A public miscarriage has robbed one of the credit of his happy
acquitments in private: Another by a home misfortune has fullied that esteem,
he bravely gained abroad. In a word, there was never yet any, whose Virtues
were not eclipst by the interposure of some near aboding Vice. But in our
Prince what unclouded rays of glory meet? What an unallay'd mixture of all
that is commendable? His affability abates nothing from his Majestic port and
Grandeur; his obliging freedom does no-way trespass on his becoming gravity,
his candor and condescension do not at all lessen the claims of his due
respect. Add to this his manly height and proportioned strength of body, the
ornament of a black hair, the advantages of a stern and commanding look, the
perfection of a found and healthy middle age, and as an express favor of
Heaven, the budding appearance of some few gray hairs, as the ensign of
Wisdom, rather than the effect o^ declining years. What can all these import
less than a Prince, hmn'd by Nature's self in her best adorning colors?

5. And such indeed ought he to have been, who climbed his Throne not through a
Sea of blood, who purchased a Crown not by Rapine and Massacre, but by the calm
mercy of appeased Heaven, and the innocent method of an universal consent. Is
there no distinction to be made between such a Prince, whom humane means shall
ordain, and such a one, whom Divine Providence does more immediately appoint?
Providence (Great Sir) that was most eminently concerned in your happy advance,
as was abundantly evidenced by a remarkable instance at your first going
General to the Imperial Army: Other Princes have drawn credulous Presages from
the blood of Sacrifices, the flight of Birds, or some such like whims of
Superstition: But you were encouraged by a more assuring token; for going to
pay your accustomed Devotions at the Holy Altar, when for greater privacy you
had shut your self within the Temple, the crowds that stood waiting at the
outer doors, ignorant of your being within, loudly saluted, as was intended,
Jove, but as the event showed, you, under the Title of Emperor: And so indeed
was the Omen understood by all, though you your self were unwilling it should
be so interpreted. Your Modesty inclined you to refuse the Empire, but your
refusal convinced the world that you the better deserved it: You were hereupon
to be compelled, though compelled indeed you could not have been, had not the
public good, and the safety of these Nations enforced you to a charitable
compliance; you seeming so generous, that you would not have accepted of a
Kingdom, if it had been barely to govern, and not rather to have redeemed and
preserved it. So that I believe those tumults and troubles which preceded your
happy Reign, were therefore Ordained by Heaven, to make your long-opprest
people more sensible of the comforts enjoyed under the gracious insluence of so
good a Prince: For as a calm air, and a smooth Sea are never more welcome than
after the bustling allarum's of storms and tempests; so may we well conceive
those gusts of Seditious rage and fury, which for some time obstructed your
settlement, were purposely contrived to prepare a better relish to those joys
your peaceful Reign affords. The dispensations of Providence being so ordered,
that Prosperity may lecture us how to bear our Misfortune, and Afflictions
instruct us how to prize our happiness, the secret springs whereof God does so
industriously conceal, that the events of good and bad do not seldom result
from their quite contrary appearances.

6. It was indeed an eternal blot to the Age it was acted in, it was a wounding
blow to this Nation, that a Sovereign Nerva by (...) Sedition (...) ^sperius,
(...)n of (...) Pretorian Guards.
Prince, a Father of his People should be assaulted, seized, imprisoned, stripped
by his own too-yielding goodness, of the power of saving or relieving his
Friends, and robbed of that Prerogative wherein Sovereignty does chiefly
consist, the doing nothing by force or restraint. Yet if all these Misfortunes
were designed but as a purchase for your enriching Reign, I may be bold to say,
that had the rates been much higher, they had scarce been equal to the value of
so inestimate a Prize. But farther yet, Military Discipline was let sink into
disorderly and corrupt practices, that your Skill and Conduct might amend and
reinforce it. Unheard Of Examples were brought in to be balanced by the most
regular Proceedings of your Reign: And in short, a Prince was forced to Condemn
those he would willingly have saved, that we might have a Prince whose will can
never be forced. You deserved to have been Adopted long before you actually
were so, though indeed had your Adoption been sooner, the blessing of your
Reign must have needs been less. You waited for that convenience of time,
wherein the acceptance of a Crown was rather a Courtesy to others, than a
kindness to your self. The trembling state fled for Sanctuary to your
protecting Bosom, the ruinous and just falling Empire was by Nerva's choice
assigned to be upheld by you. From distant Countries you were called home, and
importuned to comply with the being Adopted: As Commanders employed in Foreign
Service are upon urgent occasions recalled to divert their Arms to the more
seasonable defense of their own Country. Thus in one and the same action the
mutual Gallantry of Father and Son do interchangeably appear, he bestows on you
a Crown, you return it to him better guarded, and more confirmed. You are the
first who could ever make a requital equal to such a Present, the obligation
whereof you have so fully discharged, that the giver does even yet remain your
debtor; For by his imparting to you a share of the Empire, you become only the
more thoughtfull and concerned, he the more quiet and secure.

7. O rare and unheard of passage to a Throne! It was not your own Ambition,
not your own Jealousies, but another's desire, another's fear that pushed you
on to the Imperial Dignity: and though you seem to have attained the highest
pitch of Honor, yet the condition you exchanged for this, was indeed more
happy, it being the most desirable comfort to live a Subject under the best of
Princes. You were admitted to a relieving participation of his cares and
troubles, rather than a dignifying share of his power and greatness: Nor did a
bright, and smiling, but the black, and clouded face of affairs induce you to
accept the offer. You interposed to bear a cheerful part in the support of the
Empire, when the other sustainer of it was now weary of the pressure. There was
no Alliance, no Relation between the Adopter and the Person Adopted, save that
both were best besitting, the one to make, the other to be made choice of. You
therefore were Adopted, not as others, for the sake, or by the interest of a
Wise, your Adopter not being biast by the relation of a Father-in Law, but
disengaged and impartial as a generous Prince; and the Divine Nerva is in no
other sense your Parent, than as he is the common Father of us all. Nor indeed
in Elective Kingdoms is it fit that a Successor should be otherwise assumed.
Were you, Sir, to transfer from your self to another this vast legacy of the
Roman Empire, would you look for an Heir no farther than your own Bed; and must
the Successor to all your Imperial Dignity be no better than what happens to
be found within the narrow limits of your own House? Would you not rather
bestow some pains in a search through the whole City, and take him for your
Son, him for your next Heir, who is best accomplished, and most like those
Gods, he must one day represent? He who is to govern all ought sure to be
chosen out of all; for you leave not a Lord of your private Family, that you
must needs assign him, who comes next in blood, but a supreme Governor of a
freeborn People. It were stiff and Tyrannical, nay absurd, not to Adopt him
who is born to be an Emperor, should he not be Adopted. This was the course
the great, the good Nerva took, well thinking there could be no difference
between Generation and Election, if Children were not Adopted with better
Judgment than they are begot. Though indeed it is the humor of Subjects more
patiently to admit the unhappy issue, than the ill choice, of Princes.

8. This danger therefore Nerva did most cautiously avoid, and trusted not to
the shallow advice of Men, but took counsel from the Gods themselves. While not
in a private Chamber, but an open Temple, not before the Nuptial Bed, but the
Holy Altar of Jupiter, (that best and greatest God) did the Ceremony of your
Adoption pass, that Adoption from whence we date our lives, our liberties, our
peace, our joy, our all. The Gods were indeed (and well might they be) proud of
appropriating this honor to themselves, this was their project, their
enterprise: Nerva was no more than a Trustee in their behalf, he in Adopting,
and you in being Adopted, did both but show your submission to the Dictates of
Divine Pleasure. A Laurel was brought from Pannonia, the Gods so ordering it,
that the inauguration of a victorious Prince might be attended with the Omen of
Conquest and success: This the Emperor Nerva stuck in the bosom of Jupiter,
when on the sudden being elevated in some kind of Divine transport, before a
numerous Assembly of Men and Gods, he pronounced you his Adopted Son, that is,
the staff of his declining years, the support of his pressing Empire. Then as
if he had been disburthen'd of the load of Government, how did he hug himself
in a lightsome rest and ease? (Nor indeed is there much difference between the
perfect resignation of a Crown, and the taking a Partner into Sovereignty, save
that this last is more difficult and less practicable than the other.) He now
leans entirely on your shoulders, and by their strength upholds both himself
and the Empire: Your youth, your vigor seem to recover his, and upon the
influence of your power all Factions, all Tumults are gagged and eternally
silent. Though this happiness, it must be confessed, is owing not to a bare
Adoption, but to the efficacy of that Person, who is so Adopted. So that had
Nerva made choice of any other, he had come short of this happy, this blessed
event. Most of us may yet remember when an The Adoption of Piso by Galba.
Adoption was not the appeasment, but the rise and occasion of an uproar and
Sedition. We might now again have felt the same dismal effects, if the Election
had fell on any, but on you. That Emperor, it is true, who by too great
remissness has fooled away his due respect and esteem, must ask his Subjects
leave to dispose of his Empire: But your Election was free and absolute without
noise or murmur as much, no question, out of awe and regardfull dread of you,
as out of reverence to that Prince, who declared you Elect. You were admitted
to be a Son, a Caesar, an Emperor, a Colleague of the Tribunitian Power, all
these dignities heapt on you at the same time, which a late natural Vespasian
on his eldest Son Titus.
Father durst only by degrees bestow upon one of his own Sons.

9. A signal instance this of your admirable prudence, that you please and
oblige not only when Successor but while Companion and Co-partner in the
Empire. For Successor indeed you must have been even against your own will,
but half sharer you need not have been content with, if your ambition would
have otherwise advised. Can posterity ever believe that the Son of a Patrician,
a Consular, Triumphal Father, one who was himself at the head of a stout, a
numerous, and an obedient Army, was not by that Army created Emperor? He, who
while he commanded in Germany had conferred on him by our Senate the title of
Germanicus: Can it be imagined that one in these powerful circumstances should
make no attempt upon the Empire, that he should take no other method toward his
own advance, than that of serving and obeying? For obedience, Coesar, was your
only ambition, and it was out of duty alone that you complied with the being
made a Prince: Never more Loyally approving your self a Subject. than when you
submitted to the summons of being ordained a Sovereign. When absent and
ignorant of the honors done you, made Germanicus, Coesar, Emperor, and yet
after all this preferment, still as submissive and humble as a private man. It
will seem strange that you could not know, whether ever you should be an
Emperor, ^ay you actually were so, before ever you knew it. And as soon as the
messenger of your advancement came, your reception of the news betrayed, that
you had rather have remained in the quality you were in, if it had been manners
or duty to have refused the honor. But must not a Subject have obeyed his
Sovereign, an Ambassador his Prince, a Son his Father? Where then were all
discipline? Where were that long practiced Tradition delivered down to us from
our Ancestors, That whatever were enjoyed by Royal command, should without
farther dispute be cheerfully performed. And what if he should have ordered you
from Province to Province, from the service of one War to the task of another?
Think, by the same authority he sent you out to the conduct of an Army, by the
same he recalls you to the acceptance of a Crown. Nor is there much difference
between his commissioning you a General, and his ordaining you an Emperor,
save that in this last your obedience is the more creditable, because The glory
of being dutiful is so much the more, as it is exercised in any thing contrary
to the bent of a man's own inclination.

10. It confirmed and advanced the authority of him, who commanded, that his
authority had so lately been encroacht upon. Which blessed you with an
opportunity of being then more seasonably Loyal, when others were more basely
factious. The command of the Prince was backed with the Votes of the Senate, and
consent of the people. It was not only the single judgment of Nerva, but a
concurrent and universally approved Election. He only (as an honor due to his
Imperial dignity) led the way and did that which all first, would soon have
done, had not his doing prevented 'em. Nor indeed would the World have been
ravished with joy at the event, if they had not jointly both allowed and
applauded the design before ever it was put in execution. But with how discreet
a temper, good Gods, did you behave your self amidst all these caresses of
fortune? An Emperor in Style, in Effigies, in Statue, but in Modesty,
Vigilance, Industry, an Officer, a Deputy, a Common Soldier: While in a
becoming posture you marched before your Colors, led up your Troops, and wished
no other benefit might accrue by your adoption, than the honor of acquitting
your self a dutiful and obedient Son, in which state of subjection you desired
a long continuance, a long scene of glory. Providence had exalted you to the
first place, yet could you contentedly have demeaned your self to the second,
and there have remained much longer, yet longer, to a good old age. Nor while
another shared with you in the title of Emperor, were you willing your self to
appear more than a private Subject. Heaven heard your Prayers which were no
other than consistent with the good and happiness of that just and pious old
man, who the Gods wisely removed to a better World, that, after so Divine and
consummate an action, he might have no leisure to misemploy his pains in any
trifle of mortal concern. For There is this respect due to an unimitable
exploit that as it is the best, so it ought to be the last of all our earthly
undertakings; and therefore ought the Author immediately to be deifi'd, it
being likely the World will enquire, whether he, were not a God, when he did
it. Thus he who had no better claim to the title of common parent than by being
yours, being great in same, when he had lived a while to see how well you could
bear up under the weight of an Empire, left you to the World, and the World to
you: Leaving us sensible of our greater loss, because in you he provided that
our loss should be the less.

11. When dead, you, as a respectfull Son, first honor him with your tears,
then with a Temple. Not herein imitating those former presidents, which have
afforded indeed examples of like Piety, but upon far different inducements.
Tiberius deified Augustus, but it was only his ambition to entail a Godhead on
the Crown. Nero past the same compliment on Claudius, but it was only to
expose him. Titus did as much for Vespasian and Domitian for Titus, but the
first, that he might appear the Son, this latter the Brother of a God. You have
enrolled your Father among the Stars, not to strike an awe into the people, not
to put an affront on his fellow Deities, not to derive an honor on your self,
but because you devoutly thought him more than humane. It abates much from the
glory of this honor, when it is done by those, whose pride thinks themselves
as really Gods as those, whom by this ceremony they make so. And though you
have consecrated to his Divinity an Altar with its due ornaments, and a Priest
to Officiate at it, yet have you proved him a God in nothing more, than that
you your self are so much like him: For in a Prince who dies after a settled
appointment of his Heir, the most convincing Argument of his Divinity is a good
Successor. Has the dazelling immortality of your Father blinded you into any
pride or conceitedness? Do you copy after the vain and affected humor of our
modern kinsmen to deified Heroes? Or do you not rather imitate those more
generous souls of the Ancients, who bravely founded this Empire, which our
enemies have but of late found courage to assault, though now they dare so, we
have no surer proof of their flight or conquest, than, the pageantry of their
triumphs. This, makes 'em assume some spirit, and emboldens 'em to shake off
that yoke, they think they have now long enough labored under; nor would they
contend only for redemption of their own liberties, but would quite change the
Scene, and bring us to our turn of being slaves, accepting of no truce, but
upon even terms, and prescribing those conditions, they ought only to receive.

12. But now all return to their due bounds of obedience, and to an ambition of
performing what their betters command. For they now see a Roman General of the
true old stamp, of the same mettle with those, who made good their dignifying
titles by Fields strow'd with Murdered Carcasses, and Seas tinged with the
blood of their enemies. So that now we are entreated to accept of hostages, and
not, as formerly, forced to purchase 'em. Nor do we now on hard terms and
unreasonable rates buy the credit of coming off Victours. They humbly beg, they
often petition, and according as we think good, we either grant or deny both, we
keep our Grandeur, in both we exert our authority, if we grant, they are
thankful, if we deny, they durst not repine. They durst not, knowing that you
have tamed a surly The Ger-mans.
people, even in that season of the year, which was most beneficial to them,
and most injurious to us, when Danube's banks kept a passable intercourse by
Ice, and could transport whole Armies on the bridge that winter made, when the
barbarous Nations were armed as much by weather and by climate, as by Darts and
Weapons: And yet at your approach, as if the season of the year were by your
influence thawed into a change, they confined themselves within their holds and
caves, while our Soldiery marched along the banks, and had you allowed 'em to
have pursued that advantage, which the enemy often took, they had made the same
depth of winter, which used to be the other's greatest security, the time of
their total rout and subversion.

13. This was the respect you bore among your enemies, what among your own
Soldiers? How did you oblige 'em at the same time to duty and admiration?
While they felt no hunger, but what you bore a part in: No thirst, but what you
your self set for an example of patience: In the exercising of your Troops you
mingled your own sweat and dust with theirs, desiring in all things to be
barely their equal, except in the odds of strength and valor: Charging
briskly, and as freely receiving the charge, now whirling Darts at others, then
standing the brunt of those thrown at you, spurring on the courage and
dexterity of your men, seeming never better pleased, than with those who could
strike the deepest blow on your shield or helmet: For you commended the boldest
darer, and provokt him on to a greater boldness, a becoming boldness, which
they could not want, while they saw you stand over them a Spectatour and a
Judge of their activity: You handling their Arms, poizing their Darts, and if
any complained of their heaviness, you wheedled him into content by making
nothing of throwing 'em your self. You recruit the weary, relieve the sick. You
never enter your own Pavilion, till you have first visited each Soldiers Tent,
nor take your own repose, till you see others all asleep. A General thus
completely qualified would not so much have raised my wonder, if he had happened
among the Fabricii, the Scipio's, the Camilli, for then perhaps the heat of
imitation might have chaft him on, and he might have been touched with a noble
scorn of coming a whit behind the best. But that now in these sneaking and
cowardly times, when the profession of Arms is sunk from solid action to a
superficial sight, degenerated from rough labor to an idle pleasure, when our
Companies are exercised not by experienced home Commanders who have won the
mural and the civick Crown; but by some upstart modish Grecians: when our
discipline is thus corrupt, how strange is it to see one of the good old Roman
stamp, who fights and conquers without a rival, without an example, to convince
the lazy World, that as he Reigns alone, so he alone deserves to Reign?

14. And have you not, Caesar, from your very Infancy been nursed, been trained
to these glories? Nay did you not in your very Cradle, as it were, commence a
Hero? While yet a Stripling, your Parthian expedition added to the Catalogue
of your Father's Victories, and you even then deserved the title of Germanicus.
For hearing of the Parthian inroads on our neighboring Allies, you did
courageously dispatch, and bravely scour them back, making both the Rhine and
Euphrates jointly admire your prowess: Marching along through the most distant
Countries, yet not so fast in person, as in fame, gradually increasing your
reputation, and appearing still greatest where you appear last: And all this
before you were Emperor, before you were Successor to a God. And though
Germany be environed with many Warlike Nations, hemmed in with several
inaccessible deserts, and blockt up, as it were, with the Alps, the Pyrenoean
Mountains, and other craggy Hills, which might be called great, if not compared
with the former, which so much exceed 'em: Yet when through these discouraging
tracts you led, or rather (such was the expedition) you hurried your nimble
Army, you never so much as took Chariot, or mounted your Horse, having only a
light hunting Nag brought after you, which was more for show than service,
never making any use of him but only, when your Army were at the end of their
march, to gallop for diversion over the neighboring Fields. Shall I wonder
most at the onset of your enterprises, or at the event of them? It Is much that
you held out to the end, it is yet more that you never doubted you should fail
or come short, of your first resolves. I question not but that Domitionl
Prince, who, sending for you as far as from Spain, commissioned you to the
charge of the German War, being too lazy for the enterprise himself, and yet
envious of those parts, he was forced to employ; I say, I question not but he
admired your conduct, and yet was jealous of your eminence. As the Divine
Hercules was out of malice employed by his Erystheus.
Prince in several hazardous undertakings, yet still returned a Victour, and by
doing so derived a stronger odium upon the greatness of his success. And thus
came you always off so triumphantly, that your happy discharge of one
expedition did but make way for your fresh engagement in another.

15. While you were a military Tribune, you marched on through several
Countries, with the age of a youth, yet the courage of a man: Forestalling
fortune then kindly instructing you, in what you were afterward to instruct
others. You not being content to glance over your slighted charge, and huddle
up a tiresome War, but so acted the subordinate Officer, as if you deserved
immediately to be Supreme Commander, having nothing left to learn your self,
when you should be advanced to the Province of teaching others. You were verst
and completely skilled by ten several expeditions in the customs of the World,
in the Situation of Countries, in the advantages and convenience of different
grounds, in the property and temper of foreign Waters and Airs, which you had
made as samiliar to your body, as those of your own native Country. How often
(not out of fear or misfortune, but as spoils won from the enemy) have you
changed your half spent Horse and battered Arms? So that time shall come when
posterity shall take out their Children, and in curiosity conduct 'em to the
several places, where such a field drank up your showring sweat, where the
fruit of such a tree was your homely repast, where such a stone was your hardy
pillow, where such a Cottage was your humble Inn. As it is not unlikely that in
some of those very places you your self have been bid remember what noble
Achievements had been there wrought by some of your famed and immortal
Forefathers. This your bravery was long since shown; for they who were your
fellow Soldiers are now old and almost worn out: Though indeed you were fellow
Soldier to every one before you were his General: Thence comes it that you can
salute 'em all by their respective names, and can rehearse to each their most
memorable acts of gallantry; nor can any show a scar received for his Country,
but that at the time of receiving it you were both a witness, and a commander
of his valor.

16. But the discreet manage and command over the bent of your Education is to
be admired beyond all other your additional accomplishments: That bred up in
Arms, and nursed in a War, you should love and court the blessings of peace.
Nor, because your Father inured to triumphs, and a victorious Laurel was
consecrated to Jove on the very day of your Adoption, do you therefore seek all
occasions to improve your patrimony of triumphal honors: No, you fear not the
consequence of War, and yet you catch not at pretenses for quarrel. It was a
noble (believe me, dread Sovereign) it was a noble Act to stand deliberating on
the banks of Danube, assured of Victory should you pass, and yet out of
goodness not tempting, not urging them to Battle, whose cowardice declined it:
The one whereof was an effect of your courage, the other of your Clemency; it
was your Clemency, that induced you to forbear the engagement, it was your
courage, that made them afraid to engage. Our Capitol shall be henceforth
adorned not with stolen Chariots, not with the Trophies of a counterfeit
victory, but upon our Emperor's return with an honest and justly obtained
glory, it shall shine with the purchases of peace and settlement, and be stuffed
with spoils of the enemy, so great, so many, that it may be easily guest, there
is none remains unconquered. This far surpasses all former triumphs. The
occasion of our Wars being not drawn on by choler, rashness or ambition, but
always from the more allowable and justifying cause of calling for satisfaction
for such affronts, which shall be put upon our Empire. And if from henceforth
any foreign Prince shall be so unadvised and daring as to draw down your anger
and vengeance on him, though he be guarded by the interposal of Seas and
Rivers, though he lie intrencht within the natural fortification of Hills and
Mountains, yet shall not all these in the least obstruct your irresistible
attempts, the Waters shall sink into passable fords, the Mountains shall cringe
into humble plains, the Seas shall retire into dry sands, and the presumptuous
Prince shall with terror think, that not only a landing Navy, but a
transplanted Nation is poured in upon him.

17. Methinks I now behold a triumph not made up with feathers stolen from our
own Provinces, nor laden with Gold injuriously extorted from our Confederates
and Allies, but nobly decked with hostile spoils and chains of captive Kings.
Methinks I see our Soldiers rattling over the names of mighty Generals, and
pointing at the bodies suitable to the greatness of their name. Methinks I see
the Pageants expressing the method and manner of your respective conquests.
Before go shoals of Barbarian Captives with their hands tied behind, to denote
they are now bound to obey: after these follow you in your stately Chariot as
treading on the necks of enslaved Nations, bearing before you the relics of
those shields and helmets, which your own hand has pierced and battered: Nor
are there wanting the spoils of disarmed Generals, whom you never failed of
dismounting and making your Royal Prisoners, if happily any of them were so bold
as against your unequal skill to dare an Encounter: Though indeed a single cast
not only of your Darts, but of your very looks would make the proudest of 'em
stand rebukt, and even in the face of a whole Campaign, at the head of their
own Army, to shake, tremble and retire: And from henceforth, whenever a respect
for the honor of our Empire shall engage you to an invasive, or a defensive
War, your past moderation may assure us, that you conquer not because you may
triumph, but triumph only because you conquer.

18. The remembrance of one thing gives occasion for the recollecting of
another: How worthy and serviceable a performance is it, that you have
retrieved the impaired and lost discipline of Arms, scowring off the lazy
Lethargy of the last age, purging out their sloth, their stubbornness, their
not caring to obey? It Is safe to be feared, it is safer to be beloved, you are
safe and happy in both. There is no General, who ought either to fawn for, or
yet to slight, the affections of his Soldiers, but rather fond of their love,
yet not afraid of their hate, he ought so to demean himself, that he may
securely overlook the works, see to their being rightly Marshaled, take account
of their Arms, give order for the entrenchments, and assign the several Posts
or Stations to each respective Sentinel. For he indeed is by no means a Prince,
but a slave to his own jealousies, who suspects those strategems to be designed
against himself, that are prepared against the Enemy, which has been a cowardly
surmise of some, who have feared their own Forces would be turned against
themselves. With shame we consess it, in former times Military profession was
just sunk into nothing, men's bodies, as well as their minds, were heavy, dull
and drooping, swords with rust were riveted into scabbards, where they slept
and forgot their primitive employ: Our Generals stood upon their Guards more
from suspicion of their own Subjects than for prevention of the attempts of
foreign Princes, and feared the treachery of their own Soldiers, more than the
violence of their professed Enemies.

19. It is the nature of the heavenly bodies that the lesser and more obscure
dwindle, wink, and die into the luster of more dazzling Orbs: And thus
Ambassadors must loose both their state and authority at the personal
appearance of those Princes, they had the honor to represent. Whereas you
indeed outshin'd all, yet without eclipsing the splendor of any weaker lights,
each person kept his glory as entire while you were present, as when absent:
Nay some of your delegates were made the more honorable by your company, while
respected by you, they met with the more respect from others. By these
endearments you gained on the affections of all, from the highest to the most
inseriour quality, so acting by turns the part both of a General and a common
Soldier, that you prescribed and imposed Military duties, as a Supreme
Commander, and yet assisted in the performance of them, as an equal companion.
How happy were all under your Conduct, all your past associates, of whose
loyalty and industry not your Ears, but your Eyes informed you, the knowledge
whereof you had not from the partial advice of others, but from the safer and
stronger proofs of your own experience: And you were thus farther kind to them,
that in your absence you listn'd to no envious reports, but believed what you
had sound yourself, sooner than caught at what you heard from others.

20. Now did the longing wishes of Rome recall you, and the more fond
affection, you bore your Country, oversway'd that love, you had shown your
Soldiers. So that now you return, yet with so strict a Discipline, with so
little of forage, plunder or other abuse, as if you came from a regular peace,
rather than from a tumultuous War: And, though it seem too trifling to add to
your commendation, I cannot but observe, that no Father, no Husband feared the
injurious effects of your return. Chastity has been a virtue in most others
affected only, and pretended to, but in you it was so unfeigned, as not to be
reckoned among those endowments, which are acquired by habit, but those
implanted by nature. There was no grievance in the pressing of Carriages, no
nicety in the taking up of lodgings, no trouble in the catering of dainties for
your entertainment. Add to this, that your Progress at the head of your Troops
was with so much of dispatch, and in so well governed order, as if you went
with Commission to an Army, rather than returned in triumph with one. So little
different were your temper and behavior then while a Subject, and since when
an Emperor. How unlike this was the late March of a former Prince (if it may
be called a march, and not rather an hostile incursion) when he pillaged houses
and dispossessed the inhabitants, sacked and burnt all before him, as if some
Enemy had made an inroad for spoil and booty, or those very Barbarians, he fled
from, had pressed on in pursuit of Victory? The aggrieved Provinces ought to have
rested satisfied that it was the journey of a Domitian, not of a Prince.
Therefore to promote the public good, rather than advance your private
reputation, you published an Edict of the particular expenses both of his and
your own German expedition. It is indeed a commendable custom for a Prince to
keep a just reckoning betwixt himself and his Empire, so to undertake any
enterprise, and so to return from the management of it, as if he were shortly
to be called to an exact account: And if he thus punctually cast up what he
spends, he will be sure not to spend more, than he may be willing to own.
Beside, by your publishing this bill of charges, succeeding Princes may meet
with Precedents of frugal and more lavish disbursements, and when two such
different examples are proposed, they must give men leave to judge of their
inclinations, accordingly as they adhere to the one, or the other.

21. For these so many and so remarkable merits, what advance of honors what
additional titles did you not abundantly deserve? Yet it was not without a
struggling regret that you complied with the acceptance of that one appellation
of Father of your Country. How long were we forced to strive and combat with
your modesty? And with how much of difficulty did we at last overcome? That
name, which most of your Predecessors received at their first Inauguration, as
duly as they did that of Emperor and Caesar, you differed till such time, as
your self, the most impartial judge of your own merit, could not but own you
deserved it. So that to you of all other did regularly happen truly to be the
Father of your Country, before you were declared so to be. For under that
character did we entertain you, both in our judgments, and in our affections:
Nor would the public zeal have stood upon the ceremony of any one title, but
that having experienced your indulgence much more, than your authority, it
would have seemed undutifull, as well as improper, not to have styled you
Father, much sooner than Lord, or Emperor: Which honorable appellation with
what sweetness, what affection do you answer the just intent and occasion of?
Living in an Empire with your Subjects, as in a Family with your Children;
returning as a Prince, when you went out no better than a Subject, and yet
having your thoughts no higher for your advance to a Crown, but thinking both
your self and us in the same equal relation amidst all your Royalty, as when in
a private Station: Content in all respects to be, as one of us, and so much
greater only, by how much better, than others.

22. How long hoped, how wished for was that day when at your return you past
in public through the City? Nay the very manner of your solemn March how
grateful, how obliging? Former Princes have usually been brought in, not only
in pompous Chariots drawn with white Racers, but, what has more of State and
pride, supported on the shoulders of men; while you, so much the more visible
only, as the more tall and proper of your retinue, seemed to ride in a
triumph, not over the patience of your people, but over the Grandeur of
Princes. No age, no infirmity, no different Sex was debarred from the common
benefit of glutting their eyes on that welcome and unusual sight. Children were
taught to know you, young men pointed, old men admired, and even those, whose
sickness had confined 'em to their beds, or chambers, contrary to the advice of
their cautious Physicians, came forth, and seemed confident, that the bare
influence of so blessed an object would complete their recovery. Some were
content now to dye, since they had lived to see, what they had so long prayed
for: Others were the more eager to have their lives prolonged as knowing it
would be some comfort to live under the Protection of so excellent a
Government. Women thought it now some joy to be made Mothers, since they saw to
what Prince they brought forth Subjects, and what a long prospect of happiness
was thereby entailed on their Children. The tops of houses were all covered
with spectatours, who climbed and hung over at that venturous rate, as if they
were just falling, yet for crowds of company below were not likely to come to
the ground. The streets were thronged on either side, and scarce a narrow lane
left for your passage. The multitude from all quarters discharged loud peals of
joy, and thundered from every part in shouts and acclamations: While this
rejoicing at your return, being as universal, as the benefits of it, grew still
greater, as you marched farther, and advanced along with every step you made.

23. It was a pleasure to see you return those embraces to the Senate, which
they had lent you at parting: A pleasure to find you could salute most of the
principal Gentry by their names without a Remembrancer. A pleasure that you
would not only condescend to take notice of your meaner Subjects, but would be
very free and familiar in your discourse with them: And above all, the greatest
pleasure that you marched leisurely, and allowed time for the people to have a
full view of you, nay would suffer any of the Mobile to come up, and make the
nearest approach to your Person, not being afraid even the first day to trust
your self with a promiscuous rabble, and therefore not environed with too
numerous a Guard, but free and open to receive the Addresses sometime of your
Senate, at other times of your Courtiers, according as by turns they paid their
dutiful respects. Those of your Guard, that cleared the way before you, past
quietly and offered no injuries, nor affronts: And your Soldiers were
distinguished, scarce by habit, much less by roughness, or incivility, from the
rest of the people. When you began to mount the Capitol, how comfortable an
occasion did that give of recollecting the time and place of your Adoption? And
what a peculiar joy was it to those, who had from thence before saluted you
Emperor? Nay I believe the very Deity of the place took great satisfaction in
reviving that signal work of his own Providence. But when you stood on that
particular Station from whence your Father had pronounced this secret of the
Gods, how the Temple echoed with repeated shouts? How were the former
acclamations renewed? And how like was this day to that other, which occasioned
it? How loaded were the Altars with Victims and Sacrifices? How zealous and
devout were the people in praises for your Succession, and prayers for your
preservation? Knowing that to send up their petitions for your safety was in
effect to beg a blessing on themselves, their Children, and all their other
Secular concerns. From hence you retired to your Palace, but with so humble a
look, so meek a carriage, as if you had been returning only to your private
house; The rest went all to their respective homes, there to rejoice without
hypocrisy, because without witness of their joy.

24. Such a magnificent entrance might have been apt to have allured others to
pride and ambition: But you unshock'd by all temptations grew still more to be
admired, more to be beloved. In a word, such you are, as others do but promise
to be. You are the first precedent of a Prince who proceeds better, than he
first began: Your excellent temper joining those properties, which heretofore
seemed incompatible, the modesty of a beginner, and the constancy of a long
stander in Government. You suffer not your subjects to throw themselves at your
feet, and think it too much state to require they should kneel, and kiss your
hand. The addition of an Empire has not made you one whit the more big or
stately than before: You used to walk much, you continue the same custom: You
were wont to take delight in toil and labor, you do the same still: In a
word, Fortune has changed all about you, yet has made no alteration on your
steady self. When you take the Air abroad, it is free for every one to stop at
the sight of you, to come up, and meet you, to walk on even with you, or to
pass by and go beyond you: You come among us as familiarly, as if you were but
one of us, and accept of our company, not out of necessity, but choice. Every
one, who has access to you, stays his own time, and breaks off his discourse,
when his own modesty, not your weariness, does advise. We are indeed Governed
by you, and subject to you, yet no otherwise, than as to our Fundamental Laws,
which both direct and punish without partiality, or passion. You are eminent
and Supreme as Power and Authority in the Abstract, which are indeed above all,
yet are administered by some, and exercised on another. In past ages Princes
from a haughty disdain of doing like the rest of the World, and a fear of being
thought equal to their subjects, if they dissented not in their customs from
them, had lost all use of their feet, so that they were forced to be carried on
the necks and shoulders of others, yet when thus mounted, they were much your
inferiors in respect of that higher degree, whereto your own deserts, and the
duty of your subjects have raised and exalted you. You reach Heaven the more
justly by submitting to tread earth, and go the farther beyond us, by
vouchsafing to walk with us.

25. Nor do I fear (my Lords) to be thought too tedious on this Subject: Since
it is chiefly to be wished that the particulars, for which a just return of
thanks is due to Princes, should be many; and many indeed they are, which it
would be more manners to stifle and pass by unobserved, than to be short and
abrupt in the delivery of them: Because it naturally happens, that what is
designedly concealed is by such cunning suppression better set off, than if it
were slightly and trivially expressed. Though indeed I can but concisely touch
at his generous enriching of several Families, his frank bestowing of a Largess
on the people, and that the whole of what he had promised, when the Soldiers
received no more than a part of their Donative. This was an Argument of no
ordinary spirit, to give most to those whom he might best have denied: Yet this
odds was in other respects made up, and neither side was left to brag, or
complain of an inequality: The Soldiers had a part only, but then they were
first served: The people were forced to wait, but then their patience was
rewarded with a Recept of the whole. How impartial and equal was the Dividend
made? How careful were you that none should be defrauded of their share? It
was allowed even to those, who had not first been nominated, but were deputed
in the room of others: So that those tasted of your bounty, whom you, lay under
no promise to relieve. If one happened to be detained by business, another by
sickness, this by a voyage, that by travel, their just shares were preserved
for them; and care taken that no ones distemper, employment, or absence should
be his loss, but each appear at his own time, whenever his will, whenever his
occasions would best dispense with him. It was generous and like your self
(Heroic Caesar) to reach the most distant Countries by the extent of your
liberality, to let no not the widest space set bounds to your munificence, to
prevent the mischiefs of chance, to shackle up the powers of fortune, and so to
contrive it, that at your dispersing a Largess the worst infirmities of
humanity should never balk your bounty, but every one be less sensible of his
being a Man, than of being a free Denizen of Rome.

26. On the day of distributing such Largesses, it was formerly the custom
that shoals of young Children (the nursery and breed of a future people) used
to flock in the streets, and wait the coming of the Prince; the Parents took
great pains to show him to their little ones, and to teach them some cursory
form of petition, who accordingly pratled, as they were taught, and addressed
their pretty gabble to the deaf Ears of the Prince, while not knowing either
what they asked, or when they were denied, the grant was generally deferred,
till they came to years of more growth and understanding. Whereas you were so
frankly generous, as to impart your charity without staying for the Ceremony of
being entreated, and, though you took pleasure in looking upon Troops of
Petitioners, yet you prevented their trouble of Address, and met them in your
bounty, before they could approach you in Person. Nay you commanded the very
Infants to be Enrolled among the objects of your Royal care, that being
Educated at your charge, they might from their Cradle acknowledge you their
Foster Parent. You thought it but just and reasonable that those, who were bred
for your service, should be bred at your expense: That they should be supported
by a pension, till they were able to earn a pay: And so be all not more
indebted to their natural Parents for being born Infants, than to you for their
being made Men. It is a discreet generosity (Caesar) to discharge the expense
of bringing up these budding hopes of Rome: There can be no disbursements to
better advantage, none that will more effectually purchase you an immortal
name, than what are thus laid out for the good of Posterity. The rich have
encouragements to get Children from the several Rehearsed in the Law de
maritandis ordinibus, which was preferred by Q. Metellus, and revived by
Augustus.
privileges they thereby gain, and to avoid such inconveniences which they must
otherwise undergo: The poor have but one inducement, and that is the blessing
of breeding up subjects to so good a Prince. These Children thus born to the
alone use of his service, except he cherish, feed, and maintain them, he knows
he should but hasten the decay of his Empire, and push on the ruin of the
Commonwealth. For a Prince who guards his Nobility with favor and protection,
while he leaves his Commonalty naked and defenseless, does but provide for a
tottering head with no limbs, no body to poise or support it. It is easy to
guess what complacency you must needs take in the being so loudly welcomed with
the congratulating noise of all relations, of each Sex, and every age: To make
up the joyful Chorus, Children pratled their very first attempts to speak,
those Children for whom you made so early provision, as freely to give, before
their loosned Tongue had the power to ask. And indeed among all the other
blessings of your Government, this must be accounted the most eminent, that it
is a pleasure, nay a profit to be the Father of many Children.

27. The fondest Parents fear now no other dangers to ruin their hopes, than
the bare casualties of humane frailty, nor among incurable mischiefs is the
anger of the Prince any longer to be reckoned. A main encouragement to educate
Children arises from the hopes of a liberal maintenance, and the prospect of
honorable employs, but it is much more encouraging to breed them to the
enjoyment of a fixed liberty, and a secure unaltered property. Let a Prince
take no care to enrich his subjects, so he attempts not to impoverish them, let
him not maintain, so he does not destroy, and yet most persons, even under such
an indifferent Government, would be desirous of Issue: But on the other hand,
if he plunders more, than he bestows, if he ruin more Families, than he
raises, it will unavoidably in a short while happen, that all will see reason
to repent the birth of themselves and their Ancestors, as well as bewail that
of their Children and posterity. But in the disposals of your bounty, as being
entirely free from such extortion, I can commend nothing more justly, than that
whatever you grant, was your own to bestow; not feeding your Subjects, as wild
Beasts do their young, by the violent acquists of Murder and rapine: Your
favors becoming always the more acceptable, because those, who are obliged by
them, know that no others were defrauded of them: And that for all the
enrichments they receive no one is made poorer, but the Royal Donour only and
not properly he neither; for being truly Lord of all Estates, he is owner of so
much, as his Subjects possess.

28. More copious matter of commendation seems now (Caesar) to call me some
other way: But why so soon diverted? As if I had enough insisted on, as if I
had sufficiently respected and admired your large and almost profuse
beneficence not bestowed by way of policy to bribe off those calumnies and
slanders, your Conscience tells you, you had given just occasion for, nor to
drown the discontents, and murmurs of your people, by the offer of a more
comfortable Subject of discourse. You bought off the envy of no miscarriage by
a wheedling Largess, nor atoned for any illegal action by the settlement of a
pension; neither was that at any time the ground of your doing good, to
compound for the passing uncensur'd, in what you had done ill. The intent of
your bounty was the purchase, not of excuse, but of love; and the people always
returned from your Courts of Judicature, not so much pacified for former
abuses, as obliged by an assurance of never being injured. You offered your
Largess with as much joy to give, as those to receive, as secure in your
grants, as they in their acceptance: And that which some of your Predecessors
disburs'd to calm the discontent of swelling spirits, and take off that odium
they found themselves to lie under, this you distributed with as much of
innocence and simplicity as others could possibly receive it. No less (my
Lords) than five thousand freemen has the good nature of our Prince sought for,
found out, and relieved: These are the supplies of War, these the guards of
peace, maintained at the public charge, and thereby taught to respect their
Country, not only as their place of birth, but as their nurse and bringer up.
Out of these are our Armies to be recruited, our Tribes filled up, and from the
loins of these shall in time proceed such, whose liberal fortune shall secure
them from all need of relief. Let the Gods give you (Great Sir) that length of
days, your merits seem to challenge, and keep unchanged that generous Soul,
they have endowed you with: And when you see the Roll of Infants, who are to be
the objects of your alms, enlarged, (for their numbers do daily increase, not
because Children are better beloved of their Parents, but subjects of their
Prince) you may relieve them if you please, you may maintain them if you see
fit, if not, it is enough that they are born to obey, and must discharge their
allegiance without bribe or reward.

29. It may well be reckoned one continued Largess of our Prince, that he has
contrived to furnish our City with a never failing supply of Corn: Which piece
of provident husbandry added heretofore no less glory to Pompey, than his
regulating Elections by a law against purchase of Votes, his scouring the Seas
of Pirates, and making the East and West a successive subject of his triumphs.
This one project of stocking Rome with a constant import of provisions,
equaled, nay exceeded the best of his other Achievements. With the same care,
the same charity, has our Prince made the highways securely passable, cleared
the Ports, frighted away the fears of plunder and robbery, as well in journeys
by Land, as voyages at Sea: And made so open an intercourse of trade and
commerce between the most distant Nations, as if those commodities, which are
the growth but of one Country, were the native product of all. With joy we
find that the wants of each year are abundantly supplied with the yield and
increase of it, and this brought to our own homes without force or compulsion.
We do not plunder nor rifle our Allies, we do not cheat their Barns of the
promised Harvest, but let them quietly carry in what their fields afford, what
the several seasons do allow: Nor do we charge them so thick with fresh taxes,
as to disable them from paying off their old Arrears. The public treasury does
not steal, what it professes to purchase, but honestly buys in stores of
provisions, which are again so vended without fraud or exaction, that we have
plenty at home, and yet make no dearth or scarcity abroad.

30. Egypt has always bragged of being a fertile nurcery of Corn, and that
without being indebted to the Charity of the Heavens, without needing the
relief of refreshing showers: For she is sufficiently moistened by the Waters of
her own River, whose customary overflowings have so fatned and enriched her
soil, that she seems a Storehouse to other Nations, and might with modesty be
entitled the Granary of the World. This very Country by a surprising drought
was parched and withred into one continued Wilderness: For Nilus shrunk back,
and would not overpass its banks, but like other Rivers ran on in a bounded and
confined chanel. So that vast tracts of land by being thus deprived of their
accustomed moisture dried and crumbled into the most barren dust and sand. In
vain did Egypt now expect comfort from the denying clouds, in vain did she gape
for any blessing from the skies, since the wonted Author of her full Barns
sunk down and contracted her plenty into as narrow a compass, as his own
streams. Nor did the unconstant River keep up to those banks which were wont to
be his shortest bounds, but crept yet lower, and seemed to attempt the sneaking
away undiscovered, leaving the shallows of his own bottom as dry and scorched,
as any other parts of the Sunburned deserts. The hungry people thus loosing the
benefits of a wish'd-sor inundation, and thereby the hopes of all food and
sustenance, direct those prayers to Caesar, which in vain they had spent on
their unregarding River: While placing their devotions now aright, their
petitions were answered, as soon as heard. Thus swift (O Emperor) is the reach
of your power, thus dispatchfull upon all occasions your Acts of Mercy, that
the most miserable need use no other methods of relief, than barely to let you
know their wants.

31. I wish indeed plenteous Crops and fruitful years to the several
inhabitants of each part of the World: Yet I cannot but believe that Egypts
being plagued with this miserable dearth was a mere trick of fortune to try
your power, and make proof of your extensive care and vigilance. For since your
merits claim success in all attempts, it is apparent that whatever deplorable
chances happen, they are only to afford fresh matter and new subjects for the
employ of your undaunted virtues: Prosperity indeed may make men happy, but
misfortunes alone can approve them great. It has been a long received opinion
that Rome could not feed her inhabitants without supplies from Egypt: This made
that haughty Province boast, that the Conquerours of the World were beholden to
her for their bread, and at her disposal must they either feast or starve. We
have now quitted the obligation, and repaid the utmost of what she could charge
upon us: She has received back that Corn she was wont to export, and recalled
those stores she has formerly dispensed. Let Egypt therefore learn, let her by
this experiment believe, that she gives us not a necessary sustenance, but pays
us a justly imposed tribute: Let her know we can live without her assistence
better than she without our protection. Let Nilus now, as often as the sullen
humor takes him, stick to his own chanel, and be shackled to an imprisonment
within his own banks, Rome scorns to be concerned, and Egypts self will feel no
worse effect, than that her Vessels must launch out empty as they were wont to
return, and take in their Cargo here at Rome where they were used to unlade:
While the method of their trading being thus altered, they may change their
devotion, and turn their prayers for a safe Voyage out to a fair wind home. It
had been next to a miracle (Caesar) if these wants of Egypt had not enhanc'd
the price of Corn, and made a much greater scarcity at Rome, but that your
providence had so well stocked it, as to have enough to spare, and give the
World a proof that Rome without Egypt might well subsist, but Egypt never
without Rome. Here had been an end of a most flourishing Nation, had it been a
free and independent State; they were ashamed of their unaccustomed dearth, and
their never yet experienced hunger made them blush no less than pine: While
your opportune charity, with one and the same kindness both spared their
modesty, and relieved their wants. Their husbandmen were surprised to see Corn,
which was not of their own growth, and wondered from whence the Harvest came,
or in what other part of Egypt there had been an overflowing Nile: Thus did
your bounty correct the barrenness of their soil, and their deserting River at
this lowest ebb never rose higher to the glory of Rome.

32. What a blessing is it for all Nations to be brought under the subjection
of our Empire, since they are thereby engaged to pay Allegiance to a Prince,
who can dispense out plenty here and there according as different times and
occasions require? Who can seed and nurture a Foreign Province with as much of
tenderness, as if it were a Colony only of Roman Citizens. Nay the extent of
his influence does in some measure outreach even that of the Heavens
themselves: For those glorious Orbs are never so lavish of their blessings, as
in the same year to disperse the same portion of them through all Countries and
Climates; whereas he, with the same open hand toward all, if he does not
prevent a dearth, does at least redress the mischiefs of it: If he command not
a plenty, he does at least correct the niggardness of nature, and makes full
amends for whatever she peevishly detains. He brings the widely distant East
and West to meet, and to a wonderful embrace in an interchangeable commerce:
So that whatever is the growth of one place, or the desire of another may every
where be had, and equally enjoyed. From this happiness let all Nations be
convinced, how much more for their advantage it is to be united under the
Government of one, than by a specious liberty to be crumbled into thousands of
weak and helpless parties: For if separate and independent from each other,
their mischiefs would be peculiar, and their blessings incommunicate: But when
confederate and intermixed, their evils are abated by falling not singly on
themselves, and their benefits enlarged by being imparted to others. But with
respect to Egypt, whether something of Divinity wait on their soil, or some
Genius attend their River, I hope both their Earth and their Waters will
treasure up that Corn, our Prince bestows, in such sort, as in time to restore
it multiplied: Not that we shall demand any interest for the Loan, but that we
would have them confess an obligation to pay it. Let them make amends for the
loss of one years crop by a long unintermitted yield of plenty, which let them
measure out to us the more freely, as we are the more sparing to exact.

33. Having thus provided for the advantages both of your subjects and Allies,
having thus secured our profit, you come now to consult our pleasure: And
present us with magnificent Shows, not trifling, or of a short continuance, not
corrupting the Spectatours to vice or debauchery, but improving their courage,
and leading them on to a generous scorn of wounds, and more noble contempt of
death; while they see an eager pursuit of glory and an ambitious quest of
victory even in the basest slaves, and most wretched of Malefactors. And in
setting forth these Plays, how unparalled your bounty, how exact your
justice, above all prejudice for one faction, or partially for another?
Whenever we asked, you frankly gave, nay, offered more than we had the
confidence to desire. You seemed to chide our bashfulness, and invited us on to
a freedom of petitioning, while from hence we were obliged with many fresh and
unexpected favors. Then how free was it to come to these diversions? How safe
to declare our approbation or dislike? No person argued of impiety, as was
sadly wont, for houting or condemning any particular gladiatour. No Spectatour
was himself made a spectacle to pay for his dear-bought pleasure at the heavy
price of Fire and Gibbet. He Domitian.
was little better than raving mad, and had no right estimate of true honor,
who drew treason from the most sportive actions, nay the very looks of
Spectatours, who thought we affronted him, if we adored not his Fencers, who
believed the slighting of their skill was a contempt of his own Majesty, having
no less a conceit, than that he himself was a God, and they his Princely
Representatives, and so took as to himself what indignities were offered to
them.

34. Instead of this bloody, this accursed show, how fair, how innocent a one
have you obliged us with? We have now seen false Evidences, and suborned
Informers punished with the same severity, as Thieves and Murderers: This sort
of plague did lately so far spread, that they sculk'd not in corners or
unfrequented places, but thronged the Temples, and crowded the Courts of
Justice; At the mercy of these Rascals lay every man's life and estate, no
degree, no condition secure, the being a Father or being childless was a like
criminal, when these Villains were agreed to make it so. To this fatal mischief
in former times the spleen and avarice of our Princes has much contributed. But
you nobly resolved to correct this abuse, and when you had reformed the
discipline of the Camp, you came to regulate the proceedings of your Courts of
Justice too* You stopped the farther growth of this accursed gangrene, and by a
well timed severity took care that your Imperial City, founded and supported by
Laws, should not be ruined by the illegal execution of them. And therefore
though your fortune, and your bounty have conspired to oblige us with the
sports, sometime of strong and bulky men, now of savage beasts, then of wild
ones to a wonder tamed, and finally with an exposing to open view those
Treasured up by Domitian and now produced by Trajan.
Rarities till now hoarded and locked up from public sight: Yet have you done
nothing more honorable, nothing more becoming the glories of your Reign, than
your just retribution of suborned witnesses: We fed our eyes with seeing them
drawn through the Streets to the place of execution, we looked and blessed our
selves at the comfortable sight, when (like victims to atone for the blood
their perjuries had shed) they were dragged away to make the fame ignominious
end, they had brought so many innocent souls to. Some of them in order to be
transported were thrust on shipboard, and delivered over to the mercy of storms
and billows: deservedly were they expelled that Country their misinformations
had laid desolate. If any of them hap'd to escape the Justice of Winds and Sea,
they should be landed on barren Rocks, and unfrequented Shores, there to drudge
out a laborious, and a miserable lise, far from all Societies, which they were
not fit to be members of.

35. A memorable sight this! A fleet of Evidences turned loose to grapple with
the Winds who spread their sails together in the storms, and sly before the
driving waves, till their Cariere be stopped by dashing against some surly Rock.
A gallant prospect from the safer Shore to view the rambling Navy tossed and
scattered through the foaming Ocean! And a fit occasion this of fresh gratitude
to our Prince, who preserving his Clemency untainted, has delivered over these
criminals to the justice of the Sea and the Gods thereof. A notable instance
this of what alterations short times may produce, when to those very deserts,
where the innocent were lately so injuriously banished, the guilty are now most
justly confined: And all those savage Islands so lately filled with salsly
accused Senators, are now more properly stocked with these perfidious
Informers; whom you have not only curbed or stifled for the present, but by
penalties answerable to their black crimes totally quelled and suppressed them
for ever. If any now attempt to cheat others of their livelihood, they must
lose their own, if they would dispossess others of their homes, they must turn
out themselves. Nor can they elude the intent of the Law, or shuffle off the
sentence of the Judge; they cannot shift with a cold iron, which shall make no
mark, nor impression, nor can they laugh at those torments, that never hurt
them. Their Fines must be now proportioned to their faults, their hopes of
escape must be now less, than their fear of smart, and they must dread others
as much, as they themselves were lately dreaded. With a noble courage did the
Divine Titus begin to secure us from these mischiefs by the guard of severe and
seasonable Edicts, and in gratitude for this attempt was he deservedly deified.
How much more justly hereafter (yet long may the coming of that hereafter be)
shall you be worthy of the same divine honors, who have built upon and
completely finished those Laws, which at the rough foundation were thought
meritorious of entitling him a God? The difficulty of this accomplishment was
much the greater upon this account, that the Emperor Nerva, who deserved you
for his Son, deserved you his Successor, made so many additions to this Edict
of Titus, that he seemed to leave no room for your completing hand; and yet you
have so far enlarged it, as if nothing had been done before. Any of these
Reformations singly dispensed would have been highly gracious, and well
accepted of, but you poured them forth all at once, like the Sun and beams of
day, which sprinkle not their light by fits and parcels, but dart it forth in
discontinued streams, not confined to particular corners, but expanded through
the whole surface of the World.

36. What a blessing is it to see the Treasury free and unoppressive, in as
profound a quiet, as before all disturbances created by Informers? It is now a
Temple indeed, and the Saturn.
Deity, it was dedicated to, does there certainly reside: It is no longer a
drainer of the People, a repository of exactions or dishonest gains, and there
is now one place at least, where the innocent are no longer made a prey to the
unjust. Yet are all lawful dues levied to the full, and no abatements made of
what would be injurious to the Republic to lose: Nor are the penalties
remitted to any, whom a fair trial shall convict: Yet is there a free Process
for recovery of damages upon malicious or suborned accusers: And, in short, the
case is so well altered, that men fear the Laws, not the Informers. But perhaps
you have not taken so much care in regulating of your private Exchequer, as of
the Treasury? Yes, the greater, by how much more boldly you can dispose of your
own, than of what belongs to the public. Your Advocate, your Attorney may be
now cited, and proceeded against, as the Law directs: For justice may be now
had against them, as well as against ordinary Offenders, their penalties the
same or greater, if you measure their punishment by the greatness of their
figure and quality. Not the Princes will and pleasure, but Lots and an Urn, the
common method of Elections, assign a Judge to the Exchequer: And if any be
otherwise promoted, it is free to reject him, and to say of one, he is
unqualified because he is timorous, and does not sufficiently understand the
interest of his Country, and of another he is more fit for the employ, because
he is true to his Country, and loyal to his Prince. Caesar and his subjects
try out their Titles at the same Bar: And what, Sir, is to your eternal credit,
your Exchequer is often cast, which yet can never come to the worst but under a
good Prince. This is great obligation, and what a greater yet, that your
Advocates are all persons of such integrity that the people desire no other
Counsel, no other Judges, though it be free, for any not to entertain them, or
to appeal from them: For though you assign them, you leave it to our choice to
comply or refuse, knowing it is the highest grace of Royal favors to have the
liberty of not accepting them.

37. The charges and expense of Government impose a necessity of taxes, which
though they appear a burden and grievance to particular persons, yet is that
seeming inconvenience vastly out-balanc'd by their promoting the welfare of the
community. For this use and purpose was the twentieth part of all Legacies
formerly assigned: And this being light and easy to those heirs only, who
bore no relation to the deceased, but hard and grievous to the next of blood,
it was levi'd only upon the one, and remitted to the other. Forasmuch as it
was apparent that men would not without reluctance, or rather not at all,
endure to have any part embezelled or pared off from that Estate, which their
birth had given them a title to, which was never the possession of a distinct
family, or which they could but barely hope would be bequeathed to them, but
which was their proper and immediate inheritance, and ought to pass downward by
right of descent and proximity of blood. Yet was this exemption allowed only
to the ancient Denizens, all the late-comers, whether enfranchised by the
privilege that the Latins might claim, or by the boon and favor of the Prince,
(except by express dispensation they had obtained the right of kindred) were in
respect of the nearest relation accounted as no better than Aliens. Thus what
was designed for the greatest ease and benefit, was soon perverted into the
greatest grievance. The City of Rome was filled with jars, discords, and
breaches in families, while the next heirs without any undutifull or
disobliging carriage were in a manner dishinherited and debarred their right.
Yet were some so sond of the honor of being incorporated with us, that they
thought not only the forfeiture of the twentieth part of their estates, but
the loss of kindred was abundantly recompensed by the title of Roman Citizens:
Though upon those who prized it at so high a value it ought the more freely to
have been conferred. Your Father Nerva therefore did hereupon decree, that what
goods past from the Mother to the Children, or from the Children to the Mother
(though at their being Indenizen'd they had not received the right of
cognation) should not be liable to this tribute of the twentieth part. The same
immunity he allowed to a Son as heir to his Father, (provided he were not
emancipated from his Fahter's power and disposal) thinking it unjust,
oppressive, and almost impious to exact any thing in cases of so near alliance,
and judging it no less than some sort of Sacrilege to cut asunder the holy ties
of relation by so sharp and rigid an imposal: Nor could he digest it as at all
reasonable, that any Tax should so be raised, as to make Fathers and Children
strangers to each other.

38. Thus far went your Royal Predecessor, wherein though he fell short
perhaps of the best of Princes, he came up at least to the best of Fathers: For
being to adopt one of as large a Soul as himself, he betrayed this generous
piece of indulgence, that he would but slightly begin and barely set the
example, leaving to his Son an entire, and almost unattempted Field of glory.
Immediately therefore to his Charity did your munificence farther add, that as
the Son in the inheritance of his Father, so the Father in that of the Son
should be exempt from all encumbrances, and by his unhappy ceasing to be a
parent, not lose the advantage of his once having been so. It is an Heroical
mercy of you (Caesar) not to exact Tribute of tears, nor to make a Father's
loss your gain. Parents shall now succeed to what their Children died possessed
of, without fraud or diminution; nor indeed would it be any way just, that they
should have partners in their inheritance, who have none in their sorrows. No
persons left Childless are called to account amidst their fresh and undigested
grief, nor is the Father compelled to bring in an Inventary of what was left
him by his Son. Our Prince's unparalled bounty herein will appear the more
admirable, if I knew the grounds and reasons of it: For it may indeed be
deservedly reputed an ambition, vain glory, profuseness, or any worse name,
rather than liberality, if not grounded on some firm and solid reason. Your
motives therefore for thus doing were what are highly, Sir, worthy of your
Clemency, to abate the afflictions of disconsolate parents, and, after the
shrewd temptation of one loss, not superadd the trial of another. It is indeed
misery enough for a mournfully surviving Father to be sole heir to a dear
departed Son, without the dividing with a coheir contrary to the will and
knowledge of the deceased. Farther, when divine Nerva had decreed that Children
coming to an enjoyment of their Fathers Estates should be exempt from a payment
of the twentieth part, it was but reasonable this privilege should extend to
those inheritances, which past from Sons to Fathers, as well as from Father to
Son: For why should Children have the advantage of their Parents, and why
should not the same equity ascend? This exception (Caesar) is by you removed,
and the Father made capable to succeed the Son, supposing the Son to have been
in his Father's power, which supposal too you took always for granted, having
respect to that prime and fundamental Law of Nature, which does at no time
acquit Children from a subjection to their Parents, nor allows to Rational
beings, what is wildly practiced among brutes alone, that strength should give
the only Title to Dominion and Command.

39. Neither would our Prince rest satisfied to exempt the first degree of
blood from an imposition of the twentieth part; but his goodness scorning these
limits flies beyond, and endows the second likewise with the same privilege. So
that the Brother in the Sisters Estate, the Sister again in the Brothers, the
Grandfather and Grandmother in that of the Grandchildren, and these again in
that of theirs, should come to a free enjoyment without tax or composition. And
to those, who by the right of Latium were made free of Rome, he granted the
same immunities, allowing in all consanguinity a free passage to the direct
course of nature: Which are favors indeed that former Princes were content to
be petitioned for, yet not with so much intention of showing their Prerogative
to grant, as their power to deny. Hence may we aptly learn what a generous Soul
it argued to gather up and reunite our scattered, and as it were divorced
Families, to regraft and so husband them as that fresh branches may shoot forth
from the first paternal stocks: to comply with that which has been so often
refused, to give to all in common what particular favorites could never
obtain; and finally, to bar himself of so many occasions of exerting his
Prerogative in conferring these favors as extraordinary on them, whose loyalty
had deserved 'em, and in detaining them from such, who had been factious or
ungrateful. He deemed it, I believe, unreasonable that petition should be made
to an earthly Prince for what the Gods themselves by a branch of their eternal
law had long since past into a natural charter. If by birth you are Brothers
and Sisters, Grandfather and Grandchildren, or such like relations, this title
exempts you from the forementioned tax, without any other Ceremony of peculiar
license. The Emperor, affording this farther instance of his humanity parallel
to all the former, thinks it as invidious to make a mock gilt of what was your
own by a Precedent property, as it would be unjust to take whatever you are
legally possessed of. With courage therefore, and a bold assurance stand for
honors, sue for offices, this breach and interruption of descents shall be no
bar to your hopes or designs. All shall entirely enjoy the same proximity of
blood, they did before, with more of freedom, more of privilege. Nay the most
remote, and just ceasing degrees of affinity, in conveyances of small or but
competent estates, shall be eased of this contribution of the twentieth part:
For our indulgent Prince has imposed it only on those plentiful fortunes,
that can well asford to bear it out.

40. A low and slender inheritance shall be eased from this burden: In such
cases the grateful heir may bestow it on a Monument in memory of the
Testatour, or may disburse it all in the charges of his Funeral, none to
correct or restrain him, none to call him to account: For on whatever
consideration the Legacy was bequeathed him, he may arbitrarily dispose of it,
as his own will or discretion shall direct. The Law for payment of the
twentieth part is now so ordered, that a man must be very rich besore he can
come within the compass of it. What before was the subject of fear and grief,
is now turned into joy, what was judged an oppression, is changed into ease and
privilege: So as the heir not dreads, but wishes his Estate may come within the
reach of this Law. By another clause of this Edict it is provided that those,
who were in Arrears to the State for this tribute should be freely remitted,
and without expense discharged. To remedy what is gone and past seems even
beyond the power of the Gods themselves. Yet this have you performed: While
past debts are outdated, and those persons, who long since contracted them, are
neither now to owe, nor to pay hereafter. You so perfectly redress all our
former grievances that there remains no token of our ever having suffered under
evil Princes. Nay if your power were of equal extent with your mercy, or were
not feasible, which is indeed not possible, you would not only reinstate
those, who had been injuriously outed of their possessions, but even restore to
life as many, as without guilt or cause have been no better than formally
murdered: But since you could not reinsuse their lost blood, you have at least
redeemed their spent fortunes, by forgiving those fines and lapses, which were
made due in the Reign of your Predecessors. Another Prince would have been so
incensed at their being behind-hand in Arrears, that he would have punished
their backwardness with a fine of double, nay perhaps fourfold value to the
principal debt: But you think it equally dishonest to exact what was unjustly
made due, as to make due, what would be injustice to exact.

41. Your frugal management (Caesar) makes you fit for the care and charge of a
Consul, whose proper office it is to manage and moderate the expenses of the
public: For when I consider that you have remitted our Assessments, bestowed a
Donative, dispensed a Largess, expelled Informers, and abated our Taxes,
methinks you might well be questioned, whether you have so cast up your
Revenues, as to provide for the necessary occasions of Empire: Or is there such
magic in good husbandry, that a little well ordered can be able to suffice a
vast expense, a prodigious munificence? What account can be given why other
Princes, when they had scraped and rifled all they could hook in, and held fast
whatever by any means they procured, were yet after all in beggary and want.
Whereas you, who expend much, and yet take in but little, have always plenty,
always to spare. Few of your Predecessors ever wanted such instruments, who
with sour looks and severe carriage were very punctual and rigorous in
exacting the Imperial revenues. Nay some Princes themselves have from a stingy
inclination been so very intent and watchful, that they seemed to need no
Deputies, or Underofficers: While we were all along trepan'd to a falling out
among our selves, and so helped by informations to undo each other. Whereas
your ears, as they are guarded against all other insinuations, so they are more
especially deaf to all fawning complaints. All persons therefore of that
scandalous employ are now suppressed and silenced, and there is none who will
maliciously report, now there is none who will hastily believe. Thus are we
beholden to you not only tor the goodness of your own Morals, but for the
Reformation of ours.

42. The Voconian and Julian Laws though of great advantage did not pour in
more fines to the Exchequer, than that one strategeme of bringing all persons
upon any srivolous offense within the reach of Treason. This fright and danger
you have now released us from, in not being too jealous of your honor, which
none have experienced more impaired, than those, who have been unseasonably
suspicious of encroachments on it. Friends are now made faithful, Children
dutisull, and Servants obedient. These last are reduced to a just awe and
subjection, and taught to know that those they serve are masters of them. For
they are not our Servants now who are made Confidents to our Prince, but we our
selves: Nor does the Father of his Country, now listen to slaves more readily,
than to the Lords of them. You have freed us from our family and home enemies,
and by thus providing for the public safety you have stifled and put an end to
that Servile War which we were so long harast and afflicted with. Wherein you
have not more obliged the Masters, than you have advantaged the Servants too:
For you have made these more honest, as well as more secure. All these
redresses, I know, your modesty will scarce allow, to be commended, and suppose
them not likely to be so, yet they must needs be grateful to those who can
well remember since a Domitian.
Prince suborned Servants to swear against their Masters, and instructed them
in what crimes they should accuse them of. This was a sad and deplorable
mischief often experienced, where the Servants had no more of integrity, than
the Prince had of honor or conscience.

43. In the same Catalogue of your virtues is this farther to be ranked, that
our last Wills are now secure, and the true intent of Testatours most
religiously observed. You do not injuriously engross the whole upon an
opportunity of being bequeathed a part. No fraud, no forgery entitles you to
undesign'd, Legacies. No ones displeasure at his nearer relations, no ones
unnaturalness of passing by his own Children, no ones frenzy, or want of senses
on his sick bed is the occasion of your being enriched: Nor is your favor or
pardon by way of commutation hereby either bribed or purchased. You are named
Heir not to buy off other offenses, but to reward your own merits. All dying
persons are left entirely to their own choice: Your friends may remember you,
strangers may pass you by: No distinction in this respect between the times of
your being a private Subject, and your being now an Emperor, save that now
your love to more, makes you deservedly the more beloved. Keep on, Coesar, in
this method, and you will soon experience, that it will highly advance not
only your reputation, but your interest, that persons should assign you their
Heir, out of mere kindness and affection, rather than out of fear or
compulsion. Many Families did your Father's bounty raise, many Estates have you
your self bestowed: If any of these men, who owe their whole fortunes to the
Crown, be at their death so ungrateful, as to make no return, the affront is
past by unrevenged, those who were appointed Heirs are allowed a quiet
possession, and you are content with no other requital, than the glory of doing
good unrewarded: And indeed a thankful receiver makes us better pleased with
our favors, but a churlish and ungrateful one renders us the more to be
admired for them: Though which of your Predecessors cared to prefer the credit
of the one before the profit of the other? Which of them did not think he had a
just title to recall what he had formerly given? Nay the ivery gifts of our
Princes, like those of cajoling Tyrants, have been mere hooks covered over with
gaudy baits, snares lined with some specious trepan, till seizing and
entangling the good-natured prey, they drew in whatever was so credulous, as to
fasten on them.

44. How much does it conduce to a better deportment to come at ease and
prosperity through the rougher road of hardships and trouble? This trial, and
this improvement of it did you make: You fared no better than we did, you were
surrounded with perpetual fears and dangers, which were then the attending
alarms of all the innocent. You knew and had experience how much ill Princes
were hated even by those whose flattery made them ill. You remember while a
subject, what, with the rest of us, you were wont to wish, and what as apt to
complain of. You now are what you judged others ought to be; nay you are better
than you even wished those others to have been. And we now so inured to the
blessings of an easy Government, that whereas before the top of our wishes was
a Prince, but indifferent, and somewhat better than the worst, we can now be
content with none, but absolutely the best. There is no one therefore so
ignorant of your abilities, or so much a stranger to his own infirmities, as to
be ambitious of coming after so unparalled a President. Nay so conscious must
they all be of the impossibility of reaching up to your example, that it must
be hereafter more easy to be your Successor, than it is before hand to wish
the being so. For who would covet to undergo the same weight of care? Or who
can presume to acquit himself with any tolerable comparison to your unequaled
excellence? Even you your self were sensible what a difficulty and disadvantage
it was to succeed a good Prince, and on that account were backward and
unwilling to be Adopted. Is it a pattern so easy to be copied after, that no
person is now tempted to debauch himself for a purchase of pardon to his other
misdemeanors? Life, and the reputation of life honesty, are both now guarded
from all assault and violation. It is not now thought policy for persons of a
strict and severe carriage to retire from the notice of the Court, and bury
themselves up in private. For there is now the same encouragement given to all
virtues, as in the purest of former times. Nor is weldoing rewarded only by
the complacence of a good Conscience, but by a farther and more public
recompense. You love a fixed and resolute temper in your subjects, and their
greatness of spirit you do not, like other Princes, check and restrain, but
indulge and promote. The honest and upright meet now with preferment, who
heretofore wished for nothing but excuse: On these you confer Honors, Offices,
Employments: These your friendship courts, these your judgment esteems, while
your favors whet on their industry of being good, and make their integrity
more resolved, when they see it so well accepted. Nay the vicious are hereby
detered, as well as the virtuous encouraged. For a reward of the good makes
others out of policy honest, as well as a punishment of the bad affrights
others on the same grounds from being evil. There be few of so sound a judgment
as not to take the measures of Justice and dishonesty, as they respect their
interest, and accordingly adhere to the one or the other, as it best suits with
their gain and advantage. The far greater numbers of mankind observe what
courses will be most beneficial, and when they see the wages of industry paid
to sloth, of activeness to sleep, and of temperance to luxury, they take up a
counterfeit profession of those arts they see others thrive so well upon; they
personate and aim at the seeming like them so long. till at last they become in
truth what they designd to be in appearance only.

45. Most of our former Princes, except your Father, and one or two more,
(perhaps I may have over numbered them) were better pleased with the vices, than
with the virtues of their subjects: first because it was natural in them to be
delighted with those, who were nearest their own humor, and then they supposd
such would be most crouching and patient under Tyranny. whose debaucheries had
already enslaved them; in the bosom therefore of these they emptied their
bounties, and their secrets: But the just and sober were glad to be cloistered
up in privacies and retirements, them they never called out on the Stage, but
to affront, to accuse, and persecute. Whereas contrary to these shameful
abuses, you choose your friends out of the best and most conscientious: And
indeed there is some Justice, that they should be the favorites of a good
Prince. who were the hatred of a bad one. You, know, that as boundless Tyranny
and legal Sovereignty are of a much different nature, so none loves the Prince
better, than he, who most abhors the Tyrant. And these you animate and incite
to all that is good and glorious, setting your self as a great Exemplar, and by
your own Morals giving proof what course of life, what sort of men, you are
best pleased with. You have not therefore taken on you the Censureship or
superintendency of Manners, because you would win upon our dispositions more by
allurements, than Correction. And indeed it is hard to determine by which of
these methods a Governor shall more easily reform a People, by barely
suffering them to be good, or by compelling them to be so We are pliable and
ductile, prepared to follow wherever our Prince shall lead the way: To be
endeared to him, and approved by him is our utmost ambition (which yet is an
honor that those, who are not like him can never hope to arrive to) And in
short by your steady attention to his example, we all transcribe the same Copy,
and strive to resemble that one Original: For indeed we should be very dull and
awkard if we, who had readily learned of a bad Prince, should not be as forward
in the imitation of a good one. Go on, Caesar, and the influence of your
actions shall be as powerful, as the Authority of a Censor: For the Life of a
Supreme Governor is indeed a Censorship, and that a standing, unchangeable
one, by that we are directed, by that we are swayed, not by the force of
command, but the persuasiveness of Precedent. And fear indeed is but an
unfaithful guide to virtue: Men are much better wrought upon by examples,
which have no convenience that they demonstrate to be feasible, whatever they
recommend.

46. And what terror could have enforced that which a respect to you has
easily effected. One Domitian.
of your Predecessors got the People to comply with taking away the spectacle
of the Pantomimes, yet was this permission extorted rather than freely granted.
But now you are entreated to do, what the other compelled the doing of and
that did now commence a favor, which before was a necessity. Nor were there
fewer Petitions or less unanimous Addresses to you for the taking them away,
than there had been to your Father for restoring them: And herein, though
acting directly opposite, you both did well; for what by an evil Prince had
been removed, ought to have been restored, and when on that account restored,
ought for several other reasons again to be removed; for even where an ill
person does well, there may lie a just exception against the Author, but none
against the Action. The same people therefore, that were both spectatours and
applauders of a mimical Nero.
Emperor, do now dislike the trifling Pantomimes, and condemn such effeminate
sports, as corruptive, and debasing, of the manly Genius of the times; from
whence it is obvious to collect, that the example of Princes does influence the
very rabble and vulgar, so that if the one be serious and severe, the other
correct their looseness and immediately conform. Proceed now, Caesar, and
advance that glory your gravity has gained: Let that steadiness of temper,
which has generally been branded for state and pride, be now deservedly
esteemed the result of virtue and good Morals. By this voluntary imitation of
you, persons have chastised their own vices, who ought to have been chastised
out of them: And they have reformed themselves, who needed by punishments to
have been reformed by others; so that none find reason to complain of your
severity, though all have a freedom to complain: And so indeed does it always
happen, that people never complain less of any Prince, than of him, who allows
them the greatest liberty so to do. But under your Reign the most malicious
can find no occasion of complaint: All management of affairs is a subject of
content, all of joy. The good are preferred, and the bad (which is the securest
state of society) neither fear nor are feared, knowing they shall not unjustly
be accused themselves, nor daring unjustly to accuse others. You remedy all our
distempers, yet at our own entreaties, at our own request; and whomever you
make good, you add this farther obligation to the favor, that it was not what
you imposed or enforced, but what they themselves defir'd.

47. By your conduct how well ordered the life, how regulated the manners of
our Roman youth? What trouble, what charge do you spare for in a Princely
Education of them? What encouragement do you give to Masters of Rethoricks?
What countenance and advancement to Philosophers? So that under your patronage
our studies are animated with life, vigor and a safe repose, which the dull
cruelty of former ages persecuted into flight and banishment: While the Prince
conscious of his own vices expelled those arts, which would be sure to
reprehend them, not so much out of hatred, as fear of coming within their lash
and reproof. But these same arts you embrace, entertain, and give attention to:
You readily perform whatever they enjoin, and love them as eagerly, as you are
deservedly approved by them. Every Professor in each part of learning, after
all your other excellent endowments, must more especially commend your easiness
of access. With an open and hospitable soul your Father over his Palace Gates
set up this Inscription, The Public Buildings, but in vain he had done this,
except he had adopted a Son, who would have lived in public: And how well does
the course of your life agree with this Motto, so exactly indeed that it seems
invented by none, but your self: For what Courts, what Temples are more open
and passable? Not the Capitol it self, that place of your adoption, has more of
company, more of resort. There be no Bars, no rough denial of entrance, no hard
language nor affronts, and after an escape through a thousand Guards and
Sentinels, no excluding at last from the presence Chamber. A prosound stilness
is all around you, but the greatest about your Person. Every where such
becoming silence, such awful quiet, that the Imperial Court may well present
her self, as a pattern of modesty to the smallest family, and most humble
cottage.

48. How familiarly you entertain all comers? How patiently you epect them?
Dedicating one entire part of the day to this diversion, though so much taken
up with more serious and urgent affairs. So that we come to pay our Addresses,
not in a timorous hurry, not as if we ran for our life, and the loss of our
heads were to be the forseit of our slackness, but leisurely and as our own
convenience will best admit of. Nay when the Prince does purposely attend our
waiting on him, we may make so bold as to absent, if any necessary occasions
detain us at home: And for this rudeness we need make no elaborate excuse, your
goodness forgives sooner than our submission can acknowledge the offense. For
you know it is every man's comfort and ambition, as well as his duty, to visit
you frequently, to wait on you often, and therefore to enlarge our joy you give
a freer and more repeated admission to your presence. Nor to bestow these
customary salutes must we search you out in retirements and solitudes, but we
enter your Palace, and there engage in a familiar converse with you, as if your
Court were an Ordinary or place of public entertainment for all, which lately
that timorous Domitian,
Monster had fortified with whatever might strike a terror and amazement:
While turnning his Palace into a lurking den, he sometime there sucked the
blood of his nearest relations, and at other times sallied out to worry and
devour the noblest prey, he could seize or trepan. Terror and threatenings were
without, within dread and danger; so that it seemed alike perilous to be either
admitted or excluded. Add to this, the monster himself was fatal to meet,
ghastly to look on, pride in his Forehead, fury in his Eyes, a womanish
paleness in his Body, impudence shining through his Face in fiery redness, that
argued more of blood, than blush: None could presume to approach him, none
might dare to salute him, never peeping out of his dark retirements, never
creeping forth from his beloved confinement, except by rapine and desolation to
make as great a solitude of those places he should visit, as of those he left.

49. Yet within these walls and apartments he harbored the Traitors, he
nursed up the conspiracy, and enclosed with himself the revenger of his
Villainies, Providence. His long called for punishment broke through the Guards,
and rushed on through bolts and fastened Gates, as easily as if open doors and
a clear passage had seemed to egg and invite it. His usurped pretense of
divinity could then avail him nothing, and in vain did he hope for shelter in
those Closets and withdrawing Rooms, where he had wont so often to retire out
of a fear, a scorn, and a hatred of mankind. How much more safe, how much more
secure is the same Palace, now it is no longer impannell'd with trenches and
baricadoes, no longer fenced with the engines of cruelty, but fortified alone by
the arts of love? While experience hereby learns this one great Truth that a
Prince's strongest Guard is his own Innocence: And to need no defense is the
most inaccessible fort, the strongest bulwark. In vain does he encompass
himself with terror, who is not first furrounded with loyalty and love: His
jealousies serve but to augment his dangers, and arms of defense invite on
weapons of execution. Nor are they your serious hours only, which you spend in
our sight and society: Do you not join company with us as frequently in your
repasts and diversions? Are not your meals always public, and your table free
for all comers? Do you not take as great a pleasure in feasting us, as we do a
pride in being your guests? Are you not willing and patient to hear our
impertinencies, and do you not invite us on to a freedom of diseourse? The time
allotted to these banquets does not your humanity toward us enlarge, as much as
temperance toward your self would abridge and contract? You do not make a full
meal by your self in private, and then sit gravely at the upper end of a
public table, making remarks and observations on the humors and behaviors of
the guests. You do not belch from an overcharged stomach, and affront rather
than feast your deluded friends by setting before them such dishes, which you
your self scorn to touch or taste of: Nor hating the hurry and uneasiness of
such crowded entertainments do you withdraw to hidden rarities, and a retired
gluttony. Farther we admire not the costliness of your plate dishes, nor the
exquisite cookery, nor the stately serving them up, but your endearing
pleasantness, your obliging civility, which we can never nauseate, never
surfeit upon: All your good humors being natural, unseign'd, and occasionally
poised with a becoming gravity. Your table is not tainted with foreign
superstition, nor debauched with light gestures, or loose talk, but there is a
gracious welcome, an inossensive jocose rallying, and many times learned and
profitable discourse. After this wel-husbanded expense of the day, you betake
your self to sleep and repose, which are always short and sparing, as if you
grudged the loss of time never more, than when you spent it out of our sight
and company.

50. And if we thus share in the enjoyment of whatever you possess, how
absolute, how unencroach'd upon is our own propriety? You do not by any illegal
methods shuffle out the true owners, to engross and seize upon any pleasant
ponds, delightful lakes, or goodly forests; nor do the floods, the Fountains,
and the Ocean serve only for the prospect of one Imperial Landlord. Caesar can
now fee more than he will strictly call his own, and he is satisfied that his
Empire should be of a larger extent than his Crown Lands. Nay he has refunded
into the Empire much of his own hereditary Estate, which his Predecessors
held, not so much to enjoy themselves as to hinder others from the enjoyment of
them. Therefore the stately Seats and Manors of Noblemen their proper Lords
inhabit: Nor are the fair Mansions of great persons either impaired by the
prodigal abuse of servants, or decayed by the ruinating mischief of standing
empty. We may now view these noble edifices lifting up their long drooping
heads, and rising, like those Birds of the East, out of their own ashes.
Herein, Caesar, you highly merit not only of the Inhabitants, but of the very
houses, by repairing the ruins, banishing their solitude, and reprieving from
a burial in the dust these magnificent structures with as much of gallantry of
soul, as they first were built with: These very roofs and walls, though mute
and senseless, do in a manner tell forth your praise, and as loudly proclaim
their own joy, that they are brushed up to a decency and neatness, that they
are made tenantable, and have the honor to be inhabited by Gentlemen, not by
slaves. This Prince now frankly exposes to sale the whole Inventory of those
goods, which were the cursed extortion of that Domitian,
other, who still scraped on for bigger heaps, though he had already more than
he knew how to use. Then it was death or, at the lightest, sequestration to
have a larger house or fairer seat: But now our Prince seeks out those persons,
who were thus wrongfully expelled, and with justice reinstates them in their
former possessions. Those grounds, which were the Garden of a late prosuse Nero.
Emperor, and those other adjacent fields, which seemed the Suburbs of Caesar,
not of the City, we can now either hire, buy or build upon, So great is the
Royal goodness, so secure is the condition of the present times, that the
Prince both thinks us worthy of Imperial possessions, and we our selves are not
afraid of being thought so. Nor do you allow us only to purchase, but often make
us as firm a title by deed of gift, parting without any mercenary regard with
much of that Estate, which by your choice and adoption was conferred on you.
You make over that to others, which your merits procured to your self, as if
you thought nothing more your own, than what you enjoy by the proxy of your
friends.

51. Yet is our Prince as provident in building, as he is thristy in
preserving: Therefore our streets do not rattle, our City does not tremble with
the noise and weight of overladed Carriages, our houses are unshock'd, our
Temples no longer aguish or palsical. Though. you succeeded a Prince, who was
but little solicitous of advancing his Revenues, yet you find enough remaining
for your occasions, nay can spare something out of that small stock, he left
you: And as your Father debarred himself from the full exaction of what the
fortune of the Empire gave him, so have you abridg'd your self in the use and
expense of what your Father bequeathed you. But notwithstanding this good
husbandry in private concerns, how sumptuous and magnificent are you in
whatever relates to the public? Here Castles, there Temples, with so much of
dispatch and expedition, as if they could not be thought to be new built, but
only repaired. Here the beautifying and enlargement of the great Cirque makes
it so proud and lofty, that it dare challenge and vie with any of the best
dedicated Mansions of the Gods: It is now a place fit for entertainment of the
Conquerours of the World: Nor is the place it self a less ravishing sight, than
the most gaudy of those shows, that are there exhibited. Yet to view and admire
the Architecture is not more delightful, than to see that the Seats allotted
to Prince and people are of the same level, all equal and uniform, no
difference nor distance observed, no chair of State assigned for the Emperor,
he can now no more claim any one particular place, than he can engross the
whole show. Your subjects therefore have now as good a prospect, as your self;
nay they feed their eyes on you, as well as on the sports: For you are not pent
up in a box or litter, but sit open and unconfined among the rest of the
spectatours, the rest of the people, the people, for whose reception you have
added five thousand benches: For you knew their greater numbers would now take
up more room, being advanced by the encouragement of your Largesses, and by the
same hopes of your bounty still invited to increase their samilies, to multiply
their offspring.

52. If any former Prince had been thus generous, his head should have been
encircled with rays of divinity, his shrine of Gold or Ivory had crowded in
among the Gods, his Altars should have been gaily decked, his Victims fat and
costly. Whereas you come not into our Temples to receive, but pay devotion: The
highest honor your modest Statues claim is to wait at the outer porch and
entrance, and there to stand (as it were) Centry for the Gods. Hence are the
Deities more profoundly adored by men, when they see that an Emperor, though
never so Majestic, will not presume to encroach Heaven, or to intrude among
the number of Gods. Of your Statues therefore we see but one or two, and those
of mean brass, placed at the outside of the Capitol; whereas but a little while
since, every passage, every ascent, every corner of the Temple was decked or
rather defiled with cast gold and silver, when the shrines of the Gods were
debauched with the intermixed Statues of an incestuous Prince. However your few
brazen ones stand inviolate, and will so remain as long as the Temple it self
endures, while theirs of gold and such like precious materials are, all the
legions of them, rudely battered down, and made a sacrifice to public joy. It
was a sport and pastime to humble those exalted heads, to make them prostrate
and kiss the ground, to maul them with hammers, to hew them with hatchets, as
if at every stroke blood and pain had been to follow. None was so moderate in
the venting of his raptures, none so sober in his overflowing joys, but that he
thought it a luscious piece of revenge to see their mangled limbs, their
dissever'd joints, and finally their grim and ghastly images divested of all
their borrowed Majesty, and thrown into the flames to be melted down into
better use and service. With the like piety, Caesar, you will not permit us to
make any return of thanks for our obligations to your sacred Genius, but order
us to direct the Address only to the high and mighty Jove: What we owe to you,
we must pay to him, though to him no otherwise due, than as you, the dispenser
of all other gifts, were your self indeed a gift of his. Whereas formerly
numerous herds of sacrifice were drove in such shoals to the Capitol, that the
common roads were two narrow for their passage, and they were forced to hurry
them through bye-lanes and allies to reach the place allotted for their
slaughter, where the thirsty Altars of our Domitian.
Imperial Lord God were bedewed with as much blood of Beasts, as he had shed of
Men.

53. Whatever (my Lords) I have or shall deliver in reflections upon former
Princes, it is done with this honest intent to show how much our Prince has
improved the Morals, and bettered the condition of preceding times: And indeed
praises are never well drawn, or set off to due advantage, except when shadowed
by comparisons. Nay it is one part of the duty of subjects toward the best of
Emperors to exclaim against those, who were most unlike him. For indeed they
never enough revere good Princes, who do not detest the evil. Besides, there is
no greater instance of our Emperor's high deserts, than that under his Reign
it is safe and allowable to inveigh against so many of his Predecessors, as
were unjust and Tyrannical. We cannot yet forget, nor without abhorrence
remember, the late cruelty on Nero's Epaphroditus an Assistent in the dispatch
of Nero, and on that account Executed by Domitian, though were this the alone
reason, and nothin^ superadded of cruelty o^ malice, his death may well be
just^^fied.
Freeman. Can we think he would have suffered his actions to have been
censured, who so zealously revenged his death? He did wisely indeed to stifle
all reports; for he might well have interpreted that to have been spoke of
himself, which was spoke of one so nearly like him. Therefore this one virtue
(Caesar) I must needs compare, nay prefer, to all your other, that we have now
liberty to vindicate our selves of oppressive Emperors for past grievances,
and by their example to admonish future Princes, that there is no place, no
time, wherein the ashes of bloody Tyrants shall not be raked out, and exposed
for the trampling subject of curses and reproach. Therefore (my Lords) since we
can as freely utter our complaints, as we do our joys, let us as well murmur at
what we once suffered, as triumph at what we now enjoy: We may do both
indifferently under a good Prince. Let this be the Subject of our whispers, and
of our louder acclamations, of our private discourse, and more public
harangues: Remembering that the present Prince is then best commended, when his
ill deserving Predecessors are most lashed and chastis'd. And on the contrary
whenever the times are cautious of smartly animadverting upon wicked Princes,
it is a shrewd sign that the present is as bad, as were the former.

54. What greater stretches, what farther improvement of flattery could have
been then made, when the daubing Encomiums of Emperors were the main subject
of Plays, Banquets, Drolls, Dances, and were apishly canted forth with all the
bussoonery of ridiculous voice, garb, and gesture? Nay it was yet a greater
scandal, that they were tickled with praises in the Senate, as well as on the
Stage, by the graver Consul, as well as by the jilting Actour. But far from
such prosanation have you removed these mock vanities. Therefore not thick, and
luscious bombast, but serious Remarques, and the eternal memoires of impartial
history will deliver down your name, and embalm your memory. While the more
silent the Scenes and Stages are, the more shall the Theaters themselves
resound your glory: That glory which your coldness to accept does the more
inflame: For of those honors, which we offer, and would almost obtrude upon
you, some you admit of with a great deal of reluctance, and others you entirely
refuse. Formerly there was nothing so vulgar, nothing so trivial debated in
Senate, but that all, who were asked their Vote, must have ushered in their
answers with a glossy harangue upon the Prince. The business of the great
Counsel was perhaps nothing more weighty than to advise about increasing the
number of gladiatours or incorporating some company of Mechanics, or such like
petty trifles: And yet as if the bounds of the Empire were enlarged, and some
mighty exploit performed, we built in honor of the Emperor prodigious
triumphal Arches that would overtop the very Temples, and we some time
dedicated so many months, two or three perhaps at once, to be new named from,
the Titles of the Prince: While all this they not only by connivence admitted,
but seemed to challenge them as their right and desert. But now which of us
diverts from the cause in agitation, and falls to an unseasonable descant upon
the Prince? It is a resolute modesty in you not to hearken to flatteries, and
since they are so customary to bestow on Princes, it is a boldness in us to
dare the forbearance of them. We now meet in Senate not to fawn and be basely
fulsome in our compliments, but to be intent on the concerns proposed, and
faithfully dispatch the business of the consult. To your candor and integrity
we owe, that you never dissemble, but we can trust and believe that you
heartily approve those things, you allow, and as reasonably dislike whatever
you condemn. We there begin, we there end our consultations, where under
another Prince it was lawful neither to begin nor end. Some of your
Predecessors, it is true, were so modest in pretense, that they would not
accept those honors, we decreed for them, but there was none so self-denying,
as not to take some satisfaction in their being decreed. Whereas your disrelish
of the offer, as well as shame of acceptance, is so signal and unparalled a
virtue, that it adds more to your glory, than all the most specious Titles.
While your name becomes hereby transmitted to future ages, not engraved on
Marbles, and bulky Pillars, but treasured up in the more lasting memorials of
Books and Annals.

55. The report will reach down to the longest ages of the World, that there
was once a Prince, who in the height of glories, the midst of triumphs, had
usually none, or if any, those mean and sparing honors conferred on him. And
indeed if we should designedly lay out for glittering trophies, for lofty
titles, we must needs fall short of the more copious vein of former times: For
dissimulation in this respect is far more ingenious than truth; slavery than
freedom, fear than love. Beside, all invention being long since drawn dry by
the strains and efforts of flattery, we can find but one fresh and unsullied,
but one unpresidented, honor to bestow on you, and that is to dare to say
nothing. Yet if our transports of Loyalty do sometime break silence, your
modesty yields, and some part of our offers you graciously receive, to give
proof that it is not out of pride or disdain you wave the highest honors,
since you can sometime stoop to accept the lowest; and this (Caesar) argues
more of discretion, than if you refused all, for to refuse all would savor of
surly pride or ambition of being thought above them, but to comply with an
acceptance of the smallest imports much of goodness, much of moderation. By
which frugal temper you are both a friend to us, and a good husband to your own
Exchequer, for you hereby limit the expenses thereof not draining it in vain
projects to be replenished by extortion from the innocent. Your Effigies
therefore are of the same cheap materials with those, which have been dedicated
to private persons, in gratitude for some eminent meriting of the public. Your
Statues (though a Caesar) are now, but of the same vulgar metal with the Bruti
and Camilli: Nor indeed does the occasion of them much differ; for they
expelled Tyrants, and drove a victorious enemy from our walls; you have quelled
and for ever banished Tyranny it self, and all the heavy effects of a slavish
yoke, and have so settled the Prince, that there is no room for the Tyrant. But
when I reflect on your wisdom and judicious conduct, it seems no longer
strange, that you should disown or moderate these brittle and fading titles;
for you know wherein the firm and immortal glory of a Prince consists: You know
what goes to the making up those honors, which no rage of flames, no teeth of
time, no envy of Successors, can ever fully or eclipse. Arches and Statues,
nay Altars and Temples, though never so magnificent, oblivion will soon shroud
and interr, posterity will censure or forget. Whereas he, that can triumph over
his own ambition, he who makes a conquest of his own will and passions, his
fame shall still increase with the rolling years, and his praises be rehearsed
by those, who must needs be impartial, succeeding generations. Farther, there
be no Monarchs, but that their memory, either good or bad, will be sure to pass
down to future ages. A Prince therefore must not barely covet that fame, which
is eternal; for that he cannot avoid, but he must provide for that, which is
good, and commendable: And this is to be procured, not by Monuments and
Statues, but by virtue and desert. For after all those other trifles, the shape
and figure of a Prince can never be so lively represented in gold or other
metal, as in the hearts of his subjects, those inward tables, where it is your
happiness (Great Sir) to be deeply engraved. Your Majestic air, your becoming
aspect, being legibly imprinted in the tongues, eyes and very souls of all your
people.

56. I suppose your Lordships have observed, that I stand not to make choice of
what heads I deliver, having resolved to praise the Prince, not his actions:
For even the bad may do those things, that are justly commendable, but the
Actours themselves can never be praised, unless completely good. Therefore
Dread Sovereign, there is no glory adorns you more, than that in the
presentment of our thanks, we have nothing to conceal, nothing to omit. For
what stain or blemish is there in your whole Reign, which any speaker need
palliate or suppress? What minute, what moment, of time has been a barren Theme
for praise, a fruitless camp of glory? All your designs so accurately modeled,
all your actions so illustrious, that he seems best to commend them, who does
but faithfully recite them. Hence is it that my speech has already swelled to
this proportion, and yet I have dispatched but your first two years. How much
have I already said of your moderation, and yet how much have I yet more to
say? As that of your undertaking a second Consulship, when thereto appointed by
your Princely Father: And this you did merely in obedience to his commands; for
when the Gods had transferred to your shoulders the Sovereign Power, and you
were thereby come to a disposal of your self, as well as to the management of
an Empire, you refused a third Consulship, though your happy acquitment in the
two former so well accomplished you for another discharge of that office. It is
great and generous to wave Authority, greater yet to wave that, which would be
certainly attended with renown and glory. Which should I most admire, your
Consulships executed, or your Consulship resus'd? Executed, not in a soft
repose at Rome, not in the dull intrigues of peace, but among barbarous
Nations, amidst the toils of War: As those Primitive Heroes, who from Consuls
commencing Generals, exchanged their Gown for a Cloak, and so marched to far
distant Lands to discover, fight and conquer. It was honorable for our Empire,
glorious for your self, that our Allies and Confederates saw you dispense
justice in their own Country and their own doors. The mien and presence of a
Consul must needs have then commanded an awe and respect, when his Tribunal was
erected in the open Camp, and his person guarded not only with the rods and
axes, but the more solemn attendance of Piles and Ensigns. The Grandeur of the
Judge was enhanc'd by the diversity of Petitioners of all climes and languages,
few being able to express themselves without the help of an Interpreter. It is
noble to prescribe Laws to your subjects, how much more to your enemies? It
looks big to hear Causes in the peaceful Forum, how much more Stately and
terrible to place the Ivory chair on the wide Campaign, and there to distribute
justice, where you so lately showed your valor. It might in peace be safe and
hazardless to encamp upon the banks of the Rhine or Danube, but how bold, how
Heroic is it to despise the sury of Barbarians, to check and repress their
daring attempts, not more with the glittring of Arms, than with the awe of
Gowns? Nor did our Legions reverence your picture only drawn in their Shields
and Ensigns, but had you in Person, and with joy full acclamations to your own
face proclaimed you General, a name which others might deserve from the
conquering, but you alone from the despising, of the enemy.

57. Thus did you merit in the Execution of your first and second Consulships,
and this farther do you deserve for the adjournment of your third, that being
newly advanced to the Empire, you thought you might be excused from any other
encumbrance, and were far from the desire of additional honors: you refused
therefore that office, when yet some of our Emperors have been so greedy of
it, as to thrust themselves in after the putting by those, who were regularly
Elect. Nay there was Nero.
one, who toward the end of his Reign was so eager for the place that he turned
out a Consul when his year was just expiring, and seized the short remainder.
This honorable office therefore which former Princes, both at the entrance and
exit of their Reigns, have been so fond of, that when fairly supplied, they
have encroach'd and wrested themselves into, this you, when vacant, pass by,
and leave for the discharge of private subjects. Was it that you thought it
invidious to allow Trajan a third Consulship, or the Prince a first? As to your
second, we know you were a General, when preferred to it, yet under the
authority of a Royal Master; and therefore in this you can challenge to your
self nothing of honor or example, save that of loyalty and obedience. In this
City, which has seen the same men five or six times Consuls, not such only,
who in our declining liberty usurped the honor by force and violence, but
those, who, when retired and absent, were elected without their ambition,
without their knowledge: In this very City do you the Monarch of the World
reject a third Consulship, as too great, too invidious. Can a mighty Coesar, an
Emperor, a Father of his Country be more moderate, than the Papirii or
Quintii, who though not over ambitious to procure, were yet proud of, this
honor, when conferred on them? But, you will say perhaps, the occasions of the
Commonwealth required their repeated advancements: Well but were not you
invited by as many urgent occasions of the Commonwealth, of the Senate, nay of
the Consulship it self, which seemed sensible that your acceptance of it would
leave a luster and glory to the place for ever?

58. I would not encourage you to follow his Domitian.
example, who by a continued Consulship made a kind of prolonged and
undistinguished year: Yet whenever you undertake this charge, I can justly
compare you with those best of your Predecessors, who have supplied it not to
advance or interest themselves, but to serve and oblige the public. There was
in the Senate one, who had been thrice Consul, when you refused the third
Consulship: An insufferable affront indeed our votes would have imposed on your
modesty, that you the Prince should be as many times Consul, as one of your
subjects; this would have been too excessive a strain of bashfulness, had you
even been but a private person. Before your ascent to the Empire, while the Son
of a Consular and triumphant Father, had you been created Consul, you must have
served out the employ, nay it would have seemed the reward of your merits, and
suitable to your noble birth: Whereas now though so much better qualified, and
more deserving the honor, yet private persons are allowed to open the year,
and from their names to give a date and computation to the Calendar. And this
indeed was an instance of our liberty restored, that not the Prince but a
fellow-subject was our Consul. Thus when the last of Tyrants was expelled, the
year ran free and unshackled from arbitrary sway: Thus when we were redeemed
from slavery our Calendar commenced with the names of private men. Wretched
ambition was it in those Emperors, who would continue their Consulship as long
as their Reign: Though perhaps it was not ambition more than envy and ill
nature to engross every year to themselves, and not to lay down their
ornamental badge, the Purple Robes, till sullied, defaced, and quite worn out.
Which shall I most admire in you, your magnanimity, your modesty, or your
bounty? It was magnanimity to abstain from an honor so much affected by
others, it was modesty to wave the acceptance, and it was bounty to let others
enjoy it.

59. But it is now time so far to oblige the Consulship as by a voluntary
management of it to improve its credit and reputation. For if you always stand
out, it may have a sinister interpretation, and be well suspected that you
think it too mean, and beneath your Grandeur. It is certain you resus'd it
rather because you thought it above you, yet will none be induced to believe
so, except you can be prevailed on at last to comply. When you excuse your self
from triumphal Arches, from Trophies, and from Statues, we may afford to pardon
your modesty, because those indeed are bestowed on your self without any
appendage of benefit to others. But we now entreat on a public account, that
you would set a Predecent to future Princes, to renouce an unactive ease, to
adjourn interrupting pleasures, to awake from the slumber of Court debauches,
and for some small time at least fairly to put on that Purple, which their
Predecessors have stole back to themselves after they had conserr'd it on
others; let them regularly mount that Seat of justice, which they should guard
from Usurpers, let them approve themselves in conduct, what they affect to be
in title, nor any longer desire to be Consuls only for the name and shadow of
honor. You have discharged a second Consulship I know, but the prudence of it
was experienced not by Rome, not by us, but by your Armies, by your Provinces,
by remote and foreign Nations. We have heard indeed that you failed in no one
point of the office of a Consul; but, alas, we have only heard so: It is
reported indeed that you were most just, most gracious, most patient, yet is it
all report: It is not fit we should always resign up our faith to a spreading
fame and rumor; but let our own experience, our own eyes at last confirm the
hearsay. How long shall we admire what was at a distance performed? Give us to
make a nearer proof whether that second Consulship has raised you into
conceitedness and pride. One intervening year may have great influence on the
Morals of men, much more of Princes. It is commonly delivered, that the virtues
are so connexed that he who has really one, must needs have all. Yet we desire
to experience once more, whether a good Consul and a good Prince are one and
the same thing: For besides the difficulty of managing two separate, and yet
both Sovereign Powers, there is likewise some diversity in the powers
themselves, since with allowance to the character of each, that action might
well become a Prince, which would be improper, perhaps absurd in a Consul.

60. I am sensible that the main reason you could object that next year for
refusal of the Consulship, was because you could not fairly discharge it in
your absence. But being now returned to the City and restored to our eager
wishes, what farther cause can be alleged, why you should not satisfy our
importunities, and let us taste those blessings, we are so impatient for. It is
beneath you to come into the Senate, unless you have Power to assemble it; to
be present at their debates except you sit Judge of them: Or to hear them vote
and canvass, unless you are to determine, and confirm their resolves. If you
would have that tribunal of justice, the Consul's Chair, restored to its
pristine Splendor and Majesty, grace it with your presence. If you would
preserve inviolate a respect to the Magistrate, a vigor to the Laws, a
restraint to Offenders, be you the sole dispenser of right and justice. As it
would be very odd in you, if a private person, to be our Consul without being
Senator, so it is altogether as unseemly to be our Prince without being a
Consul. With these weighty reasons after long struggling was our Prince's
modesty at last overcome: But how overcome? Not to debase himself to an equal
level with private men, but to advance private men to an equal pitch with
himself. He accepted the third Consulship, that he might countenance others
being thrice Consuls. He knew their reluctance, he knew their bashfulness, that
they would not presume to be a third time Consuls, except as Colleagues with
one, who was so. This signal mark of honor has been but very seldom allowed,
and then not only to Fellow-Generals, and partners of sweat and danger; but
this have you conserr'd on persons of obscurer note, who have served you indeed
stoutly and loyally, yet as wrapped in the peaceful Gown, never as engaged in
the broils of War. Their faithfulness, their integrity you are willing to think
your self obliged to recompense: Yet few Princes care to own an obligation, or,
if they own it, can yet seldom affect the person, who bestowed it. Whereas you,
Coesar, both confess the kindness and repay it. Therefore when you made that
last pair a third time Consuls, you did it not so much to acquit your self a
mighty Prince, as to approve your self a grateful friend. Nay by the greatness
of your bounty you seem to improve and augment the past services of your
subjects: For they are apt to think that their own merits bear some proportion
to your rewards, and so judge the one more considerable, because the other are
so magnificent. What Prayers can I make for so generous a Donour, but that you
may ever oblige, ever be obliged, and leave it doubtful, whether it be more
advantage to your subjects to have done kindnesses to you, or to receive
favors from you.

61. Methinks I viewed the Senate in its ancient Splendor, when I saw one
thrice Consul sitting President, and first asking the suffrage of those, who
were a third time designed Consuls. How bright was their honor, how much more
outshining was yours? It happens unavoidably that bodies vast and losty, when
evershadow'd by those that are more exalted, shrink in appearance, and seem the
less for the others greatness: So the most Eminent of your subjects compared
with your overtopping Grandeur are humbled into a loss of their wonted height,
and the more nigh they would aspire to your elevation, the more visibly they
slide from their own. Yet even those you could not rear to an equal pitch with
your self, you have at least so far advanced, that they as much overlook
others, as you do them. If in this your third Consulship you had made but one
thrice Consul with your self, it had argued a great and communicative soul. For
as it is an argument of happiness to have as much power as will, so is it of
goodness to have as much will as power. He is to be commended, who merited the
third Consulship; but he more, under whom it was merited. He is great and
remarkable who received such a reward of deserts, but he much greater, that
bestowed it. But thinking it too scanty to have admitted a single person only
to a share of this dignity, you made two several Colleagues to your sacred self.
So that beyond doubt this was the sole reason of your continuance in the office
longer than the usual time, that you might have two Successive Partners, and
bear your turn of Government with them both. Each of these had discharged his
second Consulship under your Royal Father, but how much less honorable that,
than now under your more auspicious Reign? Their just resigned fasces seemed
yet in their sight, their lately dismissed Lictors seemed still to echo in
their Ears, when they were reinstated in their chair, reendow'd with Purple. So
of old, when an Enemy was upon the assault, and our Republic alarmed with the
unexpected danger, they Elected such persons as the office had before
experienced and consulted the security of the public so much more than the
honor of the elect, that they seemed not to restore the men to their
Consulships; but their Consulships to the men. Such is the efficacy of your
goodness, that what before was the effect of necessity, is now the result of a
free and unforced bounty. They had just put off their Purple Robes, they must
on with them again; the Lictors were but now discharged, they must be again
retained: Their friends were scarce got home from their visits to Congratulate
and joy them, when straight they must return and repeat the Ceremony. Was this
a goodness less than divine, was this but a humane power, to make so quick a
repetition of our joys, to revive our hopes when but just expired, to give no
respite to our Congratulations, nor to suffer a longer interval of reassuming
the Consulships, than the very instant time of Resignation? Thus may you ever
do, nor in such a course may your soul or your fortune ever faint or tire. May
you give third Consulships to many, and when you have given them to many, may
there yet remain many and many more, who shall as well deserve them.

62. In all favors that are impartially bestowed as an encouraging reward to
merit, the content and satisfaction is not greater to the present Receivers,
than it is to all, who are, or may be, alike deservers of them. So in the
disposal of these Consulships the joy was not confined to the particular
members thus preferred, but was communicated to the whole Senate, who were as
well pleased, as much obliged, as if the same honor had been conferred on
every single man: For these they had the best opinion of, the greatest kindness
for, these had they unanimously chose for Trustees of managing and retrenching
the public expenses: And their being so much countenanced by the Senate made
them the more endeared to Caesar. We have had of late very frequent proofs that
the judgment of the Senate was always opposed by that of the Prince: Nay there
used to be nothing more fatal for the crushing and keeping back a rising man,.
than for the Prince to suspect that he was popular and a leading man in the
Senate: He always hated our Favorites, and to be even, we as seldom relished
his. But now Prince and Senate take no other measures for their love than
eminent merit, and strive to oblige most the most deserving. We agree in our
sentiments of men, we trust each others character of them, and what is an
argument of our united judgments and affections, we both like, we both love,
the same. Therefore, my Lords, dare to own our inclinations, and openly profess
your friends. You need not dissemble your good opinion for fear it be a
prejudice to your selves, nor conceal your dislike lest it prove an advantage
to others. Coesar allows or dissapproves the same with the Senate. While you
are present, or even when absent, he consults and advises with you: He made
them a third time Consuls, whom your votes had so ordained, and he made them in
the same order, wherein your wisdom did appoint. His generosity is either way
to be admired, whether he love none so well, as those he knows we most respect,
or though he may love some better, does at least prefer none before them.
Rewards are proposed to the aged, examples to the younger; all may own their
acquaintance, and make their visits without secrecy or suspicion. Every one,
who gives the highest respect, the freest welcome to the friends of the Senate,
does with the same civility oblige the Prince, who accepts the honor done to
good men as done to himself; and at the same time reputes it no glory to be
greater than others, unless they also be great, who are to confess him greater.
Go on, Caesar, in these honest resolves, and rest assured we so are, as common
fame reports us to be, from hence borrow your thoughts, from hence your
estimate of us, and give no credit to those sly insinuations, that entrap not
those they are whispered against, sooner than those, who listen to them. It is
safer to believe all than some: For particular persons may both impose, and be
imposed upon; but none has deceived all, all can deceive none.

63. I return now to your Consulship, though indeed there be many things
preceding, which relate to it, and ought by way of Introduction to be first
insisted on. As namely that you appeared at the assemblies for Election as a
Candidate not only of the Consulship, but of glory, immortality, and a famed
example, which good Princes cannot but imitate, and even the bad must needs
admire. The people of Rome beheld you in the solemn place of Election, where
you patiently attend to all those Ceremonies, which on this occasion are used,
and are content to be made a Consul with the same customary rites as one of us.
Which of your Predecessors would ever condescend to do this honor to the
office, or to the people? Did not some buried up in sleep, and overcloy'd with
a yesterdays debauch, lie snorting till the news was brought up to their bed
sides? While others indeed set up and watched, but within the walls of their
own Chambers, where they plotted and contrived the banishment of those very
Consuls, who declared them their Successors. O vile ambition and degenerate
from the true spirit of Majesty, to covet that honor you so much disdain, to
disdain that honor, you so much covet! And when from your garden walks you
could overlook the field of Election, yet to come no nearer to it, than if you
were disjoined by the broadest streams of the Rhine or Danube. Do you hate the
bestowing of those votes, you are so impatient for? And content in your
retirements to have the news of your Election brought, will you not at all
appear in public, nor allow to a free City so much as the liberty of
dissembling their joy? Lastly, during the whole time of Election must you needs
so sculk and cloister your self up, as if the design of their meeting was not
an agreement to advance you to the Consulship, but a conspiracy to depose you
from the Empire? Our Imperial Lords had this proud fancy, that they ceased to
be Princes, whenever they stooped to do any thing like ordinary Senators. Yet
many absented themselves not so much out of pride perhaps as fear, being
conscious of their whordoms and incest, they durst not presume to pollute the
auguries, nor with their unhallowed feet to tread such sacred ground. They were
not yet flushed on to that height of impiety, as in that spacious camp to defy
all discovery of their villainies, and stand the eyes of men, and the acuter
Gods. On the contrary your innocence your devotion prompt you to be present,
where the business of the State is dispatched, and the service of Religion
performed. Other Princes have merited the Consulship before they received it,
but you in the very act and manner of receiving.

64. All the trouble of Ceremony might have been spared, if you would have
pleaded that exemption, you might have challenged as a Prince. And indeed it
was so little expected, that the Assembly was just dissolving and going off,
when to the wonder and surprise of us all, you come up to the Consuls Chair,
and there offered to take the oath in that form, which was before unknown to
Princes, except when they imposed it on others. You see now how necessary it
was you should not have refused the Consulship, for we could never have
imagined you would have done thus, had your refusal prevented the experience. I
am amazed (my Lords) nor am I yet satisfied, whether I may credit my own eyes
or ears, but am apt to question whether all be not a delusion, that I have
heard and seen. An Emperor, a Coesar, an Augustus, a Pontifex Maximus, stood
up before the Consuls feet, the Consul sat while the Prince himself was
standing, he sat steady and unmoved, as if he had been accustomed so to do:
And thus sitting he administered the oath, which the Prince devoutly took, and
loudly repeated these words, wherein he devoted his life and family to the
bitterest curse of divine vengeance, if he violated that faith, which he now
solemnly gave. Your glory (Caesar) is bright, and for ever uneclipst, whether
succeeding Princes shall deviate from, or conform to, this great example. What
tongue can declare, what words can express, that you would do the same when a
third time Consul, as when the first: The same, when a Prince, as when a
private man: The same when an Emperor, as when the subject of an Emperor! I
protest I know not which is more honorable, which more generous, that you did
that for which you had no Precedent to follow, or that, in loudly rehearsing
what another more sostly dedicated, you followed the precedent of that person,
who prompted and read the form of oath to you.

65. In the Forum likewise with the same submission you paid obedience to the
Laws, those Laws (Caesar) which were never hoped, or indeed designed to be
obligations to Princes. But you would allow your self no greater exemption,
than one of us, though for this we could willingly afford you the larger
allowance. This is the first time I ever heard, the first, I ever knew a Prince
not above his Laws, but the Laws above their Prince. Caesar when Consul claims
no higher privilege than others. He swears to an observance of the Laws in the
hearing of the Gods, (and whom shall the Gods better hearken to than to an
appealing Caesar?) He swears in the presence of those persons, who are to swear
the same, and he is conscious that none ought more religiously than himself to
keep the oath, because none is more concerned than himself in the ill
consequence of breaking it. And therefore at the resignation of your office,
you again swore that you had punctually performed your former oath. It was an
act of resolution to make such a promise, and of integrity to observe it. To
frequent so often the Courts of Justice, to repair to that Tribunal, which the
pride of former Princes thought scorn to approach, here to receive, here to lay
down your dignity, how worthy your great self, how different was it from their
customs who, when the Consulship had been mounted (or rather trampled upon) by
them for a few days, grew weary and disclaimed it by Edict? The same course
they took for the convention of the Senate, the summons of Election, and the
taking of the oath, that the ordering of these latter might be answerable to
the former, and they only known to have been Consuls, because theirs, and no
other, names began the Calendar.

66. I have not (my Lords) passed over the consulship of our Prince, but only
for some time deferred it, that I might bring into one place all that concerned
his oath. For we must not, as on a dry and barren subject, spin and vamp out
the same topic of praise, nor be guilty of a dull tautology in the mention of
one thing twice. How glorious was the dawn of that morning wherein your third
Consulship commenced? When entering the Senate you addressed your self now
jointly, then severally, encouraging all to reassume their sinking liberty, to
take their respective shares in bearing up the drooping Empire, to awake and be
more intent on the public good. All before you might perhaps give the same
formal advice, but none before you was ever believed to be in earnest. There
was yet floating in our eyes the shipwrecks of many noble Senators, who when
wheedled into a prospect of the greatest calm, were dashed and sunk by an
unexpected storm. For the smoothest Seas were not more treacherous, than the
smiles of those Princes, who had so much of subtilty, so much of trepan, that
it was more safe to have them profestly angry, than pretendedly well pleased.
But wherever you invite, secure and courageous we follow and attend. You bid
us use our freedom, we accept the offer; you command us to speak our thoughts,
we do so: And our never having so done before was not a cold indifference, nor
dull heaviness of temper, no it was a terror, a fear, a slavish caution, a
prudential policy taught by dangers, that made us sit unconcerned, and turn our
eyes, ears and hearts from all regard to the gasping Republic. Whereas now
supported by your hand, and relying on your gracious leave, we release our lips
so long shackled up in slavery, we unloose our tongues so long bridled in with
dread of mischiefs and dangers. You would have us be sincerely as you profess
and advise; your encouragements would neither dissemble nor betray: You have no
reserves, nothing of slyness, nothing of treachery to gull the credulous, and
at last to ensnare the contriver himself; for fraud was always repaid in its
own coin, and scarce was there ever any Prince deceived, but he who had first
deceived others.

67. And that this was the genuine sense of our Princes instructions to us
might be collected not more from his words, than from his manner of delivery.
How tuneable and well poised was the cadence of every period? How unaffected
was the truth of every sentence! What an energy in his very accent! What an
earnestness in his looks! What a confirmation in his eyes, habit, gesture, and
the air of his whole body! He will therefore always be mindful of what he
encouraged us to, and will be ready to acknowledge, that whenever we make use
of that freedom he gave, we therein pay our allegiance, and observe but his
commands. Nor will he censure us for wavering or unsteady, if we exert that
license the present times allow, though he remembers we so lately did otherwise
through fear and compulsion. We used to pray for the security of the Empire,
the safety of the people, nay for the preservation of the Emperors, and for
their sake, of the Empire. But now see how boldly we have altered the tenor of
our prayers! In those petitions, which relate to a blessing on the Prince, we
interpose this clause or condition, If he Govern well and for the benefit of
all. These are prayers that deserve to be offered, deserve to be answered. The
Republic (Caesar) by your own express order has made a covenant with the Gods,
that they shall keep you in peace and safety, while you keep your subjects so,
and when otherwise, they shall withdraw their providence, recall their
protection, and let you sink under a load of curses and imprecations. Other
Princes wished and endeavored to survive the Republic; but you neither relish
nor enjoy your own health, except attended with the common safety. You suffer
no prayers to be made for you, except the contents of them imply an advantage
to those that make them. And solemnly every year you appeal to the Gods,
desiring them to pass sentence, and depose you, if you have ceased to be
otherwise, than when they first preferred you. Thus with a spotless and
unaccusing conscience you article with the Divine Beings to give you such
protection only, which you merit, knowing that they can best judge of your
deserts. Do you think (my Lords) he does not often recollect and meditate upon
these his own words, I have delivered a Sword into the hands of the Captain of
my Guards, with a command he should draw it against me, if I act contrary to
that duty, I owe the public; nor do I deprecate the anger of the Gods, or so
much as wish for their connivence, if I incense their justice, or willingly
provoke their vengeance: Nay I am heartily content my subjects, if by me
oppressed, should make me no vows of allegiance, or when made, if by me injured,
let them be absolved from the obligation of them.

68. It is therefore (Caesar) by the Gods express consent that you are
sheltered from all mischiefs, and securely guarded with health and peace. For
when you petition the Gods should protect you no longer, than you Govern well,
you are sure you Govern well, because they yet protect you. Hence we pass the
day in mirth and profoundest quiet, which distracted other Princes with
perpetual alarms of doubt and suspicion: While now racked with jealousies, then
tortured in suspense, still fearing we should not long endure the galling yoke,
they expected every minute to hear of mutinies and revolts; and if any wind or
weather had detained those messengers that were in their road from distant
Provinces, they dreaded what their conscience had assured them they deserved,
and immediately concluded a Rebellion was begun. Nor did they suspect only
some few designing men, but were constrained to be jealous of all alike: For
when by an evil Prince every one of more worth than himself is feared as an
encroaching Successor, there being none, but worthier, there can be likewise
none, but such who are an object of his fear. But your security is fixed and
stable, no delay of Couriers, no detainment of Paquets, can suspend or
interrupt it. You know all are bound by oath to obey you, because you have
bound your self by oath to defend them. Nay there is none, but what is
conscious that to pay his duty is to purchase his advantage. We love you indeed
for your deserts, yet after all we love you not more for your sake, than for
our own. For really there is a selfishness in our subjection, nor is there any
one day wherein our prayers for your long life are not grounded upon interest,
as much as upon Religion, or Loyalty. And indeed those Princes are a scandal to
their dignity, who have any other ends of Government, than the welfare of that
community they are set over. It is observable that no Princes pump and pry into
the secret thoughts of their subjects, but only those, who are not beloved.
Whereas would the good be as searching, and attentive in this respect as the
bad, would you, Caesar, be as curious and inquisitive in this regard as your
Predecessors, what joy, what comfort, what feeding satisfaction might you find
in the recesses of every heart? What fine discourses of you might you hear
among the Women and Children, even in places unfit for dissimulation or
complement, their Kitchings and Chimney corners? You would soon confess that
they are more lavish of their good words in private, than they justly suppose
your modesty would allow them in public. For though love and hatred be
extremely distant, yet herein they conspire, that we express our love to good
Princes most freely in those retirements, where we most securely vented our
hatred of bad ones.

69. Yet had you the open experience of our judgment and affections, as much as
in your presence was possible to express, on that day wherein you so far
cherished the hopes, and allaid the disappointments of the respective
Candidates, that you let no ones joy give occasion of grief to another. Those,
who were elect, returned in triumph, and those that missed came off with hopes,
and a prospect of better success in their next attempts; so that many were to
be Congratulated, yet none needed pity or comfort. You advised our young
Gentlemen to seek out for preferment by a dependence on the favor of the
Senate, learning them to hope for honors from the Prince by engaging the
interest of his great Council. Wherein if any wanted a Precedent, you proposed
your self to his imitation: A hard example, Coesar, that which none of the
Candidates, nor of future Princes neither, shall be ever able to follow! For
what Candidate is more observant of the Senate for one day, than you for your
whole life, and more especially at that very time, when you presided and gave
judgment of the Candidates? Has any other motive but your respect to the Senate
induced you to offer preferments to our Gentry as a reward of their deserts,
nay to confer them before they were fully deserved? So that Nobility is no
longer eclipst, but illustrated by the Prince. The descendants from ancient
families, the undegenerate issue of freeborn Ancestors Caesar does neither
fear nor make afraid, but exalts them to early honors proportioned to the
dignity of that race, they sprang from. If there be any branch, any remainders,
of an ancient stock, he prunes and cultivates them to flourish, and grow up for
the service of the Commonwealth. Great and good old names are retrieved from
that oblivion, they lay buried in, and reinvested with honor and credit by
that goodness of Coesar, which extends to the raising of new families, and to
the preserving of old ones.

70. One of the Candidates had been Questor of a Province, wherein one of the
largest Cities had computed their revenues, and settled the receipt of them in
an easy method; the whole contrivance being managed by his care and conduct.
Of this you thought fit to acquaint the Senate, and to move that the merits of
it might be considered, For under such a Prince, whose virtues exceed the
greatness of his birth, why should they be in a worse condition, whose actions
may ennoble their posterity, than those, whose Ancestors have ennobled them? O
generous and worthy soul! May you ever thus encourage our Magistrates, and
incite them to be qualified for their charge, not so much by punishments
inflicted on the bad, as by rewards bestowed on the good. Our youth by your
influence is inflamed, and takes a hot pursuit of those industrious courses,
which it sees are authorized by your approbation. Nor can any be otherwise
inclined, that knows there is nothing done abroad, but what you have a perfect
account, an exact information, of. It is of much use and advantage (Coesar) for
the Governors of Provinces to be assured, there is laid up for their prudence
and integrity, the greatest reward, the countenance and favor of their Prince.
Acute and vigorous dispositions, if not quite starved, have at least been
extremely dashed and disheartened by these uneasy, yet reasonable thoughts,
what motives have we to virtue or honesty? If we do never so well, our Prince
shall have no information of it, or, if he have, will take no notice, no
farther regard. This negligence or untowardness of Princes by granting impunity
to the evil, and proposing no encouragements to the good, detered not those
from vice, nor incited these to ambition. But now if any happily acquit himself
in the Government of his Province, he is sure to be adorned with such dignity,
which shall seem acquired by his virtues. The peevish enclosures are removed,
and to all is laid open an unbounded field to honor and glory, wherein all may
attain their laudable designs, and when attained may safely thank themselves,
and repute them the effect of their own industry. You have likewise for the
future redeemed our Provinces from the fear of oppression, and the necessity of
continual accusations. For if those, to whom the Provinces have paid their
thanks and approbation, be hereupon countenanced and preferred by the Prince,
this will have so good influence on the regulating of others, that there will
be no need of complaints for the future. The Candidates will soon be sensible
that nothing will so much promote their interest in the pursuit of a new
office, as their industrious behavior in a former. The good discharge of one
employ is the easy procurement of another, and past honors bring on future. I
would not have the Governor of a Province for a testimonial of his integrity
produce the hands of his favorites, or the shufling Affidavits of his
creatures and dependants, but the decrees of Colonies, the judgment of
Corporations: That so Cities, Countries and Nations may have some influence on
our Elections, and have their suffrages in some measure occur and intermix with
ours. And thus the most effectual way of petitioning for a Candidate will be an
Address of thanks to him from that Province, which he has lately obliged by his
good Government of it.

71. What a comfort, what a pleasing joy was it, for the Senate to see that at
your putting up, or nomination of every Candidate, you gave him a courteous
salute stepping down from your Royal Seat, as if you already meant to
Congratulate his Success! Shall I more admire your civility, or condemn the
stifness of those, who have rendered this favor the greater by making it so
rare and unaccustomed? While riveted and fast nailed as it were to their Chairs
of State, they would but just hold forth their hands, and this too so slow and
sparingly, as if a touch of that were a never to be deserved favor. Your good
nature therefore presented us with an unusual sight, a Prince and a Candidate
standing on even ground, and the fountain of honor not higher than those
lesser streams, which slow'd from it. This condescension of yours was by the
whole Senate applauded with these pathetick acclamations, So much the more
great, so much the more August. And he indeed, who is already Supreme, has this
only method for a farther advance, to stoop and submit without being jealcus
it will abate from his height. For there is nothing less impairs the just
Grandeur of a Prince, than a meek humility. Beside your civilities seemed not
more taking in themselves, than in your happy art of expressing them. Your
eyes, your voice, your gesture were wholly employed to grace and set off your
delivery, and yet as if you were not hereby at all diverted, you omitted no one
circumstance of any other occasional complaisance. When the names of the Elect
were to be approved, you were one of the approvers, while from the mouth of a
Prince came the suffrage of a Senator. And we, who were formerly proud if the
Prince would accept of our testimony, are now obliged with his. But while you,
Coesar, (the Oracle of worth) pronounced the men to be deserving, you made them
to be, what you so adjudg'd them. Nor did you approve only of their merits,
but of the opinions of the Senate, who were as glad to have their judgment
confirmed by yours, as the others could be to have their virtues ratifyed by
your commendation.

72. While you prayed that our Elections might have a happy event to us, to the
Republic, and but lastly to your self: Ought not the order of this form to be
inverted, and by an easy transposal of the words should we not implore the
Gods, that all you do, or shall do, may be for ever prosperous, first to you,
then to us, and the Republic: Or (to contract our devotion) to you alone, for
in you is wrapped up the happiness both of us and the Republic? There was a time
(and that time too long) when the interests of Prince and People were divided,
and the advantage of the one was a prejudice to the other. But now we share
with you in the same fortune, our good luck or disasters run parallel with
yours, nor can we be any more happy without you, than you by your own
consession could be without us. And had you thought that your safety was
independent from ours, you would not have closed up your Prayers with this
petition, That the Gods would so answer your requests, as you continued to
merit our affections. So sacred in your esteem is the love of your subjects,
that you profess first to desire theirs, and not till afterward that of the
Gods: Nay and are willing to be indulged by the Gods, only on condition you
are first endeared to us. And really the unfortunate end of many Princes gives
reason to believe, that those are seldom regarded by the Gods, who are not
beloved by men. It was hard to Commemorate these Prayers with a suitable return
of praise, yet we attempted and did our utmost toward it. What ardour of love,
what sparkling joy, what flames of passion did we express in our rapturous
acclamations! It was the resounding echo, Coesar, not of our affections, but of
your virtues, of your deserts, which no flattery could ever invent, no terror
could ever extort. Whom have we so feared thus to dissemble, whom have we so
loved thus to pretend? You have had experience of the necessity imposed by
slavery; when did you ever hear, or when your self declare any such hearty
professions, as to be compared with these? Fear indeed often whets the invention,
yet after all betrays an unwilling mind. Wit squeezed out by compulsion is of a
far different strain from that which flows voluntary and unforced. The
cheerful and the discontented have a style, at least a tone, peculiar to the
humors they are of, and neither can possibly counterfeit without discovery.
The miserable, have one dialect, the happy another, nay though the contents of
their speech be the same, the circumstances of each are distinguishable from
their voice and delivery.

73. You your self were a witness of our universal joy. We were so taken up
with transport, that we had no leisure to mind our habit, no desire to be
curious of our outward garb. Our houses ccho'd with peals of shouts, nor could
thickest walls exclude the piercing noise. To spread the taking news, every man
was upon the wing, and flew from his own home, though in such a sort of
ecstasie, that he was scarce sensible he did so. We did many things by choice,
and many too by instinct, nay some by compulsion; for even joy in excess has a
tyrannick power. Nor could your modesty impose any bounds to our exultation;
but the more you stifled our zeal, the more it flamed: Yet not out of
stubbornness, but necessity: For as it was in your power to give occasion to
our joy, so it is beyond our own to set measures to it. You your self approved
the sincerity of our joys by sealing them with your own tears. We saw your
dropping eyes, we saw your blushing looks, and espied as much of blood in your
sace, as there was of modesty in your heart. While this enflamed our zeal to
pray, that you might always have the same cause to weep, the same motives to be
out of countenance. To these benches (supposing they can answer) we'll put the
question, whether ever they beheld the tears of a Prince? No, but a Senate in
tears they have often seen. You have brought an inconvenience on future
Princes, and laid a burden on the posterity of your subjects: For the people
will expect their Princes should deserve the like acclamations, and Princes
will take offense, if they do not hear them.

74. I can say nothing more proper, nothing more concise, than what was by the
whole Senate so often repeated, O happy you! Which we said not in respect to the
plenty of your fortune, but to the largeness of your soul. And indeed it is no
small part of happiness to be thought by others worthy of it. On that day,
among many other passages, which with prudence and gravity were delivered, this
more especially deserves remark, Believe us, nay search and believe your self.
This we speak with a mighty confidence in our selves, but a greater in you. One
may happily beguile another, but none can easily delude himself: Let him but rip
open his own thoughts, and ask his conscience, what he deserves, and he shall
meet with neither flattery, nor concealment. This very method gains us credit
with a good Prince, which made us but suspected by the bad: For they were so
conscious of their failures, that whatever professions we made of Loyalty, they
could never be affected with them, nor believe they were hearty, and sincere.
Again, we prayed the Gods might so love you, as you loved us. Who would be so
profane, if he were not assured that your kindness to the people is so great,
that the favor of Heaven to you can never exceed it? Farther we desired the
God's, They would love us, as you did. Had we not therefore reason to bless our
selves with this exclamation, O happy we! For who indeed can on this side
humanity be more happy than we, who have no need to pray that the Prince may
love us, but that the Gods would do it so well as he does? Hence does this
devoutly disposed City, which always paid a just deference to piety and
religion, think that nothing can more advance her exalted bliss and welfare,
than that the Originals would take pattern of their image, and the Gods be
pleased to imitate Coesar.

75. But why should I endeavor to enumerate all particulars? As if my speech
could either contain, or my memory recollect, what you, my Lords, to rescue
from all oblivion, have been pleased to insert in our public records, and
preserve in more lasting inscriptions on brass. To be recommended to posterity
in these monumental memoires was a favor formerly allowed only to the
Orations of Princes, while our harangues were buried under that roof, where
they were delivered: Nor indeed did they deserve to survive, they being such,
as neither Prince nor Senate could justly glory in. But these now of ours are
so well regulated, that to expose them to the open World, and deliver them down
to future ages, will be agreeable both to the honor and interest of the
Republic. First, that the whole Universe may be witness of our Loyalty, then,
that it may appear we presume to commend the good, and, when occasion serves
shall as freely dare to reprove the bad, and that not only in their graves,
but while life and reign do yet continue: Lastly, that we may by experiment
evince, we would formerly have been as grateful, but that we were thus
unfortunate, as never before to have the same subject and opportunity of so
approving our selves. But with what earnestness, what importunities were we
forced to solicit you, before you would comply to let our affections, and your
deserts be published? Though the transmitting them over to future ages would
have this notable convenience, that Princes might hence learn how to
distinguish between harangues unseign'd and counterfeit, and be obliged to you
for the discovery. They may spare the trouble of seeking out new roads to a
good reputation, they need only not deviate from that, you have put them in:
They need not study the cure of flattery, but take care only to prevent a
relapse: They Will know what they ought to do, and will know as well what they
must expect to hear. Beside those prayers, wherein the whole Senate has joined
with me, what shall I pray more for the Senate it self, than that (your
blessings, Caesar, implying her happiness) may the same joy always, overflow in
your heart, which in tears was strained through your eyes? May you love that
day, and yet be the occasion of one more joyful, may you deserve more and
still hear more: For in our duty of thanks and praise we can only repeat the
same words, unless you supply us with new matter successively to proceed upon.

76. How honorable, how Roman-like was it for the Senate, complying with your
exemplary patience, to sit three days without intermission or adjournment,
while you behaved your self not as a Prince, but as a Consul? Every one started
what questions, he pleased; Any one might dissent from another's judgment, or
retract his own, and freely advise whatever he thought would conduce most to
the interest of the public. All were in their turns consulted, the votes of
all were cast up, and not the first, but the best resolves were sure to
prevail. Whereas heretofore who durst speak, who dared so much as whisper, but
those only, who were first asked their opinion? The rest dissatisfied within
themselves, and swelling their undigested murmures, were forced to stifle their
dislike, and with a relenting heart and discomposed body let their silence pass
for a consent. One alone by the dictate of the Prince proposed what all the
rest were obliged to comply with: Though they all and especially the first
proposer privately disallowed and condemned it: And nothing sure can be more
displeasing than what is thus extorted against the will of the major part, and
yet pretended to be by the consent of all. Some Emperor perhaps out of respect
to the honorable assembly might curb and restrain himself within the Senate
house, but no sooner out, than he reassumed the character of a Prince, and with
contempt disclaimed his office of a Consul. But our Prince was so a Consul, as
if he had no other title, and thought nothing below himself, that was not below
the dignity of that place. He appeared in public without any thing of
troublesome pomp, without a burdensome train: He stopped only to consult the
Augurs, and take instructions from the Gods. None was disturbed, none was
rudely thrust aside, there was so much freedom for the Passengers, so much
civility in the Lictors, that a crowd of strangers would often stop the Prince
and Consul. In a word, his procession was every way so modest and inoffensive,
that we seemed to have a primitive Consul revived under the disguise of an
Emperor.

77. He went often to the Forum, and as frequently to the public meetings for
Election, where he sat President as Consul, and took as much pleasure in
declaring of the Elect, as he had before done in nomination of the Candidates.
Those Candidates, who stood before his Curule Chair, as he himself had so
lately done before the Consul's, and there took the same oath which not long
before had been taken by the Prince, who knew the Ceremony of it to be so
solemn, and the obligation so strong and effectual, that he would bind others
with it as firmly, as he had freely engaged himself. The remainder of the day
he spent in his Courts of Justice: And there what a devout esteem of equity and
conscience? What a respect and reverence of the Laws! If any addressed
themselves to him as a Prince, he corrected their mistake, by meekly answering
he sat there as a Consul. The rights of other Magistrates, their privileges or
authority were not by him encroach'd nor impaired, but often advanced. For he
would remit many points from his own cognizance to be determined by the
Pretors, to whom he was pleased to give the title of Colleagues, not because it
sounded popular, but because he really so esteemed them; accounting that place
so honorable that he thought a Praetor not unworthy to be the Colleague of a
Prince. Farther, he was so constant and unwearied in his attendance on the
Bench, that he seemed even fed with labor, and refreshed with pains. Who of us
could have endured the same toil? Who undergone the same drudgery? Who would
not be either unwilling or unable to serve out so laborious an employ? Though
indeed it is but fitting, he should excel all other Consuls, who has himself
the power of creating Consuls: For otherwise his strength would be
disproportioned to his fortune, if he could bestow that office, which he could
not manage. Nay when he makes Consuls, he instructs them in the duty of the
place, and renders them sensible, that he understands the nature of what he
gives, and expects, nay provides, that they should be as apprehensive of what
it is they receive.

78. From hence does the Senate more justly desire, and even with importunities
little less than command, that you would accept the fourth Consulship. This was
not a motion started in flattery, but the offer of a serious intention, and let
your compliance satisfy that you believe us to be in earnest in a matter
wherein the Senate can never beg, nor ever be relieved with a greater favor.
For as other common mortals, so even Princes (though they write themselves Gods
on Earth) must shortly resign a frail and borrowed life. It is therefore their
duty to contrive and endeavor to serve the Republic, even beyond the Grave in
bequeathing them such monuments of justice and moderation, which an able Consul
has the best opportunies to erect. And since it is your intention to reduce and
restore our liberty, what honor should you more affect, what title should you
more often assume, than that of Consul, which was the first badge of your
redemption from slavery? It has not less of Grandeur to be both Prince and
Consul, than to be Prince alone. In your acceptance of this dignity you made
some allowance to the modesty of your Colleagues, your Colleagues I may presume
to term 'em, because you your self imposed that name, and would have others
call them by it: They would not have the confidence to appear themselves in a
third Consulship, till they saw you laboring in a fourth: For it must needs
have been too much for a subject, which a Prince should have thought enough.
But you comply, Coesar, with our importunate desires, and are as charitable to
our prayers, as the Gods are attentive to yours.

79. Your third Consulship no doubt contented you, but it makes us the more
dissatisfied; your complete discharge of that does but whet us on to be more
impatient for your being farther engaged. We should have been more cold in our
Address, if we had not already a proof of your deportment. You might have
detained us from a past experience more tolerably, than you can disoblige us
with a present repulse. How eagerly must we needs interrogate, Shall we see him
again Consul whose abilities we are so well assured of? Shall he hear and
return the same wonted expressions of mutual content and joy? Shall he again
dispense as much satisfaction, as he receives? Shall he manage that public
Jubilee, which his deserts alone occasion? Shall he endeavor to restrain our
affections, and yet, as formerly, not have power to do it? Such a conflict
between the Loyalty of the Senate, and the modesty of the Prince must needs be
glorious to both, which ever gains the victory or defeat. There will be joys I
presume as yet untasted: For none can be so shallow as not to imagine his
virtues will advance with his honor, and the oftener he is employed, the better
will he still improve. Any other, if he had not quite enslaved himself to
debauch and luxury, would at least have tempered his labors with ease and
remission. But this, when he respites from the cares of his Consulship, applies
himself to those of the Empire, and so divides his thoughts on the concernments
of each, that his being a Prince does not interrupt his acquitment as a Consul,
nor his being a Consul distract or impede his discharge as a Prince. We see him
generous in indowing whole Provinces, and as free in relieving particular
Garrisons. No difficulty in giving Audience, no delays of returning answers:
All are easily admitted, all as quickly dismissed, nor are the Royal Gates any
longer besieged with crowds of humble Petitioners, who must throng and
tediously attend for entrance.

80. Through the whole course of your judicial proceedings how gentle is your
severity, and yet how uncheap your mercy! You sit not to enrich your own
Exchequer, nor take you any other methods for your final resolves, than the
impartial administration of justice. Those, who stand to plead before you, are
not so solicitous of their own fortunes, as of your estimation; nor are they so
much concerned for what you determine of their cause, as for what you conclude
of their Morals. How much like a Prince, how much like a Consul is it to
reconcile divided Cities, to compose a fluctuating people, to quell their
tumultuous humors by reason more than power, to redress the injurious Decrees
of other Judges, and by repeal to undo whatever was unjustly done! In short,
like the noblest of the Planets to have an eye over all places, an influence on
all things, and like a God to appear and assist wherever invoked! Such an
almighty goodness is alone dispensed by that great disposer of the Universe,
when he pleases to look down on the humble Earth, and make the actions of us
mortals a part of his divine inspection: which is indeed a drudgery that you
have now discharged him from; he may now confine his Providence within the
extent of the heavens, since in you he has appointed a Vicegerent, who can
suffice for the concerns of this inferior World: A Vicegerent, who exactly
performs the pleasure of his great Master, and makes every succeeding day
contribute to our benefit, and his own glory.

81. Whenever you have dispatched the exigencies of public affairs, you make
your very diversions but an exchange of labor. For what other recreation do
you accustom your self to, than toilsome ones of swift walking, of hard
riding, of scouring the Parks and Forests, of rousing the timorous game from
their Dens of refuge, of breaking through woods and thickets, and visiting the
Deities of those abstruse abodes? This was of old the Education of our youth,
this their employ, this their pleasure. In this method were our future Generals
trained up, to contend in speed with the nimblest beast, in valor with the
most courageous, and in strategeme with the most crafty. It was one sort of
military exercise in peace to clear the Country from the irruptions of wild
beasts, and to rescue the husbandman's long hopes from the damages of a
ravenous waste and spoil. Nay this sport was affected by those Princes, who
would not be at the pains to prosecute it, so they usurped that pleasure, they
were too lazy, to attain, by having beasts in some contrived Enclosures let
out, as if in open field dislodged, and then shot and wounded, as it by mighty
art and wonderful dexterity. But our Prince with a scorn of such poor shams
spends more of sweat in pursuing than in killing of them, and takes as much
pleasure in finding them out, as in running them down. If he choose at other
times to divert himself by water, he does not idly let his eyes float along
with the streaming sails, but he manages an Oar, he sets hand to the Rudder,
and contends with the stoutest Tarpolin to break a rising wave, to secure the
tackle from a ruffling wind, and so with art and strength to cut through the
toughest of resisting floods.

82. How much different was the humor of that late Domitian
Emperor, who dared not trust the smoothness of the Alban lakes, or the
shallow silence of the Port of Baiae, that could not endure the least motion of
an Oar, but trembled at every stroke they made! And therefore without
disturbance of Sail or Oar, he was towed along by another Vessel, and so drawn
like some sacrifice for religious expiation, which must be neither touched nor
approached. A scandalous spectacle to see a Roman Emperor tug'd along by
another boat, as if a Captive dragged in triumph. Nor did more distant floods
and foreign rivers escape this reproachful sight: Danube and the Rhine were
made acquainted with it, who rejoiced to be thus witness of our shame. It being
no more a scandal to our Empire that this goodly project should be displayed on
the Roman Coasts, on the Roman Seas, than presented on the banks of her enemy,
that enemy, whose custom it is to slide along these waters when they are froze
into Ice, and to wade, sail over, or swim cross them in all milder seasons of
the year. But to return, I should not commend your strength of body, or agility
of limbs, if they were not set off with a stronger and more active soul, which
the indulgence of fortune could never effeminate, nor the temptations of
Royalty ever debauch into sloth and intemperance. So that whether the
recreations of our Prince shall carry him to the Mountains, or call him to the
Ocean, I shall ever much admire his body invigorated by exercise, and his
joints compact by labor. Those Heroes, whom the Goddesses accepted of for
husbands, were not more honored by their divine Marriage, than by these nobler
arts of Hunting and Navigation. Now when the sports and most divertive pastimes
of our Prince are so severe, how much more painful must those pleasures be,
which he takes in more serious concerns! Those pleasures of the mind, wherein
every one betrays his gravity, reservedness, discretion, and other such
commendable qualities. Who so dissolute, as not to be seemingly eager and
intent on whatever employs their expense of time? Right down idleness exposes
all our infirmities, which the being taken up with any sort of business might
prudently conceal. Have not many Princes squandered away their spare hours in
Gaming, Riot and Excess, while their remission from cares was only to be more
intent on the worse drudgeries of Vice and Debauchery?

83. Great fortunes are always attended with this inconvenience, that none of
their actions lie hid, none undiscovered. The condition of Princes promotes
this unhappiness, and makes not only their Palaces to be ransacked, but even
their bed chambers and very closets to be rissd and exposed. But this, Coesar,
turns to your advantage; for nothing can more illustrate your glory than to be
thoroughly looked into. Those exploits are admirable which you act abroad, nor
are those performances a whit less famous which you exert within your own
walls. It is honorable that you preserve your self from all infection of vice,
it is more credit that you fortify others against the like contagion. Nay, by
how much harder it is to reform others than to amend our selves, so much the
more commendable is it, that being your self the best, you have made the
goodness of others to equal your own. Many otherwise of unsullied repute have
miserably tainted their reputation by a Wise either too unadvifedly taken, or
too tamely endured. So that a domestic infamy has blotted those, who had been
too illustrious abroad, and they might have been the greatest of Romans, if
they had not been the unhappiest of husbands. But your Royal Consort is your
glory and your ornament: Who more chaste! Who more pious! Were a grave and
reverend High Priest to make choice of a Wife, would he not choose her or her
equal, were it possible her equal could be found? Of all your Grandeur, how
does she claim a share in nothing but the content and comfort? How constantly
does she love, how devourly does she respect, not your power, but your Person?
You are both but one soul united: Your State does nothing impair your familiar
affections, and an exalted happiness has made no worse impressions on you both,
than a sense and experience how well you can digest it. How modest is she in
her Apparel! How frugal in her train! How discreet and decent in her Garb! The
honor of this may perhaps redound to her Royal Husband, who sets the pattern,
gives the instructions, and leaves to her the alone glory of a dutiful
compliance. When she sees you march with so little of pomp, so little of
tumult, does she not her self pass with the less noise, the less solemnity?
When she finds you so accustomed to walking, does she not imitate as far as the
weakness of her Sex will permit? These courses would become her, should you
your self do otherwise: But where you lead the way, where you are so
exemplary, how ought she to conform as a Wife for your honor, and as a Woman
for her own!

84. Your Royal Sister too, how does she remember that she has you for her
Brother? How does she copy after your integrity, your truth, your candor? So
that if any compare her with your happy Consort, from the prudent deportment of
them both, he will find reason to doubt, which is the best foundation for a
virtuous life, to be well bred, which was the portion of the one; or to be
nobly descended, which was the fortune of the other. Nothing is so apt to breed
quarrels as emulation, especially in women, where it is often begot by a nearness
in alliance, fomented by equality, inflamed by envy, till it end at last in the
most inveterate spite and hatred. From hence it ought to be esteemed the
greater wonder, that two Ladies in the same Palace, of the same Quality, should
have no feuds, no contention. They bear with each other, they never dispute the
right of precedence, and while both passionately love you best, they think
themselves unconcerned, which of them you shall please best to love. They have
the same intentions, they take the same course of life: nay they are scarce
distinguishable to be two different persons; for with one soul they imitate and
closely follow your steps, and therefore they must needs have the same Morals,
because both have exactly borrowed yours. Hence a well managed moderation, and
hence a security against all change of fortune; for those can never be in
danger of falling, whose humility always keeps them down. The Senate offered
them the Title of August, but to this they earnestly pleaded an excuse, either
because you first refused the appellation of Father of your Country, or
because they conceived it more honor to be termed your Wife, your Sister, than
to be styled August. Though what motives soever induced them to a denial, they
ever deserve to be, and shall ever be, so esteemed, the more August, the more
their modesty rejects that Title. For what can be more commendable in Woman,
than to believe that true honor consists not in aerie names, but in the solid
judgment of the World, and so to raise themselves to dignifying epithets by the
very act of refusing them?

85. That good old comfort of the Primitive World, Friendship, was outdated,
and quite shufl'd off the Stage, to make room for flattery, complement, and,
what is worse than avowed hatred, a pretense of love. Especially in the Courts
of Princes it was so unfashionable, that the very name was a word of reproach.
For indeed what friendship could possibly be contracted between Lords on the
one hand, and slaves on the other? This blessing, Sir, have you bestowed. You
have friends, because you are one: And indeed it is this way of bribing that
can alone procure them. For love cannot like other duties be imposed on
subjects; there is no one passion more free, more voluntary, more impatient of
the curb, or more resenting of ingratitude, if it meet not with a like return.
A Prince may perhaps be unjustly hated, nay even hated by those whom he does
not hate: But beloved he can never be, unless by those he loves. That you
therefore love your subjects, is proved from your being beloved by them: And
what is the greatest honor, the whole glory of both must be confessed your own,
while being Superior to all, you stoop to be equal and familiar with the
lowest, and from an Emperor humble your self into a friend, though indeed you
are then most of an Emperor, when as a Friend you Reign in the hearts of men.
Nor is your prudence less than your goodness herein concerned; for since the
fortune of Princes may in some exigencies stand in need of the friendship of
many, it is their policy to provide themselves many friends. May a belief of
this ever attend you, may you keep as constant to this virtue, as to all your
other: And may you always rest assured that hatred or ill will in a Prince is
one of the poorest mean spirited humors, that possibly he can be guilty of. To
be beloved is the sweetest of humane comforts, nor is it less satisfaction to a
generous soul to love: Both which you are so blessed with, that you love most
passionately, and are yet more passionately beloved; first, because for many to
love one is easier, than for one to love many, and then you have such a faculty
at obliging, that whomever you entertain a kindness for, he must be very
ungrateful, if he make not a more ample return.

86. It is worthy our pains to relate what penance you imposed on your self,
that you might deny nothing to your friend. You parted with a most Licinius
Sura, Captain of the Guards.
Excellent man, one you loved and prized to the just value of his merits: You
parted with him as it were grudgingly and against your will, as if you would by
persuasion, though not by force, have detained him. You made a trial by absence
how much you should want him, and though to be separate was the most averse to
your inclination, you yield because it was his request. An instance of good
nature this beyond a precedent, that a Prince and his subject friend should
have contrary desires, and yet the prince comply, the friend prevail. O
generous selfdenial worthy an Eternal Record, to choose a Captain of the Guards
not out of those, who thrust themselves on the place, but out of them, who
declined it: And then again when tired with noise and hurry, to restore the
same person to those retirements, he was called from: And when you your self
lie under an uneasy pressure from the encumbrance of an Empire, not to envy
another the enjoyment of quiet and repose. We are now made sensible (Caesar)
how much we are indebted for your own toilsome and laborious Station, since you
granted this weary Petitioner a Writ of ease, as the greatest favor he could
ask, or you bestow. What a trouble and discomposure were you in, when you
brought him on his way? For you would attend him to the Sea side, and there at
his going aboard embrace and take your last farewell. Caesar here stands upon
the envious shore, and wishes his parting friend a happy voyage, and (if he
himself so please) a quick return. Nor does he leave him so, but looks as long
as distance will allow, and then follows after with Prayers, Sighs and Tears. I
shall say nothing of your presents and rewards for his past service. For what
bounty can equal this single kindness of permission and discharge, wherein you
have so well deserved of him, that he ought to condemn himself as too blunt,
too positive, in resolving a departure, and doubtless he began to repent, and
considered whether he should not tack about and return: Nay he had certainly
done it, if he had not supposed it as much happiness to be Loyal in distant
thought and wish, as in a nearer Society and converse. He gained much honor by
the discharge of that preserment, and a much greater by the resignation of it;
to which when you complied, you show, that your service is no prison, nor shall
any man be confined longer, than he himself please.

87. This was generous and agreeable to the character of a public parent, to
enforce nothing, but always to remember, that no office can be so considerable,
but that the person endowed with it may possibly prefer a disengaged freedom.
You are worthy (Caesar) to promote such to dignities as whose modesty will soon
after resign them: And when they make it their petition to be excused, may you,
though with reluctance, oblige them. May you not think your self abandoned by
those, who seem fond to retire; and for a supply of able Ministers may you
still find those you can invite from, as well as those you shall remand to, a
privacy and solitude. You therefore who are the Princes more especial
favorites, whose friendship and familiarity he more designedly courts, improve
that good opinion he is pleased to conceive of you, this ought to be your
Province, this your duty. Neither envy nor be jealous that you are possibly
less regarded than some others; for when by his more signal affecting of
particular persons he has given proof that he can love intensly, he is to be
excused if he love some in a more remiss degree. However be assured that in
your Loyalty toward him, there can be no mean observed, since you are not to
prescribe, but only follow in his example the laws and measures of your love.
This man would be caressed when present, that esteemed when absent, both shall
have their will; none by residence shall grow cheap, none by distance shall be
forgot. Every one in all circumstances preserves that respect he merits, and
our Prince can sooner let his eyes loose the resemblance, than his heart
forfeit the memory, of his absent friend.

88. Many Princes, who have been Lords of their subjects, have been yet slaves
to their own servants: Their pleasure was a command, their advice a law,
through their eyes passd all representments, to their ears came all petitions,
and by their llands were dispensed all places of preferment. Whereas you indeed
are courteous and obliging to your servants, yet still keep them at so due a
distance, that it seems a competent reward for their industry, if they be but
by your judgment approved honest and faithful. And indeed nothing is more an
argument of a weak Prince, than powerful servants. First therefore you retain
none, but such, who have best deserved by their Loyalty to your sacred self, or
first adherence to your Royal Father. And these, when admitted to your service,
you so exquisitely frame and mould that they learn to take measures of their
fortune not from your condition of Supremacy, but from their own of subjection:
While we pay them the much greater respect, because their modesty does less
demand it. Was it not therefore upon just motives that the Senate and people of
Rome conferred on you the surname of Best? True, this Title has been before
assumed, but never till now deserved. For might the merits of any Prince have
laidany tolerable claim thereto, it had certainly been by public consent
assigned, and not by a selfish ambition usurped. Had it been more proper to
have styled you Happy? No, that had been a compliment to your fortune, not a
Character of your virtues. Or had it been better to have entitled you Great?
No, this had been an Epithet of envy, more than of glory. An Excellent Prince
adopted you into his own name, and the Senate has superadded the name of Best,
which is as justly your due, as that you derive from birthright: It being no
more significant nor distinguishing to call you Trajan, than to call you Best.
Thus of old were the Pisos sirnam'd frugal, the Laelii, wise, and the Metelli
pious: Which several appellations are all comprised in this one of yours; for
he cannot properly be entitled Best, who excells not all others in every of
their respective virtues. Deservedly therefore, after many other Titles, was
this annexed, as of all the greatest. It is much less to be Emperor, to be
Caesar, to be Augustus, than to be of all Emperors, of all Caesar's, of all
Augustus s the Best. Hence is the Supreme Parent of the World adored first by
the attribute of Best, and not till secondly by that of Greatest. The more
divine your glory, who are equally both the Best by far, and by far the
Greatest. You have gained a name that never can descend, or be transferred to
another: In a good Prince it will seem borrowed, and in a bad it must appear
usurped. Nay should each of your Successors assume it, it would after all be
esteemed peculiarly yours. For as the rehearsal of Augustus reminds us of that
person it was first conserr'd on, so a repetition of this name of Best shall
always prompt posterity to reflect on you, and whenever after they are
compelled to flatter others with this Title, so often shall they recollect, who
first deserved it.

89. What joys, Divine Nerva, are you now crowned with, that you see the event
so well answer your hopes, that he proves to be the Best whom you elected under
a prospect of his being so! What a comfort and contentment is it, that compared
with this your Son you your self are infinitely excelled! Nor indeed could any
thing argue a soul more untainted with spite and envy, than that being your
self so Excellent, you were not afraid of adopting one whose brighter eminence
should in some measure shadow and obscure your yielding luster. And you, happy
Trajan, his natural Father (who if not promoted to the honor of a God, are at
least advanced to the dignity of a Hero) what a pleasure must it needs reflect
to see him who, during your stay on Earth, was but a common Soldier, at best
but a Tribune, now since your remove so great a General, so great a Prince! You
seem to engage in an amicable contention with his adoptive Father, whether were
more glorious to have elected, or to have begot, so illustrious a Son. Both of
you do indeed equally (that is infinitely) deserve of the Commonwealth, to
which you are the occasion of so rich a blessing, who though he could bestow
but the credit of a triumph on the one, and the glory of deifying on the other,
yet are you both adorned by all his honors, no less effectually than if you
your selves had merited them.

90. I know (my Lords) that as other Romans, so more especially the Consuls
ought so to express their joys, as to seem more affected with the benefits
conserr'd on the public, than with any interest resulting to themselves. For
as it is more frequent, and indeed more just, to have ill Princes hated for
common injuries, than for any private damage; so ought the good to be more
respected and beloved for their influence on the protection of mankind, than
for any favors reached out to particular persons. But whereas it has been
authorized by custom that Consuls, after a presentment of the public thanks,
should in their own names return some acknowledgement of their private
obligations; give me leave to discharge this part of my duty not with more
respect to my self, than to Cornutus Tertullus, my worthy Colleague. For why
should I not address my thanks for him, in whose advance and interest I my self
am equally concerned. Especially since our Severeign has made us joint Partners
in that honor, to which had he promoted but any one of us, our affections were
so united, our friendship so inviolate, it had indifferently obliged us both.
That tyrannick enemy of good men by the Sequestration and Murder of our best
friends had made us alike sufferers, while we still dreaded that Thunder, which
often fell so near us. The same beloved acquaintance which we had great comfort
of while enjoyed, the same did we the more lament, when snatched from us: And
as we have now the like refreshments of hope and joy, so had we then always one
and the same occasion of grief and fear. The Divine Nerva was pleased to confer
this reward on our past sufferings, that he would advance us to be Prefects of
the Treasury, however less deserving, for an instance of the happy change of
times, wherein they were now honorably employed, who so lately wished for no
more than a safe retreat.

91. We had not been full two years in this great and laborious office, when
you Sir, (the best of Princes, the greatest of Commanders) offered us the
Consulship, making that most eminent of honors the more acceptable by our not
being imposed a tedious waiting for it. So much do you differ from those
Princes, who conceived that a difficulty of obtaining set a value on their
favors; and that therefore preserments were always the more welcome, if the
persons at last obliged with them had been first dismissed with excuses, and
baited with delays, which were no less than a seeming repulse, so long, till
their expectation was angered, and their hopes affronted. Our modesty forbids
to recite what a Character you were pleased to give of us, how in our integrity
and love to our Country you compared us with the best of Primitive Consuls:
Whether deservedly or no we dare not determine; for as it would be a scurvy
complement flatly to deny what you ventured to affirm, so it would be an
unbecoming confidence to own or assume what your good nature pronounced, but
our merit no-way required. Though indeed you are worthy to create such Consuls,
who may rise up to that Character, and make the praises no longer a kind
Hyperbole. Pardon us, Dread Sir, if among all your favors, we esteem this the
most grateful, that you have again made us Colleagues. Our engaged affections,
our agreeable humors, our united interest could have been concerned in no
greater blessing. And indeed our natural dispositions are so turned alike, that
our friendship is more owning to our temper, than to our virtues, and we are
born of such a sympathising judgment that either of us can no sooner dissent
from his Colleague, than from himself. They are not therefore slight and single
joys, which our preferment gives us since each has a double share and enjoys as
much his friends honor, as his own. They, who are Successively Consuls, have
that dignity twice, but then it is at several times: Whereas we are twice
Consuls in the same year, once for our selves and once for each other.

92. How remarkable was it that while we were Prefects of the Treasury you gave
us the Consulship before you appointed our Successors? One dignity was endowed
with another, and our honor was not barely continued, but even doubled. And as
if it had been too mean a favor at the close of one office to have removed us
to another, your bounty prevented that occasion, and heaped on us a new one
before the former expired. So great was the confidence you reposed in our
integrity, that you resolved it most convenient, after our acquitment in so
public a Station, not to strip us of all employ, nor to reduce us to private
men. Farther, you were pleased to assign us Consuls for part of the same year,
wherein you your self had begun the office. The Annals shall therefore record
our names in the same roll with yours, and the remainder of the year shall bear
date from us, as the beginning did from you. To do us the greater honor you
were pleased to sit president at our Election, and to perform those Ceremonies,
which custom at that time has made requisite. We were made Consuls by your
judgment, and pronounced so by your voice: That you, who voted for us in the
Court, might as well afterward declare us in the field. But what a more eminent
act of grace was it, that you resigned us the Consulship in that very month
which was made glorious by your thrice happy birth! That we might have the
honor to sign that Edict, and give order for those shows, which were to
solemnize that memorable 18th of ^eptemb. remarkable for ^he death of ^omitian,
the accession of Nerva, and ^he birth of Trajan.
day which took from us the worst of Princes, gave us the best, and brought
forth a better than the best. We shall amidst this Jubilee ride triumphant in
our Consular Chariot, and surrounded with those shouts and acclamations, that
shall be echoed at your appearance, we shall be even deafned with the vollies
of noise, and distracted all around, not be able to determine from which side
the louder peals alarm.

93. But above all it exacts the greatest acknowledgment, that you will allow
us a free and unstinted exercise of that authority, you have committed to us.
No threats, no terror from the Prince does either break our courage, or
pervert our resolutions. Nothing shall be spoken against our wills, nothing
decreed against our judgments. The just respect to persons so entrusted is kept
sacred, and still likely to be inviolate; nor are we debarred the liberty of
securing our rights, if Majesty it self should attempt to encroach them. And
therefore if the Consulship under our discharge lose any thing of privilege, it
is the fault of us, not of the times. For as to the Prince, Consuls may be such
as they were, while Supreme Governors, before the reduction of Monarchy. What
answerable return of thanks can we make for all these favors, but only to
remember that we are Consuls, and Consuls of your creation! Let us therefore so
debate, so enact as our Character requires. Let us so behave our selves, as if
subjection to such a Prince were the most perfect state of liberty. Let us
divide neither our Counsels nor endeavors. Let us think our selves involved in
the same concern, engaged to the same duties, and let us purchase the same
eminence in care and industry, which we justly claim in dignity and respect.

94. To shut up my discourse, I humbly entreat those Guardians and Supervisers
of our Empire, the Gods, and more especially I beg of you Supreme Jove, that
you would confirm those blessings, you have bestowed, and make your favors the
more endearing by a long and long continuance of them. You heard our
imprecations against the worst of Tyrants, hear as readily our prayers for the
best of Princes. We do not weary nor persecute you with devotion, we pray not
severally for peace, for concord, for safety, for wealth, or honor, but all
these are sum'd up in that single petition, which craves the preservation of
our Prince. Nor do we herein implore, what you are unaccustomed to bestow. For
you have sheltered him under your protection ever since that time you snatched
him from the talons of a griping Vultur. It was not without your providence
that amidst those storms, wherein all that was high, was rudely shocked and
battered, he who stood most exalted, escaped all blast and tempest. He was
unobserved by the worst of Princes, who could not be passed over by the best.
You gave us a proof of your judgment of him, when you entitled him (in his
march toward the Army) to your own name, your own honor. You, speaking by your
Representative the Emperor, did adopt to him a Son, to us a Parent, and to
your self a Pontifex Maximus. Wherefore with the more full assurance of being
heard, I humbly pray in that form, which he himself prescribed, if he Govern
well the Republic, and consult the good of all; first, that you would prolong
his life, and deliver him down as one continued blessing to our childrens
children: Then that you would give him a late Successor of his own loins, who
should be as happy by birth, as he himself was by adoption, or if your
providence deny this, be you of Counsel in his choice, and direct him to such a
one, who may deserve to be adopted in the Capitoline Temple.

95. How much I am indebted to your Lordships is Chronicled in our public
records. You have given me a credential testimony of my peaceableness in the
Tribuneship, modesty in the Pretorship, and constancy in that Province, you
imposed me, to plead in the defense of our Allies. Farther, you approved my
designation to the Consulship with so many joyful expressions, that it is made
my duty to endeavor I may so husband and improve your favors, that they shall
not seem to be ill bestowed. For certain whether a person deserves an honor,
can never be so safely judged, as after he has attained it. Do you but
countenance my attempts, and believe that, if I were ever advanced by that
dissembling Tyrant before he betrayed his hatred to the good, if after he owned
it, I declined his service; if when I saw the most compendious road to
preferments was by ill arts, I chose the honester, though the farther wayabout:
If in bad times I were numbered among the criminals and condemned, if in good
among the innocent and secure: Finally if I as much love the best of Princes,
as I were hated by the worst: Then shall I ever serve your Lordships, not as
one who is Consul, nor as a person that has been so, but as him. who is always
a submissive Candidate for that office.

THE END

