THE SPEECH OF CHARLES PAMPHLIN AT HIS EXECUTION In COVENT GARDEN, On Wednesday
the 22th of May 1678.

For Murdering Lieutenant Dalison.

Taken from his own Mouth, by two Persons that all the while stood in the Cart
by him.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1678.

A perfect Copy of the last words of Charles Pamphlin, at the Gallows in
Covent Garden.
THE Prisoner was conducted from Newgate to Covent Garden about ten of the
Clock in Morning, having put off his Perriwig, he appeared with a settled
Countenance, without the least dissertion of Spirit, only frequently lifting up
his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and seeming secretly to pour forth some hearty
Ejaculations; nor did his Countenance alter at the sight of the Gibbet, the
approaches of the Executioner, or any of the Circumstances of this Ignominious
Death, but standing up, and beholding the numerous Crowd that was flockt
thither to behold his Tragedy; with an undaunted composed look, he spoke as
follows, being taken as exactly as could be from his Mouth, and therefore the
Reader must excuse the abruptness or defects of the Style, since he pretended
not to the Gown but Sword: And besides, this was not a time to practice
Rhetoric.

Good People,
It Is usual for such unhappy Wretches as my self am now become, to say
something at their going out of the World; I know I have but a very little
time, I would not mispend it; it is from God alone I can expect Mercy, and to
him wholly I desire to direct my thoughts, yet since something will be
expected, I must tell you, that though I suffer justly, yet I had no such
design of Blood. or premeditated intention of Murder as some have reported: I
confess I had Rage and Passion in my heart, a kind of Malice you may call it,
but it never reached so far as design to take away his Life. I had a grudge
against him, and was prompt on by a crafty Fellow to be revenged on him, but
not to kill him, God is my Witness; and I do confess I waited my opportunity,
and following him out of the Rose Tavern, I struck him over the Head with a
stick I had in my hand; whereupon he drew upon me, and asked why I would strike
when I had a Sword by my side; at which retreating back, I bethought my self
that he would think me a Coward, if I did not engage him; and so I drew, and,
as I thought, he run himself upon my Sword. Perceiving I had sorely wounded
him, yet not imagining it mortal, for I did not see him fall, I was much
troubled, and putting up my Weapon went away, and forthwith conveyed my self
into the Country, traveling threescore Miles in the space of three Days,
having an intention to transport my self beyond the Seas, hoping to have got an
opportunity of passage with some Soldiers, but afterward fearing I might be
discovered amongst them, and having not Money to carry me over in the
Pacquet-Boat as I first intended, being perplexed with a thousand tormenting
thoughts, destitute of Money or Friends, and without any prospect of hope or
safety, not knowing what to do, I came back again to London, where I was in the
same distress as before.

When I was come to Town I repaired to a Friend's House, and enquired of the
Woman for her Husband, there being some small matter of Money due to me from
him, then she told me of Mr. Dalisons Murder, and I protest it was then that I
was first assured that he was dead: After some discourse she went forth to call
her Husband, but locked the outward door after her; upon which having a dread
upon my Spirits, I did not think fit to wait her return, but made my escape
backwards over a Brick-wall, and, it being late, made to Jewen-street, where
having an acquaintance, hoping he would have kept me secret, I knocked him up,
and desired him for God's sake to secure me; but he told me he durst not do it,
for he had heard I had committed a Murder and acquainted me that whosoever
should take me might have 10 l. reward; and that if he should entertain me, it
might cost him his life, and therefore desired me to shift for my self; upon
which I took my leave of him and made away, only telling him, that I intended
as speedily as possibly I could to transport my self beyond the Seas and there
to repent of what I had done, which I do protest was my serious resolution: But
this person, who I must acknowledge did nothing therein, but what became an
honest man, and I do declare I do not harbor the least ill will against him,
or any other person that I know of in the World; this Man, I say, as soon as I
was parted from him, followed me without either Stockings or Breeches; and when
he came near the Watch laid hold on me, and cried out, A Murderer! this is the
Man that killed Lieutenant Dalison: I confess I did endeavor to get from him,
and had not Providence ordered it otherwise, it is possible I might have done
it, for I shook him like a Dish-clout, but he hanged still about me like a Cat,
till the Watch came up, and then just as I was getting away, one of them
thrusting his Holbert between my Legs flung me down, and then I yielded to
them.

But I must declare that I did not tell the French-Woman that I killed the Man,
although she appeared against me as a witness; though I believe she did not say
it out of any ill will to me, but through want of a right understanding of
English to know what I said to her, and what the Court demanded of her; that
the Gentleman dyed by my hand I shall not deny; but I had no design before to
kill him, but that Allseeing Eye, who accounts a wanton Eye Adultery, has been
pleased to punnish my unbridled Rage and Anger against him in the same degree,
as if I had premeditated the Fact: The Lord forgive me, I confess I righteously
deserve this, and a thousand deaths, but through the merits of my Savior, I
trust he will pardon me, not only that but all other my Sins.

My Life has been very ill, I have nothing to say to excuse my self; I wish my
sad Example may warn others from the like mischiefs: Pride first made Devils, I
am sure by woeful experience it made me the Devil's Servant and brought me to
ruin. When I should have been at work, or about God's Service, my mind was
chiefly employed either on Objects of Debauchery, or thoughts how to get Money
to supply my Extravagances. Blood, Oh Blood, is a crying Sin; I do assure you I
suffered more by the Tortures or Conscience before I was taken, than the
Inconveniences of a Prison, or thoughts of Death could inflict upon me: Oh!
what madness is it for a Man to salve his Reputation to wound his Soul: To
hazard his Life to gratify his Humor, or rather the Humors of others: I hope
people will take warning by me not to draw their Swords on such small trifling
pretenses; Nay if it were a thousand times greater Affronts, were it not better
to put them up, than to require Satisfaction: Alas! Gentlemen, I pray look up
[casting his Eye upwards toward the Gallows] this is my Satisfaction, even the
Gallows: What madness is it to think to secure ones Reputation by an Action
that will certainly bring one to an ignominious shameful end, and be justly
condemned and detested of all Mankind. God preserve every Man from desiring
such satisfaction, and from Blood-guiltiness, even in any degree: Deliver me, O
Lord, I am a vile sinner, I have nothing to plead, but the merits of my
Savior, and to him alone I recommend my self.

There was one came to me in Prison, and with insinuating words endeavored to
possess me with a good opinion of him, at last asking me what Religion I would
dye in, to which I answered a Protestant, though most unworthy, having in all
things neglected both the pure Doctrine and most useful Discipline of the most
Reformed Church in the World. This Stranger told me he was of that mind once,
but now he understood better, persuading me to turn Roman Catholic, but I
denied and withstood his Temptations; and there are those that can relate what
I said more at large. I am an unworthy Protestant, a Prodigal that deserves to
feed on Husks with Swine, but that by the alone merits of Christ (nothing of my
own) I hope for salvation. The Lord bless this Land, and sanctify the Example
of my death to all present; I desire the Prayers of all good Christians for me:
I have but a step between me and Eternity. The Lord look in mercy upon me a
miserable sinner. Good People pray for me.

Then he composed himself to Prayer; but when the Minister had looked out a fit
Hymn to sing, according to Custom on such Occasions, which was The Lamentation
of a Sinner, and desired the People present to sing it, and he would read it;
the Prisoner answered, Read it to me and it will be as well. Then praying with
the Minister, when it was concluded, he of his own accord stepped up on the Wheel
of the Cart, and the Hangman did his Office.

The truth hereof is attested by us THO. TEMPLEMAN. JOHN SEAL.


FINIS.

