THE CHARACTER OF A GOOD ARMY, etc. BEING A few Hints touching the Gallantry
and Fidelity of an ARMY in the Late Wars; Who gave the sole Honor and Glory of
all their Atchievments to God alone; whom they exalted daily in these
Self-denying Expressions; Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da
Gloriam; And, Absque Deo nihil possumus.

Written by Capt. Tho. Plunket; who was himself in that Army from first to last.

Exodus 15.3. The Lord is a Man of War. -- Psalm. 24.8. The Lord strong and
mighty; the Lord mighty in Battle. -- Dan. 2.21, He changes the Times and the
Seasons; he removes Kings, and sets up Kings. -- Psalm-33.16. There is no
King saved by the multitude of an Host. -- Not by Might, not by Power; but by
my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 4.6. London, Printed in the Year 169^.

TO THE Sober impartial READER: For to no other I wish this may come.
AS some may be affected with several things in this little Book, so other: may
question the Verity of some extraordinary Passages therein; condemnning them as
strange Paradoxes, and therefore incredible Hyperbolical, if not phanatical
Fancies. And indeed, I cannot blame them for any just scruple upon that score;
because some affirmations herein, especially touching the wonderful Faith, etc.
in many Officers of that Army I treat of was never read in any History
whatever, except the Bible; nor never heard of in any Army but that, since the
Incarnation of Christ. But there are some (if not many) yet alive, which can
testify to the Truth of what I have written, that scorn to own me in a Lie, as
much as I scorn to write one wittingly; (as I hope I do;) for falsum
Benedictum, est malum Mendacium However some will believe nothing, but what
comports with their own Humors; for whatever they conceit to be false, must be
false, right or wrong, because they conceit it; and whatever they fancy to be
true, must needs be true, though never so false. Others again can hardly
believe any thing to be true, but what they define should be true; wherein they
verify the old Adage, Quod valde volumus, facile credimus, what we earnestly
desire, we easily believe. But seeing there want not such, as seem to cavil at,
or question the Veracity of some profound mystical Matters in the Sacred
Oracles themselves and will own no more of them, than what their Reason is able
to comprehend How much mort coarsely then must I expect to be treated, that
neither can nor dare pretend to Infallibility; no, not though I were the
holiest Saint tha^ ever breathed; yet many degrees short of the lowest degree
of such seraphica Separates. (Isa. 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.) In the mean time,
it is me thinks a very hard case, that a Man must not, cannot write in behalf of
hi^ old Friends and Fellow Soldiers, (though most of them dead,) without
incuring the high displeasure of some, whose boundless Envy and Prejudice
against brave Men, can never fix a ne plus ultra! Which yet can never offend an
Person of a martial, noble, generous Spirit; especially, when there is nothin^
mentioned, tending to Mischief, or any other Evil, that I can apprehend, from
which my Thoughts and Intentions are as far, as the Tropic of Cancer ^^ from
Capricorn.

Facile est absentem vincere, qui non repugnat:
April. 29. 1690.
The Character of a good Army, etc.
The Introduction.
THat few in our Days war for Excellency, or who should exceed each other in
Virtue, (as Zenocles and Euripides are said to have done,) I may without breach
of Charity affirm, seeing the greatest Bulk of Mankind is debauched beyond all
former Examples, even of all that ever preceded them; yea, they surpass the
Deeds of the Wicked, (Jer. 5.28.) Nay, there is scarce any so good as they were
Twenty or Thirty Years ago; and which is yet more lamentable, that the
Professors of the first Rank come short of those of the second Rank in the
former Times.

War with the Devil and our Lusts, were an holy and necessary War indeed; and a
Victory thence emergent, more glorious than all Caesar's and Alexander's
Conquests: But alas! the Contention is not now, who shall transcend in Virtue,
but who shall excel in Vice; and from hence arise Strifes, Envyings, Wars, and
Fightings in the World* Jam. 4.1.

THE Wars of most Earthly Monarchs have many times no other Foundation than
Pride, Self-will, Tyranny, Usurpation, and Ambition, or other vain Pretenses.
Nay, some have made War out of mere Stomach, Wantonness, and Fullness of all
Things, until by Wars they have been (at length) made to know themselves, and
reduced to such a Mean as to keep within the bounds of Reason and Moderation:
And hence oame the Adage, That one Sword keeps another in the Sheath; and such
a check, I hope, is now intended to impede the growing Greatness and Tyranny of
that most Unchristian Nullifidian of France: -- Illud est non solum justum, sed
etiam necessarium Bellum, cum vi vis illata defenditur. (Cicero.) That is not
only a just, but necessary War, when enforcing Force is defended by Force. And
though pure necessity and urgency of Affairs, are a sufficient ground of War;
yet of all other, that War is the most just and lawful, that is warranted by
the Sacred Oracles.

War is nothing else but a solemn Appeal to God for Justice, when it cannot
otherwise be had; or when the Laws, Liberties, and Religion of a Kingdom are in
danger to be overthrown, either by a foreign Enemy from abroad, or by a
flagitious, treacherous, profane, and potent Adversary at Home.

That is the most pernicious War, which is founded upon mere Will and Tyranny,
springing from a restless, mischievous Desire of ruining some, and of being
revenged upon others, for some pretended Injustice, capital Crimes, unknown
Provocations, or other specious Pretenses: and upon no other Grounds and
Reasons, but such as these (so far as I could understand hitherto) proceeds the
French Tyrant.

It Is amazing to consider, how many wicked Armies in a wicked Cause have
prospered (for a Time) in all Ages, against such as have been far more
innocent, more just and righteous than themselves every way, both in their
Practices and the Cause they fought for, the Reasons whereof being wholly
absconded from vulgar Capacities; yea, many times from the wisest Men, and
greatest Politicians: For secret Things belong to God; and those infernal Arms
(as I may justly style them, consideratis considerandis,) have been led by such
Wretches, as they are themselves; like Head, like Body; like Officers, like
Soldiers; and it is a kind of Sin to spare such Animals, such Beasts of Prey,
when Providence offers them to be cut off; yea, the Prophet says, Cursed be he
that keeps back his Sword from Blood (Jer. 48.10.) and you know what became
of King Saul for sparing Amalek. I suppose the Prophet meant the Blood of
bloody, implacable, inveterate, proud Persecutors and Destroyers of God's
People, as Moab was then, hinted in that Chapter of Jeremiah, and other Texts:
And also such plundering, massacring, murdering Miscreants as the French
Dragoons, and other such, whether atheistical, mercenary, treacherous
Protestants, (for there are such Beasts in Nature,) or Jesuitical Papists; and
such crafty wicked Foxes must in our days be attacked with great Care and
Circumspection.

Against an Enemy in War, discreet delays are commendable, when Necessity and
Reason require it; otherwise, delays are very dangerous and foolish, especially
when thereby a fair Opportunity is lost of doing somewhat upon, or gaining some
Advantage against the Adversary: And this kind of Cunctation, may proceed
sometimes, either from Treachery or Cowardice in the chief Leaders or some of
them; sometimes, through the preposterous, irregular Conduct of ignorant,
unexperienced Commanders; sometimes again through Infatuation, as a just
Judgment of God, for Reasons best known to himself: And perhaps, one Reason may
be, either because the chief Commander or Commanders depend solely and wholly
upon their own Skill, Policy, Courage and Conduct for a Victory, exclusive of
Divine Assistance, or upon the Number or Valor of their Soldiers, or both;
yea, many great Armies have been overthrown merely upon this Account; that is,
in trusting more to themselves than in the help of God: And he tells us plainly
by the Mouth of his Prophet, that they are accursed which trust in the strength
and numbers of Men; -- Cursed be he that trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his
Arm, etc. Jer. 17.5, 6, 7, 8.

Such Commanders have been always censured, either for Traitors, Fools, or
Cowards, that declined fighting the Enemy, when an Opportunity, joined with a
probability of gaining a Victory has been offered them. No valiant Commander
(trusting in God) was ever yet in love with delays; his Faith and Hope in the
Lord of Hosts making him as bold as a Lion; therefore rather delights in
downright Blows, than wandering in the devious Paths of intricate,
impracticable Policy; or ranging in the untrodden, uncertain Mazes of
groundless, ineffectual, procrastinating Counsels, especially when necessity
and urgency of Affairs call for Celerity and Expedition.

I knew a great Commander in the late Wars, that suffered much in his
Reputation among the older and wiser sort of Captains, for his dull and slow
Methods against the Adversary, at several Places, where he had been entrapp'd
and befooled by them; and though he had the good luck to escape with his
Brigade without Destruction, yet not without loss and shame enough sometimes:
And for all this, to give him his due, he was inferior to none for personal
Valor. But because his Conduct (as I said) and manner of ordering Matters,
when near, or in sight of the Enemy, was so remiss, cold, careless,
heavy-headed, and himself always inapprehensive of imminent Danger, when there
was a real Cause to be very solicitous, and highly concerned, (and I could name
where, and when that was,) made diverse old Officers say, they did not care to
go with him, upon any Service, against a potent Enemy.

Oliver Cromwell, though a wise and wary General, yet he could never away with
Cunctation, always impatient of delays, especially when in sight of the
Adversary; believing and knowing by Experience, that Celerity effected more
than Force it self sometimes; and he never failed of Victory, up Hill or down
Hill, few or many; no, nor was scarcely ever foiled in his greatest and and
most dangerous Undertakings, having Ways and Methods of fighting peculiar to
himself; in many things, contrary to the Courses and Counsels of other
Generals, whereof his strong Faith and invincible Courage were the principal:
As to the first, it was very strange to all Men, and his Army themselves, that
the day before the Battle at Worcester, he commanded several Parties of Horse
to several Bridges and Passes, whither he supposed his flying Enemies would run
to escape him the next day, and where they were stopped, and taken by the said
Parties in Front, and others in the Rear, as if he had been sure of the Victory
beforehand, as it seems he was indeed; nay, he said as much to many Officers
of his Army, that very Morning before he began to fight. And would often cry
out, Oh! if we had but Faith, these Men would be but Bread for us, meaning the
Adversary. Yea, a day or two before Preston-Fight in Lancashire, in Aug. 1648.
he ordered the Lord Gray, and Captain Widmerpool with their Troops, to watch
the Northern Roads of Cheshire and Staffordshire, conjecturing the Scottish
Horse would run that Way when he had routed them, whereof he made no doubt,
(though he had but 8000 against their 28000, as they themselves gave out,) and
so it came to pass accordingly; for at Vttoxater in Staffordshire, the said
Lord Gray met, fought with, and routed Duke Hamilton's Body of Horse, and took
himself Prisoner, with many more.

His constant manner was, before he entered upon Action, first earnestly to
implore the direction, and help of God in Prayer, with all his Officers; then
to deliberate, and when once resolved how to proceed, and what to do, he fell
on like a storm of Hail, and clap of Thunder, through thick and thin, Horse and
Foot, though his Enemy out-numbered him never so much: Yea, his Charges were so
fierce and furious, that the Devil could not stop him, as Prince Rupert, and
others used to say of him, (and which he knew, and felt many times by woeful
Experience,) so that he carried all before him, and to be sure, made room
wherever he came: But I fear Envy will peck at me for saying this little of
my renowned General; yet I must say a little more of him, and his Army too. I
must confess, I ever hated and scorned to trample upon the Ashes of any valiant
Man or Men, be otherwise what they will, yea, though Enemies; which rather
becomes Men of base, low, sordid Spirits, than generous Souls, who scorn and
abhor such dirty, sneaking, pitiful ways of degrading* and vilifying Persons of
Honor and Worth; who (with me) will honor the Memory of a brave and noble
Enemy, as well as of a worthy Friend. I ever loved a Soldier as a Soldier, as I
have been my self: In the mean time, take notice that I meddle not with the
grounds of Quarrels, nor the Cause contended for in those days.

When Ireland was all lost from the Parliament, and in the Power of the adverse
Party, in the year 1649. only Dublin and Londonderry excepted; yet that brave
Oliver, landing there only with 10000 Men, did great things in few weeks, and
great Wonders in few months, in setting all Friends and Protestants at liberty,
and freed them from all fears of Enemies in a very short time: Now this being
only matter of History, methinks none should be offended at it, seeing it is
nothing but the Truth. And you know it is alone with God to save by few, as by
many, 1 Samuel 14.6. 2 Chronicles. 14.11. For there is no King saved by the multitude
of an Host, Psalm. 33.16, 17. And that is the strongest side where God is, be
they never so few, Experientia docet.

Now for his Army.
And such an Army, as never was the like in all the World, for all Virtues, I
dare swear it: They were always true and faithful to their Trust, and as
valiant upon all Adventures; let the Service be never so difficult or
dangerous, they made nothing of it. They did not say, Go you, and go you; no,
but come Lads, let us on, on, on, in the Name of the Lord of Hosts: And in
truth, they went on to a Battle, yea, to many Battles, and Attacks, as if to a
Banquet; and calling upon God, while their Enemies were cursing and damning,
(which is still in fashion.) When they went to storm any great Town or City,
they were not in the least concerned; but fell on with such alacrity and
liveliness of Mind, as if they had been sure to conquer beforehand. Many
Cities, Towns, Forts, and Castles they took by pure Valor, with very little,
or no loss at all sometimes; nay, their very Enemies, would say of them (and
they said true) that they made but a Play and Sport of Fighting: Yea, the
soberest of them have said of that Army, That they should never beat them,
unless God would stand Neuter; and you know what that implies. They never lay
still in Summer, nor sneaked into Winter Quarters, while there was an Enemy in
the Field, or a considerable Garrison untaken, scorning to lie still, and take
Pay for nothing; no, but were often upon Service, even in the deep of Winter;
not seeking to lengthen out the War for their own private ends, but very
earnest to put an end thereto, which is never found in mercenary Armies, who
use to say, -- If we catch the Hare this Summer, we shall have none to hunt the
next.

The Commission Officers of that Army, were sober, chaste, temperate, religious
Men, free from all sorts of Debaucheries, kind to their Soldiers, very just in
paying them, and as severe in punishing Misdemeanors, whereby they were both
beloved and feared; very punctual and discreet in composing Differences between
their Soldiers and Landlords, etc. there was neither Plundering, Cursing,
Swearing, Whoring, Drunkenness, nor any such Vices to be found amongst them.
Most of their Soldiers, if not all of them, were civiller, and soberer in all
their Carriages and Behavior, than the Officers of other Armies; a great
rarity, never the like seen in any Army but that alone, nor, I think, never
will be again. They were exercised most commonly on Muster-days; and in
handling Arms, they were second to no Army that ever was; most of their
Captains being very expert in such Matters, many of them having been Members of
the famous Military Company of London, where they learnt the first Rudiments of
War. They never stood upon Numbers against an Enemy; but whether few or many,
'twas all one to them in their greatest Attempts: For as in Oral Disputes, it
is not Numbers, but strength of Arguments that prevail against the Opponents;
so in Warlike Disputes, it is not numbers of Men, but the force of Courage and
Resolution in a few, that prevails against a numerous potent Enemy, whereof
they had many Experiences; as for instance, at Dunbar Fight, there was but 5000
of them fought, and routed almost 30000 in half an hour's time, and all the way
up-hill; though now they, and such as they are scorned, and not thought worthy
to be employed, because they cannot pronounce Shibboleth, (Judge. 12.6.) nor
say, Crows are white; which they will never do, while they continue to black as
they are. Verbum sat.

Rebus in adversis animum submittere noli. In the Month of June, 1657. 400^ of
that Army routed 16000 near Dunkirk, led by Don John of Austria, and the D. of
Y. while the French Horse (which should have seconded them) looked on, and
never stirred till the Spanish Army fled, and then (O brave, then!) they cried,
Sa, Sa, Sa, Sa! for they are very valiant against a Flying Enemy.

Every Regiment had an able sound Preacher for their Chaplain; so that every
day in the Week, while they lay encamped, there was a Sermon or two to be
heard, and always thronged with Officers and Soldiers, besides private Prayers
in the Tents of diverse Colonels and Captains among themselves; and which was
their practice all along: And therefore I can truly say, That no City or
Corporation in the World could match them in all things, especially for
Civility and Piety: Yea, they conquered more with their Prayers, than with
their Swords; I say, the weight of their Faith and Prayers were heavier than
the strength of their Arms, in repressing their Adversaries: They prayed them
down, as well as fought them down. Not by might, nor by power, but by the
Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 4.6. But some (I know beforehand) will make
a mock to this, or they have lost their old wont; and no wonder, since
Clergymen have done the like, even at Scripture-Phrases, and so they will at
what I shall now deliver, viz.

In August, 1650. not long before Dunbar-Fight, the then Governor of
Edinborough-Castle, (viz, the Lord Dundass) a sober Gentleman, hearing of, and
also beholding and observing with his Prospective-Glass, the Order and
Religious Exercises of that Army, as they lay encamped on a place called
Penthland-Hills, about a mile from the said Castle, was so affected therewith,
that he cried out to those about him, Oh! there is no prevailing against a
praying Army, And for my own particular part, I can, and must declare, that I
learnt more good in that Army, than ever I did in all my Life before; yea, many
blessed God that ever they came into it, for the same Reasons; for it was a
Nursery of good Manners, and a Seminary of Virtue and Piety; in both which, I
am sure, they transcended both the Universities, for all they style themselves
the Two Great Lights of England: But methinks their Lights are grown very dim
of late Years, or how comes it to pass that there is so much of the works of
Darkness practiced among them, viz. Vice and Wickedness? especially in the
junior sort, which ought to be inspected by their Seniors, and would be, had
they the true Light of the Grace and Spirit of God within them.

Hundreds of Soldiers have at least been civilized, only by being in that Army,
which before were rude Fellows, as many of them confessed, and chiefly through
the good Examples and Encouragements of their sober religious Officers.

In the Year 1652. that Army made a free and voluntary Collection among
themselves, both Officers and Soldiers, toward the encouragement of Ministers,
to Preach the Gospel to the Natives in New England, which amounted to many
Hundreds of Pounds, if not some Thousands; the least that any Soldier gave in
our Regiment, was 2 s. many of them gave 3 s. and 5 s. a man. The Company
wherein I was then a Lieutenant, gave, with their Officers, 25 l. 15 s. and 6
d. By which you may guess at the rest. Such a great and noble Donative,
especially for such noble and pious Ends, I never read nor heard of in any Army
but that: No, no, other Armies have other and better ways to dispose of their
Moneys, than to such vain Phanatical ends, especially their Officers, for,
there must go tantum per mensem to the winking Whore; tantum per mensem to the
teeming Whore; tantum per mensem to the finest Whore; and many other Tantums
and Items, to keep the Kids abroad in Terra incognita, etc. O rare
Faggot-mongers! who in their way of Trading, surpass the Brown Devil of
Abbington.

I can take it upon my Oath, that I never knew, nor never heard of any
Commission-Officer in Oliver's (wherein I was fifteen years, and before that,
four years in the Wars in Ireland and England) that was in the least guilty of
Whoredom; no, nor so much as suspected, except Lieutenant W -- of our Regiment;
though nothing of that kind was ever proved against him, being only matter of
Suspicion, proceeding from some joking talkative Soldiers; and though this was
all, yet it hindered his Preferment all along; for he never was Captain wh^le
Goffe and Morley were Colonels, and that was till the Restitution of Charles
the Second.

God always sides with the best, though fewest in number; for, seeing the World
loves its own, (Joh, 15.18, 19) and hates such in whom there is any thing of
God; and not only so, but join hand in hand against them, seeking their ruin
if possible; (for, Pares cum Paribus facile congregantur;) so, God, by a parity
of Reason, must needs love his own People too, as he does indeed; yea, many
degrees above what the World can do theirs. And though that little Army (little
comparatively) was scorned, despised and hated of the world, and are still; yet
in spite of the world, their Bow abode in strength, and the Arms of their
hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; because they
sought him earnestly, frequently, fervently, and constantly, all along, (till
they were betrayed at last by --) trusting more in the Lord of Hosts, than in
their own strength, valor, and policy; to which I was an Eyewitness many
years; and (plus valet unus oculatus testis, quam mill auriti;) and the Words,
Absque Deo nihil possumus, were always in their mouths, and their constant
Motto, and ever shall be mine; for, without the help of God, the greatest Army
in the world can do nothing, though they have the best cause in the world; no,
not against a despicable Enemy.

England is owing to that Army, or part of them, (next under God) for the noble
and profitable Island of Jamaica, etc. though even such as grow rich by trading
there, can scarce give them one good word for their pains, and loss of their
Lives; Monstrous Ingratitude! Ingratus qui beneficium accepisse se negat, quod
accepit. Yea, Ingratus qui id dissimulat, etc.

The Impunity of wicked, bold, presumptuous Soldiers in an Army, must needs be
highly offensive to God, who will certainly require it at the hands of their
Officers another day (perhaps in the day of Battle,) who had power to punish,
and restrain their Vices, but did not: But, alas! How can they punish Soldiers
for that whereof themselves are guilty, and perhaps in a higher degree? If one
single Sin, of one Achan, brought down the wrath of God upon the whole Army of
Israel, and was the cause of that shameful Rout near Ai, (Josh. 7.) then surely
such impudent monstrous Sinnings, both for quantity and quality, now
perpetrated in the very face of Heaven, as it were in defiance thereof, and
especially upon the Lord's Days, and that, by many thousands of Achans, Young
and Old, Males and Females, of all Degrees and Qualities, in Army, City, Town,
Court, and Country, will, I fear, make not only a Rout, but a Rent amongst us,
a Rending and Tearing in-pieces, by some heavy stroke of the impending just
Judgments of the righteous God. I say, the remisness of Magistrates, as well as
neglects of the Army Officers, not punishing, but rather, in a manner tolerating
all sorts of iniquity, will be accounted for at the great day, to be sure; but
few of them think of that Day in earnest: Yea, they put the evil day far off,
i. e. a day of trouble and misery in this Life; especially such as drink wine
in Bowls, but are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 6,
7, etc. the poor distressed Protestants in Ireland. etc. And now is the time,
and has been for many years last past, that he that departs from evil, any Vice
or Wickedness, makes himself a prey, Isa 59.15. For the wicked still, still,
walk on on every side; and one reason of it you have in Psalm. 12.8. Things were
not thus, neither in Army, City, nor Country, in the days of yore; no, because
the Officers of the one, and the Magistrates of the other, had a zeal for God,
and a zeal against whatever was offensive to God; and such a zeal now would (I
am sure) be accounted Phanaticism, by many who think themselves better
Christians than any they are pleased to style Phanaticks: Yea, by some in holy
Orders (as they call it;) for many of that Tribe have found fault with such
kind of Austerities (as they term punishing Vice,) lest their dear Dalilahs
should be discovered, and themselves exposed: Mean time, the perishing world
lies in wickedness, like a dead Dog in a Ditch; but God will be known by his
Judgments amongst them, in a short time; and which is worse, they shall be
turned into Hell, and all that forget God. Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail;
let the wicked be judged in thy sight; Put them in fear, O Lord, that the
Nations may know themselves to be but men, Psalm. 9.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Yea, let
them know, that thou, whose Name alone is Jehovah, art the most High over all
the Earth, Psalm. 83.18.

As Christ has purchased all Good for some, and some Good for all; so, all
ought to lay out their best endeavors toward the advancement of his Cause,
Gospel, Interest, and Glory in this world, according to their power. And if the
former of these did not in a special manner make it their main business, while
in the world, they should walk very unworthy of such great Favors as the holy
Jesus has purchased for them in both worlds: But certainly they are not, they
cannot be so brutish, as to neglect, or slight over so great, so necessary a
Duty.

Now, if I should affirm, that the chiefest Ends and Aims of the Old Army,
especially of such as had the chief Conduct thereof, tended to the same
purposes, I doubt many would be very angry, and perhaps be so much transported
with envy, as to judge it a capital crime in me, for asserting it, and worthy
of punishment: but I can, I will, and must affirm it, come what will come;
because it is nothing but what I know to be Truth: Though I deny not, but they
had their failings and imperfections as well as other Christians; for
otherwise, they would be more than Men; and yet they were something more than
mere men; but as much as could be rationally expected from men, for the Ends
aforesaid, was really intended by them, in their several Capacities, yet never
was any Army in this world, more hated of the world than they were, and are
still, because they were not like the world, in rioting and drunkenness, in
chambering and wantonness, etc. Romans 13.13. yea, cursed them, because they would
not eat and drink themselves to death, as they did.

-- Praesens malejudicat aetas,
Judicium melius posteritatis erit.
Although many of this Age scorn and vilify that renowned Army, yet I am
persuaded their Successors will think and speak more favorably of them; in
whose behalf and commendation I could write much more, but I should thereby
offend the prejudicated Reader, as I have in what has been said already;
therefore I shall add but little more my self, and that in the close of this
Book, referring you in the mean time to the perusal of the following Account
and Character given of them, by an eminent Minister, one of the Chaplains
belonging to General Fairfax in those days, which he Published about the time
of Oxford-Siege, 1646, which is now Forty three years the last June: And
because it is quite lost and forgot; and I having it by me, in Print, could not
be quiet till I gave it a second Birth, or once again expose it to public
view; only I must supersede diverse Words, Sentences, and several Lines therein,
fearing the Times will not bear them; for, I would be cautious in giving
offense, especially to those in Authority; believing, that it is beneath their
Wisdom and Grandeur, the Eminency and Sublimity of their Stations, to stoop so
low, as to be concerned or offended with such a harmless, Nude Narrative as
this is; reflecting neither upon their Persons or Proceedings, which hitherto
have been just and honorable. And as I have not writ these things without
caution; so shall I not mention my Rulers without Reverence, at any time, as
occasion serves.

Vivant Rex and Regina.
TETRASTICHON
De Rege.
Lex sine Rege, velut Lumen sine Sole fuisset;
Rex sine Lege, velut Sol sine Luce foret.
Grex Regem primo legit, Rex cum Grege Legem
Condidit; hinc Legem Rex regit, atque Gregem.
And this following is the Character which the aforesaid Minister gives of that
Army.
I Find my Heart stirred within me, to testify to the world what I know in
mine own experience (says he) touching the Army under the Command of that
worthy and faithful General, Sir Thomas Fairfax; and that, because I am not
ignorant of the great Undervaluings, Despisings and Reproachings of it, by
many, even of those whose Blood runs warm in their Veins, and who enjoy all the
Comforts they have in the world, through the Faithfulness, Diligence, Activity,
Labors, Hunger, Thirst, Cold, Weariness, Watchings, Marchings, Engagements,
Stormings, Wounds, and Blood of these Men, Instruments of God's own choosing,
and calling forth to his foot, for great Services, which after-ages will wonder
and stand amazed at, as well as at the vile Ingratitude of this Age, to such
Instruments as these, for which God will not hold it guiltless. This then, for
mine own part I am most confident of, that there are as many Gracious and Godly
Christians in that Army, as in any Gatherings together of Men in all the World
again; Men, full of Faith and the Spirit, and the admirable Endowments of it.
More particularly, there are these six things most remarkable in that despised
Army.

1. Their Unity: which is admirable; it being more the Unity of Christians,
than of Men; more an Unity in the Spirit, than in the Flesh; in the Father and
Son, than in themselves; and this has been one great Means of their great
Successes; they being all, both in Counsel and Action, but as one man; they are
knit up together as in one Bundle, and so could not be broken; but have broken
all their Opposites. Many of their Matters of greatest moment, have been
carried in Council with that Unity, that sometimes not so much as one has
contradicted.

2. Their Humility: which has been admirable, as well as the former; for,
after great and glorious Victories, to the wonder of the Kingdom, and of the
World, when mighty men did flee apace, and the men of Valor ran away like
Women; yet I have never heard any of the worthy and godly Commanders or
Officers to say, I did this, or that; or to boast of his own Counsel or Valor,
or to attribute any thing to himself, or any body else, of what God had done;
but every one to say, This was the Lord's own doings, and it is mavelous in
our eyes; and, it was not our own Sword, or Bow, but the Lord's right hand, and
his Arm, and the Light of his Countenance. And they have been most willing to
be nothing themselves, that God might be all. And this has been one Means to
keep them humble; because, though God has been much with them, yet the World
has been much against them; not so much for their own sakes, who were true and
faithful; but for God's sake in them; because there is more of God among these
men, than among other men.

3. Their Faith: There are many in the Army, men of great and precious Faith;
through which, they have wrought righteousness, obtained Promises, etc. --
Through this Faith they have fought Battles, pursued their Enemies, etc. --
Through Faith they have entered strong Cities, etc. -- And I can truly and
particularly say, (let them that will needs be offended, stumble and fall at
it,) that Bristol (among other Places) was conquered by Faith, more than by
Force, i. e. it was conquered in their hearts, before ever they stretched forth
their hands against it, etc. Through Faith, one of them chased Ten, and Ten put
an hundred to flight; and an Hundred a Thousand: And this was performed in the
very Letter of it, etc. -- Many more Instances I could relate of the power of
Faith in that Army; but that I should thereby grieve and afflict many too much.

4. The Spirit of Prayer: And this the Lord has poured forth upon many of them
in great measure; not only upon many of the chief Commanders, but on very many
of the inferior Officers, and Troopers; some of whom, I have by accident heard
praying with that Faith, and Familiarity with God, that I have stood wondering
at the Grace. They never undertook any thing of weight, but God was always
sought to of them again and again; and they have found God near to them in all
things they have called upon him for; yea, God has been found of them, while
yet they have been seeking him, etc, --

5, The special Presence of God with them. I have seen more of the Presence of
God in that Army, than amongst any People that ever I conversed with in all my
Life; for there has been a very sensible Presence of God with them; they have
seen his goings, and observed his footsteps, etc. [Here I skip seven Lines,
though harmless enough; but some can call the Fox's Ears Horns;] How often has
fearfulness and trembling taken hold upon the Enemy? and the stout men been at
a loss for their -- and the men of might for their hands? etc. [Three Lines
more omitted.] Every Battle wherein they fought, they prevailed. [Two Lines
more omitted.] because God was with them; (I doubt this will be called
Treason:) this shall be written for the Generations to come; but this
Atheistical, Papistical Generation will not bear it; because there is so much
of God in it, though 43 yers since,) seeing so many of this present Generation
so little regard it; and the People that are to be born shall praise the Lord.

6. The Sixth remarkable thing in this Army, is, Their Faithfulness to the
State, etc. -- How have they gone up and down in weariness and labors, dangers
and deaths, to do the Work? When was it that they sat idle? Have they not as
soon as one Battle was fought, prepared to another? as soon as one City was
taken, advanced to another? and gone on till all be reduced; that Peace might
be hastened to the Kingdom, if it were the Will of God, and not come as a Snail,
but on Eagles wings? Have they not been active all the winter long, in a most
cold and frosty season, that continued for two Months together? (viz. all
December and January,) beating the Enemy out of the Field, and taking their
strong holds, when other Armies use to lie still? [I knew some that came not
into a Bed 14 Months together.] Have they taken the Pay of Idleness, or lived
the Life of Luxury? Have they sought to lengthen the War for their own
advantage? Have they not made even a short work? I challenge all the former
Generations of the world to stand forth, and to show so much work of this kind,
done in so little time; and by all these Successes have they ever been lifted
up, as to make proud Demands? [Eight Lines more omitted here.] Nay, I declare
this to all the Kingdom, that, as God has made them glorious in doing, so he
has made them contented to be perfect by suffering, if it be the will of God.
And most confident I am, that though some men for private Ends and Interests,
are murmuring, and others speaking out against this Army, as the perverse
Israelites against Moses and Aaron, yet the Lord in his due time, will take
away the reproach of all his People therein

This I have spoken in truth and sincerity to the Kingdom; and, to that Army I
shall say, Who is like unto thee, O People, saved by the Lord? who is the
Shield of thy help, and the Sword of thine Excellency; and thine Enemies shall
be found Liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places, Deuteronomy.
33.29.

This is all, except above twenty Lines omitted, for fear of offending; which
yet cannot be excepted against as untrue; and this Character being such as my
self (and many more) can truly testify; I cannot therefore but once again
affirm, that there was never such an Army in the whole World; Jew, nor
Christian, as that was, for all Virtues; especially, for Justice, Temperance,
Sobriety, Chastity, Humanity, Morality, and Piety. It is seldom that God
prospers a wicked debauched Army, unless against such as they are themselves;
and that is, the wicked chastising the ungodly, which are as two Pitchers
dashing against one another, till both are broken, the Conqueror coming off
many times with as great loss as the Conquered: But very rarely does God honor
such wicked Armies in doing any great good for his Church, or make them special
Instruments in carrying on his own work in the world, directly, because they
are neither Spirited nor Principled for such a glorious undertaking, nor in the
least fitted for it: No, it is the Sons of Zion that he employs chiefly and
directly, next under himself, in the hehalf of Zion; others only by the by;
serving as a Thorn-bush to stop a gap for a while, to keep out the wild Boars
and the Foxes from tearing his Vine too much, ( Cant. 2.15. Psalm. 80.13) at
other times, sets them to beating of the Bush, for his own Fowlers to catch the
Birds; as the Earl of Essex his Army did for Fairfax his civil religious Army
in those days. Though God has often for Sin, punished, and almost ruined his
own people in their temporal Concerns in all Ages, by wicked men; as the Jews,
by the Assyrians, Syrians, Philistians, Babylonians, and other barbarous
Nations of old, in the Ten Persecutions of the Christians under Rome Pagan; and
many times since that, by Rome Papal; and now of late, the Protestants in
France: But when Ephraim is against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and
both against Judah, viz. the true Gospel, or Scripture-reformed Church; this is
sad indeed, and a greater Argument of divine displeasure against them, or some
of them, than when the worst of men are let loose upon them; from both which
Calamities I pray God deliver and keep these Nations; wherein may the Wolf
dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard lie down with the Kid, the Lion with the Calf,
and the Child play on the hole of the Asp, etc. ( Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.) I say,
God continue all sorts of Protestants in peace and unity among themselves, and
labor to beware of the Jesuits dividing Principles, and the Devil's divided
foot, and other Incendiaries, and treacherous Dealers, viz. false, self-ended,
self-interested Protestants, and Clergymen too. I say, if we have not a great
care of these Miscreants, and keep peace and concord among our selves, we shall
without a miracle, be made a prey to the common Enemy, which daily wishes and
watches for an opportunity to ruin us; which they cannot do, but by dividing
us.

And now the time is come at last, that most people begin to think of, and to
know the worth of that Army, by the want of it; and would they not in these
perilous, treacherous times, prize such another? But their Equals in all
things, are not easily to be found; yet God can raise up, and qualify others
of this present Age, to do his work as well as they, as I hope he will; but if
they should prove indeed like the old praying Army, in virtue and piety, they
would be scorned, mocked, and abhorred of all the sorts of wicked men: For
Oliver's Army, because they could not live like Debauchees of the world in
their days, nor tread in their hell^sh steps, On, how were they hated of all
the drunken, whoring, swearing, cursing damning crew of Great Britain? Whose
Rai^ings they answered with silence and contempt, and passed by them with an
honorable scorn. What Christian knows not, that the world always hates most,
where there is most of God; yea, men may give a shrewd guess where there is
most of God, by observing where the greatest hatred of the world lies. It was
certainly the humility of that Army in giving God the Glory of all their
victories, that chiefly made them so successful and invincible. Never did I
hear the most valiant of them all, (and I am sure most of them were so,) speak
one word tending to magnify themselves: No, but attributed all to the
outstretched Arm of the Lord of Hoasts, the great God of Battles, as you heard
before; neither after so many wonderful Victories, did they domineer or insult
over any; no, not over their conquered Enemies; but carried ir friendly,
civilly, and courteously toward all men, friends and foes, in City, Town, and
Country; insomuch that many thousands, which before were their bitter Enemies,
became their constant Friends, and so won them to their own side; whereof the
then Long-Parliament, etc. were not a little sensible; while the Officers of
other Armies played the Devil, in swearing, cursing, whoring, drinking,
plundering, and abusing the Country where ever they came, never regarding
whether they were Friends or Foes; which hardened the hearts of the People
against them; and you may be sure, their Soldiers were not behind them in all
sorts of wickedness; and how could they be otherwise, when they were taught to
be so, by the evil examples of their own Commanders.

Now seeing I have said thus much in behalf of that renowned Army, it will not
(I hope) offend the Reader, if I set down the Names of their Chief Leaders,
which I have kept in memory ever since the new Model in the beginning of that
Year of Wonders, 1645; being then in General Fairfax's Regiment of Foot, in
Captain Bland's Company, a brave stout man, of a bold, daring Courage and
Carriage in the face of the fiercest Enemy; and most of them were so; who would
nevertheless cry out still, Nothing without God! Absque Deo nihil possumus.

A True List of the Chief Commanders of the Parliament's Army in the Year 1645,
etc.
Regiments of Horse. Genesis Fairfax. Lieut. General. Commiss. General. Col.
Fleetwood. Col. Rossiter, Sir Edw, Col. Sheaffield. Col. Butler. Col. Rich.
Col. Scroop. Col. Graves. Col. Pie, Sir Robert. Col. Disbrow. 12 Regim.
Regiments of Foot. The General. Major Genesis Skippon. Col. Hareley, Sir Edw.
Col. Rainsborough. Col. Montague. Col. Hammond. Col. Pickering. Col. Waller,
Sir Hardress. Col. Weldon. Col. Ingoldsby. Col. Herbert. Col. Fortescue. 12
Regim.

In each Regiment of Horse, 600. In each of Foot, 1200. besides all Officers.
Also,

Col. Okey's Dragoons, Ten Troops, 1000 Men, besides ^^rrisons, and diverse
independent Troops, and Companies; but this was the Marching Army, which did
such wonders.

I can assure you, there was neither Tinker, nor Cobbler among all these, as
some would have it. Neither did I ever know, or directly hear of any such that
were Commission-Officers, but one or two in all that Army, and I knew most of
them: But what if there had been twenty such? I know no reason why they should
be jeered by their lawful Trades and Callings, especially, so long as they were
brave Fellows, as many of them have been, to my knowledge; yea, transcending
both in Worth and Valor, some that would be thought great Gentlemen; But for
all this, C Hewson, though indeed a Shoemaker, they will needs have to be a
Cobbler: suppose it were so; yet, where was there a stouter and braver man in
England, among the Bullets than he was? Col. Pride, a Brewer, he must be called
the Dray-man; Col. Barksted, a Goldsmith, styled only the Bodkin-maker, out of
mere malice; and so of others: If they were such sorry Fellows as they are
represented by swearing Cowards, then the more shame it is for such Hectoring
Gallants to be trampled unner foot by them in the late Wars; during which time,
though our Regiment had been in forty Battles, Fights. Skirmishes, Stormings,
etc. yet, in all of them, we lost not above 150 Soldiers, and but three
Commission-Officers, viz. Ensign Morris, killed at Sherborn-Castle in
Dorset-shire, Aug. 1645. Capt. Hatfield, at Preston-Fight, Aug. 164^. and Capt.
Hammond, at Edinburgh-Castle, December. 1650. The two last were worthy men
indeed, both as Christians and Soldiers. But if People must needs be still
disparaging valiant men, only for their Trades, and mean Extractions, pray let
them read and consider the subsequent List; and then perhaps they will not so
much malign such of their own Country that get Honor by Valor, viz.

Agathocles, King of Sicilia, a Potter's Son. Iphycrates, Athenian General, a
Cobler's Son. Eumenes, one of Alexander's Generals, a Carter's Son. Pertinax,
Roman Emperor, a Weaver's Son. Dioclesian, Romans Emperor, a Book-binder's Son.
Valentinian, Romans Emperor, a poor Rope-maker's Son. Probus, Romans Emperor, a
Gardener's Son. Marcus Aurelius, Romans Emp. a Cloth-weaver's Son. Maximinus,
Romans Emperor, a Black-Smith's Son. Sabienus, Romans Emperor, a poor Shepherd's
Son. Brimislaus, King of Bohemia, a Plough-man. Pope Sixtus 4. a poor Sea-man's
Son. Pope John 22. a Shoe-maker's Son.
Omnis Potestas a Deo est. You see now, what great things God can do for, and
by mean men, as well as others; and for ought I know, blind Hewson the Cobbler,
(as they will have it,) might be as good a Man as the Pope's Father: I am sure
he was a better Christian than either of them, who this Year was Lieut. Col. to
Col. Pickering, 1645.

To conclude, some are born to Honor, others snatch at it; some receive it
from their Parents, others get it by their Atchievments; it runs to some in
their Blood, others rise to it by their Worth and Virtue, be their Parts and
Abilities: It Is better to get Honor by honorable Deeds, than to buy Honor;
to make our selves honorable, than to be made honorable: It is easy to
inherit Honor, but hard to attain Honor, (See Caryl upon Job, p. 1373.)

He that makes Honor his chief End, his Honor will soon have an End. As
Honor is no Bar against Infamy, so it is not a great Place, or Title, that
makes a man Honorable; but the man himself makes the Place so, if virtuous.

Noble Extraction, without noble Qualities, is rather a Disgrace than a Glory;
for the Worth of our Progenitors is none of ours: No, it is our own Worth that
must make us honorable. Then, what Abjects are they that beg and buy Titles of
Honor, which other Gallants have got by Pimping? In fine, strive not to get
Honor, but to deserve Honor; but the Courses taken by some, will never do it.
Our chiefest Aim should be to promote the Honor and Glory of God above all
things; for without him we can do nothing. Those that honor him, he will
honor; and they that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed; (1 Samuel 2.30.) As
many great Men and Monarchs have been, and some are now, at this very day;
which should Allarm others, and make them consider what are the chief and true
Ends of Government, and wherefore it is that God has put such great Power into
their Hands; which if they do not exert according to his Will, he will have his
Will on them, one way or other. O Jacobe!

Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam. FINIS.

