An ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader concerning the occasion of the ensuing Lines.
A Sober and serious Person, lately departing this Life, left the Education of
his Children to a Friend of his, of that Class called Presbyterians,
Non-Conformists, or Dissenters, whereupon an High Ecclesiastic of the
Episcopal way, pretending (it seems) some interest in the deceased, and in
order to the vacating of that part of his desires, did in an open Court or
Assembly declare, That he had rather see the Children in their Graves, than
under the Care and Intuition of such a Person; which Words, as they gave no
great content to many of the Hearers, so they administered the occasion to the
following Essay; the Author has much more to speak upon the same Subject, but
this was intended only as a brief Stricture, to perstringe and curb that
Intemperance, and exacerbation of spirit, which intervenes betwixt those, who
are all called Protestants.

A PLEA FOR MODERATION: OR, A Stricture UPON THE ECCLESIASTICS OF Our Times.

Matthew. 18.33. Should not thou also have had Compassion on thy
Fellow Servants, even as I had pity on thee?

Philip. 4.5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men, the Lord is at hand.

LONDON, Printed for R. Janeway, in Queen's Head Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.

A PLEA For Moderation, etc.
MAny and great are the Vicissitudes of humane Affairs, the All wise Providence
of the Almighty permitting changes and alterations here below, that the stupid,
unbelieving, and Atheistical World might be convinced both of his Being, and
also of his Power, That he is a God, and that he is a God, that judges in the
Earth, Psalm 58. and the 11. casting down one and setting up another, even as
it pleases him.

Nations and People in Scriptural Language are compared unto Waters, the
unstablest of all the Elements, which we know has its Fluxes and Refluxes, its
Ebbings and Flowings, sometimes Rolling toward the Shore in mighty Waves,
sometimes receding therefrom, with the like roaring Billows, which seem to be
swallowed up in their own Abyss.

And it is to be observed, as conducive to our purpose, that the said
Scriptural Metaphor and Allusion relates to mankind, principally in its
Ecclesiastic Reference, as the Book of the Revelations (which is a Church
History, wherein the similitude is eminently prosecuted) does make appear,
Revel. 17. and 15. The Waters which thou s^west, whereon the Whore sits, are
People, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues. And those iterated Monitions
in that Book of the Apocalypse, no less than seven times in the second and
third Chapter thereof; He that has ears to hear, let him hear, etc. do afford
us this useful observation, That Ecclesiastics of all others, are most deaf
and unheedful in things relating to their own fatality, and by reason of such
inadvertency, are hurried on to such Precipices as tend to their Ruin, and
therefore had need to be rouzed up by some awakening considerations, lest they
should continue to tread in those steps which have led others, in the same
Circumstances with themselves, to diminution and loss.

Now the Reasons of this drowsy and careless temper in those, which should be
Watchmen unto others, is rendered, Revel. 8. and 7. She says in her heart, I
sit as Queen and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. Present ease drowns all
thoughts of future harms; the concerns of others under sufferings, do not
otherwise affect the spirits of such men, than to make an Accession thereto by
triumphing over them, and thereupon sending gifts one to another, as after a
complete Conquest. Add hereunto, that the Ivy growing up by the Oak (1.) the
Ecclesiastic Power supported by the secular, is secure of its own station, and
looks down with di^^^ciency upon his undervalued Opponent.

But humane Dignities, not grafted on a divine Stock, are not always long
lived, neither can they give the present owners a just Ground and Title to the
hopes of a perpetuated and uninterrupted possession; God reserves so much of
the Government of the World in his own immediate hands, that high places have
been found slippery, by those who have thought themselves most secure and
established therein; and there is no greater prognostic of a declension at
hand, than an high degree of confidence, Revel. 18.8. Therefore shall her
Plagues come, etc.

It cannot justly be denied, but that Party of Ecclesiastics amongst us, which
goes under the Name of Presbyterian, had a very great Influence on the
Restoration of His Majesty; the Episcopal Clergy (unless in their wishes and
desires) contributing but little thereunto, and indeed they were incapacitated
to add much, as being outed by the then Powers; and besides, were no high
Favorites of the People. And whether their actings, since their Restitution
have been for the (...) as and affections time will show. Now that such a
considerable body and so highly demeriting in so grand an Affair, should have
the Garland plucked from their head; and instead of a privilege meet with a
vilification, and a disappointment of so deep a dye, as in offect to be
accounted the sole Troublers of our Israel; in respect of God, all men must be
silent and admire his Providence, bue in reference to the men, who are the
Instruments of such returns, I will not say, where is your Gratitude? but where
is your Common Reason and Understanding? certainly you must have vented your
passions at a greater distance, if your Adversaries (for so they seem to be
accounted) had not called you home to their own doors.

But to take matters as they are at present, whether the Church should be
governed by a Super-intendent Paramount, call him by what name you will,
Patriarch, Bishop, etc. or else by an Assembly of Elders? is not the dispute of
our Age one, it was born before us, and is likely to last, when our days are
ended; there are Great names on both sides, magno se judice quisque tuetur.

It Is not my present design to lanch out into the grand Controversy, but if
what I say can be influential: to a just and equal Moderation, and may tend to
allay the too much hear, animosity, and acerbity of Spirit, amongst Church men,
I have my end.

I look upon Interest, Self-love and Desire of revenge to be the great
Make-bates, and disuniters of those who should an agree in one common Design
for the saving of Souls; by Interest, I mean a carnal and worldly one, such as
grows upon the unregenerate stock of a vindicative mind, and has its place in
all men, as far as they are inwardly unrenewed.

It Is fresh in the memoties of some; Who were the Instruments of their
Abasement, and that Such should have any privilege under their restored
Government, what reason? This is the Voice of interested self, and by this
means the Potsheards of the Earth, dash one against another, till both (as may
be feared) come to be broken.

These differences are the more unhappy, because the Matters in dispute are not
Doctrinal, nor belonging to the Essentials of Religion, but confessedly
grounded on humane Ordinances and Constitutions, which may or may not be, as
the Governor of the World shall think fit. Why then should such havoc be made
on occasion of such foreign and adventitious things, which concern not the
Vitals of Religion. In the strict exercises of true Piety and holiness, men
cannot be too exact, but in super added Inventions, though enjoined by humane
Laws, a man may be righteous over much. And unless this Tenent be granted by
Protestants of all persuasions, we shall hardly be able to strike out those
Weapons out of the hands of the Papists, which they brandish against us in
these Controversies.

For on what foot, I pray do all their Chrisoms, Cringings, Vestments,
Crossings, Copes, and other their superstitious Implements and practices stand,
but upon Church Constitution and Privilege? in favor whereof, they are also
backed with municipal Laws; take away that foundation, and they all fall to the
ground. That portion of Scripture which is usually alleged in their defense;
Let all things be done decently and in order, has been so squeezed by malign
and distorted interpretations, that little of its own juice is left therein:
For whereas the Apostle enjoins the due and decent observation of those Rules
and Orders in the Worship of God, which he himself, being divinely inspired
thereunto, had before set down; Each party unwarrantably assuming Apostolical
Power, makes it a Buckler to defend its own Authority, in enacting such Church
Canons, as they themselves shall please, and in challenging obedience to those
Canons, so enacted.

But because our high Ecclesiastics do propound the Reformation made in Queen
Elizabeth's days, and the procedures thereupon, to be a Rule for their
severities in our times; I shall crave leave to mind them of a pair of
Instances of four Learned men, the Heads of their several Parties at that time;
the consideration of which might somewhat abate the heat of opposition against
Dissenting Brethren.

First, The one is of Arch Bishop Whitguift, and Mr. Thomas Cartwright.

Secondly, The other of Mr. Richard Hooker, and Mr. Walter Travers, Chaplain to
the Lord Treasurer Burghly, all four eminent in their respective References.
Whitguift and Hooker for the Ecclesiastical Government (as then Established)
and the imposed Ceremonies; Cartwright, and Travers against them.

Archbishop Whitguift was known to be a great Zealot for the English
Hierarchy, and Ceremonies, when he was in Cambridge, where the opposition
betwixt him and Mr. Cartwright did begin; but after he was advanced to the Arch
Bishopric of Canterbury, and to the Degree of al Privy Counselor, he was
armed with greater Power, to crush his Adversaries and Opponents. The
Controversies managed betwixt him and Cartwright on the forementioned Heads,
are sufficiently declared and canvased in the first and second Admonition to
the then Parliament, made by Mr. Cartwright; in Whitguift's Answer thereunto;
in Cartwright's Reply to that Answer, and Whitguift's Rejoinder to that Reply,
to which the Books being extant, the Reader is referred.

2. Mr. Cartwright is charactered (very heartily) by a late Episcopal Divine to
have been an excellent Scholar, pure Latinist, accurate Grecian, exact
Hebrician. And soon after the same Author affirms of him, That no English
Champion in that Age, did with more valor and success charge and rout the
Romish Enemy in matter of Doctrine, Fuller's Church History Book ninth.

And indeed he was of that Eminency abroad, that being in trouble here for his
Conscience, King James was pleased to send a Letter Dated Edinburgh, June the
12th, 1591. (which is yet to be seen in Print) to Queen Elizabeth in his
behalf; yea, the University of St. Andrews in Scotland, perceiving how he was
molested here in England; desired him by their Letters (since also Printed) to
come to them and be their Divinity Professor in that Place. Besides his Zeal
for the Protestant Religion, and the Doctrinal Part thereof was so well known,
that in the Judgment of Secretary Walsing ham, and of the then Heads of Houses
in Cambridge, he was judged the fittest man, to answer the Rhemish Translation
of the New Testament, which work (at the Instance of the Persons aforesaid,
being undertaken by him) was at last brought near to a Conclusion; and remains
in Print as a Monument of his Learned Activity and Pains against the Emissaries
of the Roman Church. And though all those, who excited his Endeavors to that
Work, knew how he stood affected to the Hierarchy, or Ecclesiastic Government
in England; yet it seems his Non-concurrence therewith, was not, in their Eyes,
a sufficient Argument to supersede his pains, in coping with our Romish
Adversaries.

It Is true, he was so unsatisfied with the imposed Ceremonies in England, that
when he was but Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, one day Preaching in
the Chapel, he did so convincingly inveigh against the imposition of
significant Ceremonies in the worshipping of God, that at the Afternoon's
Prayer all the Students of that House, (except three) left off their Surplices,
as superstitious things; Fuller's History of Cambridge.

Though Mr. Cartwright was clothed with these Circumstances, yet after many
Bickerings, with the Archbishop, and some sufferings of his own, he was
permitted at length, either by approbation or connivance, to exercise his
Ministry peaceably about Warwick, being also there the Master of a Rich
Hospital, with good accommodations belonging to that Preferment. And the
Respects he received from the Archbishop, his ancient Antagonist, are
gratefully taken notice of, by the then Earl of Leicester, in a Letter of his
to the said Archbishop, beginning thus, My good Lord, I most heartily thank
you, for your favorable and courteous usage of Mr. Cartwright. To which the
Archbishop made this Return, My singular good Lord, Mr. Cartwright shall be
welcome to me at all times, etc. Both the Letters are extant in Mr. Thomas
Fuller's Church History.

It were to be wished, that those who imitate this Archbishop in his
Severities, would at length be softened into the like tenderness, and
moderation. Neither was the Archbishops Friendship limited to Cartwright's
Person alone, but those of the same Sentiment with himself, did also
participate thereof. Yea, when the City of Geneva some few years after was
distressed by the Duke of Savoy, he was a great Instrument with the Prelates
and Clergy to procure and send their seasonable Relief, though he knew their
Form of Government to be different from that in England; a benevolence, which
is very questionable, whether many of his Successors would have imitated, who
rather behold Geneva as a Seminary of Malcontents against the Ecclesiastical
Government of England; though indeed a late Episcopal Divine has ingeniously
crowned it with the Epithet of The Nursery of the Reformed Religion.

2. The other Instance is in Mr. Richard Hooker, and Mr. Walter Travers, both
very Eminent, though, compared with the former Couple, moving in a more
inferior Orb.

Mr. Hooker was a Preacher at the Temple, well known by his Book of
Ecclesiastical Policy, wherein he has showed himself a Champion, for the
present Constitution of Church Government in England. Mr. Travers was, at the
same time Lecturer there, whose Doctrine did oftentimes thwart the others,
especially in matters relating to Discipline.

Secondly, This Mr. Travers was well known to Beza, and others of that
Reformation, to which he was addicted; his Utterance was grateful, Gesture
plausible, Matter profitable, Method plain, and his Style carried in it Indolem
Pietatis, a Genius of Grace flowing from his sanctified heart. Thus a late
Episcopal Protestant concerning him, Fuller's Church History, Book 9th.

The Truth is, his Abilities were such, that he was also sent for into
Scotland, as well as Mr. Cartwright, to be one of the Professors of Divinity at
St. Andrews; And he was after made Provost of Trinity College by Dublin, being
the second Provost thereof. This man being as it is thought by Mr. Hooker's
difference and complaint silenced by the Arch Bishop; yet in the midst of the
Paroxism betwixt them, being demanded, upon some Aspersion cast upon Mr.
Hooker, what he thought of it and him? answered temperately, that he believed
Mr. Hooker to be a holy man. And if holiness be the way to happiness in the
full enjoyment of God, it is pity that those, who walk in the same way, should
not all be allowed to do their Master's Work, without silencing, suspending, or
degrading one another.

And the rather, because God has formerly, now does, and hereafter will
appear, and manifest himself in various dispensations to the Sons of men. The
true Unity is that in the Spirit, as for compelled Uniformity to outward Modes
and Forms of Worship, it has been the Apple of Contention for many Ages in
the Church.

There were differences in the Aprehension of divine things amongst Christians,
even in the Apostles days, from whence arose contrary practices in point of
Worship; To eat, and not to eat, to observe a day, and not to observe a day,
Romans 14.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Yet both acted what they did to the Lord. Now what Rule
does the Apostle give in this Case? does he excite to external Uniformity by
threats or punishments? Nay, his advice is rather to the Governors of the
Church, as well as private Christians, to use a mutual forbearance one toward
another, who art thou that judge another man's servant? Intimating by that
Increpation, that as there is a proneness in man to set himself down in the
Chair of Judgment, from thence to censure his Dissenting Brethren, so that
temper is to be condemned and avoided.

To make that Advice, or rather Reproof of the Apostle, the more plain, we may
consider, that God, who is but one, yet as he stands at the Head of several
Dispensations, he may be called many Masters, in relation to those various and
different Injunctions and Commands given unto his Servants, under these several
Administrations respectively.

Thus he may be said, to be one Master to the Jew, who, in their Pedagogy, were
commanded to serve him in Types and Figures; and another to the Christian
Gentile, who was enjoined to a more Spiritual Worship in the Room of those
Types. Other Instances might be also given of Christians of several Forms, who
serve God according to their Light, as their respective Master under each
Class. And in some sense it is for the Glory of the Grace of God, to have it
diversified into several appearances, and to have faithful Entertainers thereof
in each appearance, acting sutably thereunto, which will doubtless be accepted
by him, and is also most comfortable to themselves. For the joy and
acquiescence of a Christian, in the Duties he performs, does not arise from his
Uniformity and compliance with others therein, but from the inward satisfaction
and complacency, which he has in his own mind, according to that, Romans 14. and
ult. Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin.

If in such Cases, all things be acted merely by Power, there was a time when
Christianity it self, as to man was on the weaker side: Let us not justify the
Sanguinary Cruelty of Heathen Persecutors, by insisting on the same Methods;
mere force is but a brutish Argument, and not sanctified by God, for such a
Divine Use (I mean in Gospel times) as the conviction of Sinners, or the
reducing those, which are gone astray. Convince your Brethren, if you can by
Scriptural Argument and Reason, but press them not to act contrary to their own
Persuasions, which were to sin against Conscience, which is God's Vicegerent in
the Soul, and whose Dictates are to be complied with, whatsoever some men
command, or others suffer to the contrary. I know the Note of singularity and
Schism is usually imputed to Dissenting Brethren by their Contrariants. To
which I say, the same Brand has been inured by Popish Writers on Luther, and
all our first Reformers, and may also be affixed (but unjustly) on the
Beginners and Promoters of all Reformations in the World, where Custom has
made some corrupt practices Epidemical. Whereas it rather concerns Church
Governors to enquire, whether the things excepted against come not within the
Notion of sinful Usages, and so fit to be abolished? And if upon Enquiry, they
should be found to be but indifferent and controverted things, yet the Words of
Mr. Hales late of Eaton, an Eminent and Learned Divine of the Episcopal
persuasion, do evince, that the limiting Church Communion to things of doubtful
Disputation has been in all Ages the Ground of Schism and Separation. Take his
Mind in his own Expressions, which are very weighty and considerable.

To load our Public Forms (says he) with the Private Fancies, upon which we
differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate, Schism to the Worlds End.
Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of the Scriptures, and Administration
of the Sacraments, in the plainest and simplest manner, were matter enough to
furnish a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of Private Opinion, or of
Church Pomp, of Garments, or prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of
Matter concerning the Dead, of many Superfluities which creep into the Church,
under the Name of Order and Decency, did interpose it self. To charge Churches
and Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the first beginning of all
Superstition; And when scruple of Conscience began, or was pretended, then
Schism began to break in. If the special Guides and Fathers of the Church would
be a little sparing of incumbring Churches with Superfluities, or not
over-rigid, either in reviving obsolete Customs or imposing new, there would be
far less cause of Schism, Superstition; and all the inconveniences were likely
to ensue, would be but this, they should in so doing yield a little to the
imbecility of their Inferiors, a thing which St. Paul would never have
refused to do. Mean while, whatsoever false or suspected Opinions are made a
piece of Church Liturgy; He that seperates is not the Schismatic, for it is
alike unlawful to make profession of known or suspected Falsehood, as to put in
practice unlawful or suspected Actions. Thus far He.

Object. But you will say, indifferent things, when commanded by the Authority
of the Magistrate, are made necessary.

Answ. The Interposal of Civil Authority in controverted Points of Divinity,
has occasioned great Havoc in the World; the Magistrate is the Asylum, which
every Party, when uppermost, usually repairs to, from the Pope to the
Patriarch, from the Patriarch to the Prelate, from the Prelate to the
Ecclesiastics of inferior Orders and Denominations.

In former days, when the High Commission (whose Judges were principally
Ecclesiastics) was in force amongst us, many Causes were out of Policy of the
Clergy transmitted from thence, into the Star Chamber, where the Temporal Lords
were also Judges, that so the Envy of their proceedings might be shared among
the Secular Lords; Though Churchmen were, in Ecclesiastical Causes, the Chief
Actors therein, as appeared by the late Archbishop of Canterbury, who ushered
in the Censures of Mr. Prynne, Burton and Bastwick, in a large and severe
Speech made in that Court, and in the present Plea, Antiquum obtinent: for the
Truth is, such Laws were made at the Instance of Ecclesiastics, and in their
favor; so that the Censures grounded thereupon, are in effect their own, but
in another mode and diversification. Let our present Ecclesiastical Governors
declare, that all Persecution for Conscience sake is an unlawful thing, and let
them improve their Interest in the Civil Magistrate, for the abrogating of
those Laws which countenance it, and then it will appear, at whose Doors the
Severities complained of do lie, theirs or the Magistrates?

I will not now dispute whether set and imposed Forms of Prayers, called
Liturgies, be lawful yea or no? This I shall say, whatsoever some allege for
the Antiquity of them, yet several of the Fathers of the Primitive Church
sufficiently intimate to us, that the Churches, soon after the Apostles Days,
used the Personal Abilities of their Pastors in prayer, without enjoining any
prescribed Forms. Neither does it appear (as the Ministers authorized to review
the Liturgy since His Majesty's Restoration have observed in their due
account) that Christ ever appointed any such to an Office, as to make prayers
for other Pastors, and Churches to offer up to God, Page 24. and in p. 23. They
say, that the Common Prayer, in most of the Vulgar, causes a Relaxation of
their Intention, and Attention, and a lazy taking up with a Corpse or Image of
Devotion, even in the Service of the Lips, while the Heart is little sensible,
of what is said. The reason of which their Assertion may be fetched from Page
23. of the said Discourse, which take in their own Words. Whatsoever can be
expected duly to affect the Heart, must keep the Intellect and all the
Faculties awake in diligent Attention and Exercise, and in the use of a Form,
which we have frequently heard and read, the Faculties are not so necessitated
and urged to Attention and serious Exercise, as they be, when from our
understanding, we set about the natural Work of Representing to others, what we
discern and feel: Man's mind is naturally sloathful, and will take its ease,
and remit its seriousness, longer than it is drawn out by delight; When we know
before hand that we have no more to do, but read a Prayer or Homily, we shall
ordinarily be in danger of letting our minds go another way, and think of other
matters, and be senseless of the Work in hand. Thus they.

Neither shall I enumerate, the particular things, excepted against, in our
prescribed Liturgy, because the Primate of Ireland, Archbishop of York, and
other Episcopal Divines, as well as others, have had Meetings formerly for the
Reformation of the Liturgy used in England, before the late Civil Wars, and
drew up a Catalogue (wherein the Cross in Baptism, was particularly laid
aside) of faults that needed mending, yet to be seen in Print, few of which
have been amended in the Liturgy now in use.

I shall conclude all with that Objection of Conformists against their
Dissenting Brethren. That they are not now so considerable for Interest and
other Respects, as they were in Queen Elizabeth's Days, and therefore justly
slighted by them.

To which I answer.

1. 'Twas never accounted the part of a Wise and prudent General to despise and
undervalue an Enemy, though inferior to him in number and other References:
Those who have done so, have been convinced of their mistake and folly to their
loss and shame.

2. If those who have the Advantages of more liberal and ingenious Education,
by having all Stipends, Exhibitions, Allowances, Salleries, and other Helps
running down to them alone in a Legal Channel (such is the Case of Conformists)
do not surmount their ordinary Brethren, who are deprived of those advantages,
certainly they would be very unexcusable both before God and Man.

3. Neither is the Dissenting Party so inconsiderable on the mentioned
accounts, but that indifferent men can smile at the weakness of the Objection.
Who more assiduous in Labors than they? Who more and greater searchers of
Conscience in plain and profitable (which is the best) Preaching? Who greater
Examples of a pious and exemplary life? I shall not instance in their Numbers,
because that of it self is no sufficient Argument, We are not to follow a
Multitude to do evil: Vnus Athanasius contra totum Mundum, and Totus Mundus
contra unum Athanasium, is a known Adage in the Case of the Arians. Only this
is worthy to be observed, that in the Memory of some now living, when things
ran in another Channel, as to Ecclesiastical Government, for I meddle not with
the Civil) then they do now, but a few years, yet then many Parishes in England
began to be supplied with diligent Preachers, though the present Form of our
Church Government was not visible amongst us: so that if ever King and
Parliament in England should reduce things to the like circumstances, who knows
how many seven thousands may start up, who are yet unknown to the Elijah's of
Israel.

In Conclusion, I think this with Truth and Modesty may be affirmed; That the
Labors of those called Non-Conformists are of great use, and worthy to be
retained in our English Church, especially when so many designers are at Work
to undermine and blow up the Protestant Reformed Religion, to which the Party
contended for is a great Bulwark. For it is not our Ecclesiastical Discipline
alone, which can exclude Popery, unless the clear and saving Doctrines of the
Gospel be effectuary urged upon the Consciences of men, for the establishing of
their Hearts in the Truth against the Dark and Superstitious Positions of the
Papal Church. And in this Work Non-Conformists are usefully employed, and that
out of a Principle and Love to Truth (as far as men can judge) because they
proceed therein against many Discouragements, Slanders. Evil Reports, and in
the midst of many sufferings of their own, all which fight against, and might
worst them, if they were not divinely assisted from above.

FINIS.

