AN ANSWER TO THE Discourse OF Mr. WILLIAM SHERLOCK, TOUCHING The Knowledge of
Christ, and our Union and Communion with Him.

By EDWARD POLHILL of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Foster, and are to be sold by most Booksellers in
London. MDCLXXV.

TO THE READER.
IN that excellent Piece the Soul of Man (which is too great for this lower
World, and in the very Frame of it aspires after an Infinite Good) the (...) or
uppermost Room is the Understanding; and among all the Truths, which are the
Furniture thereof, none are so rich, as those Theological ones, which are drawn
out of the Golden Mines of Scripture. Arts and Sciences are in comparison but
the Poor of the Mind, the Riches and Treasures of Knowledge lie in Evangelical
Mysteries; these outshine the Sun, and outweigh the Earth: They have the
highest Certainty, as coming down immediately from heaven; and withal the
noblest Tendency, as leading us thither: Infinite Truth is the Fountain, and
infinite Goodness the Center of them. These, when in their Luster, make a
spiritual Day, and derive such a pure Influence upon the Hearts and Lives of
Men, as moulds them into the Divine Image, and thereby makes them meet for the
bliss-making Vision in Heaven. No sooner can these be under an Eclipse, but
there will be a Night and a Chaos of confusions; the Path of Life and Happiness
will be wrapped up in darkness; black Legions of Errors and Corruptions will
creep forth, and pious Souls will wish for the day, I mean, for a fresh
Illustration of Truths from that sacred Spirit, which at first breahed them out
into the World; and, after all the Clouds and dark Veils put upon them, can
bring them forth in their Oriency and true Glory. These to Believers are as
Pearls and sacred Jewels, dearer than the Apple of their Eye, nay, than their
own Souls: They build upon them by Faith, espouse them by divine Love, lay them
up in a pure Conscience, distill the Virtue of them into a holy Life; and, if it
were possible, they would have none of the sacred Light put out, nor the least
Jot or Tittle of those Truths fall to the ground. O what a rate did the famous
St. Austin and others set upon God's special Effectual Grace! How highly did
the heroical Luther value the Point of Justification! Jacente articulo
Justificationis jacent omnia, says he, as if a Christians All were in it. When
such Truths are violated, Christians, how meek soever in other things, must
earnestly contend, and not give place, no, not for an hour; here, if ever,
Luther's pia and sancta pertinacia is in season.

Not to stay any longer on the excellencies and great Concerns of Evangelical
Truths, which no tongue of Men or Angels is able fully to express. I shall now
speak a little touching Mr. Sherlock's Book. When I read it, I thought my self
in a new Theological World; Believers appearing without their Head for want of
a Mystical Union, stripped and naked for lack of imputed Righteousness; the full
treasures of Grace in Christ, which have supplied all the vessels of faith,
emptied out of sacred his person, and transfused into the doctrine of the
Gospel; as if according to Pelagius all Grace were in doctrine only: The holy
Spirit, the great Origin of Graces and Comforts, in its Illumination seems to
be superfluous, in its Testimony to Believers an Enthusiastical Fancy, and in
the work of Regeneration, if any, at most but a partial Co-cause, parting
stakes with the Will of Man: Faith in Abel and Enoch lying as low as Natural
Principles; in Noah and Abraham raised up a little to particular Revelations,
but not so high as the Messiah: In Christians standing off and at a distance
from Christ its dear Object, not daring to lay hold on, or so much as touch
him, to draw any Virtue from thence. As if Socinus had hit it right, when he
said, Christi apprehensio merum commentum and inanissimum somnium est. The
immutable Love of God, the only Cement of the Church, seems to be turned off
from Persons to Qualities, and toward Persons to be as variable as the fickle
Will of Man is; and yet he is immutable still, he loves for the same Reason,
or, as Socinus says, Non sine causa mutat. The Pontifician Thesis touching
Justification by inherent Righteousness, seems to be revived a fresh, and that
in a way less tolerable than among the Romanists: They, though they would have
inherent Righteousness come in for a share, yet allow the Imputation of Christ's
passive Obedience; but in the New Scheme, inherent Righteousness takes up all
the room, and leaves none for imputed. The Drollery and sarcastical Reflections
in the Book are but the Cover of it; within there is a dark Eclipse upon many
excellent Truths which hitherto have been owned in the Churches of Christ, and
particularly in our own. Among other Truths none have had a greater share of
suffering than those two, touching our Mystical Union with Christ, and the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us; both which are to me very
momentous. The Mystical Union has I suppose, been generally received in the
Church. Indeed Gregory de Valentia once cavilled at it, as if it were Mysterium
Calvinisticum; and yet he seems to own it, when he says, Animum nostrum posse
per fidem corpus Christi, etiam ut in coelo existens, atque adeo ut est extra
Sacramentum manducare. He that denies the Mystical Union, cannot hold the head
Jesus Christ, from which all the body by joints and bands has nourishment
ministered, Col. 2.19. Take away that Union, and Christ is a Head of no
Influence, the Joints and the Bands, which were made to convey divine Nutriture
from him, are but empty Titles, and signify no more than those Conduit-pipes
do, which are severed from the Fountain. Again, he that denies the Mystical
Union, must lose that piece of his Creed, the Communion of Saints; their
Communion among themselves primarily depends on their Union with Christ the
Head, from whom the whole body is fitly joined together and compacted, as the
Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 4.16. All the Harmonies in the Body Mystical hang on its
Union with the Head; without this Believers could have no Communion one with
another, save in this only, that they must all die one common death, hy being
severed from their Head: The living Stones, once off from their Foundation, can
hang no longer together in the spiritual Building, but must totter down into a
Chaos of Confusion. Moreover, he that denies the mystical Union, must turn off
the Believer from his true standing: according to the Gospel, the Believer is a
man in Christ; he is built on him, as on a Foundation; he subsists in him, as
the Branches do in the Vine; he has vital Influences from him, as the Members
have from the Head; he is acted by his divine Spirit in all the pure ways to
heaven, and all this is his security, his preservation in Jesus Christ: But
take away the Mystical Union, he is a man out of Christ, he stands upon his own
bottom, he subsists by himself alone, he receives no influences from Christ the
Head, nor is acted by any higher Spirit than his own; and in such a case, the
next news we hear of him must be an utter downfall. But to say no more of the
Mystical Union; that other Point touching the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us, has also been ever owned in the Church; he that denies
it, must, I fear, in the consequent, overturn the Law, the Gospel, and the
Satisfaction of Christ. He must overturn the Law; for he must own a
Justification without a Righteousness answering thereunto; inherent
Righteousness being imperfect, and imputed a Nullity, there is nothing to
answer the Law, and yet we are justified, which is as much as to say, the Law
is no Law: If it be a Law, none can be justified without a Righteousness
adequate to it; if we may be justified without such a Righteousness, the Law is
no Law, which is what the Antinomians would have: That a Law should be in
force, and a man should be justified without an adequate Righteousness, and
that before a most righteous Judge, who judges according to truth, is utterly
impossible. Again he must overturn the Gospel, and that upon a double account:
The one is this: He must subvert the Promises of Justification made in the
Gospel; the Promises run thus; That we shall be justified by Christ's blood,
made righteous by his obedience; that his blood shall cleanse away sin, and
purge our consciences from dead works; and how can these be fulfilled without
an Imputation? To say, that Christ's Blood founded the Covenant, will not serve
the turn; these are Promises of a Covenant founded already, and a founded
Covenant does not promise the founding of it self. Christ's blood as it founded
the Covenant, is precedent to the Promises, and by it as such the Promises
cannot be fulfilled; for then they should be fulfilled before they were made,
or at least in the making of them: It remains therefore that Christ's
righteousness must be made ours by imputation, and thereby the promises may be
made good to us. If the Promises mean as they speak, then we must be justified
by Christ's blood and obedience, which infers Imputation; if the Promises (how
plain, how emphatical soever the words be) mean not, that we shall be justified
by Christ's Blood or Righteousness, then Christ shed his Blood for us, that we
might be justified without it; he satisfied for us, that we might be pardoned
without a satisfaction, which is an odd reflection on his satisfaction, if not
a total evacuation of it. The other is this; he must pervert the Conditions of
the Gospel from their true end and scope: These Conditions were in infinite
Wisdom accommodated and attempered to the death of Christ which founded them,
they were made to be subordinate and subservient to Christ's satisfaction and
the glory of it: The Faith required in them was not intended to be the matter
of our Justification, and in that notion to discharge and justify us; the main
scope and end of those conditions was to show upon what terms Christ's
righteosness and satisfaction should discharge and justify us. Now as long as
these conditions are made but conditions, as long as Faith keeps its proper
station, all is well and as it ought to be; but if those conditions be advanced
above their own station, if our inherent righteousness be made the very matter
of our Justification, as indeed it must if imputed Righteousness be denied,
then the conditions of the Gospel are corrupted and perverted from their true
end, they are no longer subordinated to Christ's satisfaction, but made to set
up our inherent Righteousness in the room of it, they show no longer upon what
terms Christ's satisfaction shall discharge us, but how our own Righteousness
may do it, which is plainly to pervert the conditions of the Gospel. Moreover
he must overturn the satisfaction of Christ: Touching this three things are
considerable, viz. Christ's surrogation in our room, Gods acceptance of the
(...) on our behalf, and the operation of that (...) in our discharge; none of
which can stand without an imputation. The first thing is Christ's surrogation,
he suffered (...), Matthew. 20.28. in stead of many; he was our (...), putting
his Soul in the room of ours, or else he could not have satisfied for us. Now
that Christ should suffer in our room and stead, and his sufferings should not
be accounted or imputed to us, is a contradiction; take away Imputation, and
you take away Surrogation; take away Surrogation, and you take away
Satisfaction. The second thing is Gods acceptance of the (...) on our behalf:
Christ's Sacrifice was a sweet smelling savor unto God, Ephesians. 5.2. God accepted
it on our behalf, or else Christ could not have satisfied for us. Now that
Christ's sufferings should be accepted by God as on our behalf, and yet that
they should not be accounted or imputed is utterly impossible; so far as
Christ's Satisfaction was accepted by God for us, so far it must be imputed to
us; if it was accepted only for a remissibility, then it is imputed no further;
but then remission will be without satisfaction, which is what the Socinians
would have; but if (as the truth is) it was accepted for Remission and
Justification to be dispensed upon believing, then it is imputed to that end,
actually to justify and discharge us: Take away Imputation, and you take away
Acceptance, and with it Satisfaction. The third thing is the operation of
Christ's satisfaction in our discharge. Satisfaction is destruction
obligationis, it does really and properly discharge him for whom it is made:
accepted absolutely, it discharges him immediately; accepted on terms it
discharges upon the performance, and that as properly and really, though not so
soon as in the other case; its virtue and efficacy, which was suspended by the
condition, breaks forth into effect upon the performance; this is the nature
and property of Satisfaction: A Satisfaction which does not discharge, does not
satisfy, that is, in plain terms, it is no Satisfaction. Now the satisfaction
of Christ does no discharge us immediately, but upon believing, which is the
Evangelical Condition; and how does it do it? Surely one of these two ways,
either it discharges us merely as it founded the Covenant, or else as it is
made ours by Imputation; the former cannot be, it founded the Covenant before
our believing, and if it do no more after, it discharges us not, for it does as
much before believing (before which it discharges not) as after: It founded the
Covenant for those that perish, at least so far, that upon believing they might
have been justified; and if it do no more for those that are saved, it
discharges us not; for it does operate as much and as far toward the discharge
of those that perish, who are never discharged, as of those that are discharged
and saved; which plainly shows, that it properly discharges none at all: and if
it discharge not, it satisfies not, that is, it is no satisfaction. It remains
therefore, that Christ's Satisfaction is made ours by Imputation, and so does
discharge us: If it discharge us, it must be made ours by Imputation, and if it
discharge us not, it is no Satisfaction. Socinus, who denied Christ's
Satisfaction, had reason to deny imputed Righteousness; and he, who denies
imputed Righteousness, must in the consequent deny Christ's Satisfaction, nay,
he must set up another satisfaction in stead of it. In Justification there must
be some Righteousness or other, to be the matter of our Justification, and to
discharge us before God; if the imputed Righteousness of Christ be not such,
then our own inherent Righteousness must be the very thing, that must discharge
us and satisfy for us; that indeed must be the satisfaction much rather than
Christ's, because it properly actually discharges us, which Christ's does not:
Unless we say with the Socinians, that there is Remission without Satisfaction,
there must be somewhat to be a Satisfaction, and what that is very obvious:
That which is the matter of our Justification, that which does properly
discharge us, that is the Satisfaction: if Christ's Righteousness imputed be not
it, our inherent Righteousness must be such; and yet alas! what a poor thing is
it to be so advanced? Its own defects call for a pardon, and how should it
justif^e or discharge us? May that, which wants a pardon it self, justify; or
may it first be pardoned it self, and then justify its Subject in which it is?
Both are absurd: Before it is pardoned it self, it cannot justify; and after
it is pardoned, it is very odd, that it should give that which it self once
wanted. Not to be tedious; I have endeavored to return an Answer to Mr.
Sherlock's Book, not out of Passion or disrespect to his Person, who is my
acquaintance, and for whom I have respects; but merely out of love to the
Truth, which is dearer to me than all Relations. I have for the most part set
forth his words at length; and where sometimes for brevities sake I have
contracted them, it has been my care to be just to every thing of Emphasis or
Argument. The Lapses in this my Answer beg the Readers pardon, and the Truths
in it call for his consent: If any thing in it tend toward the clearing or
establishing of sacred Truth, it is enough for him, who is

A Well-wisher to the Truth, EDWARD POLHILL.

THE INTRODUCTION.
CHAP. I.
ALL Error has some appearance of Truth, Mr. Sherlock.
it being impossible to believe a plain and undisguised falsehood.

It is so indeed: Answer.
The old Fable is true, Truth first presented her self to the World, and went
about to seek entertainment; but finding none, she resolved to leave Earth, and
take her flight to Heaven. But as she was going up, she let fall her Mantle,
and Error waiting by, snatched it up, and ever since has gone about in it.
Every erroneous Opinion, which walks about in the dress and appearance of
Reason, tells us, that the opposite Mysteries are retired up to their great
original above, there to complain against an unbelieving World, for the hard
usages found here below.

The first and fundamental mistake is in a confusion of Names, Mr. Sherlock.
in a doubtful and ambiguous use of Words, especially in Matters of Religion;
men consider nothing but the sound of words, and from thence form such uncouth
Idaea's of Religion, as are fitted to the meanness of their understanding, or
gratify their natural Genius and Disposition, or are calculated to serve an
Interest; and thus the Gospel of our Savior is defaced and obscured, by
affected Mysteries and Paradoxes, and senseless Propositions; and Christ the
brightness of his Father's Glory is represented with a thicker Veil upon his
Face, than Moses.

How truly this general Charge is laid at the Door of those Worthies, Answer.
whom this Author opposes, must be tried by the instances of the after
Discourse; in the mean time, I fear, that some men following the tinkling of
their own reason, shape such Idaea's of Religion as cast smiles and flatteries
upon corrupt Nature, and strangely darken the Gospel by clearing away those
Mysteries, which are the glory of it, and stand above the level of humane
reason, as pregnant proofs of the Divinity of the Gospel, and fit objects for
the exercise of Faith.

If we believe some men; Mr. Sherlock.
There is as irreconcilable a difference between the Religion of Christ's
Person, and of his Gospel, as between the Law and Grace: for the Gospel of
Christ is as severe a dispensation as the Law, which dooms all men to eternal
misery, who live not very innocent and virtuous lives; but the Person of Christ
is all Grace, a mere refuge and sanctuary for the wicked and ungodly, that is,
(as he after explains it) for impenitent and incorrigible sinners.

Christ at odds with his Gospel! Answer.
Absit: The reason is untrue on both sides. That the Gospel is as severe a
dispensation as the Law; (which surely calls for no less than sinless
obedience) is untrue in it self; that the Person of Christ is a refuge for
impenitent sinners; is not so much as truly affixed upon the Opposites; their
Writings deny it, their hearts abhor it as prodigious. He that goes about to
deduce it from their words, will have as little success, as that attempt had,
which would have extracted the Spirits of Turcism out of the Writings of
Reverend Calvin. What he means by virtuous and innocent lives, I know not; the
Pelagian Julianus ushers in his Fabricius, Fabius, and Scipio, as very virtuous
men, and lifts up their Chastity, Mercy and Justice, as true Virtues, and well
pleasing to God. Will this serve the turn? St. Austin can by no means endure
it, but breaks out in a holy passion, O inimici gratiae; solo vocabulo
Christiani! May there be true virtue in animo fornicante a Deo? or can a man be
just sine fide Christi? Or is that virtue, in which God is not served? Hoc est,
unde vos maxim detestatur Christiana Ecclesia, thus that excellent Father. The
Authors sense in this matter will be further seen in his after-discourse about
natural Faith.

Faith in Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
and hope in Christ are expounded of a fiducial reliance and recumbency on the
Person of Christ for salvation, in contradistinction to obedience to his Laws;
which sets up a Religion of the Person of Christ, in opposition to the Religion
of his Gospel.

If these pregnant Phrases (of Faith in Christ and Hope in Christ) do not make
him the Object of Faith, Answer.
I know not what can; when the Socinians disputed among themselves, whether
Christ were the Object of Worship, and so of Faith; it was a very hard case on
the one side, that he (according to their Principles) but a mere creature
should be the object of faith; on the other, that so many pregnant places of
Scripture should be eluded; but had they found out a way to interpret such
Phrases (as believing and trusting in him) in a sense abstractive from his
Person, they might all have concluded that he was not the object of faith. The
Author, as to a faith of recumbency on him and his merits, seems to conclude
the same; for though he speak of trusting in Christ and his blood, he
interprets himself thus, expecting to be saved according to the terms of the
Gospel Covenant, that is, by believing and obeying the Gospel of Christ, page
24. The whole is placed in believing and obeying the Gospel: Obedience, as I
take it, is no part of Faith. Works show forth Faith, James 2. and so are
distinct from it; Faith produces Obedience, Hebrews 11. and surely it does not
produce it self; We are married to Christ, that is, by Faith, that we might
bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.1. And me thinks, Faith, which is the
espousal, should not be the Progeny: Abraham's faith only is admitted in
Justification, Romans 4. And his works (though done after conversion) are
excluded, as being no part of it. When Socinus said, that, Christo credere idem
significat, atque illi obedire: The Learned Calovius tells him; That it is but
a mere Fiction, to prevent the Article of Justification, and transform Faith
into Works: And withal adds, that, Credere in nullo idiomate idem est, quod
obedire, Obedience being no part of Faith; that which remains is only,
believing the Gospel, which is a Dogmatical Faith, such as believes the Gospel
to be true, and inter alia, Jesus Christ to be the Messiah and Savior. But,
alas! This is so far beneath a faith of recumbency, such as in the Apostle is
styled, (...), faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. that the very Devils are capable
of it, who yet never shall have the least drop of that atoneing blood sprinkled
on them In our Author the whole terms of the Gospel are believing and obeying
it: Obeying it, is not so much as a part of faith: Believing it is a part of
faith, but far short of recumbency; and how the Author leaves any room at all
for recumbency, I see not, if Faith, which uses to rest in the wounds of
Christ, may be only totally lodged in the Evangelical Axiom's; I fear that
Christ will be at odds with the Gospel; which (contrary to its Native Genius,
which is to elevate faith unto him our Great Redeemer) reserves all of it to it
self. But to go on, the Author says, That they are for a recumbency on Christ
in contradistinction to obedience to his Laws, which sets up a Religion of the
Person of Christ in opposition to the Religion of his Gospel. I answer, They
make true faith contradistinct from obedience, not that faith is alone in
existence, as if it had no holy fruits of obedience hanging, on it, but that it
is alone in the matter of Justification: And this I think is the Doctrine of
Protestants, and Fathers. Which made Erasmus, as I have him quoted by the
Reverend Morton, say, Haec Vox, sola fides, tot clamoribus lapidata hoc seculo
in Luthero, reverenter legitur and auditur in Patribus; if faith, though alone
in justification, do yet spread forth it self into holy obedience; I hope the
Gospel is not in the least opposed by such a recumbency, as gives Christ the
glory of his blood and righteousness. But now we must hear the significations
of the word (Christ.)

First, Mr. Sherlock.
Christ is originally the Name of an Office, which the Jews call the Messiah,
or Anointed. Jesus Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost and Power, which was
his consecration to the Mediatory Function, and virtually contained all those
Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, which are not properly distinct Offices
in Christ, but the several parts and different administrations of his Mediatory
Kingdom; after which, the Author describes those Offices to us.

The Socinians, Answer.
who deny the Satisfaction of Christ, have some reason (according to their
corrupt Principles) to jumble all the Offices of Christ together, that the
oriency of his Priestly Sacrifice might not appear; yet are they castigated for
it by Calovius, and others; and Arnoldus calls the Racovian Catechist, Hostis
crucis Christi, upon that account: But why our Author, who owns the Sacrifice
and Satisfaction of Christ, should confound them, I know not; I conceive the
Offices of Christ are distinct, though he, who had them all, performed them in
such a just Decorum, as became him, who had all of them in himself: Though he
triumphed upon the Cross: and what he preached was a Law; yet Teaching is not
Reigning, nor is either Sacrificing: In his Prophetical Office, Salvation was
explicated: in his Priestly, purchased; in his Kingly, applied: The first
removes Ignorance, the second expiates Guilt, and the Third subdues Corruption.
In the Authors description of these Offices, the Reader may make some
Observations: In that of the Prophetical Office, he mentions his outward
preaching, but passes over in silence that internal illumination of the Spirit,
which to me is the life of the other, without which no man can spiritually
discern the things of God. Hence Reverend Bishop Reynolds, speaking of the
Opinion of Episcopius, that an unregenerate man may understand such things,
sine lumine supernaturali, is bold to censure the same as wicked words; In that
of the Priestly, he tells us; That Intercession is the Power of a Regal Priest
to expiate and forgive sins: I take it, Christ on Earth had power to forgive
sins, and did expiate them by his once offered Sacrifice on the Cross. But may
we call it Intercession? Or, is Intercession here below? I ever took it to be
above, and to be Christ's Appearance in Heaven for us, and his presenting his
meritorious Sacrifice to his Father in our behalf. When the Racovian Catechism
describes his Intercession by his Power to avert Wrath, Arnoldus censures it
thus, Quis unquam tam inepta, stolida, insulsa super claros Scripturae textus
glossemata vel somniare posset? Interpellare Christi in coelis nihil aliud esse
quam potestatem? Quae rei vel verborum saltem cognatio? In that of the Kingly,
he says, That he conquers the minds of men by the Power of his Word and
Spirit, and reduces them into Subjection; by (Minds) I hope he takes in Wills
too, and all is excellent well, may it but stand so; but afterward the Author
denies irresistible Grace, and then the Conquest is but ad nutum creaturae, at
the pleasure of the conquered; the conquered, if he please, may be Conqueror,
and the Conqueror must drop his Crown into his Hand: and shall we call this a
Conquest? Or if we may, is it such, as becomes the Throne of the Son of God, or
the design of a Church? After he has laid the Foundation of his Kingdom in his
own blood, must he enter precariously, and at the Nod of his Subjects? After
the Author has gathered up all the Offices of Christ into his Royalty, and
proclaimed him Conqueror over minds and wills, must all depend on the will of
man? It is a very hard case, if any thing could be so to the Almighty. Should
such a thing be, that of St. Austin must fall out, fallitur Deus, De Corrept.
cap. 7.
vincitur Deus, the Conquest and Royalty too must fail.

Christ signifies the Person invested with this Office, and, Mr. Sherlock.
(which I take for a new Notion) he says, in the Gospels he is always called
Jesus, in the Epistles he is as familiarly called Christ.

I suppose this Notion cannot be made good. Answer.
In the Gospels he is sometimes called Christ (without Jesus) Thus in the
accounting of the Generations from Abraham, Matthew. 1.11. Thus in the enquiry
touching his Birth, Matthew. 2.4. Thus in John's bearing of hi Works, Matthew.
11.2. and, to name no more, Thus it is in Peter's Confession, Matthew. 16.16. The
matter is not great, I suppose him, in all the Offices to which he was anointed
as Christ, to be really a Jesus. There can be no mistake in the Person (as the
Author adds) by what name he be called, whether it belong to his Office or
Nature, or circumstances of his Life and Fortune, if there be but one, to whom
that name belongs. Fortune; I wonder at that word. St. Austin repented that
ever he had used it; Retract. l. 1. cap. 1.
Where Providence is, Fortune is not. Were Fortune tolerable among the little
Gnats and Flies; sure it cannot be so in the Great Concerns of Jesus Christ:
however, it may be proper enough, if the result of his Merits and Conquests
finally hang on the Lottery of man's will.

Christ signifies the Gospel and Religion of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
as Moses signifies the Writings and Laws of Moses, and the Prophets, the
Writings or Sermons of the Prophets, Luke 16.29. and 31. and then he gives some
Scripture-instances for it.

Possibly sometimes Christ may signify the Gospel or Doctrine of Christ;
Answer.
but I shall a little consider the instances; the first is that, Gal. 6.15. In
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature, that is, says the Author, in the Gospel and Religion of Christ,
nothing is of any value to recommend us to the favor of God, but a new
creature, a holy and virtuous life; unto which I answer, those words, (in
Christ Jesus) may be fairly construed, to a man in Christ, one who (as it is in
the former Verse) is crucified to the World; Thus judicious Calvin upon the
Words, Ratio est, cur sit mundo crucifixus, and mundus illi, quia in Christo,
cui insitus est, solum nova valet creatura; and upon the parallel place, in
this Epistle, In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. St. Jerome has it, His qui in
Christo Jesu vivere volunt; and St. Chrysostom, (...), he that puts on Christ,
need not be curious in such things. When the Author in his way says, Nothing
recommends to God, but a new creature, I hope he does not exclude the Merits
and Righteousness of Christ; and when afterward he contradistinguishes the
Gospel from the Law, I hope under the latter the new Creature was requisite.
The next instance is, Col. 2.8. After the traditions of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; where, says the Author, after
Christ, is opposed to traditions and rudiments, and so must signify not the
Person, but the Gospel; that is, Have a care lest ye be corrupted with the
opinions and superstitions of men, which are inconsistent with the Christian
Philosophy: unto which I shall only say, After Christ, is, as I take it, after
Christ himself, the great Doctor of the Church, in whom, as the Apostle tells
us, are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, ver. 3. and, in whom, as
he speaks, dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, ver. 9. Quid igitur
opus est extra hunc alia aut documenta aut adjumenta salutis quaerere, says
the excellent Davenant? such an admirable Teacher may well be opposed to all
the Philosophers in the world: Neither is the Author's Reason, That Christ is
here opposed to traditions and rudiments, and so must signify the Gospel, of
any value; for if we observe what the Apostle says ver. 4. This I say, lest
any man should beguile you, and, what he says in the beginning of this 8.
verse. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, it is as clear as the
light, that the opposition is between Persons; between the Persons of seducing
Philosophers, and the Person of Christ the great Teacher. We may further
observe, That the Author, who honors the Gospel with the Title of Christ, does
somewhat degrade it, by calling it Philosophy, which I ever took to be but of
natural Extraction, and not, as the Gospel, of supernatural Revelation;
however, it is more tolerable to call, than make it so, by introducing into the
Christian Religion those Dogmata Philosophica, touching Free Will and inherent
Righteousness, which as Bp Davenant notes, are drawn ex Ethicis Philosophi, non
ex Epistolis Pauli. The next Instance is, that in the 6. Verse of the same
Chapter, As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him:
By receiving of Christ, is meant believing on him, as appears, Joh. 1.12.
Bishop Davenant observes a great Emphasis in the words; Non dicit accepistis
Doctrinam Christi, sed Christum; Expos. in Epist. ad Col.
per fidem enim non modo percipimus Doctrinam Christi, sed vivificum nostrum
Salvatorem recipimus, and in corda recondimus ad salutem. By walking in Christ,
I understand, with the same Author, living juxta hanc fidem and juxta ductum
Spiritus Christi: but says the Author, It is only to obey the Doctrine of
Christ as you have been taught; for the next Verse says, being established in
the faith, as ye have been taught: I answer, The next Verse says not only,
established in the faith, but rooted and built up in him, that is, in Christ;
and the teaching, which is inward as well as outward, was, that they might
adhere to Christ as well as to his Doctrine. The last Instance is Ephesians. 4.20,
21. But ye have not so learned Christ; if so be ye have heard him and been
taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: Now what (says the Author) can
learning Christ signify but learning the Gospel? and how could they hear him
in any other sense, or be instructed in him, as the Original carries it? To
which I answer, Learning of Christ here is not a mere Notion, but a Practical
Knowledge of him, such as the Apostle mentions, That I may know him, and the
power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death, Phil. 3.10. And whence had they this Learning? they
heard him, and were taught by or in him; not from the personal Preaching of
Christ in the flesh, but in and by his Ministers and holy Spirit: I add, his
holy Spirit, because the Gospel alone cannot do it; which made St. Austin say,
De Praed. Sanct. cap. 8.
Cum Evangelium praedicatur, quidam credunt, quidam non credunt; sed qui
credunt, praedicatore forinsecus sonante, intus a Patre audiunt atque discunt;
qui autem non credunt, foris audiunt, intus non audiunt, neque discunt: that
such is the Learning meant here, appears from the after words, As the truth is
in Jesus; Truth is in the Gospel notionally, but in Christ practically; all
Graces being exemplified in him, and the true learners are conformed to his
Image, and, as the Apostle has it in the next Verses, they put off the old man
and put on the new, and so are assimilated to his Death and Resurrection.

It is acknowledged by all, Mr. Sherlock.
that Christ sometimes signifies the Church, which is his Body: Thus we must
understand those Phrases, of being in Christ, engrafted into Christ, and united
to Christ.

It is acknowledged by all, Answer.
that Christ sometimes signifies the Church; how then can he charge those whom
he opposes, that wherever they meet with the word Christ in Scripture, they
always understand by it the Person of Christ, page 4? As for the Phrases, of
being in Christ, etc. I shall reserve them till I come to the Mystical Union.
To what the Author infers from the various significations of the Name Christ,
That such mistakes have been occasioned thereby, that some are very zealous to
advance Christ's Person to the prejudice and reproach of his Religion, I shall
only say, It is not so.

Instead of the substantial Duties of the Love of God and Men, Mr. Sherlock.
and an universal Holiness of Life, they have introduced a fanciful Application
of Christ to our selves, and Union to him, set off with those choice Phrases,
of closing with Christ, and embracing Christ, and getting an interest in
Christ, and trusting and relying and rolling our selves on Christ.

Fanciful! Answer.
alas! that a Christian, a Divine, should let drop such a reproachful word, on
so sacred a thing as the Application of Christ! Without this, the excellent
Scripture must, I fear, labor under very odd Glosses; such as these: A
Believer may be in Christ, and out of him; he may put him on, and off at the
same time; he may have Communion with him, without Union; and feed on him,
without so much as reception; Christ may dwell in the Believer at a Distance,
and abide in him without the least approach: Which are such kind of
Absurdities, as a man would hardly name, for fear of grating pious Ears and
Hearts. But this is not all: Without this, true Faith, which, as Learned Dr
Ward observes, is uppropriativa Christi, must forfeit its Nature,, unless it
can appropriate without Application; and Christ, its precious Object, must lose
the Virtue of his Blood and Merits, unless they can heal at a distance: For
what shall we say? May an unapplied Christ, be in us the hope of Glory? or may
his unapplied Obedience make us righteous? or his unapplied Blood justify us?
or his unapplied Death reconcile us to God? It is not for ordinary Capacities
to apprehend it: However, if Application fail, may the Universal Holiness of
Life, which the Author speaks of, consist? Our Savior tells us, (...),
separate from me, ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. In which words the Melevitan
Fathers observe a great Emphasis; Non dicitur, sine me difficilius potestis
facere, sed sine me nihil potestis facere: And how any man should, either not
be separate from an unapplied Christ, or lead a Life of Universal Holiness, in
such a statu separato, I cannot imagine: But what speak I of Universal
Holiness? Never any man, off from that divine Root of Grace, has, since the
Fall, bore so much as a Blossom of true Sanctity.

Instead of Obedience to the Gospel and Laws of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
they have advanced a kind of Amorous and Enthusiastic Devotion; which
consists in a passionate love to the Person of Christ, in admiring his personal
Excellencies, Fullness, Beauty, Loveliness, Riches, etc. the foundation of all
which Riddles and Mysteries, is, that they may make the Person of Christ almost
the sole Object of the Christian Religion.

To slight the Fullness, Answer.
Beauty, Loveliness, Riches of Christ, is very hardly tolerable among
Christians; and to question, why they so passionately love such an one, is, as
the Philosopher told him, who asked, why men were so taken with outward Beauty,
(...), a blind man's question: none but the spiritually blind can wonder at the
loving of one altogether lovely. But these men are for an Amorous and
Enthusiastic Love; Amorous! all Love is so; but what in a gross and carnal
way? No, it is far from those Men, who are not at all a kin to Castalio, who
(as is said) called the Song of Solomon an obscene Ballad; not relishing that
divine Love between Christ and the Church, which all along is pourtraied
therein, in Allegories and beautiful colors: Enthusiastic! why so? possibly
because it is a thing inspired from the Spirit, it is so; Scriptures and
Fathers will own such a blessed Enthusiasm, Ipse nobis fidem and amorem sui
inspirat, says the Arausican Council: But (which is the fundamental mistake)
they make the Person of Christ almost the sole Object of the Christian
Religion: I confess, and it is no shame to say so, they esteem themselves
complete only in Christ; they trust in him; they love and obey him; their
acceptance is in his Merits, therir assistance from his Spirit; their Graces
hang on him, as Beams on the Sun; their good Works are perfumed with his
sweet smelling Sacrifice: they look on him as their great All, and do all they
do in him and for him. Quicquid oratur, docetur, vivitur, extra Christum, est
Idololatria coram Deo and peccatum, said Luther.

CHAP. II.
THose men who talk so much of the Person of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
frequently without any Sense, and Generally without any just Ground from
Reason or Scripture, are very clamorous, and alarm the world with strange
jealousies and fears, as if there were a Party of men started up, who design to
make Christ useless.

What! without Sense, Reason, Answer.
and Scripture too? Alas, poor inconsiderable Creatures! What need such strong
impetuous opposition be made against them? or how are such men likely to alarm
the World with fears? But for the thing it self, I hope the Author designs not
to make Christ useless; but what he does toward it, in denying the Mystical
Union, let Bishop Davenant say; Exp. in Col.
Quicquid de obtenta Gratia, sanctificatione, de obtinenda vita aeterna homines
sperant, merum ludibrium and insomnium est, si non sint in Christo and Christus
in illis; jam vero Christus in nobis and nos in illo sumus, cum vinculo
Spiritus and Fidei per Spiritum impressae in cordibus nostris unimur huic
capiti nostro: What in denying Imputed Righteousness, the Church of England
tells at large, in the Homily touching the Salvation of Man; I shall quote but
one passage: Christ is now the Righteousness of all them that truly believe in
him; he for them paid the Ransom by his Death; he for them fulfilled the Law in
his Life: so that now, in him and by him, every true Christian man may be
called a fulfiller of the Law; forasmuch as that, which their infirmity lacked,
Christ's Justice has supplied; Which plainly implies a necessity of Imputed
Righteousness. What in bringing in internal Holiness into Justification, the
reverend Hooker says, The Church of Rome, in teaching Justification by
inherent Grace, does pervert the Truth of Christ. There are other things, but I
leave them to the Reader's observation in the After-discourse.

All Religion is founded on a belief of God's Goodness: Mr. Sherlock.
Natural Religion was founded on those natural Evidences of the divine Bounty
and Goodness, in making and governing the World: The Mosaic Religion, on those
miraculous Deliverances God wrought for Israel, and that particular Providence
which watched over them: The Christian Religion, on the Incarnation, death and
Resurrection of the Son of God.

The Christian Religion is founded so, but dated much sooner than the
Incarnation; Answer.
it was in Essence, though not in Name, under the old Testament: all along
there has been but one Faith, one Mediator, one Name under Heaven, one
Foundation of Salvation: The Gospel was preached to us, as well as unto them,
Heb. 4.2. Through the grace of the Lord Jesus we shall be saved even as they,
Act. 15.11. They all drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that
rook was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. He is that Petra, vnde omnes credentes salutem
hauriunt, as one glosses on those words: Salvation streams from him yesterday,
to day, and for ever; he that will seek any other Fountain of Life, must be
saved Platonice or Catonice; which to say, is to depreciate the Christian
Religion, and render it as cheap as any other.

He is our Savior in no other sense, than as he is our Mediator, Mr. Sherlock.
and he mediates for us as our Priest, that is, in virtue of that Covenant
which he sealed with his blood.

He sealed the Covenant with his Blood, Answer.
but did not turn over his Mediatory Office to it; he mediates in virtue of his
Blood and Merits, being not, as Socinus would have it, a mere Internuncial
Mediator, but a Redeeming, atoning, and Reconciling one: He ratified the
Covenant by his Blood, but so, that we have redemption through his blood, Ephesians.
1.7. peace through his blood, Col. 1.20. and cleansing from sin in his blood, 1 John 1.7. Hence, as the learned Lubbertus has observed, the Blood of Christ
differs from other in a way of transcendent excellency; other blood has been
used in confirming Covenants, but Christ's confirms the Covenant, and besides
expiates and purges away sin; There is one Mediator between God and men, the
man Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.5. and how he mediates, the next
Verse tells us, Who gave himself a ransom for all: The blood of Christ purges
the Conscience, says the Apostle, Heb. 9.14. and then adds, (...), For this
cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that he might purge away our
sins. What the Author afterward subjoyns, These men trust in the person of
Christ, without any Promise, nay, in contradiction to it; they quit his
Promise, and rely and roll upon his Person, is utterly denied, till proof be
made of it. The good men opposed are far from believing, that they shall have
any thing without a Promise; neither do they quit his Promise, when they rely
upon his Person and Blood: And yet that Reliance is, as I have before showed, a
Faith far higher, than that dogmatical one which believes the Gospel, and is
distinct from Obedience. When the Author sums up the Terms of the Gospel, only
in believing and obeying, he falls short, in omitting that Faith of Recumbency,
required therein under the Command of Faith, which is more than a dogmatical
Faith, and distinct from Obedience, which is the fruit, but no part thereof.

CHAP. III.
Sect. 1.
WHen God chose Abraham 's Posterity, Mr. Sherlock.
to be his peculiar People, he did not design to exclude the rest of the World
from his care and Providence, and all possible means of Salvation, as the
Apostle argues, in Romans 3.29. Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of
the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: Which Argument, if it have any force
in it, must prove Gods respect to the Gentiles before the preaching of the
Gospel, as well as since; because it is founded on that Natural Relation God
owns to all Mankind, as their merciful Creator and Governor; which gives the
Gentiles as well as Jews an Interest in his Care and Providence: This plainly
evinces, that all those particular favors, which God bestowed on Israel, were
not owing to any partial fondness and respect to that People, but the Design of
all was, to encourage the whole World to worship the God of Israel.

What the Author means by all possible Means of Salvation, Answer.
I know not: Surely God could have given as great Means to all other Nations as
he did to Israel, who was exalted above them all, in Laws, Revelations,
Miracles, Protections, Symbols of the Divine Presence, in so signal a manner,
that the Jews doubt not to say, That the seventy Souls, that went down with
Jacob into Egypt, were worth as much as the seventy Nations of the World. As
for that of the Apostle, Romans 3.29. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not
also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: The Apostle, in the precedent
Verse, concludes, that the only way of Justification is Faith; in this he
shows, that the one way of Justification was open to Gentiles, as well as Jews;
in the next Verse he infers, that it is one God who justifies both of them in a
way of Faith. He speaks not of being the Gentiles God, in respect of Care and
common Providence. but in respect of extending this way of Justification to
them, upon their coming in to Christ, who was that blessed Seed of Abraham, in
whom all Nations were to be blessed: However till the Gospel came to them, they
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, aliens from Israel, strangers from
the Covenant, without God, without Christ, without hope; seeing no further than
Nature, and that desperately corrupted, and not knowing whether there were any
such thing as Grace, or Glory, the Center of it. As for Israel, I wonder that
any man should deny Gods special Love to that people: What! did he call them
his firstborn, his peculiar treasure, the apple of his eye, without special
Love? Did he sever them from other people to be his own, Levit. 20.21. choose
them to himself above all people on the earth; set his love upon them, and that
merely because he loved them, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, and 8. Verses, and all this without
special Love? Were theirs the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises, Romans 9.4. and
all this without special Love? He has not dealt so with any nation, says the
Psalmist. To call this special Love partial fondness, is to me a presumption
not unlike that of the old Pelagians, who charged a (...) or unjust Partiality
upon Gods special Grace toward his own people; upon whom St. Austin made some
such tart Returns as these: Toll quod tuum est and vade; Annon licet mihi quod
volo facere, Li. 2. ad Bonifac. cap. 7.
hic tota justitia est, hoc volo; O homo, tu quis es qui respondeas Deo? with a
great deal more on God's behalf. But, says the Author, The end of all those
particular favors, was, that all Nations might worship the God of Israel:
Suppose so; if such particular favors to Israel above all other Nations argue
not a special love to Israel, what can do it? God loves all Creatures (as the
Schools speak) Vno and simplici actu Voluntatis: And if particular favors do
not prove his Love special, we must say, that he loves Worms as much as Angels,
and Oxen, whom comparatively he cares not for, as much as Men, upon whom his
Love has been set above all other Creatures.

Joh. 14.6, 7. Jesus says, I am the Way, Mr. Sherlock.
the Truth and the Life: no man comes unto the Father but by me. If you had
known me, you should have known my Father: and henceforth you have known him
and seen him; that is, I alone declare the true way to Life and Happiness; no
man can thoroughly understand the Will of God but by learning of me: Whoever
knows me, whoever is acquainted with the Doctrine and Religion I preach, knows
my Father also, that is, is thoroughly instructed in God's Mind and Will.

Christ is the Way, Answer.
the Truth and the Life; how so? He declared the true way to Life and
happiness. Is this the all of it? Is he only the Declarer and not the Author of
Life? Does he not work it in us by the power of his Spirit and Grace? Has he
not purchased a place in heaven for us by his Blood? and does he not consecrate
a new and living Way thither through the Veil of his Flesh? It cannot be
denied. Hear the Learned Bishop Wren against the Racovian Catechist. Vidit
Dives in inferno, ubi sinus Abrahae erat, sed monitus est de magno Chasmate
intercedente ne possint congredi: Via arboris vitae extabat, sed ab acie
versatilis gladii custodita: Aeger ad Bethesdam positus diu jam vider at viam
in stagnum, sed movere se clinicus non poterat: Norunt and piae foeminae viam
in sepulchrum Domini; pariter norunt saxo obturari: Ipsi denique Parenti horum
Barjesu ostensa est a Paulo conversionis and reconciliationis via; verum ille
eo se caeciorem factum duceque plus egentem indicavit. Respondeat igitur, an
viam Christus, quam ostendit, aperuit? an Pontem paravit trajiciendo Chasmati?
an versatilem avertit gladium? saxum revolvit? clinicum excitavit? caecum
collyrio beavit suo? Reconciliationis hae primariae parts sunt; sine his
praeviis, nihil est omnis conversio, frustra via omnis convertendi, incassum
omnis viae ostensio. And afterward speaking of Christ being the way, he shows
how he was so; Non solum quod revelavit iis, quae Deus volebat eos scire, sed
etiam quod (...), Luc. 2.14. (vel eapropter) constitutus, quae ab hominibus
sine ipso praestari non poterant, pro ipsis praestiterit; sanguinisque sui
merito ita viam ad Deum Patrem perpurgavit, communivit, illustravit, ut nos jam
ab ipso veluntatem Dei edocti, vereque ad Deum conversi, per fidem in sanguine
Christi, Propitiatione ea perfrui possimus. Thus he very excellently.. I know
no need at all for such an Interpretation as takes the Will of the Father for
himself, or the Doctrine of the Son for himself: the thing is plain: He that
knows the Son, in whom dwells all fullness of the Godhead bodily, must needs
know the Father also.

To know God is to know the Will of God, concerning the Salvation of Mankind;
Mr. Sherlock.
to know Christ is to understand the declaration of Gods will, that is, the
Gospel which he preached; which is therefore called the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. that is, that glorious
manifestation God has made of himself by Christ: For the face of Christ
signifies all that, whereby he made himself known, as a man is known by his
face; that is, his Laws, Religion and Miracles, whereby it appeared that he was
the Son of God.

In the knowledge of God and Christ, Answer.
God and Christ are the Objects, the Gospel is the outward Medium: Hence it
appears, that to know God and Christ is, in propriety, no more to know the
Gospel, than the Object of Knowledge is the Medium; properly we know God and
Christ by the Gospel. As for that of the Apostle 2 Cor. 4.6. I conceive he
discourses of somewhat more than external Revelation, even that of internal
Illumination, set forth there by the Creation of the first Light, and shining
in the heart, which gives the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Christ, that is, in the Person of Christ, who is God manifest in the
Flesh.

God was seen in Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
Joh. 14.9. He that has seen me, has seen the Father, that is, in plain
terms, the Will of God was fully declared to the World by Christ; upon which
account too (as well as with respect to his Divine Nature) he is called the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3.
(And a little after he adds) It is plain, that in this sense Christ is called
the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4.4. Lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
which is the Image of God, should shine unto them: Where Christ's being the
Image of God comes in very abruptly, unless we understand it in this Sense,
That he is the Image of God with respect to the glorious Revelations of the
Gospel, which contain a faithful account of God's Nature and Will.

He that has seen me has seen the Father, Answer.
that is, says the Author in plain terms, The Will of God was fully declared
by Christ: Thus the Racovian Catechist understands the words, de cognitione
eorum quae dixit and fecit Jesus; but if we consider our Author's
interpretation, there being God's Will and Christ's Declaration both in the
Gospel, the result of the words is this, He that has seen the Gospel, has
seen the Gospel. The plain sense of the words is, That he that has seen
Christ, the perfect Image of God, has seen the Father. That Heb. 1. The
brightness of his glory and express image of his person, imports, as I take it,
that he was, according to the eternal Generation, Lumen de Lumine, as the
Nicene Creed has it; and in his Incarnation, instar Speculi, as a Glass
representing the Majesty and Philanthropy of God unto us. In those words, 2
Cor. 4.4. Lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of
God, should shine unto them, that, of Christ's being God's Image, comes in as a
Reason why the Gospel is so glorious, viz. Because it shows forth Christ, who
is the substantial Image of God, and in his Incarnation, a rare Mirror of the
Divine Perfections: (...), says St. Chrysostom on the place, through him,
that is, through Christ, thou see the Father.

Whereas God formerly was known by the Light of Nature, Mr. Sherlock.
and Works of Creation and Providence, and partial and occasional Revelations
of his Will made to the World; now the only true Medium of knowing God is the
knowledge of Christ. Answer.


Ever since that Protevangelium or first Charter of Salvation (The seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head) which pointed out Christ, and was
understood so to do, there has been a knowledge of Christ in the Church;
though not in that Meridian splendour which broke out after his Incarnation. He
was Abraham's Seed, Jacob's Shiloh, Job's Redeemer, Moses's Prophet, and
David's Messiah. Among the Jews almost every thing looked at Christ; the
Tabernacle, Laver, Altars, Shewbread, Veil, Ark, Propitiatory, Manna,
Passover, Priests, Washings, Anointing, Sacrifices shadowed forth him who is
the Substance and Compleature of them all; And no doubt but Believers under the
Old Testament looked beyond those outward Veils and Covers, and saw him lying
and wrapped up therein.

Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal, Mr. Sherlock.
that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent, that is, The only way to eternal Life is to know the Nature and Will of
God; and the only certain way to attain the knowledge of God is by knowing
Christ, whom God sent into the world to publish the everlasting Gospel. And a
little after he says, When we speak of the knowledge of Christ, we must
consider him as our Prophet; and so to know Christ signifies to know his Gospel.

In that Text, Answer
Joh. 17. God and Christ are the express Object of Knowledge, the Gospel, not
there mentioned, is the outward Medium thereunto; the Knowledge there spoken of
is, as I take it, not a mere Notional knowledge, but such a Practical one, as
is (which is more than a Way) Eternal Life it self, in the first fruits of it;
Heaven it self dawning in that inward divine Light, which is the Firstborn of
the New Creature, as the outward Light was of the old. Christ as a Prophet is
the great Origin of all our knowledge of him; but whole Christ, or Christ in
his Royal and Priestly Offices, as well as in his Prophetical, is the object of
our knowledge: Truly to know Christ as a Prophet, is to know him to be such,
not only in the Gospel or external Revelation, but in internal Illumination
also: He opens the eyes, Psalm. 119.18. or (if the Author laugh at this Psalm. as
he does at that other, quoted page 105.) he does (as St. Luke tells us) open
the understanding to understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. He does not only
dispense the Scripture or Gospel, but the holy Unction or teaching Anointing,
which St. John mentions, 1 John 2.20. and 27. or that Spirit of wisdom and
revelation, which St. Paul prays for, for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.17. To what the
Author adds afterward, as if some did clamor, that Christ were not preached,
unless named in every sentence, I shall only say, Those whom the Author
opposes, do not worship Letters or Syllables, no, not those which make up the
sweet Name Jesus; But wherever there is aliquid Christi, they own and honor
it, seeing his Scepter in every Command, his Charter in every Promise, his
Spirit in every Grace, his Purchase in every Glimpse of Eternal Life; and where
such a divine Sense is, they must own him though unnamed.

SECT. 2.
AFter this account of the knowledge of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
it will be necessary to examine another Notion, of the knowledge of Christ,
which conteins a greater Secret, than at first one would imagine; and that is
an acqaintance with the Person of Christ, which, if we will believe some men,
is the only Fountain of saving knowledge.

Christ the only Fountain of saving knowledge? Answer.
Yes doubtless, he is so, and of all saving Graces too, or else he could be no
Head, at least not a vital one, to his Church: It is infinitely below him to be
a Caput mortuum, affording no influences of Grace to his people. Acquaintance
with Christ is a sacred precious thing, no more to be sought among mere
Notions, than the living are to be sought among the dead: It imports no less
than a (...), or Communion with Christ, a having all Grace from him: Take away
this, and all the New Creatures in the World must die in a moment, being no
more able to subsist without him, than a Ray can be without a Sun, or a Stream
without a Fountain. Take away this, and immediately we sink into the Dregs and
foul Error of Pelagius, who, besides that Liberum Arbitrium, which however
adored, is but mere Nature, placed all Grace in External Revelation. This is
evident, because if Graces come not down from him and his Spirit, nothing
remains but External Revelation: De great. Christi contr. Pel. and Cel. cap. 24
Upon which Error St. Austin passes this Censure; Legant and intelligant,
intueantur atque fateantur; non Lege atque Doctrina insonante forinsecus, sed
interna atque occulta, mirabili ac ineffabili potestate operari Deum in
cordibus hominum, non solum veras revelationes, sed etiam bonas voluntates:
Desinat igitur Pelagius and seipsum and alios fallere, contra Dei Gratiam
disputando. And here Christ, I fear, may be again at odds with his Gospel, if,
contrary to its primitive Institution, which was to be an Organ or Ordinance
under the free-breathing Spirit of Christ, if it assume all the Dispensation of
Grace to it self. But if we may not have acquaintance with Christ himself, may
we have one with the Gospel? No, I doubt not, the Gospel tells us, That the
Spirit reveils the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and by necessary consequence,
the Gospel will lead us unto Christ for that Spirit, and to communion with him;
which is the thing opposed by the Author, but to me so precious, that before I
would open my lips against it, I would put my self under the penance of Severus
Sulpitius; who, having sullied himself with Pelagianism, afterward repented,
and devoted himself to perpetual silence, ut peccatum, Spond. Ann. An. 430.
quod loquendo contraxerat, tacendo emendaret. But now we must see the Pious
Learned Dr. Owen brought upon the Stage.

The Dr. tells us, Mr. Sherlock.
that Christ is not only the Wisdom of God, but made Wisdom to us; not only by
teaching us wisdom (by his Doctrine) as he is the great Prophet of his Church,
but also because by knowing of him we become acquainted with the Wisdom of God,
which is our Wisdom: To which purpose he applies that Text, which speaks of the
Doctrines of Christ, to his Person, Col. 2.3. For in him dwell all the
treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

A little before those words, Answer.
the Doctor's Design (by which in all Candor his After-discourse should be
construed) appears to be, that all Wisdom is laid up in Christ, and that from
him alone it is to be obtained, who is so hardy as to deny it? He that knows
him, becomes acquainted with one, in whom dwell all the treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, and from whom are derived all the Riches of Understanding in the
Saints. As in the corporal vision of an Object, there is requisite a Light in
the Air, and another in the Eye; so in this intellectual Vision, there is
external Revelation and internal Illumination; and both are from Christ. Cui
Veritas comperta sine Deo? De Anima cap. 1.
cui Deus cognitus sine Christo? cui Christus exploratus sine Spiritu sancto?
cui Spiritus sanctus accommodatus sine Fidei Sacramento? says Tertullian. By
that, Col. 2.3. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, is,
as I take it, meant the Person of Christ; the very same, which is pointed out,
Ver. 9. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead; Ver. 10. in him ye are
complete; Ver. 11. In him ye are circumcised; and Ver. 12. With him ye are
buried in Baptism, and with him ye are risen, through the faith of the
operation of God, who has raised him from the dead: I can very hardly
understand all these of the Gospel, neither did I ever find that it was raised
from the dead. But now let us hear the Author's Inference.

So that our acquaintance with Christ's Person signifies such a knowledge of
what Christ is, has done and suffered for us; Mr. Sherlock.
from whence we may learn those greater, deeper and more saving Mysteries of
the Gospel, which Christ has not expressly reveiled to us; for so the Doctor
adds, That these Properties of God, Christ has reveiled in his Doctrine, in
that Revelation he has made of God and his Will, but the Life of this
Knowledge lies in an acquaintance with his Person, whereby the express Image
and Beams of this Glory of his Father does shine forth, that is, that these
things are clearly, eminently and savingly only to be discovered in Christ: So
that, it seems the Gospel of Christ makes a very imperfect and obscure
discovery of the Nature, Attributes and Will of God; and a little after: This
sets up a new Rule of Faith above the Gospel, acquaintance with Christ.

Does our Acquaintance with Christ teach us Mysteries not reveiled in the
Gospel? No, by no means; neither does the Doctor say so; Read verba mea and
vanescet calumnia tua, says St. Austin to Julian. The Doctor says, those
Properties are reveiled in the Doctrine: And in a Sentence interposed by the
Doctor, but omitted by the Author, he says, The knowledge of them is exposed
to all; but says the Dr. The life of this knowledge lies in acquaintance with
Christ: So it is; he is God manifest in the Flesh, and so a rare Mirror of the
divine Perfections; and withal he is the Great Illuminator by his Spirit, and
so opens our eyes to see the Mysteries in Christ and the Gospel: Without this
Illumination the outward Revelation gives not a saving Knowledge. It may be the
Author will smile at me; but hear St. Austin: De Praed. Sanct. c. 8.
Valde remota est a sensibus carnis haec Schola, in qua Deus auditur and docet;
gratia ista secreta est, gratiam vero esse quis ambigit? Hear Bishop Davenant;
Exp. in Col. cap. 2.
Tales illuminationes fieri, and talem (...) imprimi fidelium animis non
credunt mundani, experiuntur tamen pii. The Gospel is a perfect outward
Revelation, and Rule of Faith, yet our blindness needs an inward Illumination,
that we may spiritually discern the Mysteries therein. But now the Author will
show us, what Additions these men make to the Gospel, from an Acquaintance with
Christ's Person; and first upon the doctors words, That the knowledge of God,
the knowledge of our selves, and skill to walk in Communion with God, in which
three is the sum of all true Wisdom, are obtained and manifested in and by the
Lord Christ. The Author observes, that [by] is fallaciously added, to include
the Revelations Christ has made. To which I answer; The Dr. never excluded
outward Revelation; but this alone cannot give saving knowledge: All Wisdom is
in Christ, as the Mirror of divine Perfections, and by Christ, as the great
Illuminator by his Spirit. We should use outward Revelation in the very same
posture as Zuinglius did, who, understanding from St. Peter that the Scripture
was not of private Interpretation, Mel. Ad. in vit. Zuing.
In coelum suspexit, doctorem quaerens Spiritum, looked up to heaven, seeking
the the Spirit for his great teacher.

Had Christ never appeared in the World, Mr. Sherlock.
yet we had reason to believe, that God is Wise, and Good, and Holy, and
Merciful, because not only the works of Nature and Providence, but the Word of
God assure us, that he is so. And a little after he adds; And is not this a
confident Man to tell us, That the love of God to sinners, and his pardoning
Mercy could never enter into the heart of man, but by Christ, when the
Experience of the whole World confutes him; for, whatever becomes of his new
Theories, both Jews and Heathens (who understand nothing at all what Christ was
to do in order to our recovery) did believe God gracious and merciful to
sinners.

The Jews knew God to be gracious and merciful, Answer.
very true, but through the promised Messiah, whom the Believers among them saw
slain in every Sacrifice; or else, which is hard to believe, they knew not the
meaning of that Service, or did it not in Faith. The Gentiles, as I conceive,
had some Glimmerings of pardoning Mercy in his Patience toward them, sparing
Mercy being an hint of pardoning; but this Patience was founded on the
Sacrifice of Christ, though unknown to them. God upon the Fall of Angels made a
short work, and immediately cast them down into Chains; and that he did not so
with Men, is only owing to the Sacrifice of Christ. As for the Dr. I suppose,
as to the Jews, he will fully concur with me; and as to the Gentiles, I must
concur with him, for he says, page 91. That pardoning Mercy which is reveiled
in the Gospel, shines not with one Ray out of Christ; the Mercy in the Gospel
expressly relates to the Satisfaction of Christ, and as such they knew it not;
though that Patience, which gave some glimpse of it, was founded on that
Satisfaction.

The Doctor tells us, Mr. Sherlock.
That in Christ God has manifested the Naturalness of his Justice in punishing
Sin, in that it was impossible that it should be diverted from sinners without
the interposing of a Propitiation; that is, God is so just, that he cannot
pardon without Satisfaction. Now this is such a Notion of Justice as is
perfectly new, which neither Scripture nor Nature acquaints us with.

Perfectly new! Answer.
how so? How many grave Divines and worthy Champions against the Socinians have
affirmed, That God, such is his infinite Sanctity and Righteousness, cannot
pardon sin without a Recompense or Satisfaction? And how strongly have they
urged it out of Scripture and Reason! In Scripture God is set forth as a
Righteous God, a Judge of the World, who will do right; one who cannot look
upon iniquity, who will by no means clear the guily; his punishing sin is
attributed not merely to his Will or Decree, but to his just Nature. Thus the
terrible Tempest comes down upon the wicked, because the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, Psalm. 11.6, 7. Thus the vials of wrath are poured out, because
God is righteousness, Revel. 16.5. In God an hatred of Sin is as essential as a
love of Holiness; and in this hatred is tacitly included a velle punire, as
some Divines speak; and upon that account sin cannot go unpunished. The
Subjection of a Rational Creature to its Creator is indispensable, and this
Dependence, so far as it is broken off by sin, must be salved up by punishment.
Should God punish merely from his Will, then it seems, Sin or no Sin, is all
one to him. God is in his own Nature no more moved with Impieties and hellish
Blasphemies, than if there were none; the punishing them or absolving them is
but an indifferent thing. Socinus upon that Text, absolvendo non absolvet,
says, That God, as propense as he is to mercy and forgiveness, absolves no
rebels and impenitent persons remaining in that estate: Yet, if he might pardon
without a Satisfaction, might he not do it without Repentance also? The very
Pagans knew (...), the just judgment of God, or that he would punish sin; and
this not from the reveiled Will of God, but from the natural Principles and
Sculptures graven in their hearts; which shows that the punishment is not
merely from God's Will. If Sin could have been pardoned without Satisfaction,
why was the only beloved Son of God made a Curse? Why did he fear, and tremble,
and bow, and sweat, and pray, and die upon a Cross, as the Dr. pathetically
expresses his Passion? It seems all this might have been spared. But says the
Author, All Mankind has accounted it an act of goodness to remit injuries,
without exacting punishment; and he is so far from being just, that he is cruel
and savage, who will remit no offense, till he has satisfied his revenge: That
part of Justice, which consists in punishing offenders, was always looked on as
an instrument of Government; and therefore the exacting or remitting punishment
was referred to the wisdom of Governors, who might spare or punish as they saw
reason for it. Unto which I answer, The Comparison between God and Man holds
not in all things: A Man may renounce his Dominion over his Servant, but God
cannot renounce his Dominion over his Creature; that, whilst a Creature, must
be subject unto him. A man (says the Author) is cruel, who will remit no
offense till he has satisfied his revenge: But, I hope, God is not so, who
never did, has or will remit any the least offense without satisfaction; a man
may remit a private offense without it, but may a Magistrate remit a public
one in all cases? No, surely, sometimes Justice and the Common Good calls for
punishment; Deus non vult, ut Princeps scelerato Legum publicarum violatori
poenam commeritam remittat, says the Learned Camero: God is here considered as
a Magistrate, as the great Judge of the World, and that he cannot remit without
satisfaction, is not out of Impotence, or Cruelty, but because of the supreme
Perfection of his Justice and Sanctity.

After the terrible discovery of the Naturalness of God's Justice, Mr. Sherlock.
the Doctor makes some amends for it; for now in Christ, the Nature of God is
discovered to be love and kindness; a happy change this, from all Justice to
all Love! But how comes this to pass? why, the account is very plain, because
the Justice of God has glutted it self with revenge on sin, in the Death of
Christ: And a little after; God is Love and Patience, when he has taken his
fill of revenge, as others use to say, that the Devil is very good, when he is
pleased.

What! Answer
does God glut himself with Revenge? or is he, as the Devil good when he is
pleased? I tremble at the Expressions, and verily believe, that the Dr. would
have laid down his neck upon the Block before he would have uttered them.
Revenge or Vengeance in God is nothing but pure immaculate Justice: Glutting
with Revenge is an Expression fit for malicious Men, or for Devils rather, but
not at all for God: God out of Christ is a consuming Fire, but in Christ a
gracious Father, reconconciling the World unto himself. Not that there is a
change in the unchangeable One; but, according to his wise and gracious Decree,
his Justice was satisfied in Christ, and through that Satisfaction his Love and
Kindness sweetly stream out to Men: He that dares deny this must forfeit his
Christianity. But if the Dr. did not utter these horrid words, may any such
thing be drawn from him by consequence? This the Author would hint; for says
he, The Dr. speaks very honorably of God; Whatever, says the Dr. discoveries
were made of the Patience and Lenity of God unto us, yet if it were not withal
reveiled, that the other Properties of God, as his Justice and Revenge for sin,
had their actings assigned them to the full, there could be little Consilation
gathered from the former; That is, says the Author, he would not believe God
himself, though he should make never so many Promises of Grace to sinners,
unless he were sure, that he had first satisfied his revenge. To which I
answer, Does the Dr. by [Discoveries] intend Promises of Graces? No certainly:
In his very entrance into the Discourse of Patience, he tells us his Design,
viz. to prove, That the Glimpses of Patience shining out in works of Providence
are exceedingly beneath the discovery of it which we have in Christ; and both
before and after the words quoted, he gives Instances of Gods Goodness in the
Rain and fruitful seasons, and he shows what kind of Patience he intends, that
is, A not immediate punishing upon the offense, not a word or tittle of
Promises: Neither is it at all imaginable that he could mean them; for he, who
holds a necessity of Satisfaction, as the Dr. does, could not so much as think
one single thought of a Promise to be the object of his Faith, or indeed at all
to be, without a crucified Christ, in whom God's Justice was satisfied. And for
the Glimpses of Patience shining out in Works of Providence, which are common
even to the poor Pagans, I may well say, that they are little, very little
consolations in comparison of those which Christians have: Pagans may see God
forbearing, but Christians see him fully satisfied in the Blood of Christ:
Pagans see God forbearing, but they cannot tell how long he may do so, or how
soon his wrath may come dashing down upon them; but Christians know that they
are delivered from the wrath to come, and so God's Patience is very sweet to
them. But the Author goes on in his charge: The Doctor says, that the nature
and end of God's Patience and Forbearance, is, God's taking a course in his
infinite Wisdom and Goodness, that we should not be destroyed notwithstanding
our sins; the Justice of God being satisfied, the greatest sins can do us no
hurt, we shall escape notwithstanding our sins: But the Gospel instructs us,
That without holiness no man shall see God: Thus the Author. To which I answer.
Surely we shall escape notwithstanding our sins, or else we cannot escape
without pure sinless perfection, and notwithstanding our greatest sins, or else
they exceed Gods Mercy and Christ's Merit: But what, without Repentance and
Holiness? No, by no means, the Doctor means no such matter, but says expressly,
That the end of Gods patience is, that his Will concerning our Repentance and
Salvation may be accomplished, and quotes that of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.9. God is
long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance; and surely where true Repentance is, holiness of
Life will follow.

As for the Wisdom of God, Mr. Sherlock.
no doubt but the Gospel of Christ makes glorious discoveries of it; but if
Justice be so natural to God, that nothing could satisfy him but the death of
his Son, the Redemption by Christ may discover his Justice or Goodness, but not
his Wisdom; It requires no great Wisdom to choose, when there is but one
possible way.

No doubt, Answer.
untraceable is the Wisdom hid in Redemption, great the Mystery, God manifest
in the Flesh: And what if there were but one possible Way of Redemption or
Salvation, and that only in and by the satisfactory Death of Christ? Is this an
Eclipse of the divine Wisdom? No, that one possible Way lay so deep, that no
wisdom of Men or Angels could have started a thought of it; nothing less than
the infinite Wisdom of God could have found it out, or brought it forth to the
World.

Upon the Doctors words, Mr. Sherlock.
We learn our disability to answer the Mind and Will of God, in all or any of
the obedience he requires, the Author adds, that is, It is impossible for us
to do any thing that is good, but we must be acted as Machins by an external
force, by the irresistible power of the Grace and Spirit of God; this is a new
discovery, we learn no such thing from the Gospel. And page 109. the Author
says, After all the noise they make about coming to Christ, they mean being
carried thither by an omnipotent and irresistible power; and to the same
purpose in other places.

That there is such a thing as irresistible Grace, Answer.
such as surely arrives at the Effect, is a great Truth; the Gospel shows forth
the Glory of it, there it is set forth thus: It takes away the stony Heart,
that is, the very resisting Principle: It writes the Law in the Heart, that is,
it gives such an inward Principle, as answers to the outward Command: It draws,
opens, quickens, regenerates, new-creates and conquers the Heart, carrying it
away by a translation into the Kingdom of Christ: It gives the very Willing,
the very Believing, the very Acting, causing us to walk in his Statutes; and
all this in a way of Power, greatness, and exceeding greatness of Power, such
as raised up Christ from the dead, Fph. 1.19. And if this be not irresistible
Grace, I know not what is. St. Austin clearly owns such a Grace, De Praed.
Sanct. c. 8.
Haec Gratia (says he) quae occulte humanis cordibus divina largitate
tribuitur, a nullo duro cord respuitur; Ideo quippe tribuitur, ut cordis
duritia primitus auferatur. The Fathers in the Arausican Council tell us, That
believing, willing, desiring, endeavoring, laboring, watching, praying,
seeking, knocking, and all is from Grace, Can. 6. And that we may know how the
Work of Grace is wrought, they call it, Mutatio dextrae excelsi, A Change
wrought by the right hand of the most High, Can. 15. Our Church, in the Homily
concerning the Coming down of the holy Ghost, speaking of the Conception of the
Lord Christ, as a mavelous matter, adds, But where the holy Ghost works,
there nothing is impossible, as may farther appear by the inward Regeneration
and Sanctification of Mankind; and withal calls Regeneration or the new Birth,
The Great Power of the holy Ghost. The incomparable Bishop Usher asserts, Mist.
of Incarn. page 43.
That no less power is requisite to the effecting of the new Creature, than was
at first to the producing of all things out of nothing; and what can this be
less than an irresistible Grace? Should there be only resistible Grace, those
Prayers in Scripture, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. and,
Turn us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, Lam. 5.21. must have but a
sick Consequence; And those two great Petitions in the Lords Prayer, Thy
Kingdom come, and Thy Will be done, seem, as Mr. Rous observes, to run after
this rate, Lord, let thy Kingdom be at my pleasure, and thy Will at the will of
my Free Will, whether that shall come, or this be done. In very deed, the great
Design of a Church to be purchased by Christ's Blood, gathered by his holy
Spirit, and crowned with Glory in Heaven, though it cannot but be more
estimable than all the Providence in Nature, must be a mere Pendant on the
fickle Will of Man. But the Author urges upon the Doctor, That it is impossible
for us, according to his Principles, to do any thing that is good, that is, I
suppose without Faith in Christ, without which, our Church in her Homily of
good Works declares, that no good work can be done: I take it for a very Truth,
That from the first good Thought to the last Act of an holy Life, all that is
truly good must come from Grace: But, says the Author, This turns us into mere
Machins; and page 379. he glosses upon one of his Opposites, as if Christ were
to make us willing against our will: Unto which I answer, The very same was
cast into St. Austin's dish by the Pelagians; Sub nomine, inquiunt, Ad
Bonisacdib. 2. cap. 5.
Gratiae it a satum asserunt, ut dicant, quia nisi Deus invito and reluct anti
homini inspir averit boni and ipsius imperfecti cupiditatem, nec a malo
declinare, nec bonum posset arripere: To which, as a mere Calumny, St. Austin
returns, That a man may as well call St. Paul, fati assertorem, for saying, It
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy. Indeed it is a very strange charge; does Grace destroy Nature, or may we
be willing against our Will? It is impossible: That of the Schoolman may
reconcile the matter, Voluntas humana induci potest ab agente creato, mutari ab
agente increato, Bona^^^^ in (...). 2.25.
cogi a nullo: The Will, without ceasing to be it self, cannot be compelled;
but Grace changes it without Coaction, breaks off its Chains without destroying
its Liberty, and per suavissimam omnipotentiam makes the unwilling Will willing.

But still there is a more glorious Discovery behind, that is, Mr. Sherlock.
The glorious end whereunto Sin is appointed and ordained, (I suppose the Dr.
means by God) is discovered in Christ, viz. for the demonstration of God's
Vindictive Justice in measuring out to it a just recompense of reward, and for
the praise of Gods glorious Grace in the pardon and forgiveness of it; that is,
It could not be known how just and severe God is, but by punishing sin; nor how
good and gracious God is, but by pardoning it: And therefore lest his Justice
and Mercy should never be known to the World, he appoints and ordains Sin to
this edd, that is, Decrees that men shall sin, that he may make some vessels of
wrath, and others vessels of mercy: This is a Discovery which Nature and
Revelation could not make; for Nature would teach us, that so infinitely a
glorious Being as God is, needs not sin and misery to recommend his Glory and
Perfections; and that so holy a God, who so perfectly hates every thing that is
wicked, would not truckle with Sin and the Devil for his glory; and that so
good a God had much rather be glorious in the happiness and perfection and
obedience of his Creatures, than in their sin and misery: And Revelation tells
us the same thing, That God delights not in the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should return and live, that is, He had rather there were no occasion
for punishing, than be made glorious by such acts of vengeance: Vindictive
Justice and pardoning Mercy are but secondary Attributes of the Divine Nature,
and therefore God cannot primarily design the glorifying of them; for that
cannot be without designing the sin and misery of his Creatures, which would be
inconsistent with the goodness and holiness of his Nature. And afterward page
57. He appointed sin for the glory of his Justice and Grace, and (since nothing
can withstand the Decrees of God) it pleased God that Man should sin, but when
he has sinned, he is extremely displeased with it, and now his Justice must be
satisfied: This falls hard on those miserable Wretches, whose ill fortune it
was, without any fault of theirs, to be left out of the Roll of Election, and
who have no way to satisfy divine Justice, but by their eternal torments.

It is, I suppose, agreed by all, that God did willingly permit the entry of
sin upon the World of Angels and Men: he could have kept all the Angels up in
their primitive Station, and then there would have been no Tempter to Man; or,
had their been one, he could have sent the holy Angels to warn him from the
late downcast of their fellows, against his own, and to tell him, that the
poison would come from the Serpent; or, if not that, he could have sent him
such strong auxiliaries of Grace as should have out wrestled the temptation; he
could, no doubt, as easily as he confirms the Saints and Angels in Heaven; he
could for ever have barred out sin, but he would not, he freely suffered it to
come in, only the question is, How he did it? Whether there be only a nude
Permission, such as leaves the event pendulous and uncertain, till Man's Will
has determined; or whether there be a Preordination of the Event, so that it
falls out infallibly, Deo permittente and Creatura libere agente? Two things
constrain me to believe the latter: The one is this, That without a
Preordination, the Event of sinful Actions must be casual, and what then shall
become of Providence? The Moments, which hang upon those Events, are great and
weighty. Multitudes of Angels, Courtiers of Heaven, turn Apostates; out of
their Fall comes a Tempter, who at one blow draws Man and all his Posterity
into sin; that entering into the world makes way for a glorious Redemption by
Christ: The Four first Monarchies roll about upon the Lusts and Ambitions of
Men; The poor Church, like the Ark, floats upon the waters, and now and then a
storm of persecution comes dashing down upon it; Errors and Heresies
successively break forth as so many Torrents ready to carry away every Article
of our Creed, and what mighty Concerns are these? Admirable are the Methods and
Mysteries of Providence in and about such Events; Joseph's Brethren sell him
into Egypt, and the Church is provided for in the famine; Absolon goes in to
his Fathers Concubines,, and David is visited for his Adultery; Judah and Tamar
commit Incest, and this way came the holy One into the flesh; The wicked Jews
crucify the Son of God, and out comes the great Work of Redemption;
Persecutors scatter the Church, and God by this means scatters the Gospel, Act.
8. In such Actions as these the Light shines out of Darkness; God's Mercy,
Justice, Wisdom, Holiness, Power, break forth out of Man's Cruelty, Injustice,
Folly, Filthiness and Weakness: In every Ataxy God has a secret Order; either
an Order of Penalty, Sin punishing Sin; or an Order of Conducibility, Good
coming out of Evil. Nullum est malum in mundo (says profound Bradwardine) quod
non est propter aliquod magnum bonum, and forsitan propter aliquod majus bonum.
The Concerns being so great, sit down and consider; May such Events be casual?
Did Angels and Man fall by chance, or could that Providence, which is waky over
Hairs and Sparrows, sleep over such a Concern? Or if it could, must not the
great work of Redemption, pendent on a casual Fall, be casual also? May Fortune
ring the changes over Empires and Churches, or cast out Persecutions and
Heresies, as roving Meteors to do her pleasure? May lots be cast upon the
Genealogy and Passion of Christ, or the Acts of Gods Mercy, Justice, Wisdom,
Holiness and Power shining out in such Events hang upon a Peradventure? May the
All-wise and Almighty God sit, complicatis manibus and oculis conniventibus, as
Amyraldus speaks, whilst such vast and wonderful Concerns are in agitation?
Methinks no sober Man can in Reason think it credible. For my own part, did I
once believe a Lottery of such Events, I should think that my next Fancy would
be, That Epicurus his Atoms by a lucky Hit made up that World, which is so
fortuitously governed in the very great Concerns of it: He that allows not a
determining stroke of Providence in such things, May, as Bishop Davenant says,
avoid the suspicion of Stoicism or Manicheism, but very hardly of Atheism. This
is the first thing: These Events, if unordained, must needs be casual, and
without a Providence. Neither is this to be salved by Divine Prescience;
Prescience, as it is infallible, is of things future and of determinate Verity;
and casual unordained Events, not being such, are no fit Object for it: This
made Episcopius doubt, whether Prescience or at least the knowledge of it were
necessary. But might such a thing be of mere Casuals, yet Prescience is not
Providence. Had the Epicurean Atoms rallied themselves into a World, the Event,
though foreseen, could not have been claimed by Providence as its own, but must
have been left to those Ethnic Names of Chance or Fortune; and to the same,
must every unordained Event be left, over which there is nothing but mere
Prescience. The other thing, which constrains my Belief, is, That the holy
Scripture, from whence we must take our truest Measures, expressly, emphatically
own such a Preordination of the Event; not to insist on that Counsel of
Ahitophel, which yet observably hits the Mark, only as God will have it, to
chastise David in the Concubines, but not to destroy him in the pursuit; I
shall instance in others; God turned his heart to hate his people, Psalm.
105.25. God put it into their hearts to give their kingdom unto the Beast, Rev.
17.17. It was of the Lord to harden their hearts, Josh. 11.20. The cause was
from the Lord, that Rehoboam hearkened not, 1 Kings 12.15. Touching Absolon's
Incest, God says, I will do it, 2 Samuel 12.12. Touching the lying Spirit, he
says, Go, and thou shall prevail, 1 Kings 22.22. Antiochus tears and
blasphemes like a Devil, but that which was determined was done, Dan. 11.36.
The Jews crucisie the Lord of Glory, but God's hand and God's counsel had
determined it, Act. 4.28. In such pregnant Scriptures can there be any thing
less than a determining Providence, or what other interpretation is tolerable?
May we interpret such emphatical places only of a nude Permission, which leaves
the Event pendulous and uncertain? It cannot be; De Scient. 219.
the very Jesuit Ruiz will here confess, Dei voluntate, decreto, consilio,
definitione fieri peccatorum actiones significat Scriptura: But, which is more
valuable than Ruiz, the Sensus fidelium (which is one of the best Interpreters
of Scripture) runs this way: It was not you that sent me, says Joseph: The
Lord has taken away, says Job: The Lord has said, Curse, says David: Thou
have ordained them for judgment, says Habbakkuk of the Chaldees: Still they
look up to the hand of Providence in such Events. And in truth, what else can
they do in such cases? May they fear, trust in, or depend on Man? He is but a
Creature, and there is a Curse in it: Shall they fear, trust in, or depend upon
God? A God he is, but such Events fall not under his Providence. In a word;
These things give me such satisfaction in this Point, that if Humane Reason
could object what I could not answer, I should yet adhere to the Truth, saying
with St. Austin, Petrus negat, Latro credit, O altitudo! quaeris tu rationem,
ego expavescam altitudinem; tu disputa, ego credam. However I shall consider
what the Author says; and first he tells us, That such an ordaining is not
consistent with Gods Holiness: To which I answer, I confess this Objection in
the Remonstrants looked to me, prima facie, as a piece of Tenderness toward
God, lest any blot should light on the holy One; they frame God's Decrees upon
Prescience, and suffer Man's Will to go foremost in the Event of sinful Acts:
But remembering, that even in the Event of good Actions, they frame Gods Decrees
upon Prescience also, and let Man's Will take the Primacy, it appeared to me,
that the great Center of all was no other than the Will of Man; and from such a
Center, I despaired that any Divine Attribute should be truly glorified.
Indeed, after the Scripture has so often and pregnantly asserted a determining
Providence over such Events, for man to say, That God is holier than so, is a
piece of fondness like that of the Masoreths, who in the Hebrew Bible have put
in some words in the Margin, as cleanlier than those in the Text: Nothing can
be vainer than to imagine that Man should be able to draw the Picture of God's
Holiness fairer than he himself has done in Scripture; or that what is spoken
there touching his Providence, should in the least reflect upon his Holiness.
But for a fuller Answer, I say, Gods Providence, which in sinful Actions, is,
as I take it, operative of the Entity, permissive of the Malice, dispositive of
the Order, and preordinative of the Event, does in none of these cast any blot
on his Holiness. As to the Entity, God acts but as becomes the First Cause;
Arminius himself would have it, Vt totus act us rite Providentiae subjiciatur,
qua actus efficienti, qua peccatum permittenti Providentiae. As to the Malice,
God is but a Permissor: Sin in the abstract has only a deficient Cause, viz.
the Creature, that, as defectible in it self, has redire ad non esse a sell,
and, as under a Law distinct from it self, may fall short of it: But God, who
has no other Law but his own Perfection, and can no more decline from his
Rectitude than his Being, is a mere Permissor. As to the Order, God disposes
it; here instead of a Blot, the Glory of God breaks forth, in that he has his
holy Line in the midst of the Ataxies of men; either an Order of Penalty, such
as becomes him as the Prima Justitia; or an Order of Coducibility, such as
suits him as the Prima Sapientia. In the Sale of Joseph Man was cruel, but God
merciful: In the Act of Judah and Tamar, Man was unclean, but God holy, aiming
at the Messiah in it: In Rehoboam's rough Answer, Man was foolish, but God
wise, to accomplish his word: In the Assyrian Tyranny, Man was unjust, but God
righteous to correct his people: In the strong Delusions sent to those that
love not the Truth, Man was weak, but God strong in Spiritual Judgments; and,
to name but one more: In the Crucifixion of Christ, there was Malice, Blood and
Wickedness on Man's part, but Love, Justice and Righteousness on God's; one
Attribute or other of his glitters in the Event, with no more taint than is
upon the pure Sunbeams by their converse in unclean places. It Is true, God
needs not Sin to recommend his Glory, no, nor Virtue or Holiness in the
Creature; but sure he uses Sin that way, and that so holily, that it deserves a
more reverent Expression than trucking with sin and the Devil. As to the Event
God preordains it. I confess the Event of sinful Actions is evil in it self,
but in some respect it may be good to a third person: Confess. li. 9. cap. 8.
A railing Servant wrought a cure upon Monica, as St. Austin relates: Nay, in
some case it may be good to the sinner; De Civit. l. 14. c. 13.
Audeo dicere superbis esse utile, cadere in aliquod apertum manifestumque
peccatum, unde sibi displiceant, qui jam sibi placendo ceciderant, says the
same Author: And again on those words, Omnia cooperantur in bonum, Romans 8. he
adds, Etiam si deviant and exorbitent, De Correp. cap. 9.
hoc ipsum eis faciat proficere in bonum, quia humliores redeunt and doctiores;
But however the Event be evil to the sinner, it is not so to God as Ordinator.
The Event of Adam's Fall was evil to him, but, as it made way for the Redeemer,
was not so to God; which made one cry out, O foelix culpa, quae tantum meruit
Redemptorem! The Event of the vile Affections in the Gentiles was evil to them,
but, as it was punitive of their Idolatry, was not so to God: Hence St. Austin
says elegantly, Tradit Deus in passiones ignominiae, Contr. Jul. lib. 5.
ut fiant quae non convenient, sed ipse convenienter tradit; even those
inconvenient Affections were convenient for Gods Justice to inflict on them. Is
it not good that Sin should be punished with Sin? The Scripture plainly affirms
it; and if the Event may be good as to God, because of the Order of just
penalty, why may it not be such because of the Order of wise Conducibility? God
by his holy Ordination (...), Dion. de Div. Nom. cap. 4:
as far as that Ordination is: Hence the Apostle puts a (...) upon the Event of
Heresies; Dial. de Ver. cap. 8.
and Anselm puts a Debet esse upon the Event of Sin; and St. Austin lays it
down clearly, Euch. cap. 96.
Vt sent and mala bonum est, aliter nullo modo esse sinerentur ab omnipotente
bono; every thing is good so far as ordinated by him: In this sense the Medes
are God's sanctified ones without sanctity in themselves, and Events are good
without goodness in themselves; that which is evil in Specie, may be good in
Ordine, and so far as it is good, it is a fit Object for his Will; especially
seeing it is ordained to come to pass, Deo permittente on the one hand, and
Creatura libere agente on the other. On such Terms as these, I may say, Deo
ordinante, pulchra sunt omnia. But, says the Author, The Creature cannot act
freely, for nothing can withstand the Decrees of God. To which I answer, Gods
Providence is ever salvative of the Creatures Liberty, inferring not a
necessity of Coaction, but Immutability: Instances in Scripture are abundant;
Antiochus blasphemes according to his own will, yet it was determined, Dan.
11.36. The Chaldees march in violence and in the pomp of freedom, insomuch that
the Text says, That their judgment and dignity proceeded of themselves, yet
God had ordained them for judgment, Hab. 1. The Kings in Revel. 17. gave their
Kingdom to the Beast, and what freer than gift? yet God put in their hearts to
do so: The Jews freely crucified Christ, yet God's hand and counsel was in it.
After such pregnant Scriptures, ought we not to acquiesce in this Truth, That
God's Decree and Man's Liberty may consist together. Cajetan is an excellent
Pattern for us, who, laying down the Common Opinion, That Humane Acts are
evitable as to us, but inevitable as to Providence; and then mentioning some
distinctions to reconcile the matter, piously concluded, that he would
captitivate his Uunderstanding in obsequium fidei; and so we should all. Having
so prolixly spoken of the Ordination of such Events, a very little may serve as
to the End; when God preordains such Events, to be sure he does it in great
Wisdom and Reason, some End there is in it: If any will say, it was done, quia
Voluit, I am content, his Will is never irrational; if he will say further,
that it was for his Glory, I am satisfied, that is the supreme End; if he will
yet go on and say, it was for the manifestation of his Justice and Mercy, I
cannot tell how to assign a better End; if the after-use made of Sin may
interpret God's meaning, that shows forth the Illustration of both those
Attributes: The Apostle tells us, That God is willing to show his wrath and
power in some, and to make known the riches of his glory in others, Romans 9.
Suppose there were no Ordination, but only a nude Permission, a man may ask,
Why did God permit such an Apollyon as Sin to enter the World? Why suffered he
so many glorious Angels to fall into sin, and immediately, without any place
for Repentance, to sink into Chains of Darkness for ever? There is scarce any
appearance but of mere Sovereignty and Justice in it: Why suffered he Man and
all his Posterity with him to fall into sin and wrath? It is plain, that the
work of Redemption, in which Justice and Mercy were both showed forth, was
ushered in upon it. It Is true, as the Scripture says, That God delights not in
the death of a sinner; not in death, as it is the misery of the Creatute; not
in the death of a repenting sinner, his Repentance, which is there opposed to
Death, is more grateful: However, the sins of men fall under his Providence,
and, without repentance, their death, as an act of Justice, will be grateful to
him, insomuch that he will laugh at it, Prove. 1. There are behind yet two other
Expressions; the one puts the Doctor's Opinion into odious colors, after this
manner: It pleased God that Man should sin, but when he had sinned, he is
exceedingly displeased at it: But upon the very opening of it, all vanishes
into nothing; God's holy Ordination was his pleasure, but Man's Sin is hateful
and provocative of wrath. This cannot be strange to any one versed in
Scripture: The Assyrian Tyrant was the Staff and the Rod in Gods hand, sent by
him against his people; yet when the work was done, God would punish the fruit
of his stout heart, and kindle a fire under his Glory: Gods Hand and Gods
Counsel was in the Crucifixion of Christ, and yet what an horrible tempest of
wrath came down on the Jews for it? The other Expression is this; This falls
hard upon those miserable wretches, who without any fault of theirs were left
out of the Roll of Election: To which I answer; It is very hard if God may not
have his Royal Prerogative of putting in or leaving out whom he pleases in the
Book of Life; the Apostle is clear, He will have mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. And if any murmur he must hear, Nay, but, O
man, who art thou that reply against God? As if the Apostle had said. If
thou had, O Man, but any Sentiments of thy own Nothingness, or true Rays of
the divine Glory, thou would never dare to implead thy Maker: Thou would
not endure to see a little Fly or Ant, had it Reason enough, to draw an Earthly
Prince into question, and will thou do so to the great Lord of Heaven and
Earth? There is no Commune Jus, or Common Measure between him and thee to
warrant such a presumption.

This is not enough, Mr. Sherlock.
said the Doctor, that we are not guilty, we must also be actually righteous;
not only all sin is to be answered for, but all righteousness is to be
fulfilled: Now this Righteousness we find only in Christ, we are reconciled to
God by his Death and saved by his Life; that actual Obedience he yielded to the
whole Law of God is that Righteousness whereby we are saved; we are innocent by
virtue of his Expiation, and righteous with his Righteousness. Upon which words
the Author infers; This is a mighty comfortable discovery, how we may be
righteous without doing any thing that is good or righteous; but the Gospel
tells us that he is righteous who does righteousness; that without holiness no
man shall see God; that the only way to obtain pardon of sins, is to repent of
and forsake them: The only thing that gives a right to the promises of future
Glory is to obey the Laws and imitate the Example of our Savior, and to be
transformed into the Nature and likeness of God.

The Doctor is no enemy to Holiness, Answer.
but cannot assign it an Vbi in Justification; no more does our Church, who, in
the Homily touching the Salvation of Man, says, All men are sinners and
breakers of the Law, therefore can no man by his own Acts, Works and Deeds
(seem they never so good) be justified and made righteous before God, but every
man is constrained to seek for another Righteousness; which afterward is
declared to be Christ's fulfilling the Law and making satisfaction. In
Justification no other Righteousness can take place but that Active and Passive
one of Christ, which answers the pure and righteous Law in every point: He that
does righteousness is righteous, that is, his doing shows, but does not make
him righteous in Justification. Repentance is an Evangelical Condition, but no
Cause of Pardon: Holiness and Obedience are the way to Glory, but not the Cause
of it: A Transformation into God's Image makes us meet for Heaven, but the
Righteousness of Christ alone purchased a Title for us. As to what the Author
adds, Though our Obedience be not perfect, if it be sincere, we shall be
accepted for the sake of Christ; I answer, Our Obedience is accepted, but not
to be the matter of our Justification; Christ's Righteousness alone is that
which answers the Law for us.

The third part of our Wisdom is to walk with God, Mr. Sherlock.
says the Doctor, and to that is required Agreement, Acquaintance, a Way,
Strength, Boldness, and aiming at the same Ends; and all these with the Wisdom
of them are hid in the Lord Jesus: The sum of which, says the Author, in short
is this, That Christ having expiated our sins, and fulfilled all righteousness
for us, though we have no personal righteousness of our own, but are as
contrary to God as darkness is to light, and death to life, and an universal
polution to an universal holiness, and hatred to love; yet the Righteousness of
Christ is a sufficient, nay, the only foundation of our agreement; and upon
that of our walking with God; though St. John tells us, If we say we have
fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth.

Christ the sufficient and only Foundation? Answer.
No doubt he is so; who can, who dares lay any other? Had not he satisfied
divine Justice, there could have been no room for agreement or walking with
God, but as cursed Exiles we must have gone to our own place in the lowest
Hell: But what Foundation is he? Is he such an one, that profane persons,
contrary to God, as Darkness to Light, Death to Life, Polution to Holiness, and
Hatred to Love, may, whilst such, agree or walk with God? Is he such, that
such wicked ones, walking in darkness, may have fellowship with him, contrary
to that of the Apostle? Or that such may, as the Authors phrase is, become
bold, and look Justice in the face, and whet their knife at the Counter-door,
all their debts being discharged by Christ? Does the Dr. say so, or mean any
such thing? No surely; hear what he says, not in remote places, but upon this
very point: God is Light, we darkness, he Life, we dead sinners, he Holiness,
we defiled, he Love, we hatred; surely this is no foundation of agreement, or
upon that, of walking together; nothing can be more remote than this frame from
such a condition: The foundation then of this is laid in Christ, he is our
peace, he slew the Enmity in his Body on the Cross, he made an atonement with
God; God lays down the Enmity on his part, and proceeds to slay the Enmity on
ours: We receive the Atonement, lay down our Enmity to God, and have access
unto the Father: Christ gives us an Understanding to know him that is true; he
consecrates a new and a living way into the holiest of all; and this way is no
other but himself, he is the Medium of communication between God and us; all
influences of Love, Kingness, Mercy from God to us are through him; all our
returns of Love, Delight, Obedience to God, are all through him; nay, all our
Strength is from him, by the Spirit of life and power he bears us on Eagles
Wings in the paths of walking with God; and in him we come to have an aim and
design at Gods Glory. Thus and much more says the Dr. in that place, his
excellent words need no Apology; let the curious Palate taste them at the
Fountain, and then tell me, if there be any Tack or Tincture of those black
Consequences hinted by the Author; if there be any print or footstep of any
such thing as this, That profane men, without any personal sanctity, in a state
of contrariety to God, may, whilst such, walk or have communion with him: Nay,
let any unprejudiced Reader say, if the contrary do not appear; the Dr. says,
Nothing can be more remote than this frame from such a condition, as agreement
or walking with God; and as there are influences of Love, Kindness and Mercy
from God so there are returns of Love, Delight, Obedience from us. Afterward,
the Dr. speaking only of designing Gods glory, the Author with the same candor
glosses thus; That is, I suppose, we design it by trusting to the Expiation and
Righteousness of Christ, without doing any thing our selves; not a jot or
tittle of this appears in the Doctor.

God (according to the Dr.) is so naturally just, Mr. Sherlock.
that he could not pardon without Satisfaction; That is, says the Author, he
is so just, that he has not one dram of Goodness in him, till is Vengeance be
satisfied, which is a glorious kind of Justice.

What! not a dram of Goodness? Answer.
How then did he send his Son into the World? Was there not a dram in that Act
immense Love? Or did not that precede Satisfaction? Both are undeniable: If
God's being so naturally just, as not to pardon without Satisfaction, argue
that there is not a dram of Goodness in him before Satisfaction, what does his
being decretively so just? In this latter he might have waved such a Decree,
but he would not; neither does he pardon any man without a Satisfaction.

Justice being satisfied, Mr. Sherlock.
a comfortable Scene appears; now God embraces sinners, and accounts them
perfectly innocent in Christ's Satisfaction: But this is not enough, the Law
must be fulfilled, as well as his Justice satisfied; we must be righteous as
well as innocent; otherwise we may escape punishment, but can expect no reward:
(though, I confess, I should have thought, that Christ had satisfied for sins
of omission together with sins of commission: And as by his satisfaction for
doing what we ought not to do, we are reputed by God, as having never done any
thing amiss; so by his Satisfaction for our neglecting what we ought to have
done, we might by the same reason be reputed by God perfectly righteous, to
have done all that we ought, to have kept the whole Law; but it seems this was
not sufficient)(...) and therefore as Christ's satisfaction is imputed to us for
the forgiveness of sins; so his righteousness is imputed to us, to make us
perfectly righteous.

God in his infinite wisdom redeemed the world, in such a way, Answer.
as was perfectly completive of the Law; we in our lapsed estate were double
debtors to the Law; as rational creatures we owed perfect Obedience, and as
sinful creatures, eternal sufferings; the Law calls for punishment, but that is
not all, it calls for perfect Obedience, that it did primarily before sin
entered, and that it does unalterably: The aftersin did not dissolve the
obligation; Now Christ's righteousness was every way completive of the Law; as
active, completive of the mandatory part of it, as passive, of the minatory;
these two ought not to be divided or severed the one from the other: Now the
Authors Argument, which is this, That his satisfaction being for all sins of
Omission, as well as Commission, must needs make us perfectly righteous; runs
upon an Hypothesis, which I think is not to be admitted: viz. That Christ's
satisfaction may be considered apart, or severed from his Obedience; his active
and passive righteousness both together, taken in conjunction, are, as I
conceive, a perfect completure of the Law, and do both expiate our sins, and
make us perfectly righteous before God; But further, Innocent and Righteous are
not altogether the same: Hear the eminent Dr. Featly, Sac. Nem. 33.34,
There are two sorts of causes in Courts of Justice, criminal and civil; in
criminal its true, idem est esse insontem and justum, it is all one to be
innocent and just, but not in civil, where Justice has respect to a reward; in
that regard a guiltless man is not necessarily a just man, that is, a deserving
man; It was not enough for Demosthenes to plead for Ctesiphon, that he was an
harmless man, and therefore ought to have the Crown, but that he was a
deserving man, and by Law ought to have it. God is said to be a righteous
Judge, not only in inflicting punishments, but in conferring rewards, and
Crowns of Glory: Justification has respect to both; two questions are put to
us at Gods Tribunal: First, why should thou not be condemned to Hell for thy
sins? The answer is, Christ has satisfied for me: Secondly, Why should thou
receive a Crown of Glory, since thou have not fulfilled the Law? The answer is,
Christ has fulfilled the Law for me; both these are expressed by Anselm, in
his Book de modo visitandi infirmos, si dixerit, meruisti damnationem, dic
Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi obtendo inter me and mala merita mea,
ipsiusque meritum offero pro merito, quod ego debuissem habere, nec haheo; He
that is free from the guilt of all sins of omission, and commission, is
righteous in regard of punishment and guilt; but not so righteous, as to have a
title to a Crown of Glory, the taking away of guilt does not necessarily put
merit: Thus that learned man. Our Church in the Homily of the salvation of
mankind, puts Christ's satisfaction, and his fulfilling the Law together in
justification; not ascribing all to satisfaction.

Now God and sinners may agree very well, though they have guilt enough, Mr.
Sherlock.
and he justice enough to destroy a world; yet there is no danger, since Christ
has satissied justice; and though he be infinitely holy, and sinners
abominably filthy, yet there is no fear he should loath and abhor them, when
they are clothed with the white and spotless robes of Christ's righteousness:
They are very secure, that neither their past sins, nor present habitual
impurities can do them any hurt, they shall be saved notwithstanding their
sins.

Those who are in truth clothed with Christ's righteousness, Answer.
are secure, if any thing can do it, against the wrath of God; But are those
rich robes worn by impenitent sinners, rolling in their beloved lusts? Or do
those robes go alone without the sanctifying Spirit? Who, among those the
Author opposes, ever spoke or meant so? And why are such odious hints cast
forth? The Papists indeed have charged some such things upon Protestants in the
point of justification, which made Chemnitius enter his protest thus, Exam.
Cone. Trid. 129.
Express damnamus Simonis Magi blasphemiam, qui finxit hominibus gratis fide
salvatis liberum esse, ut agant quaecunque velint, serio abhorremus a Basilidis
blasphemia, qui finxit ita nos fide salvari, ut universa libido indifferenter
usurpari possit. But why one Protestant should draw up such a charge against
another, I cannot but wonder; however the Author triumphantly concludes, These
are those fundamental doctrines, with which these men have blessed the world,
from a pretended acquaintance with Christ's person; which ought to be called the
Religion of Christ's person, in opposition to the Religion of his Gospel: To
which I shall only say, that I leave others to judge, whether any such thing as
that opposition has been made good hitherto.

Christ having satisfied and fulfilled the Law, we have nothing to do, Mr.
Sherlock.
but to get an interest in his satisfaction and righteousness; he is very
ignorant of Christ, who hopes that any thing else will avail him to salvation:
All which the Author speaks, as the sense of his Opposites.

Is there nothing to do after getting into Christ? Who ever said, Answer.
or meant so? Is there no walking in Christ? Are there no fruits of Holiness
and Righteousness to be brought forth? Or are those mere unprofitable things,
and of no avail? None of the Opposites ever owned any such thing, however I
confess none of our good works must take Christ's Prerogative, or sit down in
the room of his merits and righteousness.

Now that we may come to Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
(says the Author, pointing at his Opposites) It is absolutely necessary, that
we be sensible of our lost condition; we must work our fancy into great terrors
and agonies, and a dismal fear of the wrath of God, and his natural justice;
the spirit of bondage must go before the spirit of adoption, without this we
shall never value Christ, the promise of ease is made to the weary, those only
shall be satisfied, who hunger and thirst after imputed righteousness; now
being stung with sin, it is time to look up to Christ to see his fullness and
perfection.

All this in a Drollery! Answer.
and are we come to that pass, that we can sport our selves at such things as
these? Need we prove that there are such things as broken hearts, or repentant
tears, or sorrow for sin? Are these the workings of fancy or imagination? When
Genesius was mocking on the Stage at the Christian mysteries, Spond. Ann.
Domini 303.
he was on a sudden so wrought on, by the Grace of God, that he did serio agere
quod jocis actitabat: May the Author speed no worse, while he makes himself
merry with this, and other Divine things: Let us seriously consider does sin
hang so loose on us, that we can shake it off easily without so much sense or
sorrow? Are we so propense to Christ, that we will go to him without a feeling
of our wants? Why, or wherefore should we do so? Will we go to him for
righteousness, who can work out one at our fingers ends, or for regenerating
grace, who can dispatch the matter our selves, or for a supply of our wants,
who feel no such matter? Our Savior spoke indeed of the weary and heavy laden:
Such as Grotius says, Peccati onere suspirant, and ad libertatem aspirant: But
according to our Author, it seems to signify little; the Apostle speaks of a
spirit of bondage, but some it seems, never felt any such thing: Afterward the
Author speaking of their comforting Souls, afraid to come to Christ thus, Does
not God justify the ungodly? Did Christ take our flesh, and not our sins upon
him? Compare your distress and Christ's compassion, your wants and Christ's
fullness, your unworthiness and Christ's freeness, etc. He adds, And now if
Christ do not prevail above thy fears, thou art not worthy to be acquainted
with him. But now let Mr. Shepherd that excellent practical Divine come upon
the Stage.

If thou objectest (says Mr. Shepherd) what have I to do with Christ? Mr.
Sherlock.
who have such an unholy, vile, hard, blind, and most wicked heart; O dishonor
not the Grace of Christ, thou can not come to Christ, till laden and
separated from sin, but no more sorrow for sin, no more separation from sin is
necessary to this closing with Christ, than so much as makes thee willing, or
rather not unwilling, that the Lord should take it away; know if thou seek
for a greater measure of humiliation, thou show the more pride, who will
rather go into thy self, to make thy self holy and humble; than go out of thy
self unto the Lord Jesus to take away thy sin; thou think Christ cannot love
thee, until thou make thy self fair, upon which serious words, the Author
after his merry way tells us, The reason of all this is very plain from our
acquaitance with Christ; he is our Physician, and we must go to him with all
our diseases and sores about us; he a fountain, and we must go to him with all
our filthiness, to be cleansed; he is all fullness, it is not fit to carry any
thing to him, he is our righteousness, and we must leave our own behind us, he
is all beauty, we must not carry any to him, all we have to do, is to go to
Christ weary and sick, and filthy, and naked, stripped of every thing but our
sins and impurities, to receive ease and health, and fullness and beauty from
him.

The Author hints, as if according to Mr. Shepherd, Answer.
a man must go to Christ indulging his Lusts, and wallowing in them, with all
his sores running, and filthiness allowed, but how untrue is this? Mr. Shepherd
says expressly, Thou can not come to Christ, till thou art laden, and
separated from thy sins; thou can not be ingraffed into this Olive, unless
thou be cut off from thy old root; thou must be made willing, or rather not
unwilling, that the Lord should take away thy sin: To come weary and sick, and
naked to Christ, is not to come indulging our sins, but groaning under them; if
there be no wants or sense of them, how or why should we come to Christ? Should
we come to him, to show him the garments which nature made, the innate or
acquisite virtue, and excellency which is in us? Should we open our treasures,
and tell him that we are rich, and increased in Goods, and have need of
nothing? this is the way to be spued out of his mouth: The Philosopher being
asked, what God was a doing, could say, that he was busy in elevatione
humilium, and superborum dejectione: We must go to Christ weary and heavy laden
under our sins, but surely not stripped of them altogether; could we strip off
the guilt and power of these without Christ, we might be our own Saviors and
Sanctisiers, Christ would have little or nothing to do for us: But says the
Author, We must receive Christ by Faith, and then what a blessed change is
there in us! For, though we continue as we were, we have all in Christ: What!
may we receive Christ, and be as we were? Does he bring nothing at all with
him? May we receive him, and not have his righteousness imputed, and his spirit
imparted to us? It is utterly vain and impossible: But now a touch for worthy
Mr. Watson.

Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
as Mr. Watson has it, says to a believer, with my body, yea, with my blood I
endow thee; and a believer says to Christ, with my soul I thee worship; As if,
says the Author, Christ and a Believer were married by the Liturgy.

I suppose our Church intended some such thing, Answer.
and I mean it in good earnest; for in the Communion Service, she tells us,
That we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us; we be one with Christ, and Christ
with us; and excellently prays, That our sinful bodies may be made clean by
his body, and our Souls washed through his most precious blood, and that we may
evermore dwell in him, and he in us: Sure such passages import a near Union and
Communication between Christ and believers: But says Mr. Watson, When a Soul
is united to Christ, no condemnation can fall upon him; a woman being married,
her debts light upon her husband: O blessed privilege! says the Author, And
who would be afraid of running into debt with God, when he has such an Husband
to discharge all; and then how vile and impure soever men are, their comfort
is, they are married to Christ, and his beauty is put upon them: To which I
answer, No men are more afraid to run into debt with God, than those, who taste
of that Grace, which forgives all; and drink of that blood, which pays for all:
Our love to Christ is a pure principle of Obedience, and his love to us is a
Divine inflammative of ours, because he will discharge all, shall we be
presumptuous and extravagant? Some Gallants in Queen Elizabeth's time, hoping
for some Church Lands, run out desperately, crying out, Solvat Ecclesia; but
shall believers, who have past through the pangs of the new birth, and tasted
the hidden Manna of Gods love, sin on and say, Solvat Christus? Nothing is, nor
can be more unnatural, because they know themselves espoused to such an husband
as Christ, shall they be adulterous? Because Christ will be their friend, shall
they be enemies? These are strange repugnancies indeed: As to what the Author
adds, How vile and impure soever men are, their comfort is, they are married to
Christ; those words (how vile and impure soever men are) are none of Mr.
Watson's, but added by the Author; after which rate one may turn any thing into
non sense, or blasphemy.

And to crown all, Mr. Sherlock.
when they are once ingraffed into Christ, they are secure to eternity; Christ
is not divided, a member cannot be lost, the union cannot be dissolved.

This indeed is that, Answer.
wherein the Covenant of Grace lifts it self up above the Covenant of works; in
that of works, the stock was in man's hand; but in this of Grace, it is in Gods;
in that there was no promise of perseverance, but in this there are many such
promises, God shall confirm you unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. He will put his fear
in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him. Jer. 32.40. The Apostle
praying for the Thessalonians, that they may be preserved blameless unto the
coming of Christ, immediately adds, Faithful is he that calls you. who also
will do it. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24, Evidently God undertakes it, and engages his
faithfulness in it; shall we take the matter out of Gods hand into our own, or
turn about to the old Covenant? Shall we take these promises conditionally?
Then we must utterly evacuate these promises; for they must run thus, if we
will persevere, we shall persevere, and so much was true under the old
Covenant, and without any promise at all: Mr. Watson argues thus, If any branch
be plucked away from Christ, it is either because Christ is not able to keep
it, or because he is willing to lose it: But says the Author, May not sin
dissolve the union? What if the believer will not stay with Christ? I answer,
This does not at all answer the Argument from Christ's power; Has he not power
to prevent sin from being, or from being final? Has he not power to strengthen
believers, in that which is good, or if they lapse, to raise them up again? If
so, his promise cannot fail, his faithfulness will make it good; neither does
sin committed, un-saint a believer, as the Author hints; this was the
remarkable difference between the two Covenants; in Adam one sin expelled
perfect holiness, but in believers it does not extinguish inherent Grace,
though imperfect; still there is a seed of God abiding in them, a well of water
springing up unto everlasting life; through Grace they shall be revived again:
But says Mr. Shepherd, Christ has taken upon him to purge his Spouse; upon
which the Author, If she be not purged, whose fault can it be but his own? To
which I answer, Christ has undertaken to purge believers, but not so as to
prevent all lapses; when they are purged, it is merely of Grace, but when they
sin, it is of their own: By such lapses God lets them know, as he did Hezekiah,
what is in their heart.

Let us now consider the consequential, Mr. Sherlock.
conjugal affections, the Soul must be enamoured with Christ, sick of love to
him, he is maxim diligibilis, the very abstract and quintessence af beauty;
you must delight in his embraces, thirst after more intimate acquaintance with
him, follow him from one ordinance to another, and never be satisfied unless
you meet with him in ordinances, there they hear of his Beauty, Riches,
Fullness, All Sufficiency, of all truths they savor the truths of Christ best.

And what needs all this? Answer.
These truths are too plain to be denied, and too sacred to be laughed at.

Such sanctified Souls loath all dull, Mr. Sherlock.
insipid, moral discourses, which are perpetually inculcating duty, and
troubling them with a great many rules for a good life: Which Mr. Watson calls
the quaint points of virtue and vice. For this is not to enjoy Christ in
ordinances.

I suppose they cannot loath discourses of duty; Answer.
For as our Author tells us a little after, they make Obedience to Christ their
husband, a conjugal act, and in order to that they must hear of duty; Only I
take it, they had rather hear duty spread before them, in a plain Scriptural
dress, than in curious speculations of mere humane reason: They would have duty
inculcated, but not so perpetually, as to exclude the preaching up of that
Divine Grace which enables thereunto, without this they despair of doing any
thing aright; but says the Author, It is very hard to find a proper place for
Obedience in this new Religion; for this is not necessary at all, to our coming
to Christ, and closing with him; nay, it is a great hinderance to it, for we
must bring nothing to Christ with us, the marriage is consummated without it,
and then we have less need of it than before, for then we are adorned with
Christ's Beauty, holy with his holiness, delivered by his expiation, righteous
with his righteousness, which gives us an actual right to Glory; we need no
righteousness of our own to save us, which were to suppose a defect in the
righteousness of Christ; unto which I answer, Though a man, with his arms of
rebellion in his hands, cannot possibly, whilst in that posture, close with
Christ; yet I take it, Faith, which espouses Christ, does precede true
Obedience: Without faith, says the Apostle, it is impossible to please God.
Heb. 11.6. Without says, says our Church in the Homily of good works, All
that is done of us is but dead before God, although the work seem never so gay
and glorious before man, even as the picture graven or painted, is but a dead
representation of the thing it self, so be the works of all unfaithful persons
before God, they do appear to be lively works, and indeed they be but dead, not
availing to the everlasting life; they be but shadows and shows of lively and
good things, and not good and lively things indeed, thus our Church
excellently; which tells us what manner of Obedience we can bring to Christ:
After our espousals to Christ by faith, Obedience follows as a fruit and effect
of Faith; though the Author fasten this opinion expressly on those whom he
opposes, calling them in sport, intimate acquaintances of Christ; yet our
Church tells us in the twelfth Article, That good works do spring necessarily
out of a true and lively Faith: Christ's righteousness makes us righteous in
Justification, but does it thence follow, that Obedience is needless? No sure.
It is a thing noted in the Papists, that they confound Justification and
Sanctification together; but we must not do so, if it be necessary to do Gods
will, or promote his Glory, or to give evidences of our Faith in, and gratitude
to Christ; or to walk in the way to Heaven and Salvation, then such is
Obedience; but the Author cannot understand this gratitude, unless our
Righteousness and Obedience be due to Christ in thankfulness to him for saving
us without Obedience and Righteousness, which is just as broad, as long, and we
get nothing by the bargain: To which I answer, our Obedience is a due gratitude
to Christ, who saves us by his Blood and Righteousness, and and that without a
perfect, personal, sinless Obedience in our selves; and withal, it is necessary
as a proof of our faith, and as the way to Heaven, which our Savior has
chalked out to us.

The Soul ( says Dr. Owen) consents to take Christ on his own terms, Mr.
Sherlock.
to save him in his own way, and says, Lord, I would have had thee and
salvation in my way, that it might have been partly of mine endeavors, and as
it were by the works of the Law; but I am now willing to receive thee, and to
be saved in thy way, merely by Grace, that is, Without doing any thing, without
obeying of thee, as the Author does interpret him.

Without doing any thing, Answer.
without obeying of thee: Is this the Doctors meaning? Do his words import so?
Nothing more remote from him; he shows how the Soul closes with Christ, and
takes him on his own terms; it will not now be justified by its own works, or
legal righteousness, but by Christ and his righteousness; it will not now
endeavor in its own strength, but under the duct of Grace; this is his plain
meaning: For before the words quoted, he speaks of accepting Christ as Lord and
Savior, and after them, of giving up our selves to be ruled by the Spirit,
which cannot be without Obedience: Its true, the Author calls this a pretty
complement, but the Doctor speaks it as his serious judgment: In the eighth
Chapter of the book quoted, he tells us, Obedience is indispensibly necessary,
if Gods Sovereignty is to be owned, if his Love to be regarded, if the whole
work of the ever blessed Trinity for us, in us, be of any moment, our Obedience
is necessary: Thus fully the Doctor, who yet is here construed by the Author to
exclude Obedience; what measure this is let others judge.

The Soul gives up it self to be ruled by the Spirit of Christ, to be
passively, Mr. Sherlock.
not actively good, to submit, as needs it must, to the irresistible working of
the Divine Spirit, and to obey, when it can rebel no longer: (Thus the Author
sports with his Opposites.)

Touching irresistible Grace, Answer.
I have spoken before; the Soul in the first act of Conversion is merely
passive, but after the Divine Principles infused, acta agit, it moves under the
sweet influences of the Spirit, without whose inspiration, as our Church tells
us in the thirteenth Article, Works done are not pleasant to God, yet that
inspiration does not, as the Author hints, force the will of man, but sweetly
lead it in a way congruous to its liberty. And now the Author shuts up this
Section thus: I have given thee Reader, an entire scheme of a new Religion,
resulting from an acquaintance with Christ's person, in all its principles and
practices; I think there needs no more to expose it to the scorn of every
considering man, who cannot but discover, how inconsistent the religion of
Christ's Person, and of his Gospel are. To which I shall only say, the Author
has done his endeavor to expose his Opposites to scorn, but how new their
Religion is, how inconsistent with the Gospel, and how just the scorn, I leave
to considering men to determine.

SECT. III.
THese men pretend to learn a Religion from Christ's Person, Mr. Sherlock.
but this is at best to build Religion upon uncertain conjectures, or ambiguous
reasons; suppose them to be cautions, yet what assurance can they have, that
their inferences are true; and as a reason of this the Author afterward adds,
There is not a natural and necessary connection between the person of Christ,
and what he did and suffered, and the salvation of Mankind, the Incarnation,
Life, Death, Resurrection of Christ were available to those ends, for which God
designed them; but the virtue and efficacy of them does depend upon God's
Institution and Appointment; and therefore can be known only by Revelation: We
cannot draw a Conclusion from the Person of Christ, which his Gospel has not
expressly taught, because we can know no more of the design of it, than what is
there revealed.

They learn from Christ's Person, Answer.
but what, without the Gospel? No, by no means; without this, they cannot,
pretend not to know, whether there be such a Person as Christ or no, or what
are the Ends of his Incarnation, Life, Death and Resurrection: These depend
upon God's appointment, and that is set forth in the Gospel: But having the
Gospel as an outward Medium, they see Christ and many Mysteries in him, who is
the Mirror of divine Perfections, and the great Illuminator by his Spirit.
But, says the Author, they (such is their intolerable presumption) shape
Religion according to their Fancies, and stuff it with an infinite number of
Orthodox Propositions; none of which are to be found in express Terms in
Scripture, but are pretended to be deduced from thence by such imaginary
consequences, from some little hints of things; and is not this unpardonable in
those men, who cry down Reason as a profane and carnal thing, and yet lay the
Foundation of their Religion on some little shows and appearances of Reason? To
which I answer, The harsh Censure of Eccius made Urban a German Divine cry out,
O infaelicem Urbanum, Melch. Adam in vit. Urb.
si Eccii calculo caelum datur and negatur! Miserable were these Men, if they
were to stand or fall by the Authors Judgment. These Men, as the Author tells
us, page 98. abound with Scripture, stuff their Books with it, and talk of
little else; yet, alas! they shape Religion according to their Fancies: If they
urge express Scriptures, they consider only the sound of words. Page 2. If they
urge Scripture-consequences, they stand upon little hints and appearances of
things; Reason they cry down as a profane and carnal thing, and yet they found
their Religion on little shows and appearances. Oh unhappy Men! But the best
is, all this, to say no worse, is but mere Accusation; each of them can plead
Not guilty to it, and say, as Urban to Eccius, Hominis judicium audio, Christi
tribunal expecto: They are Men who desire to set every thing in its due place,
Fancy below Reason, and Reason below Scripture; upon which last, as the
unerring Rule they stand, like the Karaei among the Jews, so precisely, that
they are not willing to admit any thing in Matters of Religion which is not
found there; according to that of Origin, Sicut aurum, quod fuerit extra
Templum, non est sanctificatum, sic omnis sensus, qui extra Scripturam, non est
sanctus.

When men argue from the Nature of of God, Mr Sherlock.
his Works and Providence, from the Nature of Mankind, and those eternal
Notions of Good and Evil, and the essential Differences of things; that is,
from plain and undeniable Principles, which have an unchangeable nature, and so
can bear the stress of a just Consequence, this is carnal Reason.

I cannot imagine that they call or think it so: Answer.
Principles of natural Theology carry a Divine Stamp on them; yet I conceive
these in Discourses, if taken within their proper Sphere of Natural Light only,
may not wear that Crown set on the Head of the Gospel, to be (...), The
ministration of the Spirit, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3.8. Should a Man
preach such Principles only, without setting forth Christ and the regenerating
Spirit, he would scarce be worthy to be called a Spiritual Evangelical Divine.
But now the Author gives a Scheme of Religion deducible from an Acquintance
with Christ's Person; I am glad that he owns any such thing, and shall not have
much to say upon it.

When we consider, Mr. Sherlock.
that this heavenly Ambassador and Mediator is no less than the Son of God, by
whom the Worlds were made, we may reasonably conclude, that he came upon no
less Design than of universal Goodness; for he can have no temptation to
Partiality, as being equally concerned in the Happiness of all men; and we
cannot imagine, why he should lay a narrower design of Love in the Redemption,
than in the Creation of Mankind: When in the first Creation he designed all for
Happiness, that in this new and second Creation he should design only the
Happiness of some few, is to make him less good in Redeeming, than in Creating
Mankind.

Christ in his Coming and satisfactory Sufferings had a respect to all Men,
Answer.
so far as to procure for them Salvation on Gospel-terms, but he had not an
equal respect to all; it being utterly unimaginable that he should have as
great a respect to those in the Pagan World, who have no Christ, no atoning
Sacrifice, no Promise of Life and Salvation revealed to them, as he has to
those in the Church, who have all these glorious Objects evidently set sorth
before them: Greater Donations argue greater degrees of Love; or else, which is
very hard to believe, God loves all Creatures alike, notwithstaneing that he
measures out his Goodness to them in a very various and different manner, to
some more, and to others less. But because the Author has before laid down a
good Rule, That the Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's Death does depend on God's
Institution and Appointment, and therefore can be known only by Revelation, I
shall apply my self only to the Scripture: There, as we find, he died that he
might gather together the Children of God that were scatered, Joh. 11.52. He
gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, Ephesians. 5.26.
He gave himself that he might purify to himself a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14.
He laid down his life for his sheep, so as to bring them into his fold and make
them hear his voice, Joh. 10.15, 16. He redeems some from among men, Rev. 14.4.
And out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, Rev. 5.9. All
which Scriptures do emphatically show, that Christ had a special respect in his
Death unto his own above others. But further; Christ by his precious Blood
founded those Evangelical Promises, of taking away the stony Heart, writing the
Law in the Heart, and putting his holy Spirit there; but did he found them for
all men? What, for those whom God will harden, Romans 9? What, for those Pagans,
who have not so much as the Law before them in the Letter, nor that Gospel
which is Vehiculum Spiritus sancti? How, or which way, or by what means can
such Promises be made good to them? How shall they be regenerate without the
holy Spirit, or have that without the Gospel? It is not at all credible; such
special Promises in the Covenant founded by his Blood, speak a special respect
to his own Elect. The Author's Reason from Creation cannot hold good: The
lapsed Angels had their share of Goodness in Creation, but none at all in
Redemption: God, who is the Great Donor of his Son to the World, may give him
with what Respects and to what Intents he pleases; and, if he have special
purposes in it, no man may presume to say, that he is partial or less good then
he ought to be.

Christ's Death and Sacrifice for sin seals the Covenant of Grace and Pardon to
all penitent and reformed Sinners, Mr. Sherlock.
and seals the irrevocable Decree of Reprobation against all others.

God's Decree of Reprobation may be taken two ways; Answer.
either for an Act of Preterition, not giving men saving Grace, but leaving
them to final Sin; or for a Decree of Damnation: In this latter God looks on
Men as final Sinners, and reveils his Justice in their Condemnation: In the
former he does not look on men as final Sinners, but pass them by and leave
them to themselves to become such; and in this he shows forth his infinite
Sovereignty in dispensing Grace as he pleases.

This made the Divine Goodness so restlesly zealous, Mr. Sherlock.
and concerned for the recovery of mankind; various ways he attempted in former
ages, but with little success; but at last God sent his own Son our Lord Jesus
Christ into the world, to be the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, to seek
and to save that which was lost.

Various ways attempted! Answer.
what distinct and separate from Christ? Was not Christ in the first plot and
design of our recovery? Was not he the Lamb slain, from the foundation of the
world? Immediately after the Fall, he was promised in the Seed of the woman,
and after that first Gospel, the light was still a breaking out in a succession
of Promises and Sacrifices: Various ways, says the Author, were attempted to
little Success; what! was it to any success at all? Was ever any one lost son
of Adam saved without a Christ, without a Satisfaction? No Christian ears will
endure such an opinion; however, God having a design in those ways, as the
Author imports; why did not those plots take effect, and save Christ the labor
of coming in the flesh? May it become his infinite wisdom to attempt this and
that, and at last light upon the right way? Or may it comport with his infinite
power to be posed and nonplust, and that in so great a concern, as Man's
recovery? To think so, is, as S. Austin says, To hazard the first Article of
our Creed, Euchir. cap. 96.
Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem: And, if in those various ways there could
be an obstacle to the Almighty, what might it be? Was it for want of a
satisfaction? No, according to our Author that was not necessary, God might
have pardoned without it; or was it because the corrupt obstinate Will of man
did frustrate those designs? Very well, after that last greatest design by
Christ, may it not do the same? According to our Author, God as passionately
desirous, and restlesly jealous as he is in this matter, affords yet no higher
than suasory resistible Grace; and let any judge, how reconcilable such
opinions are with infinite wisdom or power, or indeed with the Scripture, which
tells us, That he does whatsoever he pleases: Psalm. 115.3. It Is true, the great
Grotius glosses on that place thus, Ideo homo libertatem habet, quia Deus
voluit, which is true within the Text; but if that liberty be of so vast a
latitude, that it may frustrate so great a design, as that of Salvation by
Christ, the truth of the Text cannot possibly consist.

Those sins, which are not expiated by the Sacrifice of Christ, as none are,
Mr. Sherlock.
till we repent and reform, shall certainly be expiated by the death of the
sinner.

I conceive that Christ expiated our sins upon the Cross, Answer.
but that expiation avails us not, till it be applied by faith; He gave himself
a ransom for all. 2 Timothy 2.6. But all do not repent and believe, such as
continue in their hardness and unbelief cannot have the benefit of that ransom,
but fall into death eternal, ever suffering, but never able to satisfy or
expiate their sins.

If our Faith in Christ have reformed our lives, Mr. Sherlock.
and rectified the temper of our minds, and made us sincere lovers of God and
goodness; though we are not acquainted with those artificial methods of
repentance, have not felt the workings of the Law, nor the amazing terrors of
Gods wrath, nor the raging despair of damned Spirits; and then all on a sudden,
as if we had never heard any such thing before, have had Christ offered, heard
his woings, and made a formal contract and espousal with Christ, and such like
workings of a heated fancy, and religious distraction; though our Conversion be
not managed with so much art and method, we are never the worse Christians for
want of it.

Certainly it is very sad, Answer.
says a worthy Divine, That scoffing at the doctrines of repentance and
humiliation, which was wont to be a badge of profaneness, should be adopted into
religion: The Author tells us a little before, Christ and his appearance were
not designed to cause tempests and earthquakes in our minds; without such
artificial methods of repentance; says the Author, our lives may be reformed,
and minds rectified; but what says the Scripture? Our Savior preached up
repentance. S. Paul tells us of a spirit of bondage, going before the spirit of
Adoption. S. James would have sinners be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, and to
turn their laughter into mourning, and their joy to heaviness, and to humble
themselves in the sight of the Lord, that they may be lifted up: And what says
Reason? Sin of all things in the world, calls for sorrow, sorrow was made for
sin, if for any thing at all; sin is so intimately in us, that it will not
easily come out, being contracted with joy, it must be dissolved with sorrow:
The hard heart, unless melted by the fiery Law, will not run into the
Gospel-mould; nor will the proud heart, unless bowed down under the weight of
sin and wrath, ever stoop under the Divine command; the new creature is not
born without pangs, nor the inward Circumcision, which cuts off the dear, but
corrupt flesh of the heart, done without some anguish; self-judging ushers in
justification before God, and despair in our selves a lively hope in our
Savior: On all hands we are summoned to methods of repentance; the groaning
Creation shames us into that posture, and the indwelling sin presses us into
it; the broken Law calls for a broken heart, and the storm of wrath black in
the threatening, for a trembling one; a crucified Christ asks a mourning eye,
and an exalted one gives it: Why the Author should call these penitential acts,
artifices, or effects of ignorance, or think them unnecessary or improper,
under the Gospel, I see no just reason at all for it.

SECT. IV.
THese men abound in Scripture, Mr. Sherlock.
but they accomodate Scripture-expressions to their own dreams and fancies,
being possessed with Schemes and Ideas of Religion; whatever they look on,
appears of the same shape and color wherewith their minds are tinctured; if
any word sound like the tinkling of their own fancy, it is no less than a
demonstration, that that is the meaning of the spirit of God; every little
shadow confirms them in their preconceived opinions: As Irenaeus observes of
the Valentinians, that they used one artifice or other to adopt all the
speeches of our Savior, and Allegories of Scripture, male composito
phantasmati, to the contrived figment of their own brain: These acquaintances
of Christ, first contrive their religion, and possess their fancies with their
private opinions, and then read the Scripture with no other design, than to
find something there to stamp Divinity on their own conceits; they dote upon
words and Metaphors, and Allusions; they found their Religion on obscure Texts,
or mystical interpretations of plain Texts, and by the help of distinctions,
and glosses, curtailing of Texts, transplacing of words and Comma's, or
separating a single sentence from the body of the discourse, make the Scripture
speak their sense as plainly, as the Bells ring what every boy will have them;
which is to deal with Scripture; as Irenaeus observes, as if a man should take
a picture of a King, which consisted of an artificial composition of precious
stones, and transplace all those stones into another form; as suppose of an
Ape, and then should persuade silly people, that that was the Kings picture: At
this rate we may find the Alcoran in the Bible, as well as make so many Books
different and contrary to each other, from the various composition of twenty
four letters: These acquaintances of Christ: (And who may better make bold with
him than they) pervert the Gospel to serve their opinion; there are two ways
of expounding Scripture in great vogue among them: First, By the sound and
clink of words, which is all some men understand by a form of sound words:
Secondly, When this will not do, they reason about the sense of Scripture from
their own preconceived notions, and prove that this must be the meaning of
Scripture, because otherwise it is not reconcilable to their dreams, which is
called expounding Scripture by the Analogy of Faith.

It is the observation of that excellent man, Answer.
Jerome of Prague, in his defense before the Council of Constance; That many
worthy men have been unjustly condemned, such as Socrates among Pagans, Isaiah
and other Prophets, nay, Christ and his Apostles: The Author has put in a long
grievous charge against these good men; but the Reader will observe, that it is
a general one, and I suppose, he will hang by his belief, till proof be made by
the after-instances: As for the Valentinians, these men have nothing to do with
them or their Aeones; they were very high flyers in their knowledge and
perfections: And as I find in the Magdeburgenses, they held, That men, Cant. 2.
cap. 5.
especially those of their own Sect, natura salvos fieri, were saved by nature;
Which, whether it may have any affinity with the natural faith allowed by the
Author, I know not: But now let us hear out Authors instances, and first for
their expounding Scripture by the sound of words, If they find any words, says
the Author, which chime to the tune of their private conceits, they clap their
own sense on them.

Thus when Christ is said to be made wisdom to us, this is a plain proof, Mr.
Sherlock.
that we must learn all our spiritual wisdom from an acquaintance with his
Person, though some duller men can understand no more by it, than the wisdom of
those Revelations Christ has made to us of Gods will.

External Revelation was never excluded by those whom the Author opposes,
Christ is made wisdom to us, Answer.
as I have answered before, because all true Wisdom, that is, external
Revelation and internal Illumination are derived from him, who is the Mirror
of divine Perfections.

Thus when men have learned, Mr. Sherlock.
from an Acquaintance with Christ, to place all their hopes of salvation in a
personal Union with Christ, from whom they receive Pardon, Grace, Righteousness
and Salvation; what more plain proof can any man, who is resolved to believe
this, desire of it, than 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son, has life: What can
having the Son signify, but having an interest in him, being made one with
him: though some will be so perverse as to understand it of believing and
obeying his Gospel.

Personal Union with Christ? Answer.
who owns it? that is, of different Natures in the same Person, such as is not
between Christ and us; Mystical, the Author should have said; that I own, and
from thence are derived all spiritual good things to us: And so much is proved
by that of St. John; Having the Son, imports Union with him, or else we may
have all at a distance from him. Hear the Learned Bishop Reynolds on that Text:
Life of Christ, fol. 461.
One thing cannot be the Principle of Life to another, except there be some
Union, which may be the ground of that conveyance; and this is that the Text
calls, the having of Christ: And what this Union is, he afterward explains, It
is that whereby we and he are spiritually united to the making up of one
mystical body, Fol. 468.
the formal Reason or Bond of it is the Spirit of Christ; from it does
immediately arise a Communion with him in all good things. Hear the Glory of our
Church, Archbishop Usher; Sermon. before the Commons, An. 1620
No man participates of the benefits arising from Christ to his spiritual
relief, except he first have Communion with him; we must have the Son, before
we have life; eat him we must, that is, as truly be partakers of him, as we are
of our ordinary food: and a little after, This is that great Mystery of our
Union with Christ, whereby we are made members of his body, of his flesh, and
of his bone. Hear the Learned Hooker; Eecles. Pol. Lib. 5.
By virtue of this mystical Conjunction we are of him and in him; even as
though our flesh and bones should be continuate with his: No man is actually in
him, but they in whom he actually is; for he which has not the Son, has not
life. And may we say or think, that such Pillars and Luminaries of the Church,
should follow the sound and clink of words and phrases, chiming to the tune of
their own Conceits? One might rather take the Author to be out, he understands
that place of obeying and believing the Gospel: Believing the Gospel is but a
dogmatical Faith, which entitles not to Christ; Obedience follows after Union
with him, and may be rather called walking in him, than having of him.

Before we can be united to Christ, we must go to him; Mr. Sherlock.
and therefore Faith, which is the Instrument of this Union, is very luckily
called, Coming to Christ: But this is not enough, we must receive Christ, Joh.
1.12. that Faith which serves us for Legs to go to Christ, must be an Hand to
receive him; when we have received him, we must embrace him in our Arms, as old
Simeon did, when he found him in the Temple, which is a little nearer Union, as
plainly appears from the example of the Patriarchs, who embraced the Promises:
And now we have Christ, we must trust and lean upon him, as we are often
commanded; and, if leaning be not enough, we may make a little more bold, and
roll on him, as appears from the Original: Gal. Psalm. 37. We may discharge our
load and cast it upon Christ, and having brought our Souls to Christ, we must
commit them to his charge, if they perish it will be his fault: Thus St. Paul
did, 2 Timothy 1.12. And now we must hide our selves in Christ, as the Dove in the
rock, Cant. 2.14. Christ's Wounds are the clefts of the rock, where the
believing Soul hides it self: But this is not enough yet, we must put on
Christ, Romans 13.14. that is, his Righteousness, which is a most beautiful Robe
to cover our nakedness; if we would get the blessing, we must go to God, as
Jacob did, in the Robes of our elder Brother; though this resemblance does not
very well please me: For though Jacob was a good man, yet this looks like a
cunning trick, to rob his elder Brother, and cheat his blind Father; and men
must not think, that God is thus to be imposed upon; when we are united to
Christ, and made one with him, all is ours, as the Apostle tells us. And now
what better proof can you desire for all this, if you will be contented with
express words? No man would have dreamed of such Interpretations of Scripture,
who had not been prepossest with the mysterious Notion of a fanciful Union to
Christ, and Application of Christ to us; for here is no other proof of this,
but words and phrases separated from the body of the Text, and the design of
the Discourse, and like straglers picked up and listed into the service of
their Hypothesis. The whole mystery of this and a great deal more stuff of this
nature consists, in wresting Metaphorical expressions to a proper sense: When
the Scripture describes the Profession of Christianity, a sincere Belief and
Obedience to the Gospel, by having of Christ, being in him, coming to him, and
receiving of him, these men expound these phrases to a proper natural sense, to
signify I know not what unintelligible Union and closure of the Soul with him.

I never yet took any pleasure in Drollery, Answer.
and least of all when it sports it self with Scripture, which is sacred all
over to the lowest Hem and Fringe of Metaphors: Methinks no man can play with
these, but he will meet with some stops or Remora's in Conscience; the tragical
Stories of Theopompus and Theodectes, mentioned by Josephus, might serve for
retractives, or the Reverence of Scripture might fly in the face, as the Fringe
did in that Jew's, who was addressing himself to his forbidden pleasure. I
conceive Faith, which is the Instrument of Union with Christ, is not luckily,
but purposely and in wisdom called Coming; It being, as our Church tells us, 1.
Hom. of Faith.
the first coming unto God, whereby we be justified: And in another place, 2.
Hom. of the Passion.
The only mean and instrument of Salvation required of our parts. The divine
Spirit did not plant those Metaphors in Scripture, as so many Flowers in a
Garden, in vain or to no purpose, but to set and shadow forth in lively colors
that excellent Grace of Faith, which does in so admirable a way unite to
Christ, as if it had all Motions, postures and Sensations spiritually in it
self, to take in Christ with his incomparable Benefits into the Soul: Christ is
the Center of Rest, rich Treasure, infinite Beauty, sure Foundation, Rock of
Salvation, heavenly Covering, and the very Food and Life of Souls; and Faith is
coming, receiving, embracing, leaning, hiding, putting on, and feeding on him;
denoting thus much to us, That Faith is, as I may say, the commune Sensorium,
or common Capacity, which takes in Christ and his excellent Benefits in an
appropriative way into the Soul. The Author indeed thinks this Union and
Application of Christ to be but a Fancy; but it is such an one, as without
which his Blood and Merits are like to avail us little or nothing, as I before
noted. St. Austin upon that Text of receiving Christ, Joh. 1.12. says, Tract.
in Joh.
Et nos illum possideamus, and ipse nos possideat, ille nos possideat sicut
Dominus, nos illum possideamus sicut salutem. Gregory Nyssen, as I find him
quoted by Gerard, says, Nos fide Christum recipere, ut intra conclave nostrum,
quod cor nostrum est, perveniat. St. Chrysostom on that Text, Romans 13.14.
would have us put on, nay (...), to be compassed round about with Christ, he
would have Christ to dwell in us, and to be a garment about us, that he may be
all to us, (...), within and without; and a little after, he tells us, That he
is the Root, Food, Life, the Foundation, Cornerstone, and what not to us,
(...), every way conjoyning and conglutinating us to himself. That of going to
God in the Robes of our elder Brother, which pleases not the Author, not every
way suiting, as indeed no Resemblance does, was hinted by no less man than St.
Ambrose, who says, Et odoratus est odorem vestimentorum; and fortasse istud
est, quia non operibus justificamur, sed fide. And for the necessity of this
Application, our Church has laid it down in terminis; As it profits a man
nothing to have Salve, 2. Hom. of the Passion.
unless it be applied to the part infected, so the Death of Christ shall stand
us in no force, unless we apply it to our selves, in such sort as God has
appointed: Almighty God works by means, and in this thing he has ordained a
certain mean; what mean is that? forsooth it is Faith: And in another place, 1.
Hom. of the Sacrament.
our Church would have us come to the Lord's Supper, not as specially regarding
the terrene and earthly Creatures, but always holding fast, and cleaving by
Faith to the Rock, whence we may suck the sweetness of everlasting Salvation.
However, the Author, to whom all these are Fancies, understands by such
Metaphors, believing and obeying the Gospel: Believing the Gospel is but a
dogmatical Faith, not entitling us to Christ or Salvation; if that be all which
is meant, the Glory and divine Emphasis of those Metaphors is lost, and the
Texts themselves must wither in a very cold and jejune Sense: And for
Obedience, that follows after Union, and, as our Church tells us in the 12.
Article, is a fruit of Faith.

Thus when they talk of our spiritual impotency and inability to do any good
thing, Mr. Sherlock.
they prove it wonderfully from our being dead in trespasses and sins;
therefore as a dead man can contribute nothing to his own Resurrection, no more
can we toward our Conversion: Which is true of Natural death, but will be hard
to prove of a Moral death, which consists in the prevalency of vicious habits
contracted by long custom (which was the case of the Heathen, whom the Apostle
there speaks of) which do enslave the Will, that it is very difficult, though
not impossible for such persons to return to the love and practice of Virtue.

Every man, Answer.
who is acquainted with himself, may learn his own impotency to good, from the
inward pressure of corruption which is in him: However the Apostle in that 2.
to the Ephesians does notably decypher it out to us; there he speaks not so
much of a spiritual Death in actual customary sins, as of such a Death in
Original corruption; for he opposes it to quickening Grace which by divine
Principles infused heals the same; and a little after tells us, that we are by
nature the children of wrath. Hoc uno verbo, quasi fulmine, totus homo, quantus
quantus est, prosternitur, says Beza on the place: this shows him dead indeed.
It Is true the Pelagians, Contra Julian. l. 6. c. 4.
as St. Austin tells us, would have omitted the word, Nature, and in stead
thereof have read, Prorsus, altogether children of wrath, but the Church would
not suffer it. This spiritual Death in Sin is a total one, it runs over all the
Soul; there are, says the Apostle lusts or desires of the Flesh, the sensitive
Faculties, and of the Mind, the rational Powers; nothing is left in Man but
what is dead in sin, not a drop or a spark of Spiritual Life or true Grace: For
then a man should be naturally regenerate and under a Promise of that
Evangelical Mercy, which is indulged to the least measure of Grace, though it
be but as a smoking flax or bruised reed. Man is wholly void of spiritual Life
by Nature, and hence it evidently appears, that he is not able to reach so high
as any spiritual Act, such as Conversion is, unless he be elevated above his
own Line by supernatural Grace: This is fully the Doctrine of our Church, who
tells us, Man of his own nature is fleshly, 1. Hom. for Whitsunday.
carnal, corrupt, naught, sinful, disobedient, without any spark of goodness in
him: And in another place, The condition of Man, Article the 10th.
after the Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself by
his own natural strength and good works, to Faith and calling upon God:
Wherefore we have no power to do good Works pleasant and acceptable to God,
without the Grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good Will, and
working with us, when we have that good Will.

We are said to be created to good works, Mr. Sherlock.
and to become new Creatures, and therefore we can contribute no more to it
than to our first Creation; and we are born again which signifies that we are
wholly passive in it: Which were true indeed, if our being created unto good
works did signify the Manner and Method of our Conversion, and not the Nature
of the new Creature, which is the true meaning of it; That as in the first
Creation we are created after the Image of God, so we are renewed after the
Image of God, in the second; which is therefore expressly called in other places
the renewing of our minds.

The new Creature is indeed after God and his Image, Answer.
but it is also from him and his glorious Power in a way of Creation: He takes
it upon himself; A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, Ezekiel. 36.26. His great Power is put forth in it, Ephesians. 1.17. and it
is brought forth in a way of Creation, even as God commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6. May there be a new Creature without a Creator Or
may poor, dead, impotent Man without any spark of Goodness in himself be such?
Or if he cannot do it alone, may he be a Cocreator with his Maker, and put in
for a share in so great a work? No surely, all must be ascribed to the Grace of
God alone: Non est devotionis dedisse prope totum, sed fraudis retinuisse vel
minimum. says Prosper; We must not rob God of the least Atom in Nature. For my
own part, were I, as I am not, under a necessity to do one, I should rather
think it tolerable to steal away the old World, as the Manichees did, than with
the Pelagians to take away the new from him. But suppose a man could indeeed,
as some have presumed, new-make his own Heart after God's Image, might it be
called a Creation? Is not that Title too high for any Creature, and where does
the Scripture give such an one to Man? It Is God's Royal Prerogative to new-make
the Heart: Of his own will begat he us, says the Apostle, Jam. 1.18. To this
our Church agrees; It is the holy Ghost, 1. Hom. for Whitsunday.
and no other thing, that does quiken the Minds of Men; and a little after, He
is the only worker of Sanctification, and makes us new men in Christ Jesus.

When this fails, they take another course with Metaphors, to make them serve
their purpose, that is, by considering all the properties of those things
Christ is compared to, and applying all that will serve their turn to Christ,
without regarding the end, to which they are used; thus the Kingdom of Heaven
is compared to a Pearl of great price: Mat. 13. This Pearl signifies Christ,
who, as Mr. Watson says, makes us worthy with his worthiness; Though all the
Parable means, is, that we should part with all for the Gospel: Thus Christ was
prefigured by the Manna, this was circular, and so a figure of Christ's
perfection; it was meat dressed in Heaven, and Christ was prepared of his
Father, it suited every ones palate, and Christ suits every Christians
condition; he is full of quickening, strengthening, comforting virtue, that is,
He is what every man fancies him to be, relishes to their gusto; what precious
discoveries are here of Christ! What irrefragable proofs for them? Thus Christ
is a Rock, 1 Cor. 10. A rock for defense, and for offense, and for comfort, to
screen us from Gods wrath, and contein the honey of the promises; Christ is
resembled by the brazen Serpent, Brass as inferior metal signifies his
humanity, and as solid metal the power of his Godhead, it shines but does not
dazzle the eyes, and so signifies the Godhead veiled with Manhood; thus the
brazen Serpent was like a Serpent, but no real one; so Christ was in the
likeness of sinful flesh, but no sinner; the Serpent was lifted up to be looked
on, and so was Christ to be looked fiducially upon: Never man so happy in
expounding types, never Serpent so subtle: Thus Christ is a Vine, a Vine is
weak, Christ's humane nature was fain to be supported by the Divine, the Vine
grows in the Garden, Christ in the Church, not known amon the Heathen: It had
been more grand, to have said, that Christ made the Garden, where he grows; The
Vine communicates to the Branches, Christ to Believers, the Vine has rare
fruit, and the promises grow upon Christ; the Blood of Christ is the wine,
which chears man's heart, What fine work might a profane wit make at this rate,
but further they jumble all together, and prove one thing from another in a
wonderful manner, as thus; Christ is lovely, that is, as Mr. Watson has it, he
is lovely in his Titles, being the desire of all nations, the Prince of Peace,
the holy one; lovely in his Types, typified by Moses, David, Solomon, who were
lovely persons; and typified by lovely things, as the Pillar of Cloud, the
Manna, the Mercy-seat, brazen Serpent, and Noah's Ark: Who can forbear being
smitten with so lovely a Person? Besides all these, Christ is resembled to the
Rose of Sharon, the Queen of Flowers; to a Vine, the noblest of Plants; to a
Cornerstone, a Rock, a rich Treasure, a beautiful Robe, and all these are
lovely, (and so should any thing have been, that had come in his way at that
time;) thus Christ is altogether lovely.

The Author tells us, Answer.
page 75. That he had done enough to expose these men to scorn: Yet we have
here a very long Harangue, serving to very little use, unless that ill one,
which I presume the Author never intended; to gratify that ugly scoffing
humor at Religion, which runs about the profane world: God himself by using
similitudes, has sanctified them to us; the Song of Solomon is an entire
Allegory full of sacred mysteries, the writings of the ancient Fathers are in a
great measure like pieces of Arras or Tapestry, beautified with Allegorical
Flowers, and Images of Divine things, to give a little taste: S. Cyril of
Alexandria says, Comment. in Aron.
That Christ is inserted into us, (...), As if he were the Diamond of the
heart: S. Hilary tells us, That Christ is Margarita, quia nihil illo pretiosius
invenitur, Thesaurus ut in ipso omnes divitiae regnorum coelestium reconditae
agnoscantur, De Patris and Filiunitate.
all riches and pretionsness being in him: S. Austin touching Manna, says,
Panem Angelorum manducavit homo, Tract. 13. in Johan.
quis est panis Angelorum? In principio erat verbum, quomodo manducavit homo?
Verbum caro factum est, and habitavit in nobis. And in another place, De Coelo
Manna veniebat, that is in Mr. Watson's phrase, De ^tilit. Poenitent.
It was meat dressed in Heaven, attend quem figurabat; ego sum, inquit, panis
vivus, qui de Coelo descendi: For the Rock, let S. Ambrose come in, Christus
petra dicitur, De fide centra. Ar. cap. 6.
quia credentibus fortitudinem, incredulis duritiem praestat, that is, in Mr.
Watson's language; A Rock for defense, and a Rock for offense; and for the
Honey in the Rock, our Church thinks it no disparagement to say, 1. Hom. of the
Sacrament.
That from this Rock we may suck the sweetness of everlasting Salvation: As for
the brazen Serpent, let us hear Theophylact, Vide figuram, confer cum veritate,
illic Serpentis similitudo, Comment. in Joh. 3.
formam habet bestiae, venenum non habet, that is, in Mr. Watson's words, It
was like a Serpent, but no real one: Ita ex hoc loco homo Dominus, sed a
peccati veneno liber, in similitudine carnis peccati venit; that is, in Mr.
Watson's words, Christ was in the likeness of sinful flesh, but no sinner: Tunc
videntesevadebant mortem corporis, nunc autem qui vident, mortem animae; that
is, in Mr. Watson's words, The Serpent was lifted up to be looked on, and so
was Christ to be fiducially looked on. Touching the Vine, I must make bold to
vouch in St. Bernard, who, not seeing all things, never dreamed such things
should be ridiculous; he brings in Christ speaking thus; De Coena Dom. Ser. 10.
Ego sum vitis, dans botrum dulcissimum cunctis palmitibus; that is, in Mr.
Watson, I give the sap of Grace to all believers: Generans vinum, quod
laetificat cor hominis; that is, in Mr. Watson, My Blood is the Wine which
chears Man's heart: And a little after, Christus est vitis, in quo est totus
humor, id est, omnis plenitudo Spiritus sancti; The divine Spirit fills, or, as
Mr. Watson says, supports his Humane nature. And now I might bring the same
Author for the Rose of Sharon, and other things; but this may suffice to show,
that Mr. Watson's words may carry a fair Sense before a candid Interpreter: The
Author might have made no less pretty sport with those ancient Fathers, those
excellent devout Souls, who spiritualize every thing, and reduce every thing to
the great Center of Scripture, Jesus Christ. I shall only add on Mr. Watson's
behalf, that he never thought, that Christ, the Manna, should be accommodated
to Men's Fancy, nor imagined the Church unplanted by Christ; neither did he
dream that his Discourses of Christ's Loveliness should be traduced into carnal
Expressions, such as that, Who would not be smitten with such an one? To what
the Author adds, as his own imitation of these Men, being no other than the
playing of his Fancy with it self, I shall return just nothing, as seeing
nothing considerable therein.

When this will not do, Mr Sherlock.
they argue from their own preconceived Notions, and pretend to prove their own
Scheme from Scripture, but in truth prove the sense of Scripture by its
agreement with their Opinions; which is just such a trick as the Papists have
got, to prove the Church from Scripture, and the Scripture from the Church.
Thus after all their talk of being justified by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, the Scripture tells us, that we are justified by Faith, have
remission by Faith, have peace with God by Faith, are sanctified by Faith, are
the sons of God by Faith, are saved by Faith: Now how is this reconcilable with
being justified by imputed Righteousness? Why, thus; Faith does not justify
absolutely, as Faith, but relatively, as it brings us to Christ, and apprehends
his Righteousness: This is their own preconceived opinion, or else no man could
have stumbled on this Distinction: But their Reason is plain; Should Faith
justify as Faith, as our own Act, it would be as bad as good Works, and
irreconcilable with the Grace of God; though modest men dream not of meriting,
though Faith had justified as our Act; since the Reward does so infinitely
exceed the Work, that there can be no suspicion of Merit, and where there is no
Merit, the Reward is of Grace.

I shall at present wave, Answer.
who symbolizes most with the Papists, and how Justification, Sanctification,
Adoption and Salvation are here jumbled together, as if they were one thing:
The General Charge (having had so many) I say nothing to, but I come to the
Instance; The Scripture says that we are justified by Faith; very well; but
what by Faith exclusively of its Object, Christ's Blood and Righteousness? No
surely; then the Scripture, which tells us, That we are justified by Faith in
his blood, Romans 3.25. and made righteous by his obedience, Romans 5.19. must
contradict it self; or what, exclusively to the imputation of these? No
neither, without the imputation of these we cannot be entitled to them to our
Justification: Now that Faith justifies not absolutely, and as our Act, may
appear: In Justification there is a judicial proceeding, and we must answer to
something, to the Gospel only, or to the Law also; if to the Gospel only, then
Evangelical Justification is in a way frustrative and not perfective of the
Law; there needs only Faith to answer the Gospel, and not perfect
Righteousness to answer the Law: But what says the Apostle to this? Having
concluded Justification to be by Faith, Romans 3.30. he immediately adds, Do we
then make void the Law through faith? God forbid, yea, we establish the Law,
ver. 31. And how is this? That Faith, which answers to the Gospel, receives
that perfect Righteousness of Christ, which answers the Law in every point,
Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes,
as we have it, Romans 10. Without this, it is not at all imaginable how Faith, or
Justification by it, should establish or complete the Law; our sincere
Obedience, which flows from Faith, can no more do it than imperfection can
reach perfection. Again, if to the Gospel only, then all the Pagans must needs
be justified, for they have nothing to answer unto; not to the Gospel, that is
not reveiled to them; not to the Law of Nature, that is but the relicts and
broken pieces of the Moral Law: And if Christians, who have the Moral Law in
its entire perfection, are not to answer to it, then surely Pagans, who have
only some little Fragments of it, need not answer thereunto, and by consequence
they must be recti in Curia before God: But if (as of necessity we must) we
must answer to the Law also, then Faith, as it is in it self, and our Act,
cannot possibly justify; it being but a piece of the Law, and that imperfect;
God, who judges according to truth, will not esteem those perfectly righteous,
who are not so indeed, nor accept of a partial Righteousness for a total one.
If reply be made, This is true, when God judges Judicio Justitiae, but not
when he judges Judicio Misericordiae; he in his condescending Mercy accepts of
Faith in the room of total, perfect Righteousness: I answer, this cannot
possibly stand, God's Mercy and Truth are never at variance; his Truth will not
esteem us righteous upon account of a partial imperfect righteousness, and his
Mercy will not condescend so far, as to interfere with his Truth: But when he
esteems us righteous upon account of a perfect Righteousness, which is not our
own, but Christ's, then Truth and Mercy both shine forth; Truth, in that there
is a perfect Righteousness to answer the Law; and Mercy, in that it is not our
own, but our Sureties. But further; If Faith be taken for a perfect
Righteousness, then it is lifted up into the room of Christ and his
Righteousness: If you say, no, Christ's Righteousness is the foundation of this
acceptance of Faith; I answer, Then will it follow, that Christ died not so
much for Persons to justify them, as for Graces, to elevate Faith above it
self into the estimation of a perfect Righteousness; and withal, that Faith is
our proper Righteousness in an immediate formal way, and Christ but a remote
Cause only; much after the same rate as the Papists say, Bona opera tincta
sanguine Christi justificant: Works are made the immediate Cause of
Justification, and Christ the remote. Moreover, it is to be remembered, that
nothing can be Instrumentum and instrumentatum; the Artificers Tools are not
the House he makes; the Hysops sprinkling of Blood in the Jewish Sacrifices was
not the Blood of Christ; Faith is not our Righteousness, but the Medium to it:
Hence, Phil. 3.9. we read of righteousness by faith: it is not it self our
Righteousness, but a means to it. Thus it appears, that Faith in it self and as
our Act justifies not; therefore it justifies as it is that Evangelical Medium
which receives Christ and his perfect Righteousness. Thus the Reverend Hooker,
Faith is the only hand, which puts on Christ to Justification, and Christ
the only Garment which being so put on covers the shame of our defiled
Natures, hides the imperfection of our Works, preserves us blameless in the
sight of God; before whom otherwise the weakness of our Faith were cause
sufficient to make us culpable, yea, to shut us from the Kingdom of Heaven,
where nothing that is not absolute can enter: Thus our Church; 2. Hom. of
salvation.
The true understanding of this Doctrine, That we are justified by Faith in
Christ, is not, that this our own Act, to believe in Christ, which is within
us, does justify us, and deserve our Justification; for that were to count our
selves justified by some Act or Virtue that is in our selves. And in another
place: This Righteousness, 1. Hom. of salvation.
which we receive of Gods Mercy and Christ's Merits, embraced by Faith, is
accepted by God for our perfect Justification.

But this is past all doubt, Mr. Sherlock.
when it is confirmed by a Metaphor or two: A Ring which has a precious Stone
in it, which will stanch blood, may be said to stanch it, but the Virtue lies
in the Stone: Faith is the Ring, Christ the precious stone; all that Faith
does, is to bring home Christ's Merits to the Soul and so it justifies, an
invention I never met with before: And again; In the Body are Veins, that suck
nourishment from the Stomach; Faith is a sucking Vein, that draws Virtue from
Christ: Is not this plain, that we are saved by Christ, as the Body is
nourished by the Stomach?

That of the Ring is no new or absurd invention, Answer.
it was many years since used by Dr. Pomeran, Melch. Ad. in Vita Georg. Anhalt.
in these words; Vt Annulus magno estimatur and amatur propter gemmam, non
propter aurum; sic dicitur, fide justificari homines propter gemmam Filium Dei:
hanc autem gemmam fide amplectimur. With this Similitude George Prince of
Anhalt was much delighted. Neither need the Author have found fault with that
other Similitude, of a sucking Vein; all spiritual nourishment is drawn from
Christ, and that by Faith.

Now to make all clear, Mr. Sherlock.
we may give a Philosophical Account why God chose Faith to be the Instrument
of our Justification: Because it is an humble Grace, and gives the Glory of all
to Free Grace: If Repentance should fetch Justification from Christ, a man
would be ready to say, This was for my Tears: (strange deserving Creatures
these, who can dream of meriting Heaven with a few tears!) But Faith is humble,
it is an empty Hand, and what merit can there be in that? Does the poor man's
reaching out his hand merit an Alms? (yes, just as much as a few tears merit
Heaven.) Faith is only a golden Bucket, that draws water out of the Well of
Salvation. But why may not those, who are so apt to be conceited of Merit, grow
as proud of a golden Bucket, as if the Well were their own? They are civil to
Faith, to make it a golden Bucket; but at other times they tell us, That Faith
may be a sore and blear-eyed Leah, a shaking and a palsy hand, weak and
bending Legs, and have all the infirmities that may be, and be never the worse
neither as to the purpose of Justification; so that Faith had need be a very
humble Grace, else it would take such language very ill from them.

What need all this sport with Faiths Humility or Infirmity? Answer.
An humble Grace Faith is, it empties the Soul of it self, gives all Glory to
God, hangs upon Christ and free Grace, and has all in a way of receiving and
dependence; and seeing its Nature and aptitude to Evangelical purposes is such,
it is no wonder at all, that God set his stamp upon it, and marked it out for
an Evangelical Medium, to receive Christ and his Righteousness unto
Justification; Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, says the
Apostle, Romans 4.16. Fides and Gratia commeant, mutuo se ponunt and tollunt;
Fides sola Gratia nititur, Gratia tantum credenti promittitur, says the
Learned Paraeus on the place. Let us hear our Church in this matter: 2. Hom. of
salvation.
This saying, that we be justified by Faith only, freely and without Works, is
spoken, to take away clearly all merit of our Works, as being unable to deserve
Justification at Gods hands; and thereby most plainly to express, the weakness
of Man and goodness of God, the great infirmity of our selves, and the might
and power of God, the imperfectness of our own works, and the most abundant
Grace of our Savior Christ. But to go on; infirm Faith is, because of the
adherent Corruption, which is apt to blear its eyes, and give it a palsy hand
and trembling legs; however, if it be true, it entitles to Christ and his
Righteousness: Invoco te, Domine, languida and imbecilla fide, sed fide tamen,
said Cruciger the German Divine. Those men, whom the Author opposes, hold no
such thing as meriting by Tears or any thing else of our own, but caution
against it: Indeed the Author thinks there is no danger in repentant Tears; but
Humane pride, such is its venomous Nature, is ready to swell at any small
matter, which has but any shadow of excellency in it: The heart of good
Hezekiah was lifted up, over his Silver, and Gold, and Treasures, and precious
things, which yet were of a much lower value than his devotional Tears, which
shows the proneness of our Nature to that sin.

Those Scriptures (Without holiness no man shall see God; Mr. Sherlock.
The wrath of God is reveiled against all unrighteousness; In every Nation he
that works righteousness is accepted of God; Except your righteousness exceed
that of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into Heaven; He
that breaks the least of these Commandments, and teaches men so, shall be
called the least in the kingdom of heaven; and he that does and teaches them
shall be called great there) assert the absolute necessity of an holy life, to
entitle us to Gods Love and the Rewards of the next Life, and perfectly
overthrow their fundamental Notion of Justification by the righteousness of
Christ imputed to us.

Does the necessity of an holy Life overthrow the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness? Answer.
No surely, it is a very gross mistake; a holy Life is so far from overthrowing
Imputed Righteousness, that it presupposes it: We are married to Christ, that
we might bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4. And our Church in the 12.
Article tells us, That good Works follow after Justification: Those, who are
true Believers, and have Christ's Righteousness imputed to them do, above all
other men, obey God's Commands, glorify his Name, and walk in holy Obedience
toward the Crown of Glory above: Obedience is necessary, but not in that
sense, as if the least breach of a Command should finally exclude from Heaven,
for then it were, Woe, woe, to us: Nor yet so absolutely, as that a Believer,
dying in the first instant of Faith and before actual Obedience, should be shut
out of Heaven: Our Church has taught us better: 1. Hom. of good works quoting
St. Chrysostom. sor it.
I can show a man that by Faith without Works lived, and came to heaven, but
without Faith never man had life; the Thief, that was hanged when Christ
suffered, did believe only, and the merciful God justified him: If any say,
that he lacked time; truth it is, and I will not contend therein; but this I
will surely affirm, That Faith only saved him.

But these men defy you, Mr. Sherlock.
if you charge them with destroying the necessity of an holy life; for they
tell us, Tat this universal Obedience and good Works (a suspicious word) are
indispensibly necessary, from the sovereign appointment and Will of God; this
is the Will of God, even our Sanctification: It is the Will of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost; it is the end of their Dispensation in the business of
Salvation; it is the end of the Father's electing Love, Ephesians. 1.2. of the Son's
redeeming Love, Tit. 2. and of the Spirit's sanctifying Love; it is necessary
to the glory of them all: And are not these men mightily injured? Is it not
great pity they should be so abused? But the truth is, all this is not one
syllable to the purpose; for the Question was about its necessity to salvation;
and if we be justified and saved without it, all this cannot prove any
necessary obligation on us to the practice of it: God has commanded Obedience,
but where is the Sanction of this Law? Will he damn those who do not obey, for
their disobedience, and save those who do, for their obedience? Not a word of
this, for this destroys our Justification by Christ's Righteousness only; if
after all those commands, God has left it indifferent, whether we obey or not,
Obedience is not necessary. And will the Father elect, and the Son redeem none
but those who are holy, and reprobate all others? If we be elected and redeemed
without any regard to our being holy, our Election and Redemption is secure,
whether we be holy or not; and so this cannot make holiness necessary on our
part, though it may be necessary on God's to make us holy; but that is not our
care; and how is Obedience for the glory of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit,
when the necessity of holiness is destructive to free Grace, which is the only
glory God designs by Christ.

I suppose them injured and abused to some tune, Answer.
after they have in terminis asserted the Necessity of Obedience from strong,
invincible, Scriptural Arguments, they are yet charged with destroying the
Necessity of an holy Life. But, says the Author, All this is not one syllable
to the purpose; for the Question was about its necessity to salvation; if we be
justified and saved without it, it is not necessary. I answer, Here we have
Justification and Salvation confounded; Obedience follows after Justification,
as we heard but now from our Church, but precedes Salvation: But to pass that;
Is nothing necessary to Salvation but what justifies? Is not Sanctification
necessary to Salvation, and yet distinct from Justification? and how then are
we saved without Obedience? But, says the Author, Where is the Sanction of
this Law? Will he damn those that obey not, and save those that do obey? If
after all those Commands God has left it indifferent, Obedience is not
necessary: But what a strange Supposition is this! Commanded and yet left
indifferent? It is utterly impossible; no man will say so so much as of an
Humane Command: No doubt at all, but God will damn the rebellious, and save the
obedient; yet our Obedience no way clashes with Christ's Righteousness, neither
is Eternal Life given us for Obedience, as if it merited the same. What follows
in the Author, Will the Father elect and the Son redeem none but those who are
holy? is a very strange Question: Will they? as if the Book of Life were yet
unwritten, and the Blood of Atonement yet unshed: The Father has elected us,
that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. and how can he elect us being such? The Son
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. and how could we be
holy before? However, no disregard is cast upon Holiness, which, though it do
not antecede Election and Redemption, yet it sweetly streams and issues from
thence; and Believers are obliged to follow after it, as they will answer the
End of Election and Redemption; And whilst they are passing on in that pure
way, I dare be their Bondsman, that they shall not be met with any such
monstrous Conceit, as if Holiness, which is exaltative of free Grace, were
destructive of it.

Yet Holiness is necessary to our honor, Mr. Sherlock.
for it makes us like to God: Profane men that they are! as if the perfect
Righteousness of Christ were not much more for our honor, and did not make us
more like to God, than the rags and patches of our own Righteousness.

A very hard case, Answer.
they must be profane for proving the Necessity of Holiness and likeness to
God; but the reason is, this disparages the Righteousness of Christ; A sad
story; but it will be proved much about the time, when Christ's justifying
Righteousness and sanctifying Spirit shall fall at odds and variance among
themselves: So horrid a thing cannot be, neither let any Christian Mind start a
thought of it.

But it is for Peace; what! Mr. Sherlock
Peace of Conscience? Must we fetch our peace from Duties and Graces? Is not
this to renounce Christ? Miserable men! must we set about correcting our Lives,
amending our Ways, performing Duties, following after Righteousness according
to the prescript of the Law? Why this is the course, wherein many continue long
with much perplexity, hoping, fearing, tiring themselves in their way:
Afterward they come to the Apostle's Conclusion, By the works of the Law no
man is justified; and is this the way to Peace? Is this the way to Communion
with God by our own Righteousness? Does not all our wisdom of walking with God
consist in our acquaintance with Christ? God is Light, we darkness; he Life, we
dead; he Holiness, we defiled; he Love, we hatred; surely this is no foundation
of Agreement or Communion: the foundation then of this Peace is laid and hid in
Christ, who is our peace, and the Medium of all Communications between God and
us: So that if this Gentleman's (that is, Dr. Owen's) memory had not failed
him, he would never have told us, that Holiness is necessary to our peace and
Communion with God.

All this is but a mistake, Answ
for want of distinguishing between the Foundation of our peace with God, and
the Sense of it: The Foundation of our peace is not laid in our Works or Legal
Righteousness, but in the atoning and satisfying blood of Jesus Christ, which
speaks peace to all believers: Melch. Adam. in vit. Jureconsult.
A notable instance whereof we have in that German John a Berg Father of
Joachim, who in all his life was a zealous Papist, standing on his works and
legal righteousness, but upon his deathbed cast away those fig leaves and poor
coverings, and reposed himself in the merit and expiation of Christ, as the
only foundation of peace: But the sense of this peace is found in a way of
holiness, whilst the believer is there; the love of God coming down in the
witness of the spirit, and ecchoing in conscience, makes such a pure serenity
in the heart, as outrelishes all things in nature: Now whether there be any
inconsistency between the foundation of our peace and the sense of it, I leave
to the Reader; these may as well stand together, as Christ's atonement and our
Obedience.

However Holiness serves for the conviction of enemies; Mr. Sherlock.
how so, when it is not essentially necessary to his Friends? and it is for the
conversion of others; why so, when men may be converted without it? It keeps
off the Judgments of God from men; But why cannot Christ's Righteousness do this
more effectually than the holiness of men?

Holiness casts forth a convictive Ray and Glory into the dark world, Answ
yet it is not essential to Believers to justify, but to sanctify them; It
has a Divine tendency to convert others, yet the first act of conversion
precedes in habitual Grace, and actual Holiness or Obedience follows after;
Christ's righteousness, without which there would be nothing but wrath and
judgments, is the great fundamental reason of keeping them off; but Holiness
ministers under it to the same end.

But it is necessary in respect of the state and condition of justified
persons, Mr. Sherlock.
for they are accepted and received into friendship with an holy God; therefore
they must cleanse and purify themselves: what need of this? when they are
clothed with the Robes of Christ's Righteousness, which is the only foundation
of our Commuuion with God. And page 267. They fulfill the Righteousness of the
Law, not by doing any thing themselves, but by having all done for them, by
having this perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to them. And page 423. The
Doctor places Christ's righteousness in the room of ours, to be not only the
foundation, but condition of the Covenant; And then makes it an expression of
our chaste affections to Christ, quite to thrust out our own righteousness, and
to allow it no place in our Religion: And page 427. The foundation of their
love to Christ, Is a fond imagination that he will save them by his
righteousness without any righteousness of their own.

What! Answer.
Does imputed righteousness make holiness needless? Under pardon, this is
neither better nor worse, than an old Popish calumny, such as has been cast
into the face of Protestants over and over: Chemnitius asserting justification
by imputed Righteousness, tells us, Exam. Conc. Trid. de Justif.
Inde vero Pontificii texunt calumniam, omnia decreta Tridentina ita condita
sunt de justificatione, ut oblique nos insimulent, quasi doceamus credentes non
renovari, quasi charitatem and obedientiam ita excludamus, ut nec adsit, nec
sequatur in reconciliatis: And what return does that learned man make
thereunto? Sed tantum Syeophanticae and impudentes calumniae sunt, quibus
strepitum excitant. The learned Chamier brings in Sapeins, Cham. de Sanctif.
cap. 2.
charging the Protestants thus, Non esse nos justos, nist solu imputatione
justitiae Christi, non autem ulla inhaerente qualitate: And Costerus thus,
Christus est nostra justitia, nulla est ergo alia justitia in nobis: And Bozius
thus, Vt salutem consequaris and sis sanctus, aiunt omnes Protestants, nihil
est necesse boni aliquid velis, moliaris, aut facias, Christo fidas, impune
quidvis audeas, and ad exitum perducas; and then expresses himself thus,
Immanem, ita me Deus amet, calumniam: The excellent Davenant, De H^tuali cap. ^.
ushering in Bellarmine and Campian, and Becanus, as casting the same dirt into
the face of Protestants; says plainly to the two first, quot verba, tot sere
mendacia; and to the third, calumnia est, and aperte falsa. The Papists you
see, have cast out these calumnies, but should a Protestant do so? No surely;
the Author I confess, has done a great honor to these few Nonconformists, in
casting upon them that reproach of Christ, (for so as a Protestant I must call
it) which many a son of the Church of England would willingly bear, hoping to
have the spirit of Glory rest upon him; but I suppose, he has done no great
right to the Protestant cause therein: How vain this calumny is, does as soon
appear, as we can open our eyes upon the common distinction between
Justification and Sanctification: Justification is an Action of God without us,
Sanctification an Action of the Spirit within us; the one is by the perfect
Righteousness of Christ imputed, the other by the holy Graces of the Spirit
infused and inherent in us: In the one we are freed from the Guilt of Sin, in
the other from the Corruption and Pollution of it: By the one we have a Title
to God's Kingdom, by the other a Meetness for it; it being such as no unclean
thing can enter into the same. And what color of Repugnancy is there between
these two? and how does the one make the other useless? Both are useful to the
Believer, and both in Harmony between themselves; Obedience is so far from
being needless, that it is a necessary consequent upon Justification by
Christ's Righteousness. St. Paul in the Epistle to the Romans first treats of
Justification, and then of Sanctification as a consequent thereupon. Good works
(as our Church tells us in the 12th Article) are the Fruits of Faith and follow
after Justification. To me it is unimaginable, that the holy Spirit, which is
procured by Christ's Righteousness, and before whose inspiration (as our Church
tells us in the 13th. Article) works done are not pleasant unto God, should
inspire unjustified persons to Obedience; nay, had it not been for Christ's
Righteousness, the holy Spirit, I verily believe, would no more have touched in
the least holy motion upon Men than upon Devils. I shall close this Point with
the Authors own words: Christ's Satisfaction was for sins of Omission and
Commission, and by it we are reputed by God as having done nothing amiss; and
as perfectly righteous, to have done all, to have kept the whole Law, page 60.
and yet I hope the Author does not esteem Holiness needless; though I cannot
tell, how Christ's imputed Righteousness (whereof his Satisfaction is a part)
should make any man more than perfectly righteous.

However Holiness is necessary with respect to Sanctification. Mr. Sherlock.
We have in us a New Creature, which is fed, cherished, nourished, kept alive
by the fruits of Holiness: God has not given us new Hearts to kill them in the
womb, or to give them to the Old Man to be devoured, as Dr. Owen has it: The
phrase of this is admirable, and the reasoning unanswerable; if men be new
Creatures, they will certainly live new Lives: And this makes Holiness
necessary, by the same reason, that every thing necessarily is, what it is,
when it is.

The new Creature is fed with fruits of of Holiness; Answer.
so Dr. Owen: Upon which the Author tells us in sport, that the phrase is
admirable: I suppose it is so: Hear our Church: As Men that be very Men indeed,
1. Hom. of good works quoting St. Chrysostom. for it.
first have life, and after be nourished; so must our Faith in Christ go
before, and after be nourished with good works: But for the reason, I think it
cannot be answered: Exercise is necessary for the Body, and is it not necessary
for the Body, and is it not necessary for the Soul? It is necessary for the
Soul in mere Moral Virtues, and is it not necessary for it in spiriritual
Graces too? Reason, though a natural Talent only, necessarily obliges us to
walk sutably to it, and how much more do Divine Graces, which are altogether
supernatural, bind us to live in a Decorum thereunto? These things to me are
very cogent.

Well! Mr. Sherlock.
but holiness is necessary as the means to the end, but how? Though it neither
be the Cause, Matter, nor Condition of our Justification, yet it is the Way
appointed by God for us to walk in for the obtaining Salvation; he that hops,
purifieth himself: none shall come to the End who walk not in the Way, without
Holiness it is impossible to see God. This is all pertinent and home to the
purpose; but it has two little faults in it, that it contradicts it self, and
overthrows their darling Opinions, which I can pardon, if he can: What? the
necessary way to eternal Life, and yet neither Cause, Matter nor Condition? At
least it might be the Causa sine qua non, and that will make it a Condition:
But not to dispute about words; I am content it should be only a way to life,
but, what becomes of Christ then, who is the only way? Cannot Christ's
Righteousness save us without our own? Does Christ's Righteousness free us from
guilt, and entitle us to Glory, and yet can we not be saved without Holiness?
What becomes of free Grace then? Is not this to eek out the Righteousness of
Christ with our own? To make Christ our Justifier, and our Works our Savior?

This is all pertinent: Answer.
It seems the former Arguments drawn from the sovereign Will of God, from the
End of the Love of the blessed Trinity, from the Glory of them all, from our
Likeness to God, from the Peace of Conscience, from the Conviction and
Conversion of others, from the aversion of Judgments, from the State of
justified Persons, from the Work of Sanctification, are but poor insignificant
things with the Author; which yet with me are of great Moment. This is all
pertinent, says the Author, but it contradicts it self, and overthrows their
Darling-opinion: What? the necessary way to eternal Life, and yet neither
Cause, Matter nor Condition? At least it might be Causa sine qua non, and so a
Condition: But the Author might have observed that the Doctor did not speak ad
idem, to one and the same thing; his words are, Holiness is neither the Cause,
Matter nor Condition of Justification, yet it is the way to Salvation; both
stand well together without any shadow of Contradiction: Obedience is
subsequent to Justification, and so neither Cause, Matter nor Condition of it;
but it is antecedent to Salvation, and the way thereunto. Well, the Author is
content, that it only be a necessary way to eternal Life, but what then becomes
of Christ the only way? What of Christ's Righteousness and of free Grace? I
hope there is no matter of fear; our Holiness, unless it be lifted up above it
self into the room and Throne of Christ, very well comports with Christ and
Grace: it is a way, but not, as Christ, an Expiatory Meritorious one; it stands
as necessary in Sanctification, but eeks not out Christ's Righteousness in
Justification: It flows from free Grace, and does not overturn, but magnify
its Fountain. Afterward our Author draws up a long Charge against these men,
That they prepossess their Fancies with arbitrary Notions, pervert the
Scriptures, to justify their Darling-opinions; and that sometimes with so ill
success, as to break some stubborn Truths into palpable absurdities and
contradictions; their Fancies and Scripture agree no better than the Church of
Rome and Scripture do: They add such limitations, distinctions, glosses to
Scripture, as are necessary to make them orthodox. Their Acquaintance with
Christ's Person is only a work of Fancy, teaches men Hypocrisy, undermines the
Design of the Gospel; makes men incurably ignorant, yet conceited of knowledge;
impertinent talkers and censurers of Mankind; despisers of their Teachers, as
if ignorant and mere Moral Preachers: Their Acquaintance with Christ's Person
warms their Fancies, moves their Passions; sometimes they find breakings of
heart, and feel the horrors of damned Spirits; sometimes they are ravished with
his love and Beauty, refreshed with the sweet caresses of his love: All which
may be no more than the working of a warm Enthusiastic Fancy, the
transportation of frantic Raptures and Ecstasies of Love. Unto all which I say
two things only; the one is this: In general Charges, which may be drawn up
against the most innocent Souls under Heaven, the intelligent Reader must
measure the truth of them only by the Instances, which before have been
examined: The other is this, that the Author tells us, That their breakings for
sin, and ravishments in Christ, may be but the working of a warm Enthusiastic
fancy: In which Censure, I suppose there is no over-measure of Charity. There
are yet Two things behind, which, because interwoven with the general Charge, I
have hitherto omitted, but shall now recite them; the one is this; Prepossessed
Fancies force men (says the Author) to pervert the Scriptures to make them
speak the Orthodox Language; to this we owe all those nice and subtle
Distinctions, which constitute the Body of Systematical Divinity, which
commonly have no other design than to evade the force of Scripture, or to bribe
it to speak on their side. I will now wonder no longer, that the Author treats
a few Nonconformists with such rough hands; Behold! an universal blast put on
those excellent Divines, which have stood in the Protestant World like burning
and shining Lights, and have set forth so many learned and worthy Systems of
Divinity for the Churches use: But this is All-a-mode with the Remonstrants,
who, as Vedelius tells us, De Arcan. Armind.
have poured forth convitia atrocissima in Formulas; not being afraid to say,
Ista ars est Sathanae, calling them humanam tyrannidem; and proceeding so far
as to say, That that Preface in Athanasius his Creed, Qui vult salvus esse ante
omnia credat, etc. was a proud one: Systems of Divinity are to them as Bonds
and Fetters, which they would willingly break off, that they might have the
better Scope to introduce their unsound and novel Opinions. The other is this:
It is not, says the Author, the Person, but the Gospel of Christ, which is
the way, the truth and the life. It seems the new and living Way through his
Flesh may be stopped up, the great Prophet may want the Title of Truth, the
vital Influences of Grace from Christ may be intercepted; and all this after
Christ himself has told us expressly, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life.
These things, I suppose, will hardly be passable with Christian Ears or Hearts:
If he be not the Way, there is no approach for us to the Father; if not the
Truth, we are not bound to believe him or his Gospel; if not the Life, to
quicken our dead and unbelieving Hearts, we should never believe in him, though
he were both the former.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. I.
NExt to the Knowledge of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
there is not a greater Mystery than our Union to him and Communion with him;
on which, as these men represent it, are built all those wild and fanciful
Conclusions, which directly oppose the Doctrine and Practice of Christianity:
Therefore it is of great concernment to state this matter, and to examine, what
is meant in Scripture by Union to Christ and Communion with him; for the
Scripture mentions such a Relation between Christ and Christians, as may be
expressed by an Union; and the phrases of being in Christ, abiding in Christ,
can signify no less.

The Author owns some kind of Union, Answer.
but our enquiry is after a spiritual, mystical union between Christ and
believers, who are knit together by the Divine Ligatures of the holy Spirit and
Faith: The quickening Spirit (as the right Reverend Usher has it) descending
downward from the Head, Sermon. before the Commons, 1620.
to be in us a Fountain of supernatural Life, and a lively Faith (wrought by
the same Spirit) ascending from us upward to lay fast hold upon him. This Union
is fully set forth in Scripture: We are called unto the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. Our fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus
Christ, 1 John 1.3. And this (...) or Communion cannot but import Union: We are
said to have the Son, and to have life by him, 1 John 5.12. To eat his flesh
and drink his blood, so as to live by him, Joh. 6.56, 57. And, unless we dream
of an oral Manducation, what can this be but a Mystical Union? and what better
proof can be of it, than that divine Life, which issues from thence? Our
Savior has put it out of all doubt, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me and I in him, Joh. 6.56. And in another place he tells
them, Abide in me and I in you, Joh. 15.4. What can be more emphatical and
expressive of our Mystical Union? If such words do not signify it, what can?
We are said to be in him that is true, even in Jesus Christ, 1 John 5.20. And
Christ is said to be in us the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. And how full are these
Expressions? This our Savior prayed for in that solemn Prayer, Joh. 17. As
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may be one in us: This he
promised; At that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and
I in you, Joh. 14.20. Surely that Union, which is set forth by the Union of the
Father and the Son in the blessed Trinity, must be a mystical one: The Bonds of
this Union are no less pregnantly expressed; touching the holy Spirit, which,
as Bishop Davenant tells us, is Primaria Commissura, by which Christ and we
touch, the Scripture speaks negatively, If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. that is, he has no Union or Communion
with him; and positively or affirmatively, He that is joined unto the Lord, is
one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. Hereby we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. Touching Faith, which, as
the Learned Usher says, is the Soul of all other Graces, the Scripture teaches
us, that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. and that Faith comes,
receives, leans on, puts on, feeds on, and, in a word, possesses Christ: In one
place, Gal. 2.20. we have both these Bonds together, I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, that is, by his Spirit, and I live by the faith of the Son
of God; these two Make up the Mystical Union. The Name of this Union is also
expressly in Scripture; Fancy did not baptize it, Mystical, but the holy Ghost;
This is a great mystery, to be members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones, Ephesians. 5.30, 32. Nay, The riches of the glory of the mystery, is Christ in
us the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. The ancient Fathers were no strangers to this
Union; that of Ignatius, (...), Epist. ad Ephesians.
points it out to us. In the times of St, Cyprian and Julius Bishop of Rome,
the Church, in the Lord's Supper, which is a divine Seal of this Union, used
over and above to note it out by mixing Water with the Wine: Hence St. Cyprian
says, Cypr. E. pist. 63. Decret. Julii in Council.
Quando in calice vinum aqua miscetur, Christo populus adunatur, and credentium
plebs ei, in quem credidit, copulatur and conjungitur. And Julius says, Si sit
vinum, tantum, est Christus sine populo; si aqua sola, populus sine Christo.
St. Hilary and St. Cyril of Alexandria compare our Union with Christ with that
high Union which is between the Father and the Son: St. Cyril upon John tells
us, as I have him quoted by the Noble Sadeel, that Christus per fidem
ingreditur in nos, and per Spiritum sanctum inhabitat. St. Basil speaks of a
(...), an intellectual mouth in the inner Man, by which we feed upon Christ the
Bread of Life. St. Chrysostom says, Hom. 11. in Ephesians.
that there is (...), a Spirit flowing from above, which touches all the
Members of Christ. Diximus fratres (says St. Austin) hoc Dominum commendasse
in manducatione carnis suae and potione sanguinis sui, Tract. 27. in Joh.
ut in illo maneamus and ipse in nobis; maneamus autem in illo, cum sumus
membra ejus, manet ipse in nobis, cum sumus templum ejus: And in another place,
De peccator. Mer. cap. 31.
Homines sancti and fideles ejus siunt cum homine Christo unus Christus, unus
Christus caput and corpus, magna est and mira dignatio. Theophylact says, In
Joh. 15.
that a man is by Faith (...), part of the Root, united to the Lord, and
incorporated in him: And to name no more; generally those Sayings of the
Fathers, which the Papists plead, for an oral Manducation of Christ, are so
many proofs of the Mystical Union. The Schoolmen concur in the same thing:
Aquinas says, that Christ and his Members are but una Persona mystica: And
Barthol. Medina expresses it fully; In 3. partem Thom. qu. 8.
Cum efficimur membra sub Capite Christo, mirabili quadam Spiritus sancti
operatione unimur, and transimus in Christum, induimusque illum, and deiformi
quadam insitione atque Union illi inserimur. Modern Divines go the same way;
to name but a few: Bishop Usher says, Imman. page 50.
The Bond of this Mystical Union between Christ and us, is on his part, the
quickening Spirit, and on ours, Faith. Est inter Christum and omnia Christi
Membra, continuitas quaedam ratione Spiritus sancti, qui plenissime residens in
Christo Capite, In Col cap. 1. ver. 18.
unus and idem numero ad omnia ejus membra diffunditur, vivificans singula and
uniens universa; so Bishop Davenant. The Spirit knitteth us, as really, though
mystically, Life of Christ. 457.
unto Christ, as his Sinews and Joints do fasten the parts of his sacred Body
together; thus Bishop Reynolds. But I shall shut up all with the Authority of
our Church: In the Lords Supper there is no vain Ceremony, no bare Sign, nor
untrue Figure of a thing absent; but the Table of the Lord, the Bread and Cup
of the Lord, the Memory of Christ, the Annunciation of his death, the Communion
of the Body and Blood of the Lord in a mavelous Incorporation, 1. Hom. of the
Sacrament.
which by the operation of the holy Ghost (the very Bond of our conjunction
with Christ) is through Faith wrought in the Souls of the faithful, the true
Understanding of this Fruition and Union between the Body and the Head, between
Believers and Christ, the ancient Catholic Fathers perceiving themselves, and
commending to their people, were not afraid to call this Supper, the Salve of
Immortality, a Deifical Communion, pledge of eternal health and food of
immortality. This Mystical Union, we see, is no Fancy, no, very great moments
depend upon it: Tota veraejustitiae, salutis, vitae participatio ex hac
pernecessaria cum Christo (...) pendet, says the Learned Zanchy: Without it,
how should Christ profit us? which way should his blood wash, or righteousness
cover us? What illapses of the holy spirit, or vital influences of Grace could
we look for in a state separate from him? He is the Savior of the body, his
merits and righteousness cover only those that are in him; the effectual
working of the Divine Spirit is only in those that are parts of him, and united
to him as their head; a man can no more continue in the Divine life, and walk
in holiness without this union, than the old Dionysius (as the fable runs)
could walk a great way with his head off: The opinion against this mystical
union, if practical, would in a moment murder all the new creatures in the
world, and make a more bloody day with the Church, than that of the Parisian
Massacre: This at one blow beheads the Church Catholic, and cuts off that neck
of Faith, through which all Graces and Divine influences are derived from
Christ unto believers: But now let us hear the Author.

Those Metaphors which describe the relation and union between Christ and
Christians, Mr. Sherlock.
do primarily refer to the Christian Church, not to every individual Christian:
Christ is the head, but of his body, which no particular Christian is; Christ
is an husband, but the whole Church is his Spouse; as St. Paul tells the Church
of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present
you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Christ is a Shepherd, and that concerns the
whole flock; Christ is a Rock, a corner stone, and the Church an holy Temple:
All these Metaphors in their first and most proper use refer to the whole
Society of Christians; the union of particular Christians to Christ, is by
means of their union to the Church; the Church is the body of Christ, and every
Christian by being united to this body, becomes a member of Christ: As the
Apostle tells us, Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular: 1
Cor. 12.27. The Church is the Temple of God, and every Christian a lively stone
in it; the Church is Christ's Spouse, and every Christian a member of that
Society, but every Christian is not Christ's Spouse; he is an enemy to Polygamy,
and has but one Spouse, as he has but one body, and one Church; which quite
spoils the prettiness and fantastical wit, of a late exhortation to young
women, to take Christ for their husband; which would have sounded much better
in a Popish Nunnery, than among such pretenders to reformation; and to give
every one their due, the Papists are the most generous sort of suitors for
Christ, for they persuade them to forsake all other husbands for Christ, which
is more honorable and meritorious.

These Metaphors refer to the whole Church or body of Christ very well; Answer.
but are not particular Christians united to Christ as their head, espoused to
him, under him as Sheep under a Shepherd, built on him as on a Rock? Yes
surely, The Church of Corinth (which is the Authors instance) was in proper
speech, no more the whole body of Christ, than a particular Christian is, and
yet it was espoused as a chaste Virgin to Christ; if a particular Christian,
because not the whole body of Christ, cannot be espoused to him, then neither
can a particular Church, because not such, be so espoused: And so the grave
words of S. Paul about the Corinthian Church, as well as the fantastical wit
of the late Exhorter, must spoil together: But if a particular Christian may be
espoused to Christ, why should Ministers who are Suitors on that behalf, be
checked with a Popish Nunnery, as if those Espousals smelt of a superstitious
Vow? The Author himself tells us, page 180. Every devout Soul is Gods Temple,
an enlightened mind is his Debir or Oracle, a pure heart is his Altar, devout
Prayers are spiritual Incense, and sweet Perfumes, the body it self is a
consecrated place, and called Gods Temple: All which is excellently spoken; and
I think by the same reason a particular believer may be called Christ's Spouse;
but says the Author, The union of particular Christians to Christ, is by means
of their union to the Church; that is, to the whole Catholic Church, the whole
body of Christ, which is made up only of Believers and Saints; being as
Ignatius calls it, (...), Epist. ad Tral.
This is the Church the Author here means, by the whole Church or body of
Christ; that body has none but Believers and Saints in it: Now if particular
believers are united to Christ by their union to this Church, how was the first
believer united to Christ? Or afterward, how was the Church Catholic united
to him? Surely not by another Church, but immediately; and then to me it is
unimaginable, that the whole Church should be immediately united to him, and
never a part so united, or that all believers should be so united to him, and
never an one of them so united: Besides, the Church Catholic is part militant
on earth, and part triumphant in Heaven; Those in Heaven are no part of the
visible Church, afterward mentioned by the Author; and withal they are at so
great a distance from us, that we may as easily imagine an immediate union to
Christ, as to them; Those on earth are not all the body of Christ, and so not
properly within the Authors discourse; however if we consider the business,
those vincula unionis, the holy Spirit and Faith, which unite them all
immediately to Christ, are resident in particular Believers; and therefore it
is a wonder to me, that those particular Believers, in whom the Divine Bonds
reside, should not be immediately united to Christ: It is apparent, that in
case those Bonds in particular believers should be dissolved, the whole
Catholic Church on earth would be dissolved also; and how then can particular
persons be less than immediately united to Christ? Add hereunto, that none are
in the Church Catholic but real Believers, and in the very instant of
believing they are united to Christ; and therefore it is not at all
supposeable, that they should first be united to the Church, and by that means
to Christ: That place in the Corinthians quoted by the Author, Now ye are the
body of Christ, and members in particular proves it not: The Church of Corinth
was not the whole body of Christ, neither is there any syllable in it to prove,
that first we are united to the Church, and then to Christ.

Christ speaking of himself, Mr. Sherlock.
says, I am the true Vine, John 15. The meaning is, that Church which is
founded on the belief of my Gospel, is the true Vine; I signifies Christ
together with his Church, which is his body, upon which account the Church is
elsewhere called Christ.

The Author is a little various here; for he says, Answer.
I signifies Christ together with his Church; but a little after, I, and in me,
cannot be meant of his own person: So there it is the Church alone, and not
together with Christ, neither does the Author agree upon the Church: First he
speaks of the body of Christ, which is the Church Catholic; and a little
after, of the visible Church, which the Church Catholic is not; but that, I,
does not here signify the Church is apparent; The same I runs throughout the
whole Chapter; I have loved you, verse. 9. I have kept my Fathers Commandments:
verse. 10. I have spoken to you: verse. 11. I have heard of my Father: verse. 15.
I have chosen you: verse. 16. I came: verse. 22. I did the works: verse. 24. I
will send the comforter: verse. 26. In none of these I's is the Church meant, no
more is it meant in that first I, when he says, I am the true Vine; however
the Author offers some reasons for it: The first is this, The Church in the old
Testament is compared to a Vine: Esaias 5. Jer. 2. Hosea 10. and so John 15. The
Church is the Vine; Christ applies the parable of the Vineyard to the state of
the Gospel: Matthew. 21.33. And the Christian Church is called an Olive, and the
members of it branches. Romans 11. But I fancy not this arguing: In some places
the Vine is the Church, therefore it is so in all; this is the very same with
that, which the Author would charge upon his adversaries: page 4. Christ
sometimes signifies the person of Christ, therefore it must do so always;
after the same rate the Author, In some places the Vine is the Church,
therefore it is so in all: But in the 15. of John, the context will not bear
it; one and the same I, runs through the whole Chapter, and in many passages no
way suits to the Church: The Vine in this Chapter differs from those quoted out
of the Old Testament; in those the Ghurch is the Vine, no mention at all is
made of branches; but in this, the branches are set distinct from the Vine, as
appears verse 5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches: The Branches and the Vine
are distinguished by I and ye; the Church is included in the branches, as the
branches taken asunder, signify particular Christians, so put together they
import the Church. The second reason is, God is called the Husbandman, but he
dresses not Christ, but the Church, which is Gods Husbandry. To which the
Answer is easy, God is the Husbandman with reference to both, planting the
Vine Christ, and dressing the Branches Christians. The third reason is, Christ
speaks of branches in him, which bear no fruit, and there can be no such
branches in the person of Christ: But as the Learned Whitaker has observed
against Stapleton, that place, Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he
takes away: Joh. 15.2. May be read thus, Every branch which bears not fruit
in me, he takes away. The words, in me, being referred not to the Branch, but
to the Fruit: But being read as is usual, the answer is obvious; our Savior in
this Verse speaks not of true real Branches, which are always fruitful, but of
seeming ones, which are barren; they seem to be in Christ, but are not.

When Christ speaks in the first Person, Mr. Sherlock.
I, and in me, he cannot mean this of his Person, but of his Church and
Doctrine, according as the circumstances require: Thus Ver. 5. I am the true
vine, ye are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing: I would willingly
learn what sense can be made of this, if we understand it of the Person of
Christ; for it is not very intelligible, how we can be in the Person of Christ;
and it is more unintelligible how we can be in the Person of Christ, and the
Person of Christ in us at the same time, which is a new piece of Philosophy,
called Penetration of Dimensions; and that our fruitfulness should depend upon
such an Union, is as hard as all the rest.

How various is the Author on this Vine! First, I, Answer.
is Christ together with the Church; then the Church only, and now the Doctrine
is ushered in to eek out the Interpretation; and after this rate we may come to
the seventy Faces which the Jews talk of in Scripture: But that 5. Verse in the
15. of John cannot be meant of Christ's Person, why not? The Milevitan Council
Can. 5. and afterward the Arausican Council, Can. 24. did so interpret it; the
words of the last are remarkable; Vitis sic est in palmitibus, ut vitale
subministret eis, non sumat ab eis, ae per hoc, and manentem in se habere
Christum, and manner in Christo, discipulis prodest, and non Christo: 1. Hom.
of good works
Our Church interprets it of no other but Christ; but it is not intelligible,
How we can be in the Person of Christ, and the Person of Christ in us. Luther
in his Conference at Marpurg with Zuinglius about the Eucharist, told him, Mel.
Ad. in vita Brentii.
that he must not Mathematica huic negotio admiscere, nec carnem Christi (...),
so will I say to the Author, Physics and Mathematics must here lie by; here
is no room for Penetrations or Dimensions, all is spi itual and divine: The
Union between Christ and Believers, though a new piece of Philosophy, or rather
no part of it at all, is old Divinity, and, though a very great Mystery, not
altogether unintelligible: Our Divines express it plainly according to
Scripture, to be made by the Spirit and Faith. The most Reverend Usher tells
us, Scrm. before the Commons, 1620.
That it is altogether spiritual and supernatural, no Physical nor Mathematical
Continuity or Contiguity is any way requisite thereunto; it is sufficient for
the making of this Union, that Christ and we be knit together by those
spiritual Ligatures, the quickening Spirit and a lively Faith.

If by, he that abides in me, Mr. Sherlock.
we understand the Christian Church, he who makes a profelsion of Faith in me,
and continues in society with those who do so; and by, I in him, the Christian
Doctrine, the Sense and Reason of it is very ovident.

Why, in me, Answer.
should signisie one thing, and, I, another, why, in me, should be construed,
in the Church, and, I, the Christian Doctrine, there is no reason in the Text;
however the Author had some reason to interpret it so: For if in those words, I
in him, I should fignifie the Church, as those words, in me, are made to do,
then every particular Believer should have a Church in him; which would be as
unintelligible, as that of Christ's being in us. Mr. Sherlock


To abide in Christ is to make a public and visible Profession of Faith in
Christ, to be Members of his visible Church; but because many are so, who do
not credit their Profession, hence to distinguish true Christians from
hypocritical Professors, he adds, And I in you, that is, my words abide in you,
Ver. 7. Thus you see, that the Union of particular Christians to Christ
consists, in their Union to the Christian Church.

This Opinion, Answer.
which denies that particular Believers are immediately united to Christ,
being, as I take it, but novel, has not yet found its Center; but rowls about
from the Catholic Church, which is made up all of Saints, to visible
particular Churches, which are made up of Believers and Unbelievers: First, the
Author spoke of our Union to the Body of Christ, now of it to the Church
Visible. Before I made it appear, that particular Believers were immediately
united to Christ in respect of the Church Catholic; and it is as evident, that
they are so united to him in respect of the Church Visible: On the one hand,
all that are in the Church Visible are not really united to Christ, the
hypocritical Professors do but seem to be so. It is observed by the Learned
Whitaker, that Eccesiae particulares visibilibus nexibus colligantur, Ecclesia
vero Catholica invisibilibus: A Visible Church as such is connected by visible
Bands; and more the Connection cannot be, because Believers and Hypoctites (of
both which the Church is made up) cannot otherwise be knit together; and how is
it possible, that the Union of Believers to Christ, which is made by invisible
Ligatures, should consist in their Union to the Visible Church, which, as such,
is only knit together by visible Bands? On the other hand, those, which are not
of the Church Visible, may yet be really united to Christ: Thus the Catechumeni
were but in vestibulo, and not actually in the Visible Church, and yet, if
Believers, were united to Christ. The same may be said of unbaptized Believers:
The Emperor Valentinian died before Baptism, but in real Union to Christ; hence
St. Ambrose says, that he had in se imaginem Christi, and that his Soul was in
refrigerio. Believers, if unjustly excommunicate, are no longer in the Visible
Church, and yet they are in Union to Christ: The Apostles, as Christ foretold
them, were to be (...), cast out of the Synagogues but never to be parted from
Christ. Believing Merchants may be at a vast distance from the Visible Church,
and yet in near spiritual Conjunction with Christ: And what if a Visible Church
turn Apostate from the Gospel? True Believers will come out of her, and, I
hope, without any loss of their Union to Christ. Those 7000 which in the time
of Elias bowed not the knee to Baal, were, I suppose, joined to no visible
Church, and yet they were a choice reserved people unto God. Thus it appears,
that Believers are immediately united to Christ, in respect of the Visible
Church. As for what the Author, adds Those words, I in him, Joh. 15. 5. are the
same with those, My words abide in you, Ver. 7. I answer, The 5. verse. says,
that Christ is in Believers, and the 7. denies it not, but declares, that where
Christ is, there are his words also.

Hence it is, Mr. Sherlock.
that the ancient Fathers interpret all those Metaphors, which decypher the
Union between Christ and Christians, to signify the cntire Love and Unity of
Christians among themselves: Thus St. Chrysostom expounds Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21.
to signify the Unity of the Church in all Ages, the Jewish and Christian
Church being both united in Christ: Thus also St. Ambrose to the same purpose:
Thus St. Chrysostom, on 1 Cor. 3. observes, That the Apostle disswades from
Schisms and Factions; and tells us, that the Branch draws nourishment and
fatness from the Vine by its Union to it, and the Building stands firm by the
strong adhesion of its parts: Which plainly signifies, that our Union to Christ
consists in our Union to the Christian Church: Thus the same Author argues from
Joh. 14.21. He unites us to each other by many Examples and Patterns of the
closest Union; he the Head, we the Body; he the Foundation, we the Buildding,
etc. According to the sense of this holy Man, Christians are united to Christ,
by their Union to the Church; otherwise I can-not understand, how our Union to
Christ can be an argument to Unity among our selves, if we are immediately
united to the Person of Christ, without being first united to the Church.

The Fathers interpret those Metaphors, Answer.
which decypher the Union between Christ and Christians, to signify the Love
and Unity of Christians among themselves; so the Author: And is there no Union
between Christ and Christians according to the Ancients? Or do they deny, that
particular Believers are immediately united to Christ? Oh! no, St. Chrysostom
on that place, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21. says expressly, (...), Every one of you is a
Temple for God: And upon 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay, than
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, he adds (as our Author has it) Let us be
built on Christ, and cleave to him as to a Foundation, and as a Branch to the
Vine, that there may be no distance between Christ and us; for if there be, we
immediately perish. By the way observe, Christ is the Vine in St. Chrysostom;
and for the point in hand, if there be no distance between Christ and us,
surely we are immediately united to him: And this is very emphatical in the
Greek, (...), Let there be no Medium between Christ and us; and if there be
(...), any Medium, we immediately perish. Nothing could be more emphatically
spoken for immediate Union: And in that place, Joh. 14. he expresses (as the
Author quotes him) plainly the Union of Christians to Christ. And for St.
Ambrose, I shall quote but one place, on 2 Cor. 13.5. he says, Qui fidei suae
sensum in cord habet, hic scit Christum Jesum in se esse. But, says the
Author, If our Union to Christ be immediate, it can be no argument to Unity
among our selves: But the consequence fails; there can be no greater argument
to Unity among our selves than this, That we are all built upon one Foundation,
Christ, and have all one and the same Spirit in us; so it is with all that are
mystically united to him.

The Sacraments our Savior has instituted, as Symbols of our Union with him,
are a plain demonstration of it: Mr. Sherlock.
Baptism is the Sacrament of our admission into the Christian Church; For by
one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. In which the
Apostle seems to allude to Baptism, which confers the holy Spirit on us all,
and thereby makes us all members of the Body of Christ: But more expressly in
Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, and one Spirit; as ye are called in one hope of
your calling: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: That is, the Christian Baptism
is but one, and is a Sacrament of Union, making us all members of that one
Body; This is called being baptized into Christ, that is, admitted into the
Church by a public Profession of our Faith in Christ. Thus the Lord's Supper
is a Sacrament of Union, and signifies the near conjunction between Christ and
the Church, and the mutual fellowship of Christians: Hence the Apostle calls
the Cup, the Communion of Christ's Blood; and the Bread, the Communion of his
Body: For we being many are one bread and one Body, (one Body represented by
this one Bread) for we are all partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.16.

Sacraments are Symbols of our Union with Christ, Answer.
and why not of an immediate Union? the Elements are immediately applied to
individuals, and why may not the signified Union be immediate? else how does it
correspond to the Sign? But to clear this point; first for Baptism: Unbaptized
Believers are really united to Christ, even before their Baptism; how else
should the Thief on the Cross ever arrive at Paradise? Or which way should the
unbaptized Martyrs get thither? Baptism admits men into the Church Visible,
but, if Believers, they are in the Church Catholic, that one Body of Christ,
before; nay, Baptism supposes them to be so, because it is a Seal of the
Covenant: If thou believe with all thine heart, says Philip to the Eunuch,
thou may be baptized, Act. 8.37. and after the holy Ghost poured down on the
Gentiles, water could not be forbid them, Act. 10 47. And on the other hand,
baptized persons may yet not be really united to Christ, they may be admitted
into the visible Church, and yet not in that one body of Christ, which is made
up of Believers: Simon Magus was baptized Acts 8. but for all that, in the bond
of iniquity; many are partakers of baptismal water, in whom appears not a
Scintilla Spiritus Sancti; In like manner for the Lords Supper, men may be,
nay, should be in union with Christ before their receiving of it; and yet many
outwardly receive it, who are not in union with him, receiving only Panem
Domini, and not Panem Dominum (as S. Austin speaks) and eating only fores non
intus, in Sacramento tantum, non usque ad Spiritus participationem. To
conclude; Sacraments and visible Churches must not be disparaged, yet truth
must be owned; a real union to Christ may be before the use of Sacraments,
nay, before entrance into the Church visible, and therefore it must be
immediate, or else it could in no case be before them.

The intention of our Lord and Savior, Mr. Sherlock.
in what he did and suffered for us, was not merely to reform and save some
single persons, but to erect a Church, and combine all his Disciples into a
public Society, to unite them by holy mysteries, and to engage them to a
mutual discharge of all Christian Offices, whereby the whole body may edify it
self in Love; and therefore our Savior does not own any relation to particular
men as such, but as they are members of his body, for he is the Savior of the
body, and redeemed his Church with his own Blood: Hence St. John tells, 1
Epist. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that you may have
fellowship with us; and truly our Fellowship is with the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ: First, That ye may have fellowship with us, become members of the
Church, by which means you have fellowship with God and Christ.

Christ intended to erect a Church; How so! Answer.
Common Philanthropy, which does alike for all men, does no such singular
thing, as to cull and call a Church, a select company out of the rest of
mankind: No, it is impossible, because the Love is common, and the work
singular; no less than special love must do it, such as God sets upon his
chosen ones; Christ intended to set up a Church; very true, and he has pitched
upon the individual persons, which shall make it up, he has set down their
names in the Book of Life; or else his providence, which is so accurate in the
little Flies and Gnats, as to set down every wing and little part, which makes
up those minute animals, should be very lame and imperfect in that great design
of a Church, a Church only being designed, and not the persons of which it
should consist: Christ intended to set up a Church; Yes, and he resolved to
give such Grace, as should infallibly effect it: Providence, such is its wisdom
and accurate perfection, never fails or falls short of its intent; no, not in a
design of Justice, and that to come to pass through the hardest medium can be
used by it, we need not scale Heaven for this, but have a Scheme let down from
thence, to assure us of it. 2 Chronicles. 18. God intended that Ahab should go up
and fall at Ramoth-Gilead; and though the manner of it were by a lying spirit,
yet it infallibly came to pass, how much more must providence be unfailable in
such a design of Grace, as that of a Church: Its true, suasory resistible Grace
cannot secure it, because it leaves the issue of all upon the will of man;
irresistible Grace must come in, or else we may lay by the design of a Church,
and confess with Corvinus, Finis mortis Christi constaret, etiamsi nemo
credidisset. As for that place of St. John, That ye may have fellowship with
us, and our fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ: By us is
meant S. John or the Apostles, not the Church or body of Christ: But were that
Church meant, it hinders not but that they in the use of the Evangelical Truths
and Ordinances might come to an immediate Communion with God and Christ, as the
Apostles had; thus the Learned Grotius on the place, Vt and vos ipsi non minus
quam nos frucium inde percipiatis, societatem cum Deo and cum Christo.

Those public censures, Mr. Sherlock.
whereby rotten or dead members are cut off from the body of Christ; consist in
casting such persons out of the Christian Society, in debarring them from the
Communion of Prayers and Sacraments, and all religious Offices, which is a
plain demonstration, that our union to Christ, is not an union to his person,
but consists in a sincere and spiritual communion with the Christian Church;
otherwise this external communion with the Church, could be no visible
signification of our union to Christ; nor could our excision from the visible
Church signify our separation from him.

The Author argues thus, Answer.
If union to Christ be immediate, then our external communion with the Church
cannot signify our union to Christ, nor could our excision from the visible
Church, signify our separation from him: To which I answer, just before our
Author says, Our union to Christ, is not an union to his Person, but consists
in communion with the Church, that is, the visible Church, as he afterward
calls it; and therefore our communion with the Church does not signify our
union to Christ, but is it; and our excision from the Church does not signify
our separation from Christ, but is it, according to our Author, which cannot
possibly stand; Because our union to the visible Church is external, and our
union to Christ internal and spititual; our excision from the Church is one
thing, and our separation from Christ another; a man may be united to the
visible Church, and yet not really united to Christ; for so is the hypocrite; a
man may be cut off from the visible Church, and yet not cut off from Christ,
for so is the unjustly excommunicate. Mr. Sherlock.


The union between Christ and the Church is not a natural, but a political
union; Christ is a King, and all Christians his Subjects; and our union to
Christ consists in our belief of his Revelations, Obedience to his Laws, and
subjection to his Authority, If you continue in my words, then are ye my
Disciples indeed. John 8.31. Which is the same thing with being in Christ: And
by keeping his Commandments we abide in his love; John 15.10. and 14.21. And to
have his word abide in us, Is a description of the closest and fir mest union
to him: John 15.7. Thus Christ is a Shepherd, and Christians his Sheep: To
signify the Authority he has over his Church, Shepherd is used as a name of
power; thus Christ is a head, and the Church his body, a Husband and the Church
his Spouse, which are names of power. Ephesians. 5.23. Christ is called an Head an
Husband, because he has the Rule and Government of us, Head is a name for
Princes and Governors, Deuteronomy. 28.13. The Apostles always expound the Metaphor
of Christ's being a head, by power: Ephesians. 1.20.21. Col. 1.18. So (...) in that
place signifies one that has Authority; Christ is the head of all
principalities. Col. 10. He is an head and husband, because he is invested with
authority to govern; the Church is the body and Spouse, because it must obey;
also these Metaphors signify the mildness and gentleness of his Government, as
a good Shepherd he lays down his life for his Sheep, John 10. He loves his
Church with the natural kindness of an head and husband, his Government is only
for the good of his Church; and therefore his yoke is easy, he gave himself
for his Church, that he might sanctify it: Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Upon which account
we may be called members of his body, of his flesh and bone, verse 30. The
Church being taken out of his crucified body, as woman out of man; Christ has
reconciled the Gentiles, (that is, taken them into his Church) in the body of
his flesh through death; because the Covenant which was the foundation of the
Church was sealed with his blood, Christ owns himself our friend: John 15. Ye
are my friends, if ye do what I command you; which shows the tenderness of his
Government. He exercises his authority in methods of Love; hence he is called a
Father.

Our union to Christ, Answer.
consists in a belief of his Revelations, Obedience to his Laws, and Subjection
to his Authority: Thus the Author; To whom I answer, A belief of Revelations is
only a dogmatical faith, which is found in many not united to Christ; Obedience
is not our mystical union to Christ, but a fruit of it; Christ and the Soul
being once espoused, out-comes a blessed progeny of good works, as so many
real proofs of that Divine conjunction, which is made by the Spirit and Faith;
and shows forth it self in such effects, as the dead womb of nature could never
have produced: Subjection to Christ's Authority, is either a formal actual one,
standing in doing his commands, and that is the same with Obedience, a fruit of
our union to Christ, or a virtual one, consisting in accepting Christ as our
Lord, and this is part of that Faith, which is a bond of that Union. Those
words, If ye continue in my words, then are ye my Disciples indeed: John 8.31.
Were spoken to Believers, to men in union with Christ, to exhort them to
perseverance, as a real proof of their Discipleship and Union to Christ: If ye
keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love: John. 15.10. They were in his
love before; Verse 9. But Obedience will show it forth: Thus St. Austin on the
place, Ostendit, non unde dilectio generetur, sed unde monstretur, hinc
apparebit, quod in dilectione mea manebitis, si precepta mea servaveritis;
Christ's promise to the Obedieut is, That he will love him, and manifest himself
to him. Joh. 14.21. Christ loved him before, but now he will manifest it: Thus
St. Austin on the place, Quid est diligam, tanquam dilecturus sit, and nunc non
diligat? Absit, diligam and manifestabo, id est, ad hoc diligam, ut manifestem.
Our abiding in Christ, and Christ's words abiding in us; are very well joined
together: Joh. 15.7. To show us, that where the Soul and Christ are in union,
there the holy words will have a mansion in the heart. Christ is a King, a
Shepherd, an Head, an Husband; and all in a superlative transcendency above all
others in those relations: He is a King who has his Laws without us, and an
inward Scepter in our hearts, making the unwilling will to become a willing
one, in the day of his power: A Shepherd who speaks to his Sheep, nay, and
brings them into the Fold, John 10.16. who before were not in it: A Head, who
stands above all in eminency, and influences spiritual life and motion into the
lowest, meanest Believer on the earth: An Husband who espouses us unto himself,
and invests us with a rich Dowry out of his incomparable Graces and
Perfections. The Church was taken out of the crucified body of Christ: But that
place, We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30.
plainly declares the mystical union, as man and wife are one flesh, so Christ
and Christians are one spirit. One thing more may be observed; Christ, says
the Author, has reconciled the Gentiles (that is, taken them into his Church)
in the body of his flesh through death Col. 1.21.22. This is a little strange,
reconciled, that is, taken them into his Church; Socinus on this place, De
Servat. pars 1. cap. 8.
says, That the reconciliation here is, Omnium rerum non cum Deo, sed secum
ipsis per Christum parta concordia: And a little after, Vniversi tam Gentes
quam Judaei unus Dei populus sunt facti: But I hope our Author does not exclude
reconciliation to God.

Christ does not govern us immediately by himself, Mr. Sherlock.
for he is ascended up into Heaven, where he powerfully intercedes for his
Church, and by a vigilant providence superintends all the affairs of it; but
has left the visible and external conduct, and Government of his Church to
Bishops and Pastors, who preside in his name, and by his authority: He governs
his Church, by men who are invested with his authority, which is a plain
demonstration, that the union of particular Christians to Christ, is by their
union with the Christian Church, which consists in their regular subjection to
their spiritual Guides and Rulers, and in concord and unity among themselves:
For if our union to Christ, consist in our subjection to him, as our Lord, and
this authority is not immediately exercised by Christ, but by Bishops and
Pastors; it follows that we cannot be united to Christ, till we unite our
selves to the public societies of Christians. and submit to the public
instructions, Authority and Discipline of the Church.

Christ has left the visible and external conduct of his Church to Bishops and
Pastors: Very well, Answer.
But the internal Scepter and Rule over hearts, is in his own hand only; and
therefore the Papists, who make the Bishop of Rome Head of the Church, secundum
exteriorem gubernationem, are yet so modest as to leave Christ to be the only
Head, secundum interiorem insluxum. Our union to Christ is an internal,
spiritual one, made by the Spirit and Faith, such as cannot consist in any
thing external; such as subjection to Ecclesiastical Governors, who have the
visible conduct, is. Hence the Reverend Usher tells us, Without that quickening
Spirit, Sermon. before the Commons, 1620.
no external communion with Christ or his Church, can make a man a true member
of his mystical body; this being a most sure principle, that he which has not
the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. Romans 8.9. A wicked man may be subject to
Ecclesiastical Government; yet while such, is not, cannot be a member of
Christ, or his mystical body; Bellarmine himself was so struck with the
evidence of this truth, that he confessed, That wicked men, are but membra
mortua and arida, quae solum adhaerent reliquis externa conjunctione, non de
Eeclesia nisi secundum apparentiam exteriorem, and putative, non vere; that is,
they are no members at all, which makes it clear, that our union to Christ
stands not in subjection to Ecclesiastical Governors, and what (for such a
thing is possible) if the Ecclesiastical Governor be a wicked man himself? Is
it imaginable, that the union of one wicked man to another, should produce an
union to Christ? Or what if such a case should fall out, as once did, when
under the Emperor Basiliscus, Evag. Hist. L. 3.
no less than five hundred Bishops condemned the Council of Chalcedon? It would
be very hard in such a dismal lapse, to say, that all the Christians under
them, had without any default in themselves, lost their union with Christ; and
yet we must say so, unless we allow that union to be made and supported by the
internal bonds of the Spirit and Faith.

Schismatics are in the Church, Mr. Sherlock.
just as Rebels are in a Kingdom, not as parts of it, but enemies: The Apostle
tells us, wherein the unity of the Church consists: In Ephesians. 4.16. Christ is the
Head; from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, making increase of the body to the edifying it self in love:
That is, The supreme power is invested in Christ, as Head, to whom the Church
is obedient and subject; but to make this union firm and lasting, there must be
a regular subordination of the several members, and a mutual discharge of
Christian offices, which advances their growth in Grace, and especially in
love; this supposes a visible society of Christians, professing the Faith, and
living in communion with each other, if there be no such visible Society, as in
persecution, or degeneracy of the Church: Our union to Christ consists in an
acknowledgment of his Authority and Subjection to his Laws, which makes us
members of the universal Church, but when there is a visible Church, we are
under an obligation of communion; because herein our Subjection to the
Authority of Christ, and our Union to him consists.

Schism is the concern of visible Churches; Answer.
but that place Ephesians. 4. speaks not of visible Churches, which are made up of
believers and unbelievers, but of the Church Catholic made up of Believers and
Saints only; This is plain, the Church Catholic is that whole body, (...),
fitly joined together, all being Saints in it; but in the visible Church, there
are believers and unbelievers, who can no more stand in harmony than light and
darkness, Christ and Belial, the Temple of God and Idols: In the Church
Catholic there is an effectual working in every part; but in the Church
visible, there is no such energy in the wicked: And so in that parallel place,
Ephesians. 2.20. The Church. Catholic is that (...), That whole Building fitly
framed together, which grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord: But in the
Church visible the wicked grow not into a Temple; nay, there is not a stone of
the spiritual Building laid in them: And Ephesians. 1.23. The Church Catholic is not
only (...), not only the body, but fullness of Christ: Every member of it helps,
as it were to fill up the mystical body; but in the Church visible the wicked
do not complete the body, but corrupt it; they do not adorn, but deform it. I
have before showed, that our union to Christ, stands not in communion with a
visible Church, or its Rulers: It is made by internal and spiritual ligatures,
and is invariably one and the same, whether there be a Church visible or not:
But says the Author, We are under an obligation of Communion with a Church
visible, when there is one: But it is one thing what our Duty is, and another
what constitutes our union with Christ; it is our duty to be subject to civil
Magistrates, but I suppose our union to Christ consists not in it; it is our
duty to hear the Ministers of Christ; Luke 10.16. But our union to Christ does
not consist in it; indeed it is a sacred Ordinance which God is pleased to use,
to bring us to Christ; but the only proper immediate bands of that union are
the Spirit and Faith.

If any particular Church apostatize from the Faith of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
we are then under the same necessity of deserting their communion, as we are
of obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Authority of our Lord and Master.

We must indeed desert an apostate Church; Answer.
but if, as our Author holds, our union to Christ consists in communion with a
visible Church, then upon our departure from it, though never so just, our
union to Christ must fail; Which yet I think can never be the lot of a true
believer; he is part of that Church built on the Rock, against which the gates
of Hell shall not prevail: Matthew. 16.18. Part of that building, which is an
holy Temple, an habitation of God through the Spirit; Ephesians. 2.21.22. and that
Spirit makes and maintains that union.

This Political Union betwixt Christ and his Church, Mr. Sherlock.
may be either only external and visible, and so hypocritical Professors may be
said to be united to Christ, or true and real, which imports the truth and
sincerity of our Obedience and Subjection to our Lord and Master.

Hypocrites may seem, Answer.
but are not members of Christ, or united to him: non potest Christus habere
damnata membra, omnia ista membra, absit omnino, Contr. Cresc. l. 2. cap. 21.
ut in membris illius columbae unicae computentur, says St. Austin; and in
another place, Si amas and amplecteris peccata tua, contrarius es Christo,
Expos. in Epist. Jo, hannis.
intus sis, foris sis, Antichristus es, intus sis, foris sis; palea es, sed
quare foris non es? Quia occasionem venti non invenisti: Our Obedience to
Christ our Lord, is not the very mystical union it self, but a Divine fruit of
it.

The Spiritual Kingdom of Christ requires the homage of the Soul, Mr. Sherlock.
the Government of our thoughts and passions, the renovation of our minds and
Spirits; we must be born again of water and of the Spirit, if we would enter
into Gods Kingdom; that is, before we can be the Disciples and Subjects of
Christ, we must be born of water, make a public profession of our faith in
Christ, and obedience to him in our Baptism, we must be born of the Spirit too,
that is, our minds and Spirits must become subject to Christ, our faith in
Christ, and subjection to him must be sincere and hearty, governing all the
motions of our Souls, and making usually such as we pretend to be, which is
called, being born of the Spirit; because all Christians Graces are in
Scripture attributed to the Spirit, as the Author of them.

Here are two things, Answer.
Baptism and Regeneration; both are not of a like necessity to make us
Disciples of Christ, Regeneration is simply necessary, but so is not Baptism;
unbaptized persons may be real believers, and if they die before Baptism, as
Valentinian did, they enter into Bliss: Contr. Don. l. 1.4. cap. 22.
Impletur invisibiliter, cum mysterium Baptismi non contemptus religionis, sed
articulus necessitatis excludit; says St. Austin: Baptism may be administered
by man, but Regeneration is the sole work of the holy Spirit, which breaths
where it lists, and forms all those Graces, which make up the new creature;
hence we are said to be born of the Spirit, and all the Graces in the new man
are called the fruits of the spirit: Hence Fulgentius says, ex eodem Spiritu
renati sumus, ex quo natus est Christus: De Jucava. cap. 20.
The very same Spirit which formed Christ in the womb, forms him in the heart.
And S. Ambrose speaking of the Gracious Image of God in us, says, Pictus es o
homo, Hexaem. l. 6. cap. 8.
a Domino Deo tuo, bonum habes artificem atque pictorem: No other hand, but
that of the holy spirit only, is able to draw such a picture of God, as is in
the new creature; we who naturally lie in a Mass and Chaos of corruption, are
not capable of doing any thing in it.

As a visible profession is the foundation of an external Political union
between Christ and his Church, Mr. Sherlock.
so this new nature is the foundation of a real and spiritual union: And this
the Scripture represents under several notions. First by the Subjection of our
minds and Spirits to Christ, as our spiritual King, when we put our Souls as
well as our Bodies under his Government: Hence Christ is said to dwell in our
hearts by Faith; Ephesians. 3.17. That is to have the sole command and Empire of our
wills and affections, to govern our hearts, as a man does the house in which he
dwells: Secondly by a participation of the same nature, which is the necessary
effect of the Subjection of our minds to him; for the Gospel of our Savior is
the truest image of his mind, he transcribed his own nature into his Laws; and
therefore a sincere Obedience to his Laws is a conformity to his nature: Hence
is that exhortation, That the same mind may be in us as was in Christ: Phil.
2.5. And to be his Disciples, is to learn of him: Matthew. 11.29. Hence our union
to Christ is described by having the Spirit of Christ: Romans 8.9. If any man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, that is, unless he have that
same temper of mind which Christ had, which is called having the Spirit, by an
ordinary figure of the cause for the effect; for all those Virtues and Graces,
wherein our conformity to Christ consists, are called the fruits of the Spirit;
and therefore what the Apostle calls, having the Spirit, in the next verse he
expresses by, If Christ be in you,, that is if you be possessed with the same
love of virtue and goodness, which appeared so eminently in him, which is much
to the same sense with that expression of Christ being formed in you: Gal.
4.19. Hence in 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit:
Herein consists our union to Christ, that we have the same temper; Souls are
united by an harmony of wills, this makes two one Spirit.

After a long discourse touching external communion with the Church; Answer.
the Author is now come to own a spiritual union with Christ; and this (says
the Author) the Scripture represents to us; first by the subjection of our
minds to Christ, as our King; Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.
that is, he commands there; But I take that place of the Apostle, to be an
eminent proof of the mystical union; it is not said Christ commands, (though
that be very true) but he dwells in our hearts, not by a piece of faith, such
as accepts Christ as our Lord, but by an entire one, such as receives him in
all his offices: We have in those words faith expressed, which is a bond of
that mystical union, and where faith is, there is that other bond, the holy
Spirit, which flows as rivers of living water in the believers heart; and just
before those words of Christ's dwelling in our hearts by faith; the Apostle
speaks of the holy Spirit in the inner man, Verse 16. which is the principal
bond of that mystical Union: And St. Chrysostom on the words says, that (...),
By the holy spirit in the inner man Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith:
But (says the Author) Secondly this is represented in Scripture, by a
participation of the same nature, which is the necessary effect of the
subjection of our minds to Christ. To which I answer, If by that subjection be
meant a receiving Christ as our Lord, it is but a part of that faith, which
with its Sister Graces make up the new creature; all Graces are found in the
new creature, and among others Faith, which receives Christ in all his offices,
and among other in his Kingly; but if by that subjection be meant Obedience to
his Laws, (which the Author after mentions, calling it a conformity to his
nature) the new creature is not the effect of Subjection or Obedience, but the
cause of it; true Obedience is too pure a thing, to issue out of an
unregenerate heart; before it can come forth; Enchir. cap. 106.
Ipsum liberum arbitrium liberandum est: As St. Austin speaks: Lapsed nature
must be new-natured, and its deadly wound healed by regenerating Grace. First,
according to Scripture there must be a good tree, and then good fruit: De
Eccles. Hierar. cap. 2.
First a (...), A Divine state or being (as Dionysius calls it) and then Divine
operations issuing forth in a sweet connaturalness to the Heavenly principles
within. To this purpose let us hear our Church, 2. Hom. of Alms.
As the good fruit is not the cause that the tree is good, but the tree must
first be good, before it can bring forth good fruit; so the good Deeds of men
are not the Cause, that makes men good; but he is first made good by the
Spirit and Grace of God that effectually works in him, and afterward he
brings forth good fruit. As for such as are regenerate and new Creatures, I
acknowledge them to have the same temper of Mind with Christ, and that every
Grace in the new Man, answers to that in Christ, and morally unites to him; but
the Mystical Union is made by the holy Spirit and Faith, which has this above
other Graces, to receive Christ and incorporate us into him. That place, Phil.
2. of having the same mind with Christ, holds out the same temper in both; that
in Matt. 4.11. calls us to an imitation of him; that Gal. 4.19. expresses the
State of the new Creature which is molded after the Image of Christ: But the
other two places, quoted by the Author, prove the Mystical Union; the one is
that, Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: By
Spirit, is not meant an holy temper of Mind, but the Spirit it self; the very
same which just before the words is called, The Spirit of God, and ver. 11. The
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, and by which our mortal
bodies shall be quickened: This is that Spirit, which unites us to Christ, in
such an admirable manner, that Christ is said to be in us, ver. 10. St.
Chrysostom on the words says, (...), He that has the holy Spirit, has
Christ himself; the Spirit being present, Christ, nay, the whole Trinity must
be so: The other is that, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined unto the Lord is one
Spirit, that is, one and the same holy Spirit is in Christ and Believers,
mystically uniting them together: This appears, as well by the opposition of
one spirit in this 17. Verse, to one flesh in the 16. Verse: For, as the
Learned Beza notes on the place, Vt constet expositio exterioris corporum
copulae, and nostrae cum Christo interoris, spiritus nomen usurpavit Apostolus;
as also by the after-words, What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of
the holy Ghost, which is in you? ver. 19. The holy Ghost is that one Spirit,
which unites Christ and Believers: Hence the Reverend Usher, quoting this place
among others, concludes, That the Mystery of our Union with Christ consists
mainly in this, that the self same Spirit, which is in him, as in the Head, is
derived from him into every one of his true Members.

There is yet a closer Union, Mr. Sherlock.
which consists in a mutual reciprocal Love, when we are transformed into the
image of Christ; he loves us, as being like to him, and we love him, as
partaking of his Nature; he loves us as the price of his Blood, as his own
workmanship created to good Works, and we love him as our Redeemer and Savior.

I acknowledge there is a Moral Union between Christ and Christians by holy
Love; Answer.
but this Moral Union supposes a Mystical one, made by the Spirit and Faith:
Where these are not, there can be no such thing as Love to Christ: Hence the
Apostle, Ephesians. 3.16, 17. first lays down the Mystical Union with its two Bands,
the Spirit in the inner man, and Faith, whereby Christ dwells in the heart; and
immediately after adds the Moral one, That ye may be rooted and grounded in
Love: Wherever the Mystical Union is, there is holy Love to Christ. What the
Author afterward adds, touching God's dwelling in the Church as his Temple, is
so far from opposing, that it points out the Mystical Union; especially seeing,
as the Author confesses, Particular Christians are in Scripture styled the
Temple of the living God: That place quoted by the Author, Know ye not, that ye
are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3.16.
is very emphatical; Christians are the Temple of God, and made so by the
indwelling Spirit, which is the bond of the Mystical Union. Indeed the Author
says, That the indwelling of the Spirit primarily refers to the extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit, which God in that Age bestowed on the Church; this was the
true Shechinah or divine Glory resting on them: But I conceive the holy Spirit
has been in Believers in all Ages: God dwelt in the Jewish Temple in Types and
Symbols of his Presence, but, which was far more excellent than those outward
shadows and appearances of Glory, he dwelt even then by his Spirit in all true
Believers. The sweet strains of Devotion in David did plainly evidence, that
the holy Spirit was in him; the spiritual Imbroidery or Needle Work in every
Psalm, tells us, that the Finger of God was there: The believing Israelites, in
Manna Christum intellexerunt, saw Christ in their Manna and fed on the same
spiritual Meat, as believing Christians do; which is a clear proof that the
holy Spirit was in them. The Son of God coming in the Flesh, the holy Spirit
was poured down in extraordinary Gifts; and, though those Epiphanies of divine
Glory went off, yet the same Spirit has been and ever will be in Believers.
This our Church acknowledges; 1. Hom. for Whitsunday.
Neither does the holy Spirit think it sufficient inwardly to work the
spiritual and new Birth of Man, unless he do also dwell and abide in him: And a
little after, our Church breaks out in an holy admiration; O what comfort is
this to the heart of a true Christian, to think that the holy Ghost dwells in
him! The Apostle tells the Ephesians, that they are builded for an habitation
of God (...), through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. Indeed the Author interprets
(...), a spiritual Temple, in opposition to the material one, which St. Peter
calls (...), a spiritual house; but I take it the Spirit it self is meant: Thus
Grotius, as I have him quoted in the Critics, says, Non tantum tota fidelium
collectio, sed and fideles singuli recte appellantur Templum, quia in ipsorum
mentibus Spiritus Dei habitat. Mr. Sherlock.


Eaptism and the Lords Supper represent and signify both our external and real
union to Christ.

Baptism does signify to all baptized an admission into the Church Visible,
Answer.
and to Believers it seals the Mystical Union with Christ: Thus the Apostle,
speaking of Believers, such as are the children of God by faith in Christ, Gal.
3.26. says, As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ; you are mystically united to Christ, and Baptism seals up that Union to
you: The Lord's Supper does import to all receivers a Communion with the
Visible Church, and to Believers it seals the Mystical Union; hence the cup is
the Communion of Christ's blood, and the bread is the Communion of Christ's
body, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Greek word is (...), and why was it not (...); St.
Chrysostom upon the words answers, Because the Apostle would show something
more, even (...), a great Conjunction with Christ.

Baptism signifies our profession of becoming new men, Mr. Sherlock.
of Conformity to Christ in his Death and Resurrection: We are buried with
Christ by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans
6.4. Baptism signifies our dying to sin and walking in newness of life; He that
is baptized into Christ, has put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. that is, has engaged
himself to be conformed to Christ's image and likeness.

Baptism signifies our profession of Conformity to Christ; very well: Answer.
But first of all it signifies our Union to him, without which there can be no
participation of his Death and Resurrection, nor conformity thereunto. In that
place, Gal. 3. putting on of Christ imports an Union with him; and in that Rom,
6. after that discourse of Conformity to Christ's Death and Resurrection, the
Apostle immediately raises up himself to the Fountain of that Conformity, and
tells us, that we are (...), implanted in the likeness of his death and
resurrection, ver. 5. Aptissima translatione arctissimam illam nostri cum ipsa
Christi substantia conjunctionem, and vivificam illam virtutem inde in nos
manantem expressit, says Beza on the place. The Apostle by that Metaphor of a
Plant, expresses our intimate Conjunction with the very Substance of Christ,
and the quickening virtue flowing from thence unto us, to assimilate us to his
Death and Resurrection.

Thus the Lord's Supper is a spiritual feeding on Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
eating his flesh and drinking his blood, which signifies the most intimate
Union with him, that we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, Ephesians.
5.30. That as we are redeemed by his death, and so taken out of his crucified
Body; so by this spiritual feeding on Christ, we are transformed into the same
Nature with him, as much as if we were of his flesh and bones: This is eating
the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ, when the visible figures of his
death and sufferings, affect our minds with such a strong and passionate sense
of his love to us, and excite in us such a firm hope in God, as transforms us
into a divine Nature: And this is our real Union to Christ.

In the Lord's Supper all true Believers feed upon Christ: Answer.
Those words of our Savior, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him, Immanuel 52.
Joh. 6.56. declare, as the most Reverend Usher has it, That by a mystical and
supernatural Union we are as truly conjoined with him, as the meat and drink we
take is with us: And what this Mystical Union is, the same Author tells us,
That it is made by the Spirit and Faith. But, says our Author, This spiritual
feeding on Christ is, when we are transformed into the divine Nature: But, I
take it, that transformation cannot possibly exist, without a Mystical Union to
Christ, who is the great Treasury of Grace; nor without the Spirit and Faith,
which are the bonds of that Union: Therefore our Savior tells us, He that
eats me shall live by me, Joh. 6.57. Spiritual Life follows after eating or
Union to Christ: No man (says the Reverend Usher) can participate in the
benefits of Christ, Sermon. before the Commons 1620.
except he first have comunion with Christ himself: We must have the Son,
before we have Life; and eat him we must, that is, as truly be made partakers
of him, as of our food, if we will live by him. The Apostle tells us how the
divine Transformation comes; Beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. The heavenly Change is from the two bands of the Mystical
Union, that is, from the Spirit, which is called the Spirit of the Lord; and
from Faith, which is set forth by a transformative View of Christ. Excellent is
that of Calvin, and by him quoted out of St. Chrysostom, Inst. l. 4. c. 17.
Vinculum istius conjunctionis est Spiritus Christi, cujus nexu copulamur: Et
quidem veluti canalis, per quem quicquid Christus ipse and est, and habet, ad
nos derivatur: The Spirit of Christ is the Bond of Union between Christ and us,
and the Chanel of derivation, whereby Christ and all that he has is conveyed
to us.

1 John 1.3. Mr. Sherlock.
That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ. Observe, that our fellowship with the Father and Son is first
founded on our fellowship with the Christian Church, 1 Cor. 1.9. God is
faithful, by whom ye are called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord; where the fellowship of Christ can signify no more, than the fellowship
of the Christian Church, whereof Christ is Lord and Head; and therefore the
Apostle adds in the next Verse, Now I beseech you Brethren by the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, that there be no
divisions or schisms among you, but that you be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and in the same judgment: Where he argues from the nature of
their Faith in Christ, to the Obligations of Peace and Unity; which plainly
evinces, that this fellowiship with Christ is that relation we stand in to him,
as Members of the Christian Church, whereof he is Head: The true Notion of
(...) is plain, 2 Cor. 6.14. where the Apostle disswades from fellowship with
heathen Idolaters, where we have (...), all which Expressions decypher to us
the Nature and Foundation of Fellowship; The Nature of it consists in the Union
of things, which in Rational Beings consists in mutual Relations and common
Interests; and the Foundation of it is a likeness of Nature and Harmony of
Wills: And therefore the Apostle explains our fellowship with God by our being
the Temple of God, and that God dwells in us, and walks in us, ver. 17.18.

As for that place, 1 John 1.3. Answer.
I have answered before: As for the other, 1 Cor. 1.9. Ye were called into the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, it is to be considered, that in the
Epistles written to Visible Churches, some things are common to all, some
proper only to Believers: Those Churches are made up of Believers and
Unbelievers, and all things do not quadrate to all: Thus in the quoted Chapter,
that touching schisms and divisions is an Item to all, ver. 10. but that
fellowship of Christ, ver. 9. is proper to Believers; such as shall be
confirmed unto the end, ver. 8. This place evinces not, that our Fellowship
with Christ is founded on our Fellowship with the Visible Church; all that are
in it have not Communion with Christ; those therefore, who walk in darkness,
have it not, and if they say that they have it, the Apostle gives them the lie
in plain terms, 1 John 1.6. Where by the way, it appears, that the fellowship
with Christ mentioned, ver. 3. consists not in Fellowship with a Visible
Church; on the other hand all that are out of it want not Communion with
Christ: The unbaptized and unjustly excommunicate, if Believers, have it, and
yet are not in a Visible Church. But, says the Author, the Apostle, 1 Cor.
1.10. argues from the nature of their Faith in Christ to the obligations of
Peace and Unity. To which I answer, that the Apostle argues from the precedent
Commendations, that the Grace of God was given to them, ver. 4. that in every
thing they were enriched,, ver. 5. that they came behind in no gift, ver. 7.
that they had fellowship with Christ, ver. 9. which were only proper to the
Believers among them; and from thence exhorts all to Unity, ver. 10. Because
the Believers among them were really such, and the rest would seem to be such.
Afterward the Author tells us, That the Foundation of (...), or Communion, is
a likeness of Nature and harmony of Wills. Now if we speak of Communion with a
Visible Church made up of Believers and Unbelievers, these have not a likeness
of Nature; the one having a divine Nature in them, the other only an humane and
that corrupt; nor an harmony of wills, the Will of the one being sanctified, of
the other carnal and vicious; which shows that a Visible Church in the whole
Complex of it has only external Ligaments to tie the Members of it together:
If we speak of Communion with Christ, which is proper to believers, they are
mystically united to Christ by the Spirit and Faith, and withal have an
heavenly Nature and Will suting to his.

Now because the Lord's Supper is the only Act, which the Scripture mentions,
Mr. Sherlock.
whereby our Fellowship with God and Christ is expressed; hence it is called
the (...) or Communion. 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup is the Communion of Christ's
blood, the bread of his body: And he calls it the Communion; 1. Because it
signifies the Communion of Christians with each other, that they are all
Members of Christ's body, ver. 17.2. Because it signifies our fellowship with
God, ver. 18. Behold Israel after the flesh, are not they that eat of the
sacrifice partakers of the Altar? The sacrifice on the Altar was reckoned as
God's meat, as the Temple was his House; therefore those, who eat of the
Sacrifice, were entertained at God's Table, which was a signification of their
Fellowship with him: Thus the Lords Supper is a Feast upon a Sacrifice, even
that great stupendous one of the Body of Christ, which was offered on the
Cross; Therefore to eat the Bread and drink the Wine, which are Figures of his
Body and Blood, is to eat of that Sacrifice, that spiritual food God has
provided for us: Thus God entertains us at his Table as his own Children, who
are of his Family, as Members of Christ, who have a right to all the Blessings
of the New Covenant, which was sealed with his Blood: This is the only Act of
Religion which in Scripture signifies Communion with God: But Prayer,
Meditation, and such like Acts of Devotion, are no where called Communion with
God; though a prevailing custom has in our days almost wholly appropriated
that name to them: Fellowship with God does not consist in transient acts, but
is a state of life, that relation we stand in to God and Christ; and no act of
religion properly signifies this fellowship with God, but only eating at his
table: You will not say, that a poor man enjoyes communion with his Prince,
when he puts up his petition; to pray to God is an act of homage, which we owe
him, a Duty which results from our fellowship with God, but it is not in its
own nature an act of communion.

The Lords Supper is called (...), Answer.
or Communion, but Prayer, Meditation, and such like acts of Devotion, are no
where called so; thus the Author: But the (...), mentioned 2 Cor. 13.12. cannot
be spared out of Divine Ordinances, unless we would strip them of their Divine
excellency, and write upon them that Ichabod, which is proper to their
departure: And what if there were no such word as (...), in Scripture? No more
was the Nicene (...), nor the Ephesine (...), the thing it self being there
will suffice all men but Chimers, who only follow the sound of words: True
Believers, as they are (...), Partakers of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
molded and formed into the Resemblance and beautiful Image of God, so they
have Communion with God in all holy Ordinances; there God meets them, and
dispenses out spiritual Blessings to them; there is a divine Converse and
Intercourse between God and believing Souls; the drawings of God are answered
with the Soul's running, Cant. 1.4. God says, Seek ye my face, and the
Antiphon in the Soul is, Thy face, Lord, will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. In Prayer the
holy Spirit (...), Romans 8.26. lifts over against us to help up our devotions,
and the Great God above makes such sweet returns of Grace and Mercy, as if he
were present and vocally said, Here I am, Isai. 58.9. While we are devoutly
musing, the holy Fire will perhaps drop down from Heaven, and set the Heart as
a spiritual Altar, burning and aspiring upwards toward the great Origin of all
Goodness and Perfections: In the Dispensations of the Word, oh, what divine
Influences and Spirations are there on Gods part! What Compliances and
Responses on the Believer's! Justice, it may be, appears in a Threatening, and
the Heart trembles at the Word; Heaven opens in a Promise, and the Heart leaps
up in the triumphs of Faith; the Rays of the divine Purity break forth in a
Command, and the holy Principles in the heart sparkle in a beautiful
Correspondence thereunto; and is not this Communion with God? Who would not
say, God is here of a truth? When God in Ordinances impresseth something of
himself upon the Soul, and draws answerable Affections of the Soul to himself,
there is Converse with God indeed. Further, a true Believer has Communion with
God in Providence; If Providence pipe in Prosperity, he dances before the
Goodness of the Great Donor, in whom are all the Springs of Happiness; If it
mourn in Adversity, he complies in an holy Silence under the Will of that
infinite Mind that orders all: He looks upon himself (as the excellent Mr. Shaw
has it) not as in himself, but in God, Welcome to she Plague.
and labors to become (...), wholly God's, and to live in the world only an
Instrument in the hand of him that works all things according to the counsel
of his own Will: Nay, I may add, a Believer, as far as he acts like himself and
expresses the Purity of the divine Life, has Communion with God in every
thing; how low soever his Calling be, therein he abides with God, and the works
that he does are wrought in him; he would not live a moment without God in the
world, but be ever receiving Impressions from him and giving up himself to him:
After the similitude of a Plant that is influenced by the benign Beams of the
Sun, and in the Virtue of those Beams spreading it self toward Heaven, as Mr.
Shaw speaks. As for the Authors Simile, That a Poor man, who begs of a Prince,
has not Communion with him, it is enough to say, That Alms is called (...),
Romans 15.26. God, such is his condescending Grace, takes us into Communion with
himself, notwithstanding that infinite distance, which is between him and us,
incomparably greater than that which is between the greatest Monarch on earth
and the poorest Almesman.

SECT. II.
NOthing more easy to be understood than our Union with Christ; Mr. Sherlock.
and it had certainly continued so, had not some men undertook to explain it,
who have made it more than mystical, that is, an unintelligible Union: When we
enquire what this Union is, they answer in general, that it is a mystical Union
through the Spirit and Faith: This, Mystical, is a hard word, and therefore to
explain it, they tell us, that it is an Union of Persons, but no Personal
Union: Dr. Jacomb, page 45.
The Person of Christ is united to the Person of the Believer, and the Person
of the Believer is united to the Person of Christ (as it must needs be, where
the Person of Christ is united to the Person of the Believer:) Which Union is
made by Faith, which receives the Person of Christ, and therefore must unite to
the Person of Christ: (I doubt that consequence is not good, for men are not
united to every thing they receive; but yet what follows may help it out:) As
it is in the Marriage-union which joins person to person: This is not very
clear yet, and therefore the same Author describes it thus: This Mystical Union
is that supernatural, spiritual, intimous Oneness and Conjunction, which is
between the Person of Christ and the Person of Believers, through the Bonds of
the Spirit and Faith; upon which follows mutual and reciprocal Communion with
each other: This Oneness and Conjunction are hard words still; and therefore to
explain them, you must observe, that Christ and Saints are united; how? Why, in
respect of that Oneness and Conjunction which is between them: This is as
plain, as one could wish; they are one by their Oneness: Union is Union, and
Christ is Christ, and Believers are Believers, and Oneness is Oneness; and thus
Christ and Believers are united by their Oneness: But what are the Bonds of
this Union? (though it had been convenient first to have understood the Union
better:) Why, they are the Spirit and Faith; the Spirit unites Christ to us,
and Faith unites us to Christ: And who can deny this to be a very Mystical
Union. But besides this mystical Union, there is a Legal or Law-union between
Christ and Believers, as he is their Surety; a Moral Union, the foundation of
which is Love: And thus Christ and Believers are united mystically, legally,
morally. The design of these distinctions is to prove the Union of persons
between Christ and Believers: And, because I find this Author has bewildred
himself, I will help him out; for it is a very plain case, if Christ and
Believers are united, their persons must be so: For the Person of Christ is
Christ himself, and the persons of Believers are Believers themselves. I cannot
understand, how they can be united without their persons, that is, without
themselves: But then they are united by mutual Relations, or mutual Affections,
or Common Interest; not by a natural Adhesion of Persons.

Never did I like Scoptical Divinity; (...). Almost every where in this Passage
there is a flurt and a sting at worthy Dr. Jacomb, who yet may comfort himself,
that Sadeel, Zanchy, Davenant, Usher, Reynolds, with many more are Co.
sufferers with him; all of them (however the Author be so civil as not to name
them) hold the very same Mystical Union as Dr. Jacomb does: But what says the
Author? Nothing is more easy to be understood than our Union to Christ:
Nothing! how so? St. Paul calls it a great Mystery, our Church, a mavelous
Incorporation, Bishop Reynolds, one of the deep things of God, not discernible
without the Spirit; and yet nothing more easy to the Author: Only some men
have made it, as he tells us, more than mystical, that is, an unintelligible
Union. More than mystical they have not made it; yet the Learned Whitaker
says, De Fe^les. Visib. quest. 2.
it is Maxim mystica and plane mirifica: Neither do they make it
unintelligible, though they would have it received in Faith; according to the
measures of Scripture, and not of mere Reason: This latter in the Socinians
cashiered the Hypostatical Union in Christ, because it could not pierce into
the Vinculum Vnionis, Racov. Cat. deperson. Christi
which tacks mortal and immortal, eternal and temporal together in one Person;
and, unless it be subjected to Scripture, it may do as much in us touching the
mystical one. But the Dr. says, Faith receives Christ and so unites to him;
which consequence is not good; for men are not united to every thing they
receive: But Faith receives Christ as spiritual Food, and eating Christ's flesh
and drinking his blood, as the Author tells us, page 184. signifies the most
intimate Union with him, besides the Marriage union, which might have prevented
the Exception. But Christ and Saints are united in respect of the Oneness
between them: This is plain, says the Author, they are one by their Oneness. I
fear the Reader may think we are at Tittletattle; How should they be one
without Oneness? or who would deny or cavil at it? But the Doctor should have
understood the Union first, before he had come to the Bonds: And has not the
Dr. in his Book set down the Properties of this Union? Or what can better show
the Nature of it than the Bonds thereof? But the Dr. in his design to prove an
Union of Persons is bewildred, and the Author will help him out: Bewildred? Not
by any Arguments as yet; however it is kindly meant for one, who has
interlaced his Discourse with so many exceptions to very little purpose. But
Christ and Believers are not united by a natural Adhesion: No, who ever said
so? Does not the Dr. make the Union and the Bonds of it both spiritual? But the
Author apprehends some strange Mystery in the business, which now must be heard.

Dr. Owen tells us, Mr. Sherlock.
That by the Graces of Christ's Person, he does not mean the glorious
Excellencies of his Deity, considered in it self, abstracting from the Office,
which for us as God and Man he undertook; nor the outward appearance of his
Humane Nature neither, when he converst here on earth, nor yet now as exalted
in Glory; but the Graces of Christ's Person, as he is vested with the Office of
Mediation; his spiritual Eminency, Comeliness, Beauty, as anointed and
appointed by the Father, unto that great work of bringing home all his Elect
into his bosom: Now, unless the Person of Christ as Mediator be distinct from
his Person as God-man, all this is idle talk; for what personal Graces are
there in Christ as Mediator, which do not belong to him either as God or Man?
The peculiar Duties of that Office of Mediator are not personal Graces; his
Personal Graces fitted him for his Office, but he has no Personal Graces, as
Mediator, which he has not either as God or Man. The Dr. tells us, That Christ
is white in his Deity, and ruddy in his Humanity; but these belong to his
Divine and Humane Nature, and that without regard to his Mediatory Office.
Again the Dr. tells us, That Christ is excellent in his Deity, and desirable in
his Humanity: This looks like a contradiction to what he said before, but he
has a Salvo, which delivers him both from contradiction and from sense, that
he does not consider these Excellencies of his Deity or Humanity as abstracted
from his Office of Mediator, though he might if he pleased; for these
Excellencies would have belonged to him as God and Man, whether he had been
Mediator or not: But what becomes of his distinction of the Graces of Christ's
Person as Mediator, from the Graces of his Person as God and Man? When there
are no personal Graces in Christ, but what belong to his Deity or Humanity, an
then you can find no other Person to be the Subject of these personal
Excellencies, unless his Office of Mediation must go for a distinct Person,
which is a new kind of Heresy.

It was the saying of Nazianzen, Answer.
That there is one Consideration of the Deity, (...), and another (...). Dr.
Owen being to speak of the Grace of Christ the Mediator, did not consider the
Excellencies of his Deity in it self or apart, nor the Excellencies of his
Humanity singly and by it self; but the Excellencies of both Natures met in
conjunction in the Person of the Glorious Mediator Jesus Christ: This must be a
distinct Consideration from the other, or else what is the Hypostatical Union?
What the (...), the Immanuel, or Word incarnate? What is that (...), or
Communication of Properties, celebrated by Divines? How did God purchase his
Church with his own blood? Act. 20.28. Or lay down his life for us? 1 John
3.16. which way was the blessed Virgin (...), as the ancient Council has it?
What is the Grace of Unction, or all those full Treasures of habitual Grace in
the Humane Nature of Christ? And what are the opera (...), or operations of
God-man the Great Mediator, who has the Excellencies of both Natures in
himself? This Consideration being therefore a distinct one, the Dr. shows, that
Christ was white in his Deity and ruddy in his Humanity, which needed no more
have been slighted, than such allusions common in the ancient Fathers; but the
humor of exposing to scorn provokes to such things. The Doctor does not, and,
I am sure, will not own any such thing, as that the Person of Christ, as
Mediator, is distinct from his Person as God-man; or that the Graces of
Christ's Person, as Mediator, are dististinct from his Person, as God-man. But,
says the Author, What personal Graces are there in Christ, as Mediator, which
do not belong to him either as God or Man? To which I answer, The Grace of
Union was not peculiar to either Nature in Christ, but common to both; the
Humane Nature in him was only assumed, but the Divine and Humane were both
united; but says the Author, Those excellencies would have belonged to him as
God and man, whether he had been Mediator or not: To which I shall only say:
That Christ should be God and man, and yet not Mediator is such an
extrascriptural conceit, as I suppose never entered into the Doctors mind.

But what ever becomes of the distinction, Mr. Sherlock.
there is a very deep fetch in it; the observing of which will discover the
whole mystery of the Person of Christ, and our Union to him: For these men
consider that Christ saves as Mediator, and not merely considered as God or
man, they imagine that we receive Grace and Salvation from Christ's Person,
just as we do water from a Conduit, or a Largess from a Prince; that it flows
to us from our Union to his Person, and therefore they dress up the Person of
the Mediator with all those personal Graces and Excellencies, which may make
him a fit Savior, that those who are united to his Person, need not fear
missing of Salvation; hence they ransack all the boundless perfections of the
Deity, and what ever they can fancy as comfort to Sinners; this is a personal
Grace of the Mediator, they consider the effects of his Mediation, and what
ever great things are spoken of his Gospel or Religion or Intercession, these
serve as personal Graces too, that all our hopes may be built not on the
Gospel Covenant, but on the Person of Christ; so that the dispute now lies
between the Person of Christ and his Gospel, which must be the foundation of
our hope, which is the way to life and happiness.

To what purpose all this is, I see not; Answer.
Is not Christ God-man, our Mediator? Do we not receive Grace and Salvation
from Christ's person? And if we do, is he a conduit only, and not rather a Sea
or Ocean of Grace? S. Chrysostom, as I have him quoted by the Learned Jeans,
calls him (...), an infinite Sea, adding, Though all the Saints that are, were,
or shall be, did, do, or shall receive of his fullness, yet will he never be
emptied, never the less full for all that; and why should the Author utter such
a word, as dressing up of Christ? The investiture of him with his sacred Office
of Mediator, is so far above a slight, that it is no less than the work of
infinite Love, Wisdom and Power; those whom the Author opposes, ascribe nothing
to Christ, but what is founded on Scripture: And for such as are united to
Christ in truth, I verily believe that they shall never fall short of Heaven,
and to keep them in the true way thither, God puts his fear into their hearts,
that they shall not depart away from him, but these men ransack all the
boundless perfections of the Deity? What is this for? Must we not own that
Christ is God, and has all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him? Or may
we be Christians without it? but they would have us build all our hopes, not on
the Gospel, but on the person of Christ: And where do they utter any such word
or syllable? Or how could they do so? To rest upon Christ, and cast away the
Evangelical warrant, to stand for the great purchaser, and despise or neglect
the Charter is utterly impossible.

To make this appear, consider, Mr. Sherlock.
Dr. Owen tells us, That Christ is fit to be a Savior from the Grace of Union;
and if we would understand what this strange Grace of Union is, It is the
uniting the nature of God and man in one Person, which makes him fit to be a
Savior to the uttermost, he lays his hands upon God by partaking of his
nature: Zach. 13.7. And he lays his hands on us by partaking of our nature:
Hebr. 2.14. And becomes a Daysman or Umpire between both. Now though this be a
great truth, that the Union of the Divine and Humane nature in Christ did
excellently qualify him for the Office of a Mediator; yet this is the
unhappiest man in expressing and proving it, that I have met with: For what an
untoward representation is this of Christ's Mediation, that he came to make
peace by laying his hands on God and men; as if he meant to part a fray, or
scuffle, and he might as well have named, Genesis 1.1 or Matthew. 1.1. or any other
Scripture for the proof of it.

Strange Grace of Union! Answer.
No Divine is a stranger to the Gratia Vnionis: Nay, the Author himself
confesses it to be a great truth, but the strangeness is in the Doctor's
untoward expressing of it, he being the unhappiest man therein, that ever the
Author met with, Imman. fol. 21.
that is, except Bishop Usher, whose words are these, Christ the only fit
Vmpire to take up this controversy, was to lay his hand as well upon God the
party so highly offended, as upon man the party so basely offending: But the
Doctor might as well have named Matthew. 1. or Genesis 1. for the proof: The
expression was taken from Job 9.33. And if that expression, the man God's
Fellow, Zach. 13.7. do not prove Christ's Divinity; and that other, he took
part of our flesh and blood, Heb. 2.13. do not prove his Humanity, what can do
it?

From the Deity of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
the Doctor observes, The endless, bottomless, boundless Grace that is in
Christ; it is not the Grace of a creature, no, not of the humane nature it
self, that can serve our turn; if it could be conceived as separate from the
Deity: Surely so many thirsty, guilty souls, as every day drink deep and large
draughts of Grace and Mercy from him, would, if I may so speak, sink him to the
very bottom; nay, it could afford no supply at all, but only in a moral way;
and that is a very pitiful way indeed.

The condemned Pelagius would allow mere moral Grace; Answer.
but if there be no more, what means the drawing, quickening, renewing,
regenerating, creating, conquering Grace so signally set forth in Scripture? Or
how should poor, lost, lapsed, corrupted man, dead in Sins and Trespasses, ever
be raised up into the Divine life? Mere suasion operates only, as proposing an
object, and not as ingenerating a power or faculty; and were there no other
Grace, how should the power of repenting and believing, which are things far
above the Sphere of Nature, ever be produced? Or which way should the acts of
repenting and believing ever come forth without a power? S. Austin is not
content with mere suasory Grace, but would have such an one, Qua Gloriae
magnitudo non solum promittitur, De Great. contr. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 10.
verum etiam creditur, nec solum revelatur Sapientia, verum etiam and amatur,
nec suadetur solum omne bonum, verum and persuadetur: And a little after, he
tells Pelagius, That he must confess such a Grace, if he would be a Christian.

The Dr. tells us, Mr. Sherlock.
That if all the world should set themselves to drink free Grace, and Mercy,
and Pardon from the Wells of Salvation; if they should set themselves to draw
from one single Promise, they would not be able to sink the Grace of the
Promise, ( of the Person of Christ he means, says the Author) one hairs
breadth; The Infiniteness of Grace with respect to its Spring or Fountain will
answer all objections, what is our finite guilt before it? Show me the sinner
that can spread his Iniquity to the dimensions of this Grace: Here is Mercy
enough for the greatest, the oldest, the stubbornest Transgressor, etc. Enough
in all reason this; what a comfort is it to sinners to have such a God for
their Savior, whose Grace is bottomless, and boundless, and exceeds the
largest dimensions of sin, though there be a world of sin in them!

The Grace of the Promise, says the Dr. of the Person of Christ he means,
Answer.
says the Author: This is just to as much purpose, as if the Author should
tell us, That the Grace of the Evangelical Charter, and the Grace of Christ the
great Purchaser cannot consist together, which as yet I never found admitted
among Divines: The Infiniteness of Christ's Grace is a thing no more to be
scrupled or played withal, than the Verity of his Deity. When the Emperor
Constantine had unjustly and unnaturally dipped his hands in the blood of his Son
Crispus, Spondan. Annal.
and Nephew Licinius Junior, the Pagan Flamins were nonplust, and could tell of
no way of Expiation for so horrible a Crime; but the Christian Doctrine
furnished him with one. No sooner does a man become Christian, but he must own,
that the Grace of Christ is infinite, and in a transcendent Excess above all
the dimensions of sin, that the oldest and greatest Transgressor may find mercy
enough in him; and in very deed, this is a comfort for sinners too high and
sacred to be entertained with any other laugh than that of the joy of Faith.

But what now if the Divine Nature it self have not such an endless, Mr.
Sherlock.
boundless, bottomless Grace? At other times the Dr. tells us of the
Naturalness of Vindictive Justice. Though God be rich in Mercy, he never told
us yet, that his Mercy was so boundless and bottomless: He has given a great
many demonstrations of the severity of his Anger against sinners, who could not
be much worse than the greatest, oldest, stubbornest Transgressors. But
supposing the Divine Nature were such a bottomless Fountain of Grace, how comes
this to be a personal Grace of the Mediator? For a Mediator, as Mediator, ought
not to be considered as the Fountain, but as the Minister of Grace: God the
Father ought to come in for a share at least in being the Fountain of Grace,
though the Dr. is pleased to take no notice of him. But how excellent is the
Grace of Christ's Person above the Grace of the Gospel! for that is a bounded
limited thing; it is a strait gate, and narrow way that leads unto life;
there is no such boundless Mercy, as all the sins in the world cannot equal its
dimensions, as will save the greatest, oldest, stubbornest Transgressors.

Smalcius denies God's Mercy to be infinite and immense, Answer.
and the Author seems to hint some such thing; But Christ is God, and in his
Divine Nature there can be no finite Attribute; and what if Divine Justice be
natural and infinite too? Infinite Justice and Infinite Mercy may stand very
well together; or what if Divine Justice break out against sinners? yet is
Divine Mercy infinite for all that; nay, what if Divine Mercy had showed it
self in gracious Effects to no one man in the World? yet still would it have
been infinite (...), in the divine Essence: And what if the Author will not
call this a personal Grace in the Mediator? It is doubtless a Grace in the
Person of the Mediator; and what if Christ as Mediator be God's Servant? yet is
he really God, and a Fountain of Grace, and that without the least exclusion of
his Father being such: The Son made and upholds all things, and yet, I hope,
the Father did and does the same; and what if in the Gospel the Gate be strait,
and Way narrow? yet the Grace is never the less infinite, because it is
dispensed in a way decorous to the Holiness of God: infinite Grace stands open
to the greatest Sinners; and yet none shall partake of it but upon the holy
Terms of the Gospel.

Thus the Love of Christ is an Eternal Love, Mr. Sherlock.
because his Divine Nature is Eternal; an unchangeable Love, because his Nature
is so; a fruitful Love producing all things which he wills to his beloved; he
loves Life, Grace, Holiness into us; he loves us into Covenant, loves us into
Heaven: This is an excellent Love indeed, which does all for us, and leaves
nothing for us to do; we owe this discovery to an Acquvintance with Christ's
Person, or rather with his Divine Nature, for the Gospel is very silent in this
matter; all that the Gospel tells us is, that Christ loved Sinners so as to die
for them, and that he loves good men who believe and obey his Gospel, so as to
save them; and that he continues to love them, while they continue to be good,
but hates them when they return to their old Vices: And therefore sinners have
reason to fetch their comforts, not from the Gospel, but from the Person of
Christ, which as far excels the Gospel, as the Gospel excels the Law.

The Dr. discourses of the Love of Christ as he is God: Answer.
There is in God Amor Complacentiae, a Love of Complacence, whereby he delights
in good men; but is there not Amor Benevolentiae too, a gracious purpose of
bestowing good things on us? All the good things Temporal in the World, and
Spiritual in the Church, know no other Spring or Origin than this; our
Repentance, Faith, Grace, Holiness (unless we will blaspheme the great Donor,
and deny them to be Gifts) are so many pregnant proofs of it: Hence the Apostle
tells us, That God works in us to will and to do, (...), of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13. And is not this Love or gracious Purpose an Eternal one?
It can be no other; all the divine Decrees are so: His Works are in Time, but
his Decrees in the same Eternity with himself, as being no other than Deus
Volens. Should his Decrees be made in time, the Divine Will, though it ever had
an infinite Reason and Wisdom standing by it, must yet hang in suspense, and
float in uncertainties touching things to come, till its own Creature, Time,
came forth into Being; and then upon passing those Decrees, a new Generation of
Futures must start up which were never before, and withal a new Prescience in
God to look upon those novel Objects; both which are impossible. But this is a
Love, which does all for us, and leaves nothing for us to do: Thus the Author.
Vsser. de Cottesch.
The Semipelagians, to blast the Doctrine of St. Austin touching God's Free
Grace, formed out of their own Brain a Story of the Praedestinatiani, an odious
Sect which, as was pretended, held such a Notion, as rendered an holy Life
altogether unnecessary: But why the Author should charge the Dr. with any such
thing, I know not, he never said or thought any such thing; nay, he has again
and again urged the Necessity of Obedience: Neither do I see how there can be a
more unnatural Consequence framed than this; Christ loved us, and therefore we
need do nothing our selves: Our Love to Christ is an excellent Principle of
Obedience to him, and, to set it a working, his Love to us is a divine
Inflammative to ours. But, says the Author, All that the Gospel tells us, is,
That Christ loved Sinners, so as to die for them, and that he loves good men,
who believe and obey the Gospel: But sure this is not all; Christ in his Love
does something to the Quickening and Conversion of men, and something to the
sanctifying and establishing of them: This Last I suppose the Author allows
not, for he tells us, That he loves them while they continue good, and hates
them when they return to their old vices; But this is much after the rate of
the Remonstrants, who tell us, That as soon as men believe, there is a kind of
incomplete Election, such as rises and falls with their Faith; and when they
arrive at the full point of Perseverance, it becomes complete and peremptory:
The Divine Will, according to them, must be successive and make its progress
from an incomplete Election to a complete one, and in its passage to that
Completure, it must all the way vary and turn about to every point as the
fickle Will of Man does; that standing, there is an Election, that falling,
there is none; and so toties quoties, as often as it pleases man to show
himself variable, Election will be something or nothing as it happens. This
Opinion does not ascribe Eyes and Hands to God, as the gross Anthropomorphites
did, but it assimilates him to the filly turnings and windings of the Creature.
But to speak more directly to the Author; God's electing Love antecedes all
Goodness in in Men; and if his elect Vessels fall into great sins, as holy
David did, and this after their Conversion, however the Light of God's
Countenance be for a time suspended, however their habitual Graces be weakened,
and their Consciences wounded, yet the Foundation of God stands sure; electing
Love remains unvariable, and will revive them again by Repentance. When God
elected a People to himself, he did not, as Mr. Shaw speaks in allusion to the
words of the Apostle, use lightness, or purpose according to the flesh, after
the manner of men, unsteady and wavering in their determinations; no, the
foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows those that are his.

But if the Love of Christ be infinite, Mr. Sherlock.
eternal, unchangeable, fruitful, I would willingly understand, how sin, and
death, and Misery came into World; for if this Love be so, because the Divine
Nature is so, then it was always so; for God always was what he is, and that
which is eternal, could never be other than it is now: And why could not this
Love as well preserve us from falling into Sin, Misery, and Death, as love Life
and Holiness into us; for it is a little odd, first to love us into Sin and
Death, that then he might love us into Life and Holiness, which indeed could
not be, if this Love were always so unchangeable, and fruitful, as the Dr.
persuades us: For if this Love had always loved Life and Holiness into us, how
should it happen, that we should sin and die.

The gracious Decree of Election is, Answer.
as becomes the Divine Nature, eternal, unchangeable, fruitful; yet was it a
free Act, terminating upon what Object it pleased: Hence God says, Jacob have
I loved, and Esau have I hated; he infallibly brings his Elect to Glory: But no
man may be so vain or presumptive, as to limit the holy One, or chalk a Way or
Method for him to walk in, who works all things according to the counsel of his
own will. But how then came sin and death into the World? Why, surely it came
in by Man's Transgression, and under God's-Permission: But why could not this
eternal, unchangeable, fruitful Love, preserve us from falling? I doubt not at
all, but God, who is Almighty, could have kept up Man and all his Posterity in
their primitive station, as well as he did the standing Angels; but if you ask
on, Why did he not do it? I have nothing to answer, but that it was not his
pleasure: God loves no man into sin; the Expression is too odd for a Christians
Mouth or Ear; but he suffers his very Elect to fall into sin, yet is his Love
eternal, unchangeable, fruitful toward them; if I may allude to that of
Hezekiah, Isai. 38.17. He loves them from the pit of corruption, he fetches
them out of the corrupt Mass of Mankind by his effectual Grace; and though
afterward they have many falls and lapses, yet electing Love sets to its hand
again, and revives them by a fresh Repentance, showing it self fruitful in
their recovery and safe conduct to Heaven; and all this is managed in a way of
unaccountable Sovereignty.

Not that I deny, that the Love of God is eternal, Mr. Sherlock.
unchangeable, fruitful, that is, that God was always good, and always
continues good, and manifests his love and goodness in such ways as are
suitable to his nature, which is the fruitfulness of it; but then the
unchangeableness of Gods love does not consist in being always determined to
the same object, but in that he always loves for the same reason; that is,
that he always loves true virtue and goodness, wherever he sees it, and
never ceases to love any person, till he ceases to be good; and then the
immutability of his love is the reason why he loves no longer; for should he
love a wicked man, the reason and nature of his love would change, and the
fruitfulness of Gods love with respect to the Methods of his Grace and
Providence does not consist in producing what he loves by an omnipotent and
irresistible power, for then sin and death could never have entered into the
world; but he governs and does good to his Creatures, in such ways as are most
suitable to their Natures; he governs reasonable Creatures by Principles of
Reason, as he does the material World by the necessary Laws of Matter, and
bruit Creatures by the instincts and propensities of Nature.

After all the rest, Answer.
the Author himself confesses, that there is in God an eternal, unchangeable,
fruitful Love; how so? There is a Love of Virtue and Goodness; and is there not
a Love of Persons too? The Scripture is express in it: St. Paul is a chosen
vessel, Act. 9. Jacob was loved, and that before he was born, or had done any
good at all, Romans 9. The Lord knows those that are his, 2 Timothy 2. He calls
his sheep by Name, Joh. 10.3. Some are drawn of the Father, Joh. 6.44. Some are
called according to purpose, Romans 8.28. On some God will have mercy, when he
hardens others, Romans 9.18. All which places places prove that electing Love is
of particular persons, who, as St. Austin has it, certissime liberantur, are
certainly saved, when others are left in massa perditionis. Unless this be
owned, that great Design of a Church, which is the Masterpiece of Providence,
must be carried on in such a lame and imperfect manner, as if God (which is
unworthy of him) should say, I would have a Church, but I intend not who shall
make it up: Such a Jeofail is hardly to be found in a prudent Man. But says
the Author, The Unchangeableness of God's Love does not consist in being
determined to the same Object, but in that he always loves for the same Reason,
that is, he always loves true Virtue and Goodness, wherever he sees it, and
never ceases to love any person, till he ceases to be good: he always loves for
the same Reason; where Goodness is, there he loves, where Goodness is not,
there he loves not: This is the Author's meaning, this is loving for the same
Reason: But if this had been so, what could have become of Man, corrupt, lapsed
Man, in whom, as our Church tells us, there is not a spark of Goodness? How
desperate must his case have been? Divine Love could not possibly have let out
a drop of Mercy to such an one, much less have showed forth it self in such an
unparalle'd Act, as the Mission of his own Son for our Redemption, there being
not in any Son of Adam naturally, so much Goodness (the only reason according
to the Author of divine Love) as might attract the least crumb of Comfort on
Earth, or the least moments Reprieve from Hell. But says the Author, Should he
love a wicked man, the Reason and Nature of his Love would change: He cannot
love a wicked man with a Love of Complacence, but cannot he love him in Design,
or with a Love of Benevolence? Then, (though, as the Author tells us, page 88.
he did passionately desire and design the Happiness of Man) yet he could not
design to him (being in a lapsed corrupt Estate) a Christ, or a Gospel, or any
the least Means of Salvation; Goodness, the only reason of Love, being gone by
the Fall, nothing that is good could be intended to him. The Author
acknowledges that God loves Goodness in Men, but whence came that Goodness? Was
it a Donative of Divine Love or not? If so, then he loved them before they were
such; if not, then may we say with the Pelagians, A Deo habemus, quod homines
sumus, a nobis ipsis, quod justi sumus; though God be necessary to our Being,
yet he is not to our Goodness, Tract. 81. in Joh.
as St. Austin observes. I shall add no more to this, having spoken before
touching irresistible Grace.

Christ being God and Man, Mr. Sherlock.
made him an endless bottomless Fountain of Grace to all that believe: Thus the
Dr. upon which the Author glosses, This he was as God, as we were told before,
and his Grace was never the more bottomless for becoming Man: The design of all
this is, to make the Person of Christ the Fountain of all Grace, from whence we
must drink Pardon and Mercy as long as we need any.

His Grace was never the more bottomless for becoming Man; Answer.
yet as God and Man he is the Fountain of all Grace to us; and unless he had
been Man, there would have been no Communication of Grace to us. The most
Reverend Usher, upon that Text, He that eats my flesh, Imman. page 52.
and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him, says Three things: 1.
That by the mystical and supernatural Union we are as truly conjoined with him,
as meat and drink is with us: 2. That this Conjunction is immediately made with
his Humane Nature: 3. That the Lamb slain, that is, Christ crucified, has by
that death of his, made his flesh broken, and his blood poured out for us, to
be fit food for the spiritual nourishment of Souls, and the very Wellspring,
from whence by the power of his Godhead, all Life and Grace is derived to us.
To the same purpose speaks the Learned Zanchy.

To begin with the Fullness of Christ; Mr. Sherlock.
and the first place wherein we meet with it, is Joh. 1.16. And of his fullness
we all received, and grace for grace: Now what is meant by this Fullness, we may
learn from ver. 14. The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth: This Fullness which was in Christ, is a Fullness of Grace and Truth; and
if we consult ver. 17. we shall find, that this Grace and Truth is opposed to
the Law of Moses, The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ: So that Grace and Truth signify the Gospel, which is a Covenant of
Grace, and is expressly called the Grace of God, Tit. 2.11. and conteins the
most clear and perspicuous Revelation of the Divine Will, in opposition to the
Types and Shadows under the Law; is Truth, in opposition to Types and Figures;
this is the Fullness we receive from Christ, a perfect Revelation of the Divine
Will, concerning the Salvation of Mankind, which conteins so many excellent
Promises, that it may be well be called Grace, and prescribes such a plain and
simple Religion, so agreeable to the natural Nations of Good and Evil, that it
may well be called Truth: This Fullness dwelt only in Christ, and from him alone
we receive it; for none of the Prophets, who were before him, did so perfectly
understand the Will of God as he did: No man has seen God at any time, but the
only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, v.
18. No man ever before had so perfect a knowledge of the Will of God ( which is
here called seeing God, because sight gives the most perfect knowledge) but the
Son, who understood all his most secret counsels, has perfectly declared the
Will of the Father to us: and hence that Fullness we receive from Christ is
explained by Grace for Grace, which signifies the abundance of Grace manifested
in the Gospel. St. Austin expounds it, Pro Legis gratia quae praeteriit,
gratiam Evangelii accepimus permanentem; but this seems to be a forced sense,
for the Law is no where called Grace, but Grace is opposed to to the Law in the
next verse: But however, this they agree in, that by the fullness of Grace and
Truth they understand the Gospel, that perfect declaration which Christ has
made to the World. This Fullness was first in the Person of Christ, before he
could communicate it to us; yet it is not this Personal Fullness we are to
attend to, but the Fullness and Perfection of his Gospel, from whence we must
fetch the knowledge of the Divine Will.

Joh. 1.16. And of his fullness we all received, and Grace for Grace: Arswer.
Upon this Text the only Quaere is, Whether by Fullness is meant, the Fullness of
Christ's Person, or the Fullness of his Gospel? I conceive here is clearly meant
the Fullness of Christ's Person; it is in the Text his fullness, his, who is God
the Word, ver. 1. his, who was in the beginning with God, ver. 2. his, by whom
all things were made, ver. 3. his, who is the true light, that lights every
man that comes into the world, ver. 9, his, who was made flesh and dwelt among
us, ver. 14. None of these [his's] can be attributed to the Gospel, but they
are all proper to the Person of Christ; [his fulness] therefore must signify
the Fullness of Christ's Person, from whence all Grace is derived, as Light is
from the Sun, and Sense from the Head: All true Believers receive from him
grace for grace, that is, say some, Gratiam cumulatissimam, abundant Grace; or,
as others, Grace answering to the Grace in Christ; as the Child receives from
his Parents Limb for Limb, or the Glass from the Face Image for Image. It is
further to be noted, that the words are, we received (...), out of his fullness:
Had the Fullness meant here been the Fullness of the Gospel, the words would have
been, We rereceived of his Fullness, even the whole Gospel; but because here was
intended the Fullness of Christ's Person, the words are, We received of his
fullness, that is, a part or share of it, and, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.7.
Grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. We may then conclude,
that the Fullness is in Christ's Person, and say of him, Hom. of Man's Misery.
as our Church does, He is the alone Mediator between God and Man, which paid
our Ransom; he is the Physician, which heals all our diseases; he is the
Savior, which saves us from our sins; he is that flowing and most plenteous
Fountain, out of whose Fullness all we have received. But says the Author, We
may learn what this Fullness is, by ver. 14. We beheld his glory, the glory, as
of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth; so that this Fullness
is a Fullness of Grace and Truth; and if we consult ver. 17. we shall find, that
this Grace and Truth is opposed to the Law of Moses, so that Grace and Truth
signifies the Gospel. To which I answer, In the 14. ver. we have only a
description of the Person of Christ, whose Glory is there set forth by being
full of Grace and Truth, not a tittle in it of the Gospel: In the 17. verse. we
have not the word, fullness, but we have Grace and Truth opposed to the Law of
Moses, but how? not as if under the Law, taken in the whole Complex and
Administration of it, there were no Evangelical Truths or Graces: this is
evident; for in the Second Commandment we have mercy for thousands: Upon the
renewing of the Tables we have God proclaiming himself in those stately Titles
of Love, The Lord gracious, merciful, longsuffering, abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin:
In Deuteronomy. 30.6 we have the circumcision of the heart; in the 37. Psalm. 31. we
have the Law of God in the heart, as the Character of a righteous man: We have
the holy Spirit in the Saints; hence David siducially prays, Take not thy holy
Spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11. We have Job looking to his living Redeemer, Job
19.25. Abraham rejoicing to see Christ's day, Joh. 8.56. Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob embracing the Promises, and looking to an heavenly country, Heb. 11.
and, and to say no more, all the Types and Shadows in the Ceremonial Law, were
a kind of veiled Gospel, and pointed at Christ, the great Center of both
Testaments: And hence it appears, that, in case the Law be never called Grace,
yet Evangelical Truths and Graces were not wanting under it. But in that 17.
verse. two things are pointed out to us; the one is this, That the Evangelical
Truths and Graces, after the coming of Christ in the flesh, though in Substance
but the same, were gradually far more excellent than before; those Truths,
which under the Law were in Shadows and dark Resemblances, after the coming of
Christ appeared in Splendor and evidential Glory; those Graces, which under
the Law were but as Drops and in lesser measures, after his coming were as
Showers and in greater plenty: The other is this, That Christ is in a
transcendent manner supereminent above Moses; though there were Grace under the
Law, yet Moses could not communicate it; he could declare the Law or Doctrine,
but being but a Man, a Minister, he could go no further: Just as John could
baptize with water, but then he was at his utmost: Moses could no more
communicate Grace then John could baptize with the holy Ghost and Fire; but
Christ dispenses more than mere Doctrine, he communicates Grace it self: Hence
it appears, that in that 17. verse. there is more than bare Doctrine opposed to
the Law, and attributed to Christ. I confess the Gospel to be the Charter and
Medium of Grace, but it is in the Royal hand of Christ to communicate it, and
that from his own Person: He is a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and
remission of sins, Act. 5.31. Moreover, if all Grace, and the fullness of it be
only in the Gospel, in the outward Doctrine and Declaration of Gods Will, as
the Author seems to hint, what becomes of the influences of Grace? What are the
supplies of the Spirit of Christ? Phil. 1.19. What the inward drawings and
teachings? John 6.44.45. What the measure of the gift of Christ? Ephesians. 4.7. What
the effectual working in every part, which is from the Head Christ? Ephesians. 4.16.
All internal operations of Grace, all vital influences from Christ must utterly
cease; the condemned Pelagius may come in, and set up the very first and rudest
draught of his Heresy, which placed all Grace in Free Will and external
Doctrine; and the Orthodox Fathers, which with might and main opposed him
therein, may be justly censured for doing so.

To the same purpose the Apostle discourses in Coloss. 9.10. Mr. Sherlock.
For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete
((...), filled) in him, who is the head of all Principalities and Powers: The
expression is allusive and Metaphorical: For God who is a Spirit, cannot in a
proper sense dwell bodily in any thing: The Apostle's design in this Chapter is
to persuade the Colossians to adhere to the Gospel, not to be seduced by Jews
or Gnostics, ( who talked very much in their canting phrase of the Pleromata)
to corrupt the Religion of Christ with Jewish Ceremonies, or Pagan
Superstitions; and the principal argument he urges to this purpose is the
perfection of the Gospel-revelation, that in Christ (that is the Gospel) are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; Verse 3. (...), that is, not in
whom are hid, but in whom are all the hidden treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
that is, who has now revealed to us all those treasures, which in former ages
were hidden from the world; upon this he exhorts them to be firm to the Gospel,
Verse. 6.7. To beware lest any man spoil them through Philosophy and vain
deceit, after the traditious, of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ; and then adds, For in him (that is, in Christ) dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily: So this must refer to the complete and perfect
revelation of the Gospel, which needs not be supplied by the Philosophy or
Traditions of men. To understand the reason of this phrase, and the force of
Argument, we must consider, that this is an allusion to Gods dwelling in the
Temple at Jerusalem by Types and Figures, which were the Symbols of his
presence: The Temple was Gods house, the Mercy-Seat and Cherubims, etc. were
the emblems of Gods presence; he dwelt among them by Types and Figures, and
therefore instituted a typical and figurative Religion, and this was an
imperfect declaration of himself to the world: But now God has sent his son to
tabernacle among us. Joh. 1.14. The Deity it self dwells in the Temple of
Christ's Body, not by Types and Figures, but by a real and immediate Presence
and Union; and therefore those revelations, which are made by Christ, are
answerable to the inhabitation of the Godhead in him, contain a true and
perfect declaration of God's will, in opposition to the impersect rudiments and
types of the Law, so that (...), or bodily, is opposed to figurative and
typical; and this is a plain demonsiration of the persection of the
Gospel-revelation, that the fullness of the Deity dwelt substantially in Christ;
his Religion answers the greatness of his Person, the Godhead dwelt in him
bodily, and his Religion is (...) too, all truth and substance, The Law was but
a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ, Verse 17. His Religion
is body, truth, and substance, this place is exactly parallel with Joh. 1.14.
the word (...), tabernacled among us: Herein the Figure of the Tabernacle was
fulfilled, that God dwelt in our flesh, and the Revelations he made of Gods
Will did agree with the manner of his appearance, were full of Grace and Truth;
not typical, but a plain and perfect declaration of God's Will, and as the
Evangelist tells us, That of his fullness we have all received, that we are
perfectly instructed by him: So our Apostle adds here, And ye are complete in
him, filled in him; you need no Instructor but Christ; so that this fullness of
the Godhead dwelling bodily in Christ, does ultimately resolve it self into the
perfection of the Gospel-revelation: For since the fullness of the Deity did
inhabit in Christ's Person, he was able to acquaint us with the whole Will of
God; the force of this reason our Savior takes notice of: John 3.34, 35. He
whom God has sent, speaks the words of God, that is, declares his whole
will to us; for God gives not the Spirit by measure to him; it is not with
him, as it was with the meaner Prophets, who bad only particular Revelations:
The fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily; the Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand.

That place Col. 2.9. Answer.
In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, speaks not of the
Gospel, but of the Person of Christ, it being a most pregnant, invincible proof
of his Deity: The Socinians would fain wrest away this Scripture: Here Bishop
Wren against the Racovian Catechism, first setting down their odd
interpretation, and then passing his worthy censure on it, In Christo, id est,
in Evangelic, habitat, id est, patefacta est, omnis plenitudo, idest, tota
voluntas, Deitatis, id est, Dei, corporaliter, id est, integre and reipsa: Vt
placet vero! Quid malum! Naso suspenditis has glossas; satisque ridicule
coactas esse clamatis! Erratis profecto Juvenes, neque satis rem adsecuti
estis; praeter enim quod gratis dictae sunt, sunt etiam insanum violentae, and
serio execrandae: Thus he. The interpretation was execrable in his eyes, and
well it might be so, contrary to all just rules of interpreting Scripture
without any necessity at all urging thereunto, they decline from the native
proper sense of the words, and run into Tropes and Figures; Christ is taken for
Doctrine, Dwelling for Manifestation, the fullness of the Godhead for the Will
of God, and Bodily for Clearly and Perfectly; all is a mere force and violence
upon the Text: Was it ever heard or read that the Allfulness of the Godhead
should signify the Will of God, or the knowledge thereof; This is such a
Catachresis, (says Mr. Jeans) for which they can bring no Precedent or
Parallel; it sounded so harsh in the ears of their own Eujedinus, as that it
drove him to affirm, That (...), was by the carelessness of transcribers crept
into the Original, instead of (...); but the thing is clear by the after-words,
In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, says the ninth Verse:
What is this, In him? In him, who is the Head of all Principality and Power:
Verse 10. In him, in whom we are circumcised with the Circumcision made without
hands: Verse 11. In him, with whom we are buried in Baptism: In him with whom
we are risen through Faith: In him, who was raised from the dead, Verse 12. In
him, who nailed the handwriting of Ordinances to his Cross, Verse 14. In him,
who spoiled and triumphed over Principalities and Powers: Verse 15. All which
are proper, not to the Gospel, but to the person of Christ; In him therefore
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, not in the Gospel, but in the Person
of Christ: But says the Author, The expression is allusive and metaphorieal;
for God who is a Spirit, cannot in a proper sense dwell bodily in any thing: I
answer, God is a Spirit, but I take it, that the (...) here is put for (...),
bodily is the same with personally: For as Bishop Davenant observes, among the
Hebrews, Souls are put for Persons: Genesis 14.21. And among the Greeks, (...)
signifies a Person, and so it is used in the vulgar Epigramm, -- (...).

In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; that is, by the
hypostatical Union, the eternal Word assuming, and the humane Nature assumed,
becoming one Person: The Apostle's design in this Chapter (says the Author) is
to persuade the Colossians to adhere to the Gospel, and that, because of the
perfection of the Gospel; in Christ, that is, in the Gospel, are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, or there are the hidden treasures: But I
answer, the Apostle exhorts them to adhere to Christ; the Person of Christ, (
In whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Verse 3. In whom
dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, Verse 9.) is opposed to the
persons of the Seducers, with all their Philosophy and vain deceit: Thus Bishop
Wren says, Christum ipsum iis opponi, quia ipsa Deitas in Christo inhabitat:
Neither Verse 3. nor Verse 9. speak of the Gospel, but of the Person of Christ:
The Godhead (says the Author) dwelt in Christ bodily, not by Types and
Figures, and his Religion is (...) too, all truth and substance; but we must
remember, that this (...), the substance of the Christian Religion was under
the Law, though the face of it did not shine with such a Luster and Glory as
after the incarnation; but the Author goes on, Ye are complete in him: Verse
10. You need no Instructor but Christ, who has revealed God's will to us; so
that this Fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in Christ, does ultimately
resolve it self into the perfection of the Gospel-revelation: To which I
answer, We are complete in him; but is instruction a Christians completure? Oh!
no, besides knowledge, there must be justifying and sanctifying Grace, Christ's
Righteousness, and the Holy Spirit with all its Divine Furniture, to make a
Christian complete, and in whom, or in what is he complete? Not in the Gospel,
(of which the Apostle speaks not) but in the Person of Christ: To which purpose
Bishop Wren has an excellent passage, Quid non sunt praestituri fideles, atque
summa fide elaboraturi, ut divelli se nunquam patiantur ab illius ( in quo and
seipsos quoque Divinitatis repletos esse intelligunt, (...), Verse. 10.)
spirituali and mystica Union? Observe, he owns that Believers are united to
Christ by a mystical Union, and in him complete, and according to the
Creature-model, filled with the Divinity: As for that in the Author, That the
Fullness of the Godhead ultimately resolves it self into the Gospel; If the
meaning be only this, the Fullness of the Godhead is in Christ, therefore the
Gospel is Divine, I own it; but if the meaning be, the Fullness of the Godhead
is in Christ, and by him transfused into the Gospel, I utterly deny that
transfusion. Mr. Sherlock.


In other places the Fullness of Christ signifies the Church, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. the
Church is called his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all; the
Church makes him (as it were) complete and perfect; for he cannot be a perfect
Head without a Body: Hence the Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. Beza
tells us, That this is the reason of that Phrase, which so frequently occurrs
in the New Testament, of being in Christ, that is, being Members of the
Christian Church. Now the Church is called Christ's fullness, with respect to
its extent and universality, that it is not confined to any particular Nation,
as the Jewish Church was, but takes in Jews and Gentiles, bond and free: This I
take to be the meaning of Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell. Beza observes, that some Expositors by his fullness,
understand the Church; for ver. 18. the Apostle tells us, That he is the head
of the body, the Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
that in all things he might have the preeminence: For it pleased the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell: Where fullness must be expeunded of the
Church, that it pleased God to unite his Church unto Christ; for the Apostle
assigns this as the Reason of Christ's being the Head of the Church. And if you
would know, why the Church is called fullness, and all fullness said to dwell in
Christ, the Reason follows in 20, 21. And having made peace through the blood
of his Cross, to reconcile all things by him, I say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in Heaven; and you, who were sometimes alienated, and enemies
in your minds by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled: This is that fullness
that dwells in Christ, that he is made the Head of the Universal Church, both
in heaven and earth, that Jews and Gentiles are now united in one Body, that
Christ is the universal Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, by him to reconcile all
things to himself: And this is the meaning of that phrase, The fullness of him
who fills all in all; the Church is his fullness, because he fills all in
all, that is, does not consine his care and providence, and the influences of
his Grace to any one Nation, but extends it to the whole World: Thus the
fullness of Christ signifies in Ephesians. 4.13. Till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ, which is the explication, of, to a
perfect man, that is, to that perfection of Faith and Knowledge, which becomes
the Christian Church; for (...) signifying the age, and growth and stature of a
Man, the fullness of Christ cannot so properly be understood of any thing, as of
the Christian Church: This is all I can find in Scripture concerning the
Fullness of Christ, which either signifies the Perfection of his Gospel, or the
Universality of his Church; which is a plain Demonstration of those men's skill
in expounding Scripture, who make this Fullness a Personal Grace in Christ.

Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Answer.
The Church is called Christ's body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all: But this is not the Church Visible, which is made up of Believers and
Unbelievers (these latter being dead and putrid Members, do not as, Bishop
Davenant has observed, complere Corpus Christi, sed corrumpere and deformare;)
but it is the Church Catholic which is made up only of Saints; these make up
the Mystical Body of Christ, and without them Christ as Head accounts not
himself complete: The Church is Christ's Fullness, but is there not a personal
fontal Fullness in Christ? No doubt there is; the Text tells us, That he fills
all in all, and that he is head to the Church, and so must dispense vital
Influences of Grace to all his Members: Hence the whole Body is (...), supplied
with all the Furniture of Grace from him as Head, Col. 2.19. and all the
Members of that Body are (...), filled with all graces in him, Col. 2.10.
Without this fontal Fullness in Christ, what would become of the Church? In a
moment the (...) or Body would turn into Corruption, and the (...) or Fullness
would vanish into Confusion; but, because it is mystically united to him as a
living Head, hence it is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. The phrase, being in
Christ, signifies the Mystical Union with him: Hence Beza on that place, There
is no condemnation to them which are in Christ, Romans 8.1. says, Quia sumus per
fidem facti unum cum Christo. That place Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father,
that in him should all fullness dwell, speaks not of the Church as Christ's
Fullness, but of the fontal personal Fullness in Christ; the Church is called
Christ's Fullness, but never the All-fulness of him; the All-fulness is not the
Church's Fullness, but Christ's, such as made him fit to be Head of the Church,
and the Origin of all Graces in the Church: The All-fulness is an antecedent
Reason, why Christ was Head of the Church, the Church's being Christ's Fullness
is a consequent and result from thence. But says the Author, The Church is
called fullness, because ver. 20, 21. Christ reconciled all things in heaven,
and earth, he is Head of the Church Universal in heaven and earth, Jews and
Gentiles are now united in one body: To which I answer, Christ is indeed the
Head of the Church Universal, but the All-fulness made him meet to be such an
Head, else he could not have reconciled all things. Christ (says the Author)
fills all in all, that is, he extends the influences of his Grace to the
whole world: This I suppose, is somewhat hard to be maintained; in the Pagan
World it is difficult to believe, that there are Influences: There they are
without God in the world; the only Name, Jesus, is not named; the holy Spirit,
the Fountain of all Grace, is not heard of; the holy Ordinances, the Chariot of
the Spirit, are wanting; and how can we think of the Influences of Grace there?
The Fathers in the fourth Council of Carthage would have every Bishop believe,
Crab. Council. Tom 1.
that Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam nullus salvetur. I therefore conclude with
Camero, Vult Apostolus omnem plenitudinem esse a Christo, non vult omnes
participes esse hujus plenitudinis: Thus says the Author) the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. signifies the fullness of the Church; the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, is the explication of the perfect man; (...)
signifies the age and stature of a man, the fullness is to be understood of the
Christian Church. I confess this Text may well be construed, as Ephesians. 1.23.
ought to be, of the Church; only whereas there the Apostle speaks of the
Churches being the Body of Christ, here he speaks of its growing to ripeness
and full perfection, which is chiefly accomplished above in Glory: But we must
still remember, that the Churches being Christ's Fullness does not deny, but
suppose a personal fontal Fullness in Christ, who silleth all in all.

Let us now consider in what sense Christ is called our Life; Mr Sherlock.
he is called Life with respect to his Doctrine; he preached the Word of Life,
and brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel: In him was life, and
the life was the light of men, Joh. 14.6. that is, he preached the Word of
Life, which enlightneth the dark Minds of men, it is not imaginable how Life
should be Light in any other sense. Christ tells his Disciples, I am the way,
the truth, and the Life, Joh. 14.6. that is, I declare the true way to Life:
Thus he calls himself the bread of life, Joh. 6. with respect to the Doctrine
he preached, ver. 33. and with respect to that Sacrifice he offered for the
Life of the World; The bread I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world, ver. 51. Christ is also our Life, because he has power to
bestow immortal Life upon all his sincere followers: Joh. 11.25. I am the
Refurrection and the Life; Joh. 5.25. The hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live: He
first raises those who are dead in sin, to a new spiritual Life by the power of
his Doctrine, and then has Authority to raise them to an immortal life: Thus
Col. 3.3, 4. Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God: When Christ,
who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory:
That is, you profess your selves dead to the world in conformity to Christ's
Death; and though that immortal Life, which you expect to enjoy with Christ,
who is now risen again from the dead, be at present concealed from your view;
yet when Christ, who is the Author of Eternal Life, and has power to raise us
up from the dead, shall appear the second time to judge the world, then shall
ye appear with him in glory. We must not dream of fetching Life from the Person
of Christ, as we draw water out of a Fountain; but we must steadfastly believe
and obey his Gospel, which is a Principle of divine Life in us, and then we may
expect a Resurrection and immortal Life.

Christ preached the Word of Life, Answer.
he brought Life and Immortality to light, that is, in a more illustrious
manifestation of it; Immortality, which did but dawn and glimmer under the Law,
breaks forth in Luster and Glory under the Gospel. That, Joh. 1.4. The life was
the light of men, speaks not of Christ's Doctrinal Word, but of his Creative,
which lighted up an excellent Reason in Man: This is clear from the Series of
the Evangelist's speech, which in this place makes its progress from a state of
Creation, unto Darkness or the amission of Light, and from thence to the
instauration of it. Christ is the life, Joh. 14.6. not only declaring the Way
to Life, but inspiring that Spiritual Life, which is a Seed of Eternal: He is
our Life with respect to his Sacrifice, Joh. 6. but then that Sacrifice must be
applied to us, by the quickening Spirit, which unites to Christ, and by Faith,
which feeds on him. He raises up those that are dead in sins to a new spiritual
Life, Joh. 5.25. Not by his Doctrine only, but by his Regenerating Spirit; and
when he has raised them up, he is their Life still by the supplies of the
Spirit, and influences of Grace: Hence St. Austin upon the 26. Verse, As the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself, observes, That Christ has Life in himself, but the Believer has not
Life in himself, but in Christ, living but as a part or piece of Christ, and
ever in dependence on him. Christ is called our life, Col. 3.4. that is, he is
the Fountain of the glorious Life in Heaven, and withal of those Graces which
are the first fruits and buddings of it. After all this, the Author concludes
thus: We must not dream of fetching Life from the Person of Christ, as we draw
water out of a fountain: This is durus sermo indeed, we must not fetch Life
from Christ; he calls us to come to him, nay, charges the unbelieving Jews for
not coming to him for Life, Joh. 5.40. yet we must not fetch life from him. St.
Paul did all things through Christ strengthening him, Phil. 4. 13. and did not
live himself, but Christ lived in him, Gal. 2.20. yet we must not: Christ is in
Scripture an Head, who gives all vital Influences to his Members; 2. Hom. of
Man's misery.
and in our Church-Homily a flowing and most plenteous Fountain, of whose
fullness we all receive; yet we must not: And what then must we do? We must
believe and obey the Gospel, which is a Principle of divine Life in us; so the
Author: But is Christ and his Gospel at odds indeed? If we fetch Life from
Christ, may we not believe and obey the Gospel? Or if we believe and obey the
Gospel, may we not fetch Life from Christ? What strange inconsistencies are
these? The Ephesians tusted in Christ, and yet heard the Gospel of Salvation,
Ephesians. 1.13. they were for the great Purchaser and Fountain of Life, and yet cast
not away the Charter; The Jews searched the Scriptures, and yet should have
gone to Christ for Life; they thought they had Eternal Life in the Scriptures,
and, which was their folly, they thought they had it there in a way separate
from Christ; but he told them, that the Scriptures, if they had dug deep
enough in them, would have testified of him unto them, and so have pointed out
unto them the Fountain of Life in Christ, Joh. 5.39, 40. Nay, believing and
obeying the Gospel are so far from being inconsistent with fetching Life from
Christ, that they cannot be without it; Without Life from Christ, how or which
way should a man believe or obey the Gospel? May Nature, lapsed Nature do it?
No surely, that, which of it self is not sufficient so much as to raise up an
holy thought, or to say, Jesus is the Lord, cannot of it self believe or obey
the Gospel: Or may Nature and Doctrine do it? To place all Grace in outward
Doctrine is mere Pelagianism: It is a saying of St. Austin, Solet dicere humana
superbia, De Great. and Liber. Arb. c. 2.
si seissem, fecissem; ideo non feci, quia nescivi: Humane pride is wont to
say, had I known, I had done it; asking only a Rule, and presuming upon its own
power for performance: But the Scripture tells us of an internal Work, of
inward Teachings, Drawings, Quickenings, and New-creatings in the Heart; where
these things are, there the Gospel is a Principle of Divine Life in us: There
the Gospel comes not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in
much assurance; as the Apostle has it: 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Believing and obeying the
Gospel, suppose internal operations of Grace; and these must come from Christ
the fountain of life: In him we are created unto good works, and without him we
can do nothing.

Thus to proceed, Mr Sherlock.
Christ is the Power of God, and the wisdom of God, and the Gospel is the
wisdom and power of God: 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the power of God, and the wisdom
of God, that is the Doctrine of a crucified Christ, as appears by the verses
before; The Jews require a Sign, and the Greeks seek after Wisdom, but we
preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness, but to them who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power
of God, and the wisdom of God: The Jews were all for Signs and Miracles, the
Greeks for curious Philosophical Speculations; neither of them could relish the
plain simple Doctrine of a crucified Christ: But the Apostle tells us, that
this Doctrine is the power and wisdom of God; the most powerful method which
was ever used by God for the reforming of the world, and the contrivance of
excellent wisdom; thus the Gospel is called, the power of God to them that
believe: Romans 1.16. And by this foolishness of preaching, that is, by preaching
this foolish Doctrine (as it was accounted by the world) of a crucified Christ;
it pleased God to save them that believe: Christ being exalted to the right
hand of Majesty, may in a proper sense be called the power of God, because all
power is given to him in Heaven and earth, and he has the supreme Government
of all the affairs of this spiritual Kingdom, and this is a personal power
inherent in him; but the exercise of it is confined to the Rules of the Gospel;
he has power to save those that believe and obey, and to destrey his enemies;
this power cannot save any man whom the Gospel condemns; we have no reason to
trust to his personal power, unless we first obey his Gospel; however
omnipotent he be, his Gospel is the measure of his actings, if that condemn us,
his omnipotent power will not save us.

Christ is the power and wisdom of God, and so is the Gospel, Answer.
but are they both in equal degree such? No surely, the Gospel is such
organically, and in a way of subordination to Christ, and he is such
principally, and in a way of excellency above the Gospel: The Gospel is the
wisdom of God, a Glass of it, and a Divine Medium to illuminate, and make us
wise; but all this under Christ the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and great
illuminator; from whom the unction or teaching anointing of the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation descends down upon us, to open our eyes and hearts upon
the glorious things in the Gospel: The Gospel is the power of God, a Divine
Scepter, to subdue and overcome the wills and hearts of men; but this is under
Christ, the eternal word and power of God, who by that Scepter produces that
great and supernatural effect. The Apostles, though earthen Vessels carried
about the Evangelical treasure with them; but the (...), or the excellency of
the power was of God, and not of them: 2 Cor. 4.7. The believing Corinthians
were the Apostles Epistle, and Christ's too, 2 Cor. 3.2. and 3. but not in
equal degree: They were (says the Text) Christ's Epistle ministered by the
Apostles; the Apostles were but as the pen, which the Almighty Fingers of the
Spirit used to make the Impression or Divine Inscription upon their hearts:
Hence the Text says, That the same was written, not with Ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God: The Text quoted by the Author, (The Jews require a
sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom; but we preach Christ crucified, unto
the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness, but unto them,
which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom
of God; 1 Cor. 1.22, 23 and 24. is a very remarkable one; they all had the
Gospel, the external call; yet, to show that all was in the Royal hand of
Christ, the dispensation is very different: Those to whom Christ preached, was
a Stumbling block or Foolishness, had not so much as any internal illumination;
For it is not at all imaginable, that Christ the power of God, if truly
understood, could be a stumblingblock to the Jews, who looked after signs; or
that Christ the wisdom of God, if truly understood, could be Foolishness to the
Greeks, who sought after wisdom; but those called ones among them, to whom
Christ was the power of God, and wisdom of God, had internal illuminations and
operations of Grace: The Gospel then is the power and wisdom of God, but
organically and in subserviency to Christ, who has all the power in Heaven and
earth, and illuminates and subdues hearts by the Gospel, as he pleases; he has
power to save such as believe and obey; but that is not all; he has power to
make them believing and obedient, and to save them, not contrary to the
Gospel-rules, but according to them.

But the chief personal Grace is still bebind; Mr. Sherlock.
viz. the Righteousness of Christ: Now no Christian will deny, that Christ was
very righteous, a great example of universal holiness and purity; and it must
be confessed, that his Righteousness was not an imaginary, imputed
Righteousness, but inherent and personal; but what comfort is this to us, if we
continue wilful, incorrigible sinners: Yes, says the Doctor, Have thou the
sense of guilt upon thee? Christ is complete Righteousness, the Lord our
Righteousness; this makes Christ suitable to the wants of a sinner indeed, that
he has a Righteousness for him, which God infinitely prefers before any
homespun Righteousness of his own. This is a very comfortable Notion for bad
men, and such as I would not part with for all the world, did I resolve to live
wickedly, and yet intend to go to heaven; but it is good to be sure in a matter
of importance.

Christ's Righteousness was not an imaginary imputed Righteousness, Answer.
but inherent and personal; thus the Author: It was not imaginary, but
inherent; very true; but was it not imputed to him? Then Christ would never
have appealed to God, as he does, Surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my
work with my God, Isai. 49.4. God would never have accounted him as righteous,
or promised him a Seed, Isa, 53.10. he would never have said, This is my
wellbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. neither would he ever
have exalted him, and given him a name above every name, Phil. 2.9. In a word;
if his Active and Passive Righteousness were not reckoned or accounted of by
God, then he could not be our Savior, or pay a Ransom or Satisfaction to
divine Justice for us. What follows in the Author, That this Righteousness may
be a comfort to wilful incorrigible sinners, is, as I have before manifested, a
mere Popish Calumny.

But before I proceed any further with the Author, I shall crave lieve of the
Reader a little to state and prove this point, That we are justified before God
by the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, and then I shall proceed with the
Author.

Justification may be considered in a double Notion; there is Constitutive
Justification, whereby we are made righteous before God; and Sentential,
whereby we are pronounced such at Judgment: I chiefly aim at the first, upon
which the second follows as a consequent. Christ's Righteousness is either
Active, such as fulfilled the Command of the Law, or Passive, such as bore the
Curse of it; I take in both. The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is,
either that Fundamental Imputation, whereby it is so far reckoned or accounted
unto men in general, as to make them capable of Justification upon
Gospel-terms; or that after particular Imputation, whereby it is so far
reckoned or accounted to Believers in particular, as to constitute them
righteous before God: The first Imputation severs men from lapsed Angels; the
second severs Men from Men, Believers from Unbelievers. The first we have in
such Scripture-expressions as tell us, that Christ died for us; for unless his
Death were in some sense accounted to us, it was no more for us than for
Devils: The second we have in such Scripture-expressions as tell us, that we
are justified by his blood; for his Blood justifies us not, unless it be
actually particularly made ours, and made ours it cannot be without an
Imputation: We have both together, Col. 1.20, 21. He has reconciled all
things, and a little after, yet now has he reconciled you; all things in the
first sense, and you, O believing Colossians, in the second; Reconciliation was
actually particularly imputed unto them, which was before applicable to all. I
intend the second particular Imputation in this discourse. That which I assert
is this, That Believers are justified or constituted righteous before God, by
the Active and Passive Righteousness of Christ actually particularly applied
unto them.

And first, as is meet, let us open our eyes upon Scripture, which is the only
infallible Rule; there often occurrs that memorable phrase, the righteousness
of God, which cannot but be of considerable moment in this matter: And what
does it import? our own inherent Graces, or Christ's Righteousness? Not our
inherent Graces, for these, though they come down from Heaven, are never called
the Righteousness of God; nay, on the contrary, they are called our own: Hence
the Fath of the Romans is called, your Faith, Romans 1.8. the Love of the
Corinthians, your Love. 2 Cor. 8.8. the Patience of Christ's Disciples. your
Patience, Luke 21.19. the Hope of the scattered Christians, your Hope, 1 pet.
1.21. That which is called in Scripture the Righteousness of God is not the
same with that which is called our own there, but it imports the Righteousness
of Christ, which by Imputation is made ours: This is called the Righteousness
of God, because it is the Righteousness of Christ who is God, (for so his Blood
is called, the blood of God, and his Life laid down, the life of God) and not a
Righteousness inherent in us: And withal it is a perfect Righteousness (which
can consist before the Tribunal of God himself, and in which the pure Eyes of
the holy One can find no spot or blemish at all) and not an imperfect one, such
as our inherent Graces are. But that the Righteousness of God imports Christ's
Righteousness will further appear by the places wherein that phrase is used:
Thus Romans 1.17. For therein is the Righteousness of God reveiled from faith to
says: In the precedent Verse he says, That the Gospel is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes; and how so? Why, because it reveils the
Righteousness of God, which saves the Believer, and delivers him from the
wrath, which in the subsequent Verse is declared to be reveiled from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men: And can our inherent Graces
expiate sin and avert wrath? Oh, no; these, such are their spots and
imperfections, must pass with God cum Venia, with a pardon of their defects,
and under the Wings of Christ's Righteousness; that, that alone expiates sin
and averts wrath; no other but that can be the Righteousness of God within that
Text. Thus Romans 3.22. The Righteousness of God is by the faith of Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all them that believe: Inherent Graces are not upon us, but
in us; but Christ's Righteousness, as that in the Text, is not in us, but upon
us: Inhererent Graces are not the matter of our Justification, of which the
Apostle there treats, but of Sanctification; Christ's Righteousness is not the
matter of our Sanctification, but of our Justification, which is the very thing
there treated of: Hence it appears, that the Righteousness of God in this place
is that of Christ. Thus Romans 10.3. They submitted not themselves to the
Righteousness of God; and what was that? The next Verse tells us, For Christ is
the and of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes; and which way
was Christ the End of the Law, by imparting inherent Graces to the believer, or
by his own perfect Righteousness imputed to him? Not by the inherent Graces,
alas! these are so far from reaching the perfection of the Law, that they are
full of defects, and every defect is no less than (...), a falling short of the
Law: Profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est, says St. Austin,
That which is less than it ought to be, is so far sinful, as it is less than it
ought to be: Nothing less than the pure Righteousness of Christ, which answers
the Law in every point, can be the Righteousness of God in this place. Thus 2
Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him; The Apostle does not speak of a
Righteousness in our selves, but in him; not of a Righteousness inherent, but
imputed: Christ's Righteousness is made ours, as our sins were made his, and
that is only by Imputation. St. Austin pithily expresses it, Ipse ergo
peccatum, Enchirid, cap. 41.
ut nos justitia, nec nostra, sed Dei simus, nec in nobis, sed in ipso; sicut
ipse peccatum, non suum, sed nostrum, nec in se, sed in nobis constitutum;
similitudine carnis peccati, in qua crucifixus est, demonstravit. Thus Phil.
3.9. That I may be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith: By the Righteousness which is of God cannot here be meant
inherent Graces; those words (that I may be found in him) have a tacit relation
to the Judgment of God, and before that Tribunal no Saint on earth can can
stand in his own Righteousness: Job could not; If I justify my self, my own
mouth shall condemn me, Job 9.20. David could not; Enter not into judgment with
thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2.
Danicl could not; O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
confusion of faces. The Righteousness which is of God is not the same with
inherent Graces; which, because inherent, are our own, and so styled in
Scripture; neither is it the same with Faith it self: The Apostle says not,
that it is Faith, but that it is a Righteousness through the Faith of Christ, a
righteousness of God by faith: It is therefore no other than Christ's
Righteousness, which Faith receives, and God imputes. But there is one place
behind, which in terminis calls the Righteousness of God the Righteousness of
Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1. To them that have obtained like precious faith with us
through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ: Observe, it is
not through the Righteousness (...), of God and of our Savior Christ, as
noting two Persons, but (...), of God and our Savior, as betokening one, as
Reverend Bishop Downham has observed; like that, Tit. 2.13. The glorious
appearance of the great God and our Savior, where one Person is intended:
Hence it appears, that the Righteousness of God is the Righteousness of Christ,
who is God. Neither can inherent Graces be here meant; for Faith, the first
Radical Grace of all, is said to to be obtained through this Righteousness.
Thus far it appears, that the Righteousness of God is the Righteousness of
Christ. Now it is evident that this Righteousness is imputed to us, or else it
could never arrive at those glorious Effects which are ascribed to it; how
should it profit us, unless it were applied and become ours? Or how should it
become ours but by Imputation? Being the Righteousness of another, it cannot be
ours subjectively and inherently; and if it at all become ours, it must be so
by Imputation. Without the first fundamental Imputation it could not render us
justisiable or savable, any more than it does render Devils so, without the
after particular Imputation it cannot justify or save us: Unless this
Righteousness be imputed, it cannot save, or avert God's wrath, Romans 1. It
cannot be upon the Believer to justify him, Romans 3. It cannot be the end of
the Law for Righteousness to him, Romans 10. We cannot be made the Righteousness
of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. We cannot have the Righteousness of God to make us
stand before God's Tribunal, Phil. 3. The virtue of all depends upon
Imputation. Thus much touching that excellent Phrase, The Righteousness of God,
so often mentioned in Scripture. I now proceed to other Scriptures: To him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness, Romans 4.5. (...), it is reckoned or imputed for
Righteousness: Now is Faith taken here properly absolutely in it self? or is it
taken relatively with respect to its Object, the Righteousness of Christ?
Properly absolutely in it self it is a Work; the Apostle opposes believing to
working, ver. 5. and speaks of a Righteousness without Works, ver. 6. Faith
therefore is not here taken absolutely; for so Faith is a Work, and believing
working: Faith absolutely taken is our own; hence we meet with those Phrases,
Thy faith, and My faith, Jam. 2.18. But that which justifies us is not our own,
but the Righteousness of God; the Righteousness which justifies is through
Faith, Phil. 3.9. and not Faith it self: Faith is the hypostasis of things
hoped for, Heb. 11.1. but the justifying Righteousness is not the hypostasis,
but the very thing hoped for. We by faith wait for the hope of righteousness,
Gal. 5.5. That Righteousness, which justifies us, is the Righteousness, which
is imputed to us; but we are justified by Christ's blood, Romans 5.9. we are made
righteous by his obedience, Romans 5.19. these therefore are imputed to us for
Righteousness: It is not Faith in it self is our Righteousness, but its Object,
the Blood and Obedience of Christ. Another famous place we have, Romans 5. there
Adam and Christ are set forth as two Roots; Adam conveying to the Branches,
naturally in him, Sin and Death; and Christ conveying to the Branches,
spiritually in him, Righteousness and Life: As by the offense of one judgment
came upon all to condemnation, so by the righteousness of one the free gift
came upon all men unto justification of life: As by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous,
ver. 18, 19. Here the Apostle speaks of Justification; Justification of Life is
opposed to condemnation; Christ's Righteousness is called (...), because it
has a virtue in it to justify others, and is opposed to Adam's Transgression,
which had a power to involve others in condemnation: By the obedience of Christ
we are made, or (as the Greek word (...) implies) constituted righteous: And
how can Christ's Obedience being not inherent in us, make us righteous? This, I
confess, is above Philosophy, but the Apostle clears it: Adam's Transgression
was not inherently ours, yet was it imputed to us to Condemnation; in the same
manner Christ's Obedience is not inherently ours, yet was it imputed to us to
Justification of Life: Hence St. Bernard expostulates thus; Cur non aliunde
justitia, Epist. 190.
cum aliunde reatus? Alius qui peccatorem constituit, alius qui justificat a
peccato: An peccatum in semine peccatoris, and non justitia in Christi
sanguine? And indeed it would be very strange, that Adam's Sin should be
imputed to us, as the Church has ever acknowledged against Pelagians, and yet
Christ's Righteousness should not be imputed to us. Another place I shall
instance in, is that, Romans 8.3, 4. What the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us: Unto which I shall also add that other, Romans
10.4. Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes. The (...), the Righteousness of the Law, is a pure and spotless
Perfection, the least defect makes a breach upon it, and ushers in a Curse: The
chief and primary End of the Law was absolute Obedience, and how is the
Righteousness of the Law fulfilled or its great End attained? Our inherent
Graces can no more reach it, than defect can reach perfection, or a spotted
Face, absolute Beauty: Neither does the Apostle say, that the Righteousness of
the Law is fulfilled, (...), by us, but (...), in us, it is not our own work;
but in the Righteousness of Christ the Law has its end and completion, and
when that Righteousness is made over to us by Imputation, then the Law may be
said to be fulfilled in us. The Apostle, Romans 5.18. says, (...), By the
Righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to justification of life:
Here we have a (...) in Christ answering to that in the Law, and, that being
ours by imputation, the Law is fulfilled in us. St. Chrysostom putting the
question on that place, Romans 8. (...); What is the Righteousness? What would
the Law have? And answering himself, (...), That we should be without sin,
adds, (...), This therefore is performed for us by Christ. The last place I
shall quote is that, Ephesians. 1.6. He has made us accepted in the Beloved: Where
we may observe, that we are not accepted in our selves, in our inherent
Righteousness, but in Christ the beloved; in his perfect Righteousness, which
becomes ours by Imputation. Thus far I have asserted Imputed Righteousness by
Scripture. I shall now add some Reasons to prove it. And

1. God the righteous Judge proceeds judicially in Justification, his judgment
is according to truth, Romans 2. 2. he esteems no man righteous which is not
such, nor does he account an imperfect Righteousness to be a perfect one, such
as justifies before him: Hence it appears, that our inherent Graces, because
imperfect, cannot be our Righteousness or the matter of our Justification; and
what then shall we do? How may we be justified before him? Must not the
perfect Righteousness of Christ come in, and, to make it ours, a divine
Imputation! No other expedient can be thought of, because there must be a
Righteousness, and a perfect one to justify us, If any reply, That in and
through Christ, our inherent Graces, though imperfect, are accepted of God in
the room of a perfect Righteousness, I answer, God is merciful, but his Mercy
never clashes with his Truth, which calls for a perfect Righteousness; He
accepts of our Graces, but they must pass (as St. Austin says of our Life) sub
venia, under pardon, and under the Wings of Christ; he accepts them, but not as
the Matter of our Justification, nor in the room of Christ's perfect
Righteousness: Justification of Life comes (...), by one righteousness, as that
place may be read, Romans 5.18. and that one only Righteousness is the perfect
Obedience of Christ, no other Righteousness may take away its Crown. But
further, should God accept of an imperfect Righteousness in Justification, some
I fear might ask, why he could not abate a little more, and accept of a
No-righteousness? why he could not pardon and justify wilful and impenitent
sinners? which the impure Socinus himself will not allow of? yet, if the true
and holy one might decline from a perfect Righteousness in Justification, what
may not men imagine or presume upon?

2. God has set down in the Gospel his own Way and Method of Justification.
The Apostle, Romans 3.28, 30. having drawn his Conclusion up, That a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law, that Circumcision and
Uncircumcision are justified in one and the same way of Faith, adds ver. 31. Do
we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid! yea, we establish the Law,
(...), we make the Law to stand in its firmness and perfection: That God might
justify poor sinners returning and believing, he does not abrogate the Law,
and so accept of their imperfect Grace in the room of that perfect
Righteousness, which the Law calls for; but he introduces the perfect
Righteousness of a Mediator and imputes it to Believers, and so stablishes the
Law, and justifies in a way completive and perfective of it: Hence Christ is
said to be the End of the Law, and the Law is said to be fulfilled in us: The
Obedience of Christ answers the Law in every point, and makes the old Promise (
Do this and live) dead through our Impotency, spring and bud again with life.
Here the infinite Wisdom of God shows forth it self, that as all the Types and
Shadows of the Law, which were but Temporaries, were perfected in Christ the
true Substance; so all Moral Commands, which are of an immortal Goodness, were
completed in his Righteousness; it pleased God through the perfect
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, to justify; that being a way perfective
of the Law: neither may any man presume to contradict his Method.

3. A man in Justification is presumed to stand at God's Bar, and to answer to
somewhat; and what must he answer to, to the Gospel only, or to the Law also?
If to the Gospel only, I confess Faith answers to the Terms of it; but mean
while all the Pagans in the World must be in a justified State: They as well as
others are only to answer to the Gospel, and to that, because unreveiled, they
need make no answer at all; and having nothing to make answer unto, they must
needs be in a justified condition: And mean while also, all true Believers must
be in a state of Perfection, the defects of their Graces must be no sins; for
the truth of Grace in them answers to the Terms of the Gospel, and to more than
these they are not to answer: But if in Justification a man be to answer to the
Law also, nothing less than the perfect Righteousness of Christ (and that made
his by Imputation) can possibly serve his turn; nothing else is an answer to
the pure perfect Law, nothing else can stand before the divine Tribunal of
Heaven: Hence the Reverend Bishop Andrews says, with respect to that Name (
Jehovah our righteousness) we may say, Esto justitia, Sermon of Justif. in
Christ's Name.
and fac justitiam; esto justitia, and intra in judicium cum servo tuo: With
this Righteousness, with this Name, we may without fear appear before the King
executing Justice. If any here reply, we are Christians, the Moral Law
delivered by Moses obliges not us, I answer, I conceive it obliges all
Christians, the Scripture urges it upon them: St. Paul presses the Romans,
though no Jews, to love, as the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.8, 9. and the
Ephesians, though no Jews, to honor their parents, because it is a commandment
with promise, Ephesians. 6.2. St. James in his Epistle, which is general to Gentiles
as well as Jews, would have them fulfill the Royal Law, according to the
Scriptures, Jam. 2.8. The Matter of the Moral Law is perpetual, and why should
God put a temporary obligation upon it? If the Moral Law bind us not, then all
the excellent Morals in the Prophets, (which are but as so many Commentaries on
the Moral Law) do not belong unto us; and what a door will this open to
overthrow the Old Testament? I conceive therefore the Moral Law delivered by
Moses obliges us Christians, and I take it that our Church is of the same mind;
for I am sure she is too wise to command us to Echo to an abrogated Law in
such a devotional Prayer as that, Lord, have mercy upon us, incline our hearts
to keep this Law: But, however this opinion be touching the Moral Law as
Mosaical, without doubt, whatsoever is Moral. Natural in it, whatsoever is the
pure Primitive Law of Nature must reach unto all, and bind all, all must answer
to it; and, because it calls for finless Perfection, nothing can answer it but
the perfect righteousness of Christ, and that made ours by Imputation.

4. It is evident that the Passive Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us; In
Scripture the blood of Christ justifies us. Romans 5.9. purges the corjcience.
Heb. 9.14. cleanses us from all sin. 1, Joh. 1.7. washes us from our sins.
Revel. 1.5. And how can it do these great things for us, unless it be applied
and made ours in particular^ or how can it be made ours but by a particular
Imputation? sanguis Christi non haeret in nobis; it is not subjectively in us,
but what ever it does for us in Justification, it does as imputed to us; Hence
Christ is called a propitiation through faith in his blood. Romans 2.25. Faith
receives the atoning Blood, and God imputes it: If there had been no first
fundamental Imputation of that Blood to us, it could not have been said that
Christ dyed for us more than for Devils: That Blood shed could not have
rendered us pardonable or justifiable upon Gospell-terms: And if there be not
an after particular Imputation of that Blood to us upon believing, it cannot be
said actually to justify and wash us from our sins: As shed for us it makes us
pardonable and justifiable but no more, till there be a particular imputation:
Without this it does not actually justify and wash us, because it is not
particularly applied and made ours. Should we be justified or pardoned without
this Imputation, we should be justified or pardoned without that Blood made
ours, and by consequence without a (...) or Satisfaction made ours in
particular; that Satisfaction without this Imputation being only in common to
all pardoned or unpardoned, and particularly applied to none. Bellarmine
himself confesses the Imputation of Christ's Passive Obedience: Solus Christus
(says he) pro peccatis nostris satisfecit, D. Justifi^^ (...)
and illa satisfactio nobis donatur, and applicatur, and nostra reputatur, cum
Deo reconciliamur and justificamur: And why he might not as well have allowed
the Imputation of the Active Obedience, I see not; save only because he would
leave for our inherent Graces a room in Justification: But because he allows
not the Imputation of the Active Obedience, Bishop Andrews is bold to tell him,
Sermon of J^stisie
That he spoils Christ of one half of his Name, that is, of that Name, Jehovah
our Righteousness: And withal the Bishop urges thus against the Papists; By
what proportion do they proceed? They cannot counterpoise an infinite sin but
with an infinite Satisfaction, and think they can weigh down a reward every way
as infinite, with a Merit (to say the least) surely not infinite: Why should
there be a recessary use of Christ's death for the one, and not an use f^^^ as
necessary for the Oblation of his Life for the other? And again he says, This
nipping at the Name of Christ is for no other reason, but that we may have some
honor our selves out of our Righteousness: Hence Bellarmine says, Magis
honorificum est habere aliquid ex merito: Rather than they will lose their
honor, Christ must part with a piece of his Name. Thus that Reverend Man. Let
us therefore confess that all Christ's Righteousness Active as well as Passive
is made ours by Imputation: His Obedience, like his seamless Coat, all woven
together of Love and Philanthropy, from his first breath of Holiness on Earth
to the last gasp upon the Cross, should not be rent or divided, but preserved
entire for our Justification and Salvation.

5. When we are justified before God, it must be by a Righteousness, either
that of inherent Grace, or that of Christ imputed to us; We are not justified
by the first, our inherent Graces have all their spots and wrinkles of
imperfection; how faultring is our Faith! How fluctuating our Hope! How cold
our Charity! How much is there wanting of what ought to be in every one of
them! All of them are but in part, and as it were in their first Lineaments,
none of them in plenitude or full measure answering to the Law; they dwell not
alone; but alas! there is a sad Inmate of Corruption, a body of Sin dwelling
under the same roof, so that the purest actions of the Saints on earth come
forth ex laeso Principio, out of an Heart sanctified but in part, and in their
egress from thence gather a taint and tincture from the indwelling sin:
Quotidie stillamus super telam justitiae nostrae saniem concupiscentiae
nostrae, says one, Our concupscence like putrid matter is ever dropping upon
the web of our weak little holiness; If we walk not post concupiscentias, it is
very well; Non concupisces, which is a greater thing, we cannot reach in this
Vale of sins and sorrows; still the Flesh will be lusting, and Corruption
bubling up in the heart; and can we think that such imperfect Graces should be
the Matter of our Justification? Again, we have contracted many Guilts, and
every even the Least of them, have a kind of Infinity in them, because against
an infinite Majesty; and can our inherent Graces; which are but finite things,
ever expiate or blot out those guilts? No surely, they cannot cover their own
spots and blemishes, but must pray in aid from the Grace and Righteousness of
Christ to have them done away; and is it imaginable that those Graces, which
want a pardon and covering for their own Defects, should ever be able to stand
before God and justify us at his Bar? Who? were is the Saint in Scripture that
ever durst stand before God in his own inherent Righteousness? Job. though
perfect, would not know his own soul, Job. 9, 21. David though a man after Gods
own heart, would not have him mark iniquities, Psalm. 130.3. Daniel, though a
man of desires, prays, not for his own Righteousness, but for Gods great
Mercies, Dan. 9.28. Look over the posture of all Saints in Scripture, you find
them not standing upon their own bottom, but in a sense of their wants,
breathing after Holiness, pressing on toward perfection, flying to a
Mercy-seat, and (as it is expressed, Hebr. 12.2.) (...), looking off from
themselves unto Jesus the author and finisher of their faith, in whom alone
perfect Righteousness is to be found. Now if, as appears, Justification be not
by inherent Righteousness, then it must be by imputed, according to that of St.
Bernard touching fallen Man, Assignata est ei justitia aliena, qui caruit sua.

Unto what has been said, I shall add a few Testimonies out of the Fathers: Ad
Diag
(...)! What other thing could cover our sins, but Christ's Righteousness? In
whom could we lawless and ungodly be justified, but in the only Son of God! Oh
sweet exchange! Thus Justin Martyr. The fulfilling of the Law by Christ the
First Fruits, (...), was to be imputed to the whole lump; so Athanasius. Christ
having translated the filthiness of my sins to himself, has made me partaker
of his purity, (...), communicating unto me his own beauty; so Greg. Nyssen.
Non habeo unde me jactem, De Jacob. and ^it. Beat. lib. 1. cap. 6.
gloriabor in Christo; non gloriabor quia justus sum, sed quia redemptus sum;
non quia vacuus peccati, sed quia remissa peccata; thus St. Ambrose. God sent
his Son, that, assuming our flesh and obeying his Father in all things, (...),
that he might justify the Nature of Man in himself; so St. Cyril of
Alexandria. (...), If thou believe on Christ, thou have fulfilled the Law,
and more than it commanded; thou have now received (...), a greater
Righteousness, Hom. in ^om. 10
that is, in Christ the end of the Law; So St. Chrysostom. Domine, memorabor
justitiae tuae solius, ipsa enim et mea; nempe factus es mihi tu justitia a
Deo: Sup Cant Ser. 61.
numquid mihi verendum, ne non una ambobus sufficiat! Non est pallium breve,
quod non possit operire duos; Justitia tua in eternum me and te pariter
operiet, quia largiter larga and eterna Justitia; thus St. Bernard. Many other
Passages might be quoted out of the Fathers, but this Taste may suffice: This
divine Truth touching imputed Righteousness, such is its Heavenly Oriency, has
extorted a confession even from its enemies; The very Schoolmen themselves, as
Bishop Andrews has observed, whatever they are in their Quodlibets and
Comments on the Sentences, yet in their Soliloquies and devotional Meditations
acknowledge Jehovah justitiae nostra, Cardinal Contarenus says, Ego prorsus
existimo, pie and Christian dici, quod debeamus niti tanquam re stabili
justitia Christi nobis donata; non autem sanctitate and gratia nobis inherente.
And Bellarmine himself confesses, Propter incer^itudinem propriae justitiae,
and periculum inanis gloriae, ^^^just, (...) cap. 7.
tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericardia and benignitate
reponere. And now having in short asserted this great Truth, I shall attend the
Author.

To begin with that famous place, Mr. Sherlock
Jer. 23.6. where Christ is called expressly, the Lord our righteousness: In his
days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: And this is the name
whereby he shall be called, the Lord our righteousness; a very express place to
prove, that Christ is our righteousness, as these men expound it; that the
righteousness of Christ is imputed to us: But is there no other possible sense
to be made of this phrase? Righteousness in Scripture is a word of a very large
use; sometimes it signifies no more than mercy, kindness and beneficence, and
so the Lord our righteousness is the Lord, who does good to us, who is our
Savior and Deliverer; which is very agreeable to the reason of this name; that
in his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel dwell safely; and righteousness
signifies that part of justice, which consists in relieving the injured and
oppressed: Thus David speaks: Hear me, O Lord, of my righteousness, Psalm. 4.
Thus Isai. 54, 17. Their righteousness is of me, says the Lord, which is a
parallel expression, to the Lord our righteousness, and signifies no more than
that God will avenge their cause, and deliver them from their enemies, the like
we have, Isai. 45.24. In the Lord have I righteousness and strength; that is,
the Lord the righteous judge will deliver them from their enemies, which agrees
with that promise, verse. 14. Thou shall be far from oppression; and Isai.
61.10. He has clothed me with the garments of Salvation, he has covered me
with the robe of righteousness. This sounds like imputed righteousness; but it
signifies the great deliverances God promised to Israel in the former verses,
which should make them as glorious as a splendid garment would.

The Lord our righteousness is a very illustrious Name of Christ: Answer.
Bishop Andrews observes the word, Jehovah; Fl (says he) is communicated to
Angels; their names end in it, as Michael, Gabriel, Jah is communicated to
Saints, their names end in it, Isaiah, Jeremiah: But here is Jehovah to
certify us, that it is not the righteousness of Saints, nor of Angels that
will serve the turn, but the righteousness of God, very God: And in his after
discourse upon that name, he fairly builds on it the imputation of Christ's
active and passive righteousness; but our Author has no mind to it. The
Socinians, who play in Homonymies, familiarly enervate the force of a word in
one Text, by the different signification of it in another: Tell them that
Christ is called God; they will say, so are creatures too; tell them of a
(...), they will reply, Moses was a (...), Acts 7.35. I will not say that our
Author imitates them, but he turns himself about, and is much concerned for
another interpretation of Christ's name: Is there no other possible sense to be
made of this phrase? Righteousness sometimes signifies mercy; and so the Lord
our righteousness, is the Lord that does good to us: Thus the Author,
righteousness in some places signifies mercy: Very well, but where do we meet
with Jehovah our mercy? Or, because it signifies so in some Texts, must it do
so in all? The question is, what it signifies in this place; Christ borrows not
his Name from temporal blessings: no, that is too low: The Salvation their
spoken of is a spiritual and eternal one, that Salvation is procured by the
active and passive righteousness of Christ, that righteousness is made ours by
imputation. Hence Christ is called the Lord our righteousness: The Name of
Christ must import somewhat peculiar to himself, to do good to us is common to
the whole Trinity: but the active and passive righteousness of Christ is
peculiar to himself, that therefore is imported in this Name: This Name seems
to be attributed to the Church, Jer. 33.16. because the Church is mystically
united to Christ, in whom this perfect righteousness is; and this
righteousness, which is in Christ, becomes the Churches by imputation; Observe,
this name is not given to all men, but to believers, as pointing out not common
favors, but that righteousness of God, which is upon those that believe: The
Kingdom of Christ is a spiritual Kingdom, and the Salvation must be suitable to
it: And this great Name, the Lord our righteousness, is the foundation of both:
As to the places quoted out of Isaiah by the Author, that Isai. 54. may
possibly speak of a vindication, or justification against their enemies, that
Isai. 45.24, 25. In the Lord have I righteousness and strength; in the Lord
shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory; speaks of a
justification by Faith in Christ, that robe of righteousness, Isai. 61. may be
taken for Christ's Rrighteousness, which is the foundation of Salvation; but
however these be taken, that first quoted place, Jer. 23.6. plainly imports
imputed righteousness.

It is very observable, Mr. Sherlock.
that in all the histories of the Gospel, which gives us an account of our
Saviors Sermons, and parables; whereby he instructed the people in all
necessary truths, he makes no mention at all of imputed righteousness: but
exacts from them a righteousness of their own, if they would find mercy with
God: Now it is very strange, (if imputed righteousness be the great
Gospel-mystery) that our Savior should not once mention it, nor warn his
hearers to beware of tructing in their own righteousness: but that instead of
this he should severely enjoin them the practice of an universal righteousness,
as the only thing that pleases God, and severely threaten those, who continue
in any sin, who break the least of his commandments, that they shall not enter
heaven: This to me is a very great prejudice against such notions, as are set
up for the fundamentals of Christianity, when there is not the least footsteps
of them to be seen in the Gospel of our Savior: Did not our Savior instruct
his hearers in all things necessary to Salvation? Or have the Evangelists given
us an imperfect account of our Saviors doctrine, and omitted so essential a
part of it, as imputation of his Righteousness? Choose which side you please,
and the consequence is bad; if the first, then Christ was not faithful in his
prophetical Office; If the latter, you overthrow the credit of the Gospel and
by both destroy the foundation of our Faith: Our Saviors Sermons were to be
the rule of the Apostles, had the Apostles taught any thing, as necessary to
Salvation, which our Savior had not taught, especially any thing that did so
plainly contradict the Doctrine of our Savior, as this imputed righteousness
does, it would very much have weakened their credit with me; for this had been
to preach another Gospel than our Savior did, and we have St. Paul 's command
to reject all such Preachers; though they were Apostles, or an Angel from
heaven, Gal. 1.8, 9.

And is there no mention at all in the Gospel of imputed Righteousness? Answer.
Are there no footsteps of it? Yes surely, our Savior tells us, Seek ye first
the kingdom of God (...), his righteousness, that is, Gods, Matthew. 6.33.
Inherent Graces are in Scripture called our own; but here we have Gods
Righteousness, which answers to Jehovah our righteousness in the Prophet, and
the righteousness of God in the Epistles. Now the Righteousness of God, that is
of Christ, as before has been noted, is made ours only by Imputation; but
where does Christ speak of his own Righteousness? See Math. 3.15. Thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, says he; he fulfilled all
righteousness, but was it for himself or for us? Not for himself, his humane
Nature was no sooner assumed into his divine Person, but it had a Title to
Heaven, and might have asended up thither; it was for us therefore: Hence the
Apostle says expressly, That he was made under the Law to redeem us, Gal. 4.4.
What he did as under the Law was for us; and such was all his righteousness,
and therefore that was for us; and what was for us must be applicable to us,
and this cannot be without an imputation. It is said that, Christ gave his
life. (...), a price or ransom for, or instead of many, Math. 20.28. Now a
Ransom or Satisfaction implies imputation, and (...) properly imports a
Subrogation or Substitution of one in the room of another: Christ died in our
room and satisfied for us; this Satisfaction is made ours particularly by
imputation, Hear the French Divines; Hanc satisfactionem loco nostro praestitam
a Christo nobis imputari, negari non potest, quis neget solutam a Fidejussore
pecuniam imputari Debitori? exhibitam a Vade satifactionem imputari ei cujus
nomine facta est? Ea igitur Christi satisfactio, nobis ex gratia Dei Patris
imputata atque donata, illa demum justitia est, qua justificamur in Dei
judicio. We see therefore in the Gospel Satisfaction owned, and that
necessarily infers Imputation: Christ's blood was shed for many for the remssion
of Sins, as himself tells us, Matthew. 26.28. Now it could not be shed for us
without the first fundamental Imputation; neither can it be made ours to
justify us without an after particular Imputation; For his Blood, when it
cleanses away our sins, is not ours by Inhesion, therefore if it be at all ours
to do that great Work, it must be so by Imputation. Remission of sins was to
be preached in his name, Luke 24.47. and In his name shall the Gentiles trust.
Math. 12.21. This Name includes his Blood and Righteousness and these are made
ours by Imputation. If any reply, plainer proof is desired, I answer; Several
things are to be considered by us; There is no one place in the Gospels to
maintain Justification by our own Righteousness, or if there were, I shall be
bold to say, that all the Protestant Churches in the World are bound to yield
the Cause in this point to their Adversaries the Papists. Obedience to Gods
Commandments is indeed the way to heaven, but it is no where made an
ingredient into our Justification. That place, Math. 5.19. quoted by the
Author, that Whosoever shall break one of the Least Commandments shall be the
Least in the Kingdom of Heaven, if taken in rigore juris; were enough to shut
all men out of heaven; it imports therefore, that sincere Obedience is
necessary to those who will go thither: Again, the Evangelicall Light brake out
as it pleased the Father of Lights, gradually and successively. In Math. 16.
Peter makes that famous Confession, Thou art Christ, and was by Christ called,
Blessed, for it; and a little after Peter, as ignorant of Christ's Passion,
would have diverted him from it, and for that was called, Satan: Christ's
Passion was sure a most necessary thing, vet he knew it not. Further, our
Savior tells the Apostles, that It was expedient for them, that he should go
away; why so? Then the spirit should come, which should guide them into all
truth, which should glorify Christ, which should take of Christ's, and should
show it unto them, Joh. 16.7, 13, 14, 15. Observe, the Spirit was to open and
display the things of Christ; amongst others, his blood and righteousness in
their glory, and true use to be made ours; and now it is no wonder at all, if
imputed Righteousness be more fully laid down in the Epistles, than in the
Sermons of our Savior Christ himself; the wisdom of heaven reserved that
fuller light, till the descent of the holy Ghost. Moreover, we must distinguish
between the necessity of Christ's imputed righteousness in it self, and the
necessity of the knowledge of it: Imputed Righteousness since the fall has
ever been necessary in it self; no man was ever justisied without Christ's
blood applied to him, and that application is made upon believing by way of
imputation; but the knowledge of it has been more or less necessary, as the
Evangelical light has more or less reveiled it. St. Peter at that time of his
confession was no doubt justified by Christ's blood; and yet he then had not
the knowledge of his passion. Lastly, it appears plainly, that our Savior
warned his hearers not to trust in their own Righteousness: Thus the Pharisee
and the Publican are in the Parable set forth to those that trusted in
themselves, that they were righteous, Luke 18.19. The Pharisee boasts of his
Justice, Purity, Sanctity: The Publican cries out of his sins, and begs for
mercy; and as our Savior tells us, went away jestified rather than the other:
So true is that of Prosper, Melior est in malis factis humilis confessio, quam
in bonis superbagloriatio: To conclude, I hope by these things it appears, that
neither our Savior was unfaithful in his prophetical Office; nor the
Evangelists in giving us an account of our Saviors Doctrine.

It is worth the observing, Mr. Sherlock.
that in all the New Testament there is no such expression as the Righteousness
of Christ, or the imputation of Christ's Righteousness; we there only find
(...) righteousness of God, and the righteousness of Faith, and the
righteousness of God, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ; which is (...)
strange: Did the whole Mystery of the Gospel consist in the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, that neither Christ nor his Apostles should once tell
us so in express terms.

This is Bellarmine's own Argument, Answer.
Hactenus nullum omnino locum invenire potuerunt, De just. l. 2. cap. 7.
ubi legeretur Christi justitiam nobis imputari ad justitiam: But I hope our
Author will not follow the sound and tinkling of words; what if it be not in
Scripture syllabically and literally? May it not suffice to be there in Sense
and just Consequence? Ratio divina non in superficie est, sed in medulla. The
Author says, That there is no such Expression, as the Righteousness of Christ;
but St. Peter tells us of the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, 2. Pet. 11, 1- Again he says That there is no such Expression, as the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: But St. Paul tells us, That we are made
righteous by Christ's obedience, Romans 5.19. But I will say no more to this
Objection. because I have before proved Imputed Righteousness by Scripture.

That phrase, Mr. Sherlock.
the Righteousness of God, sometimes signifies his Justice Veracity or
Goodness, Romans 3.5. but most commonly in the new Testament it signifies that
Righteousness which God approves, and commands and which he will accept for the
Justification of a sinner, which is contained in the Terms of the Gospel, Rom,
1.17. For therein is the Righteousness of God reveiled: Thus it is called the
Righteousness of God, Math. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness; which is the same with the righteousness of his Kingdom. Now
the Kingdom of God signifies the State of the Gospel, and the Righteousness of
God or of his Kingdom, that Righteousness which the Gospel prescribes, which is
contained in the Sermons and Parables of Christ, and consists in a sincere and
universal Obedience to the Commands of God. Answer.


The Righteousness of God is indeed that which he approves and accepts of in
Justification, but not that which he commands us to do; no then we should not
be justified by Christ's blood, Romans 5.9. nor made righteous by his obedience,
Romans 5.19. then the Apostle would not tell us of a righteousness imputed
without works, Romans 4.6. Neither would he as he does in that place, exclude the
Works of converted Abraham from Justification; I say, of converted Abraham; for
those words ( Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness, Romans 4.3.) were spoken of Abraham diverse years after his
Conversion. as Dr. Ward has observed: Our Obedience is an Evidence of our
Justification, (...) 22.
but till it can expiate sin, and reach the top and apex of the pure Law, it
cannot be the Matter of our Righteousness before God. Our Church places good
Works after Justification, and most exellently states Justification in three
things; Upon Gods part his great mercy and grace; (...) of Salvation.
upon Christ's part Justice that is, the satisfaction of Gods Justice, or the
price of our Redemption by the offering of his Body and shedding of his Blood,
with fulfilling of the Law perfectly and thoroughly; and upon our part true and
lively Faith in the Merits of Jesus Christ, which is not ours but by God's
working in us: Thus our Church, leaving no room at all for Obedience In the
point of Justification.

The Righteousness of God (that which he commands and rewards) is the
Righteousness of Faith, Mr. Sherlock.
or Righteousness by the Faith of Christ: Now Faith in Christ, is often ujed
objectively for the Gospel of Christ, which is the Object of our Faith; and so
the Righteousness of Faith, or by the Faith of Christ, is that Righteousness
which the Gospel commands: Thus Acts. 24. Felix sent for Paul, and heard him
concerning the Faith of Christ, that is, concerning righteousness, temperance
and the judgment to come, verse. 25. which are the principal Matters of the
Gospel; Thus obedience to the Faith, is obedience to the Gospel, Romans 1.5. In
this sense Faith and Works are opposed in St. Paul's Epistles: the Dispute in
the Epistle to the Romans is, Whether we must be justified by the Law of Moses,
or by the faith of Christ, that is, whether the observation of all the external
Rites and Ceremonies, and an external Conformity of our Actions to the moral
Precepts of it will justify a man before God, or that sincere universal
Obedience, which the Gospel of Christ requires, which transformes our Minds
into the likeness of God. and makes us new creatures? And that this
Righteousness of Faith, and this alone can recommend us to God, the Apostle
proves from the Example of Abraham, in the 4. Chapter. who was accounted
righteous for the sake of his sincere and steadfast belief of Gods Promises;
verse. 3. Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness:
And this, while he was uncircumcised, which is a convincing argument against
the Jews, that Circumciston, and the observation of the Law of Moses, is not
necessary to justification, because Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and
pattern for our justification, was justified without it.

The Righteousness of God, Answer.
is the Righteousness of Christ: And this is called the Righteousness of God,
because he accepts it, and imputes it to us: And a Righteousness through the
Faith of Christ, because Faith receives it: The Righteousness of God is not
Faith it self, but a righteousness through the faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9.
Faith, I confess, is sometimes put for the Gospel; but the question is not what
it is in other places, but what in those which speak of the Righteousness of
God: Mark that place, Romans 1.17. therein, that is, in the Gospel, is the
righteousness of God reveiled from faith to faith. Here Faith is not put for
the Gospel; for then the Righteousness of God should be reveiled from Gospel to
Gospel: Nay, here we have the Gospel, the Righteousness of God and Faith, all
set down as distinct things: And in other Scriptures, we have the Grace of
Faith mentioned with the Righteousness of God, because Faith receives that
Righteousness: The Moral Law of Moses required not only external conformity;
but internal Sanctity, and that in all perfection; the Apostle in the fourth
Chapter to the Romans, excludes not only external observations; but the works
of converted Abraham from justification; Faith is accounted for Righteousness,
not properly absolutely in it self, but relatively with respect to its object
Jesus Christ, as I have before proved.

Abraham's faith was not a faith in Christ, Mr. Sherlock
but Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for Righeousness: Christ
indeed was the material Object of Abraham's Faith; that is, he believed that
promise, which God made of sending Christ into the world; upon which account
our Savior tells the Jews: Your father Abraham rejoyed to see my day, and he
saw it, and was glad, Joh. 8.56. But no man could believe in Christ till he
came; that is, could not believe any thing upon his Authority, which is the
true Notion of believing in him. Some men make work with Abraham 's Faith, as
if it were a fiducial reliance or recumbency on Christ for Salvation; upon
which the Righteousness of Christ, apprehended by Faith, was imputed to him:
But how should Abraham learn this great Mystery from that general and obscure
promise; In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; which is
all that was ever reveiled to Abraham concerning Christ; this is such a train
of thoughts from: In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; to
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as Mr. Hobs himself could never have
hit on: Is there no possible way for God to bless the world, but by imputation
of Christ's Righteousness? Or is there a natural connection between this
blessing and imputed Righteousness, that we cannot understand the one without
the other? before Abraham could come to the knowledge of imputed Righteousness,
he must distinctly know, first, that the blessings here meant are spiritual,
pardon and eternal life: The whole Jewish Nation for many ages, who had more
promises concering Christ, than this was, expected only a temporal Prince; and
therefore they were prejudiced at the mean appearance of Christ. Secondly, That
Christ was to dye for the sins of the World: And this the Apostles themselves
did not understand till after Christ's Resurrection. Thirdly, That he fulfilled
all Righteousness for us. Fourthly, That great mystery of the Incarnation of
the Son of God, without which it is impossible to understand the virtue of his
Sacrifice and Righteousness. Fifthly, That intimate oneness and conjunction
between Christ and his Church, which is a riddle not understood to this day.
Sixthly, The Nature of Faith, rolling the soul on Christ for Salvation; and
then possibly he might understand this great mystery of imputed Righteousness;
and all this must be learned from that general promise: In thy seed shall all
Nations be blessed.

Abraham believed the promise of the Messiah; Answer.
but his Faith was not a Faith in Christ: Why so? no man could believe in
Christ till he came; that is, he could not believe upon his Authority: But
surely Christ was a Prophet under the Old Testament, his Spirit, and surely
then his Authority too was in the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.11. And so it was in the
Promise to Abraham: Besides, true Faith in Scripture imports a reliance or
fiducial recumbency; so (...) and (...), in the Old Testament signifies; and to
these, (as Dr. Ward proves by many parailels) answers (...), in the new, where
also we often find that phrase, (...) (...), which is a phrase totally the holy
Spirits, found in no humane Author; I mean not for the Object, but the form of
speaking, (...), is not any where but in Scripture (as Dr. Ward observes) which
surely must import a reliance, or fiducial recumbency. According to this notion
of Faith, I conceive Abraham rested on, or trusted in the Messiah for
Salvation; he being the Messiah, he could not but expect some great thing from
him; and what was it, Temporals or Spirituals? Surely not Temporals, his Faith
was gone beyond the Line of this World, even as far as the City which has
foundations in another, Heb. 11.10. And how did he think to come thither, but
by the Messiah? He did not speak to God, Genesis 18. trusting in his own
righteousness; But in the lowest posture of humility: much less did he think to
enter Heaven upon the account of his own worthiness; he was a man of great
Faith, and the Father of the faithful: The Promises of the Messiah were
Spiritual Ones, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, Genesis 3.15.
that is, Christ should dissolve the works of the Devil, and erect his own
Kingdom of Grace and Glory; In thy seed shall all nations be blessed, Genesis
22.18. That is, with all spiritual and eternal blessings in Christ. It is not
imaginable; that God should suffer the Faith of so great a Believer as Abraham,
to hang in the thickets of carnal things, when he had such spiritual Promises
before his eyes; our Savior says, Abraham saw his day and rejoiced, Joh.
8.56. He saw the day of his Incarnation; and as some, the day of his Passion:
How far God carried the eyes of his Faith, I know not; however he saw so much,
as put him into those joys and triumphs of Faith, which pointed beyond this
World to that Salvation, which is the end and center of Faith: To me it
suffices to say, that Abraham rested upon Christ for Salvation, and then
Christ's Righteousness, though unknown to Abraham, was imputed to him: The
Author says, That, from in thy seed shall all nations be blessed, to imputed
righteousness, is a train of thoughts beyond Mr. Hobs, and yet ( Abraham
discerning the Messiah in that Promise) it may be absolved in two short words,
that the Messiah shall merit Spiritual Blessings for us, and that that merit
shall be applied to us; there being no other way of applying of what is
another, but by Faith on our part, and Imputation on Gods: The Author ask's
the question, Is there no possible way for God to bless the world, but by
imputed Righteousness? I answer, had not Christ dyed for us, which involves an
imputation, nothing of blessing could have been expected, the wrath of God
would no more have spared us, than it did lapsed Angels: The Jews about
Christ's coming thought only of a temporal Messiah; the very Apostles for a
time thought not of Christ's death; but this was because they then lived in the
dregs and darkness of the Jewish Church. I suppose in former ages the Jews had
another manner of Prospect of Christ, and above others Abraham, whose Faith
stands in Scripture, with a more than ordinary crown on it, probably had so.

Now if you would know what the Faith of Abraham, and if all good men in
ancient times was; Mr. Sherlock.
the Apostle to the Hebrews gives us a full account of it, Heb. 11. that he
discourses there of a justifying Faith; that is, such a Faith as renders men
approved of God, and which he will count for Highteousness, appears from the
tenor of this Chapter, in the second verse he tells us, That by this the
elders obtained a good report; that is, the Fathers were approved and rewarded
by God for the sake of this Faith, as he shows particularly, That Abel obtained
witness, that he was righteous, ver. 4. That Enoch had the testimony, that he
pleased God, ver. 5. That Noah became heir of righteousness, which is by Faith,
ver. 7. Now this justifying Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, (...), A firm and confident expectation of those
things hoped for, and (...), an argument of the being of those things, which we
do not see; Faith is such a firm and steadfast persuasion of the truth of those
things, which are not evident to sense, as makes us confidently hope for them:
the object of Faith must be unseen things, and the nature of it consists in
such a firm assent to those unseen things, as produces some answerable effects
in our lives: This is the general notion of Faith, by which the elders obtained
a good report.

Faith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of things not seen,
Answer.
Heb. 11. This, says Erasmus, is encomium fidei, rather than definitio
Dialectica: However be it, that justifying Faith is here meant; Christ (the
marrow and center of the Covenant) must be included in it; Faith is the
substance of things hoped for; that is, hoped for by virtue of the Promises,
and in a special signal way, by virtue of the prime fundamental promise
touching the Messiah, which (as we see, Genesis 3.15.) was delivered to Adam as an
heavenly treasure, more worth than a world; and by him was no doubt handed down
to his posterity, not merely in the bare words and letters of it (for that
protevangelium, or first Promise of the Gospel was ministerium spiritus) but
with such Divine Commentaries upon it, as the illuminating spirit was pleased
to give in to the heart of believing Adam; Faith, such is its excellent nature,
presentiates and makes to subsist the good things hoped for, in such a lively
manner, as if they were actually at hand, and before our eyes: Nay, as learned
Pareus observes on the place, it makes them subsist, not only speculatively and
assentively in the mind, but fiducially in the heart. Now by Faith in the
Messiah the Elders had their divine Testimony. Abel was righteous before God;
Enoch pleased God; Noah was an heir of Righteousness, all of them were
Justified and accepted in their persons and holy walking: The Author makes
Faith to consist in a firm assent only, without any thing more in the nature of
it: Thus the Romanists: Thus Bellarmine proves it to be only assensum firmum,
(...) certum ad ea omnia quae Deus credendae proponit: And to that purpose,
among others, quotes this Text, Heb. 11. But I cannot find that this will down
with Protestants: Faith is set forth by (...), confidence; (...), a firm
persuasion; (...), a fiducial liberty; (...), a persuasion with full sails;
(...), a fiducial subsistence of things hoped for; which expressions speak more
than a naked assent: Faith receives Christ, puts on Christ, feeds upon Christ,
such an (...), it was to the Fathers in the days of Moses, that they did eat
the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of God, even before his Incarnation,
1 Cor. 10.3, 4. Mere assent cannot do this; Through faith we are justified, and
have peace with God, Romans 5.1. We have our hearts purified, Act. 15.9. We have
the Spirit of all grace, Joh. 7.38. We quench the fiery darts of the Devil,
Ephesians. 6.16. We have a victory over the world, 1 John 5.4. We rejoice in the hope
of the glory of God, Romans 5.2. Nay, not only in the hope of it: but with joy,
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. as if we had a piece of heaven here
below; mere assent cannot reach such admirable effects: Nay, it may be in
wicked men, who have not the least mite of those Graces or Comforts: Our
Savior has excellently expressed the nature of true Faith: Every one which
sees the Son and believes on him, has eternal life, Joh. 6.40. Here are two
acts, the one is (...), to see the Son, to assent that he is the Redeemer of
the World; the other is (...), to believe on him, by fiducial recumbency; by
which, says Bishop Davenant, Dav. Det. 165.
Vitam a vitae font haurimus, and in ipsum quasi totos nos immergimus, We draw
life from the fountain of life, and wholly drown our selves in him; It was well
said of the School-man; Nullus potest justificari, nisi per unionem ad
Christum, prima autem unio ad Christum fit per fidem; None can be justified but
by an union with Christ, and the first union is by faith: Faith does not only
look upon Christ; but it unites to him, and rests on him; It is not a mere
intellectual thing, but as Philip said, Act. 8.37. It is (...), out of the
whole heart, the whole, not a Plece only of the heart is resigned up to Christ
in believing, mere assent therefore is not the all of Faith, but there is
fiducial recumbency in it: Thus our Church, 3. Hom. of Salvation.
The articles of our faith the devils believe, they believe all things written
in the New and Old Testament to be true; and, for all this faith, they be but
devils, remaining still in their damnable estate, lacking the very true
Christian faith; For the right and true Christian faith, is not only to believe
that holy Scripture, and all the Articles of our faith are true; but also to
have a sure trust and confidence in Gods merciful promises to be saved from
everlasting damnation by Christ; whereof does follow a loving heart to obey his
commandments. And again, 1. Hom. of Faith.
our Church sets forth faith to be, a true trust and confidence of the mercy of
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, a trusting in God, committing our selves
wholly unto him, hanging only upon him, and calling upon him: But it may be
said, that the Author places Faith in such a firm assent, as produces some
effects in our lives, and so not in mere assent: To which I answer, according
to our Author: The nature of Faith stands only in assent: Obedience indeed is
an effect of Faith, but it is not Faith it self; it is not an essential
ingredient in the nature of Faith; neither is it indeed the effect of any
Faith, but such an one as is total and genuine; that is, which is assentive and
fiducial also.

The different sorts of Faith result from the different Objects and Motives of
it; Mr. Sherlock
the Apostle takes notice of two kinds of Faith in this Chapter; and Faith in
Christ makes a third, which are all the kinds of Faith the Scripture is
acquainted with: The first we may call a natural Faith; that is, a belief of
the principles of natural Religion, which is founded upon natural
Demonstrations or Moral Arguments, as that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him; Which was the Faith of Abel and Enoch, whereby
they pleased God; for there being no mention made of the Faith of Abel and
Enoch in the Old Testament: The Apostle proves, that they were true believers;
because they had this Testimony, that they pleased God: Now it is impossible to
be sincerely religious, or do any acceptable service to God without the belief
of his being and providence, and care of good men: These are the first
principles of all Religion: And God required no more of those good men, who had
no other particular Revelation of his Will. Secondly, There is a Faith in God,
or a belief of those particular Revelations, which God made to the Fathers of
the Old Testament: Thus Noah believed God, being warned of the deluge; and in
obedience to him, provided an Ark; and this was imputed to him for
Righteousness. Thus Abraham, in obedience to the divine Revelation left his
Country and Father's house, and went into a strange Land: Thus Sarah by
believing the promise of God, received strength to conceive seed, and was
delivered of a child, when she was past age, because she judged him faithful,
who had promised: Thus Abraham, in obedience to God, offered up Isaac, which
was as heroical an act of Faith, as was ever done by man: The like examples we
have of the Faith of Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Moses, etc. Who firmly
believed all the particular Revelations God made to them, and confidently
expected the performance of all his promises; how unlikely soever they appeared
to be: This is that Faith whereby Abraham, and all the good men in these days
were justified, viz. Such a firm belief of the being and providence of God, and
all those particular Revelations God made to them, as made them careful in all
things to please God, and to obey him.

It is the observation of the Learned Dr. Prideaux, Answer.
That in the dark age of the Schoolmen, Paulus cessit Aristoteli, and gratia
naturae: St. Paul was fain to yield to Aristotle, and grace to nature: And I
fear it will be so again, we have here set before our eyes natural Faith: Faith
natural in its believing principle, and natural in its Object; Reason of it
self, and without any elevation of Grace, may, nay, I suppose, must admit the
things of natural Theology, as being within its own Sphere; and shall we call
this faith, justifying faith, which is nature, and nothing but nature?
Justifying Faith, if we believe Scripture, is every way supernatural;
supernatural in its Principle, and supernatural in its Object: Supernatural in
its Principle, it is called, faith of the operation of God, Gal. 2.12. It is
not of our selves, but it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Not a natural gift, but
a gift of mere Grace: unto you it is given to believe, says the Apostle, Phil.
1.29. (...), it is freely graciously given to you to believe, it is (...), a
good grace divinely given. Hence the second Arausican Council, expressly tells
us, that our believing is per infusionem and inspirationem spiritus Sancti,
Can. 6. Nay, the very Council of Trent pronounces an Anathema on those that
say, that a man may believe without the inspiration of the holy Spirit: And
Faith is also supernatural in its Object, it is a thing above the (...), above
mere natural Theology: It is fixed in a God in Covenant, and in his free Grace,
it hangs upon Christ, and his sweet smelling Sacrifice; it embraces the
promises of Grace and Remission, and all these are supernatural only: As in the
Authors Natural Faith, there is nothing but Nature; So in the true justifying
Faith, there is nothing but supernatural Grace: But the Author gives us an
instance of natural Faith in Abel and Enoch, who believed the principles of
natural Religion, who believed that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them
that seek him: And had Abel and Enoch only a natural Faith? Did they not
believe in a Messiah? Was that first precious promise, Genesis 3. Given to be hid
and buried in oblivion? Or was it not handed down to Abel and Enoch? Surely it
was, and they believed in the Messiah: How could they come to God without a
Mediator? No man comes to the Father but by me, says our Savior, Joh. 14.6.
Or how could they be reckoned among those, that (...), seek out God, Heb. 11.6.
Nature may grope after God, but it cannot indeed seek him out, as he is in his
gracious Covenant without a Divine Call and Spirit: Or how could they be
justified without Faith in a Messiah? By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many, Isai. 53.11. To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins,
Act. 10.43. We see, without believing in him, there is no remission, no
pleasing of God. And were Abel and Enoch without a promise; then they were in a
mere Pagan state; and what that is, the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2.12. Having no
hope, and without God in the world; and this because they were without Christ,
and without the covenant of promise; as that place tells us. Now if Abel and
Enoch were without God; then how could they be sincerely Religious, or do him
any true service? And if they were without hope, how could they look upon God
as a rewarder of them that seek him? Indeed, there are some rudera imaginis Dei
in us: A natural man has some obscure notions of God, and his remunerating
goodness, but in the Apostle, when God is said to be a rewarder, it is not to
be taken Philosophice, but Evangelice; that is, that he is a rewarder of
Believers in and through the Messiah; and the Promises of Grace, and eternal
life made in him: Take away the word, and you take away justifying Faith: How
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14. If Abel and
Enoch had only natural Faith, and that justifying, mere Pagans may have the
same, who yet have not the name Jesus, the only name of Salvation, who never
heard of the holy Ghost, the Fountain of all Holiness; who have not the Gospel,
the Chariot of the holy Spirit; who know not what Grace is, in its supernatural
nature, or in its center; the glory of heaven; notwithstanding all this, they
may have justifying Faith: Before the Author told us, That the Gospel is the
fullness of Christ, the principle of a Divine Life, the Wisdom and Power of God;
and yet without this Gospel a man by mere Nature may arrive at justifying
Faith: By these things I hope it appears, that the Faith of Abel and Enoch, was
more than natural, even Faith in the Messiah: Remarkable is that of the second
Arausican Council, Can. 25. Crabbe, 1. tome, 628.
Abel justum, and Noe, and Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and omnem antiquorum
Sanctorum multitudinem, illam praeclaram fidem, quam in ipsorum laudem
praedicat Apostolus Paulus, non per bonum naturae, sed per gratiam Dei credimus
fuisse collatam: You see, they allow no natural Faith: Our Church, reckoning up
Abel, and the rest of the Worthies, Heb. 11. says, They did not only know God
to be the Maker and Governor of the World; 2. Hom. of Faith.
but they had a special confidence and trust, that he would be their God,
although they were not named Christian men; yet was it a Christian Faith that
they had; for they looked for all benefits of God the Father, through the
merits of his Son Jesus Christ, as we now do: And in the eighteenth Article,
our Church says, They are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every
man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes; so that he be
diligent to frame his life according to that Law, and the light of Nature: For
holy Scripture does set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, by which men
must be saved. And what can be more full or zealous than these passages? I
shall only more add the judgment of Bishop Wren; Abelem, qui per propterque
fidem Messiae defunctus est, etiamnum celebrari a nobis Christianis, atque in
Ecclesiae Christi Martyrologiis ( quae (...), rite appellantur, Heb. 12.1.)
locum habere: Thus much touching natural Faith. The second sort of Faith
mentioned by the Author, is of particular Revelations made to Noah, Abraham,
and others, whereby they were justified: Observe, the Author says, That in the
Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, there are mentioned two kinds of Faith; that
is, natural Faith, and Faith of particular Revelations: So that it seems in
this Chapter (which reaches down from Abel to the Maccabees, Nay, I suppose
after them, to the Incarnation of Christ) there is no Faith in Christ at all to
be thought of: But Noah and the rest had not only a Faith of particular
promises, but a Faith in the Messiah too, which was that which made it
justifying, Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day: And that was the joy of
Faith, Joh. 8.56. Jacob tells us of a Shiloh, to whom the gathering of the
people should be, Genesis 49.10. And surely he himself was gathered to him by
Faith. Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasure
in Egypt, Heb. 11.29. And surely he was no stranger to Christ in his Faith: Job
says, I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25. And O how piercing and
appropriative of Christ was his Faith! The Fathers in Moses's time did all eat
the same spiritual meat, and all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank
of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ, 1 Cor.
10.3, 4. And how this feeding on Christ should be without Faith, I know not:
Unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them, says the Apostle, Heb.
4.2. They were (...), Evangelized; they had Christ set before them: And we
believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved even
as they, says St. Peter, Act. 16.11. We shall be saved, (...), according to
the very same manner as they were saved; that is, we and they are both saved by
Faith in Jesus Christ and his Grace. Again, it is to be considered, that the
Sacrifices under the Law were ordained to be as Types, and shadows of Christ,
to make an Atonement for sin (as appears in Leviticus) not that the Sacrifices
themselves were an absolute real Atonement in themselves; but a typical one,
pointing out the only true atoning expiatory Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Now
either God did reveil to the Jews, at least wise to the Believers among them;
the typicalness, the true use and end of those Sacrifices, or not: if he did
reveil it to them, then all true Believers among them did not hang upon the
Shadow, and outward Sacrifice only; but by their Faith did fix upon Christ and
his precious Blood: but if he did not reveil it to them, the Sacrifices, even
of those Believers, must be all miscarriages, nothing but mere blots and
Errata's; they must be offered up not in Faith, but in mistake, in the belief
of an utter falsity; that is, in the belief of that impossible thing, That the
blood of bulls and of goats could take away sin: There must be such a gross
error in modo, a misprision so horrible; that it is not imaginable, that any
one among all the millions of Sacrifices under the Law, could be rightly
offered up, or accepted by God: Such hard intolerable consequences follow this
opinion, that the Ancients had no knowledge of, or Faith in the Messiah: On the
other hand, that they had such a Knowledge and Faith, may be gathered, as from
other things; so from this consideration, that they offered up their Sacrifices
in Faith, as Abel did; that they were graciously accepted of by God in their
offering up those Sacrifices: Hence it is said, that God had respect to Abel
and his offering, consuming it, as is thought, by fire from Heaven; and so
giving a divine Testimony to it. Hence also we find, that when Noah offered
burnt offerings, the Lord did smell a sweet savor, Genesis 8.21. because those
Sacrifices had an aspect upon the sweet Sacrifice of Christ, in which God is
ever well-pleased. Moreover, if the justification of the ancients were, as it
must be, built upon the (...), the death and satisfaction of Christ; then,
unless it were by a Faith in Christ, the death of Christ, one in it self, must
found three ways of justification; one by natural Faith, another by a Faith of
particular promises; and a third by Faith in Christ, which seems very strange
and incongruous: Thus much touching the Ancients Faith in Christ; unto which I
shall only add the Testimony of our Church. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob believed,
and it was imputed to them for righteousness: 2. Hom. of the Passion.
was it imputed to them only? And shall it not be imputed to us also? Yes, if
we have the same Faith as they had, it shall be as truly imputed to us, as it
was to them; for it is one Faith that must save both us and them, even a sure
and steadfast Faith in Christ Jesus.

From hence we learn: Thirdly, Mr. Sherlock.
what Faith in Christ is, which is now imputed to us for righteousness, as
Abraham 's Faith was to him; for to make our Faith in Christ answer to the
Faith of Abraham, and all good men in former ages ( without which the Apostles
argument from Abraham's being justified by Faith is of no force) our Faith in
Christ must signify such a steadfast belief of all those Revelations, which
Christ has made to the world, as governs our lives and actions: Abraham was
justified by believing the Revelations, which God made to him, and we are
justified by believing those Revelations which Christ has made of God's Will
to us; for if by the righteousness of Faith, you understand the righteousness
of Christ apprehended by Faith, and imputed to us; you utterly destroy the
Apostles argument for our justification by Faith; for Abraham and all the good
men of old were not justified by such a Faith as this; they never heard of the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us: Noah was made heir of Righteousness,
because he believed the deluge, and prepared an Ark at Gods command. Abraham 's
Faith was imputed to him for righteousness, because he left his own Country,
followed God into a strange Land, believed that God would give him a son, and
offered this son at God's command. Now what has all this to do with an
imputation of Christ's Righteousness? How does it follow, that because Abraham
was justified by such noble and generous acts of Faith; therefore we should be
justified by imputed Righteousness, by rolling our souls on Christ? These two
Faiths are of as different kinds, as can be imagined; we cannot reason from the
one to the other: The difference between the Faith of Abraham, and the Faith of
Christans is this; Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness; we believe in Christ, and this is counted to us for
righteousness: Abraham believed the Revelations God made to him; we believe the
Revelations God has made to to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1. So that the first
notion of Faith in Christ, is a firm belief of his divine Authority; which
necessarily draws after it a belief of the whole doctrine of the Gospel: Thus
Joh. 20.31. The Christian Faith is described by believing that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God: And 1 John 5.5. Who is he that overcomes the world;
but he that believes, that Jesus is the Son of God; That is, that he came from
God with full Power and Authority to declare his Will, and confirm the
Covenant: Abraham 's faith was founded on the immediate Inspirations of God, or
the Revelations of Angels; But a Faith in Christ is founded on the Authority of
Christ, which is the first Object of the Christian Faith; and the reason and
foundation of all other acts of Faith: Abraham had only some particular
Revelations, as the Object of his Faith; but Christ has made a perfect
Revelation of the whole Will of God, which is the Object of our Faith: Thus the
Christian Faith excels all other kinds of Faith, as much as the Gospel excels
all other revelations made to Abraham and other good men: but still the end of
all Faith is the same to govern our lives, and make us obedient in all things
to God, as Abraham 's was, without which no Faith can justify.

The stress of this discourse lies upon two or three supposals: Answer.
One is this, that the very act of Faith is properly, and in it self, our
Righteousness, or the matter of our Justification: Another is this, that the
whole nature of Faith consists in an assent to Divine Revelation: A third is
this, that Abraham had only a Faith of particular Revelations; but no Faith in
Christ: Now, not to repeat things over and over, I have before proved, that
Faith, as it is an Act, and absolutely in it self considered, is not our
Righteousness, or the matter of our Justification; that there is in the nature
of Faith, over and above a mere assent, a fiducial recumbency also; and that
the Faith of Abraham was not only a Faith of particular promises, but a Faith
in the Messiah: These things being before asserted; the answer is very easy;
Our Faith in Christ very well answers to the Faith of Abraham: Abraham trusted
in Christ, and so do we: These Faiths answer one another, and that much more
harmoniously, than if we say, Abraham believed particular Promises, and we
believe in Christ; for there the Objects are variant: Indeed our Faith, as
having more of Evangelical Light in it, is more explicit than Abraham's was;
but (this being but a gradual difference) still they are one Faith in substance
and, center in the same Object, in the Messiah. But says the Author, Abraham
and the rest never heard of imputed Righteousness; no, he and Noah believed
particular Revelations, and what has this to do with imputed Righteousness?
Does it follow, because Abraham was justified by such generous acts, that we
should be justified by imputed Righteousness? But I must assert, that Abraham
and Noah trusted in the Messiah, and so Christ's Righteousness (though,
suppose, unknown to them in such a clear manner as it is to us) was imputed to
them; And indeed without it, I see not how they should have (which, no doubt,
they wanted) remission in Christ's Blood. But (says the Author) The first
notion of Faith in Christ is a firm belief of his Authority; the Christian
Faith is deseribed by believing, that Jesus is the Son of God, the very Christ,
Joh. 20.31. and 1 John 5.5. that is, that he came from God with full authority
to declare his Will, and confirm the Covenant: To which I answer, That Jesus is
the Son of God, in its proper signification imports, that he is his Son by
Eternal Generation, and from thence we may infer, that his Authority is
Divine: But we must remember, that Christ was a Prophet under the Old
Testament; his Spirit, and surely then his Authority, was in the Prophets. The
Author seems to hint by those places, Joh. 20.31. and 1 John 5.5. that
justifying Faith consists only in assent to divine Principles, such as that
(That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God) is; but though those places in the
Letter sound only an assent to that divine Axiom, That Jesus is the Son of God,
yet more must be taken into the construction; as well because the Scripture,
which ever consists with it self, does in other places assert, that in
justifying Faith, there is, over and above a mere assent, a fiducial Recumbency
on Christ; as also because wicked men, who have no justifying Faith, may have
an assent to all Evangelical Axioms: Nay, the very Devils cried out, and
confessed, That Jesus was the Son of God, Matthew. 8.29. and yet (as our Church
observes) for all this they were but Devils.

Phil. 3.8, 9. Yea, doubtless, Mr. Sherlock.
and I account all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: By my own Righteousness
these men understand inherent Righteousness, whatever good St. Paul had done,
either while he was a Jew, or after his Conversion to Christianity, this he
rejects; and therefore the Righteousness, which is through the Faith of Christ,
must needs be an imputed Righteousness, the personal Righteousness of Christ
apprehended by Faith and imputed to us: This is fairly offered, but what proof
have they of it? That, I confess, I cannot learn; only it is taken for granted,
that my Righteousness, signifies inherent Righteousness, and the Righteousness
of Faith, imputed. But they need not signify so; my own Righteousness, can
signify no more than that in which he placed his Righteousness, whatever it
was, and what necessity is there to understand this of inherent Holiness? An
External Righteousness serves most men's turn very well, and this is the
Righteousness by which the Pharisees (and amongst the rest St. Paul while he
was a Pharisee) expected to be justified: For what his Righteousness was he
tells us, in ver. 6, 7. Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of
the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the Law a Pharisee
(who were mighty strict and punctual in observing all external Ceremonies) and
he expressed his zeal for the Law of Moses by persecuting the Christian Church;
and touching the righteousness which is in Law he was blameless: which last
phrase, touching the righteousness of the Law blameless, signifies only an
external blamelesness of conversation, as Mr. Calvin acknowledges: For this was
the Pharisees Notion of the Moral Law, that the obligation of it did reach no
further than the outward man; and Trypho the Jew in Justin Martyr quarrels with
the Gospel of our Savior for this very reason, That it requires the government
of our thoughts and passions, which, he says, is impossible for a man to do:
Thus we must understand this blamelesness here; unless we will say, that St.
Paul, while he was a Pharisee, did perfectly observe the Moral Law, which
those, who talk so much of the impossibility of keeping Gods laws, will be
loath to own: So that my own righteousness which is of the Law, is so far from
signifying an inherent Righteousness, that it signified only an external one,
which consisted only in some external Rites, or external Privileges, or an
external Civility: This Righteousness he had reason to reject, because God will
reject it: This was all the Righteousness he had, while he was a Pharisee, and
this he accounts dung and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus our Lord; that is, for the sake of the Gospel, which is the knowledge of
Christ, which contains a more excellent and perfect Righteousness than the Law
did: and that he might win Christ, that he might attain to Evangelical
Righteousness, such as Christ was the Preacher and Example of: And that he
might be found in him, not having his own righteousness which is of the Law;
that at the last day he might appear to be a sound and sincere Christian, whose
righteousness does not consist only in external observances or external
conformity to Gods Law; but, that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith; that is, that inward vital Principle of
Holiness, that new Nature which the Gospel of Christ requires of us, and which
this Christian Faith will work in us; which is a Righteousness of Gods own
choosing, which he commands, and which he will reward.

We are now come to that famous place, Answer.
Phil. 3.8, 9. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith. Learned Beza observes, That those words (and be found in Christ) have a
tacit relation to the Judgment of God: The Apostle here treats of
Justification, and from that removes all things but Christ and his
Righteousness: The Author indeed would have him only to reject his external
Righteousness, external Observance, and Conformity to the Law of God, that
which he had as a Pharisee, that which God will reject. But let us consider the
place: First the Apostle sets down a Catalogue of his Privileges; He was
circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin,
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the Law a Pharisee, concerning zeal
persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness which is in the Law
blameless, ver. 5, 6. But then after all, he casts away all this Jewish and
Pharisaical glory, What things were gain to me, those I have counted loss for
Christ, ver. 7. he would not be justified by any of those things; but does he
go no further? Does he only exclude his external Pharisaical Righteousness? No
surely, his discourse goes on, (...), Yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, verse. 8. (...) are
Particles of amplification, as if the Apostle had said, Nay, more than that,
even now do I count all things loss: In the 7. Verse he casts off his Jewish
and Pharisaical gains, but in the 8. he puts by (...), all things, his inherent
Graces not being admitted to be the Matter of our Justification: In the 7.
Verse. we have (...), in tempore praeterito, I have counted, but in the 8. we
have (...), in praesenti, now I do count all things loss: Hence the excellent
Beza says, Notandum praesens tempus; sic enim crescit oration, ut jam
Apostolus, quod ad justificationem coram Deo attinet, omnia opera excludat, tum
praecedentia, tum etiam consequentia fidem. Exam. 'de Justif. page 135.
And Learned Chemnicius says, Paulum non tantum uti praeterito tempore (...),
de operibus praecedentibus conversionem, sed praesenti (...), ut ostendai quod
operibus suis, etiam post renovationem fact is, non tribuat Justificationem
coram Deo. Even our inherent Graces (how precious soever they be in
Sanctification) must not assume the Royal seat of Christ and his Righteousness,
they must not be our very Righteousness in Justification. Bellarmine indeed
here cries out, Quanta, quaeso, blasphemia est! How great is this blasphemy, to
call good works done out of the Faith and Grace of Christ no better than dung!
But Paraeus answers him very well, That they are not so called absolutely in
themselves, but comparatively to the Righteousness of Christ; nefas enim ducit
in ullis operibus fiduciam Justificationis ponere coram Deo: In the Matter of
Justification, the whole Church calls her Righteousness a filthy Rag; St. Paul
will not there own his own inherent Graces, no more than holy Job would know
his own Soul. But this is yet more clear, ver. 9. The Apostle would be found in
Christ, not having his own Righteousness, which is of the Law; he excludes his
own Righteousness, that is, his inherent Graces in the point of Justification;
I say, his inherent Graces, for he had before shut out his external Pharisaical
Righteousness, ver. 7. and (his after-speech being not a Battology or vain
repetition, but progressive or expressive of more than went before) he does in
the 9. Verse put by his inherent Graces, under the name of, his own
Righteousness; and (which further confirms this Sense) inherent Graces are in
Scripture said to be our own: Hence we find, my faith, and thy faith, Jam.
2.18. and our Savior says, Except your righteousness shall exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.20. See here, a Righteousness, and that exceeding a
Pharisaical one, called theirs. The Apostle excludes the righteousness which is
of the Law: In the 7. Verse he had shut out the Righteousness of the Law taken
in the Pharisaical sense; but in the 9. Verse he goes on, and puts by the
Righteousness of the Law taken in its own spiritual Nature, the Righteousness
which the Law in its holy Commands prescribes; and surely the Law calls for
internal Holiness, as well as external Conformity. In another place the Apostle
tells us, That by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified, Gal. 2.16.
No flesh, not the holiest Saint on earth (whose Righteousness is as much above
the Pharisees as Life is above pictures and shadows) shall be justified by his
own Righteousness or conformity to the Law. But if the Apostle would not have
his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, in Justification, what would he
have? He would have the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith: He does not say, a Righteousness which
is Faith or other Graces, but a righteousness which is through the faith of
Christ, a righteousness which is of God by faith: Now inherent Graces are never
in Scripture called the Righteousness of God; The righteousness of God is upon
those that believe, Romans 3.22. not in them, as inherent Graces are: The
righteousness of God is in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21. not in our selves, as our
Graces are: The righteousness of God is one and the same with the righteousness
of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1. not the same with our Graces: The Apostle therefore
would have, the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith; that is, the perfect Righteousness of
Christ, which Faith receives, and God accepts on our behalf. By these things it
appears, that the Apostle in this place does not only exclude external
Pharisaical Righteousness, but even inherent Graces in the matter of
Justification.

There is a double Antithesis in the words; Mr. Sherlock.
the righteousness of the Law is opposed to the righteousness which is by the
faith of Christ, and my own righteousness to the righteousness of God: Now the
surest way to understand the meaning of this, is to consider how these phrases
are used in Scripture. The righteousness of the Law (as you have already heard)
is an external Righteousness, which consists in washings, and purifications,
and sacrifices, or an external conformity, to the Moral Law: The righteousness
which is by the faith of Christ is an internal Righteousness, which consists in
the renovation of our Minds and Spirits, in the government of our thoughts and
passions, which is therefore called being born again, becoming new creatures,
rising with Christ, putting off the old man, and putting on the new, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness: That Righteousness,
which God requires of us under the Gospel, must be an inward Principle of Love
and Obedience, which transforms us into the image of God, as if we were born
again or made new creatures. The reason why Godsent Christ into the world, to
die as a Sacrifice for our sins, and to confirm and seal the new Covenant with
his Blood, was, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Rom, 8.3, 4. (...), that is,
(...), as St. Chrysostom expounds it; that which the Law was designed to work
in them, but was found too weak to effect it, by reason of the greater power of
sin; that is, the inward holiness and purity of mind which was represented and
signified by those external Ceremonies of Circumcision, Washing, Purifications
and Sacrifices: This was the design of the Gospel, to work in us that inward
Holiness and Purity, which is the perfection and accomplishment of the typical
and figurative Righteousness of the Law. I know very well that this place is
expounded of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; but is there any mention
here of the Righteousness of Christ? That he fulfilled all Righteousness for
us, that his Righteousness is imputed to us, and so we fulfill the Righteousness
of the Law in him? The Apostle's design is to show the great Virtue of the
Gospel in delivering from the power of sin, which the Law could not effect: The
Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, (that divine and spiritual Law,
which Christ has given us, which governs our Minds, and is a Principle of
Spiritual Life) makes us free from the Law of sin and death; (from the power
and dominion of sin, which is called a Law, and the Law in our Members warring
against the Law of our Minds: For what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh (what the Law could not do, to deliver us from the power
and dominion of sin) this God effected by sending Christ into the world to
publish the Gospel to us, and confirm the Promises and Threatenings contained in
it with his Blood, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: How can Imputation come in
here? What pretty sense would this make of the Apostle's Argument? The Law was
too weak to make men thoroughly good, to conquer their sin, reform their hearts
and lives, therefore God sent his Son into the world; What for? to give them
better Laws, more excellent Promises, and more powerful assistances to do good?
No, by no means; but to fulfill all Righteousness for them, that they may fulfill
the Righteousness of the Law, not by doing any thing themselves, but by having
all done for them, by having Christ's Righteousness imputed to them: There was
no reason to abrogate the Law of Moses for this end, it might have continued in
force still, and have been as available to Salvation as the Gospel is, with the
supplemental Righteousness of Christ; but the weakness of the Law, the Apostle
complains of, was not the want of an imputed Righteousness (which might have
been had as well under the Law as under the Gospel, if God had pleased;) but a
want of strength and power to subdue the sinful appetites of men: It was weak
through the flesh; by the prevalency of lusts, which the Law could not conquer;
therefore the Gospel must supply this defect, not by imputed Righteousness, but
by an addition of power to enable men to do that which is good, to fulfill the
Righteousness of the Law by a sincere and Spiritual Obedience.

The Righteousness of the Law (as you have already heard) is an external
Righteousness: Answer.
Thus the Author: We have heard so from the false Glosses of the Pharisees, we
have had such a rumor from the Socinians, as if the Law were but a lame
imperfect thing. Socinus (as I have him quoted by Calovius) was not afraid to
say, That Praecepta Veteris Testamenti were levia, vana, parum Deo digna; but
surely this will not down with Christians: The Law is Sanctio sancta, the Image
of the divine Sanctity, the Summary of all Duties. The Psalmist in the 19.
Psalm, having set forth how the Glory of God breaks forth from the Sun and
Heavens, elevates his discourse to the pure Law; which, as it enlightens the
inner Man, is a brighter Luminary than the Sun, which shines to Sense; and, as
it comprizes all Duties within it self, is a nobler Circle in Morality, than
the Heavens, which environ all other Bodies, are in Nature: The Law of the Lord
is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is pure, making wise
the simple, says the Psalmist in that place: So perfect it is, that nothing is
to be added to it, or diminished from it, Deuteronomy. 4.3. so spiritual, that even
the Saints under the Gospel are but carnal in respect of it, Romans 7.14. It
calls upon us to love the Lord with all our heart, with all our soul, and with
all our might, Deuteronomy. 6.5. to love him in such a divine degree, as to love
nothing else supra, aeque or contra, and is this external Righteousness? Or
what is inner purity, if this be not so? It tells us, Non concupisces, and so
meets with the very first risings of corrupt Nature, with the very motions and
titillations of the flesh; it would have an heart all of purity and holiness,
without any (...) or relics of corruption in it, and what can be more divine?
St. Paul therefore says, that in his Pharisaism he was (...), without the Law,
because without a sense of its spiritual Nature, Romans 7.9. Unless we own its
divine Spiritualty, we are as it were without it. In a word, whatsoever it be
that makes up the just posture of Man toward God or his Fellow Creatures, is
there delineated in such accuracy and full perfection, as no man in this life,
but Jehovah our righteousness only, ever arrived at: But to go on with the
Author, The Righteousness, which is by the Faith of Christ, is internal: This
God requires of us under the Gospel. Thus the Author; To which I answer, The
Author, page 259. makes the Righteousness of Faith in those under the Old
Testament, distinct from the Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ; and
here he makes the Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ, to consist in
internal holiness and renovation: But surely there were New Creatures under the
Old Testament, as well as there are under the New; Job was a perfect, an
upright man; and therefore a New Creature: David a man after Gods own heart,
and therefore a New Creature: without this internal renovation there could not
have been that circumcision of the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. nor the law in the heart,
which is made the Character of a righteous man, Psalm. 37.31. That Covenant of
writing the Law in the heart, Jer. 31.33. was in substance one and the same in
both Testaments: Those under the Old Testament, unless regenerate, could never
have entered so holy a place as Heaven, that (...), or general Assembly (which
takes in all the Saints of the Old Testament) is the Church of the first born,
Heb. 12.23. There are none else but New Creatures in it: However the Racovian
Catechist appropriates the New Creation to the New Testament; yet I must
assert, that it was under both Testaments; but under neither was it the
justifying Righteousness: But the Author goes on, God sent his son into the
world, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.3, 4.
that we might have inward holiness and purity, that we might be delivered from
the power of sin, and that by the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ: Thus the
Author, to which I answer, God sent his Son indeed into the world, that we
might be sanctified by his Spirit; but that was not all, he sent him, that we
might be justified by his Blood and Righteousness; to which purpose it will be
worth while to consider that place, Romans 8. The Apostle in the first verse,
sets forth believers, men in Christ, by two excellent things; first, by
Justification, There is no condemnation to them; no, though there be relics
of corruption in them, as is imported in the seventh Chapter, there is none;
and then by Sanctification, which is in conjunction with the other; they walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: And in the other verses he confirms
both, but inverso ordine, first, he confirms their Sanctification, from the
great Origin of it; the holy Spirit, The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death, verse. 2. The power of
the holy Spirit has subdued the power of sin; and then he confirms their
Justification from the sufferings of Christ (with which his active obedience is
to be taken in conjunction) What the Law could not do in that, it was weak
through the flesh; God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, verse. 3. Their sins were condemned in
the flesh of Christ; there was an atonement made for them, which certainly must
relate to Justification: from these sufferings of Christ (with which his active
obedience must be taken in conjunction) the Apostle inferrs, That the
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, verse. 4. The Law was not able to
justify us, for want of a perfect obedience in us; but God translated the
impletion of the Law upon Christ; Christ fulfilled all Righteousness for us:
Christ bore the wrath of God for us, and (these things being imputed unto us)
the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us: But then the Apostle returns
again to Sanctification, and subjoyns, Who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit; assuring us, that those who are justified by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, are also Sanctified and led by his holy Spirit: This I
take to be the meaning of the place: But let us hear our Church treating upon
this place in conjunction with other Scriptures: r. Hom. of Salvation.
St. Paul says, Romans 3. We are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption which is in Christ: And Romans 10. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes: And Romans 8. That which was
impossible by the Law; in as much, as it was weak by the flesh; God sending his
own Son, in the similitude of sinful flesh, by sin, damned sin in the flesh;
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit: In these places the Apostle touches
three things, which must go together in our Justification; upon Gods part his
great mercy and grace; upon Christ's parts justice; that is, the satisfaction
of God's justice, or the price of our redemption, by the offering of his body,
and shedding of his Blood with fulfilling of the Law perfectly and thoroughly;
and upon our part true and lively Faith in the merits of Jesus Christ, which
yet is not ours, but by Gods working in us: So that in our Justification is not
only Gods Mercy and Grace, but also his Justice, which the Apostle calls the
Justice of God, and it consists in paying our ransom, and fulfilling of the
Law: And so the Grace of God does not shut out the Justice of God in our
Justification, but only shuts out the justice of man; that is to say, the
justice of our works, as to be merits of deserving our justification. And
therefore St. Paul declares here nothing upon the behalf of man, concerning
his justification, but only a true lively Faith, which nevertheless is the gift
of God, and not man's only work without God; and yet that Faith does not shut
out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread, and the fear of God to be joined with Faith
in every man that is justified, but it shuts them out from the office of
justifying; so that although they be all present in him that is justified; yet
they justify not all together. These are the excellent words of our Church,
worthy (without flattery be it spoken) to be written in Letters of Gold, but
much more in the hearts of all true Christians: We see here, that there is in
justification nothing on the behalf of man but Faith only; no, internal
Holiness, Repentance, Hope, Love, Fear of God, are in the justified, but shut
out from the office of justifying: God's Grace, and Christ's Righteousness are
the great causes of justification: But says the Author, Is there here any
mention of Christ's Righteousness, or the imputation thereof? I answer, Our
Church surely thought so, and we have his passive Righteousness expressed,
verse. 3. and where that is expressed, the active is implied: This is clear,
when the Scripture says, That we are made righteous by Christ's obedience,
Romans 5.19. It does include his blood also, and when he says, That we are
justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. It does include his active obedience also, so
that the Scripture (because it expresses justification by both, and because it
must be consistent with it self) in expressing the one, includes the other:
When therefore, Romans 8.3. his sufferings are expressed, his active obedience is
also included, both therefore are intended, and withal an imputation, without
which they cannot be profitable to us: But says the Author, The Law could not
do it; that is, the Law could not deliver from the power of sin. I answer, The
Law could not do it of it self, and without the Spirit of Christ; but if that
divine Spirit take the Law into its hand, and write it in the heart, I suppose
there will be a New Creature: But the Author says, That the righteousness of
the Law may be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, verse. 4. How can imputation come in here? What pretty sense will this
make of the Apostles argument? I answer, The sense is very clear, the
Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, by Christ's Righteousness imputed
to us; and withal, we to whom that is imputed, walk after the Spirit; the one
is our Justification, the other our Sanctification: Both the Apostle proves to
be in Believers, and both consist very well together, as appears from the first
verse: There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit. The, No condemnation, appertains to
Justification, and the walking after the Spirit to Sanctification, and both
stand very well together: As to what the Author says afterward, That there
was no reason to abrogate Moses' s Law, it might have availed to Salvation; as
well as the Gospel, with the supplemental righteousness of Christ, there might
have been an imputed righteousness as well under the Law, as under the Gospel.
I answer, That I conceive, that the Moral Law delivered by Moses, obliges us
Christians, as I have before proved; and I suppose our Church is of that mind
too; for I cannot imagine, that she should in her Catechism instruct Children
in an abrogated Law: How there should be an imputed Righteousness without a
Gospel, I know not; it pleased God to found the Gospel upon a (...), a
satisfaction, and that cannot be, or be profitable to us without an imputation:
The impotency of the Law was, as I noted before, that it could not justify us
for want of perfect obedience: But God translated the impletion of the Law upon
Christ; and his Righteousness being made ours by imputation, the Law is said to
be fulfilled in us.

To the same purpose the Apostle discourses, Mr. Sherlock.
Romans 7.4, 5, 6. Wherefore, my Brethren, you also are become dead to the Law,
by the body of Christ, ( who put an end to that imperfect dispensation by his
death) that you should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God; for when we were in the
flesh, ( under that carnal and fleshly dispensation of the Law of Moses) the
motions of sins, which were by the Law ( which grew more boisterous and unruly
by the prohibitions of the Law, verse. 8.) did work in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death; That is, did betray us to those wicked actions, which
end in death: But now we are delivered from the Law; that being dead, in which
we were held, that we should serve in newness of the Spirit, and not in the
oldness of the Letter: So that the reason why the Law of Moses was abrogated,
was, because it could not make men good, it nursed them up in a ritual external
Religion, taught them to serve God in the Letter by Circumcision, Sacrifices,
or external conformity to the Letter of the Law; but the Gospel of Christ alone
teaches us, to worship God in the Spirit; to offer a reasonable Sacrifice to
him; to fulfill the (...), all the internal Righteousness, of which those legal
Ceremonies were the Signs and Sacraments: This is the plain meaning of the
Apostles, which can never be reconciled with imputed Righteousness, which would
make his argument foolish and absurd: Therefore he tells us in other places,
what little reason we have to be so zealous for the Law of Moses, since we have
the perfection of it in the Gospel: what need is there of the circumcision of
the flesh, which the Law required? When in the Gospel we have the circumcision
made without hands, (...), of that fleshly circumcision: What need of legal
washing and purgations? When they are all fulfilled in the washing of
regeneration, in the Gospel baptism: Thus we are complete in Christ, who bath
perfectly instructed us in the will of God, and instiluted such a Religion as
is the perfection of all Ceremonies, Col. 2. We must now offer another
Sacrifice, than the Law of Moses commanded, not the Sacrifices of dead beasts,
but of a living and active soul, Romans 12.

The Apostle, Answer.
Romans 7. verse. 4. Shows that we are dead to the Law by the body of Christ; that
is, by Christ crucified, we have remission, and the holy Spirit, and so are
dead to the cursing and irritating power of the Law, that we might bring forth
fruits of holy works to God: Before, when we were in the flesh, in our corrupt
unregenerate estate, the motions of sin, which were accidentally irritated by
the Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death; that is, to
bring forth sinful actions, which tend to death, verse. 5. But now says the
Apostle, we are delivered from the Law, from the curse and irritating power of
it, That being dead wherein we were held, that we should serve in newness of
Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, verse. 6. That is, in those new
Divine Prinples, which our spirits have from Gods, not in the old nature, which
by the outward Letter of the Law is irritated unto sin: This I think is the
scope of the Apostle, he discourses of the regenerate and unregenerate; the one
dead to the Law, the other irritated by it; he discourses not of the difference
between those under the Old Testament, and those under the New; for the
regenerate under the Old Testament, were dead to the cursing and irritating
Law; they had internal Righteousness, which the Author calls (...); they had
the circumcision of the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. which in the Author is the (...), of
the fleshly circumcision, they had the law in the heart, Psalm. 37.31. And by
consequence they had true regeneration, in which (says our Author) all the
legal washings and purifications are fulfilled; they were not irritated by the
Law, but delighted in it, as in their joy, choice, treasure, honeycomb of
sweetness, and what not, as appears in the Psalms: They served in the newness
of the Spirit, in new Divine Principles, which they had from the holy Spirit,
in the easiness of the New Creature; to which the Will of God is natural: Even
in their Rituals and Sacrifices, they knew all must be done in newness of
Spirit, in the exercises of internal Graces. The very Heathens themselves,
thought that they were to Sacrifice, Mente candida, and expurgata conscientia:
How much more did the servants of God under the Old Testament do so; they knew,
that there were better Sacrifices than the outward ones: Sacrifices of
righteousness, Psalm. 4.5. And sacrifices of a broken spirit, Psalm. 50.17. They
understood, that the heart, the truth in the inward parts, was more than all
the rest: On the other hand, the unregenerate under the New Testament, they are
in the flesh; the motions of sin carry all before them; they have nothing of
internal Righteousness, they are uncircumcised in heart, as well as in flesh;
they are baptized, yet want the (...), of regeneration; they are irritated by
the Law, their inward malignity swells and rises against the holy commands
which stand in Scripture as so many damms and bars to their impetuous lusts:
Whatever they do in Evangelical Ordinances, they do all in the oldness of the
Letter, the Letter, the outward Rule presses them to Duty; but there is no
inward acting of Faith, no suavity of Love or holy Affections; all is done in a
dead, dull, flat manner, nothing is minded but the opus operatum, the mere
external work. By this we see clearly where the difference lies: Its true, the
Ceremonials of Moses were abrogated by Christ, but, I suppose, the Moral Law
was not, its own intrinsecal Rectitude and Righteousness immortalizes it so,
that it stands faster than the Pillars of Heaven and Earth, and must be so as
long as God is God, and Man Man: The Reason of Man must be bound in duty to
point to God as the Primum Verum, and the Will of Man to resign to him as the
Primum Amabile: these are Foundations never to be shaken: The (...), of the Law
amounts to so much more than the inherent Righteousness of all Saints put
together, that it is no were to be found, but in the perfect spotless obedience
of Christ; neither can that be made ours but by imputation.

Hence Christ is (...), Mr. Sher-Jock.
the end of the Law, the perfection and accomplishment of it, for Righteousness
to them that believe, Romans 10.4. That is, the Gospel of Christ requires that
Rightcousness of us, which the Law did only typifie and represent, that
holiness and purity of mind; which is the perfection of all legal
Righteousness: For that Christ should be the end of the Law, by imputation of
his Righteousness to us, has no foundation in the Text. The Apostle explains
what he means by this in the following verses, where he gives us a description
of the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of Faith: The
righteousness of the Law is an external conformity, to the letter of the Law;
the man that does them shall live in them; that is, shall enjoy all the
Temporal Blessings of Canaan, which were promised to the observance of the Law:
But the Righteousness of Faith, is a firm and steadfast belief of the Divine
Authority of Christ, that he is the Lord, and more particularly a belief of his
Resurrection from the dead, as the last and great confirmation which God gave
to the divinity of Christ's Person and Doctrine: This is that Faith that
overcomes the world, and purifies the heart, and transforms us into the
likeness of God; which is the perfection of all the ritual righteousness of the
Law. Upon this account Christ is said to be made to us Righteousness, 1 Cor.
1.20. He of God is made to us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption: He is our Wisdom, as he is our great Prophet who instructs us in
true Wisdom; our Righteousness, as we are justified by Faith in him, by a
sincere belief of his Gospel, which is the only Righteousness acceptable to
God; our Sanctification, because the law of the spirit of life in him makes us
free from the law of sin and death; our Redemption, as by these means he bath
delivered us from the bondage of the Jewish Law, from the idolatrous Customs of
the Heathens, and the tyranny of wicked Spirits, and the wrath of God, which is
the merit of sin.

Christ is the end of the Law, Answer.
even of the Moral Law, and what did that call for? Not external Conformisty
only, but all Holiness and Righteousness, and that in pure sinless perfection;
this our Faith or inherent Graces, because imperfect, can never amount to: The
Law therefore has its end only in the perfect spotless Righteousness of
Christ, and, that being made over to Believers by Imputation, Christ is truly
said to be the end of the Law for righteousness to the believer. The man that
does them shall live in them. Romans 10.5. that is, says the Author, shall enjoy
the temporal blessings of Canaan. Indeed the Racovian Catechist will go no
further; Nusquam in Lege Mosis reperies vitam aeternam promissam, says he: But
we find the Saints in the Old Testament fixing their Faith upon eternal Life;
My Redeemer lives, and I shall see him, says Job, Job. 19.25, and 27. Abraham
desires a better country, that is, an heavenly, Heb. 11.16. The just shall
live by his faith, Hab. 2.4. which is interpreted of eternal Life, Romans 1.17.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved, Joel 2.32. that
is, with eternal Life, as it is applied, Romans 10.13. Paul said no other things,
than the Prophets and Moses did, Act. 26.22. and yet surely he spoke of eternal
Life: Moses and the Prophets are frequent in promising the Messiah, and in him
all the Promises are contained. Do this and live, is meant of eternal Life; a
Curse, that is eternal Death, is threatened to the violaters of the Law, Gal.
3.10. therefore Life and that eternal is promised to the keepers of it. When
the Lawyer asked, What shall I do to inherit eternal life? our Savior answered
him, that he must keep the Law, Luke 10.25, 28. If the Law did not promise
eternal Life, then it did not threaten eternal Death, and by consequence
Christ, who redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, redeemed us only from a
temporal one: But to pass on. Christ of God is made unto us righteousness, 1
Cor. 1.30. that is, says the Author, we are justified by Faith in him, by a
sincere belief of his Gospel: That we are justified by Faith in Christ, I
acknowledge, but not in the Authors sense; he makes Faith properly and as an
Act to justify; he makes the nature of Faith to consist only in a firm assent:
But I have before proved, that Faith justifies as it receives Christ and his
Righteousness; and that justifying Faith,, over and above assent, includes in
it a fiducial Recumbency. Christ is made to us righteousness one of these two
ways, either by the Graces of his holy Spirit imparted to us, or else by his
perfect Obedience imputed to us; He is not made Righteousness to us by the
Graces of his Spirit imparted to us, for with respect to these he is made
Sanctification to us; and Sanctification and Justification must not be
confounded: As we have holy Graces from him to sanctify us, so we have
Righteousness from him to justify us: He is therefore our Righteousness,
because his perfect Righteousness by Imputation becomes ours. Bellarmine.
speaking of this place, at s^^^interprets it of the inherent Righteousness in
us, which comes from Christ; but afterward, as convicted of the truth, De
Jusi^^. 11.2. cip. 10.
he says, Nobis imputari Christi justitiam and merita, cum nobis donentur and
applicentur, ac si nosipsi Deo satisfecissemus; That the Righteousness and
Morits of Christ are imputed to us, when they are given and applied to us, as
if we our selves had satisfied God. Further, our Author upon this Text says,
That Christ is our wisdom, as he is cur Prophet; our Righteousness, as we are
justified by believing the Gospel; our Sanctification, as we have the Law of
the Spirit of life; and our Redemption, as by these means he has delivered us.
I see not what room is left here for the redeeming Blood of Christ;
nevertheless I suppose the Author meant to include the same.

This is the (...), Mr. Sherlock.
the foundation of all other mistakes, that by the Righteousness of the Law,
and the Righteousness of Works, most men understand an internal Holiness, and
then conclude, That if this Righteousness will not please God, nothing but an
imputed Righteousness can; though I should rather have concluded that nothing
can: But the truth is, the Righteousness of the Law and of Works in the New
Testament signifies only an external Righteousness, which cannot please God;
and that internal Holiness, which they call the Righteousness of the Law, is
that very Righteousness of Faith, which the Gospel commands, and which God
approves and rewards, and this imputed Righteousness is no where to be found,
that I know of, but in their own Fancies.

The Righteousness of the Law and of Works in the New Testament signifies only
an external Righteousness: Answer.
Thus the Author: And yet before the Author quoting that Text, Romans 8. That the
righteousness of the Law might he fulfilled in us, interprets it of internal
holiness in us: I confess it is not meant of our internal Holiness; but neither
does it signify external Righteousness only: The righteousness of the Law,
Phil. 3.6. does by the circumstances of the Text intend only an external
Righteousness; but the righteousness of the Law, ver. 9. reaches to an internal
one; for, as I before noted, the Apostles speech there is progressive, and
expresses more than it did before. The Works of converted Abraham are excluded
from Justification, Romans 4.2. and yet surely they were more than external
shadows; By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified, Gal. 2.16. not
only the Pharisee with his external Righteousness, but no flesh, not the
holiest man on earth shall be justified by the works of the Law. The Law in the
New Testament plainly calls for internal Holiness; it is a holy, just, good,
spiritual Law, forbidding Concupiscence, the very first risings and imperfect
births of Corruption, Romans 7. commanding the love of God with all the Heart,
Soul and Mind, Matthew. 22.37. And therefore it would be very strange, if the
Righteousness or the Works of this Law (which is represented in the New
Testament as a divine spiritual Law) should in the same New Testament signify
no more than external Righteousness, no more than the mere shell or outward
superficies of true Sanctity, and that too in Epistles written not to Jews or
Pharisees, who hung about the Letter of the Law, but to the Romans, Galatians,
Philippians, who, I suppose, understood it better: They could not but see some
hints of inward Purity in the Books of Pagan Philosophers; and it is
inimaginable, that they should look for less in the Law of God: Though the
Pharisees, who had only an external Righteousness themselves, construed that
Law, according to their Model; yet why the believing Romans, Galatians,
Philippians, who had internal Graces in themselves, should do so, I see no
reason: Neither is it to me credible, that the Romans, who in the Epistle to
them had the pure Spirituality of the Law set before them, should ever construe
the Righteousness or Works of the Law mentioned in that Epistle to be only
external. As for internal Holiness, God indeed approves of it, but not as that
which is the matter of our Righteousness in Justification.

Let us now consider in what sense the Apostle opposes his own Righteousness to
the Righteousness of God; Mr. Sherlock
and there is no great difficulty in this; for the Apostle tells us, that by
his own Righteousness he means the Righteousness of the Law, and by the
Righteousness of God the Righteousness of Faith; and what that is you have
already heard: Thus in Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted to the righteousness of God: Where, their own Righteousness, which
the Jews so obstinately adhered to, was the Righteousness of the Law; and the
Righteousness of God, which they were ignorant of, and would not submit to, was
the Righteousness of Faith: For this was the great Controversy between the
Jews and Apostles (which is the Subject of this Epistle) Whether men were to be
justified by the Law of Moses, or by the Gospel of Christ, by a Legal or
Evangelical Righteousness, as appears from Romans 9.3. Israel, who followed after
righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness; wherefore?
Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law;
that is, The Israelites, who pursued so earnestly after Righteousness, are
excluded from Righteousness or forgiveness of sins, and are under a Curse,
because they did not look for Righteousness and Justification in the way, which
God prescribed, which is by Faith in Christ or by Christianity, but by the
observance of the Law of Moses. Now the most obvious reason, why the
Righteousness of the Law is called their own Righteousness, and the
Righteousness of Faith Gods Righteousness, is, because this Legal Righteousness
was a way of Justification, not of Gods appointment, but their own choosing; God
never designed that any man should be justified to eternal Life by observing
the Law of Moses, but yet they confidently expected Justification by that Law,
and for that reason rejected the Gospel of Christ: But the Righteousness of
Faith is a Righteousness of God's choosing, this he approves and accepts of for
the Justification of a sinner: By this the Elders obtained a good report; by
this Enoch and Noah and Abraham were justified before God: And therefore this
may well be called the Righteousness of God, because this he appointed, and
this he will own and reward.

Our own Righteousness is, I confess, Answer.
the Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of God is a Righteousness
by Faith, or through Faith, because Faith receives it, but it is not Faith it
self; The righteousness of God is reveiled from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. Were
Faith it self the Righteousness of God, the words must amount to no more than
this; Faith is reveiled from Faith to Faith. We are made the righteousness of
God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. and who ever construed those words thus, We are made
Faith in him? Faith is inherent in our selves, but the Righteousness of God is
in Christ, who is Jehovah our Righteousness. The Jews went about to establish
their own righteousness, Romans 10.3. but it does not appear, that that was a
mere external one; we find, that they had a zeal of God, Ver. 2. which surely
was internal. Zeal is a mixture of Love and Anger: They had, at least in
pretense, a love to God and his Glory; and an anger at the Christian Faith, as
supposing it an enemy to God and his Law. All the Jews were not Pharisees, nor
did they stick merely in the Letter or husk of external Righteousness; the
Scribe could say, That the love of God with all the heart, was more than all
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, Mark 12.33. and some Jewish Rabbis say, That
the heart of man answers to the holy place; there a place must be made for the
Shecinah, the divine Majesty to dwell in, and it must be the holy of Holies. No
question the Jews, at least some of them, did know, that there must be some
inward Sanctity; but still they stuck in their own Righteousness, they would
not submit to be justified by the Righteousness of another. Our inherent
Graces, as before I noted, are called our own in Scripture, but never the
Righteousness of God; that is not our own but another, that is, Christ's, and
made ours only by Imputation. Israel followed after righteousness, but attained
not to the Law of righteousness; wherefore? Because they sought it not by
faith, but, as it were, by the works of the Law, Romans 9.31. they attained not
to the Law of Righteousness: Had the Righteousness of the Law been only an
external one, they might have reached it; but the Law called for all
Righteousness and that in pure sinless perfection, and that they attained not,
because they sought it not in Christ, in whom perfect Righteousness is, but in
themselves, where it could not be found: But to go on, God never designed that
any man should be justified to eternal life, by observing the Law of Moses: So
the Author: Its true, God never intended to justify us fallen Creatures by our
own Righteousness, or by the Righteousness of the Law performed by us: But if
(as the Author told us before) Abel and Enoch were justified by a belief of the
Principles of natural Religion: If Noah was justified by believing the Deluge;
if Abraham was justified by believing the particular Revelations made to him,
why might not the Jews be justified by believing the Law of Moses? Abraham and
all the good men in those days were justified by such a firm belief of the
Being and Providence of God, and the partcular Revelations made to them, as
made them careful in all things to please God: Thus the Author, page 255. Why
might not Jews before the Incarnation of Christ be justified by such a firm
belief of the Law of Moses, as made them careful to please God? The Law of
Moses was a Revelation too, in its Morals pointing out a perfect Sanctity and
Righteousness; and in its Typicals aiming at Christ, the body and substance of
them all.

There is one Metaphorical expression still behind, Mr. Sherlock.
The unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. Where by the unsearchable riches
of Christ is meant the Gospel: The Apostle calls it unsearchable riches,
because the grace of the Gospel is not a narrow stinted thing, not confined to
a particular Nation, as the Law was, but is offered to all mankind: The Gospel
contains those glorious discoveries of Gods goodness to all mankind, as may
well be called the riches of his Grace: And is it not a great violation of the
Majesty of Scripture, to sport and toy with words and metaphors, as some men
with this riches of Grace? That he is rich, because he has a rich dowry,
Brooks riches of Christ.
having all the world given him, that he keeps open house, and maintains all
the Creation, that he does enrich all the Saints, and all of the Saints, their
Understandings with glorious light, their Consciences with quickness, etc. that
he after all this vast expense is never the poorer, that he is rich in Houses,
Lands (though he had not a place whereon to lay his head) Gold, Silver,
Temporals, Spirituals, that he is the great Lord and owner of all: These are
sine things to persuade young women to accept of Christ for their Husband.

By the unsearchable riches of Christ, Answer.
I suppose, are meant the infinite merits of Christ; the Gospel is the Charter
of them, but no more his riches, than the Deeds and Evidences are the Lands and
Manors, which they convey: The merits of Christ are an infinite inexhaustable
Treasure, and that because the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him: But, I
hope, no man will say, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in the Gospel: I
see nothing of sport or toying in the words of Mr. Brook, but very sober and
excellent truth: Though our Savior had not Houses or Lands here, yet he
promises an hundredfold to those which forsake them for his names sake: That
of the young women, I pass by as a toy, which possibly may gratify some
fancies, more than they do mine.

SECT. III.
THe union of persons between Christ and Believers, Mr. Sherlock.
which gives them a propriety in all the personal graces of Christ is commonly
explained by a conjugal relation, and legal union, that mutual relation which
is betwixt Husband and Wife; and that union, which is betwixt the surety and
debtor: Now these men say, That the Wife has an interest in her Husbands
Estate, and is secured from all arrests of the Law; And therefore, Christ being
our Husband, all his personal Excellencies, Righteousness, etc. are ours, and
the Law cannot take hold of us, but our Husband must be responsable for our
faults: A very hard Law truly; and I think a Husband is in a very ill case,
when he has a bad Wife. Now suppose this were the case in some earthly
Marriages, it were worth while to consider, whether this be essential to
Marriage: Or whether it depends upon private contracts or public Laws, which
are arbitrary and mutable; for if this be essential to Marriage, how can we be
secure, that this is the Law of our Spiritual Marriage, unless our Spiritual
Husband had told us so; especially considering that this Spiritual Marriage
betwixt Christ and his Church, is of a different nature from earthly Marriages;
and if they differ in any thing, we cannot be sure, but that they differ in
this, unless we have some better proof of it, than this Analogy between earthly
and Spiritual Marriages: Nay, and better proof too, than Dr. Owen giver us of
it, Cant. 1. Behold! thou art fair, thou have Doves eyes: Cant. 3.14. O my
Dove! thou art in the clefts of the rock: Or Cant. 4.8. Come with me from
Lebanon; look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon; from
the lions dens, and the mountains of the leopards: Or Isai. 4.2. The branch of
the Lord is beautiful and glorious: and the fruit of the earth is excellent and
comely to them that are escaped of Israel: Which are all the proofs he can sind
for Christ's giving himself to the soul with all his excellencies: Now how any
such consequence as this can be drawn from Doves eyes, or the clefts of the
rock, or from Lebanon, Amana, Shenir, Hermon, or from the lions dens, or
mountains of leopards, is past my understanding to make out: But let the Laws
of Kingdoms and Nations be as they will, there can be no Law made to alter the
nature of things; there never was any Law, that the personal virtues, and
qualities, and perfections of the Husband should be settled on his Wife for a
jointure; though the Husband be never so fair, wise, virtuous, his Wife may be
ugly, a fool, or an harlot; for personal excellencies pass not out of the
person, nor can be made ever to any other, as Money and Lands are: By our
Marriage to Christ; his personal excellencies cannot be ours, though his person
were. In Marriages there are private contracts; and the truth is, Christ has
not made such an absolute settlement of himself upon us, as these men dream he
has: for the Gospel contains the Articles of this Marriage; and there we must
learn to what purposes, and upon what conditions Christ gives himself to us,
and must challenge no more from Christ by virtue of our Marriage to him, than
what the Gospel, the Marriage Covenant promises; and we find nothing there of
his personal Righteousness to be made ours: And for what they tell us, That a
woman under covert is not liable to an arrest at Law; but all must fall upon
her Husband: It is true as to matters of debt, but does not extend to crimes;
if a woman kill or rob, her being under covert secures her not from the
Gallows: How secure soever any man may fancy himself of his Marriage to Christ:
I would not advise him to venture too much upon it; for if he be guilty of any
gross wilful sin, there is some danger, that the Law or Gospel may condemn him,
unless he timely repent, and reform: When the Scriptures calls Christ our
Husband, and the Church his Spouse; it means no more but that Christ is our
Head and Governor, who rules his Church with as great kindness, tenderness,
and compassion, as an Husband exercises toward his Wife; and that we are to
pay the same Love, Duty, and Obedience to Christ, that Wives owe to their
Husbands: And here we must have done with the Metaphor, unless we will turn
Religion into a Romance.

Christ being our Husband, his Righteousness is ours; Answer.
the Law cannot take hold of us, our Husband must be responsable for our
faults: But this is a very hard Law (says the Author) and the Husband in a
very ill case: In truth our Husband, though the eternal Son of God, was made
under the Law, wounded, bruised, cast into a bloody sweat, made a curse; and
(as the Septuagint has it, Isai. 55.3.) he was (...), a man set in the stroke
of Gods wrath: But all this he was, not by chance or fortune, but out of choice
and unparallelled Love to his Spouse: The essentials of Marriage lie in a
narrow room, a consent per verba de praesenti does it; but the just necessary
consequents of it, are, as the Civilians tells us, Consortium omnis vitae,
divini and humani juris communicatio; the Wife participates of his sacred and
civil good things; neither can it be otherwise, where there is, as there is in
Marriage, such an intimate union of minds and bodies; there must needs be a
communio bonorum, nature and reason tells us; that the Wife in so near an union
must have (...), alimentum and indumentum, food and raiment, out of the
Husbands estate; Nay, and all things in a decorum thereunto; and can we think
that Christ should do less for his Spouse, when her necessities exceed all
those in nature? Will he, who infinitely transcends all humane Relations, leave
his Spouse to the rags of her own Righteousness, or suffer her to perish in an
eternal prison for debt; and that, when he has fulfilled the Righteousness,
and bore the curse of the Law on purpose to cloth her, and satisfy for her?
The whole Book of Canticles is a divine Ditty; which, under the parable of
Marriage, streams all along, as a full torrent of Spiritual Love
interchangeably passing between Christ and his Church: Well might the Doctor
bring his proof from thence: Christ calls his Spouse all fair, and without
spot, Cant. 4.7. She was not so naturally, but by Marriage; neither is she so
in this life by inherent Graces; but by the Righteousness of Christ put upon
her by a gracious imputation: Christ calls her from Lebanon, from the top of
Amana, Shenir, and Hermon, from the lions dens, from the mountains of the
Leopards, verse. 8. That is, from the brutish lusts and idolatries of the World;
and he calls her thus: Come with me, with me, my Spouse, as if he had said,
that he would provide for her as a Spouse; and therefore she should come away
with him: But, says the Author, Personal virtues in the Husband were never
settled on the Wife for a Jointure, by our Marriage to Christ; his personal
excellencies cannot be made over to us. To which, I answer, the Righteousness
of Christ cannot be made ours, so as to inhere in us: But it may be made ours
by imputation; or if not, neither can his blood be imputed to us; and by
consequence there can be no such thing as satisfaction or redemption through
his Blood: But for the truth of imputed Righteousness, these men desire to
appeal no further than the Articles or Marriage Covenant contained in the
Gospel, beyond this they desire to claim nothing from Christ their Husband and
Savior? But, says the Author, A woman under covert is not liable to debts,
but she is to crimes. I answer, Our debts are crimes, and that above Felonies;
they are High-treasons against the God of Heaven; and if these fall not on our
Husband Christ, they must fall upon us; and then who, where is the man that can
stand before the Divine Tribunal? What room can there be for the least drop of
mercy or forgiveness? Remarkable is the form, that in Anselms time was used in
the Visitation of the sick, the weak man is there directed thus: Si Dominus
Deus te voluerit judicare, dic Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi
objicio inter me and tuum judicium, aliter tecum non condendo; and si tibi
dixerit, quia peccator es, dic Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi pono
inter me and mea peccata: He was not to contend with God; but to put the death
of our Lord Jesus Christ between himself and God's Tribunal, and to put it
between himself and his sins; unless our Husband had undertaken to discharge
our debts, we could never have had any possibility of Salvation.

Christ and Believers are legally united, Mr. Sherlock.
Dr. Jacomb tells us, That Christ is the Saints (...), or Surety, he struck
hands with God (as the words imports) put himself into their stead, took their
debt upon himself, and bound himself upon this account to make satisfaction to
God. Now in the Law the debtor and surety are but one person; the Law looks on
them as one, and makes no difference between them; and therefore both are
equally liable to the debt; and if the one pay, it is as much in the eye of the
Law, as if the other had paid it: Thus it is with Christ and us; he is our
Surety, he took our debt upon himself, engaged to pay what we owed; upon this
Christ and we are but one person before God; and accordingly he deals with us;
for he makes over our sins to Christ, and Christ's Righteousness and
Satisfaction to us, he now, in a legal notion, looks upon both but as one
person: Now I have two things to say to this: First, I wonder why this should
be called the union of Saints to Christ? Or why Christ should be called only
the Saints Surety? The Apostle tells us, that he is (...), Heb. 7.22. The
Surety of a Testament or Covenant: Now there is a vast difference between
Christ's being the Saints surety, and the surety of the Covenant; for the
Covenant respects both Saints and Sinners; therefore is antecedent to our union
to Christ as Saints; and to be surety of the Covenant, signifies no more but to
confirm this Covenant, and to undertake for the performance of it, that all the
promises of it shall be made good upon such terms as are annexed to them: But
to be a Surety for Saints (as the Doctor explains it) is to strike hands with
God, to put himself in their stead to do and suffer for them. Now this notion
is different from the notion of a Surety of a Covenant, and so it wants some
better proof. But secondly, suppose Christ had been called the Saints surety: I
doubt they are as much out in the Law of suretiship, as they were before in the
Laws of Marriage: For, first, the prime end of suretiship among men, is not
that the Surety, shall without more ado pay the debt: but to give security to
the Creditor, that the debt shall be paid; that is, the Surety does not make
himself immediate Debtor; but the Debtor is Debtor still, and bound to pay the
Debt; and the Surety is liable only in case of his default: It is a strange
definition of suretiship, That it is an absolute taking the debt upon our
selves, and an actual discharging the Debtor. No man in his wits ever became
surety for another, when he knew before hand; that, if he did, he must pay the
debt: but men become sureties upon reasonable assurance, that they shall suffer
no injury by it: Therefore when Christ died for us, he did not dye as our
Surety, but as our Sacrifice substituted in our room, which is the Scripture
notion of it, and differs as much from the notion of a surety; as paying the
debt does from being bound with another, that it shall be paid: Suppose,
secondly, That Christ dyed for us as our Surety; yet did Christ fulfill all
Righteousness for us as our surety too? Does this also exactly answer the case
of suretiship among men, so as that there needs no illustration of it? The
Doctor was so wise, that he would not assert this in the premises, but very
craftily thrusts it into the conclusion; That therefore God makes over our sins
to Christ, and Christ's Righteousness and satisfaction to us: But was there
ever such a surety heard of among men, that one man should discharge all
offices of piety, virtue, justice, temperance instead of another? If such a
thing had ever been, such a man ought not to have been called a surety, but a
proxy: But humane Laws, as many defects as there are in them, never admitted of
such proxies; for these are personal duties, which none can perform for us; you
may as well say, that a man may live and be a man by proxy, as discharge those
duties, which are necessarily entailed on his person by a proxy. Proxies are
allowable only in such cases, where the material enquiry is, whether the thing
be done, not who does it; but where the consideration of the person that does
it, is essential to the action; there is no place for a surety or proxy:
because it does not satisfy the Law, that the thing is done, unless it be done
by such a person. Thus it is in all the duties of Piety and Religion; every
individual person is bound to do them: Though there were never so many
righteous men in the World, there righteousness can avail none but themselves;
Nay, the righteousness of God, which is more than all the righteousness of men
cannot make an unrighteous man righteous; no external Relation can make the
righteousness of another ours; because it is personal righteousness, that is
required of us, and the righteousness of another can never be our personal
righteousness, unless we become one person with him: There is no other way to
make the personal righteousness, (which is the Righteousness required of us)
but by a personal union to Christ, by being christed with Christ, as some
speak, how boldly soever, yet very agreeable to these principles.

Christ is the Surety of the Covenant, Heb. 7.22. Answer.
And he is our Surety also, he undertook the satisfaction of our debts; and
therefore must be such, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, says he, Heb. 10.7.
Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices could not pay our debts: The blood of Bulls and
Goats could not take away sin, as the Apostle there tells us: Christ therefore
undertook the doing of it, he was substituted in our stead or room, he gave his
life, (...), Matthew. 20.28. A price in the room or stead of many; he gave
himself, (...), 1 Timothy 2.6. A counterprice, or vicarious price for all; he was
our (...), his Soul was in our Souls stead, which could never have been, unless
as our Surety he had undertaken to satisfy for us: The sins of us all met upon
that holy immaculate one, Isai. 53.6. He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. Sin
by imputation, who had not the least spot by inhesion; and this could by no
means have been, unless he had undertaken satisfaction as our Surety: St. Paul
could never have been charged with the debt of Onesimus, unless as his Surety;
neither could Christ have been charged with our sins, unless he had been ours:
he was nor only charged with our sins, but made actual satisfaction for them;
he paid that he never took, he was wounded for our transgressions, Isai. 53.5.
He gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. He made such satisfaction, that he
blotted the bond or handwriting that was against us, Col. 2.14. And these
things he would never have done, unless he had taken them upon himself as our
Surety; he says of himself, that he came to give his life a ransom for many,
Matthew. 20.28. He came for that end, as being bound by his suretiship so to do:
He was therefore our Surety, as well as the Surety of the Covenant: Nay, it
being plainly the divine pleasure, that there should be no remission without
shedding of blood, that all pardoning mercy should issue out to us through a
satisfaction; unless he had been our Surety, unless he had undertaken to
satisfy for us, he could not have been Surety of the Covenant; he could not
have secured the least Grace or Mercy to us, more than to Devils; for whom he
would not be surety, or make any satisfaction: Now being our Surety, he is one
with us Conjunctione legali, and so he is with all those for whom he is Surety,
so far forth as he is Surety for them. But possibly Dr. Jacomb may speak of the
Saints, because the Payment or Satisfaction of Christ has a special aspect
upon the Elect or chosen people of God, and is particularly applied to
Believers and Saints; whilst in the mean time to others, who receive not the
Atonement, it is totally ineffectual, and in the event, as it were, none at
all: But, says the Author, I doubt these men are as much out in the Law of
Suretiship, as before in the Laws of Marriage: To which I only say, I hope they
are out in neither. But before I come to the Authors Objections, I shall crave
lieve to offer one thing to the Readers consideration, viz. That the Titles
given to Christ in Scripture, are all to be taken (...), in a way of
transcendent Excellency and Eminency, not according to the narrow Scantling of
humane Laws or Reason: Christ is a Sacrifice, but when did you ever hear of a
Sacrifice that offered up it self, or of a Sacrifice and Priest both in one? Or
when was there a Sacrifice that was offered up through the eternal Spirit, or
that had such an Altar as the Deity? Christ is a Redeemer, but when was there a
Redeemer who paid down himself as a Price, and, which is more, paid down
himself to himself? For so Christ as God-man paid down his humane Nature to
himself as God. Christ is a Mediator, and where is there a Mediator, who has
two Natures in one Person, or who gave himself a Ransom for all? And to name
but one instance more, Christ is a Surety for us; but where was there a Surety
ever procured by the Creditor only? Or a Surety, who took another Nature to be
such in? Christ is a Surety of the Covenant, where there is something on Gods
part, and something on Man's; and who ever heard, that in Articles of
agreement, or reciprocal Covenants between Man and Man, any one became Surety
for a performance of both parts or sides of the Covenants? These things plainly
show, that Christ is all these in a way of Eminency or Transcendency: So that,
unless we will be so bold as to spoil him of the glory and excellency of his
Titles, we must by no means crowd them into the Span of humane Laws or Reason.
This, if considered, will prepare a way to answer the Authors Objections, which
are now to be heard: The Surety does not make himself immediate Debtor, he does
not absolutely take the debt upon himself; he is liable only in case of the
Debtors default: No man in his wits would be Surety for another, when he knew
beforehand, that, if he did, he must pay the debt: Men become Sureties upon
assurance not to suffer injury by it: Thus the Author: To which I answer,
Sureties are usually bound to pay in case of the Debtors default, but it is not
at all material or essential to Suretiship, whether the Debtor be solvent or
not; it is not the Debtors sufficiency, but the Sureties own Act, which makes
him a Surety; neither can a Surety, if prosecuted, plead this in Law, that the
Debtor was a Non solvent at the time when he became Surety: But however it be
with Sureties among men, Jesus Christ was a Surety after another rate than they
are: Sureties among men undertake to pay the debt upon a mere contingency, that
is, if the Debtor make default; but Christ undertook to satisfy for us, not
upon contingency, but certainty: he was delivered (...), by a determinate
Counsel; it was down in the eternal Rolls, that he must make satisfaction for
us, there was not the least Salvo, or Condition, or Contingency in it. No man
in his wits will be a Surety for a known Non-solvent: But Christ was by his
love to us so excordiated and ravished out of himself, that he would be Surety
for us, though known utter Bankrupts, though under the (...), under a perfect
impossibility to fulfill the Law or expiate the least breach of it: Nay, he
would be a Surety for us, for this very reason, because he knew, thar we were
in a lost irrecoverable condition in our selves. The Surety does not absolutely
undertake the debt: But Christ our Surety did absolutely undertake to make
Satisfaction, he was a Surety and a Redeemer both in one: As a Surety he paid
down his Blood for satisfaction, and as a Redeemer he paid the same Blood for a
price of Redemption. A Redeemer, we know, does not depend on the Captive for
paying the Ransom, but absolutely undertakes it himself; and so did Christ our
Redeemer for us: And if as Redeemer he absolutely undertook to pay down his
Blood for a price of Redemption, then as a Surety too, he absolutely undertook
to pay down the same Blood for satisfaction; otherwise his Redeemership and
Suretiship could not possibly consist together. Sureties use to have assurance
to save them harmless: But had Christ any? Or was any such thing possible? It
pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isa. 53.10. There was an absolute (...) upon
his Death and Sufferings, Matthew. 16.21. and how could he be saved harmless
against the Decree of Heaven? Nay, if if he could, he would not; when Peter
would have had him spare himself, he calls Peter, Satan, one who in that
particular savoured not the things of God. Thus we see, Christ is a Surety in a
way of Excellency above humane Sureties. But says the Author, Christ died for
us, not as our Surety, but as our Sacrifice: To which I answer, Christ died for
us as a Sacrifice, but he died for us as a Surety too; no one Notion can take
in all the Excellencies of his Death: Though the Essentials of his Suretiship
lay in his undertaking to satisfy for us, yet the Satisfaction it self was a
just necessary consequent of it: As he offered up himself for us, so he died
for us as a Sacrifice; and as he undertook to satisfy for us, so he died for
us as a Surety. But to pass on with the Author: If Christ died for us as a
Surety, yet did he fulfill all Righteousness for us as a Surety too? Was there
ever such a Surety heard of among men, that one man should discharge all
Offices of Piety, Virtue, Justice, Temperance in stead of another? Such a man
must have been called not a Surety, but a Proxy; but humane Laws admit no such
Proxies; these are personal Duties, which none can perform for us; no external
Relation can make the Righteousness of another ours; the Righteousness of
another can never be our personal Righteousness, unless we become one person
with him: Thus the Author: To which I answer; Here the Author makes a great
wonder at Imputed Righteousness; Was there ever such a Surety heard of among
men? says he: To which I answer, Socinus makes as great a wonder at the
imputation of sin to Christ: Ego sane non video quid absurdius aut iniquius
dici potuerit, quamjure alicui posse aliena peccata imputari; I see nothing
(says he) more absurd or unequal than that the sins of one man should be
imputed to another: Yet for all this our Divines do maintain, that our sins
were imputed to Christ; and indeed there can be no Satisfaction without it. The
Author here complains, that Christ should be a Surety to fulfill all
Righteousness for us, and so that Righteousness should be imputed to us; but if
the sin of one man may be imputed to another, why not his Righteousness? The
Apostle argues from the Imputation of Adam's Sin, to the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; As by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to
justification of life: As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so
by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.18, 19. What can
be more express, if our Reason would submit to it? Bishop Davenant tells us,
that, De justit. habit. cap. 28.
Christus Sponsor pro nobis factus nostro nomine non modo subivit perpessionem
Crucis, sed impletionem Legis: Christ, not as our Proxy, but as our Surety, did
in our name not only undergo the sufferings of the Cross, but took on him the
impletion of the Law. But says the Author, Righteousness is a personal thing,
to be performed by our selves: I answer, What Christ performed for us, was not
performable by our selves in our lapsed estate; he fulfilled all Righteousness
for us to the very highest pitch of the Law, in order to our Justification, and
that we could not reach in our own persons; and that sincere Obedience which we
pay in our own persons does not fully answer the Law, and so appertains not to
our Justification, but Sanctification: And this I take to be the Method of
Salvation which God has chalked out to us. It Is true, the Author urges, That
the Righteousness of another can never be our personal Righteousness: But
though it cannot be ours by Inhesion, yet it may by Imputation; it was only in
Christ's Person, yet may be reckoned or accounted to us in Justification, or
else I cannot tell, how the Blood of Christ, which cleanses away all sin,
should ever be ours; that was not inherent in us, and, if it become ours, it
must be by Imputation: If we own not the Imputation of Christ's Passive
Obedience, we cannot own, that Christ gave himself for us as a Ransom or a
Sacrifice; and if we own the Imputation of his Passive Obedience, we must also
own the Imputation of his Active; for there was, not to say a tincture, but a
great, and high measure of Active Obedience in his Passion, and if his Passion
in its entirety and complete perfection be imputed to us, his Active Obedience
must be imputed to us also.

But now let us consider, Mr. Sherlock.
whether in Law the Debtor and Surety are one person; no considering man can
think it indifferent, who pays the debt, the Surety or the Debtor, or that they
are both equally obliged to it; the Debtor is the immediate Debtor still, and
the Surety only obliged in case of default, the Law does not account it
indifferent which of them pay it: For though it permit the payment to be
exacted from the Surety, in case the Debtor refuse, yet it will look back
again, and allow the surety an action against the debtor for such a refusal,
which is an Argument that the Law does not judge them one person: Thus it is in
bail, the Law does not judge them one person, for if the prisoner escape, the
bail or surety shall be punished according to the nature of the fact; and yet
the prisoner is not quitted by this means, but liable either to the arrest of
the Surety; or in Criminal Causes to the Sentence of the Law, if ever he be
retaken. Thus in Sureties for good behavior (which sounds as if it were
nearest a kin to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness as our Surety) though
the Surety be never so innocent and virtuous, this will not serve him for whom
he is Surety; but if he prove a Villain they shall be both punished: So that
humane Laws are strangers to this Mystery of imputing the Righteousness of a
Surety to a bad man; Suretiship does not so unite their Persons, that whatever
one does, is always and to all purposes imputed to the other: And if this will
not hold good among men, it is a very sorry foundation for this bargain and
exchange betwixt Christ and Believers, that he should take their sins upon
himself, and impute his Righteousness to them.

All this runs upon a mistake, Answer.
that Christ cannot be a Surety, unless he be such after the manner of men; the
Suretyship of Christ is not to be measured by humane Laws, unto which (because
variant among themselves no less, I suppose, in points of Suretyship than in
other things) it cannot possibly correspond; but it is to be measured by the
holy Scriptures, which set forth his undertaking and satisfying our debts in a
way of superlative Excellency above all the Sureties in the world. Among men,
notwithstanding the Surety, the Debtor is Debtor still: But Christ has as our
Surety made such a plenary Satisfaction on our behalf, that if we receive him
by Faith, we are Debtors no longer, all our debts are crossed and blotted out
of Gods Book. Among men the Surety, having made payment, may have his Action
against the Debtor, and ordinarily he seeks to reimburse himself; But our
heavenly Surety seeks no such matter; he knows, that all the Creatures in
Heaven and Earth are not able to repay him what he has laid down for us,
neither if they could, does he desire it; but on the contrary he woes and
beseechs men to come in to him, that their Debts may not be charged on them by
the Law for want of embracing the Gospel. If upon the escape of the Prisoner,
the Bail be punished, yet is not the Prisoner quitted: But our Surety Christ,
did not suffer as a Bail does upon escape, upon accident or contingency, but
upon absolute and irrevocable certainty, such as could not be avoided, and he
suffered so in our room and stead; and his Satisfaction is so far reckoned or
imputed to us, that upon our believing there is not, there cannot be any
condemnation to us, or satisfaction required of us for ever. In Suretiship for
the Behavior, the Virtues of the Surety are not accounted to him for whom he
is Surety: But the Payment and Satisfaction of Christ our Surety is upon
Gospel-terms so imputed and made over to us, that the Law or Justice of God
cannot demand a second Payment and Satisfaction from us: Hence it appears, that
Christ and we are one person in Law, that his Payment and Satisfaction is
reckoned as ours. And what matters it, if humane Laws are strangers to imputed
Righteousness, it suffices us, that this Mystery is founded on the holy
Scripture. When the Romans would have no other Gods, but what were approved of
by the Senate, Tertullian tells them, Apud vos de humano arbitratu Divinitas
pensitatur; Apost. cap. 5.
nifi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit: But as long as we find Imputed
Righteousness in Scripture, we need not seek a Probatu^ est from humane laws or
reason.

Let us now try, Mr. Sherlock.
whether the Notion of a Mediator can do any better service than the Notion of
a Surety. Dr. Owen says, That Christ fulfilled all Righteousness as he was
Mediator, and that whatever he did as Mediator, he did it for them whose
Mediator he was, and in whose stead, and for whose good he executed the Office
of a Mediator before God; and hence is it that his complete and perfect
Obedience to the Law is reckoned to us: But that Christ fulfilled all
Righteousness as he was Mediator must have good proof, the Notion of a Mediator
includes no such thing. A Mediator is one who interposes between two differing
parties; but was it ever heard of yet, that it was the Office of a Mediator to
perform the Terms and Conditions himself: Moses was the Mediator of the first
Covenant, Gal. 3.9. and his Office was to receive the Law from God, and to
deliver it to the people, and to command them to observe the Rites and
Sacrifices and Expiations, which God had ordained; but he was not to fulfill the
Righteousness of the Law for the whole Congregation: Thus Christ is now the
Mediator of a better Covenant, and his Office required, that he should preach
the Gospel, which contains the Terms of peace between God and men; and since
God would not enter into Covenant with sinners without the intervention of a
Sacrifice; he dies too as a Sacrifice and Propitiation for the sins of the
World, and confirms and seals this new Covenant with his own Blood; and being
risen from the dead, he executes this Office of Mediator with power and glory,
that is, he intercedes for us according to the Terms and Conditions of the new
Covenant, to obtain the pardon of our sins, and the assistance of the divine
Grace to do the Will of God, and all those other blessings that are promised:
But the Office of Mediator does not oblige him to fulfill the Righteousness of
the Covenant for us.

Christ is a Mediator but in a supereminent way; a Mediator, Answer.
but above all Peers or Parallels: Hence the Apostle tells us, that there is
one Mediator between God and men the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. One
Mediator; Moses was a Mediator too, but, because Christ was a Mediator in a
peculiar and superexcellent manner, there is but one Mediator. Moses was an
internuncial Mediator; but Christ was a satisfying and atoning one: Hence it
appears, that the Mediatorship of Christ must not be measured by the
Mediatorship of Moses or any other person in the world, but must be construed
according to those singular Excellencies and Preeminencies which the Scripture
attributes to it: The Apostle tells us what a Mediator he was; He gave his life
a ransom for all; and, as I noted before, where his Passive Obedience is
expressed, there the active is employed: Christ was a Mediator in that, which he
did for us; and on our behalf, and for us, and on our behalf he fulfilled all
Righteousness: This is evident; that of Christ's which is imputed, and applied
to us to justify and make us Righteous before God, was done for us, and and on
our behalf; and such was his fulfilling all Righteousness. Hence the Apostle
tells us; That by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
justification of life, and by the obedience of one, shall many be made
righteous, Romans 5.18, 19. Moses was not to fulfill the righteousness of the Law
for the people, nor was he to dye as a propitiatory Sacrifice for them, but
Christ, a more excellent Mediator, did both for us.

Dr. Owen first tells of an habitual Righteousness of Christ, Mr. Sherlock.
as Mediator in his humane Nature, that this was the necessary effect of the
Grace of Union, that thereby he was (...), fit to do all that he did for us; So
that this is not imputed to us, but was his own proper Righteousness: But
Secondly, There is the actual obedience of Christ, which was his willing
performance of every thing that God by any Law did require, besides the
particular Law of the Mediator: Let us then first consider the peculiar Law of
the Mediator, which he tells us, respected himself merely, (so that we have
nothing to do with this neither) and it contains all those acts and duties of
his, which were not for our imitation; he instances in his obedience, which he
showed in dying, ( though St. John tells us, that we must imitate him in this
also, must lay down our lives for the brethren, as Christ dyed for us, Joh.
1.3.16. And St. Paul tells us, that we must be conformed to the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, Romans 6. which sounds very like an imitation) though in
the next page he excepts the case of dying of his passive obedience; and tells
us, that all the rest of his obedience to the Law of meditation is not imputed
to us, as though we had done it; So that by the Law of meditation, he
understands whatever Christ was bound to do as our Mediator, whatever was
proper to his Mediatory office; all this (though sometimes, when he better
thinks of it, he excepts dying) is not imputed to us, as though we had done it:
I hope we shall find something at last to be imputed to us; and yet there is
nothing left now. But thirdly, That which concerns him in a private capacity,
as a man subject to the Law: And now whatever was required of us by virtue of
any Law, that he did and fulfilled: And this is that actual obedience of
Christ, which he performed for us: This is very strange, that what he did as
Mediator, is not imputed to us: But what he did not as our Mediator, but as a
man subject to Law, that is imputed to us, and reckoned as if we had done it,
by reason of his being our Mediator; and it is as strange to the full, that
Christ should do whatever was required of us by virtue of any Law, when he was
neither Husband, Wife, Father, Merchant, Soldier, Captain; much less a Temporal
Prince; and how he should discharge the duties of those Relations for us, when
he was never in any of those Relations, I leave to the subtilty of the
Schoolmen.

I know not of what moment this discourse is, Answer.
only the Author would seem to wrap the Doctor up in obscurity; but the Doctor
has expressed his mind in plain terms, page 182. his words are these: God sent
Christ as a Mediator to do and suffer whatever the Law required at our hand;
for that end and purpose, that we might not be condemned, but accepted of God.
This satisfies me, Christ our Mediator was made under the Law, under the
command, and under the curse of it; he fulfilled the command of it by his
active obedience, he bore the curse of it by his passive: This entire obedience
of his, which fully answers the Law, is by God imputed to us; not as if we were
Mediators, or had done it as Mediators; no, by no means, Christ is the great
Actor of it, the Mediatorship is his own: But it is imputed to us so far as to
justisie us, and make us righteous before God; we were no efficients in it, but
are mere recipients; and it is applied to us in order to our justification: It
is not for us to reach the works of our Savior; these are far above our Line,
we must indeed lay down our lives for the Brethren, as St. John tells us: But
what in a way of atonement and expiation of sin! No, it is too high for us so
to do: Paul was not crucisied for us, nor can any other Saint be, only we must,
as we can, Procul ejus vestigia sequi, as Calvin expresses it, imitate him as
far as our model goes: We must be conformed to the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, Romans 6. We must dye unto sin, and be alive unto God: But, after we have
in our little resembled him, we must confess, that the merit is only in him,
not in us, we are but receivers, he is the great purchasor: But, says the
Author, it is strange that Christ should do whatever was required of us by
virtue of any Law, when he was neither Husband, Wife, Father, Merchant,
Soldier, Captain or Prince; and how could he discharge the duties of those
relations which he was never in? To which, I answer, After this rate would the
Socinians rob us of the satisfactory passion of Christ: For, say they, If
Christ had satisfied for us, then he must have suffered all that we should have
suffered; that is, eternal torments, which he did not: But one answer serves
for both: Christ suffered the same which we should have suffered in the
substantials and essentials of it, though not in the accidentals or
circumstantials of it; and what was wanting in the duration of his sufferings
was compensated by the dignity of his person, and Christ fufilled the command
of the Law in the substantials and essentials of it, though not in every
relation; this latter not being poslible for him to do, because he could not
possibly be in all relations; he had that Love in perfection, which is (...),
the fulfilling of the Law, and what of accidentals of obedience was not in him,
was compensated by the dignity of his person.

The Doctor tell us, Mr. Sherlock.
That of this exexpression, as Mediator, there is a double sense, it may be
taken strictly, as relating solely to the Mediator, and so Christ may be said
to do as Mediator, only what he did in obedience to the Law, (that is only what
he did as Mediator, which is a pretty Observation:) But in the sense now
insisted on ( that is, not strictly as Mediator, but as not Mediator, whatever
Christ did, as a man subject to the Law, he did as Mediator, because he did it
as part of the duty incumbent on him, who undertook so to be: The meaning is,
that he, who was Mediator, being bound to do such things, though not as
Mediator, but as a man subject to the Law; yet he did them as Mediator, because
he was a Mediator who did them, which is such an exposition of Qua, as
subtilest Schoolmen never yet thought of.

I suppose there is no need of the subtle Schoolmen, Answer.
who yet sometimes take Qua specificative, sometimes repliducative: I suppose
the Doctor wants only a fair Interpreter, he tells us expressly, page 182. God
sent Christ as a Mediator to do and suffer whatever the Law required at our
hands; for that end and purpose, that we might not be condemned, but accepted
of God. It was all to this end, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
sulfilled in us; that is, which the Law required of us, consisting in duties of
obedience; this Christ performed for us: The Doctor does not merely intend that
the Mediator did fulfill the Law, or that he who did fulfill it was a Mediator;
but that he did it as a Mediator, and was by God sent to do so, and that for
us. This, I suppose, will appear to any Reader, who seriously peruses the
places in the Doctors Book; a little piece of a face, and that wrested, will
hardly reprsent the whole as it ought.

The difficulty of Christ's doing those things as Mediator, Mr. Sherlock.
which did not belong to the Laws of his Mediation, is a very material one, and
requires great skill in Logic to get rid of it: but however, it is wisely done
to make a show of saying something, to that which cannot be answered; for he
was sensible, that what Christ did purely as Mediator could not be imputed to
us, as though we had done it, though the (...), or fruits of it are, because we
were never designed to be Mediators and the Righteousness of a Mediator is as
improper to be imputed to those, who are not Mediators, as it is to impute the
Righteousness of a Prince to a Beggar; therefore he was forced to consider him
not as Mediator, but as a private man, though this too was impossible; for he
could not at the same time act so wany different and opposite parts as there
are relations and conditions of men in the world; and yet when he thought on it
again, he found, that it was not the Righteonsness of a private person, that
would avail us (because we have no way to come at it, to make it ours) but only
the Righteousness of the Mediator, who did, what he did for us, and in our
stead; and so wheels about again, and is caught in the net and labyrinth of his
making.

The Doctor asserts positively, Answer.
that Christ, as Mediator did do whatever the Law required at our hands; and I
can never persuade my self, that he should exclude the fulfilling of the Law
from the Laws of his Mediation: But then, as the Author would have it, we run
upon another rock; that is, If what Christ did as Mediator be imputed to us,
then we must become Mediators, and much such an Argument against imputed
Righteousness, we have in Bellarmine, whose words are these, De justif. l. 2.
cap. 7.
Si vere imputaretur nobis Christi justitia, profecto non minus justi haberi
censerique deberemus quam ipse Christus, proinde deberemus dici atque haberi
Redemptores and salvatores mundi. Upon which Bishop Davenant gives this
censure, that it is ridicula illatio; The Righteousness of Christ was in
himself by inhesion, or from him by personal action; but it is ours only by
imputation; and who ever heard of a Mediator, made such by imputation, or by
that Righteousness, which another performed for him? The Righteousness of
Christ is imputed to us; but what, Secundum totam latitudinem, to all intents
and purposes whatsoever? Oh no, it is not imputed to us, to do that which is
impossible, to make us Mediators, or the Efficients of it, but so far only as
to make us Righteous before God; by the imputation of it, we are justified and
saved, but we are not Mediators and Saviors: The Righteousness is formally
Christ's the one Mediators; but materially it becomes ours by imputation, so
far forth as to justify us: The Righteousness it self is one thing, and the
manner of application another: Bellarmine himself, who made the objection, can
say in another place, passiones Christi, and quae sunt infiniti pretii, De
Indulgent. l. ^. cap. 4.
applicari per indulgentias finiso modo: So say I, the Righteousness of Christ
is imputed to us, not to all intents and purposes; not to translate a
Mediatorship upon us, but in a limited manner, to justify and save us, who are
the receivers of it: It is imputed to every Believer, but it makes never an one
of them, God-man; and no man that is a mere man, or less than God-man can be an
expiating and saving Mediator; or, if he could, he could not be such without a
Divine Call or Ordination, which no Believer can pretend to: The Mediatorship
is totally, solely Christ's; but the Righteousness which he performed, is so
far imputed to us, as to justify and save us: The satisfaction of Christ's
death is made ours, and that by imputation; or else we must be pardoned without
a (...); and yet that imputation does not make us satisfying Mediators: Our
Church tells us, 1. Hoim. of Salvation.
Christ is the Righteousness of them that believe, he for them paid the ransom
by his death; he for them fulfilled the Law in his life: So that now in him,
and by him, every true Christian may be called a fulfiller of the Law: And yet
our Church never dreamed of any such thing, as that such an imputation would
turn a Believer into a Mediator; there is therefore no ill consequence, but an
infinite comfort in this assertion; that the Righteousness of Christ, our
Mediator is imputed to us.

The Doctor tells us, Mr. Sherlock.
That Christ was under no obligation to obey these Laws himself; And to make
this appear, he discourses particularly of the Law of our Creation, and the
Ceremonial Law given to the Jews: And for the first, the Law of Creation, that
comprehends those eternal Laws, which result from the essential difference of
good and evil, which all mankind are bound to observe by the very frame of
their natures: Now he dares not deny, that Christ was bound to obey this Law
for himself; but then his obedience was voluntary: And what of that? For so the
obedience of every good man is; for by voluntary he tells us, he does not mean,
That it was merely arbitrary, and at his choice, whether he would obey or not;
but on supposition of his undertaking to be Mediator, it was necessary it
should be so; but he voluntarily and willingly submitted to it: and so became
really subject to the commands of it. And is it not very plain now, that Christ
was not obliged to obey those Laws, because he willingly submitted to them; but
he means somewhat more by this, voluntary, than he could tell how to express;
and all that I can guess is, that whereas we are bound to obey these Laws
antecedently to our choice; it was not so with him, for his obligation was
consequential, upon his being born, and becoming man, which was his own choice;
and yet, even then, as he tells us: As he was Mediator God-man, he was not by
the institution of that Law obliged to it, being, as it were, lifted up above
that Law by the hypostatical Union: Now this is very profound reasoning; for
the meaning of it is this: That Christ had not been bound to live like a man,
unless he had become man; and yet I can grant something more, that it was
impossible that he should have lived like a man, without being man: But when he
chose to be man, he was bound to discharge all the duties of a man for himself:
But how could he be exempted from this Law, by being Mediator God and Man: When
the Doctor acknowledges, that upon supposition of his being Mediator, it was
necessary it should be so; that is, that he should obey, now, not to be obliged
by the Institution of the Law as Mediator; and that it should be necessary for
him to obey as Mediator, are at so great a distance, that it may serve for
another trial of skill to reconcile them.

Christ, Answer.
when he assumed the humane Nature, was as man subject to the Law of Creation;
for his humane Nature was but a Creature, and its will, not being Supreme in it
self, was under the Divine Will; but Christ freely and voluntarily became man;
and so put himself of his own accord into the state of subjection; and as he
was not made man for himself, but for us: So neither was he made under the Law
for himself, but for us. Hence the Apostle joining both these together; He was
made of a woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. Superadds as the end common
to both, that he might redeem us; he assumed humanity, and with it duty,
neither for himself, but both for us, that he might (...), fulfill the Law,
Matthew. 5.17. for us; not only doctrinally, by opening the pure Spirituality of
it; but practically too, by fulfilling all the Righteousness thereof. Christ as
man was bound by the Law; but this hinders not, but that his obedience may be
for us, and may be imputed to us in justification: No sooner was that Divine
Decree (which put a must upon Christ's sufferings) made known to him as man;
but he was bound to dye, and yet his death was a sweet Sacrifice for us, and a
propitiation for our sins; And as the Blood of Christ was the Blood of God, so
the obedience of Christ was the obedience of God; being stamped with his Deity,
it amounted to an infinite sum; enough for himself, and a world besides.
Christ was in some sense, as it were, exempted, and lifted up above the Law by
the hypostatical Union; he might have carried up the Humane Nature into heaven,
in the very first instant of its assumption; he need not have performed the
Law, in such a debased manner, for such a space of time, and in such a place as
earth; he was not simply and absolutely bound to it in himself; but upon
supposition, that he took upon him the Mediatory Office, he was bound to fulfill
the Law for us as he did.

Though we suppose, Mr. Sherlock.
that Christ as man was bound to yield obedience to the Law of Creation, yet
the Dr. observes, that this is the only Law he could be liable to as a man; for
an innocent man in a Covenant of works, as he was, needed no other Law, nor did
God give any other Law to such persons; the Law of Creation is the only Law,
that an innocent Creature is liable to, with what Symbols of the Law God is
pleased to add: But now Jesus Christ yielded perfect obedience to all the Laws
which came upon us by the occasion of sin, as the Ceremonial Law; yea, those
very Institutions that signified the washing away of sin and repentance from
sin, as the Baptism of John, which he had no need of himself; this therefore
must needs be for us: This looks something like, but I fear it will prove like
all the rest, that is, to no purpose: I would willingly have had some proof of
it, that an innocent man can be bound by no other Law than that of Creation:
God, as he acknowledges, might add what Symbols he pleased to that Law; (for he
remembered the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil) and I
know not what these Symbols are, but positive Laws, and such the Ceremonial
Laws were; and if God may require the obedience of an innocent man to one
positive Law, he may, if he please, enjoin twenty. And though they were at
first commanded upon occasion of sin, an innocent man may observe them to good
and wise purposes, as solemn acts of Worship, external expressions of Devotion,
a public profession of a virtuous Life; to which purposes among others, the
Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law and Baptism of John served: And if there
were no other reason, this were enough, that an innocent man should set an
example of reverence to all divine Institutions: But this is not worth
contending about; for the Righteousness of the Ceremonial Law could never
justify any man; neither can I understand, why the Doctor should suppose, that
Christ fulfilled the Ceremonial Law for all Believers, when the greatest part
of them, the Gentiles, were never under the obligation of it.

God gave unto innocent Adam symbolical Precepts, Answer
over and above the Law of Creation; but what were those Precepts? Not
Washings, Purifications, Circumcisions, Expiations, Sacrifices, nothing that
was significative of sin, but such only as were congruous to that State: The
true One would not have the least shadow of a lie in his Service; neither is it
to me imaginable that Christ should for his own sake be put under such Laws as
are unsuitable to his Innocence; what need had he of Circumcision, who had no
corrupt flesh in him, or of Baptism, who was without spot? But, says the
Author, an innocent man may observe such Laws, for profession or examples sake:
But surely what he does must be done in truth. We find in Scripture, that at
the Jewish Sacrifices there was a confession of sin, the form of which, as
their Doctors say, was thus; O Lord, thy people, the house of Israel, they have
sinned, they have done wickedly, etc. and might an innocent Israelite (had
there been such an one) have joined in this confession, and that without the
forfeiture of his innocence? I doubt he could not: Besides, when the Scripture
assigns no such reason for Christ's subjection to any Law, who may be so bold
as to do it? But, says the Author, Christ's Obedience to the Ceremonial Law
justifies no man; Neither according to the Author does his Obedience to the
Moral Law; and therefore he might have left his Obedience, which is the
compleature of all divine Laws, undivided and in its entirety.

The Dr. says, Mr. Sherlock.
There can be no other reason assigned of Christ's Obedience to the Law of God,
but only this, that he did it in our stead: Now this Argument would be good,
were it true and were there not a great many things done, which we cannot
assign the reason of, and yet done for great and weighty reasons; but this
reason is sufficient, because he was as much bound to it as any other man. The
Dr takes it for granted, That if Christ were not bound to obey these Laws upon
his own account, it must be either for us, or to fit him for his Death and
Oblation; but it was not to fit him for his Death, therefore it was for us: He
tells us, that he answered all Types, and was every way fit to be made an
offering for sin by his Union and habitual Grace: If his Obedience were not for
us, and upon our account, there is no just cause to be assigned, why he should
live here in the world so long as he did in perfect obedience to all the Laws
of God. Had he died before, there had been perfect Innocence and perfect
Holiness by his habitual Grace, and infinite Virtue and Worth from the dignity
of his Person; and surely he yielded not that long course of Obedience but for
some great and special purposes, in reference to our Salvation: Yes truly; but
must this needs be his actual fulfilling all Righteousness for us? What do you
think of his preaching the Gospel throughout all Judea which would take up some
time? What of the many Miracles which confirmed his Doctrine? What of training
up his Apostles to succeed him in his Ministry as Eyewitnesses and
Earwitnesses of his Miracles and Doctrine? What of the holy Example of his
Life, which was no less necessary than his Laws? These are all great and
special purposes in reference to our Salvation, though we should suppose him
fit to have been a Sacrifice ( as Herod designed he should have been) as soon
as he were born; though by the way, I think he could not have answered the
Types and Predictions of him, had he dyed so soon, notwithstanding his perfect
innocence and holiness.

I take it the Doctor's Scope was this, Answer.
That the end of Christ's Active Obedience could not be assigned to be, that he
might be fitted for his death and oblation, and that because be was every way
fit to be made an offering for sin, by his Union and habitual Grace; the Dr.
intended not, that Christ lived here so long, only that he might obey and for
no other ends: It Is true that Christ lived here so long, that he might preach,
and do Miracles, and instruct his Apostles, and it is true, that he lived here
so long, that he might fulfill all Righteousness, all these were ends of his
living here; but the Quaere is, What was the end of his Active Obedience? I
never yet read, that the end of that was his preaching, doing of Miracles, or
instructing his Apostles; these were simultaneous and concurrent in time with
his Obedience. But Christ obeyed the Law, that he might give us an holy Example
by his Life: I grant it, but that was not all; Christ died also for to leave an
Example to us, but there was much more in his Death; in truth both were for our
Justification: As we are justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. so we are made
righteous by his obedience, ver. 9.

His Third Reason to prove, Answer.
that Christ fulfilled all Righteousness for us, is from the absolute necessity
of it: For this is the Term of the Covenant, Do this and live; Life is not to
be obtained, unless all be done that the Law requires; we being unable to do
this, it is necessary that Christ our Mediator and Surety should fulfill the Law
for us: This Argument is to prove that it ought to be so, not that it is so;
but we must not prescribe methods to God. The sum of the Argument is, that
there never was, nor never can be a Covenant of Grace; that God still exacts
the rigorous perfection of the Law from us; that we must not appear before him
without a complete and perfect Righteousness of our own or of another: Now this
is the thing in question, Whether we must be made righteous with the perfect
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, or whether God will for the sake of
Christ dispense with the rigor of the Law, and accept of a sincere and
Evangelical Obedience in stead of a perfect and unsinning Righteousness; so
that he only confidently affirms what was in dispute, and this goes for an
Argument.

We must not prescribe methods to God: Answer.
Nor may we deny those he has set down and reveiled to us. The Scripture tells
us, that Justification under the Gospel is in a way completive and perfective
of the Law, so that the Law is established, Romans 3.31. and has its end or
complement, Romans 10.4. and this cannot be without a perfect Righteousness: And
withal the Scripture tells us where that Righteousness is, Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness to us, Romans 10.4. and, We are made the Righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. The Righteousness of Christ is made ours by
Imputation, and that answers the Law in every point. But then (says the
Author) there can be no covenant of Grace: If the perfect Righteousness were to
be done by us in our own persons, there could be none indeed; but may there be
none, if that Righteousness be fulfilled by Christ and imputed to us? The
Papists use to blast imputed Righteousness with many ugly names, as if it were
putative, an imaginary Fiction, a Spectrum of Luther's Brain, and the like; but
I never before heard, that the Righteousness of Christ, made ours by
Imputation, did overthrow the Covenant of Grace: Sure the Passive Righteousness
of Christ does not overthrow it, and, if the Active be joined with that as it
ought, no evil can ensue; but we may in the conjunction of both as in a Glass
see the admirable Wisdom of God, which has framed the Covenant of Grace in
such a manner, that we, who have no perfect Righteousness of our own, are yet
justified by the complete Righteousness of Christ our Surety; so that the Law,
though not fulfilled by us, has its perfect completion. It Is true, that God
accepts of our sincere Obedience, but not in Justification; not in the room of
Christ's perfect Righteousness, but in its own proper place, having its defects
covered with Christ's Righteousness.

The Doctor makes a great flourish with some Scripture-phrases, Mr. Sherlock
that there is almost nothing that Christ has done, but we are said to do it
with him; We are crucified with him, dead with him, buried with him, quickened
with him; etc. But he is quite out in the reason of these expressions, which is
not, that we are accounted to do the same things, which Christ did, but because
we do some things like them: Our dying to sin is a conformity to the death of
Christ, and our walking in newness of life, a conformity to his Resurrection.

I know no Divine who interprets those Phrases (of being crucified, Answer.
dead, buried, quickened with Christ) of imputed Righteousness, neither do I
suppose that the Doctor ever intended any such thing; those Phrases belong to
Sanctification: Then we are crucified with Christ, when we feel the power of
his Cross in our Mortification then we are risen with Christ, when we feel the
power of his Resurrection raising of us up to the divine Life and Likeness.

The Doctor cites that Text, Mr. Sherlock.
Gal. 4. 4, 5. God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, and here he stops; but I shall take
confidence to add, That we might receive the adoption of Sons: Now by being
made under the Law, he tells us is meant, being disposed of in such a
condition, that he must yield subjection and obedience to the Law; well,
suppose this, and this was all to redeem us, and therefore our redemption is by
the obedience of Christ imputed to us: Fairly argued, but can his obedience to
the Law contribute no otherways to our redemption, but by being reckoned as
done by us? But the truth is, this, us, is not in the text, it is not to redeem
us, but to redeem them that were under the Law, that is, the Jews, who were in
bondage under the Mosaical Law; from which Christ redeemed them by abrogating
that Law, and introducing a better covenant, the adoption of sons: For in this
Epistle, nay in this chapter, the Law is called a state of servants, and of an
heir under age, but the Gospel is the adoption of sons, puts us into such a
free and manly state, as that of an heir at age, and therefore is called the
Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. So that the meaning of this Text is this, that
God has put an end to the dispensation of the Law, which is called redeeming
them that are under the Law, in a state of servitude and bondage, and has
established a better Covenant in the room of it, which as much exceeds the Law
as the adoption of Sons does the state of Servants; and this God brought to
pass by sending his Son made of a woman, made under the Law: For the
understanding of which words we must consider, what influence Christ's
appearing in the world had on the abrogation of the Law, and that was, that he
accomplished all the Types and Figures of the Law in his own Person; and when
all those Types were fulfilled, they grew out of date: So that his being made
under the Law most probably signifies his being made such a Person, as should
exactly answer all the Types and Figures of the Law, and so to put an end to
it, as of no further use: Thus the Temple was God's House, but now the
Shechinah or divine Glory rested on Christ: When Christ the great High Priest
came, and offered himself, all legal Priests and Sacrifices were of no use:
Thus by his being under the Law, and accomplishing all the Types of it; he put
an end to all those beggarly rudiments, and delivered the Jews from the bondage
of the Law; for though the Gentiles too are redeemed by Christ, yet they were
not redeemed from the Law of Moses, under which they never were.

God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, Answer.
made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons: Thus the Apostle, Gal. 4. 4, 5. The Son of God
was made of a woman, in his Incarnation, made under the Law; under the rule of
it in his active obedience; under the curse of it, in his passive; and the end
of all was, that he might redeem us; that we, who were captives under the wrath
of God, might be redeemed ones. And further, that we might receive the adoption
of sons, that we, who were children of wrath, might be sons of God, and so
heirs of eternal life; and that it may be thus indeed, that Christ's being
under the Law, his active and passive obedience may procure such a redemption
and adoption; such an exemption from wrath, and title to heaven for us: His
obedience must be applied to us, and become ours, which cannot be but by
imputation: But, says the Author: This, us, is not in the Text, it is not, to
redeem us, but to redeem them that were under the Law; that is, the Jews: But
was not Christ a Redeemer of the Gentiles also? Or is he not their Redeemer
within this Text? Yes, surely, observe the words of the Apostle; To redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. The
Apostle alters his phrase, and turns them into, we, which takes in the
Galatians into the adoption; and by consequence into the redemption too; and to
make it more clear, he alters his phrase again, and turns we into ye; in the
next verse which hangs upon the former: And because ye are sons, verse. 6. ye
Galatians, ye Gentiles are sons; and ye Galatians, ye Gentiles, are redeemed
ones within the Text: Otherwise, which is very strange, the Apostle should
argue from the Redemption of the Jews only, to the Adoption of the Gentiles:
But to go on, Christ, says the Author, redeemed the Jews from the bondage of
the Mosaical Law (that is, I suppose, the Ceremonial Law) and introduced a
better Covenant, the adoption of sons. To which I answer, Christ did indeed
redeem from the bondage of Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies: But is this all the
Redemption within the Text? If we stop here, we fall in with the gloss of
Socinus; who understands only a freedom, A jugo legis, De servat. part. 2. cap.
24.
ut Spiritus servilis loeo filialem spiritum adipiscerentur. The Redemption
here is not to be restrained to a freedom from Mosaical Ceremonies only: Christ
was made under the whole Law, and the Redemption, which must be parallel to his
being under the Law, must not only be a Redemption from the Bondage of the
Ceremonial Law, but a Redemption from the curse of the Moral; of which the
Apostle had discoursed but a little before, Gal. 3.13. Our Savior was never
made under the whole Law to redeem from a part of it only. Again, Redemption
from the Ceremonial Law was peculiar to the Jews: But the Redemption here
spoken of reaches as far as the Gentiles also; who, as I before noted, have a
share in the Adoption of Sons, as well as the Jews: The Redemption here spoken
of, is not a part or piece of Redemption, but Redemption in its fullness and
excellency. Christ by coming into the flesh, introduces a better Covenant;
that is, the beams of Evangelical Light were purer, and the effusions of the
holy Spirit larger than before: But still we must remember, that the Covenant
of Grace was for substance, one and the same under both Testaments: Under the
Old Testament, true Believers had the Law in their heart, the Adoption of Sons,
the free Spirit, and a true title to eternal Life: And on the other hand, under
the New Testament, unbelievers have the Law and Gospel too, but in the Letter;
their bondage is far greater than that of beggarly Elements: The unclean spirit
dwells and works in them; and the dreadful wrath of God abides on them.
Christ's being under the Law, says the Author, is his being such a person, as
should exactly answer all the Types and Figures of the Law: Unto which I add:
His being under the Law, is his being such a person, as should exactly answer
all the demands of the Moral Law, in its mandatory and minatory parts.

I shall now examine what influence the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, Mr.
Sherlock.
and the Righteousness of his life have upon our acceptance with God: And all
that I can find in Scripture about this, is, that to this we owe the Covenant
of Grace, that God being well pleased with the obedience of Christ's Life, and
the sacrifice of his Death; for his sake entered into a new Covenant with
mankind; wherein he promses pardon of sin and eternal life to those who believe
and obey the Gospel: This is very plain with reference to Christ's death. Hence
the Blood of Christ is called the blood of the covenant, Heb. 10.29. And Christ
is called, the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, Heb. 13.20. And the Blood of Christ is called, the blood
of sprinkling, which speaks better things than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24.
which is an allusion to Moses, his sprinkling the blood of the Sacrifice,
whereby he confirmed the Covenant between God and the children of Israel, Heb.
9.19, 20, 21. For when Moses had spoken every Precept to all the people
according to the Law (when he had declared the terms of this Covenant to them)
he took the Blood of Calves and Goats, with Water and scarlet Wool, and Hysop,
and sprinkled both the Book, and all the People, saying, This is the blood of
the testament, which God has ordained to you: Thus the Blood of Christ is
called, the blood of sprinkling; Because by his Blood God did seal and confirm
the Covenant of Grace, as the sprinkling of the blood of beasts did confirm the
Mosaical Covenant, Hence we are said, to be justified by the blood of Christ,
Romans 5.9. that is, by the Gospel Covenant, which was confirmed with his Blood:
Christ is called a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. that is,
by a belief of his Gospel. Hence the Scripture uses these phrases
promiscuously; To be justified by Faith, and to be justified by the faith of
Christ; and to be justified by Christ, and to be justified through Faith in his
blood, and to be justified and saved by grace; Nay, by believing, that Christ
is the Son of God, Joh. 20.31. And that God raised him from the dead, Romans
10.9. All which signify the same thing, that we are justified by believing and
obeying the Gospel; for faith, or faith in Christ signifies such a firm belief
of the Gospel, as brings forth all fruits of obedience, and the Grace of God is
the Gospel of Christ, expressly so called, Tit. 2.11. As being the effect of
Gods Grace, and Faith in the Blood of Christ is a belief of the Gospel; which
was confirmed by his death, and believing, that Christ is the Son of God, the
Messiah, and Prophet, whom God sent to reveil his will, includes a general
belief of the Gospel, which he preached; and believing that God raised him from
the dead does the same, because his Resurrection was the last and great
confirmation of the truth of the Gospel. Hence the Apostles attribute such
things to the Blood of Christ, as are the proper immediate office of the
Gospel Covenant, because the Blood of Christ is the Blood of the Covenant; and
therefore all the blessings of the Gospel are owing to it, because the
Gospel Covenant was procured and confirmed by it: Thus the Gentiles, who were a
far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ; and the Gentiles and Jews were
reconciled unto God in one body by the cross, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. That is, the
Gentiles were received into the fellowship of God's Church, and the Jews and
Gentiles united in one body: Now this union of Jews and Gentiles is owing to
the Gospel, which takes away all marks of distinction and separation, and gives
them both an equal right to the blessing of the New Covenant: This New Covenant
belongs to all mankind; there is now no distinction of persons: Neither Jew,
nor Greek, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ is all, and in all:
No man is acceptable to God, because he is a Jew or Greek; but the only thing
of any value is Faith in Christ, or a belief of the Gospel, which is
indifferently offered to all. Now this is attributed to the Blood of Christ,
and to his death, because thereby Christ put an end to the Mosaical Covenant;
and sealed this New Covenant of Grace with Mankind, as the Apostle explains
himself, in the following verses 17.18. etc. That Christ having abolished the
Law of Commandments by his death, he came and preached peace, (that is, the
Gospel of peace) to them who were a far off, to the Gentiles, and to them who
were nigh to the Jews, he abrogated the Mosaical Law; That Law of Commandments
contained in ordinances, which was peculiar to the Jews, and separated them
from the rest of the World; And he broke down the middle wall of partition,
which kept the uncircumcised Gentiles, though Proselites, at a distance from
God, as confining their worship to the outward court of the Temple, which the
Apostle seems to refer to in that phrase; Them that were a far off. And now, by
the Gospel he admits the Gentiles to as near an approach to God, as the Jews:
As he adds; For through him we have an access by one Spirit to the Father,
verse. 18.

The Author enquiring, Answer.
what influence the obedience and death of Christ have upon our acceptance with
God, resolves it thus: All that I can find in Scripture is, that to this we owe
the Covenant of Grace. Christ's Blood is called the Blood of the Covenant,
because it did seal and confirm the Covenant. I answer, Christ's Blood did
indeed seal and confirm the Covenant: But is this the all of it? Socinus will
own as much as this comes to; Sicuti alicujus animantis sanguine fuso foedera
antiquitus sanciebantur, De servat. l. 1. cap. 3.
and confirmabantur, ita Christi silii sui sanguine foedus suum novum atque
aeternum, quod nobiscum per ipsum Christum pepigerat, sancivit and confirmavit
Deus: Thus he, telling us too, that it is therefore called, Sanguis aeterni
foederis: To the same purpose speaks the Racovian Catechist, with others of the
same Tribe: But the Scripture tells us more of the Blood of Christ, That we are
justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. But, says the Author, we are said to be
justified by his Blood; that is, by the Gospel Covenant, which was confirmed
with his Blood: This is a strange way of interpreting Scripture: We are
justified by his blood; that is, by the Gospel: We may as well go on to verse
18. and say, justification of life is by the righteousness of one; that is, by
the Gospel: And to verse 19. and say, We are made righteous by the obedience of
one; that is, by the Gospel: And from thence we may go on at the same rate with
other Scriptures, as, He has washed us from our sins in his own blood, Revel.
1.5. that is, in his own Gospel: The blood of Jesus Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered up himself without spot to God, shall purge your
consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14. that is, the Gospel shall do it: This
is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of
sins, Matthew. 26.28. that is, this is my New Testament of the New Testament,
which is shed for many, for the remission of fins: Rather than make such work
with Scripture; we were as good let the Blood of our dear Lord stand there, as
it ought, in its justifying Glory: We are justified by Christ's blood; that is,
by the Gospel: And is Christ's Blood the Gospel? Or where in all the Scripture
is the Blood of Christ so taken? The Scripture rarely, if ever, speaks of being
justified by the Gospel, but it speaks much and often of being justified by
Christ's Blood: It cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. It purges the
conscience, Heb. 9.19. It was shed for the remission of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. It
washes us from our sins, Rev. 1.5. And yet all this contrary to the express
words and genius of Scripture, must be understood not of the Blood of Christ,
but of the Gospel; and why of the Gospel? Because his Blood confirmed the
Gospel: And is justifying and confirming the Gospel all one? Christ's Blood,
according to the Author, confirmed the Covenant with all Mankind; but all men
are not justified: When the Scripture speaks of Christ's Blood and Death as
confirmative of the Covenant or Gospel, it speaks sometimes in general of all
men: Thus he died for all men, 2 Cor. 5.15. He gave himself a ransom for all,
1 Timothy 2.6. with many other places to the same purpose: But when the Scripture
speaks of Christ's Blood as justifying, it speaks not in general of all, but in
particular of Believers only; and yet if justify- and confirming the Gospel
were all one, it might be as truly said, that Christ justifies all as that he
died for all The Gospel is the Charter of Justification; but besides the
Charter their must be a Righteousness to be the Matter of our Justification:
God never justifies any man without a Righteousness, and what is it? Is it the
very Act of Faith? Thus Socinus would have it, De servat. part. 4. cap. 4.
that the (...) Credere is loco justitiae, in the room of all Righteousness:
But I have before proved that Faith as an Act and absolutely in it self
considered cannot justify us; Or is it our inherent Graces? This is the express
Tenet of the Papists: Thus Bellarmine would have justifying Grace to be donum
in Animainhaerens, Renovation and Regeneration: Against this our Protestant
Divines have sufficiently testified. Indeed no man, who understands, either
himself and his own Errata's, or the necessary distinction which is to be made
between Justification and Sanctification, can assert it: And now nothing
remains to be our Righteousness in Justification but the Obedience and atoning
Blood of Christ, and these cannot be applied to us, and become ours but by
Imputation: By this it appears, that the Blood of Christ does not only confirm
the Covenant, but that it justifies us also. And this further appears by the
place quoted by the Author, Moses sprinkled the blood on the book and on all
the people, Heb. 9.19. He did not only confirm the Covenant, but sprinkled the
People too; this was the Type or Figure; but Christ, who is the Substance, not
only confirms the Covenant, but sprinkles the hearts of Believers by his Blood:
Hence their hearts are sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10.22. and they
have the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2. But to go on; The
Scripture, says the Author, uses these phrases promiscuously, to be justified
by Faith, by Christ, by Grace; nay, by believing that Christ is the Son of God,
or risen from the dead: To which I answer, All these concur to the same
Justification, but not in the same manner: Grace, which is the inward impulsive
Cause of Justification, is not Christ or his Blood; the Blood of Christ, which
is the Matter of our Righteousness, is not Faith; Faith, which is the Hand to
receive Christ and Grace, is not the Gospel, the Charter of Justification,
which contains the Evangelical Axioms, such as those, touching Christ's being
the Son of God or touching his Resurrection from the dead, are: These are
distinct things and not to be confounded. As for that place, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16.
the Apostle speaks indeed of reconciling Jews and Gentiles, but that is not
all, he speaks too of reconciling both to God, ver. 16. and of making them one
new man in himself, ver. 15. which notes a further reconciliation than that
among themselves, even a conjunction with God and Christ, according to our
Saviors Prayer, That they maybe one in us, Joh. 17.21. Christ, says the
Author, abrogated the Mosaical Law: I answer, He did so as to Types and
Ceremonials; but the Moral Law, which is immortalized by its intrinsecal
Sanctity, stands to this day, and the Grace, which was under the Old Testament,
was not abrogated, but made more illustrious than it was before. The Gentiles,
says the Author, were at a distance from God; But if they had natural Faith,
and could by it please God, the distance was less and more tolerable; though
they were but in the outward Court of the Temple, nay, though they were a
thousand miles off from it, they would do well enough in the other world.

Mr. Sherlock.
Thus the Jews are said to be redeemed from the curse of the Law, by the
accursed death of Christ upon the Cross, Gal. 3.13. Because the death of Christ
put an end to that Legal dispensation, and sealed a new and better Covenant
between God and Man; and the Gentiles were redeemed from their vain
conversation, received from their fathers, that is, from those idolatrous and
impure practices they were guilty of; not with silver and gold, but with the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.18, 19. Now the Gentiles were
delivered from their Idolatry by the preaching of the Gospel, which is called
their being redeemed by the blood of Christ, because we owe this unspeakable
blessing to his death.

Thus the Jews are redeemed from the curse of the Law by the accursed death of
Christ, Answer.
Gal. 3.13. so the Author; and thus Socinus, De Servat. part. 2. cap. 1.
Ad Judaeos tantum pertinet, This belongs only to the Jews: But the Curse which
fell upon Christ, was not a ceremonial one, but a real, such as put him into
Agonies and a bloody Sweat; neither were the Jews only redeemed from it, but
the Gentiles also; what else was this to the Galatians who were Gentiles? Were
not the Gentiles also under the Curse, and by nature children of wrath? No
doubt they were, the Apostle says, That Christ redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, ver. 14. And surely he would not argue from the Redemption of the Jews
only to the Benediction of the Gentiles, but from what was common to both of
them. The Gentiles were redeemed from their vain conversation, that is, from
their idolatrous practices, with the blood of Christ; 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. that is,
they were delivered by the preaching of the Gospel; So the Author: But when
they were redeemed from their vain Conversation, they were redeemed from the
guilt of it; and the (...) for this was not the Gospel, but the precious Blood
of Christ, who was a Lamb without blemish and without spot.

Those men are injurious to the Blood of Christ, Mr. Sherlock
who attribute no more to it than a non-imputation of sin; That by his death
Christ, Dr. Owen Com. 193.
bearing and undergoing the punishment due to us, paying the ransom due for us,
delivered us from the wrath and curse of God: And thus by Christ's death all
cause of quarrel is taken away: But then this will not complete our
acceptance, the old quarrel may be laid aside, and yet no new friendship
begun; we may be not sinners, and yet not so far righteous, as to have a right
to the Kingdom of heaven: So that the Blood of Christ only makes us innocent,
delivers us from guilt and punishment; but (if we will take the Doctor's word
for it) it can give us no title to Glory; this is owing to the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, to the Obedience of his Life: But you see the Scripture
gives us a quite different account of it; we are said to be justified and
redeemed by the Blood of Christ; nay, We have boldness to enter into the
holiest by the Blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.19. which is an allusion to the high
Priest's entering into the Holy of Holies (which was a Type of Heaven) with the
blood of the Sacrifice: Thus by the Blood of Christ we have admission into
heaven it self, though the Dr. says, That the Blood of Christ makes us
innocent, but cannot give us a Title to Heaven. The Scripture takes no notice
of their artificial Methods, That the guilt of sin is taken away by the death
of Christ, and that we are made righteous by his Righteousness: But the Blood
of Christ is said to justify us, and to give us admission into the holiest of
all; into heaven it self; nay, we are made righteous by the death of Christ
too, 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him: That is, Christ died as a
Sacrifice for our sins, that we might be reconciled to God: So that our
Righteousness as well as Innocence is owing to the death of Christ, to that
Sacrifice he offered for our sins; his Blood had a great virtue in it, to make
us righteous, to purge our consciences from dead works, that we might serve the
living God; and our righteousness and accceptance with God is wholly owing to
that Covenant, which he purchased and sealed with his Blood.

I suppose the Author to be a very unfit man to put in this accusation: Answer.
Who attributes most to that Blood, the Author or these men, is a very short
issue, and will soon he tried: Christ's Blood sealed and confirmed the
Covenant; this is the all of it says the Author: These men (though they do not
stint it with an All) yet they freely own, That Christ's death did seal and
confirm the Covenant; evidently therefore they attribute as much to Christ's
blood, as the Author does: But do they stay here? No, they say with the
Apostle; That we are justified by Christ's blood, Romans 5.9. And does the Author
do so? No surely, We are justified by his blood; that is, by the
Gospel Covenant, which was confirmed with his blood: Thus the Author: Now if
justifying and confirming the Covenant be one thing, then the Author allows
justification by Christ's blood; But justifying and confirming the Covenant are
not one thing: Christ's blood, according to the Author, confirmed the Covenant
for all; but it does not justify all. Hence it appears, that the Author allows
not justification by Christ's Blood; and yet he charges these men with being
injurious to it; to which they attribute remission, or non-imputation of sin:
But for the matter it self, I conceive that the Obedience and Blood of Christ
are to be taken in conjunction; both together are the completure of the Law,
both are imputed to us, both justify us unto life eternal. Hence I conceive
where one is expressed in Scripture, the other is employed; when the Scripture
says, That we are justified by Christ's blood, Romans 5.9. It does include his
Obedience; and when it says, That we are made righteous by his obedience, Romans
5.19. it does include his Blood also. Hence our Church takes in both into
justification: 1. Hom. of Salvation.
He paid the ransom for them by his death; he fulfilled the Law for them in his
life: so that in and by him every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller
of the Law.

But though our pardon and justifieation be attributed to the Blood of Christ;
Mr Sherlock.
yet I could never persuade my self, that this wholly excludes the perfect
Obedience and Righteousness of his life: For the Apostle tells us, That we are
accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Whatever rendered Christ beloved of God, did
contribute something to our acceptance: For because he was beloved, we are
accepted for his sake: No man will deny, that God was highly pleased with his
perfect Obedience: We know how many blessings God bestowed upon the children of
Israel, for the sake of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who were great
examples of Faith and obedience, which made them very dear to God; and no doubt
God was more pleased with the Obedience of Christ, than with the Faith of
Abraham; and therefore we ought not to think that we receive no benefit by the
Righteousness of Christ, when Abraham 's posterity was so blessed for his sake:
But then Christ's Righteousness and Death serve not two such different ends, as
these men fancy; but they both serve the same end to establish the Covenant:
God was so well pleased with what Christ did and suffered; that for his sake he
entered into a Covenant of Grace with man: As Abraham 's Faith was not imputed
to his Posterity, as their act; but for Abraham 's sake, God entered into
Covenant with them, and chose them for his peculiar people.

Here we have the Author acknowledging, Answer.
that the obedience of Christ did contribute something to our acceptance with
God: The children of Israel were blessed for Abraham 's obedience; and why may
not we for Christ's? The confequence is undeniable; but there is a vast
disproportion between Abraham's obedience and Christ's. Abraham's was but the
obedience of a man, and of an imperct man; but Christ's was the obedience of
God: His Blood is called, the blood of God; and for the very same reason his
obedience may be styled the obedience of God: Abraham's had not a jot or tittle
of merit in it, he had nothing to glory in before God: But Christ's was so
richly meritorious as to purchase the Blessings of both Worlds: Abraham's was
not imputed to his Posterity; it was little enough, and (without Christ's
Righteousness to cover its defects) too little for himself: But Christ's is
imputed to us, and is long enough, and broad enough to cover a multitude of
Believers, and to justify them before God. The Covenant made with Abraham was
the very Covenant of Grace; The Gospel was preached to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. And
Abraham saw Christ's day and rejoiced, Joh. 8.56. And hence it appears, that
the Covenant with Abraham was not founded in Abraham's Righteousness, but in
Christ's; and therefore the Apostle tells us expressly, That it was confirmed
before of God in Christ, Gal. 3.17. (...), before confirmed; The (...) tells
us, that the Gospel was in Abraham's time.

The obedience of Christ's life was one thing, Mr Sherlock.
which made his Sacrifice so meritorious, which was the precious blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and spot; And this is the most that can be
made of, Romans 5.18, 19. As by the offense of one judgment came upon all to
condemnation: So by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all to
justification of life: For as by one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners; so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous: There is no
necessity of expounding this, (...), obedience, of the Righteousness of
Christ's life; for it may well signify no more than the obedience of his
death, notwithstanding the Doctors distinction, that doing is one thing, and
suffering another: For the Apostle tells us, That he became obedient unto death
(...), Phil. 2.8. And his offering himself in Sacrifice, is called doing God's
will, Heb. 10.9, 10. And whether this be properly said or not, I will leave the
Doctor to dispute with the Apostle: It is plain, that in this Chapter there is
no express mention made of any act of obedience and righteousness, whereby we
are reconciled to God: But only his dying for us, in verse. 8. the Apostle tells
us, That Christ dyed for us: In verse. 9. That we are justified by his blood: In
the 10. That we are reconciled by his death; which makes it more than probable,
that by his Righteousness and Obedience here, the Apostle understands his death
and sufferings; because this was the subject of his discourse; but yet these
expressions, His righteousness and obedience, seem to take in the whole compass
of his obedience in doing and suffering the Will of God; and the meaning of the
words is this: That as God was so highly displeased with Adam's sin, that he
entailed a great many evils and miseries, and death it self upon his posterity
for his sake: So God was so well pleased with the obedience of Christ's life
and death, that he bestows the rewards of Righteousness on those who according
to the rigor of the Law are not righteous; that for Christ's sake he has made
a new Covenant of Grace, which pardons our past sins, and rewards a sincere
though imperfect obedience: For (...), shall be made righteous, is the same
with (...), shall be justified; That is, treated like righteous persons: So
that Christ's Righteousness is not the formal cause of our justification; that
very Righteousness, whereby we are righteous: But it is the meritorious cause
of that Covenant, whereby we are declared Righteous, and rewarded as Righteous;
for the Apostle tells us, in verse. 17. who those are, who are thus justified by
Christ, and shall reign with him in life; not those who are Righteous by the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness: But those who have received abundance of
Grace, and the gift of Righteousness; that is, who by the Gospel, which is the
abundant grace of God, are made holy and righteous, as God is; which
Righteousness is called a gift, because it is not owing solely to humane
endeavors, but is wrought in us by supernatural means: We are made righteous
by the Righteousness of Christ, not that his actual obedience is reckoned as
done by us (which is impossible) But because we are made righteous, both in a
proper and forensick sense, by the Gospel Covenant, which is wholly owing to
Gods Grace and Christ's Merits and Righteousness: So that the Righteousness of
Christ is our Righteousness, when we speak of the foundation of the Covenant,
by which we are accepted; but if we speak of the terms of the Covenant, then we
must have a righteousness of our own; for the Righteousness of Christ will not
serve the turn: Christ's Righteousness and our own, are both necessary to our
Salvation; the first as the foundation of the Covenant, the other as the
condition of it.

We are now arrived at that famous place, Answer.
as by the offense of one judgment came upon all to condemnation; so by the
Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all to justification of life; as
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.18, 19. The Apostle here uses two words,
(...), or Righteousness; and (...), or Obedience; both these signify the doing
of God's Will, which doing for its rectitude is called Righteousness; and for
its subjection, Obedience, neither of them do properly signify suffering: Mere
suffering, which is not spirited with a right and subjective mind, is not
Righteousness or Obedience: The Apostle here speaks of Righteousness in
general, and Obedience in general, and who may pare off ought, and say, it is
not all Christ's Righteousness or Obedience, but some; especially, when that
some, the passive, I mean, is less properly such than the active? and what
necessity or cogent reason is there for doing so? The Antithesis in the Text
evinces the contrary; Act is here set in opposition against Act, Christ's
Obedience against Adam's Disobedience. Now, for what the Author alleges, I
say, it is true, that of Christ's being obedient, Phil. 2.8. reaches down to
his death, but it takes in all the Obedience of his life; and that of Christ's
doing Gods will, Hebr. 10.7. extends to the Sacrifice of himself, but it
comprises all the righteousness of his life too. It is true, that the Apostle
in this 5. Chapter to the Romans, does first speak of Christ's Death and
Sufferings; but his active and passive Obedience are so near in conjunction,
that the Apostle may in his discourse easily pass from the one to the other:
Nay, as I before noted, when the one is expressed in Scripture, the other is
implied; so that the Apostle does not indeed pass from one thing to another,
but only vary his Phrase. The Author himself confesses, That those expressions,
his righteousness and Obedience, seem to take in the whole compass of his
Obedience, in doing and suffering the will of God. And how does the active and
passive righteousness of Christ justify us, or make us righteous? Why, these
procured that Gospel Covenant, whereby we are declared righteous, and rewarded
as righteous. Now, this Interpretation may stand good, when justifying and
procuring the Covenant shall be, what they can never be, one and the same
thing: Christ's active and passive Obedience, according to the Author, procured
the Covenant for all Men; But surely they do not justify all Men. The whole
Obedience of Christ may be confidered two ways: either as it is procurative of
the Covenant, and so it renders us justifiable; or as is it received by Faith,
and so it actually justifies us: But neither of these can be without a Divine
imputation; without that first fundamental imputation (which is implied in such
Scripture expressions, as tell us, that Christ died for us) the Obedience of
Christ could not have rendered us justifiable any more than it does Devils; and
without that second particular imputation (which is implied in such Scripture
expressions, as tell us, That we are justified by Christ's Blood, that we are
made righteous by Christ's Obedience.) the Obedience of Christ could not
justify us; for it justifies us not as it procures the Covenant (that is done,
according to the Author, for all Men; and all Men are not justified) but it
justifies us, as it is particularly made ours; and made ours it cannot be
without an Imputation. According to the Author, the Apostle must be interpreted
thus: By the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all unto
Justification of life; that is, by the righteousness of one the Covenant was
procured: and so, by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous; that
is, by the obedience of one the Covenant was procured. But this Interpretation
is so harsh and strange, that, I suppose, few will be able to receive and own
it: But the Author tells us, That the Apostle, in ver. 17. acquaints us, who
the justified are, not those who are righteous by imputed righteousness, but
those who by the Gospel, which is the grace of God, are made righteous as God
is; But by the grace of God, verse. 17. is not meant the Gospel, but the rich
mercy of God; and by the gift of righteousness there, is not meant inherent
graces, but the righteousness of Christ, which is made over to us by a gracious
imputation; the very same righteousness, which is called the righteousness of
one, verse. 18. and the obedience of one, verse 19. The Apostle is so far from
speaking of our own inherent righteousness, that the great scope of the Chapter
is not of Sanctification, but Justification; and that not by a righteousness of
our own, but of another, that is, of Christ. But now, let us hear the Authors
conclusion: Christ's righteousness and our own, are both necessary to our
salvation; the first, as the foundation of the Covenant; the other, as the
condition of it. Very well, Faith in Christ is indeed the condition of the
Covenant, and in us inherent; but I had thought, the Author had been treating
of that righteousness, which is the matter of our justification, and not only
of the condition of the Covenant: To understand what that righteousness is,
which is the matter of our justification, we must consider, what it is which we
are to answer unto in the point of justification; if we are only to answer unto
the terms of the Gospel Covenant, then indeed Faith answers thereunto; but what
will be the consequences of this? If we are only to answer unto the terms of
the Gospel Covenant, then our Savior, contrary to his words, came (...), to
dissolve the Law, to untye all the Bonds of it, to loosen the very Foundation
of it; then Justification is not in such a way, as establishes the Law, as the
Apostle tells us, Romans 3.31. But in such a way as voides and abrogates it, then
all true Believers must be in a state of perfection, the defect of their Graces
must be no sins, for they have that true Faith, which answers the terms of the
Gospel; and to more then these they are not to answer; then the Gospel, the
great Charter of Grace, has no pardon in it, for no more is required of us,
but the truth of Faith and other Graces; and the want of true Faith and other
Graces the Gospel does not pardon: Then Christ dyed not to obtain the pardon of
those sins, which are consistent with Gospel-sincerity, but dyed to prevent
them from being sins, which otherwise would have been sins, and to prevent them
from being pardoned by his Blood; and to name but one thing more: Then all the
Pagans must be in a justified state; for the Gospel Covenant being founded for
them also, they are only to answer to the terms of the Gospel; and to these
they have a very easy full answer, that they knew them not: By these things it
appears, that in the point of Justification, we must answer not to the terms of
the Gospel only, but to the pure perfect Law also; and to that, nothing of our
own imperfect Graces can respond; nothing less can answer, but the perfect
Righteousness and Obedience of Christ, which is made ours by imputation: Hence
the Apostle tells us, That by the righteousness of one we have justification of
life; and by the obedience of one, we are made or constituted righteous.

SECT. IV.
According to the notion of these Men, Mr. Sherlock.
men may, nay, must be united to Christ while they continue in their sins; Mr.
Shephard tells us expressly: That Obedience does not make us Gods People, or God
our God; but he is first our God (which is only by the Covenant of Grace) and
hence it is, that he being ours, and we his, we of all others are most bound to
obey him: We are Gods People, and that by virtue of the Covenant, before we
obey him. The same Author tells us: That we are united to Christ our life, not
by Obedience as Adam was to God by it, but by Faith (that is, by such a Faith
of which Obedience is no part) and therefore as all actions in living things
come from union, so all our acts of Obedience are to come by Faith, from the
Spirit on Christ's part, and Faith on ours, which make the union; The meaning is
this, We must first be united to Christ by Faith, before we can do any thing
that is good; before this union the best actions we can do are sins, which is a
plain demonstration of the truth of this charge; because according to this
principle, we can do nothing but sin, before we be united to Christ; hence
these Men constantly place our Justification before our Sanctification, that we
are first accounted holy by God before we are made so; now our Justification
follows our union to Christ, and our Sanctification follows our Justification;
and therefore we must first be united to Christ, before we are sanctified, that
is, before we are made holy: Hence we are told, that holiness is a remote end
of vocation, but the next end is to come to Christ. And the same Author makes a
speech for Christ to a Sinner (more gracious than all the Gospel invitations)
though thou have resisted my Spirit, refused my grace, wearied me with thy
iniquities; yet come to me, this will make me amends, I require nothing of thee
else but to come.

We cannot indeed be united to Christ, whilst we continue in our sins, Answer.
in the wilful Indulgence of them; neither can we be holy, whilst we are
separated from Christ, and the influence of his Holy Spirit. Mr. Shephard sets
Faith in the first place, and then Obedience after it as a fruit thereof; and
well he may do so, Ye are all the Children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus,
Gal. 3.26. Faith makes us Gods People; Obedience, which comes after, proves us
such: Without Faith it is impossible to please to God, Heb. 11.6. and therefore
without Faith it must be impossible to obey him: (...), Faith is the beginning
of life, says Ignatius: Fides principium Christiani est, Faith is the first
principle, Epist. ad Ephesians.
or mover in the new Creature, says St. Ambrose: Laudo fructum boni operis, In
Psalm. 118. Ser. 20.
sed in Fide agnosco radicem, I praise the fruit of a good work, but I
acknowledge the root of it to be in Faith: So St. Austin: And a little after he
says, In Psalm. 31
That works before Faith are but, inania and cursus ceberrimus praeter viam,
Vain things and a swift running beside the way. Hence our Church in the 1.
Homily of good works assures us, That Faith gives life to the Soul, and that
they be as much dead to God that lack Faith, as they be to the World, whose
Bodies lack Souls; that without Faith all that is done of us is but dead before
God, all good works are but shadows and shows of good things; that out of Faith
come good works, that be good works indeed, and without Faith no work is good
before God. I suppose Mr. Shephard cannot speak more fully; it may seem harsh
to some, that before Faith in Christ, there should be nothing good in us, that
our best actions should be sins: but if we look on a wicked Man, that is, a Man
without Faith in the Scripture-glass, nothing can be plainer; take him at an
honest calling, The plowing of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. Take him in
sacred or Devotional affairs, His Sacrifice is an abomination, Prove. 15.8. And
so is his Prayer too, Prove. 28.9. Whatever his outward work or posture be, To
the unbelieving there is nothing pure, Tit. 1.15. The very mind and conscience
is defiled, and will be so till it be purified by Faith. Mr. Shephard places
Justification before Sanctification; and what does the Church of England do? It
tells us in the 12. Article, That good works are the fruits of Faith, and
follow after Justification, that they spring necessarily of a true and lively
Faith. And in the 13. Article, That works done before the Grace of Christ, and
the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they
spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ: Nay, in the close of that Article, our
Church says of such works, We doubt not but they have the nature of sin. As
for Mr. Shephards speech for Christ, come in a sense, that they have in some
measure resisted his Spirit, refused his Grace, and wearied him with their
iniquities; the inviting of such is no more than that of our Savior, which
calls the weary, and heavy laden, to come to him for rest; in which all are
concerned, except such as can without Christ earn a sanctity, or holiness at
the fingers ends of Nature, and take a nap at home, in a presumption of their
own worthiness and self made righteousness.

But let us consider, Mr. Sherlock.
the whole progress of the Soul to a closure with Christ; the several steps to
this are Conviction, Compunction, Humiliation, and Faith, which is the uniting
Grace. Now if there be nothing of forjaking of sin included in all this, then
Men must be united to Christ before they forsake their sins: Now, Conviction is
a great sense of the evil of sin, and the evil after it, of its abominable and
accursed Nature, and the Judgments which follow it; and this is as it ought to
be, Men must be awakened to see these evils, before they will reform their
lives; Reform? nay, you are out, this is not the end of Conviction to reform
sin (that is a legal way) but Compunction is the end of it; well then, what is
this Compunction? Why, Compunction is first a great fear of being damned, he
sees death, wrath, eternity near to him; next to this succeeds a great sorrow
and mourning for sin, and that which perfects this Compunction, is a separation
from sin; this is something like, but by a separation from sin, you must not
understand a leaving sin, but such a separation as consists with living in it;
For it is nothing but a being willing, or rather not unwilling, that the Lord
should take it away; the Lord does not wound the heart, that the Soul should
first heal it self, but that it may desire the Physician, the Lord Jesus, to
come and heal it: So that all he means by separation from sin, is to be content
that Christ by an irresistible power should take away our sins: By this
Separation the Soul is cut off from the will to sin, not from all (no, nor from
any) sin in the will, for that must be mortified by a Spirit of holiness, after
the Soul is implanted into Christ. Now this is down right nonsense, for he
must be a subtle Man, who can distinguish between a will to sin, and sin in the
will; and all that can be made of it is this, that this separation is a
willingness, or rather not unwillingness, that Christ should take away our sins
against our wills; and therefore he tells us, That this Separation is no part
of our Sanctification: The whole design of this Compunction, is to work
humiliation in us, which is the work of the Spirit, whereby the Soul, broken
off from self-conceit and confidence, submits and lies under God, to be
disposed as he pleases; this self-confidence is any hope of pleasing God, by
Reformation, or Repentance, or any thing he can do. When Men feel this
Compunction, the great danger is, lest they should seck ease, by Repentance and
Reformation; if they can repent and reform, they have some hopes (as well they
may if they do so) that this will heal their wounds, and pacify the Lord
toward them, when they see no peace in a sinful course, they will try a good
one: But this is a dangerous mistake; for while it is thus with the Soul, he is
incapable of Christ: For he that trusts to other things to save him, or makes
himself his own Savior, or rests in his duties without a Savior (that is
according to this Author, all those who repent and reform) he can never have
Christ to save him: So that true Humiliation is this; when the Soul feels its
own inability and unworthiness, that it may lie under God to be disposed of;
that is, contented to be saved or damned, as shall please God; and when the
Soul is at this pass, it is vas capax, a vessel capable of Grace: And now they
are made thus hollow and empty by Humiliation, they are capable of receiving
Christ, as an hollow vessel is of receiving any thing. This is a new notion of
our union to Christ, that it is a receiving Christ into us, as an hollow vessel
receives any liquor poured into it: This is a Philosophical account of the
nature of Humiliation, that a man must have such a sense of his inability to
please God, that he shall never dare to be so profane as to attempt it, but
must leave repentance and reformation to carnal christless men; and that he may
be so sensible of his unworthiness, that he shall contentedly submit to God to
be damned or saved, as he pleases: And now the Soul being thus hollow, is fit
to receive Christ; and being grown careless of its Salvation, and indifferent
whether it be saved or damned, (for it is impossible thus to submit without
being indifferent in some measure which God shall choose) it is a fit object for
mercy; certainly it is a very hard thing to bring any man in his wits to this;
and I find by this Author, that God is very hard put to it to humhle the Soul
thus: For he is forced to irritate and stir up original corruption, to stir the
dunghill (a very unfit office for an Holy Being) that so men finding themselves
sensibly, grow worse and worse, may despair of growing better, and leave off
such vain attempts, and sit down humble under God: Nay, the Lord loads, and
tires, and wearies the Soul, by its own endeavors, till it can stir no more;
That is, when the Soul labors to repent and reform; the Spirit of God, which
should assist such pious endeavors withdraws it self; because it knows the
Soul would rest therein without Christ: Now I know not, who suffers most by
this: The sinner who is thus humbled, or God who thus humbles him; for it must
needs be as contrary to the holy merciful nature of God, to use such methods of
Humiliation, as it is to the proud heart of man, to be thus humbled: Thus you
see that Humiliation has nothing to do with repentance, and reformation of our
lives.

The steps of the Soul toward Christ, Answer.
are conviction, compunction, Humiliation, Faith: Now if there be nothing of
forsaking of sin in all this, then men must be united to Christ before they
forsake their sins: So the Author: But does Mr. Shepherd allow of no kind of
forsaking of sin before union to Christ? Yes surely, There is, says he, a
separation from sin; so much separation, as makes the Soul willing, that sin
should be taken away: So much separation, as is necessary to the Souls closing
with Christ: He never thought that a man indulging his lusts, should
immediately come, and be united to Christ: No, every step or degree, which he
sets in the Souls progress to a closure with Christ, proves the contrary, what
need conviction, compunction, humiliation; If the Soul, wallowing in its lusts,
might be united to Christ. But Mr. Shephard makes the end of conviction to be,
not reformation of sin, but compunction: But how does he so? What, that there
is no tendency at all in conviction toward reformation? No, he says expressly,
that the next end of it is compunction. Sorrow for sin is so called for in
Scripture; that no man may deny it to be one of God's methods, by which he uses
to bring men home to himself: Neither is it imaginable, that sin our old joy,
unless in some measure it become our sorrow, should ever be reformed, as it
ought, without compunction (says Mr. Shephard) a sinner will never part with
his sin: A bare conviction does but light the Candle to see sin; but
compunction burns his fingers, and that makes him dread the fire: But Mr.
Shephard (who places this compunction in a fear of wrath, sorrow for sin, and
separation from sin) means by separation, not a leaving of sin, but a being
willing, or rather not unwilling, that the Lord should take it away, and that
by an irresistible power, and that against our wills. To which, I answer,
touching irresistible Grace, and that objection, as if we were made willing
against our will, I have before discoursed: In compunction there is a leaving
of sin in some measure; the fear of wrath will make a man start from it; sorrow
for sin will make it cease to be joy; separation from sin, so as to be willing
to have it taken away, is a kind of withdrawing and departure of heart from it:
But indeed in this compunction, there is not such a leaving of sin, as if we
could be our own Physicians, and heal our corrupt natures, as if we could our
selves reach that victory over the world and its lusts, which is the triumph of
Faith, as if we could mortify the deeds of the body, without that holy Spirit,
which is given to Believers for that end: This were to render Christ, Faith,
the holy Spirit unnecessary to our Sanctification, and to render our selves
like those Pagans (of whom St. Austin speaks) who would not be made Christians,
Quia quasi sibi sufficient de bona vita sua. Mr. Shephard says, Enarr. in
Psalm. 31.
That this separation from sin cuts off the Soul from the will to sin, not from
all sin in the will, which is mortified by the Spirit of Holiness: Now this
(says the Author) is down right nonsense; for he must be a subtle man, who
can distinguish between a will to sin, and sin in the will: But, I suppose, no
great subtilty is required to solve this; by a will to sin is meant that act of
the will, whereby it is carried out to sin as its beloved Object; and by sin in
the will is meant that habitual corruption, which is there: In compunction
there is such a separation from sin, that the will is not in its acts carried
out, as before, to sin as its pleasure, joy, and pursuit; but not such a
separation from sin, as if the habitual corruption in the will were mortified,
as after Faith it is by the holy Spirit: But, says Mr. Shephard, Huniiliation
breaks off the Soul from self-considence: after compunction men are apt to seek
ease by repentance and reformation, to try a good course: but if they trust in
themselves, or rest in their duties without a Savior; they are incapable of
Christ; that is, says the Author, all those who repent and reform, are
incapable of Christ: And must the world believe, that Mr. Shephard is against
repentance and reformation? Surely, there is no reason at all for it, the thing
is very plain, if a man will stand like the proud Pharisee upon his bottom; if
with the Jews he will go about (...), to make to stand his own weak cadaverous
righteousness, if he will repent and reform in his own strength, and without
coming to Christ the Fountain of Grace: Surely he is not, whilst in this proud
posture, capable of Christ: Repentance and Reformation are good things, but
they must be done in a good manner, they must not be made our Christ's or
Saviors, they must not keep us off from Jesus Christ, or make us say, as the
Pagan mentioned by St. Austin did, Jam been vivo, quid mihi necessarius est
Christus? I can live well already, what need have I of Christ? All that
reformation, which is without Faith in Christ, is, as our Church says of works
without Faith, But dead before God: Nemo computet bona opera sua ante fidem,
says St. Austin, If we would reform indeed, we must go to Christ by Faith:
But, says the Author, in this Humiliation of Mr. Shephards, a man must have
such a sense of his inability to please God, that he must not dare be so
profane as to attempt it; and such a sense of his unworthiness, as to submit
to God, whether he will save or damn him, he must in some measure be
indifferent, whether he be saved or damned; but it is an hard thing to bring a
man in his wits to this. To which, I answer, for the first, a sense of our
inability to please God, is a thing so necessary, that our Savior tells
Laodicea, that she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked,
and must have her gold, and raiment, and eye salve, and all from him: If we
think we can please God in our selves, and not in the beloved Jesus Christ; or
that we can please God, by walking in our own strength, and not in the power of
Grace, we do but deceive our selves, and our labor will be but in vain; it
will fare with us, as it did with the man storied of in one of the Jewish
Rabbis, who in the night lighted his Candle, and it went out again, and
lighted it again, and again, and still it went out: Our Lamps of a self-made
Sanctity and Righteousness, though trimmed over and over, with our endeavors,
will certainly go out, and at last we must resolve, as he did, to wait for the
Sun, to have all Grace come down to us in the healing Beams of the true Sun of
Righteousness, Jesus Christ. And as for the second thing, a sense of our
unworthiness, so as to submit to God, whether he will save or damn us; it is no
such strange thing to me, that poor finners should lie prostrate at Gods feet,
acknowledging their worthiness to be for ever condemned, and Gods Sovereignty
in dispenfing Grace as he pleases; it is no more but only to subscribe to that
of the Apostle, He will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy; and whom he
will he hardneth, Romans 9.8. Theodorus Cornhertus, though in his life he had
writ against Calvin and Beza, in the point of Predestination, yet at his death
professed to God, Se animam suam a Deo possidere, quam Deo integrum sit, pro
suo beneplacito, servare vellet an reprobare, sibi nil esse quod conqueratur:
Either we have power in our hands to work true Faith in our selves, to
regenerate our own hearts, or not 5 if we say, we have such a power in our
selves, how shall those Scriptures be salved, which tell us, That God begets us
of his own will, James 1.18. That he works the will of his own good pleasure,
Phil. 2.13. That the regenerating spirit blows where it lists, Joh. 3.8.
That faith is not of our selves, but the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. How shall Gods
Royal Prerogative, which is to make a new heart, to take away the stone of it,
to sprinkle the clean water, to put his Spirit into men, as we have it, Ezeck.
36. ever be preserved inviolate? It cannot be, but if, as becoms us, we fay,
that God is the great Worker of regenerating Graces in us; how can we do less
than lie prostrate at his feet and pleasure for it? The case is very short,
either Gods will must depend on Man's, or Man's will must depend on Gods; and one
would think it very reasonable, that Man, a Creature, a mere Receiver should
depend on him who is a God and great Donor of all. The Fathers in the second
Arausican Council, Can. 4. determine thus: Si quis, ut a peccato purgemur,
voluntatem nostram Deum expectare contendit, non autem, ut etiam purgari
velimus, per Sancti Spiritus infusionem and operationem, in nos fieri
confitetur, resistit ipsi Spiritui Sancto: You see they make Man's will hang
upon Gods, and not e contra: This submission to Gods will is not, as if we
might be indifferent whether we were saved or damned; but that we must lie at
Gods feet, humbly confessing our desert of eternal damnation on the one hand,
and the Sovereignty of Gods free Grace on the other: And that such a man is in
his wits, hear the judgment of learned Bishop Reynolds, Sinful. of sin 262.
That man, who can in secret and truth of heart willingly, and uncompulsorily
stand on Gods side against sin, and against himself for it, giving God the
glory of his Righteousness, if he should condemn him; and of his unsearchable
and rich mercy, that he does offer to forgive him; I dare pronounce that man to
have the Spirit of Christ; for no man by nature can willingly and uprightly own
damnation, and charge himself with it, as his due portion: Thus he: But, says
the Author, I find God is very hard put to it, to humble the Soul thus: For he
is forced to stir up original corruption, which is a very unfit office for an
holy Being. To which, I answer; God is too high to be put into an office, and
too wise to do that which is unfit; yet in Scripture we find him withdrawing
from, and hardening of men: The Church cries out, O Lord, why have thou made us
to err from thy way! and hardened our hearts from thy fear? Isai. 63.17.
Nevertheless God does what he does in a just decorum, in a way congruous to
himself; so that his Holiness, or any other Attribute suffers not thereby; and
withal in a way profitable to men: When God left good Hezekiah to fall, I
doubt not but it was so far profitable to him, as it did humble him for the
pride of his heart: when he withdraws and leaves the humbled sinner to the
stirrings of inward corruption, it has a very merciful issue; if it carry him
out of himself to Christ: The very withdrawings of the Spirit, are by it self
made use of, to make the sinner hasten out of himself to Christ.

Mr. Shephard says, Mr. Sherlock
That true Faith is the coming of the Soul, not unto duties of Holiness (which
is obedience properly) but unto Christ, Which notion of our union to Christ is
such, that according to it, wicked men, who live in sin, may be united to
Christ: But the Scripture places the formal nature of our union to Christ in a
subjection to his Authority, and obedience to his Laws; an holy life must not
only follow our union to Christ, as an effect of it; but must at least in order
of nature go before it; because by this we are united to Christ: We are not
real members of Christ, till we sincerely obey him, till our minds are
transformed into his Image. Our union to Christ is more or less perfect
according to our seize in true Piety and Virtue: The first and lowest
degree of Union to Christ, is a belief of his Gospel, which in order of Nature
must go before Obedience to it: But yet it includes a purpose of obeying it;
and in this sense we must be united to Christ before we can be holy, because
this belief of his Gospel is the great principle of Obedience, as our Savior
tells his Disciples: Abide in me, and I in you, as the branch cannot bring
forth fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye
abide in me, Joh. 15.4. But then our Union is not perfected without Obedience:
This makes us the true Disciples of Christ, when we are fruitful in good works,
as he adds in verse. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much
fruit, so shall you be my Disciples; A belief of the Gospel, and a purpose of
Obedience is all can be expected from beginners; but this does not give an
actual title to all the promises of the Gospel, unless we actually obey it: But
when in the strength of this Faith, we conquer the world and the flesh, and
improve all opportunities of doing good: This makes us the Disciples of Christ
indeed, and heirs of Glory. Nothing can be a greater dishonor to our Savior,
nor a greater contradiction to his Gospel, than to affirm, that wicked men,
while they continue such, are actually united to Christ, and thereby have an
actual right to pardon and eternal life: St. John understood not this Doctrine,
when he told us: God is light, and in him is no darkness at all: If we say, we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness (live in any sin) we lie and do
not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as God is in the light; then have
we fellowship one with another, 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. This doctrine does not only
take away the necessity of Holiness, in order to our Union to Christ; but
destroys the necessary obligations to Holiness and Obedience for the suture,
and so thrusts Holiness quite out of the Christian Religion: Our Union to
Christ is perfected, while we are unholy; and when we are united to Christ,
there is less need of Holiness than before: For now the merit of Christ's death
is imputed to us, to remove the guilt and punishment of sin; and his actual
obedience is imputed to us, to make us righteous, and to give us an actual
right to glory: So that if men will obey Christ out of a principle of good
nature and thank fullness, they may, but according to this notion there is no
necessity of it, because they are delivered from wrath, and have a right to
eternal life without it.

Still the Author goes on with this charge, Answer.
That wicked men, who live in sin, may be united to Christ. Mr. Shephard holds,
that we are united to Christ by Faith: And are Believers wicked men? they
receive Christ, whole Christ, as their Prophet to teach them, their Priest to
satisfy for them; their King to rule them: and upon account of this receiving,
they are the sons of God, Joh. 1.12. And are they wicked men for all this? they
have the promise of pardon and justification, Act. 13.39. The promise of the
Spirit, Joh. 7.38.39. The promise of eternal life, Joh. 3.16. And may we call
them wicked men? If wicked men may be entitled to such promises, there is no
need at all of Holiness or Obedience: But, says the Author, an holy life must
not only follow our Union to Christ: But at least in order of nature go before
it, because by this we are united to Christ. To which I answer; Without doubt
that Faith, which in Scripture phrase does come to Christ, receive Christ, put
on Christ, and feed upon Christ, must needs unite to him; and of this Faith,
Obedience, or an holy Life is not a part, but a fruit; all those worthies, Heb.
11. First believed; and then by that Faith produced all those acts of Obedience
there recorded: First, We are married to Christ by Faith, and then we bring
forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4. And in that fifth Chapter of John quoted by the
Author: First, there are branches in Christ by Faith, and then there is holy
Fruit brought forth: An holy Life must needs presuppose Faith, it flows out of
a pure heart, and the heart cannot be such without Faith: It is a conformity to
the Divine Rule, and that Rule cannot be assured to be such but by Faith: It is
levelled at the Glory of God, and the single eye, which looks at that great
end, is Faith; without which the whole Body of our Works is full of darkness:
Now if Faith unite to Christ, and precede Obedience or an holy Life; then it is
evident, that Obedience or an holy Life do not go before our Union to Christ,
but follow after it: But, says the Author, our Union to Christ is not
perfected without Obedience. Hence our Savior says, Herein is my Father
glorified, that you bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples, Joh. 15.8. To
which, I answer; Our Union to Christ is not indeed perfect before Obedience, as
to its Fruit and Consequences: but it is as to its essentials; for the Believer
in the very instant of believing has a true title to the promises of pardon,
of the Spirit and of eternal Life: So that should he immediately, and before
any one act of Obedience depart this Life, he should undoubtedly, and without
any scruple enter that blessed Region, where are the spirits of just men made
perfect; as for that place, Joh. 15.8. where our Savior tells them, That
bearing of fruit they should be his Disciples, it is parallel to that place, If
ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples, Joh. 8.31. In both they were
Disciples before: In that Joh. 8.31. they were Disciples before that period of
life, unto which their continuance in the word extends it self; or else their
discipleship must have been adjourned to the other World: And in that Joh.
15.8. they were Disciples before their bearing of fruit, for they could not
bear fruit without being branches in Christ; and Branches they could not be
without being Disciples: when there fore our Savior says, so shall ye be my
Disciples, the meaning only is, that by their fruitfulness they should give a
real proof and demonstration, that they are indeed true Disciples and Branches
of Christ. But, says the Author, This Doctrine destroys the obligations to
holiness, and thrusts holiness out of the Christian Religion; our union to
Christ is perfected while we are unholy, and when we are united to Christ,
there is less need of holiness than before, for now the righteousness of Christ
is imputed to us. To which I answer, As to that, that our union to Christ is
perfected while we are unholy: If by unholy, be meant only before a holy life,
Believers before that are so perfectly united to Christ, as to have a true
title to the promises of Pardon, the Spirit, and Salvation: If by unholy, is
meant a wicked Man, no wicked Man is united unto Christ; this would be a
dishonor to our Savior, a contradiction to the Gospel; such a one walks in
darkness, and cannot have fellowship with God, who is Light, as St. John
speaks: But a Believer (who before an holy life is united to Christ) is not,
must not be called a wicked Man. As to the other, That when we are united to
Christ, there is no need of holiness, because of the righteousness of Christ
imputed to us. I answer, That before I have proved, that this assertion, that
imputed righteousness makes holiness needless, is but a Popish calumny, and
without any ground at all.

SECT. V
ACcording to these principles, Mr. Sherlock.
there is no certain way to get into Christ; the method prescribed is,
Conviction, Compunction, Humiliation, and Faith, which is the uniting Grace.
Now I observe first, that a Man is passive in all this, and can contribute
nothing to it himself, any otherwise than as he is acted by an irresistible
power; and it is a vain thing to give such rules and directions, as no man can
follow; this only tells us, by what methods God unites us to Christ, not what
we must do, but what we must suffer in order to this union; A Sinner may stir
up in himself some natural Conviction of sin, some natural fear, sorrow, etc.
And in a sense of this, may set upon the work of Reformation, of leaving his
sins and performing duties: But all this they tell us, is to no purpose, for
unless this Conviction, Compunction, Humiliation, be wrought in us by the
irresistible power of the Spirit of God, (which no Man can possibly tell
whether it be or not) it is not of the right stamp, and will avail us nothing;
so that the Sinner has nothing to do but to sit still, and patiently expect,
till God will do all for him.

The method is Conviction, Compunction, Answer.
Humiliation, and Faith, but a Man is passive in all this: How passive? what is
he to sit still, and do nothing at all? No surely, he may abstain from outward
Acts of sin; he may do Acts of Sobriety, Justice, Charity; he may hear, pray,
but internal Grace is Gods work. Some have taken those words, Let us make Man,
as if God has spoke to the four Elements, and said, Vos date Corpus, ego dabo
Animam: Do you give the Body, I Will give the Soul. If I may allude to this
Gloss, thus it is, Man may frame a Body of outward Piety, but the (...), the
inward life of Grace, is from God only; it is he, Who quickneth the dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Believers are not born of the will of Man, but
of God, Joh. 1.13. But, says the Author, It is a vain thing to give such rules
and directions, as no Man can follow. To which I answer, Rules are not
therefore vain, because Man cannot follow them by his own power; God gave not
the Moral Law in vain, yet the spotless sanctity of it was a (...), a mere
impossible thing to any fallen Man in the World; God bid them not in vain, to
make a new heart, Ezekiel. 18.31. and yet claims it as his prerogative, and as an
act of special Grace to make such an heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. Christ did not in vain
call Men to come to him; and yet withal tells them, That no Man could come to
him, except the Father drew him, Joh. 6.44. Moses was but to lift up the Rod,
but it was God only who could divide the Sea; we are to use the means, but it
is God only who can work the great work of Grace: These Rules, though we cannot
follow them of our selves, may yet show us our duty; and if we reflect upon our
selves, they may point out our impotency to us, and withal they minister under
that Spirit, which in the use of means infuses the life of Grace into Men.
Polychronius in the 6. Council of Constantinople, offered by a Paper,
containing in it the Doctrine of the Monothelites, to raise a dead Man to life
again. Mr. Shephard never thought that his rules, though containing excellent
truths in them, could raise the Spiritually dead; but this they do, they
minister under that Divine Spirit, which breathes regenerating Graces into the
Soul. St. Paul would have Timothy instruct the Opposers, not as if they had a
power of themselves to repent, but if God peradventure would give them
repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. All Rules and Instructions do but minister under the
Holy Spirit, who gives Faith and Repentance as it pleases. But says the
Author, These tell us not, what we must do, but what we must suffer in order to
our union to Christ. To which I answer, we are to use the means, and thus far
we must be doers, but, I suppose, we must suffer the Holy Spirit to have the
glory of our Regeneration, we must not presume to be such doers, as if we could
work Regeneration our selves, or by our works procure it. Pelagius would have
been a doer in this kind, alleging that, Gratiam darisecundum merita, that is,
in the Phrase of the Ancients in those days, secundum opera, that Grace was
given according to works: But, unless he had recanted, he had in the Palestine
Council been by the Church turned into a Sufferer, by a just Excommunication;
neither is our Church for any such doers, for it tells us in the 13. Article,
That works done before Grace do not make Men meet to receive Grace, or deserve
Grace of congruity; yea, rather they have the nature of sin. The Inspiration of
the Spirit (which that Article mentions) must work the great work of Grace in
us; which when we see in our selves, we must needs acknowledge the insuperable
power that was in it.

Suppose a Man have this Conviction, Mr Sherlock.
Compunction, Humiliation, is this a sufficient reason to lay hold upon Christ
by Faith? by no means: The end of Conviction is Compunction, the end of
Compunction Humiliation; and all this carries us no nearer to Christ, than
quietly to lie down before God, that he may do what he will with us, he may
save or damn us: So that all this contributes nothing to our union to Christ,
but brings us to such a temper of mind, as to be content to have Christ, or go
without him as God shall please; this is all Men get by Humiliation, that if
the Lord intend to do them good, this is the way in which he will do it; but
though they be humbled, they cannot be sure whether God intend to do them good
or not; therefore we are told, we are as much bound to submit to God, whether
he will save or damn us, as we are to submit to the disposal of God, as to any
common mercy; though you must pray for mercy, it must be with submission to
Gods good will; saying, the Lords will is good, whether it be to save or damn;
but mine is evil, though it be to be saved, and have Jesus Christ: Nay, we are
much more bound to submit to God, whether he will save or damn us, than we are
to submit in the lesser concernments of this life; if it be pride to murmur, in
case the Lord deny you smaller matters, the off-alls of this life; is it not
greater pride to quarrel with him, if he deny the greater, the things of
another life? Is he bound to give thee greater, who does not owe thee the
least? The Lord gives you life, but you ask for treasures of Grace and Mercy;
(now God has given you life, you would live for ever, an unpardonable fault
this!) thousands of pounds, Christ and all he is worth, and the Lord seems to
deny you, and now you sink and grow sullen; may not the Lord say, Was there
ever such pride and insolence? as to be unwilling to be damned for ever; though
I dare say, this is not the pride which cast the Angels out of Heaven; so that
though Humiliation be the way to Christ, yet it brings us never the nearer him;
when all is done, we are where we were: Before Humiliation, it was at Gods
pleasure, whether we should have Christ or not, and so it is still.

The humbled Soul may, Answer.
without doubt, lay hold upon Christ; but we must remember, that we cannot do
it by the power of Nature, but must do it by the Grace of God: Faith is a great
receiver, it receives Christ, and all blessings in and with him; but this
Faith, this very receiving, must be received from Grace: Nothing is plainer in
Scripture, than that Faith is the gift of God; hence it is called the fruit of
the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. and Faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12. It is not
of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8, And such a gift it is, that
(...), it is freely gratuitously given, Phil. 1.29. Seeing then it is thus,
should we not submit to God for every crumb of bread, drop of drink, and
moments patience, because they are his gifts; and must we not submit to him for
Faith, because it is such? Had not God given a Jesus, a Savior, to Men, they
could not have made a just complaint against him; and now there being one, that
he is not known all the World over, the Pagans may not open their lips against
God; and in the Church where Christ is known, that all Men have no Faith, no
Man may question God about it: Gifts are free and must be submitted for. The
Apostle asserts Gods Sovereignty clearly: He will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9.18. And if any dare repy or
find fault, the Apostle takes him up: Nay, but O Man, who art thou that
reply against God? If thou had but any sentiments of thy own nothingness,
or rays of the Divine Majesty, thou would never dare to question, or to
implead thy Maker; before whom thou art but a Worm, a piece of Clay to be
disposed of at his pleasures: It is certain that God owes us nothing. Though we
are in the use of means earnestly to seek Christ and Faith; and not in a
careless indifferent manner (as without cause the Author would hint Mr.
Shephards mind to be) yet we must still adore Gods Sovereignty, and lie at his
feet for all his Gifts, and particularly for Faith. It was horrible insolence
and presumption in him, who prayed: Read mihi vitam aeternam, quam debes; And
it would be no less for any one to pray: Read mihi fidem vivam quam debes:
Verbum (debet) venenum habet, as Peter Lumbard has it. These things
considered, Mr. Shephards words need no more but only a candid Interpretation.

What then is to be done, Mr Sherlock.
in order to our closing with Christ by Faith? for hitherto there is no
foundation for our Faith. Why, you must not catch at Christ, but stay till God
give him to you, till God take you into his Arms, that you may lean upon your
Beloved; you must stay till God give you a particular call, to come to Christ;
and whether that will be ever or never, no Man can tell. Many a wounded Sinner
will be scrambling from some general reports of him (such as his Gospel makes)
before the day and hour of Gods glorious call: Now, for any Man to receive
Christ, before he is called, is presumption: (I, unpardonable presumption too,
to attempt impossibilities, for no Body can come till he is called) no man
should come unless first called (and therefore no crime to stay away) as it is
in calling to an Office, so it is in our calling to special Grace: No Man takes
this honor, but he that is called of God, Heb. 5.4. (It is a great presumption
to usurp the Office of a Priest, Prophet, or King, without a designation; and
so it is to be a good Man, or Christian, without a particular call.) For what
has any Man to do with Christ, to make himself a Son of God and Heir of glory,
(to take care to please God, and to make himself happy) but he that is called
of God, Well, Sinner! wait with patience till thou art called, and so thy work
is at an end for this time.

The Author laughs at Mr. Shephards particular call, Answer.
let us therefore consider it; there is a double call, a general external call
reaching to all in the Church, and a particular internal call, vouchsafed to
some: The first, is a command, a sufficient warrant to come to Christ; The
second, is a special Act of Grace, which infallibly produces Farth in those to
whom it is given: This distinction is clearly founded in Scripture, all in the
Church are called, but all are not drawn of the Father, all do not hear and
learn of the Father, Joh. 6.44, 45. For these taught and drawn ones do all of
them come to Christ, which all Men in the Church do not; all in the Church are
called, but all are not called according to purpose, Romans 8.28. for then all
would love God, as those called ones do, and by consequence all would have that
Faith, which works by love. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks foolishness, but to them which are called, both Jews
and Greeks, Christ the power of God and wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. All of
them had an external general call; those to whom Christ was a stumbling block
and foolishness, had such a call; for an unknown, an unreveiled Christ could
not be a stumbling block or foolishness: But besides this call there is
another, an internal effectual call, such as makes Christ the power and wisdom
of God to Men, such as works Faith and other Graces in Men: Hence the Apostle
says, That they are the called, called with a more internal and efficacious
call than other Men are. These things laid down, all things in Mr. Shephard are
very easy; all Men in the Church have an external call, and so a sufficient
warrant to believe in Christ, it will be no presumption at all in them to do
so. The Object, Jesus Christ is evidently set forth before their eyes, but that
they may believe in him indeed, they must wait for a particular internal call,
for that Grace which works Faith in the heart; if not, the work of Faith must
be their own; they must believe of themselves: And this I fear, though the
Object, Christ be free for them would be presumption, because the Scripture
assures us, that Faith is the gift of God. All Men in the Church should come to
Christ, for the Evangelical command makes it their duty; yet, if we believe our
Savior, there must be internal teachings and tractions from the Father, to
make us truly come to him: All in the Church are by the Gospel called to be
Believers, and so to the (...), to the Royal dignity, to be Sons of God, Joh.
1.12. to the Divine Offices, to be Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. But
this believing is produced by that internal efficacious call, which calls
things that are not as though they were; I mean, which calls Faith into being
where it was not before. But then says Mr. Sherlock: The Sinner must only wait
till he is called, and so his work is at an end for this time. To which I
answer, His work is not at an end, because he is still to wait; if the
Scripture, which makes Faith the free-gift of God, be true, there is no nearer
passage to Heaven, then by waiting upon God for Faith in the use of means. The
Saints of God, if we observe their posture in the Scripture, endeavor all they
do in a way of dependence upon the Grace of God; a famous instance is David in
the 119. Psalm: With my whole heart have I sought thee, says he: But O let me
not wander from thy Commandments, verse. 10. I will run the way of thy
Commandments but do thou enlarge my heart, Verse. 32. Consider how I love thy
Precepts, but quicken me according to thy loving kindness, verse. 159. Lord I
have hoped for thy Salvation, and done thy Commandments, verse. 166. all his
endeavors were under Grace; and if Believers in all their endeavors wait upon
the Grace of God, much more should Sinners wait upon God for Faith in the use
of means. Mr. Sherlock


But how shall a poor humbled Sinner know when he is called, that then he may
come to Christ? You must not mistake the general offers of the Gospel for this
special call, for they are not a sufficient foundation for our Faith, though
they are made to the weary and heavy laden: Men cannot, will not come at such a
call, and they have no reason to do it, for Christ is not intended for all;
therefore though he be offered to all in the Gospel, yet it would be
presumption for every one to lay hold on him, for Christ does not immediately
offer himself to all Men as a Savior, whereby they may be encouraged to serve
him as a King (that is he does not promise Salvation and Eternal life in the
Gospel, with a design that every one that will, should take encouragement from
these promises, to obey and serve him.) But first, as a King commanding them,
to cast away their weapons, and stoop under his Scepter, acknowledging that if
ever he save me, I will bless him; if he damn me, his Name is righteons in so
dealing with me, that is, every Man is invited in the Gospel to submit himself
to the mercy of Christ; but then Christ reserves a liberty to himself to save
or damn as he pleases; these are hard terms, and such as sound wore like the
arbitrary will of an haughty Lord, than the conditions of a gracious Savior.

Christ died so far for all Men, Answer.
as to found the general promises of the Gospel for them, to make them saveable
upon Gospel terms, which Devils are not; and these general promises are a
sufficient groundwork and warrant, for them to come to Christ; it is no
presumption for any Man to do so, but these general promises are not that
internal call, which produces Faith in Men. Christ, says Mr. Shephard, does
not immediately offer himself as a Savior, to encourage them to serve him as a
King; that is, says the Author, he does not promise Salvation, with a design
to encourage every one that will to serve him. To which I answer, The promise
is an encouragement to all Men to serve him; but, that this may be done, they
must lay down their weapons, they must stoop under his Scepter, or else surely
they cannot serve him. But Mr. Shephard goes on, They must acknowledge, if he
save me I will bless him, if he damn me he is righteous; that is, says the
Author, every Man is invited in the Gospel to submit to the mercy of Christ,
but Christ reserves a liberty to himself to save or damn, which are hard terms:
To which, I answer, God was under no necessity to give us a Jesus, a Gospel, a
promise of Salvation: What if there had been none? would not the terms have
been harder, or rather no terms at all? What hope of Salvation could there then
have been? yet in all this God would have been like himself, the Righteous One;
man could not have uttered the least just complaint against him: But now there
is a Gospel, what is the Liberty to save or damn which Christ reserves? Is it a
liberty to save men, though unbelievers; or damn men, though believers? No
surely, the Gospel stands firm, that the believer shall be saved, the
unbeliever shall be damned, and that without any (...), or difference among
men; but still Christ reserves to himself his Prerogative, the key of David, to
open the hearts of men, as he did Lydia's, to believe upon him; he dispenses
Faith as he pleases: And no man may say to him, what do thou? He gives not an
account of such matters.

What then must we do now? Why, Mr. Sherlock.
the only remedy is to venture and try, God has elected but few: Christ has
shed his Blood for few; therefore we must venture (and a hard venture it is,
where there is such great odds-against us, and yet our eternal happiness
depends upon the success, too great a stake for such a venture) As many men
among us do now, who hearing of a good living fallen; twenty will go for it,
though but one can have it (though did they know it were irrevocably decreed,
who should have it, none of them would stir, but wait for the news: Good God!
what Merchant adventurers are poor sinners, who after all their seeking for
Christ, are in such danger of missing him?) Or as the Lepers in Samaria, if we
stay here, we must dye: If we go out to the Assyrians, we may live, Which is
the resolution of desperate men, as it seems the Gospel condemns us all to be.
No previous dispositions can give us encouragement to come to Christ,
Humiliation cannot do it: After this we must expect a call still; we are but
probationers, and may miss him; nay, assurance it self cannot do it, for if you
come to Christ, because you have assurance, (That is, if you come to Christ,
because you are sure you are come) or because you feel such Graces and Heavenly
impressions of Gods Spirit in you, then you may many a day and year keep at a
distance from Christ, and live without Christ: This is an hard saying, though
we come to Christ, we may be at a distance; nay, though we come because we are
sure we are come already: It is time now to give over, when assurance is no
security.

What then must we do now? Answer.
We must venture and try, God has elected but few: Christ has shed his blood
for few; therefore we must venture, and an hard venture it is, and great odds
against us. Thus the Author: To which, I answer, God has elected but few: But
do secret things belong to us? May we pry into the eternal Rolls, and make them
the measures of our acting? No surely, the Rule is before us in the Gospel,
which we must not wave, because there are secret Decrees: A man, that would
argue against himself; and his venturing upon Christ from these principles,
must do it thus: If I am eternally reprobated, then it is to no purpose to
venture upon Christ: but I am eternally reprobated; Ergo, it is to no purpose
to venture: But how does he know the Minor, or what reason has he for it? What
madness and desperate rashness is it to say that which he cannot know, and that
against his own Soul and eternal Salvation? Is there any such reprobation in
Scripture, as bars out of Heaven, such as by Faith venture upon Christ? No
surely, Christ has so far dyed for all men, as to found for them that general
promise: whosoever believes, shall be saved: This is a plain sure foundation
for men to venture upon, none that by Faith venture upon Christ shall be barred
out of Heaven by any Decree of God, because his Decree cannot clash with his
Promise: It is very irregular arguing to say, I know not Gods Decree, therefore
I Will neglect my duty. St. Paul exhorts the Philippians to work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God, which works in you to will
and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. Might the Philippians have
said, how do we know what Gods pleasure is, or what he will work in us? Why
should we work at such a venture, or at the pleasure of another? No, the fear
and trembling in the Text was enough to keep them back from arguing at that
rate: Suppose now, that there were no such thing as Election, will there not be
a paucity, and an hard venture still? Our Savior tells us, that few find the
way to life, Matthew. 7.14. And God, whose prescience is immutable, eternally
foresaw that it would be so; and what must we do now? May we deny the truth of
Christ's words, or of Gods prescience? Surely we ought not, or may we argue
thus: Few enter into life, why should I venture? Its an hard venture, and great
odds against me; May I now cry out, Good God, what Merchant adventurers are
poor sinners? Surely it does not at all become me; I must look upon the Rule in
the Word, and endeavor to do my duty: Duties belong to us, and issues to God:
But to pass on, according to Mr. Shephard, it seems assurance it self cannot
secure us, to which the bare recital of Mr. Shephards words will be answer
enough: they are these; The Call of Christ is the ground by which we first
believe: It is a constant ground of Faith; For, if you come to Christ, because
you have assurance, or because you feel such and such Graces, and heavenly
Impressions of Gods Spirit in you, you may then many a day and year keep at a
distance from Christ, and lie without Christ, for the feeling of Graces and
assurance of favor are not constant: His meaning is very plain, the Call of
Christ is the ground of our first believing; and it is a constant ground, if by
after renewed acts of Faith we come to Christ, because we have assurance; we
may many a day live without Christ, for assurance is no constant thing, as the
Call is. The Author, I suppose, took out a little out of Mr. Shephard, not to
interpret him, but to sport with him: Afterward we have the Author concluding
from Mr. Shephards particular Call, That the general Call signifies nothing;
that there is no foundation for our Faith in Christ, but this particular Call.
To which I answer; The general promises of the Gospel signify Gods will to
save Believers; and therefore are a sufficient foundation for a man to believe
in Christ for Salvation; a greater warrant we cannot have for it, then Gods own
Charter sealed with the Blood of his Son Jesus Christ: But that which works
this Faith in us, is a special Call, or internal Grace, which shines into the
heart, and calls forth Faith into being.

But though we know not how to get into Christ; Mr. Sherlock.
it would be some comfort to know, that we are in him: But this is as
impossible as the other; As the only foundation of our Faith in coming to
Christ (aocording to these men's notions) is a special call of the Spirit; So
the only infallible assurance that we are in Christ, is the testimony of the
Spirit: The spirit of adoption, which teaches us to cry, Abba, Father: And yet
God does not afford this Testimony to all; but suffers many good Christians, to
walk in darkness, and hides his face from them; for no other reason, but
because they are desirous of it, and would be quiet, if they should know it;
this is somewhat hard measure: But suppose you have, or think you have this
testimony of the Spirit; how can you be sure, that it is not a cheat and
delusion, the imposture of the Devil, or of your own self-flattering
imagination? to satisfy this we are directed to marks: Thus this infallible
assurance from the testimony of the Spirit must in its last resolve be founded
upon some Moral evidence: As it is with the Church of Rome; who after a great
noise and cry of infallibility, are at last forced to resolve their Faith into
some Motives of credibility, or to dance round in an endless circle: Well, what
are the marks of our being in Christ? You must enquire whether you have the
Spirit of Christ; And it is just as easy to know this, as whether you be in
Christ: But are you true Believers? Is your Faith of the right stamp? is it
wrought by the Almighty Power of God? Or is it such an easy, common,
presumptuous, false faith, as that which is in the generality of men? This is
as easy to know, as any of the former: For if there be such a false
presumptuous faith as takes Christ, when he does not belong to us, and rests
and relies on Christ only for pardon and salvation, and yet shall never have
Christ: How shall we know whether our Faith be true and genuine, such as will
make Christ ours? and the answer to this brings us to that great mark of
Sanctification. You must consider the effects of Faith; Dr. Jacomb. page 65.
does it purify the Heart? overcome the World? work by Love? are you new
Creatures? Is the state of your person changed from a Child of wrath to an Heir
of Grace? (which is the thing to be proved) Or is your nature changed? Do you
walk in newness of life? Have you crucified the flesh with its lusts? Do you
bring forth fruit? That is, you must prove your justification by your
sanctification, your Faith by your Works. I am glad it is no worse, that good
works, and an holy life may at least put in for marks and evidences of a
justified state, though the truth is, this is a mere complement to Holiness;
and as they order the matter, an holy life can no more be a sign of a justified
state, than it can justify us.

It would be some comfort to know, Answer.
that we are in Christ: But this is impossible; Thus the Author: Impossible?
Nothing plainer in Scripture; we read of the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts, 2 Cor. 1.12. The sealing of the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. The
witness of the Spirit with our spirits, that we are the children of God, Romans
8.16. But God does not afford this testimony of the Spirit to all good men:
Very true, he does not, a Saint of God may walk in darkness: The face of God
may be hid from him: And that (says Mr. Shephard) because there is in many an
one an heart desirous of his Love, and this would quiet them, if they were sure
of it. The Author thinks this hard measure: But Mr. Shephard goes on; they
never came to be quieted with Gods will, in case they think they shall never
partake of Gods love; but are above that, opposite, resist, quarrel with that;
the Lord therefore, intending his favor for humbled sinners, hides his face
till they lie low: And now, I suppose, the measure is fair, it is very fit we
should know our selves to be but receivers; and withal unworthy of the Mercies
we receive: But how do we know, that it is the testimony of the Spirit indeed,
and not a cheat or imposture? To satisfy this we are directed to marks: Thus
this infallible testimony of the Spirit must in its lastiresolve, be founded
upon moral evidence. So the Author: To which, I answer, When the Spirit
witnesses with our spirit; when Gods Spirit and Man's concur, and so heaven
and earth agree in it; one would think it might pass without further
examination: The Testimony of the Spirit is such, that he, to whom it made,
certainly knows, that it is the Spirit of Truth it self which bears the
Testimony, otherwise the Spirit it self testifies, and would not be believed by
him, to whom the Testimony is made; that is, he testifies, and does not
testify, if he do not make a man sure, who it is that testifies. The Testimony
is to make us sure, that we are the children of God; it is to make us with
confidence cry out Abba, Father: It is to be an earnest and seal of our
Salvation; and how can this be, if we know not who testifies. Hence St.
Chrystom upon the place says, The Spirit bears witness, and (...); What
doubt can remain? Hence reverend Dr. Ward says, Parum abest a blasphemia
dicere, De certitud. Great. 221.
non esse certum illum, cui testimonium perhibet Spiritus Sanctus, utrum
testimonium illud a Spiritu Sancto sit an a diabolo, and (...), By this it
appears, that the Testimony of the Spirit is not such, as gives only a
conjectural certainty, but an infallible one: But to proceed, What are the
marks of our being in Christ? Have you the Spirit of Christ? This (says the
Author) is just as easy to know, as whether you be in Christ: Yet this is a
mark in the Apostle, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, Romans 8.9. Is your faith of the right stamp, wrought by the Almighty Power
of God? This (says the Author) is as easy to know as the former: Yet the
Apostle would have us examine our selves whether we be in the Faith; that is,
whether we have a true genuine Faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. True Faith, where ever it
is, makes Christ to belong to him that has it: Does Faith purify the heart,
overcome the world, work by love, bring forth holy fruit? These are, as the
Author confesses, true marks, but these men do but complement Holiness: And now
we must hear his reasons for it.

For first, Holiness is not necessary to our Union to Christ; Mr Sherlock.
and therefore can be no nec^ssary sign of it: We are united to Christ (...) we
are holy, an unholy man may be united to Christ; and how can Holiness be the
only sure mark of our Union to Christ? They tell us, That Holiness does
necessarily follow Union: But no man knows how long it may be before it
follows; yet all this, while such a person is united to Christ, at least this
gives evidence but to one part of the question, an holy life is an evidence of
a man in Christ; but the want of it is no evidence, that a man is not in him:
This mark may be rejected by any one, who has no mind to it: Nay, secondly,
according to these men's principles we cannot tell, whether we be holy or not,
till we know, whether we be in Christ or not, our Union to Christ must be an
evidence of our Holiness, not our Holiness an evidence of our Union; till we
are united to Christ, we can do nothing to please God: The best actions of
christless men are but Splendida peccata, glittering impieties, appearing fair,
but odious to God, because the person who does them is out of Christ: Our
persons must be first accepted in Christ, and then our services; we cannot
judge of Holiness by the external performance of any duties, nor by the inward
sense of our minds; but must first know, whether we be in Christ, whether our
persons be accepted in him, before we can tell, whether any thing we do be
good: And this is a plain demonstration, that Holiness cannot be an evidence of
our Union to Christ, because we must first know our Union, before we can know
that we are holy.

So much Holiness, Mr. Sherlock.
as is included in true Faith, is necessary to our Union to Christ; an unholy
man, that is, a wicked man, cannot be united to Christ, believers are not such;
but an unholy man, that is, one who yet has not lead an holy life, may be
united to Christ, and his after holy life, is a sure mark of that Union,
because a necessary essect thereof: But when does the holy life follow that
Union? I answer, immediately: Thus our Church tells us in the twelfth Article,
That good works do spring necessarily out of a true and lively Faith; insomuch,
that by them a lively Faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by
the fruit: The want of an holy life, in the very instant of believing, is not
an evidence, that a man is not is Christ, but soon after, the want of it will
tell him, that his Faith was but a fancy, and his being in Christ but a dream:
The best actions of christless men are, I confess, as our Church tells us in
the thirteenth Article, not pleasant to God; nay, they have the nature of sin,
without Faith it is impossible to please God, in our persons or actions: our
persons must first be accepted in Christ, and then our services; the best
actions of a man, not in Christ, are not acceptable to God: Those actions
cannot be acceptable to him, whose defects are unpardoned, and the defects of
those actions are unpardoned, whilst their Agent is so. But the Author from
hence concludes, That Holiness cannot be an evidence of our Union to Christ,
because we must first know our Union, before we can know that we are holy. To
which, I answer, Our Union to Christ cannot be known to be so without a
knowledge of Faith; nor an holy life cannot be known to be so, without a
knowledge of Faith; because without Faith neither can be in reality: when we
see our Faith flowing out in an holy life, we see the truth of our Union to
Christ, and the truth of our holy life both at once: An holy life taken not
merely in its outward acts, but in its efflux from Faith is an infallible mark
of our Union to Christ.

At other times these Men make the work of Sanctification so imperfect, Mr.
Sherlock.
and so like an unsanctified state, that it is impossible to distinguish a
sanctified and unsanctified Man; upon this account holiness must be a very
sorry evidence of our union to Christ, when it is so imperfect that it cannot
be known: An unregenerate Man is under the Law of sin, under the reigning power
of it; and a regenerate Man (as they describe him) is in a state as like this,
as one Egg is another: For a regenerate Man may be carnal, sold under sin, that
is, a Slave and Captive to it, he may do those things he allows not; nay, those
things which he hates, that is, he may sin against the clearest convictions of
conscience and sense of duty; he may neglect to do those things which he knows
he ought to do, and do those things which he knows he ought not to do; he may
find a Law in his Members, that when he would do good, evil is present with
him; a Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his mind, which brings
him into captivity to the Law of sin, that is in his Members: For so they tell
us, that St. Paul complains of all this in the person of a regenerate Man, Romans
7. Now an unregenerate man does the very same, and indeed cannot do much worse;
he sins against conscience, is brought into captivity to sin, is overpowered by
indwelling sin; he finds natural fears and terrors, when he is tempted to sin,
which gives some check to him, and makes him sin against his own will with some
unwillingness and reluctance; he approves the Law of God as just and equal, his
conscience assents to it, but there is a strong bias upon his will, which runs
counter to all those holy Commands, and makes him a Slave and Captive to his
lusts. Now, not to dispute which of these two the Apostle means in Romans 7. I
think it is hard to assign any difference between them; the regenerate Man,
according to this description, is full as bad as the ungenerate; or if there be
any difference, the regenerate Man is the worst of the two, because in the
regenerate Man the spirit is led into captivity; but in the ungenerate only
natural conscience, which is a much weaker principle, and so is capable of a
better excuse, is led into captivity: But which of these two it is, no Man can
tell, and therefore a regenerate Man has great reason to fear, that he may be
unregenerate; and an ungenerate Man has as much reason to hope, that he may be
regenerate; and what becomes then of this evidence of Sanctification to prove
our union to Christ, when Sanctification it self cannot be distinguished from
an unsanctified state.

According to these Men, Answer.
we cannot distinguish a sanctified and an unsanctified man, an unregenerate
man is under the reign of sin, and a regenerate man (as they describe him) is
so too. Why so? He may be Carnal, Romans 7.14. but not as the ungenerate, totally
altogether Carnal, without any spark of Spiritual life in him; but partially
only, in respect of the Relics of corruption abiding in him: He is Spiritual,
so far as he is regenerate; yet Carnal, because he has some corrupt flesh in
him. This appears, because though regenerate, he is still to go on mortifying
the flesh, and the flesh is yet lusting in him against the Spirit: The Babes in
Christ are called Carnal, 1 Cor. 3.1. yet they were not unregenerate, but their
regenerate Man is sold under sin, Romans 7.14. He is so; but what, as Ahab, who
sold himself to work evil? What, as the unregenerate are, who are willing
Captives, ready to obey the desires of the flesh? no; but he is a captive
against his will, he cannot wholly rid himself of those lusts, which lie as so
many heavy chains upon him; so far as regenerate, he is a freeman, but because
Regeneration is imperfect, he is yet a Captive: But their regenerate man may do
those things he allows not, nay, those things he hates, Romans 7.15. Not that, as
the profane, he does outward gross acts of sin, and wallows in them; but that
the inevitabile malum, that unavoidable concupiscence, (though he disallow and
hate it and all its progeny) will be stirring in his thoughts and desires; nay,
and sometimes prevailing too. That the Apostle speaks of such unavoidable
defects, is clear from the following words: It is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me, verse. 17. which words can be only understood of
unavoidable defects: But their unregenerate Man neglects duty, the good he
would do he does not, verse. 19. not that he does not do duties to God, but that
the clog of corruption impedes him from doing them, in that pure and
uninterrupted manner as he desires: He finds a Law in his Members warring
against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the Law of sin,
which is in his Members, verse. 23. He has a Divine Spiritual life in him, but
because Regeneration is imperfect, the indwelling sin is still in him,
struggling, though not reigning; by these things it appears, that there is a
vast difference between a regenerate Man and an ungenerate: But if we
understand Romans 7. of an unregenerate Man, see if we do not saint him, and make
him a regenerate Man; A regenerate man hates sin, Ps. 119.128. and so does the
unregenerate, Romans 7.15. which yet never any unregenerate Man did reach unto: A
regenerate Man has a will to that which is good, and so has the unregenerate,
Romans 7.18. which is a lift beyond: A regenerate Man delights in the Law of God,
Psalm. 1.2. and so does the unregenerate, Romans 7.22. which is a Divine strain
much beyond him: A regenerate Man groans under the burden of the indwelling
corruption, and so does the unregenerate, Romans 7.24. who yet has little or no
sense of it: A regenerate Man blesses God for the great deliverance by Jesus
Christ, and in gratitude serves him, and so does the unregenerate, Romans 7.25.
who yet never made it his business so to do: And thus the unregenerate Man is
made as good as the regenerate; to conclude, the holiness of the regenerate,
though imperfect and laboring under the indwelling sin, is yet a good evidence
of their Union with Christ.

Dr. Jacomb, Mr. Sherlock.
in his Discourse of the Law of sin, attempts to assign the difference between
the Law of sin in the regenerate, and it in the unregenerate; and has given
such a Description of an unregenerate state, that there is scarce such an
unregenerate Man in the World; and yet if we must judge what a regenerate Man
is, by inverting the Character of the unregenerate, he is by odds much the
worse Man: As first, When the whole bent and tendency of the heart is toward
sin, when the propensities of the Soul thereto are entire and unmixt, there it
is the Law of sin in the unregenerate: But is every one a regenerate Man, who
has some good propensities in him? who has some wouldings and velleities to
that which is good? then there are few unregenerate in the World. Secondly,
which is the explication of the former, when all the several Faculties of the
Soul are altogether on sins side, and wholly take its part, then it is the Law
of sin in the unregenerate; where the understanding gives in its final positive
dictate, that sin is good, represents it as eligible to the will, the will upon
this closes with it, embraces it it, cleaves to it, the affections, desire,
joy, delight, run out upon it; where it is thus, the case is determined, yea,
without controversy: But where shall we find such a Man? I believe there was
never such a Man born; too many choose evil though they know it to be evil, for
the seeming advantages of profit or pleasure; but to choose evil, as believing
it to be good, and to rejoice and delight in it, as good and eligible for it
self, is such an unregenerate state as the Devil never arrived at; for though
he be a wicked Spirit, yet he is no Fool, as those must be, who mistake evil
for good in such plain instances: The Heathens themselves at this rate were all
regenerate, for their consciences accused them for doing evil, Romans 2. They
knew good to be good, and evil evil: There was never such a Man as he
describes, when he tells us, That sin comes to the Sinner, and says: Art thou
willing that I should rule? Yes, says he, with all my heart, I like thy
commands, I am thine, I submit to be at thy dispose, I here swear fealty and
allegiance to thee, etc. This Oath, etc. might very well have been spared, for
there is enough without it; and yet if this be the difference, that the
unregenerate Man chooses sin, believing it to be good, and the regenerate Man
chooses sin, though he knows it to be evil, it is plain that the regenerate is
much the worse, because his sins have the greatest aggravations that any sins
are capable of, which the sins of an unregenerate Man have not: viz. That they
are sins against knowledge; and so, according to our Saviors reasoning, this
regenerate Man will be beaten with more stripes.

Dr. Jacomb assigns the difference between the Law of sin in the regenerate and
in the unregenerate: Answer.
First, When the whole bent of the heart is toward sin, when the propensities
are entire and unmixt, there it is the Law of sin in the unregenerate. But,
says the Author, is every one regenerate who has some good propensities? Who
has some wouldings and velleities, to that which is good? Then there are few
unregenerate Men in the World. To which I answer, The unregenerate may indeed
have some wouldings and velleities to good, not of himself; for in his flesh
(and such he is all over by Nature) there is no good, but from the common
motions and operations of the Holy Spirit: Yet, notwithstanding these, the bent
of his heart is to sin, the power of sin is habitual in him, which is all the
intent and very expression of the Doctor in that place. Secondly, When all the
faculties of the Soul are on sins side, when the understanding gives in its
final positive dictate, that sin is good, represents it as eligible to the
will, the will closes with it, the affections run out upon it; there the case,
says the Doctor, is determined. But, says the Author: Never such a Man was
born, as to choose evil believing it to be good, to delight and rejoice in it,
as good and eligible for it self. To which I answer, The Authors discourse runs
upon this, as if the Doctor had asserted, that the understanding in the
unregenerate did represent sin as good; that is, as conformable to the Law and
Will of God, and so good. Hence the Author tells us: That the Devil, though a
wicked Spirit, is no Fool; that the very Heathen know good to be good, and evil
evil: But all this is besides the scope; the Doctor never said or meant so,
when he says, that the understanding dictates sin to be good: No Man, I
presume, will interpret the words thus; the understanding dictates sin to be
conformable to the Will of God, that is, sin to be no sin: No, the
understanding knows sin to be sin, sin to be contrary to the Will of God; yet
it represents sin as good in other respects, and so good as to cast the
balance in the heart on sins side; it may be there are baits of profit or
pleasure in it: Nay, it is my own thought, that the pravity in sinsul actions
comes sub ratione convenientiae, and offers it self as congruous, and so good
to the corrupt Will and heart of Man, the very difformity or contradiction to
the will of God, as intrinsecally black as it is, blushes and looks fair to
that Carnal mind which is enmity against God: An unregenerate Man drinks in
iniquity as water, Job 15.16. being filthy himself, iniquity, though a very
foul thing, goes down naturally with him, and is as it were his proper Element.
St. Austin in his Confessions, speaking of his stealing of Apples, says that
he was: Gratis malus; Confess. li. 2 cap. 4.6.
Amavi defectum meum, decerpta projeci, epulatus inde solaminiquitatem, qua
laetabar fruens; si quid illorum intravit in os meum, condimentum facinus erat.
He confesses, the very sin it self was grateful to him: If Sinners did not
believe sin to be good in some respect or other; if they did look on it as
evil, and nothing but pure impure evil, it were utterly impossible that they
should choose it or delight in it; the will cannot appetere malum sub ratione
mali, for that were appetere non appetible, which is impossible. I conclude
with the words of the Doctor, in that place: Whosoever upon deliberation judges
a sinful course to be the best, and thereupon chooses, embraces, falls in with
it, delights in it, continues in it, in this Man it is the Law of sin; this Man
is, as I take it, a Servant of sin, and willing it should rule: There is, as
learned Bishop Reynolds says, a Covenant, a virtual bargain between him and
his lusts, he agrees to serve and obey them.

But Thirdly, Mr. Sherlock.
The Law of sin has different workings in the People of God than in others;
This working of the Law of sin in Gods People, me thinks, is an ill thing. But
let us hear how it is: First, Where sin is committed industriously and
designedly, there it is the Law of sin in the Graceless; unless Men be very
cunning at the trade of sin, they are not under the Law of it, as graceless
persons are: Grace is consistent with taking all fair opportunities of sinning,
so we do not design it before hand. Secondly, When the temptation easily
prevails, then it is the Law of sin in the unregenerate; This is an Argument
indeed, that a Man is a willing Slave; but when a Man is conquered by a
temptation, though he make some resistance, it is an Argument, that sin is his
Master, which rules and governs, especially if this be often, such a Man surely
is none of Christ's freemen, and therefore not to fail. Thirdly, When sin
carries it in spite of all opposition, against all external discouragements,
threatenings of the Law, the Scepter of the Gospel, the Love of God, and his
Wrath, the Death and Wounds of Christ, Reproofs, Resolutions, Vows, Promises,
etc. then it is the Law of sin; So that it seems, when sin carries it in
despite of all external oppositions only, it is the mark of an unregenerate
Man; but when it carries it against internal and external oppositions, that is
a sign of a regenerate Man; for a regenerate Man has the same external
oppositions, to preserve him from sin, that an unregenerate Man has, and
besides these he has internal oppositions, the checks of his own conscience,
which he says the unregenerate Man has not. And Fourthly, When it is sinning
and no sense of sin, no after Repentance for it, then it is the Law of sin: Now
what bad Man is there, who does not at one time or other repent of his sins,
and complain of them? And how many are there, that repent of their sins, and
make large Confessions of them, and return to them again? There are no Men, but
do at one time or other express some sorrow for their sins, (which he calls
Repentance) and there are a great many, who pretend thus to be sorry for their
sins, who it is to be feared, are never the better Men for it; and yet were
there any such, who sin without any sense of it, they would be much better then
those regenerate Men, who feel the gripes of conscience for sin, and yet return
to it.

This working of the Law of sin in Gods People is an ill thing. Answer.
Oh! that we had perfection! But while we are here sin will be in us, and
whilst it is in us, it will work in some measure: Concupiscere nolo and
concupisco, says St. Austin. De Temp. Sermon. 45.
The first mark in the Doctor, is sinning industriously and designedly, and
this is a sure one, and found in all the unregenerate; although all of them are
not alike cunning, and Artists at the Trade of sin, all more or less make
provision for the Flesh, the frame of their Heart, and stream of their Thoughts
run this way. The Flesh (as the Doctor speaks) has the (...), the projecting
and forecasting ability at command in them, thus it is not with the regenerate.
The Second is, The temptation easily prevails in the unregenerate; and what
more certain? The old heart is as dry tinder, ready to take fire upon every
little spark; thus it is not with the regenerate, who has a higher and a
better Spirit than his own, to guard him against the temptatation: If he be
overcome in a particular Act of sin, sin is not yet his Master, because it
cannot gain the bent of his heart, and the course of his life. The third is,
When sin carries it against all external Discouragements, against the
threatenings of the Law, the Scepter of the Gospel, the Love and Wrath of God,
the Wounds of Christ, Reproofs, Resolutions, Vows, etc. then it is the Law of
sin. Upon which the Author inferrs thus: It seems when sin carries it against
external oppositions only, it is a mark of an unregenerate Man; but when it
carries it against internal and external oppositions, that is a sign of a
regenerate Man. To which I answer. It is true, when sin carries it in a
regenerate Man, it carries it against such internal helps, and principles of
Grace as are not in the unregenerate, but then it carries it only in a single
Act: But in the unregenerate it carries it in a course of life too, against
Law, Gospel, Wrath, Love, the Blood of Christ, the smitings of Conscience,
Reproofs, Promises, Judgments, still he will sin on, whilst he is
unregenerate; thus the regenerate does not. The Fourth is: When it is sinning,
and no sense of sin, no after Repentance for it, then it is the Law of sin.
But, says the Author: What bad Man is there, who does not at one time or other
repent of his sins? and yet were there any such, they would be better than
those regenerate Men, who feel the gripes of conscience for sin, and yet return
to it. Unto which I answer, Surely all bad Men do not repent of their sins,
such as God gives up to a reprobate mind, to a fat heart, to a spirit of
slumber, to a (...), a brawny hardness, which feels nothing, do not do so; and
yet, I suppose, these are the worst of Men: Sinning against gripes of
Conscience is a great aggravation, but an hard senseless heart is the worst
state imaginable on Earth. But suppose bad Men have some kind of Repentance; is
it such as the regenerate have after their falls? No surely, the regenerate, as
the Doctor has it, are greatly humbled, they recover again by true Repentance,
they rise after their falls, thus unregenerate Men do not.

It is wonderful to consider, Mr. Sherlock.
how little a matter will serve for an evidence of Grace, (after all their talk
of Sanctification) when they come to administer comfort to distressed
consciences. Oh, says the Soul, I find sin prevail, Sheph. Sts, Jewel.
and how can I be comforted! (not by Sanctification sure.) Answ. I will subdue
your iniquities, and cast your sins into the midst of the Sea. Obj. But the
Devil will be busy with me. Ans. God will tread him down. Obj. But I cannot go
to God by Prayer, to fetch comfort. (Comfort! what have thou to do with
comfort? get quit of thy sins first, and then it is time enough for comfort.)
Ans. Though it be so, yet believe and thou shall have thy desire. (But I doubt
the Soul that cannot pray, cannot believe neither.) Obj. But I am afraid I
shall fall away from God. (Afraid of it! thou art fallen from God already, if
sin prevail so much, for sin is the great Apostasy from God.) Answer. None can
pluck thee out of Christ's hands, neither sin nor the Devil. (But how if they be
not in Christ's hands yet, sin I doubt may keep them out; if God cut off barren
Branches, there is some danger of putrid ones.) God has said, I have made an
everlasting Covenant with thee, I will not turn away from thee. Obj. This is
good news, had I a right to the promise; but alas! I cannot believe, and take a
naked promise. Ans. Do thou desire to believe and to have Christ, and say
thus, If it were possible for Christ and Heaven to be separated, I would rather
desire Christ without Heaven, than Heaven without Christ. Obj. But this is a
hard matter; I cannot say, I desire Christ on such terms as I should. (This
saying is the best sign of Grace I have met with; he is an honest Man, who will
not contradict the natural sense of his mind, and say, he can do that which is
impossible to be done: It is an odd proposal in order to comfort a poor Soul,
that he must be willing to be damned with Christ, before he must take comfort
in hopes of being saved by him.) Ans. But is it the grief of thy heart, that
thou can not deny thy self? Desire thou to close with Christ upon any
terms? Obj. Alas! I cannot grieve and mourn for sin. (Certainly they are at
cross purposes, their Objections and Answers do so ill agree.) Ans. Have thou
any will to it? Art thou willing to part with thy sins? But the poor Soul
says, I fear I shall never do this. But art thou willing, that Christ should
make thee willing, (against thy will) and pitch thee upon a promise and hold
thee there? (for shame, poor Soul, refuse not this) then comfort thy self, thou
have a right to Gods promises. Thus this evidence of Sanctification is dwindled
away into a desire to be willing; Nay, into a desire to be made willing; and he
is a strange Man, who cannot go so far.

When a Minister comes to comfort poor afflicted souls, Answer.
he does not offer them the Altitudes, the highest Statures of Holiness to
measure themselves by, that would be horrid cruelty; but he sets before them
that immense mercy, which stoops down, in its acceptance, to the least seeds or
sparks of Grace, to grace latent in a desire or willing mind; Nay, to that
poverty of the spirit, which, though it seem to it self to have nothing at all
of Grace, has yet a blessedness entailed on it; a broken heart, which has
some truth of Grace, may complain of the prevalency of sin in some sense. The
pressure of inherent corruption may make him cry out: O wretched man! the flesh
may so lust against the spirit, that he cannot do the things that he would,
Gal. 5.17. Yet comfort may and does belong to him, those promises of subduing
iniquity, of treading down Satan; may, without straining them beyond their
scope; let out their sweetness to him: When he thinks, that he cannot pray, God
may find and accept of a prayer in his sighs and groans, when he fears by
reason of the stirring lusts, that he shall fall from God; Grace is sufficient
and able to make him stand, he may be in Christ's hands, and yet not know it to
his comfort: He says, he cannot believe, and yet his Faith, though little, and
as the smoking Flax may be true: The deep sense which he has of the power of
sin and want of Faith, argues somewhat of Faith and a Divine Life in him, which
struggles against sin, and aspires after more Grace: He says, that he cannot
desire Christ, as he should: And this sense of his want may speak him, not an
honest man only, but a pious, such as indeed breaths after Grace: He says, he
cannot grieve or mourn for sin; yet that very saying argues a kind of mourning
and lamentation over his hardness, and speaks his heart not to be totally hard
or senseless: He complains his will is not such as it should be; and this
shows, that in some measure he looks up to that Grace, which is able to make
him willing, not as if he were to be made willing against his will; but that
Grace can change an unwilling will into a willing one: In such dealings as
these with broken hearts; Sanctification is not dwindled away, but comfort is
administered from the lowest measure of true Grace. Mr. Sherlock.


But when they have a mind to take down the confidence of men, who are apt to
presume too soon, that their condition is good; they do so magnify the
seize of hypocrites, who shall never go to Heaven, that it is impossible,
for any sanctified man to do more than an hypocrite may do: So that,
notwithstanding any evidences of Sanctification, he may be a hypocrite still,
which quite spoils the evidences of Sanctification, because we cannot
distinguish a sanctified man from a hypocrite: Thus for example, one may plead:
I have left my sins I once lived in; I am no Drunkard, Swearer, Liar. I answer,
Shep. Sinc. convert.
Thou may be washed from the mire, the pollution of the World; and yet be a
Swine in Gods account ( which he proves from, 2 Pet. 2.20. Where the Apostle
tells them: That if they have escaped the pollutions of the World through the
knowledge of Christ, and are again entangled therein and overcome (if they
return to their old vices) then their latter end is worse than the beginning;
Which is point blank contrary to what he affirms, that those, who have escaped
these pollutions, and are not yet entangled again in them, may, notwithstanding
that, be Swine in Gods account: For so he adds; Thou may live a blameless,
innocent, honest, smooth life, and yet be a miserable creature: But I pray,
says such a man, and that often; so thou may, and yet never be saved, Isai.
1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? To great purpose
sure, when they are offered by men of blameless, innocent, honest, smooth
lives; the want of which made those sacrifices abominable to God: But I fast
sometimes, so did the Scribes and Pharisees: But it was to devour widows
houses, which was not the fast of an honest, innocent man: But I hear the word,
so did the stony ground, who for a season believed; And it had been well, and a
good sign of Grace, if it had continued: I read the Scripture, so did the
Pharisees, who were perfect in the Bible: But though knaves read the
Scriptures, and be never the better for it; yet good men may read it to good
purpose; reading of Scripture is no argument, that a man is an hypocrite,
because the Pharisees were; But I am grieved and repent of my sins, so did
Judas; but he hanged himself, and that indeed is no repentance to life: But I
love good men and their company, so did the foolish Virgins; But they slept and
suffered their Lamps to go out, which all that love good men do not: But God
has given me much knowledge, that thou may have and never be saved; Yes, and
twenty good things more; but if a blameless honest man has the keeping of this
knowledge, it is never the worse for him: But I keep the Lords day, so did the
Jews; had he been as well acquainted with the Scriptures, as the Pharisees
were, he would not have said, that the Jews kept the Lords day; however this is
one good thing, which does well in the company of more: But I have good
desires, and endeavors to get to Heaven; these thou may have, and miss of
Heaven; And yet, when he was in a more gentle humor, he told the poor doubting
soul, that desire, nay, that a desire only to desire, at two or three removes
was enough: But I am zealous, so was Jehu, and Paul while a Pharisee, (in
persecuting the Church; and therefore an universal, religious, well-governed
zeal for God can be no sign of Grace) But I am constant, and persevere in godly
courses, so did the young man; all these have I kept from my youth, (only he
left Christ for the sake of his riches, and so did not persevere:) But I do all
with a good heart for God; so thou may think of thy self and be deceived:
(And if this be an objection, let a man have what marks he will; the objection
will still be good, and so all evidences signify nothing; for after all a man
may be deceived in it, and think he has those marks, when he has them not.)
There is a way that seems right to man, but the end thereof is death; thou
may live so, as to deceive thy self and others, and yet prove an hypocrite;
as if because some men may think themselves good, who are in a bad estate; no
man could ever be sure that he is in the right. And thus farewell all evidences.

There is reason to administer comfort to wounded Souls from the lowest
measures of Grace, Answer
and no less to pluck down the proud Plumes of Hypocrites from the inward and
pure spirituality of Religion: Our Savior does both, he gave out gracious
Promises to mourners, and to the poor in spirit, and he poured out woes upon
the Pharisees, and upon all the pomp of their external righteousness: But,
says the Author, they do so magnify the seize of Hypocrites, that a
sanctified man can do no more than an Hypocrite; and so all the evidences of
Sanctification are spoiled: But how so? do they paint the Hypocrite fairer than
he is? Do they attribute to him a jot or tittle more than what is true? No
surely, an Hypocrite may be no Drunkkard, or Swearer; he may escape the
pollutions of the World; that is, gross sins; and, though he be not entangled
therein again; and so a Swine in his outward converses: yet he may be such
inwardly, his inward parts may be wickedness and uncleanness: He may live a
blameless, innocent, honest, smooth life, and yet be foul within: He may fast,
pray, hear, read the Scriptures, and yet his heart not right in the sight of
God: He may have some kind of sorrow or repentance, some kind of love to good
men; and yet like the foolish Virgins have no Oil in his Lamp; no true Grace
with his profession: He may have a notional knowledge, and yet not be
Sanctified by the Truth: He may keep a Sabbath in the outward decorum of it;
and yet want the Spirit and Life of it, a delight in the Almighty: He may have
some kind of zeal, and some desires after Heaven; and yet not of the right
stamp: He may presume that he has a good heart, and a godly course, and be
deceived in both, all this is true: Now one Truth cannot oppose another: The
truth which concerns the seize of Hypocrites, cannot oppose that which
concerns the evidences of Sanctification: The outward reformation is an
evidence, not merely as it is outward, but as it flows from Faith, and a pure
heart: Fasting, prayer, hearing, reading are evidences, not merely in opere
operato, in the work done; but in the doing of them in a Spiritual manner;
Faith, and Hope, and holy Love being actuated therein: Keeping the Sabbath is
an evidence, not merely in the outward observation of it: But when it is filled
up with Duties, spiritually performed: Knowledge, Zeal, Repentance, Love to
good Men are Graces; when of the right stamp, but mere notion which swims in
the brain, is not that sanctifying Knowledge, which influences Holiness into
the Heart and Life: Every heat upon a Religious account is not true Zeal, but
that celestial Fire, which rightly inflames the heart for the glory of God:
Every sorrow or pressure from the Law, is not true repentance, but that which
melts the heart into tears for the sinfulness of sin; Every respect to good men
is not the right love, but that which flows out of love to God, and points to
the Divine Image in them: Desires after Heaven may be a mark of a good Estate;
but then they must be such as are vertually Grace, and issue out of poverty of
spirit. A man may think he has a good heart, and a godly course, and be
deceived therein; yet it follows not, that we must bid farewell to evidences; an
holy life issuing out of a pure heart, will still be an evidence to him who
has it.

But after all this, Mr. Sherlock.
it would be worth while to know, how to distingush a regenerate from an
unregenerate man; and that he tells us may be done thus: An unregenerate man;
let him go never so far, do never so much, yet he lives in some one sin or
other: This now is very strange: What? go never so far? and do never so much?
and yet live in some one sin or other; what live a blameless, innocent, honest,
smooth life, and yet live in some one sin or other? Yet suppose he did, a
regenerate man may be, in captivity to the Law of sin: And pray what is the
difference? But then an ungenerate man cannot be poor in spirit; and so carried
out of all Duties to Christ; That is, if an unregenerate man do good, he is
conscious to himself that he does it: If he have a good heart, he feels a good
heart in himself, and in all he does, and therefore feels not a want of all
good, which is true poverty of spirit: So that according to this discourse, the
surest mark of a regenerate man is either to have no good in himself: or, if he
have any to be mistaken, and think he has none; either of which, I think, is a
very odd sign of Grace: But then an unregenerate man comes to Christ; but he
never gets into Christ, never takes up his eternal rest and lodging in Jesus
Christ only; I thought coming had been believing, and that believing would have
done the business; And if so, God forbid, that any man should be damned for
want of that other Metaphor of taking up his eternal rest and lodging in
Christ: Men in distress of conscience, (that (...) unregenerate men under such
distress) If they have comfort from Christ, they are contented: If Salvation
from Hell by Christ, they are contented, (and I think they have some reason
then to be contented) But Christ himself; that is, without Comfort, and without
Salvation, contents them not. Now to be contented with Christ without comfort
and salvation; is so far from being the mark of an unregenerate man, that I am
not yet satisfied, that it is the mark of an unreasonable man.

An unregenerate man, Answer.
let him go never so far, do never so much; yet, as long as he is in his old
Sphere, in corrupt unregenerate nature, he lives in some one sin or other; in
an unregenerate heart, while such, Gods throne is not, cannot be, and therefore
sins must be there: Such an heart, as yet not elevated by Grace to the true and
immense goodness which is above, hunts after an happiness in the lower Sphere
of its self and the world, embracing some vain Image or Shadow instead of a
Deity: The young man in the Gospel, for all his smooth, innocent life, had yet
a regnant World within. Trajan and Antoninus the Philosopher, as fair Moralists
as they were, were yet enemies to Christianity: But a regenerate man, however
he groan under the indwelling sin, does not indulge his lusts; his heart,
having found out God the true center of Blessedness, rests no where else: But,
says Mr. Shephard, an unregenerate man cannot be poor in spirit, and so
carried out of all duties to Christ. Upon which, says the Author, if an
unregenerate man do good, he is conscious to himself that he does it; if he
have a good heart, he feels it: And is it so indeed? If an unregenerate man may
have a good heart, and do that which is truly spiritually good; Regeneration is
altogether useless, internal and supernatural principles of Grace are to no
purpose: Nature, though lame and lapsed, may do its own work: But I suppose
rather, that all this in the unregenerate, is but pride and presumption; his
feeling a good heart in himself, but a lie and imposture. But, says the
Author, the regenerate man is either to have no good in himself, or to think he
has none, either of which is an odd sign of Grace. To which, I answer; To be a
regenerate Man, and to have no good in himself, is not possible, to think he
has none, if he know he has some, is as little possible as the other: The
regenerated man has a Divine Life and Principle in him; yet, by reason of
inherent corruptne^s, sees little or nothing in himself; and is ever in
dependence upon the treasures of Grace in Christ. An unregenerate man may come
to Christ in Profession or Ordinances, but not in believing: He takes not up
his rest in Christ: He would, says Mr. Shephard, like Judas, have Christ and
the bag too: Or, as the young man, have Christ and the world too: He would live
in his Lusts; and, if at last Christ would save him from Hell, it would be
enough: But the regenerate are in love with Christ himself, Epist. ad Romans
(...), My Love Christ was crucified, and with him my love to all other things,
sait Ignatius, and the Reverend Usher, as Mr. Baxter relates, was of opinion,
That by the first act of Faith we receive Christ's person, and by a second his
benefits.

Mr. Shephard Jaith, Mr. Sherlock
That men tired and weary in themselves, go to Christ to remove their sins: If
they get these sins subdued and removed; if they find power to do better, they
hope to be saved, (here is the evidence of Sanctification) whereas thou may
be damned, and go to the Devil at last, though thou do escape all the
pollutions of the World; and that not from thy self, and thine own strength:
but from the knowledge of Christ: Woe to you if you dye in this state (with
your sins mortified and subdued by Christ) and the reason is, because this is
to come to Christ, to suck juice from him, to maintain his own Berries (his own
stock of Graces) Alas! he is but the Ivy, he is no Member, nor Branch in this
Tree: And hence he never grows to be one with Christ: So that Holiness and
Obedience is no evidence of our Union to Christ, though we fetch strength from
Christ to do his will; we may only grasp about Christ all this while, as the
Ivy about the Oak; but never be united to him, and become one with him.

Mr. Shephard's plain scope is no more but this, Answer.
that poor sinners tired with their sins, should not rest in any thing, no, not
in some power to subdue sin, and do better, without Union to Christ: And the
Scripture-Method calls for this, that we should have our being in Christ, put
on Christ, and receive Christ, that we may have all benefits from him. 1. Hom.
of the Sacrament.
Hence our Church tells us, That we must make Christ our own, and apply his
merits to our selves. Thus the Learned Zanchy, Tota verae justitiae, De vera
dispensat.
vitae, salutis participatio ex hac pernecessaria cum Christo (...), pendet:
The whole participation of Righteousness, Life, Salvation, depends on our Union
with Christ, which is most necessary. A man through the knowledge of Christ,
may escape the pollutions of the World; that is, gross sins; he may learn to do
better in his life; but true mrtification of sins flows from our Union to
Christ, and is effected by the holy Spirit in Believers: Holiness and
Obedience, such as indeed is true and spiritual, does not go before Faith and
Union to Christ, but follow after it, and so evidence it, as the Fruit does the
Root. As for the Authors subjoyned exclamation: Good God! into what mazes and
labyrinths do these men lead poor distressed souls? I must leave it to the
Reader to determine, whether there be any just cause for it or not.

The testimony of the Spirit concerns the general adoption of Christians for
the sons of God, Mr. Sherlock.
not to testify to any particular man, that he is a good Christian, or in the
estate of Grace: It is not a private, but a public testimony given to the
whole Christian Church: That holy Spirit, which God bestowed upon the Apostles
and Primitive Christians, which enabled them to work Miracles, speak Languages
and Prophecy, was a plain argument to all the World, that God now owned the
Christians, not the Jews, for his chosen and elect people; for his sons and
children: For this was the great dispute of those days, whether Jews or
Christians were the sons of God? whether God now owned the Jewish or Christian
Religion? and the Apostles decide this Controversy by the Testimony of the
Spirit; for God could not give a greater Testimony to the Christian Church,
than the gift of the holy Spirit; for it was a plain argument, that he owned
them for his sons, when he bestowed the Spirit of his Son on them, as the
Apostle argues, Galat. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or
by the hearing of Faith? that is, did God bestow his Spirit on you, while you
were Jews, or upon your conversion to Christianity? For if God bestowed his
spirit on Christians: This is a sufficient seal to the Christian Religion: This
is plain and intelligible, the Testimony of the Spirit assures us, that all
Christians are the Sons of God, and Heirs of the Promises; and every man's
conscience will tell him, whether he be a Christian, whether he heartily
believe and obey the Gospel; and herein consists our Union to Christ, and
fellowship with him; let us then leave those other dim notions to men, who can
believe, what no man can understand, who despise every thing, that can be
understood, as if it were no better than carnal reason.

The Author, Answer.
who hitherto has highly, though without cause, charged his opposites with
violating the evidences of Christians, does now himself blast the highest of
all evidences, the Testimony of the holy Spirit, which is so clealy asserted by
the holy Apostle, that the Jesuits themselves, though hotly disputing against
assurance, never yet attempted totally to deny it: The Testimony of the Spirit
(says the Author) concerns the general adoption of Christians, not to testify
to any particular man: It is not a private, but a public Testimony given to
the whole Church. But let us consider the Text it self in the Apostle: The
Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of
God, Romans 8.16. The Spirit, the Apostle speaks not of the Spirit, as showing
forth it self in Miracles and Tongues; but as sanctifying and sealing
Believers; he speaks of the spirit dwelling in them, verse. 9. Mortifying the
deeds of the body in them, verse. 13. Leading of them, verse. 14. Making them
cry, Abba, Father, verse. 15. And then follows, (...), the self same spirit
bears witness: Here is not one jot or tittle of Miracles or Tongues, the
testimony of the Spirit in Miracles or Tongues, is an external one, which runs
into the senses: But the Testimony of the Spirit in the Text is internal; it
bears witness not to our senses, but to our Spirits. It is said to be sent
forth into our hearts, Gal. 4.6. The Testimony is not without in Miracles or
Tongues, but within in the heart: The Spirit bears witness with our spirit;
the Apostle says not, it bears witness with the Spirit of the Church; for
there is one body, and one spirit; the Spirit of the Church Catholic is the
holy Spirit, which quickens the whole Mystical Body of Christ: And these words,
The Spirit bears witness with our spirit; cannot be translated thus: The
Spirit bears witness with it self; but the plain meaning is: It bears
witness with our spirit; that is, with the spirits and consciences of
particular Believers: And what does it testify? The Apostle tells us, That we
are the children of God; We particular Believers are so. Thus in another place,
ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. Ye, particular
Believers were so. And again, He has sealed us, and given the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. He has dealt so with us in particular. The
Testimony of the Spirit in the Gospel is, that all Believers are the Sons of
God: But the Testimony of the Spirit in our spirits is, that we are Believers,
and so the Sons of God in particular. This Testimony of the Spirit, (though so
fully asserted in Scripture: Nay, and I will add, though so sweetly
experimented by the dear Saints of God, that they have thought themselves in
the very borders of Heaven in respect of it) is yet with the Author no better
than a dim unintilligible notion; and, as he speaks a little before, a private
Enthusiasm: But why unintelligible? cannot the holy Spirit so illustrate and
irradiate the heart, that the truth of Grace may appear to the Believer; that
he may certainly see in his own heart, that this is precious Faith, and that is
love in incorruption; and so of other Graces there: Or, what if it were
unintelligible? Shall we cast off the Divine Revelation, because above our
narrow reason? What then must become of those Mysteries of the Trinity, and
hypostatical Union? What of that peace of God, which is (...), passing or
transcending all understanding, Phil. 4.7. Surely in such things reason must
vail and do homage to Revelations: Ephraem Syrus discerning an heretical
propensity in his Disciple Paulinus, gave him that excellent advice, Vide,
Pauline, ne te submittas tuis cogitationibus, sed cum te perfect
comprehendisse Deum putaveris, creed nec intellexisse: We must not commit
Divine Mysteries to the measures of Humane Reason; but take them as they are in
Scripture: But this Testimony of the Spirit is but a private Enthusiasm, says
the Author. To which I answer, We are now more afraid of Enthusiasm, than they
were of old: Dyonisius would have the Hierarch to be (...), De Eccles. Hierarch.
to be a divine man and a kind of Euthusiast: Ignatius in the Epistle to the
Romans, says, That he wrote (...), Secundum arbitrium Dei, as if he had wrote
by impulse and Inspiration: And, as Dr. Arrowsmith has it, in Suidas, and
Hesykius, (...), Enthusiasm is, when the whole soul is irradiated by God: And
in this sense, I wish with him, Vtinam essemus omnes Enthusiastae? Would we
were all Enthusiasts. Its true, there is not now an Enthusiasm of gifts in an
extraordinary way; but sure there must be still in the use of the means an
Enthusiasm of Graces in Regeneration, and an Enthusiasm of comforts in the
Testimony of the Spirit; or else, which is quite contrary to Scripture, there
must be no new Creatures, but what are of Man's own making; nor no Divine
comforts for them, but what are of Man's own gathering: The Just need no longer
live by Faith, or in dependence upon the Divine Spirit, but may have his being
and well-being, his graces and comforts, all from himself.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1.
CHrist has reveiled the whole mind and will of God, Mr. Sherlock.
in such a plain and familiar manner, that every one may understand it, who
will but exercise the same reason in it, that he does to understand the Laws of
his Prince.

Before the Author took away the witnessing Spirit, now the illuminating one:
Answer.
A Man may, according to him, understand the things of God by the exercise of
his reason; Thus Episcopius: Men may by mere natural perception, without any
supernatural superinfused light, understand the Will of God. After the same
manner speak the Socinians: The darkness (for such are all the unregenerate
Men) may, it seems, comprehend the Evangelical light. But the Apostle tells us,
That the natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.14. That flesh and blood does not reveil these things, but our Father in
Heaven, Matthew. 16.17. Hence the Apostle prays for the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.17. Hence our Church tells us, 2. Hom.
of Scripture.
That the Revelation of the Holy Ghost inspireth the true meaning of Scripture
into us: In truth we cannot without him attain true saving knowledge.

According to these Men, Mr. Sherlock.
the love of Christ is a love to the person of a Believer; without considering
any other qualifications, than that he is such an individual person; that is,
the excellency of Christ's love consiss in this, that he loves for no reason:
Now I confess this is a wonderful love, but wherein the excellency of it
consists, I cannot see: I am sure we account that Man a Fool, who loves at this
rate; we who are reasonable Creatures, think that we are bound to govern all
our actions, and the passions of our mind too, by reason; and we accouut it a
reproach to a Man, to act either against reason or without it, to do any thing
of which he cannot give a reasonable account: And how that should come to be
the perfection of the Love of God, which is a reproach to Men, is above my
apprehension? Indeed were this true, it would undermine the very foundations of
Religion: For the great end of Religion is to please God, and to procure his
love and favor; but if God and Christ love for no reason, then it is a vain
thing for us to think of pleasing God, or procuring his love by any thing we
can do: Whether we obey him or disobey him, it is all one in this case; for if
he please to love us without any reason, our sins cannot hinder it; and if it
does not please him to love us, our Holiness and Obedience cannot alter him.
When our Acceptance with God depends wholly upon a sovereign and unaccountable
will, nothing we can do can hinder or promote it, and therefore all Religion is
in vain. The foundation of this mistake is a Philosophical nicety, that God
must act wholly from himself, and therefore must not be moved by any external
cause; whereas should he love us because we are holy, or hate us because we are
wicked, his love or hatred would depend upon an external cause: viz. The
holiness or wickedness of Creatures, which unbecomes an independent Being, to
depend upon any thing else: The sum of which reasoning is this, that because
God is the first cause of all things, on whom all things depend, and he on
nothing, therefore he must love or hate his Creature without any reason, but
his own unaccountable will: For this is all the inconvenience they can Object,
that when God loves or hates, rewards or punishes his Creatures, the reason of
this difference he makes between his Creatures, must be fetched from the
persons themselves whom he thus loves or hates; and so it must of necessity be,
if he have any reason at all; for the reason of love or hatred ought to be in
the Object, not in the Person who loves or hates; and yet in propriety of
speech, God cannot be said to depend on his Creatures, or any thing without
himself, for the reason of his love or hatred, but his own Nature is the reason
of it: He is infinitely Holy, and therefore loves holiness and hates sin; and
his natural love to holiness is the reason why he loves holy Men, and his
natural hatred to sin, is the reason why he hates wicked Men: his own holiness
is the reason why he loves holy Men, but the holiness of the Creature is the
reason, why he determines his love to any particular person; And if they will
call this a depending on creatures, we must acknowledge that God does thus
depend on his Creatures, in the administration of his Providence, in
distributions of rewards and punishments; and he should not be wise, and holy,
and just, and good if he did not, that is, if he did not put such a difference
between things and persons, as their Natures require: It is a strange notion of
an independent Being, that he must have no other reason for what he does, but
his own Arbitrary will; which is so far from being a perfection, that it
destroys all the other perfections of the Divine Nature.

There is a double love in God: Answer.
A love of complacence, whereby he delights in his own Holy Image in the
Creature, where ever he finds it; And a love of Benevolence, whereby he designs
to bestow good things on his Creatures: The first, points at goodness in the
Creature; the other, is the great origin of all good things in the Creature.
The first, Issues out of the perfect sanctity of his Nature; The other,
proceeds according to his Sovereign will and pleasure. But then, says the
Author, God loves for no reason, or without reason. To which I answer, Gods
love of Benevolence is no Caecus impetus, there is summa ratio in it, it is
irradiated with infinite wisdom; but the reason of it is not in the Creature,
but in himself only: God would redeem fallen Men not Angels; but surely the
reason was not in the Creature, for then all the Grace, Mercy, and Freedom of
God in that work vanishes: The whole of it must proceed from the Nature of God,
as it respects something in the Creature, and by consequence it could not fall
out otherwise, because God cannot deny his Nature. After the Fall it is strange
how God did sever, and pick out some to himself out of the rest of Mankind. De
P^p^^^, Hebr. (...)
Ex Adami liberis tantum Sethus, ex hujus stirpe Noachus, ex Nochi Filiis
Semus, ex illius posteritate Abramus; ac postremo ex numerosa Abrami sobole
unus Isacus placuit electusque est: Cujus Familia Ecclesiae nomen at que
dignitatem ineffabili ratione, velut per successionem, sibi vindicaret,
caeterae gentes tanquam prophanae, spretaeque a numine sunt. So the learned
Cunaeus: And it will be an hard thing to find a reason in the Creature for such
a strange separation: God chose and set his love upon his Children of Israel,
above all People in the Earth, he severed them from all other Nations unto
himself; and was the reason in the Creature? No surely; they must not so much
as say or mutter in their heart, That they had the Land for their
righteousness, Deuteronomy. 9.4. No, God tells them, that they were a stiff-necked
People, verse. 6. but he chose and loved them, because he loved them, Deuteronomy. 7.7.
and 8. What he did was merely out of his good pleasure, and without any reason
on their part. God gives the Gospel to some Nations, not to others; and is the
reason in the Creature? No; the Apostle tells us: That God calls us not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and Grace, 2 Timothy 1.9.
Christ was manifested to a Thief, and not to a Socrates or Plato; Impenitent
Corazin and Bethsaida had a visible Deity before them in Christ's Miracles, when
poor Tire and Sidon, much nearer to Repentance, had it not, Matthew. 11.21. Here
the reason cannot be in the Creature, unless we will say with Pelagius: Gratiam
dari secundum merita, That Grace is given according to works. But to come to
the Church, there God gives Faith and Repentance to one Man, not to another;
and is the reason in the Creature? Faith and Repentance are the very first
Graces in Men, and therefore cannot be given to them for any precedent Grace in
them, or indeed for any reason at all in them; unless, which is very odd, we
presume them to be given to them for the goodness of their Nature: The
Scripture clearly resolves it into the Sovereign will of God, He will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9.18. He begets us of his own will, Ja.
1.18. He begets us according to his abundant mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3. He works to
will and to do of his good pleasure, Ph. 2.13. Neither is it possible to be
otherwise; his love of Benevolence, is the Fountain and great Origin of all the
goodness in the Creature; and how or which way shall the goodness of the
Creature be the cause or reason of that love? All the goodness in the Creature
is but a donative of Divine love; and if so, then the Divine love was
antecedent to that goodness in the Creature. Now these things being clearly so
in Scripture and reason, I suppose there is little reason, and less Religion,
to say, That God loves for no reason, or without reason; that that Man is a
Fool who loves at this rate that it is a reproach among Men so to Act; with
such other stuff, which I pray God to forgive unto the Speaker. If there be
reason for any thing in the World, there is for this: That God the supreme
Donor, should do what he would with his own: That Man, the poor Receiver,
should not expostulate with God, or think to call him to an account for any of
his matters: That the regenerating Spirit should be at liberty and breath where
it lists: That all Gods gifts should be free, and of his good pleasure, there
being in the Creature nothing that is good, but what is a mere gift only. But,
says the Author, This undermines the foundations of Religion, if God love for
no reason, whether we obey him or disobey him, it is all one; if God love us
our sins cannot hinder it, if he love us not our holiness cannot alter him,
therefore all Religion is but in vain. To which I answer, This Argument runs
upon two or three hypotheses which are untrue: The Author supposes first, that
God's purpose or decretive love is, what it is not, the rule of our acting;
next, that there is in God what indeed there is not, some purpose or decree to
bar some Men, though never so holy, out of Heaven. And Thirdly, That there is
not, what in truth there is, a complacential love in God toward all holy
Persons whoever they be. Now, these things are not so, we say, that God
commands all in the Church to Repent and Believe, that God has made a general
promise of Salvation to all that do so; and withal that God has a
complacential love toward all holy persons whoever they be: And these things
considered, surely Religion cannot be in vain or to no purpose. As for the
Philosophical nicety or verity rather, if God be, as he is, a God and the
supreme Donor of all; in reason, all Creatures as Creatures must depend on him
the Creator, and as Receivers must depend on him the Donor: And hence it is
evident, that all the grace and goodness in the Creature, because a Creature,
must depend on him its Maker; And because a gift must depend on him the Donor
thereof. Man, though but a petty Benefactor, is free in his gifts, or else they
would not be gifts; how much more must God the supreme Donor be so? It is true,
when Men are good, God, such is the sanctity of his Nature, does take pleasure
in them; but to dispense grace or goodness to the Creature is his Royal
prerogative, he does it according to the sovereign unaccountable pleasure of
his will; he was under no Natural necessity to give a Christ, or a Gospel, or a
dram of Faith or holiness, to any one fallen Man in the World, what he gives,
he gives as he pleases out of mere Free grace. It is true too, when Men are
good, God, such is his gracious promise, will greatly reward them; but it is he
only who makes us good, and so meet for the inheritance in light; our goodness
is of Grace, and our reward is Grace upon Grace, remunerating Grace upon
sanctifying; In a word, the love of Gods Complacence respects goodness in the
Creature, but the love of Benevolence causes it, and that freely in a way of
unaccountable Sovereignty; and this is so far from being a love without reason,
that without it, it is impossible that there should be any goodness in the
Creature: Were there a goodness in the Creature, antecedent to the love of his
Benevolence, it would be a beam without a Sun, a gift without a Giver a
strange, independent, self-originated goodness, and that in the Creature, which
is as great an absurdity as can well be imagine.

Secondly, Mr. Sherlock.
These Men tell us too, that Christ's love is immutable, having once fixed his
love upon us, though without any reason, he can never alter: Sin it self cannot
separate us from the Love of Christ. If sin foreseen were not able to hinder
him from planting his heart on us: How then shall it (that is, sin committed)
be able to over-turn the thoughts of his heart, when once they are fixed on us?
This is a strong fixed Love indeed, which sin it self cannot alter: But how
wise, and holy a Love it is, let any man judge: Herein Dr. Owen tells us the
depth of Christ's Love is to be contemplated, that whereas his holy Soul hates
every sin, it is a burden, an abomination, a new wound to him; and his poor
Spouse, that is, sinful Believers are full of sin, failings, infirmities, he
hides all, covers all, bears all, rather than he will loose them. He adds
indeed, by his power preserving them from such sins, as a remedy is not
provided for in the Covenant of Grace. I suppose he means the sin against the
holy Ghost; for there is a remedy provided for all other sins in the Covenant
of Grace, and all other sins a Believer it seems may be guilty of; and Christ
will hide all rather than lose him. Now this is as downright Antinomianism, as
ever Dr. Crisp or Saltmarsh vented; There have been, and are to this day a
great many wise learned men, who contend for the perseverance of the Saints,
that those, who are once in a state of Grace, shall always continue so: But
then they found this not on such an immutable Love, as sin it self cannot
alter; for this is not reconcilable with the Holiness of the Divine Nature; nor
with those threatenings in Scripture against such back-sliders: When the
righteous man turns away from his Righteousness, and commits iniquity; and
does according to all the abominations that a wicked man does, he shall dye,
Ezekiel. 18.24. If any man turn back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, which
is a plain demonstration, the truth of which is which is acknowledged by all
sober Writers, that if such men can be supposed to relapse into a sinful state,
God will cease to love them; therefore they found the immutability of Gods Love
to them on their perseverance in doing good, God loves all good men; but if
they cease to be good, he also must cease to love: Herein the immutability of
Gods Love consists, not that he always loves the same person, but that he
always loves for the same reason: For it is no perfection to be so fixed in our
kindness; that where we love once, we will always love, whatever reason there
may be to alter our affections; for by this means we may love undeserving
Objects, which is the greatest degeneracy of Love; but the perfection of Love
consists in loving deserving Objects, and in loving upon honorable reasons,
and the immutability of Love consists in loving always for the same reasons,
which is the only foundation of a virtuous immutability: The reason of Christ's
Love to any person is Holiness and Obedience: If any love me, he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him; and we will come to him, and make our abode
with him, Joh. 14.23. The unchangeableness of his Love is seen in this, that he
will continue to love, while we continue to obey him: If ye shall keep my
Commandments; that is, continue to do so: Ye shall abide in my Love; I will
continue to love you: As I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his
Love, Joh. 15.20. This is the immutability of the Divine Nature, that God
always acts upon steady, constant Principles, that whatever changes there are
in the World, which may occasion very different administrations in his
providence; yet he is the same still, and never changes: Whereas, should God
always love the same person; however he changed and altered, God must change
and alter too; because though he still loves the same person; yet he must love
for different or contrary reasons, or for none at all; and that is the much
greater change of the two, to alter the reason, than the Object of Love: If God
love a good man, because he is good, and continue to love him, when he is
wicked, his love is a mutable thing, which can love goodness or wickedness,
which can love for none, or for contrary reasons: But if God always loves true
goodness, and good men, and never loves any other; whatever change there be in
Creatures; God is the same still, and unchangeable in his Love.

The Author admits an immutable Love in God toward goodness; Answer.
but the Scripture asserts an immutable Love in God toward persons: He has
chosen us before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. Electing Love is
eternal, and therefore immutable: Non enim est vera aeternitas, ubi orttur nova
voluntas, nec est immortalis voluntas, quae alia et alia est: An eternal choice
must be ever the same, and after one there cannot rise another. The foundation
of God stands sure, having this seal; the Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. Election, which is the foundation, is sure, and Gods foreknowledge,
which includes invariable Love in it, is the seal of it: The Book of Life has
all the names of the Elect written in it, and Gods Love is the Seal that
confirms it; whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans
8.30. This Golden Chain of Grace comprises in it certain individual persons, as
the words ( whom and them) which fasten every link of it, does evidently
import; and that which holds all the links of it together, is immutable Love:
Nay, besides Scripture evidence, reason will evince this immutable Love of the
Elect; without this there can be no design of a Church, and without the design
of a Church, Christ's blood must needs be shed irrationally, or upon a mere
peradventure; I say, without this there can be no design of a Church; for the
design of a Church must comprise in it, those individual persons, which shall
make up a Church, and undertake that they shall infallibly believe and
persevere till they come to Heaven; it must first comprise in it those
individual persons which shall make up a Church, or else it is lame and
imperfect, unworthy of the Divine Wisdom and Perfection; running much after
this rate, as if God should say, I design a Church, but I care not of whom it
consists, which is much one, as if God should design an Heaven, and not what
Stars should be in it; or an Earth, and not what Plants should be there: All
the members in man's body are written in Gods book, Psalm. 139.16. And can any
man imagine, that those, who should make up the Mystical Body of Christ, as so
many Members thereof, are not certainly designed? God calls them by name,
Joh. 10.3. Your names are all down in the Book of Life, Phil. 4.3. To design a
Church, and not who, is too weak a thing for the all-wise Deity. Again, the
design of a Church must undertake, that those individual persons shall believe
and persevere; unless this be granted, the design of a Church must be framed
thus: God gives a Savior and a Gospel in common, and over and above a power to
men to believe and persevere; and so, though the issue hang upon man's will,
hopes for a Church: But in Truth, this is not to design a Church; but the
possibility of one; there may be one, as it may happen, and there may be none:
And is this like that Divine Providence, which is perfect in all things, and
especially in the great design of a Church? Nay, is it probable upon these
terms, that any should believe and persevere! Innocent Adam (and yet alas! how
soon was that Star shot?) was more likely to stand in his integrity, than any
man since upon those terms has been to believe and persevere: The disparity
clears it. The Divine principles in Adam sweetly inclined him to obedience: But
the power of believing in men does not incline, but only put the will in
aequilibrio. The Divine Principles in Adam, were pure and without mixture: But
the power of believing has in the same heart, where it dwells, an inmate of
corruption, which continually counter-works it. In innocence the temptation
stood without a courting the senses: But after the Fall it makes nearer
approaches, as having a party within ready to open and betray every faculty.
These things considered, methinks every one, who with humble eyes looks on that
glass of Creature defectibility, which was made out of the broken pieces of
fallen Adam, should conclude it very improbable, that any one in all the World
upon those terms should believe and persevere; it being no less than a proud
thought for any to imagine, that upon such great disparities he could act his
part better than Adam did: And is it reasonable, that God should found the
design of a Church upon such improbabilities? The first Covenant, in which the
stock of Grace was in man's own hand, and the stress of all lay upon his will,
miscarried and brought forth no happiness to man; and can we imagine, that the
All-wise God, who made the second Covenant as a secunda tabulae to repair the
ruins of the first, should frame it in that very same way in which the first
miscarried? May the stock be in man's hand again, and his Bankrupt will trustee
a second time? Will God hang up all upon a mere posse in the Creature, and
expect it may do better in lapsed than innocent man? Alas! what miserable
specimens has Free Will given of it self in fallen Man! The old World, left to
their own Free Will (though, I suppose, according to the Author, not without a
posse) all but one Noah, desperately corrupted themselves, till the Flood swept
them away: And for that one Noah, it is not probable or indeed imaginable, that
he, had he been left to himself only with the common Grace afforded to the
rest, should have done better than they; nay, it is a World against one man,
that he would have corrupted himself as they did. After the flood (and that was
a startling warning-piece) has free Will with the common Grace done better?
All Nations have walked in their own ways, that is, in ways of wickedness,
affording us a vast experiment in millions of men, that free Will left to it
self will miscarry, and come to naught; and withal a pregnant proof, that
nothing less than special effectual Grace could secure a Church or so much as a
single Noah unto God. These things being so, I conclude that the design of a
Church does not only give a power to believe and persevere, but Faith and
Perseverance to those individual persons which make up a Church; Hence our
Savior tells us, that all that the Father gives him, shall come to him, Joh.
6.37. that is, shall believe and make up his mystical Body; and withal, that it
was his Fathers will, that none of them should be lost, verse. 39. that is, that
they should persevere unto the end. Now after all this discourse, if there be
such a design of a Church, that comprises in it those individual persons which
shall make up a Church, and secures Faith and Perseverance unto them, then the
love of God toward them can be no less than immutable, pitching upon them in
election, and carrying of them through Faith and perseverance unto glory.
Having said thus much to establish the point, I now shall attend the Authors
objections, first he tells us. That sin it self cannot separate us from this
immutable Love. Very well; I acknowledge it, that immutable Love, which gives
Faith and Perseverance to his People, preserves them so, that sin, any other
than unavoida-infirmity, shall not be at all; or if it be, shall not finally be
in them: They shall not sin such sins, or if they do, the divine Grace shall
raise them up by Repentance. They are, as Dr. Owen has it, preserved from such
sins, for which a remedy is not provided in the Covenant of Grace; that is, not
only, as the Author glosses, from the sin against the Holy Ghost, but from
final Impenitency too; which is not remedied in the Covenant of Grace: If they
sin, they shall not lie in it by final Apostasy and Impenitency, and
consequently they shall never fall under such threatenings against Backsliders
and Apostates as that mentioned, Ezekiel. 18. and in other Scriptures: and what
Antinomianism there is in this I know not; neither can I see how that Love,
which preserves from final Impenitency, should want Wisdom or Holiness. The
Author goes on; Many wise learned men there are, who contend for Perseverance;
but they found Gods immutable Love on their Perseverance: To which I answer, I
know no such: They, who are for Perseverance, do not found Gods immutable love,
on perseverance, but perseverance on Gods immutable love, which causes the
same: Thus Fulgentius, Deus, Praedestinatione sua and donu^ Illuminationis ad
credendum, and donu^ Perseverantiae ad permanendu^ and donu^ Glorificationis ad
regnandu^, quibus dare voluit praeparavit; nec aliter perficit in opere quam in
sua sempiterna and incommutabili voluntate habet dispositu^: Faith,
Perseverance Glory, all are the effluxes of immutable Love. But the Author
further tells us That the Immutability of Gods love consists in this not that
he always loves the same person, but that he always loves for same reason; he
always loves true goodness and good men, and never loves any other, and so is
unchangeable: To which I answer, God loves good men with a Love of Complacence;
he cannot love a wicked man with a Love of Complacence; but may he not love him
with a Love of Benevolence? Then he cannot design the least good to any fallen
Man in the World, all being by Nature wicked, and children of wrath: If God
love good men, and never loved any other, then he could not design to lapsed
corrupt Man, a Christ, or a Gospel, or any the least means of Salvation:
Goodness, the only reason of Love being gone by the Fall, nothing that is good
can be intended to man: This, as the Author tells us, would be the degeneracy
of Love, to love an undeserving object; and every man by Nature is no better:
It is, says the Author, the greatest change of all to alter the reason of
Love; and therefore according to this Principle, God (as he would be a
Self-preserver, and not suffer a Change in himself) having loved innocent Man,
was bound not to love fallen Man; not to give him a Christ, or a Gospel, or any
good thing. But rather than run our selves into such Consequences, I think we
were as good say, God's Love of Complacence is toward good men, but his Love
of Benevolence is toward men, even before they are good, and is the fontal
Cause of all that after-goodness in them which is the Object of his
Complacence. As for that place, Joh. 14.23. If a man keep my words, my Father
will love him, the meaning is, God will manifest himself unto him, as it is,
ver. 21 I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him: If God did not
love him before, whence came his Obedience? It must be an odd independent
Self-originated Obedience, which came not from the Grace or Love of the great
Donor.

SECT. II.
SOme men tell us, That as Christ falls in love with our Persons, Mr Sherlock.
so we must in requital to him love the Person of Christ: This is as certain as
any Demonstration in Euclide, that if we love Christ, we must love his Person;
for the Person of Christ is Christ himself, and if we love Christ, we must love
him: But this will not serve their turn; they oppose our love to the Person of
Christ to our love to him upon account of his benefits, to our love to our
selves, and to our duties. First, we must love the Person of Christ in
opposition to his Benefits; that is, we must not consider what advantages we do
or may receive from Christ, what he has done or suffered for us, but we must
love his Person purely for himself without any other considerations to endear
him to us. This matter is gravely stated and determined by W.B. who tells us,
1. That it is a good and lawful thing to love Christ in reference to his
benefits: This is a very liberal grant,; that Gratitude, which has hitherto
been accounted a great and excellent Virtue, is now owned as a lawful thing. 2.
It is our duty to love Christ's Person: This is so true, that those men, who
love Christ for his benefits, love his Person: 3. The Excellency of Christ's
Person is not the Object of my Faith, but Christ crucified: 4. Though Christ
crucified be the Object of my Faith, yet the personal Excellencies of Christ
are the Object of my Love; yea, it is a more excellent thing yet to love the
Person of Christ, than the Benefits of Christ; to have my heart drawn out in
love to the Person of Christ, than to have it drawn out in love to him for his
Benefits. Now what can be the meaning of all this, but that the Excellency and
Perfection of our Love to Christ consists in loving him for no reason: The
proper object and reason of Love is Goodness; to love that which is good for
nothing is the folly and degeneracy of Love; and it is as foolish and
impossible a task to love a person, who has been good to us, not because he
has been good, but for no reason. Now this is the case here; for if you
separate the Person and personal Excellencies of Christ from the consideration
of his benefits, his personal Goodness from the expressions of his Love and
Goodness to our selves and others, it can be no Object or reason of our Love:
for a Goodness which does no good, or never did any, or, which is all one, is
considered as doing none, is so far from being the Object of our Love, that it
is not the Object of our Understanding: For we cannot understand what that
Goodness means, which never did any good. God challenges our Love, not upon
account of an imaginary Goodness of Nature, which never did any good; but for
the real and sensible Effects of his Goodness in the works of Creation and
Providence, and Redemption by Christ: And Christ challenges our love for the
like reasons; because he has loved us, and died for us, and now intercedes for
us, and will at the last day bestow a Crown of Glory and Immortality on us, but
never, as I can observe,, requires such an abstracted and Metaphysical Love to
his Person, without any respect to his benefits.

We love Christ for his Benefits, Answer.
these are the first impulsives of our Love; but our love, once kindled, is
afterward blown up into a purer flame by those attractive Excellencies and
ravishing Beauties, which are in the Person of Christ; we come to love Christ
for himself. The Spouse in the Canticles did not only love Christ for his
Shadow and sweet fruits, for the Graces and Benefits communicated from him, but
for himself, his incomparable Person, who is the chiefest among ten thousand,
and altogether lovely. Neither is this Love to Christ for himself (what the
Author would have it to be) a Love for no reason, or a Love in its folly and
degeneracy: But it is a Love for the greatest Reason, and a Love in perfection.
There is a greater worthiness and so an higher attractive of our Love in the
Person of Christ than in his Benefits; and therefore in all reason Love is in a
more high and superlative measure due to the one than to the other. All the
Benefits of Christ are but as so many Mediums to draw up and attract our Love
to the Person of Christ, and our Love in its ascent up thither, must not stay
or take up its final rest in Means (for this would be to pervert the nature of
Means and transform them into Ends;) but it must terminate in Christ the great
End and Center. Should we love the Benefits more than the Person of Christ, we
should be lovers of our selves more than lovers of Christ; our Love would then
return and circulate into our selves, and there rest and center ut in ultimo
termino, which is no less than Idolatry. If we are truly espoused to Christ, we
will not love the Rings and Jewels, more than himself; nay, nor so much: The
true noble Lover does not acquiesce in other gifts, but in Christ, the Gift
above all other gifts. But, says the Author, A Goodness, which does no good,
or never did any, is so far from being the object of our Love, that it is not
the object of our Understanding: To which I answer, It Is true, if God had never
done good, that is, had never created a Creature, he could not have been the
Object of any created Love or Understanding; for there being no Creation, there
could have been no such thing as any created Love or Understanding; however he
had been an Object for a greater Love and Understanding than any created one,
even for his own infinite Love and Understanding. Had he never created a
Creature, he would have been for ever happy by amatorious and intellectual
Reflections upon himself, and his own Perfections. It is true that God calls
for our Love upon account of Creation, Providence and Redemption; but it is due
to him for himself, for his Divine Excellency and All Sufficiency. Could we
imagine, what is impossible, that there were a rational Creature, who never
received any good from God, upon such a supposal, that Creature would be bound
to love God for his intrinsecal Goodness and Excellency; or else the Will of
that Creature might, which is very strange, pass by the Supreme Good unsaluted.
But to leave that Supposition; now we have God and many blessings before our
eyes, we are bound to love God above all, as the complete and adequate Object
of our Love: Should we love any Blessings without or above him, it would be
Cupiditas, Lust, (which is the formale of every sin) and not Love. I conclude
with that of Bonaventure, Li. 3. distinct. 29. quest 2.
Secundum Charitatis legem, impossible est aliquid plus vel aequaliter Deo
amare, Charitas enim, quia diligit Deum ut summum bonum, diligit eum super
omnia; quia diligit Deum ut finem ultimum, diligit eum propter se. Blessings
may be motives to us to love God, but they are not to be loved as the supreme
End or Good, that is God only in his infinite Goodness and Excellency; upon
account of these all Worship, and among the rest, Love is due to him.

Indeed these men seem not to understand themselves; Mr. Sherlock.
for when you enquire what this Person of Christ is, which is the Object of our
Love, then they describe his Beauty and perfections; the Comeliness of his
Person, the sweetness of his Disposition, his great Riches, that he is a Good
suitable to all our wants: Now either all this signifies the benefits we receive
by Christ, or it signifies nothing; and how then do these personal Excellencies
differ from his benefits? They teach us to use Christ much, if we would love
his Person: Now this using must signify his benefits, and to love Christ much,
because we use him, is to love him, because we receive many benefits from him;
which is neither better nor worse, than to love him for his benefits.

We love Christ for his benefits, Answer.
and for himself too: Hence these men describe Christ's Person by both; they
set out his Beauty and Comeliness in himself, and withal his Suitableness to
our wants: The first rise of our Love to Christ is from his Benefits, and
afterward our Love to him is for himself also; the Excellency and Amiableness
of his Person in himself calls for our love, and must have it.

The Love we owe to God and Christ is no other than gratitude, because God
loved us first, Mr. Sherlock.
and our Love is only a return of his: Now thankfulness and gratitude includes
in it a necessary respect to those blessings and benefits we have received: It
is peculiar to God, who wants nothing, and can receive nothing from his
Creatures, to love without any respect to benefits; but the Love of indigent
and dependent Creatures is a Love of thankfulness, a grateful acknowledgment of
those many blessings we receive from God.

Our Love to God and Christ is gratitude: Answer.
It is for Benefits, but is it only for Benefits? No surely; we are to love God
and Christ for the infinite goodness and excellency which is in them; if we
ask, what is the formal and adequate reason of Divine Worship? No other answer
can be given, but that it is the infinite divine excellency and perfection
which is in God: Our love to God, which is a part of Worship, though possibly
its first rise or motive may be from benefits; yet it stays not in the
benefits, but in and by them ascends to God; the ultimate Object and Center of
Worship, who is to be loved in and for himself.

Secondly, Mr. Sherlock.
these men oppose our Love to the person of Christ, to our love to our selves:
The first destroys the Reason, and the Object of our Love; and this destroys
the principle of it: It is made the character of a wicked man, Shep. Sinc.
Convert.
who wants an inward principle of love to God and Christ; That though he seeks
to honor God never so much, yet all that he does, he does out of love to
himself, self-credit, self-ease, self-content, self-safety; he makes himself a
God. Hence the same author exhorts sinners: away out of your selves to the Lord
Jesus, take hold on him, not with the hand of presumption, and love to thy
self, to save thy self; but with the hand of Faith and Love to honor him: Here
is the strongest difficulty of all to row against the stream, to hate a man's
self, (our own souls and eternal Salvation) and then to follow Christ fully:
Now is it not an hard case, that before we can love God and Christ, as we
ought, we must root out the very principle of all love, that we may learn to
hate Salvation and Eternal Happiness, before we can close with Christ for
Salvation! This is the strongest difficulty of all; for indeed it is
impossible: Love to our selves is the foundation of our love to all other
things, even to God himself: He that does not love himself, will love nothing
else; he that hates himself, his own soul, and despises eternal Salvation, will
not care for Christ or Salvation by him: All the Motives and Arguments of the
Gospel to persuade us to love and fear, and obey God, are founded on self-love;
for how is it possible, that we should be affected with a due sense of Gods
goodness to us? That we should be excited and quickened by the hopes of such
great rewards? That we should be restrained and governed by the fears of
punishment? If we did not love our selves, if we did not care what became of
us; whether we were happy or miserable for ever. It is a vain thing to persuade
a man not to love himself: For this is as natural and necessary, as it is for
the Fire to burn, or Sun to shine: It is not matter of our choice; it is not in
our power to do otherwise, all that such discourses as these can do, is either
to make men hypocrites to pretend to do what they cannot do, or to make honest
men, who cannot thus cheat and delude themselves, despair of their Salvation,
because they cannot find themselves contented without Salvation, that Christ
without Salvation cannot satisfy them. It is true, when men set up self in
opposition to God; when self-love te^^^^s them to disobey God, to despise his
Counsels, to renounce their Faith and Religion: This is a very vicious and
mistaken self-love: Such men neither love themselves nor God in a proper sense,
because it is our interest as well as our duty to obey God; such men are
Idolaters, because they set up self above God, and in opposition to him: But
when our love to our selves teaches us to love God, and in all things to submit
to his will and pleasure: We do as we ought to do, they who separate our love
to God, from our love to our selves, from the care of our Salvation, do plainly
declare, that they neither understand the nature of man, nor the Gospel of
Christ.

Mr. Shephard speaks of a wicked man, Answer.
who wants an inward principle of love to God and Christ, that he does all for
himself, he sleeps, prays, hears, speaks, professes, for himself alone, that
he commits the highest degree of Idolatry, and makes himself a God: And adds
this reason; For a man puts himself in the room of God, as well by making
himself his finis ultimus, as if he should make himself primum principium: And
is there any question at all in this? may not a wicked man (not to say, sleep,
which every man does) but pray, hear, speak, profess? No doubt can be made of
it, and if he do so, it must needs be for himself; he having, whilst wicked, no
Divine Principle, nothing of grace to elevate him above himself: But Mr.
Shephard would have men go out of themselves to Christ: And this is hard to row
against the stream, to hate a man's self: And, says the Author, this is
impossible, this is to root up the very principle of Love: Love to our selves
is the foundation of our Love to all other things, even to God himself. To
which I answer: No doubt we are to love Christ for the purchased Salvation
neither does Mr. Shephard deny it, but we are not to love him for Salvation,
only or supremely, no, but for himself, his infinite goodness and perfection:
This is not to root up the principle Love, but to rectify it: Indeed this is
hard: Nay, I may add unattainable by lapsed nature in it self: but Grace
elevates nature above it self, to love Christ (though not without a respect to
Salvation) yet above our selves, and so in a comparative sense to hate our
selves for him: Indeed, if love to our selves were (as the Author would have
it) the foundation of our Love to God, then it must be the measure of it too;
and by consequence we should not need love God above our selves; and our love
of God might, for ought I see, center and ultimately terminate in our selves:
But this cannot be allowed; As long as God is God, the supreme good and last
end, he must be loved above all, and for himself; that inclination, which is in
us to love our selves more than God, is, as Bonaventure well observes, not the
perfection, but the corruption of our Natures: But, says the Author, he that
does not love or care for himself, will not love God. To which I answer: If we
do not care for our selves in a way of foolish neglect, we are unnatural to our
selves, and want true love to God: But if we care not for our selves in a
Paroxism of holy Zeal for God, as when Moses prayed, to be blotted out of Gods
book: Or when St. Paul wished himself accursed from Christ: then our love to
God is very great and fervent; if, whilst we pay that debitum naturae, love to
our selves; We subordinate it to the love of God, loving God above our selves,
and in that sense comparatively not estimating our selves; then our love to God
is true, and as it ought to be: We need not make men hypocrites or desperate,
we need not break any of the sweet links, duty and interest may well consist
together, our love to God, and our love to our selves may stand in conjunction;
yet still our love must keep its decorum, we must have a higher respect for
Duty than for interest; and our love to God must be superlative, and above our
love to our selves.

Thirdly, Mr. Sherlock.
they oppose our love to Christ to our own Duties; that is, to the most proper
and natural expression of our love to him: Herein Dr. Owen places the chastity
of our affections to Christ; (which you know is a great marriage duty) in not
taking any thing (as our own righteousness) into our affection and esteem; for
those ends and purposes for which we have received Christ; and God forbid that
any Christian should, for our own Righteousness and Duties, cannot be our
Mediators and Advocates: What then is the difference? Why it is only this: The
Doctor places the Righteousness of Christ, in the room of our righteousness, to
be not only the foundation, but the condition of the Covenant of Grace, and
then makes it an expression of our chaste affection to Christ, quite to thrust
out our own righteousness, and to allow it no place in our Religion: He makes
Christ all to us, and leaves no room for any thing else, and then warns us upon
our vows of chastity, not to take any thing into Christ's place; Whereas, as he
has ordered the matter, we must take our own righteousness into Christ's place,
or else cast it quite away; for there is no other place left for it: But is it
not very strange, that when our Savior has made our obedience the principal
expression of our Love to him: These men should make such a competition between
our Love to Christ, and our Obedience? should put such jealousies into peoples
heads: What great danger there is of their own Duties and Righteousness; lest
they should prove like foolish Lovers, Sincere Convert.
who, when they are to woo for the Lady, fall in love with the Handmaid. Men
dote upon Duties, and rest in the naked performance of them, (that is, in doing
good) which are only Handmaids to lead to Christ. Is not this to persuade
people, that our love to Christ consists in something more refined, and
spiritual than obedience? Which will quickly teach them to love Christ without
obeying of him, and not run the hazard of doting on duties.

Does the Doctor quite thrust out our own Righteousness? Answer.
Does he allow it no place in our Religion? I have before noted what charge
this is. The Doctor in his Book does assert; That our Obedience is
indispensibly necessary, Commun. fo. 208, 209, 210, etc.
and that, because of the Sovereign will of God the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, because of the Fathers electing Love, the Sons purchasing Love, the
Spirits operative Love, because of the glory of the whole Trinity, because
Holiness is our Honor, and makes us like to God; our peace in communion with
God; our usefulness in our Generations, because it stops the mouths of enemies,
tends to the conversion of others, and profit of all, because justified persons
are accepted, and admitted into Gods presence; they are new Creatures, and the
new Creature is not to be stifled, because holiness is the way to eternal life;
a Testimony and Pledge of Adoption, a sign and evidence of Grace. Now if this
be not enough to answer that charge, I must utterly despair, that ever it can
be cleared: No man, that I know of, ever dreamed of an opposition between Love
to Christ and Obedience; I should as soon be persuaded, that the Sun was fallen
out with his Beams; or that all the causes and effects of Nature were at a
variance among themselves, as conceit any such thing: Yet Christ must be upon
the Throne, and Duties must stand at his Footstool: The Homage, which is in
Duties, proclaims the preeminence of the Lord, we are not, as Mr. Shephard has
it, to rest in Duties, in the naked performance of them: Our Duties must not
supplant Christ's Righteousness, but pay a tribute of gratitude to it; we must
use them, as Noah's Dove did her wings, to carry us to the Ark, even to Jesus
Christ, in whom only is the Sabbath of Souls. But, says the Author, is not
this to persuade people, that our love to Christ consists in something more
refined than Obedience? which will quickly teach them to love Christ without
obeying. To which, I answer: Love without obeying is to me an utter
inconsistency: If we indeed love Christ, we do really will Christum Regem, that
he should be King, and reign in and over us: Love sets his Throne in the Heart,
and Obedience in the Life: The expression of our Love to Christ is in
Obedience: Nothing is more refined within than Faith and Love, nor without than
Obedience; it being, as it should, performed in a due manner, in the actuation
of Divine Graces; for if it be only an outward naked performance, it is but the
shell, and semblance of obeying without loving.

Let us now enquire, Mr. Sherlock.
how they express their love to the person of Christ, and that consists in
preferring Christ above all, they value him above all other things and persons,
above their lives, above all Spiritual Excellencies, and other Righteousness
whatever; he is their Joy, Crown, Life, Food, Health, Strength, Defire,
Righteousness, Salvation Blessedness; The meaning of all is, that they prefer
the person of Christ, which has such a perfect righteousness for them, and
will save them without requiring any legal conditions of them, infinitely
before the Religion and Gospel of Christ, before Obedience to his commands;
before the Love and Fear of God; So that the foundation of their love to Christ
is a fond imagination, that he will save them by his Righteonsness, without any
Righteousness and Holiness of their own: This makes them so fond of the person
of Christ, because they look on him as a refuge and sanctuary for the wicked
and ungodly, where the greatest, oldest, stubbornest transgressor, may shelter
himself from the wrath of God, and I have some reason to think, that Christ
will not much prize such Devoto's as these, nor their obsequious flatteries or
praise.

They prefer Christ above all; Answer.
and no wonder, all the Saints and Martyrs have done so; he is worthy of love
in its height and tallest Statures: A Believer may love other things, but he
loves Christ with a love more eminent and over-topping, such as is congruous
for an Object so altogether lovely and desirable; he loves other things with
reference to Christ: But Christ for himself; his infinite excellency and
perfection: He loves Ordinances, because they are the Banqueting House of
Christ; he loves the Gospel, because it is his Royal Charter; he loves his own
Graces, because they are his love tokens, and bear his Divine Image: After all,
the great center of his love is Christ himself. But, says the Author, the
foundation of their love to Christ, is a fond imagination, that he will save
them by his Righteousness, without any Righteousness of their own, that he will
be a refuge and sanctuary for the wicked and ungodly: To which I say, That I
have before noted this to be as it is, a Popish Calumny, and without any just
ground at all for it; when Grotius drew up such a kind of charge against the
common Protestant Doctrine, as if it were enough to say, Credo justitiam
Christi mihi imputari, as if there were no need of true Repentance or holy
walking. Dr. Arrowsmith makes this return; Quam nollem haec a te dicta vel
ficta potius, Tact. Sacr. fol. 141
Hugo doctissime, cum nihil sit a praxi, nihil a sensu nostro remotius. Mr
Sherlock.


The devotion of these men consists in admiring, prizing, valuing the person of
Christ. This is that Evangelical Righteousness, we must gain by Duties; more
prizing of acquaintance with, defire, loving and delighting in Union with the
Lord Jesus Christ; a Moral man, who rests in duties (that is, who does what God
commands and expects to be saved by Christ) may grow in legal Righteousness;
that is, in true Holiness and Piety: But this will not avail, unless we grow in
this Evangelical Righteousness: Sincere Convert.
This is the great end of Duties, to carry us to the Lord Jesus. Hear a Sermon
to carry thee to Christ; fast, pray, get a full tide of affections in them, to
carry thee to Christ; that is, to get more Love of him, more Acquaintance and
Union with him; sorrow for sins, that thou may be more fitted for Christ, and
more prize Christ; use thy Duties, as Noah's Dove did her wings, to carry thee
to the Ark of the Lord Jesus: As it is with a poor man, that is to go over a
great water for a treasure on the other side, though he cannot fetch the boat,
he calls for it, to carry him over to the treasure: So Christ is in Heaven, and
thou on Earth: He does not come to thee, thou can not go to him: Now call for
a Boat, though there is no Grace, no Good, no Salvation in a pithless duty; yet
use it to catry thee over to the Lord Christ; when thou come to hear, say,
have over Lord by this Sermon; when to pray, say, have over Lord by this Prayer
to a Savior, etc. So that it seems the whole business of our Love to Christ
and Evangelical Righteousness, consists in some flights of fancy and
imagination, in admiring and valuing the person of Christ, in getting an
acquaintance and union with him: The business of all Religion is, to have over
to Christ, that we may love and prize his Person, and personal Righteousness,
above all things in the World. It is not so much the business of Sermons to
acquaint us with the Nature, Attributes and Works of God, to instruct us in our
Duty, and encourage us to it by the Motives of the Gospel, as to have over to
Christ: The design of prayer is not so much to affect our Souls with a sense of
the Divine Majesty, to worship and adore him, and to express our trust in him,
as to have over to Christ. Sorrow for sin is not so much to imbitter sin to us,
and to strengthen us against it, as to teach us to prize Christ: The Nature of
Religion is now changed from being the Homage and Worship of God; the certain
means of pleasing him, and transforming us in* to his likeness; which is the
natural end of Religion, into a Cock-boat and Skuller to waft us over to
Christ: Here we see the true reason why these men do so despise Morality in
comparison of those Gospel-duties, of hearing Sermons, Prayer, Confessions,
Humiliation, etc. because as they handle the matter: The practice of Moral
Virtues, cannot have us over to Christ, cannot apply the righteousness and
fullness of Christ to us, nor ravish our fancies with glorious Images and Idea's
of his person: And since all the Duties of Religion are such pithless things,
which have no Grace, no Good, no Salvation in them, but as they have us over to
Christ, poor Morality must needs be a worthless thing.

That we are highly to prize Christ, Answer.
can be no question with Christians; when he comes in his Glory, he shall be
admired of all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. And before that coming, we
are, as far as our Faith will carry us, to admire him, who is indeed an Object,
in whom Heaven and Earth are so admirably blended together, that humane reason
may well lose it self, and stand in a maze at such an Union: That Christ is to
be highly prized by us; we need go no further, than the raptures and extatical
passions of the Spouse in the Canticles, which are a kind of Commentary on that
Admiration, which is the genius and communis sensus of Christians: Nature it
self reveils God to be the great Object of Worship; but the Gospel assures us
that there is no access, no coming to God but by Christ; That there is no
Righteousness able to cover our persons and duties with the defects thereof but
Christ's Righteousness; That there is no doing Duties in a right and spiritual
way acceptable unto God, but by the Spirit and Grace of Christ; and upon these
strong important Reasons, the Gospel calls and presses upon men to come to
Christ; and therefore all Evangelical Duties (because they are by infinite
Wisdom framed in a perfect Symmetry to the Gospel) must needs be, not to say
Cock-boats and Skullers, but Divine Mediums and Conveyances to have us over to
Christ; without whom we cannot have any access to God, or standing before him,
or power to do any thing in a spiritual and acceptable manner. Sermons are to
instruct us in our Duty, not as if we could do any thing truly and spiritually
as of our selves: But that in the sense of our own weakness and impotencie, we
may be drawn to Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God; who can teach us inwardly,
and empower us by his Grace to do the Will of God: In Prayer we are to have a
sense of the Divine Majesty, to worship him, and express our trust in him: But
a true sense of the Divine Majesty tells us, that we must not approach
immediately thither without Christ our Mediator, that our trust and other acts
of Worship must find their acceptance only in and through Christ: Sorrow for
sin without coming to Christ and prizing him, is so far from being repentance
unto life, that it drives a man down into the Black Gulf of horror and
desperation. The Nature of Religion is not now changed, but only turned into
such a Channel, as is congruous to fallen man, that all access and acceptance
with God may be in a Mediator, and all Grace and Glory may be from him.
Morality is a beauty, and good in suo genere; but (because it sacrifices only
to Reason, and Reason cannot supply the room of a Mediator) it must needs fall
much below that Evangelical Religion, which would have all transacted through a
Mediator: Sermons, Prayers, Confessions, Humiliations are Divine Media: But, if
we stay in the means, and never arrive at the Mediator, we pervert the means
from their true end, and fall short of that scope, to which they were
appointed; possibly the phrase, have over to Christ, may to some have but a
rough aspect; yet the thing is as amiable as can be imagined, its importance
being no more than that the whole managery of Religion must be in and through a
Mediator.

To conclude, whether these men have transformed Religion, disfigured the
Gospel, undermined the fundamental design of it; misrepresented the ends of
Christ's coming, abused his Expiation, Sacrifice, Righteousness, intercession
to the patronage of Vice, laid Snares to betray some men to a licentious life,
and to entangle others in endless troubles, have under pretense of advancing
the person of Christ, banished his Religion out of the world? I shall leave to
the judicious Reader. Narcissus the old Bishop of Jerusalem labored a while
under grievous accusations: But at last providence brought forth his innocence
as clear as the Light: However, good old Truths may be clouded, and aspersed
for a time; yet sooner or later they will appear again in their luster,
recommending themselves to the Consciences of all true Christians.

FINIS.
ERRATA's.
PAge the 6. line the 7. read pervert: p. 11. l. 19. r. hearing: p. 13. l. 10.
r. (...): p. 36. l. 26. r. laugh at this Gal. p. 46. l. 25. r. righteous: p.
61. l. 30. r. penality: p. 80. l. 1. r. of immense Love: p. 113. l. 6. r.
adapt: p. 204. l. 4. r. us really: p. 234. l. 22. r. distinct from the Graces
of his person: p. 256. l. 13. notions: p. 258. l. 16. r. (...): p. 258. l. 20.
r. received his fullness: p. 280. l. 21. r. trusted: p. 290. l. 5. r. Faith: p.
291. l. 27. r. inherent: p. 299. l. last r. (...): p. 319. l. 16. r. ascended:
p. 330. l. 22. r. concerning: p. 399. l. 19. r. not essential: p. 405. l. 19.
r. contendo: p. 409. l. last, r. to make it our personal righteousness: p. 431.
l. 28. r. redupli^ative: p. 471. l. 25. r. imperfect: p. 484. l. 17. r.
cele^^^^ius: p. 486. l. 1. r. they who come to Christ, come in a sense: p. 536.
l. 16. r. and after in two pages, unregenerate: p. 539. l. 9. r. beyond nature:
p. 544. l. 28. r. appetibile.


