THE GALLANT LADIES, OR, THE Mutual Confidence. A NOVEL. Translated out of
French.

THE FIRST PART.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Baily. 1685.

To my Worthy Friend, W. Horner ESQUIRE.
Generous Sir,
COntrary to the Custom of our late Dedicators, who are pleased to importune
People of Quality with tedious Catalogues of those Virtues which neither they,
nor their Forefathers ever had the least Title to, and abuse them with fulsom
Commendations of their Wit and Judgment, of which they are so little guilty,
that their Elevated Fortune very rarely admits of Common. Sense: in laying this
Translation at your Feet, I shall only take the Freedom to acquaint you, the
Subject is so adequate to your Capacity, and suitable to the Noble Employment
of your Time that I could not without manifest wrong to your extraordinary
Endowments, address it to any body but your self, who are certainly the
greatest Master of Intrigue, that this, or any precedent Age has ever yet
produced. This Period I confess is something longwinded; but, Sir, you
challenge this, and much more from me; it is due to your incomparable Merit, as
all the World will be convinced, when it will shortly appear, how finished an
Ass, and elaborate a Coxcomb you are upon Record. When a certain Billet doux of
yours to a Person that shall be nameless, which some very uncivil Persons have
communicated to some Persons in Authority, shall Publicly instruct our Little
Smatterers in Love, how to raise their Thoughts to a Seraphick pitch, and
entertain their Female Divinities with sublimer Nonsense This Modern way of
Writing, as you are modestly pleased to call it, is a Talent you ought to
cherish, and which perhaps the neighbring Mineral Waters, and now and then a
Draught of Bansted Air, may improve to that degree, as the Whole Nation may be
obliged to Surry for a second, and more refined Longinus. Mac Flecnoe, who will
ever own you to have been his Worthy Maecenas, has already assured us, you
were, by his Endeavors, come to be a pretty hopeful, competent Atheist: You
were then, I suppose, no further than Speculation; but now are advanced to
Practice, and show us a new Method of using the Scripture, by introducing it
into Love Letters. Harry Martin was something too familiar with his Pigsnye:
But you are as Pathetick as Ingelo himself, and as devout in your Expressions
when you make a Cuckold, as he was when he wrote of Repentance. I should here
leave you, but that I think it necessary to let all Married Women know, how
vigorous an Asserter you are of their Liberties; I mean not only in your
Personal Performances, but in the Character yon bestow upon the whole Herd of
Husbands, whom you so generously call Tyrants over their Ladies. Unhappy
Brutes! to fall under your Displeasure. But thrice happy the Fair Sex, in
having so unparalleled an Hero to deliver them from the Insolence and
Barbarity of their most Tyrannical, Arbitrary Cuckolds. The many real Favors I
have formerly received from you, obliged me in Gratitude to make you some
Return; which if I have not done so effectually as you deserve, I must needs
beg your Pardon. Dear, Dear Mr. Horner,

Your most Devoted, Faithful, Humble Servant, etc.

THE GALLANT LADIES, OR, THE Mutual Confidence.
NOT long after the Garden of the Tuilleries was finished, the Countess of
Marignan had a mind to go thither to take the Air. After she had walked some
turns, she sat down upon a Bench, where she found a Woman whose Face she
thought was not unknown to her. Yet, what Idea soever she had preserved of her,
she could not call her perfectly to mind, till after some attentive
consideration they at last knew one another, and embraced with all the kindness
that could be expected between persons who love tenderly, and have the pleasure
to see one another again, after a long separation. These two Ladies before they
were married, had contracted a strict Friendship, and for a long time used to
converse under the names of Iris and Climene. Upon this account the Countess
breaking the Ice, Ah, my Dear Iris, how am I overjoyed to see you? and yet must
needs complain of you at the same time, since I am obliged to Chance more than
your self, for this happy meeting. My Misfortunes are such, replied Iris, that
they have left me no Friends Proof against Censure, and Absence; so that,
Madam, I could not flatter my self with the hopes of your Pardon, when all the
World did me so much wrong.

I have always believed, answered the Countess, that your Enemies have
contributed more than your self to the Reports that have been spread of your
Conduct. Madam, said Iris, I can assure you, I have never really transgressed
the Laws of true Honor; but I must consess, I have often hazarded the
appearances. The same Ascendant that disposed Men to wish well to me, made me
rejoice to see my self beloved. I will yet own further, that I neglected
nothing that was capable of pleasing them, and that the desire I had to make
them in love with me, was the only employment of my Life. I looked upon a crowd
of Adorers as the chiefest good, and thought nothing equal to the happiness of
being encompassed with them. In fine, Madam, I was what they call a perfect
Coquette. That is the Character, said the Countess of Marignan, of all Women
who have but Beauty enough to make themselves talked of; the handsomest, and
the youngest are often least guilty; their vanity is more general, their
business is only to acquire Lovers, and their Conquests follow one another so
close, that they have not leisure to be sincerely engaged. Those who are older,
and less charming, almost always imbarque upon the appearances of a feigned
Person, and sometimes push their adventures so home, that they are Criminal. It
is ever dangerous, replied Iris, to follow that sort of inclination, and it
seldom happens that the disorder of the Heart has not an effect on the
Behavior, and draws after it abundance of Calamities. I wish, said the
Countess, then you would let me know what has befallen you, for yet I am but
imperfectly informed, as those are, who have not things from the Original. I
can stay here as long as I please, no body will call me from you, I conjure you
therefore to tell me your Adventures; I would not request this of you, but I
promise to give you a Relation of mine afterward. Upon these Conditions Iris
could not excuse her self from satisfying the Countess's curiosity, and began
her Relation after this manner.

The History of Iris.
YOU know, Madam, with what constraint my Mother brought me up, that she hardly
gave me the freedom of improving your Friendship. It is true also, that since
you were married, and that your Husband carried you down into the Country, I
had no more communication with the World. The wearisom life I led, made me
fancy it a great pleasure to be no longer subject to the hasty reproofs of my
Mother, and her Commands, so opposite to my inclinations. I believed, like a
Fool, that when I was married, I should be Mistress of my Actions. This was it
that caused me to accept the first offer my Mother made me of an Husband, and
without examining whether my Heart approved my Friends choice, I married the
Vicount of --

In the mean time, my Mother, who had a mind that I should never be free from
her severity, gave my Husband large instructions how he should govern me. There
are few of them who are not very ready to pursue such Maxims: So that quickly
after I was married he let me know his intentions, which seemed very different
from what I proposed to my self. He told me, I must confine my visits among my
Relations, and some Godly Persons of my Mothers acquaintance; he appointed what
time I should spend in Devotion, but allowed me none for Pleasure. Now you will
be surpised, Madam, to see how things are brought about. My Husband told me
one day, Presidente is a Judges Wife.
that the Presidente of -- had asked him for me and desired he would give me
leave to visit her. She passed in the World for a Woman of an uneasy Virtue, a
Character not much for my purpose; so that I was not very earnest to see her:
but I was so strictly enjoined to do it, that I was forced to obey. I had
formed so unpleasant an Idea of her, as would hardly have been removed, but
that I found her House full of Company, and the Conversation very free. She
received me very civilly, commended me extremely, and in the most obliging
manner that could be, told me, she desired both my Friendship, and my Company
as often as I could afford it her. Her Husband looked upon me very earnestly;
and as I was about to take my leave, the Prince of -- and the Duke of -- came
in. The first came to make a Proposition to the Presidente of going to see a
general Muster of the King's Guards that day at Vincennes. She made some
difficulty at first; but on condition I would make one of the Party, she
consented. We went in her Coach, for the Duke had occasion for his another way.
The President had a Mien very grave and serious, and whatever he did was so
forced, that I did not like him at all; not that he wanted Wit, but his way
appeared to me so contrary to the Politeness of the Courtiers who were there,
that as little experience as I had of the World, I could not but find a great
deal of difference between them. I will further own to you, Madam, that at this
first Visit I thought the Prince very amiable. His Air was free, his Humor
cheerful, his Thoughts were refined, and his Expression just. I took notice
also, that I was not displeasing to him, and that he often sought Opportunities
of saying obliging things to me. I never spent a Day so much to my satisfaction
as this; but my Mind was so taken up with the Idea of the Prince, which I could
by no means efface, that when I found my self alone with my Husband at Night, I
thought his Company more troublesome to me than ever it was before.

The Inclination I had for the Prince, carried me a great way in a very little
time. It was impossible for me to avoid loving him; and I believe the ardour
wherewith he served me, contributed not a little to my Flame. One day the
Presidente sent to me to come and sup with her, and not questioning but the
Prince would be there, I spared no pains or care in dressing. I knew that
Patches become young People, but my Husband would not suffer me to wear any;
therefore I took a Box with me, and put them on by the Torch which lighted the
Coach. I found the Prince just come to Madam la Presidente's as I arrived. I am
glad, Madam, said he to me, as he helped me out of the Coach, that I am here to
render you this small Service, and shall watch all opportunities of giving you
more evident marks of the Possion I have for you. I do not remember what I
answered him, for I was very young, and unexperienced; but I know very well I
spoke to him with a great deal of simplicity, and that this Declaration raised
a mighty disturbance in my Heart. He has told me since, that this Disorder, and
my innocent Behavior, pleased him better, than if I had spoken with more Art.
The President observed the pleasure the Prince had in seeing me, and had a mind
to converse with me in private; so that, Madam, in less than an hour I was
forced to hear another Declaration of Love, which I answered no better than the
first, tho for different Reasons; for if my Inclination to the Prince made me
silent, you may well judge, the Indifference I had for the President caused me
not to answer him. After Supper we had a Consort of Voices and Instruments,
which did not last long, because some of the Ladies had a mind to play. You
know, Madam, those who are of that humor, are insensible to all other
Diversions. The President seeing I did not play, told me he would take care to
divert me, on condition I would contribute no less to his satisfaction; in
order to which, he sent for the Music again, which he knew I liked. This was a
Conjuncture pretty nice for a Woman so little versed in the Affairs of Love as
I was: for the Prince and the President besieged me by turns. When the first
took me out to dance, the other told me, that Courtiers knew not how to love,
and that they took more pleasure in ruining a Woman's Reputation. than in the
Favors she could bestow upon them. This Truth hindered not my Kindness to the
Prince; on the contrary, it increased my Aversion for him who told it me. I
continued my Visits to the Presidente, which my Husband approved of, telling
me, he wished I would conform my self in all my Actions to that Virtuous Lady.
I saw the Prince almost every day at her House, but not with such freedom as to
discover our Thoughts to one another; which made him think fit to give me this
Billet there.

SHall I never see you, Madam, but in a Crowd of People who besiege you, and
will not give me leave to acquaint you with that Passion you have inspired?
Alas! Madam, I fear all, and hope nothing; whilst you give me not so much as
one comforting look: and whatsoever mine express, you love me not enough to
understand what they mean. If you would have this Secret concealed, take care
to cherish it by some Mark of Pity; for unless you assist me, it is impossible
for me not to discover it.

I read this Note over an hundred times; but I was strangely perplexed how to
answer it: for my Mother was one of those old-fashioned Ladies who would not
have young Folks know how to write to one another, and never let me learn any
more than enough to sign my Marriage-Contract. However, I was resolved to
answer him; but I could not do it without trusting a Wench that waited on me,
called Limelville, because she wrote pretty well, and I had a mind to make use
of her Hand, and her Advice, in this important Dispatch. After several
Beginnings of my Letter, which did not please me, at last I pitched upon this.

IT was not without some difficulty that I resolved to write to you, and I
found it no less hard how to express my self. But you must not so much as one
minute believe I want Gratitude, since you have discovered what favorable
Thoughts you have of me: And I will suffer no body to instruct me how to love,
but your self.

Having spent all the Morning in framing this Billet doux, I had just done
sealing it, when my Husband came into my Chamber. I held it still in my Hand,
and going hastily to put it in my Pocket, I unhappily let it fall. My Husband
seeing a Paper fall between me and Limelville, took it up immediately, and
being naturally suspicious, went out again presently to see what was in it. I
presently perceived I had lost it, and looked about for it to no purpose; you
may imagine how I was alarmed. But there was so little time to lose, that
without any more Reflections we soon contrived how to bring our selves off. The
Billet was in Limelville's Hand, and she played the Part we had agreed on with
as much address and assurance, as was requisite. I was still instructing her,
when she perceived my Husband stealing sostly toward us, to hear what we said.
Well, Madam, said she to me, raising her Voice, you shall either give me the
Note again which you took from me, or let me quit your Service. It is no such
Crime sure to write to a Man I intend to marry; let me beg of you, not to leave
me in this uneosie condition. To keep up the Scene, I swore to her I had not
seen her Billet; but the more I assured her, the more she persisted that I had
it.

My Husband was mightily pleased to hear us talk thus. Limelville besought him
to use his Interest with me to restore her Note, and that with so much concern,
and real signs of anger, that he was deceived by them, and at last gave her the
Letter, and withal rallied her for having such a tender Correspondence with a
Man. Thus she came off by a pretended Intrigue, and the same Billet which had
been in my Husbands possession, I conveyed that very Night into the Prince's
Hands, at the President's House. From this time forwards I had no more need
either of Secretary or Interpreter: My Passion taught me more in eight days,
than I should have learnt in half a year, if Love had not been in the case. But
I was continually plagued with the President's Addresses, which were the only
Subjects of his Discourse, and he would needs persuade me, I ought to make him
some return; but finding he gained no ground upon me, and believing my Husband
stood in his way, he waited impatiently for the Spring, which would oblige him
to go to his Command in the Army. I visited his Lady frequently, and found her
not altogether so severe as the World took her to be. She very patiently
suffered the Duke to praise her white Hands and Neck, which she was not very
scrupulous to show.

The King, who stays not for fair weather to extend his Conquests, in February
marched to invade the County of Burgundy; and my Husband having Orders to be
with his Regiment, left me alone at Paris. All things at this time seemed to
contribute to my Happiness; my Mother went into the Country too, and I forgot,
Madam, to tell you, that my Husband desired the President and his Lady to have
an eye to my Conduct, and charged me to do nothing without their advice. The
first use I made of my Liberty after his departure, was to advertise the Prince
of it, and to give him an Assignation in the King's Garden. I was preparing my
(...) meet him, when the President came to see me: He began his Vint with a
long Discourse, how reserved I ought to live, whilst my Husband was exposed to
the Chance of War; that now was my time to establish my Reputation in the Eye
of the World: and added, that the Care of it was recommended to him. But when
after these grave Admonitions, he would have spoken to me of his Love, I
spitefully asked him whether that Article was included in his Commission? No,
it is not, said he but if you do not use me well, I assure I will be revenged
of you for that Coldness wherewith you have hitherto treated me. I was all this
while it the worst Humor that could be for I thought my time very ill spent,
which I might have passed in Conversation much more acceptable to me: But there
was no remedy, I was sain to be patient two hours, and should hardly have come
off so, if his Lady had not come in and then he left us together. Having
something, said she, to speak (...) you in private, I desire we may not (...)
interrupted. So I ordered my Porter to deny me, and we went presently into my
Closet, where shspoke to me much after this manner. You are not ignorant, said
she, Dear Child, (for so she was wont to call me) that I have a sincere
Kindness for you, and am overjoyed to see you happy. For this reason, I have a
mind to give you some Advice, which may not be unnecessary to you, if you
desire your Quiet. And I assure you, it is a great ease to a Woman to have the
World think her a Person of regular and prudent Behavior. Therefore if we are
wise, we ought to settle an Opinion of our Reputation, before we think of our
Pleasures. To compass this, we must ever study to appear well outwardly, and
deny our selves Trifles, so we make sure of what is solid. Those who follow
this method, have great Privileges above others, and whatsoever they do is
still interpreted to their advantage. By this means I have hitherto succeeded
well enough, having sacrificed the first part of my Life to enjoy the remainder
with more freedom. To proceed, I should not desire to be so intimate with you,
but that I have observed you are very discreet. I would have you fix your Eyes
and your Heart, limit your Desires, and have a care that your Ambition to
please all men, remder you not contemptible. It is ridiculous for a Woman to
have such wild Designs; she undoes her self, and never succeeds. My Friendship
will be a considerable Protection for you from universal Censure; and as long
as (...) live united, you will need to fear nothing on that side: However, we
will not fail to live pleasantly. But Child continued she, I think you must
resolve to comply a little with my Husband. I perceive he loves you, and am
satisfied he should have such a Amusement, that he may not look to narrowly
into my Behavior.

After all this long Preamble, the Presidente confessed she loved the Duke, and
that he was not ingrate full. She added, That to avoid trusing her own Women,
she would be glad to have a She-friend, whom she might confide in, to make
Appointments to walk with; and that we should admit the Prince into our
Society, for she knew well enough we had an Intrigue between us. I approved all
she said, only I could not agree to fix my Thoughts upon one Object, that
Article I excepted out of the Treaty with a mental Reservation. She told me
further, That the Chevalier du -- and the Count of -- whom I had seen at her
House, were not fit to be trusted with our Secrets; and desired me not to
entertain them. I promised her every thing, and did stand much upon breaking my
Word. When this Discourse was over, she invited me home to sup with her. My
Porter told me, as I went out, that the Prince had been to wait on me. I
believe his impatience to be alone at the Rendezvous, made him come to know why
I failed. The President received me very cheerfully, and gave me a thousand
Testimonies of his Friendship. I dazzled his Eyes with a superficial Compliance,
which he liked the better, because he thought it sincere. You will wonder,
Madam, to see me so enlightened in the Affairs of Gallantry in so small a space
of time: But Love, as soon as we are sensible of it, takes care to initiate us
in his Mysteries; and besides, I had so lately received Instructions, that I
could not choose but be something improved. As soon as I came home, I found this
Note from the Prince.

YOu are more knowing than I thought; and I find you are able to instruct me
However, it is not so easy for you to abuse me, as you believe; and I begin
now to understand what your Proceedings mean. You make an Assignation, and
fail. When I come to inquire the Reason of it, your Servants tell me you are
not within, at the same time I find the President's Coach at your Door. I give
place to this Happy, Worthy Rival, and thank you heartily for restoring me to
my self.

I could not endure to leave the Prince in this mistake; and though it were
after midnight, I presently sent him this Answer.

WIse men never judge wholly by Appearances; and I am far enough from being
guilty, to give you any reason to do so: but you are very much to blame, for
entertaining so disadvantageous an Opinion of me. Take care to find out the
Truth your self; for I assure you, I am not enough your Friend to night to take
any pains to convince you of my Innocence; and I doubt not but you will have a
harder Task to repair the Wrong you do me, than I shall have to persuade you
that the President is my Aversion, and that I was powerfully disposed to love
you.

If Lovers easily entertain Suspicions, they are are as easily rid of them. The
Prince came to see me next day, we soon came to an eclaircissement, and Peace
was concluded. Though the Winter was not yet quite over, yet we had now and
then some fair Weather, which I was sure not to lose; and for all Madam la
Presidente's Advice, went to Vincennes, where I found all the young People that
staid in Town. Here I met the Chevalier du -- whom I had often seen at her
House. He came up to my Coach, and I alighted, and walked with him a pretty
while. You may well think, Madam, that he said soft things to me, and that I
was not angry to hear them. We began a kind of an Intrigue, but it came to
nothing because he went away next day to the Army, and was killed in that
Campaign. I had abundance of such Adventures, which I pass over, and shall
confine my self to those only which have caused all the Misfortunes of my Life.

I told the Presidente the little Misunderstanding between me and the Prince,
and she generously offered to be our Mediatrix; but there was no need of it,
our Hearts had already prevented that good Office. In return of my Considence
in her, she let me know, that she never had any difference with her Duke. I
have never the better Opinion, said I, of your Kindness for one another, for
that. A peaceable Love is too like Matrimony; without quarrelling sometimes, we
should lose the Pleasure of Reconciliation; and without Difficulties, the Glory
of surmounting them: there is more in it than People fancy, to have the
uncontrolled Enjoyment of the Delights of an Amorous Intrigue. What would you
have me say? coninued I: I protest I should not hate that man whose Jealousy
made him a little rough with me. Pardon me there, said the Presidente; no body
sure can talk as you do, unless they have a depraved Taste. We will not dispute
of Tastes, answered I; for I am satisfied, all the Brisk Women in Town are of
my Opinion; for Concern is almost always a sign of Love. My Dear, said the
Presidente, you are very knowing for a Woman that was married so young; and I
fear you do not distinguish in this Case between a Husband and a Lover. Yes,
but I do, replied I; for that which would appear intolerably whimsical in the
first, would charm me in the last Then you have tried them both, said she. No,
never, said I; all these Differences that I speak of, are but Speculative. It
was to no purpose for me to maintain my Opinion, for she would never agree to
it. We lived thus near two Months pretty quietly, at least among our selves for
as to my particular Circumstances, I had a mixture of Melancholy and Pleasure.

You may remember, Madam, if you please, that I told you I saw the Chevalier du
-- at Vincennes, and that we began an Intrigue, which was to have been carried
on at his return from the Army. The poor Youth was killed at the Siege of Dole,
and the first News I had of it was from the Count de -- I wept bitterly when I
heard it, which had such effect upon the Count, that he fancied my Heart was
susceptible of a true Affection; and therefore endeavored to comfort me. I
remember he talked to me above two hours, to no great purpose; till at last
looking steadfastly upon me, he said it was a great Blessing for a man to be
beloved by me; and assured me, he would omit nothing that might deserve that
Honor. At those Words I listened to him, I looked upon him, and did not forbid
him to hope.

Some days passed without seeing him; but his return from the Army cheered up
my Spirits. Being under a necessity of carrying Matters fairly with the
Presidente and her Husband, and the Prince, I told the Count he must not come
so often as he did to my House; but that I would meet him at some Ladies Houses
of his Acquaintance and Friends: and I was mightily pleased to find him always
there before me. He is certainly a man of a penetrating Wit, which made him
quickly see into the bottom of my Behavior, and showed him, there was nothing
in my Temper to be depended upon. He went into the Country for some time; and
when he came back, I had quite forgot him. Sure he had made but little progress
in my Heart; for I never heard of him there since. One day reslecting upon this
half Adventure, I said to my self, See what comes of Love without Opposition.
If I found more Obstacles to remove, more Quarrels to make up, and that my Mind
and my Heart were more employed, I should not run so from one thing to another,
and take such pains to entangle my self.

All this while my Happiness seemed to be sirmly established. Neither Husband
nor Mother talked of coming to Town, and I managed the President with such
dexterity, that he imputed my Coldness to him, wholly to my rigid Virtue. But
at last things began to turn, and I should have had Affliction enough, had I
been capable of taking any thing much to heart. The Prince's Friends obliged
him to marry; and I believed, that if this Engagement did not quite break off
our Commerce, it would at least necessitate him to save the Appearances.
However, things proved quite otherwise; he married a Woman that had neither
Beauty nor Worth, and was only considerable for the Money she brought him: So
that finding nothing either in her Person or her Mind, that could engage him,
he soon dispensed with those Duties which a Wife to his liking would have
obliged him to, and I had no reason to fear she had robbed me of his Heart. I
resolved to see the Princess my self; and I had no reason to repent of my
Visit. But, Madam, the Pleasures of Love are built upon such tottering
Foundations, that they are liable to sudden Change. Till now I lay secure, if I
may so express my self, in the Bosom of Prosperity; but at last mytime was come
to undergo the Calamities that Gallantry exposes Women to.

The President, who began to be weary of my Resistance, and was not willing to
think his want of Merit the Cause of it, cast about to discover which way my
Heart was inclined. To effect this the better he corrupted my Woman, who had
helped me off so well with my first Letter. Perfidious Limelville told him all
I have related to you, not forgetting either the Chevalier du -- or the Count
of -- However, the President's Love not going beyond his Prudence, he was
willing to be convinced by being an Eye witness of my Intrigues. One Evening,
when the Prince was with me in my Closet, Limelville sent the President word of
it: This Advice disturbed hm; but as all Lovers are apt to flatter themselves,
he fancied at first I did not much value the Prince's Company; and to be
satisfied whether I did or no, ordered his Wife to send for me to play at Ombre
with her. I told the Messenger, I could not possibly come, because I was to
answer a long Letter I had received from my Husband; believing this Excuse
would bring me off: but it provoked the President more. He perceived I designed
to keep close where I was; therefore to expose me, he proposed to his Wife and
the Duke to come to my House. I had taken no measures to hinder my self from
being surprised, and knew nothing of their coming till they were in my
Antichamber. I went thither as fast as I could, and would have led them into
another Apartment; but the President pushed me back, and taking a Flambeau,
went directly into my Closet, where he found the Prince in some disorder. They
saluted one another in such a manner as you may imagine, and came back together
into the Room where his Wife staid with the Duke; after which, he made me go
along with him into that Chamber where I would have carried him at first.

I had not time to consider much what I should say, to excuse my not coming to
his House, and my being found in private so close with the Prince. Shall I tell
you, Madam? his Jealousy was so great, that he gave me a Box on the Ear with
all his strength. After this transport of his Rage, he said all that could
confound me with shame. I wonder how I did to go through with it. The truth is,
I was so little concerned, that I held it my best way to take his Blows in good
part: So that in stead of answering his Fury with the like, I fancied the
President, who was otherwise a Man of very good temper, could not have been so
violent, without an Ingredient of Jealousy, which is never without Love. When
he left off speaking to me, I would have justified my self, by telling him, I
could not help entertaining the Prince, for fear he should suspect I had some
other Amorous Design on foot, that hindered me from doing him that Favor. Hold
your tongue, false Creature, interrupted he; I know all your Intrigue: And then
told me my Adventures with the Prince, the Chevalier, and the Count; of which,
he said, Limelville had informed him. After this, I had no more to do, but to
submit, which was certainly my best way.

While I was thus employed with the President, the Prince and the Presidente
passed their time but little better: The first apprehended I would reconcile my
self to the President by betraying him; the other was ready to die for fear I
should discover all the Secrets she had trusted me with, to her Husband. But
neither of them had any reason to trouble themselves; all that I endeavored,
was to convince him, that he did me wrong to be jealous of me; and the Interest
I had not to exasperate him, armed me with so good Reasons, and made me so
eloquent, that at last I brought him to beg my Pardon. So we went back again to
the Company pretty well reconciled, considering how desperately we had fallen
out.

The Prince and Madam la Presidente were a little surprised, that such a
terrible Storm was so soon over. I endeavored to find by their Eyes what they
thought; but they were so taken up with looking upon one another, that they
took no notice how narrowly I observed them. As Play was only the Pretense of
this Visit, which was spent quite in another manner, we soon broke up: When
they were gone, I turned away Limelville; and the President, to whom she
complained, resus'd to intercede for her. I thought now I was pretty well out
of this troublesome Business, but I was deceived; for afterward the face of
Affairs was extremely altered. Limelville told the Presidente all she knew, and
was no less communicative to the Prince. I was astonished next day to find them
both very cold to me, without giving me any reason for it: Indeed I did much
trouble my self to find it out. We went to walk at the Arsenal, where the Duke
came to us. He gave his Hand to the Presidente, and the Prince began to
converse with me in such a forced manner, that he had much ado to tell me, he
was sorry for my Misfortune the day before. I quickly guessed he was changed,
by his stiff way. Nor was the Duke better satisfied with Madam la Presidente's
Proceedings; so that I believe all our thoughts at that time were much alike.
Upon this occasion, Madam, I remembered what the President had told me of the
Prince's Humor, and he began to appear less and less worthy of my Esteem. What
I once thought an Accomplishment in him, I now looked upon to be nothing but
Rudeness: On the contrary, every thing the President did, seemed very graceful
to me. Yet I must needs confess these thoughts went out of my Head as fast as
they came in; but at last they returned so often, that though my Design was not
to make him perfectly happy, I was at least desirous to make an intimate Friend
as long as I lived. To speak truth, I did not yet understand my self, and was
very incapable of behaving my self as I ought in such Circumstances.

The Presidente, for her share, was grown so weary of the long Tranquillity she
enjoyed with her Duke, that she had already relished the Prince's insinuating
Temper; and I doubt not but she met him half way; for I am sure of himself he
was not very forward to court a Lady old enough to be his Mother, or his
Governess. I perceived plainly, she apprehended me no less than the Duke; and
she had reason to fear, that her thwarting me would provoke me to disabuse the
World in general, and her Husband in particular, of the false Opinion they had
of her Virtue: But she had so much wit, and was so nearly concerned to preserve
her young Lover, that she made it her Business to abuse me.

One day, as I was walking with her in the Garden, I had the pleasure to see
her setch three or four Turns at a mighty rate, and to hear her sigh as if she
were deeply afflicted. I was impatient to know the meaning of these Tricks,
when she began her self, by telling me, That the Humor and Way of Living in
the World was very dangerous for Women; that it was inconsistent with their
Repose; that she had found more Delight in her severest Retirements, than in
all the Liberties she had ever allowed her self. To conclude, Madam, said she
to me, I could not possibly conceal my Melancholy and my Sighs from you any
longer, which are the Effects of a Conflict in my Breast, between a remainder
of Inclination for the World, and a Resolution to abandon it for ever. I did
not oppose her Resolutions, because I was sure they were affected, and that the
World had her fast enough. I praised her extremely for choosing the solid part;
and when she told me that her Experience confirmed her in those pious
Intentions, I promised her, that when I had as much as she, I would not fail to
follow her Example. This entertained us five or six days, during which I often
met with the Duke, who endeavored to make me join with him in being revenged
of her. But I had a mind to have all the Glory of it my self, and should have
been sorry to share it with any body else.

I learnt not long after, that the Presidente saw the Prince often by visiting
his Wife, under color of Friendship, to make up Differences between them; to
effect which, I was sacrificed. I resolved then in my turn to make her a Victim
to my Resentment; yet would not do it so base a way, as to betray the Secrets
she had trusted me with, but chose a more refined sort of Revenge. One day that
I was at her House, after her Husband had discoursed in private to me a pretty
while, she asked me, as she used to do, what he said to me, He spoke to me,
said I, of the Evening that he found the Prince with me, and represented to me
the prejudice a Woman does her self, by having to do with a man of his
Character. It is as little for a Woman's Reputation to entertain my Husband,
said the Presidente, as the Prince. Since things, replied I, continue still in
the same state you first settled them, I see no reason you have to find fault
now. Yes, answered the Presidente, I have now some Scruples of Conscience. I Will
take them upon me, said I, and you shall allow me to preserve a Friend whom I
have an infinite value for. At last we were so exasperated against one another,
that we were utterly irreconcilable. I was informed, that her Passion for the
Prince transported her beyond all bounds; yet I was not jealous, though
certainly to a Woman who pretends to any thing of Beauty, nothing can be more
insupportable, than to see another, who is neither so handsome, nor so young,
deprive her of a Servant. My Curiosity to know what passed between her and the
Prince, made me think of corrupting one of his Footmen, which was no hard
matter to do; and by this means I learnt, that the Presidente and her new Lover
were to go and spend a day at an House of her Husbands in Brie, five or six
Leagues from Paris, where he had importuned me a great while to go along with
him, and pass a few days. Hitherto I had refused him; but now I pressed him as
much, and without telling any Reason for it, conjured him to keep the Design of
our Journey private. I made him consent to let the Princess be of the Party,
for she began now to disbelieve the malicious Stories that were told her of me.
I went to her, and proposed taking the Air at Ruell, which I took to be the
best way to prevail with her; for she is not a Woman to be depended upon in any
thing. It was very well I went this way to work; for she presently told her
Husband, we were to go next day to Ruell: which was as he could have wished,
because it was the quite contrary Rode to that he was to take.

The President was no less satisfied, when his Wife told him, she was to go
next day to the Abbey of St. Cyr. to visit Madam Arangonois, who was retired
thither.

Being unwilling to neglect any thing that might complete my Revenge, I writ a
Note to the Duke, desiring him to meet me at the Place where I was going; but I
had little hopes of his coming, because they said he was gone to Versailles.

I was extremely glad to see the Day arrive which was to yield me so much
satisfaction, by exposing my Rival: And the President was as well pleased too;
for he fancied this Journey would be much to his Advantage. He commanded his
Servants to go before, and prepare an Entertainment for us; but I ordered one
of my Laquais to stay them by the way, promising to excuse them to their
Master; and then I went to call the Princess, telling her, we were not now to
go to Ruell, because the Duchess of Aiguillon was there. She never examined
whither she was to go; for she is a Woman easy to be managed. From thence we
went to meet the President, who staid for us at the Gate of St. Antoine, with
the Abbot B -- and we set out very cheerfully. The President full of vain
Hopes, the Princess intent upon her Diversion; for my part, I thought of
revenging my self upon Madam la Presidente and my treacherous Lover; and the
Abbot B -- was not idle; for he read us a new Play, which he had just fitted
for the Stage. My Mind all the while was so possessed with malicious Joy, that
I could not help laughing out aloud sometimes, to the astonishment of the
Company, who could not tell what to make of it. At last we came to the House,
and went in, without any bodies seeing of us; for it happened at a time that all
the Servants were abroad at work; and Madam la Presidente's People were busy,
a getting something for them to eat.

From the fore-Court we went into the next, where the President had the
satisfaction to behold his Ladies Coach, and the Princess her dear Spouses
Footmen. The surprise they were in, was not enough to content me yet; my
Business was to let them see something more convincing: And to prevent any
bodies giving our Lovers any notice what Company was there to wait on them, I
ran before, whilst the President was pleased to ask his Wives Lacquay some
Questions. The Princess followed me, and we went as fast as you may imagine,
into a low Apartment, which we found open; we crossed a large Hall, and several
Rooms, without meeting any body; so that I began to be afraid we were mistaken:
but at last I opened the Door of a Closet, where the Princess, the President,
and my self, found the Prince and his Mistress very lovingly together. She was
not at all disturbed, or surpised; but with wonderful confidence accosted me
in this manner: You did not think, Madam, to have met so good Company here; I
could not suffer you, continued she, to take the pains to come to a Place where
I have any thing to do, without being there my self to bid you Welcome. I
protest, Madam, she spoke to me with that assurance, that I was like to forget
my Business was only to surprise her. She carried on the Adventure with so
little disorder, and her behavior was so open and free, as would have
confounded Innocence it self. She said a thousand extravagant things afterward
to her Husband, the Princess, and me, not forgetting the Abbot himself; and
when the poor Gentleman asked her what hindered her from going to St. Cyr. and
why she was locked up with the Prince? she answered, She did it to discover my
Designs, and to convince her self that I was unworthy of her Friendship. While
the President and his Lady were entertaining one another with all that
Impudence and Jealousy could suggest, the Princess and her Lord were reasoning
the Case much after the same manner; and without any respect to the Title he
had qualified her with, she said abundance of things to him that exceedingly
diminished the Splendor of it. But neither the opening of the Plot would have
been according to form, nor my Revenge complete, if the Duke had not been there
too. He received my Note, it seems, when he came back from Versailles, and did
not doubt but I writ it on purpose to let him understand some way or other
Madam la Presidente's Infidelity, who of late made him believe she was forced
to break off Commerce with himout of true remorse of Conscience, and Religious
Considerations. Desirous therefore to find out her Hypocrisy, he staid no
longer than just to shift his Clothes, and with one Page only came away full
speed to the Place where I directed him. Nor could he come at a more seasonable
time for his Instruction; for he had but to listen a little, to be informed of
all that he was ignorant of; and the Princess took care to open his
Understanding. The Duke is not a man who easily pardons Faults of this nature;
and if he be severe sometimes without cause, you may judge how he treats the
Guilty. He thought now he might without any scruple take his full swing of
Revenge; and without considering that Husband and Lover were by, set himself to
rally her in that manner as is natural to him, and indeed to all the Gascons.
Madam, said he, addressing himself to the President's Lady, I came on purpose
really to have my share of your sweet Meditations, to ask you how far you are
improved by them, and if they are yet prevalent enough to efface the Love you
have so often sworn to me: But I see plainly, continued he, the New Guide of
your Conscience has a greater Influence in the change of your Behavior, than
the holy Resolutions you were pleased to make against me; and that he had quite
extinguished those Flames, which I had reason to believe I had pretty well
fomented for a year together. Besides, give me leave to tell you, that it was a
great satisfaction to me to behold you return into a Course from which I
imagined I had diverted you: But I should be justly guilty of all the Crimes of
your New Intrigue, if I should not now take my turn to exhort you to be more
faithful to Monsieur le President, than you have been hitherto; and if I did
not caution him not to be any longer cheated with the false glittering Tinsel
of your imaginary Virtue.

Whilst the Duke spoke thus, the miserable Husband, his Wife, and the Prince
were so confounded, that they could not open their Mouths; not but that they
had enough to say, but the truth is, People in their condition are a little
indisposed to Eloquence. The Princess, who hearkened to the Duke all this while
with inexpressible pleasure, could not help crying out when he had done, Bless
me! what prodigious Wit he has! There was no occasion of this, to make him
begin again upon so copious a Subject. What, Monsieur le President, said he,
are you still insensible of your Ladies Conduct? Will you never open your Eyes,
to see the Injury she does you? Don't you know, that when you sued one of your
own Robe, and would come to no Terms of Agreement with him, she, good Lady, was
at no distance in the World with him, and sacrificed yours, and her Honor too,
to her immoderate Passion? Where have you lived, Man, that you know not the
Marquis de St -- was her particular Friend, and that I my self, without vanity
be it spoken, have not received the least of her Favors?

You may guess, Madam, what the Duke said was sufficient to expose Madam la
Presidente's affected Wisdom and Gravity to her Husband; but for fear he should
go on, she interrupted him to answer his Impostures, as she was pleased to call
his raillying her Intrigues. As for the Prince, he was so exasperated that
fearing he would quarrel with the Duke, which might have been laid upon me as
the Cause, I took the last aside, and desired him to go out of the Room, and
leave the happy Couples to compose their Differences without our assistance.
With much ado I persuaded him to go, and we walked into a very pleasant Garden,
while the Abbot B -- took upon him to be the Plenipotentiary to make Peace
between the Husbands and Wives. Though the Duke saw clearly what I did was much
out of Jealousy, and made no question, but that I had really loved the Prince;
yet those Reflections now were food out of his Head. He told me, nothing could
be so welcome to him as Madam la Presidente's Insidelity; that she had but got
the start of him a few days; that he had already resolved to leave her, and
apply himself wholly to me; that what he said was no Essect of Melancholy for
her Change, but of a secret Compliance he had for all my Thoughts and
Inclinations.

The Duke was Handsome, Liberal, and Magnificent; and I foresaw after this bout
I should lose Prince, and President, Wife and all: So that, Madam, I must
confess, being persuaded that the Merit of a young Woman is best distinguished
by the Multitude of her Adorers; and that to live with any satisfaction, it is
necessary to have one at least; I did listen to what the Duke said, but did not
give my self over to believe all his Vows of loving me eternally; nor did I
repulse him so, as to let him fear he was indifferent to me. I had a great
Ambition to see the Court, where he was in a Station adorned with all the
Charms that accompany high Birth, great Riches, and considerable Preferments.
As he was very discerning, and found how fond I was of showing my self in the
best Company, he flattered me so far, as to tell me, I could see nothing in the
Circle it self so Beautiful as my self. While I was hearing what he said to me
on this Subject, the Abbot of B -- came and told me the President endeavored
to justify his Wife, that they laid all the Mischief of that days Work at my
door, and that both of them would make it their Business to ruin me when my
Husband came home. The Duke, who now began to embrace my Interests, was so
concerned at this Menace, that he desired the Abbot to tell Madam la
Presidente, that if she did what she threatened, she should severely pay for it,
and that he would make no difficulty to tell all the World what he knew of her
Life and Conversation. The Abbot discharged his Commission with a great deal of
Address, and in appearance things seemed to be made up; but in reality the
President could never heartily forgive me.

Though all I have related to you, Madam, looks very Romantic, and that those
feigned Heroes never had any occasion to eat, I Will assure you this is a true
Story, and those who were concerned in it were very hungry; for my part, I
found my self so, and desired the Abbot to put the President in mind of our
Condition, which he did effectually; for his Servants came time enough to get a
good handsome Entertainment ready for us. While we were at Table, the Abbot
discoursed of the Rules of Tragedy, and of the Abbot of Aubignac's Censure of
Dramatique Poetry. Perhaps he chose this Subject to show his Parts, because he
made Plays himself; or rather to divert the Company from talking of what happened
just before.

From this day forward I saw none of them any more, applying my self to appear
at Court, whither I went with one of the Dukes Sisters. My Face and Shape were
more taken notice of there, than either of them deserved; but you know, Madam,
what a Value the World sets upon Novelty, and there are few who are not imposed
upon by it. To that therefore I must attribute all the fine things the Count de
Save and the Marquis de Villerey said to me. I discovered so much Vanity, that
the Duke soon repented he had brought me into such a dangerous Air: And that
which spoiled me quite, was, that being one day at Versailles, I perceived the
King ask who I was, and looked upon me in such a manner as persuaded me that he
liked me; and the Duke told me afterward, that I was not mistaken. Certainly,
Madam, when a Woman is once possessed with Pride, and the Spirit of Coquetry,
she is liable to a World of Extravagances. The Duke having assured me that the
King liked me, I presently entertained ridiculous Notions of imaginary
Happiness, and believed I might come to strike that Great Monarch's Heart. I
never went out, but I was as exactly dressed, as if I was to appear in the
Drawing Room; and I gave my self a loose in my Behavior too, that it might be
no Impediment to my vain Hopes: Vain I may call them; for they had no
Foundation but in my Fancy. As soon as these Illusions vanished, I reconciled
my self to the rest of the World, which I overlooked before, and the Duke took
Care to give me all the Diversions he could invent, to kill, as he said, the
Chimera which haunted me so. He loved Pomp, and there was hardly a Day passed
that he did not give me a splendid Entertainment; to which I invited a hundred
Ladies, more to gratify my Vanity, than out of any kindness: for it is a
Maxim, That Coquettes love no body but themselves; but I did not foresee, that
this Splendor which I took such a pride in, hastened my Ruin, and plunged me
into great Misfortunes.

My Husband received Orders from the King to meet the Count de Vignory, who was
then Governor of Binch, to concert some secret Expedition. There happened some
Difficulties which retarded their Designs, and obliged my Husband to stay
longer at Binch than he intended. Vignory, in order to divert him, and perhaps
to show him how happy a man he was, carried him to a Lady of the Neighborhood
in his Government, with whom he seemed to have an habitude; and to let him see
what Credit he had with her, told him he had recommended a Woman to serve her
who had lived with me at Paris. My Husband's chief Reason to consent to this
Visit, was the desire he had to learn how I behaved my self in his absence. The
Woman that Vignory told him of was the treacherous Limelville, who no sooner
saw my Husband, but to be revenged of me for turning her away, you may be sure
told him all that could make him jealous. She was good at improving of things,
and heightning that to a Crime which was but a Trifle; informing him how I was
fallen out with the President, and his Lady, and the Prince, and all that she
knew of my Intrigues. He conjured her not to discover so important a Secret to
any body else, and promised her, that when he had punished me, he would send
for her again to govern his House.

After Limelville had so fully instructed him, he made all the haste he could
to execute the Orders he had received, that he might the sooner have an
occasion to give the King an Account. Vignory and he succeeded in their
Enterprise, which was to surprise a considerable Party of the Enemy, and then
my Husband came back to Paris; for the News he brought was so good, that he did
not question being well received, though he came without particular Order from
his Majesty.

All this while I was not without Employment; for the Duke is a man pretty hard
to be dealt with; he was jealous of every thing, the most innocent Actions
seemed criminal to hm, and I lived in such constraint as began to be
intolerable to me. One Evening (the most dreadful one of all my Life) it came
into my Head to go take the Air at the Point of the Island, which was the
Quarter of the Town where I lived. You may remember, Madam, how the Duke
reproached Madam la Presidente with an Intrigue she had with the Marquis de --
That very man I unfortunately met, and could not help letting him take me by
the Hand to lead me. He had seen me lately at Versailles, and several other
Places, and my engaging way of Behavior had begot a strong Inclination in him
for me. I was delighted to converse with a man who did not teaze me; for the
Duke was now grown as troublesome to me as the worst Husband in the World. I let
him talk to me therefore a pretty while; and when he had said what he had a
mind to, I told him how much I was distasted at all men in general, and then
gave him a Character of such a Lover as I could like. After that, I described
what an insufferable Plague it is to bear with Jealous People, or to be so ones
self; under borrowed Names I told him all my Husband's and the Duke's Whimseys,
and what just Reasons I had to complain of all who had ever loved me; at last I
opened my Heart freely to him, without any apprehension that any body overheard
me. The Night indeed was so dark, that I could not perceive the Duke, who
followed us close, wrapped up in a great Cloak. I walked on still several
Turns, and then took leave of the Marquis, not suffering him to lead me home;
where, as soon as I came in, I learned that the Duke waited for me, and fancied
he would welcome me but coldly: and I was in the right; for after he had
repeated all that passed between the Marquis de St. -- and me. from Words he
came to Blows; and though too much Indiscretion was my greatest Fault, he
punished me as severely as if I had been really guilty. Now as Complaints are
very natural on such Occasions, I was weary eloquent upon this Subject, and
reproached him bitterly for his unworthy Usage of me; when of a sudden I heard
a mighty Noise in the Street. I was too much afflicted with my own Concerns, to
trouble my self with other Peoples; but the Duke put his Head out of the
Window, to see if the Disorder which made so much noise was not caused by his
own Footmen. It seems they did not begin it; but hearing a pretty way off what
a Bustle there was at my Gate, they ran thither, and without discerning Friend
from Foe, struck every body at random that was in their way. In the heat of the
Tumult I distinguished a Man's Voice that was not unknown to me, who called all
the Servants by their Names whom my Husband left with me when he went away; but
they were not there to answer, for I had turned them all going. You may guess
how surprised I was to hear them so called upon, and could not apprehend who it
should be; but that Night, to my sorrow, produced nothing but astonishing,
mischievous Accidents.

While I was attentive to this Voice, I saw my Husband come in like a Man whose
Fury had overcome his Reason; he fell upon all that stood in his way, and
without any respect for the Duke, was running full tilt at him, if his loss of
Blood had not weakened him so, as to make him fall down. When he came out of his
Swoon, his Servants carried him into his Chamber, and put him to Bed; and then
his Valet de Chamber told me he had been two days in Town, and had a mind to
come home alone to surprise me. This was all the Fellow could tell me, for he
knew no more; but this was enough to make me think I should stand in need of
the Duke's Protection, which he promised me; and I sent for a Relation of my
Husband's, to desire him to endeavor to get out of him what Reason he had to
be so transported against me. This Man, who was always kind enough to me,
happened to come to him just as the Chyrurgeons had done dressing him the first
time. How dangerous soever it was for him to speak much, he would needs tell
his Kinsman all he knew, and desired him to get me secured in a Convent, till
he had consulted with my Relations what to do with me. But now, Madam, I must
tell you what most of all enraged him against me. You have already heard, that
he gave the King an Account of his Expedition, who received him graciously, and
gave him leave to stay a Week at Paris, The two first Days he was at the
President's, who forgot nothing that could load me; and to make me appear more
criminal to the World, they contrived my Husband should suffer himself to be
set upon by Fellows hired for that purpose, that they might have color to give
out I would have had him murdered. It fell out so, that the Duke's Footmen
wounded him, while their Master was with me; however, he would make no use of
this Imposture against any body but me, and when he complained most of so
horrid a Design, still he justified the Duke, because if he should accuse him,
he knew it would be difficult to make People believe it. My Husband's Kinsman
advised me prudently to retire, before he had fresh Orders to secure me. I took
his Counsel, and putting up my Jewels, and some Money, I went to the Countess
of -- who received me with a great deal of Generosity. Aster she had said all
that could compose my Mind, she dexterously took an opportunity to reprove me
for having so little care of my Reputation; but it was in so noble a manner,
and so gently, that she made me repent my Folly, without putting me out of
countenance.

My Husband's Wound did not prove so dangerous as was believed at first; but as
fast as that mended, his Anger increased: so that I found my self necessitated
not only to quit Paris, but the Kingdom likewise. I resolved therefore to put
my self into the Protection of the Duchess of Savoye. The Duke approved my
Design, and the charitable Countess gave me Letters of Recommendation to the
most considerable Persons in that Court, where she was well acquainted.

I went by the Name of Madam de Courcilly, and took three Places in the
Flying-Coach for Lions, for my self, and a Maid that was newly come to me, and
a Man called Bernard, of whose Fidelity and Discretion I had some experience:
The rest of the Coach was hired by the Abbess of Bly, two Nuns, and a rich
Banquier of Genoa named Hieronymo Spichetti.

By what I have related to you, Madam, you may imagine my Thoughts could not
choose but dwell upon the troublesome Accidents of my past Life, and those I was
then further exposing my self to; and yet that which made me most melancholy,
was the remembrance of the little Concern the Duke expressed to part with me,
which was more grievous to me than all my Husband's ill Usage; to see my self
without Lovers, rendered me the most forlorn wretched Creature in the World; and
by the coldness of his Adieu, I found his Heart was no longer mine. While these
idle things ran in my Head, the Abbess of Bly bethought her self of
entertaining the Company with my Story, which I had the pleasure to hear her
tell at length, with such false ridiculous Circumstances, that I was twenty
times about about to interrupt he, and tell her she was mistaken. Judge what a
perplexity I was in, when addressing her self to me, she would needs have me
agree with her, that I was the most faulty Woman upon Earth. This made me so
uneasy, that at last I was fore'd to tell them a Story of a Cock and a Bull,
to turn the Discourse.

Now, Madam, pray observe the wonderful Events of my Destiny: At the very first
place we baited at, who should I see come into the Inn, but the Marquis of St.
--? You may think, perhaps, he came by my appointment: No, upon my word, it was
perfect Accident brought him thither; for he was going to Turin, to Complement
their Royal Highnesses from the King, upon the Recovery of the Duchess of
Savoy. The truth is, finding a Place empty in the Coach, he discharged his
Posthorses, and took it, without ever dreaming to meet with me. As soon as I
knew it, I reasoned the Case with Bernard, whether I should discover my self or
no: and we concluded it impossible I should be long concealed, though I took
never so much care. Well, I got up into the Coach without discovering my self,
and did not speak one Word for fear he should know my Voice: But the Abbess of
Bly was not so silent; for we had hardly gone a Mile, but she asked the Marquis
whether he knew the Story of the Lady who would have murdered her Husband? He
answered, He had not heard of it yet: Upon which, she, who knew it so well by
heart, began it over again in the same Terms, without omitting one Syllable:
But when she came to name me, he bid her hold her tongue; or if she must tell
Tales, she might find enough in her own Convent, without going any further for
them. This worked as I would have it; for the Abbess then gave over, and we had
scarce a Word spoken among us all the rest of that day: And I will own, Madam,
I was sensibly obliged to the Marquis for rescuing me so nobly from the
Abbesses ill Language. It happened, before we came to the Place where we were to
lodge that Night, there was a necessity of alighting to walk over a dangerous
part of the Way, because it was dark. I staid in the Coach, and the Men went
out. The Marquis then perceiving Bernard belonged to me, asked him who I was;
and was overjoyed to learn I was the Person he loved and valued so much, and
whom he had defended against the Abbess; but he was too discrect to speak to
me, till he saw his time. When we came to the Inn, he gave me his Hand to help
me out of the Coach as a Stranger; and as he had me to the Chamber where the
Nuns and I were to lie, told me softly how glad he was to meet with me, and how
happy he should be to serve me. Spichetti was as zealous to wait upon me as the
Marquis; but I did not give him the same Encouragement. Less than this was
susficient to set the Abbesses and her Nuns Tongues upon Wheels, who were vexed
to see they had more time allowed them to say their Prayers than they cared
for. At last we came to Lions, where having no Acquaintance, the Marquis and I
took Lodgings in a very good part of the Town, which the Italian directed us
to; who, not to belie his Country, watched us very narrowly; and guessing by
the Marquisses Deportment, and my Behavior to him, that we knew one another
before, he no longer doubted but we had agreed upon this Meeting. But he
cunningly dissembled both this, and whatever other Reasons he had to be so
inquisitive after me; and he and the Marquis contracted a Friendship, at least
outwardly.

It being very indecent for me to go along with the Marquis to Turin, Spicketti
told him he would take care of my Journey, and save me the trouble of passing
the Alps, which on the French side especially are very troublesome, by reason
both of their Height, and the excessive Cold. Though he was not yet perfectly
informed of my Affairs, he knew I avoided the Persecution of my Husband: So
that joining his Conjectures to my Silence, which he observed when the Abbess
related my Story, he no longer doubted who I was; but took no notice of what he
thought, either to me or the Marquis. All he said to him, was, That he would
show me Provence, and bring me into Savoy by the way of Italy; that leaving
Lions when he did, and going down the Rhosne, we should be at Turin a Fortnight
after him. I was well enough pleased to see Provence, and therefore embraced
his Proposition, so much the rather too, because he said his own Business
required him to be at Turin by that time: So we went by Water from Lions to
Avignon. But I must not forget to tell you, Madam, that my Man Bernard was much
troubled to see me trust my self so easily in Spichetti's hands. His Kindness
and Care had so far opened his Eyes, as to make him often repine at my
Indiscretion; but there was no avoiding what was destined for me.

When we came to Avignon, Spichetti lodged me at a very fine Castle which
belonged to a Friend of his; it stood in the Popes Territories, about two Miles
out of Town, where he showed me all that was worth seeing there. After I had
been there three Days, I told him it was time to be gone; I do not intend,
Madam, said he to me, to take the pains to put you into my Rivals power. These
words struck me like a Thunderbolt, and made me perceive into what ill
circumstances I had brought my self. They were followed by a bundance more
which served to declare his love; that nothing was so difficult but he would
attempt it to gain my favor, or so violent but he would do, if I repulsed him.
I would not own that I believed him in earnest, and turned all he said to
Gallantry, and Flattery; but that would not serve my turn, for he persecuted me
without intermission, at that rate that I was several times reduced to the
utmost extremities to escape the effects of his brutish Passion. Till now,
Madam, I had tasted too much of the satisfaction of loving, and being beloved:
Here it was my Fortune to be plagued by a Man who was my aversion; for I hated
Spichetti mortally. If I showed him the least kindness imaginable, that fed his
hopes; if I treated him ill, that provoked him; so that nothing but a perfect
Miracle, or Death could put an end to my misfortunes. Bernard, who took upon
him to be my Privy Counselor, reproached me for not followinig his advice,
that I protest I was never in so perplexed a condition in my life. At last,
Hieronimo calling me one day by my right name, told me, he knew all my
Adventures, and if I did not resolve to comply with his desires in a week, he
would send my Husband word where I was, and look so narrowly to me in the mean
time, that I should find it impossible to escape out of his Hands. I did all I
could to persuade him I was not the Person he took me for; but it would not do,
he knew all my concerns, though I could never learn how he came to be so
perfectly informed. The miserable condition I was reduced to, made me think of
nothing now but dying, which I resolved to do rather than satisfy the beastly
desires of this filthy Italian. However, I thought I was bound to try all means
of delivering my self, before I gave my self quite over to despair, and so set
my self to consider what was possibly to be done to obtain my liberty.

First, then I took my Jewels, and Bill of Exchange for a considerable Sum, and
some ready Money I had left, with the Letters of Recommendation to the Duchess
of Savoy, and gave them all to Bernard when Spichetti was out of the way; then
telling him, he should be my Governor for the future, I begged him to invent
some means to free me from the violence which my Tyrant threatened me with. To
effect which the better, we agreed he should pretend to leave me, which he
presently put in execution, and corrupted the Gardner of the Castle where I
was, which enabled him to give me notice how his endeavors succeeded.

The Day which Spichetti set me, now drawing near, without any hopes of
escaping, it came into my Head to desire a little longer time, which he was
easily persuaded to grant, because I made him believe his perseverance had made
some progress in my Heart. He took this opportunity to try if he could dazzle me
with his Wealth, which he set forth with such advantage as would have gone a
great way with any Woman but my self, but his offers were thrown away upon me.
I had but one Day left now, which Spichetti impatiently waited for, when I had
notice every thing was ready for my deliverence; which was thus: I was to get
out of my Window into the Garden by a Cord Ladder; in the Gardners House there
were two Suits of Men's Clothes for me and my Maid, and Bernard was to wait for
me with Horses an hundred paces from thence. Though this design was well enough
contrived, yet he might have justly questioned the success of it, if he had
considered Hieronimo was an Italian, in Love, jealous, and suspicious; and such
Monsters are hard to be imposed upon in things of this importance; but great
dangers require strong resolutions. One thing happened to my advantage;
Spichetti was taken with a violent Fever, and grew lightheaded, but not so bad
as to hinder him from ordering me to be locked up in my Chamber. This caution
was to no purpose, for I got away as we had contrived, and traveled all Night
without knowing what Road we were in. At last, when day broke we found our
selves on the top of a Mountain from whence we discovered a great many more,
which composed an extraordinary pleasant solitude. We kept on till Sunrise,
through untrodden Paths which brought us to an Hermitage that stood in a very
melancholy place.

The charitable Hermits whom I found there, made me as welcome as they could; I
had never been on Horseback before; was very weary, and wanted rest. The eldest
of the Hermits led me into a little neat Cell, where I slept for some time; for
my Mind was so disturbed, that I soon waked, and found out my good Host, who
had got some Herbs, and Fruit for me to eat, whose cleanly dressing made up
what they wanted in abundance. Summer was just now coming on, and if I had had
but the least inclination to spend my life in a Desert, far from the noise, and
communication of the World, I should have been much more delighted with this
solitude; but alas! I was in no condition to hearken to the Music of the
Birds, to try the neighboring Eccho's, or to consider the Beauty of the Rocks;
my Head was taken up with other cares. The Hermit, who applied himself to
entertain me, soon perceived I was melancholy, and took occasion to say
whatever he thought might comfort me. I observed more Understanding and
Politeness in his Discourse than usally Hermits are Masters of, but what most
surpised me, was, that after he had looked steadfastly upon me, he told me, the
Clothes I wore did not belong to my Sex. I should have thought he had
discovered it by my Complexion, or my Shape, but that continuing to look upon
me, he added, that Love had caused all the miseries of my Life. He asked me the
Minute of my Nativity, which I told him as near as I could, and then he spoke
of several things in general to me, which gave me warning to take heed of.

Though what he said was very serious, yet I could not forbear laughing, for I
could not fancy I should be the happier, or unhappier for being born a Minute
sooner, or later. For all that he enlarged his Discourse upon the future, and
his Predictions have proved very true. I thought it now time to take leave of
the Hermit, and was inquiring of him what place I might safely retire to, where
I might hear how my Affairs went in the World, when my Woman who lay asleep
upon the ground, was bitten by a Scorpion: This accident forced me to stay two
days longer in the Desert, during which time the Hermit was so civil as to
relate his Life to me, which discovered him to be a Man of Quality. His Story
had a great many extraordinary events in it; but I have so many to tell you
that relate to my self, that I shall take notice of the Hermit's no otherwise
than as they fall into my own Relation. At last, My dear Child, said he to me,
you see an unhappy Man, who once gave himself wholly over to the World, the
remembrance of which serves only to renew my repentance of those extravagances,
and errors, which her dangerous maxims engaged me in. The Knowledge I have of
the disgraces which attend those who are not yet weaned from her, makes me pity
your misfortunes, and prompts me to serve you. I have a Friend about two
Leagues off, with whom you may stay with more convenience, and decency, than in
our retirement. There you may safely learn what you would be informed of, for I
will go to Avignon, and enquire what is become of Spichetti, and settle a
Correspondence with a Friend of his, and mine, that I may know what his Designs
are. Besides I must tell you, the place where I would have you take refuge, is
as pleasant as this, and celebrated upon many accounts. You cannot but have
heard of Vaucluse, which was heretofore the dwelling of the famous Petrarch,
and his charming Laura. There you will see that wonderful Spring near which so
many excellent Verses have been made; but if those objects have so much effect
upon you, as to make you remember the Loves of that Poet, and his Mistress,
they ought also at the same time to put you in mind, that all things in this
World perish and fade, since there remains nothing more of them than such
wretched imperfect Footsteps. I besought the Hermit to relate the Loves of
Petrarch, and when I had heard them, was more impatient than before of seeing
his Habitation.

Before I took my leave of him, he gave me a Letter to his Friend, and a Book
of Petrach's Poems in Italian, for which, and the rest of his favors I thanked
him with all the marks of gratitude I could express. He gave Bernard a strict
charge not to forsake me, and then showed us the Way that would bring us to
Vaucluse. At Night we came to Madam de Mezelon's (so was the Lady called to
whom he recommended me) whose House is but a quarter of a League from the
Fountain. This Lady, though something in years, had a good Presence, and such
remainders of Beauty still as showed she had been handsome in her Youth. She was
well dressed, without being taudry, and neat without affectation. I had sent
Bernard before to deliver her the Letter from her Friend, and she received it
very kindly; I was so lucky as to please her at first sight, and she used me
with a great deal of respect. The good Hermit in his Letter acquainted her with
my Quality, and my Disguise, and enjoined her Secrecy in both, which she
promised me, and I found her as good as her Word. When I came to her first, she
presented her Daughter to me, whom I saluted like a Cavalier, but with that
disorder as you may imagine such an unusual Compliment put me into. She was
exceeding handsome, and I found afterward her Mind was as charming as her Face.
After the first Ceremonies were over, I could not but take notice of the deep
sorrow that hung both upon the Mother and Daughter, occasioned by the loss of
her Brother, who was killed at the Siege of Candie, the remembrance of which of
ten renewed their Tears, for they both described him to be a Man of
extraordinary merit.

The habitual Melancholy I had contracted, having lessened my natural
Cheerfulness, I became a very suitable Companion for Madam de Mezelon, and her
Daughter; and we entered into a strict Friendship, but upon different grounds:
for the Mother knew who I was, but her Daughter did not, and so, in spite of
all she could do to resist it, could not help falling into a violent Passion
for me. My Fate thus, rather than my Desert, brought Love to meet me in
whatever Shape I was. After I had been some days at Mezelon, I sent Bernard
away to Turin to enquire after the Marquis de St. -- and to see of there were
any likelihood of my being there conveniently during my Exile. I wrote also to
Paris, and Madam de Mezelon gave me a Direction to Sorgues, by which I might
have Answers to my Letters. Poor Bernard could not leave me without a great
deal of sorrow, and could not forbear coming back again twenty times, to give
me the best Advice he could for my Health, my Safety, and my Behavior. When he
was gone, I went to see Vaucluse, and that delightful Abode made me consider
all the Places which Petrarch and Laura had chosen there to spend the sweetest
Moments of their Love, and Life too, in so blessed a Retirement. I said to my
self, I had never been truly happy; for my Design to please others, had
hitherto deprived me of the enchanting Pleasures which proceed from the Union
of two Hearts sincerely affected to one another.

Lovely Feliza (so was Madam de Mezelon's Daughter named) had a Woman to wait
on her called Theresa, who had Wit enough; both these young Women did all that
lay in their power to divert me; we went every day toward Vaucluse, because
that sweet Place furnished us with Discourse of what had formerly happened there.
I understood Italian, but Feliza and Theresa had not enough to read Petrarch's
Poems; therefore I explained to them, with abundance of pleasure, all the
tender, moving things in them. Feliza, who was as much delighted to hear me,
still looked so languishingly upon me, that I, who was not to learn that silent
Language, quickly apprehended the meaning of her Eyes; but I seemed however not
to understand her, and wished a thousand times she might never discover her
Thoughts more plainly to me. But all to no purpose; for poor Feliza could not
forbear making a Declaration of Love to me. I entertained it with as much
confusion as she made it; and as Lovers are ingenious in tormenting themselves,
she fancied my Heart was prepossessed with some other Object; and her Jealousy
and Love together brought such a Melancholy upon her, that it injured her
Beauty, and made me really pity her. Her Mother perceived what was the Cause of
her Melancholy, as well as I; for she had been acquainted with the Mysteries of
Love: but apprehending no Inconvenience in her Daughters Kindness to me, she
would not undeceive her, by discovering my Disguise. For my part, I could not
find in my heart to abuse her any longer; but desiring Madam de Mezelon to
amuse Theresa, while I spoke with her Daughter, I went one day into her
Chamber. I found her alone, leaning her Head upon her Left Hand, her Eyes fixed
upon the Ground, in a Posture exactly proper to express Melancholy. The Habit
under which I covered my Sex made her scrupulous of being so near me alone as I
desired, and therefore she rose up to call Theresa; but I laid hold of her
Gown, and staid her. My dear Feliza, said I to her, I conjure you by all the
marks of Friendship you have hitherto shown me, to let me speak with you a
little in private. Alas! answered Feliza, What can you say to me, which my ill
Fortune does not already too well inform me of? I would undeceive you, replied
I, of the Opinion you have, that I am insensible of the Affection you have
expressed to me; and withal give you the greatest Proof of mine you can ever
receive. At these Words she looked up, to discover in my Eyes, if she could,
what I had to say to her; and by the languishing of hers, I could easily
perceive her Heart was really touched: At last I owned to her, I could make her
no Return for her Love but my Friendship, and discovered to her I was a Woman.
But, Madam, in stead of quieting her Mind, at present this did but disturb her
more. The confusion she was in for having opened her Thoughts to me, made her
blush; and her Circumstances were very strange, that she should be tormented
with a Passion, which she could not stifle, though she had never yet been fed
with any Hopes, and now knew it was impossible for me to satisfy her.

I did all I could to convince her, that no Pleasure is so refined and lasting
as mutual Friend ship; which she had much ado to believe: but at last in a few
days her Reason wrought more with her, than all the Advice I could give her
then: She overcame her Inclination, which I found next time I saw her had cost
her some Tears. From thence forwards she grew reconciled to my Sex, and we
spent above fifteen days together in a great deal of Tranquillity and
Happiness. We walked one Evening to the Fountain at Vaucluse, where after a
long Discourse upon different Subjects, at last I fell asleep with my Head upon
Feliza's Knees: At the same time two Horsemen passed by us; Feliza did not know
who they were, because they turned their Faces another way, and were not near
enough to view them distinctly; yet one one of them brought the Image of that
dear Brother, whom she loved so tenderly, into her Mind. She waked me to show
him me; and though I saw him a good way off, I thought him an handsome Man.

When we came home again, we went into Madam de Mezelon's Chamber, who was
quite overwhelmed with Grief. Ah, Chevalier, said she to me, (for so I desired
her to call me) am I not very miserable? My Afflictions began to wear away with
time, and I found my self under a necessity of submitting patiently to the loss
of my Son, when word was brought me, that he was seen pass by an hundred Paces
off the House, just in the same Garb as when he took his leave of me. The
tender Mother could not forbear weeping afresh at a Remembrance so dear, and
yet so afflicting; then we told her what we had seen, which added exceedingly
to her Sorrow. I had much ado to pacify her, telling her there were many
People so like one another, that it was easy to be deceived. I kept with her
till midnight, and was retiring to my Chamber, when the Porter brought me a
Note that was delivered him for me, in which I found these Words.

I Am resolved not to come into an House which you have dishonored, till I
have made your Life pay for your Ingratitude. My own Eyes have been Witnesses
of that Disgrace which Honor obliges me to wash off in your Blood; and I have
besides too good Proofs of your Villainy, ever to believe the contrary. I will
expect you to morrow at Sunrising, at the same Place where I saw you yesterday
with my unworthy Sister. Fail not to be there, to satisfy my just Revenge,
unless you would have me do something that may be worse for you.

Judge, Madam, how surprised I was to have a thing of this nature upon my
Hands. I easily guessed the Cause of it, and immediately went and showed the
Challenge to Madam de Mezelon, who was overjoyed at it. She waited impatiently
for Daylight, to go to the Place appointed, whither she went alone, and though
she was his Mother, was sain to bear with her Son's Reproaches, for it was
really He. She smiled at what he said, and you may believe was not angry to see
him so sensible of Honor. After she had let him go on a little while in his
Mistake, she undeceived him, by telling him part of my Story, and the Secret of
my Sex, which was now between the Mother, the Daughter, and the Son. He
aggravated the trouble it was to him, to see his Sister suffer a Man to sleep
in her Lap; and added, he was just about to come and kill us both upon the
Place, but that thinking his Sister might be married in his absence, he
resolved to inform himself well, before he committed so violent an Action; that
he applied himself to a Man who had lived heretofore in the House, who
confessed to him he saw me every day with Feliza about Vaucluse, and that all
the Neighborhood was scandalis'd at it.

Madam de Mezelon said a great many things to him to my advantage, and when she
brought him in, presented me to him. What made the best sport, was, it was
already current among all the Servants, that Mezelon had challenged me to fight
with him; so that when he came to embrace me, the same People who believed we
were Enemies, fancied I was married to his Sister, and that the Business was to
be kept private.

After this first Interview, Mezelon took some time to refresh himself, and to
put himself in a Condition to appear decently before me. Well, Madam, what
shall I say? The Brother too, as soon as he came home, thought as
advantageously of me as his Sister did when I came thither first for Refuge. I
was in Feliza's Chamber when he came to visit me, and that pretty Creature,
either presagingly, or in raillery, told me, she was sure her Brother would not
see me long without paying Homage to my Charms. As soon as he sat down, Well,
dear Brother, said she to him, would you not think me as guilty now, as you did
yesterday, if you did not know the Truth? Remember, Sister, answered Mezelon, I
was not angry with you; for I think I forgave you in my Heart: But I question
whether I shall not have more cause to complain of this Cavalier, than before,
and carry my Resentment so far, as to challenge him to give me another Meeting
at Petrarch 's Well. I am such a Coward still, said I, ever since last Night,
that you may wait there for me again to no purpose, as you did this Morning.
Truly, Madam, replied Mezelon, I believe if you had been in my place, you would
have done what I did. Seeing an handsome Man in a very familiar posture with my
Sister, I inquired if they were married; and being told they were not, after
that, I think -- I find no fault with what you did, said I, interrupting him; I
only wish it may teach you never to judge by bare Appearances, let them be
never so strong.

In this Visit, which lasted a good while, I found Mezelon had a great deal of
Wit; and those he made me afterward, convinced me that he really loved me. How
was it possible, Madam, to breathe the Air of Vaucluse five or six Months, and
not be sensible of Love? By what passed then in my Heart I plainly perceived I
had never yet been in Love, but had only suffered my self to be beloved. I had
not till now felt those pleasing pains which seize upon one's Heart before it
is firmly determined to abandon it felf wholly to Love; I had always been
ignorant of the lively pleasures it injoys in the beginnings of a Passion;
those trifles which have such great effects; in a Word, those little things
which indifferent People call folly, but which make the most delightful
employment of Lovers. I forgot all my misfortunes, the only one I feared was
being forced to part with Mezelon. I would not so much as suppose that
Bernard's return could engage me to a Journey from thence; and I accommodated
my Morals to my Love and often flattered my self, that the hatred my Husband
showed to me, was a sufficient Dispensation from my Conjugal Faith. In short,
Madam, I forbore nothing but what came too close both upon my own Honor as
well as his, and made no manner of scruple of all the rest.

Most Women in the World, if they were sincere, would freely own what I confess
now; for I do not believe I am the first Example in this kind. Mezelon's Return
brought a great many People of Quality to see him, for he was generally
beloved, and all who came were delighted to hear the Description of his
supposed Death and Resurrection, which we had not yet got from him. Being one
Evening with his Mother, and Sister, and one of his Kinswomen, we put him upon
the Relation of his Adventures in Candie, which he complied with in these Terms.

The History of Mezelon.
I Went on Roard the Duke of Beaufort's Ship, and I cannot tell you, Ladies,
whether our Voyage was stormy or calm; all I can say, is, That I was sick all
the while I was at Sea, never was upon the Deck till we saw Candie; and the
Inconvenience I suffered during the whole Passage, hindered me from learning any
of the Sea-terms. As soon as I landed, I quickly recovered my Health again, and
made it my Business to be as near the General as I could, whose Example was
sufficient to inspire us all with generous Emulation. You must needs be
informed of what passed at the Siege by the Public News, so that I shall not
enter into the Particulars, which cannot but be tedious to those that know them
already: I suppose it is my Story, and not that of the Turks, or the Venetians,
you desire to learn; therefore I shall tell you, That in the lost Battle I was
dangerously wounded I was, I said before, near the Duke of Beaufort's Person,
who had sent his Aids de Camp to carry his Orders into several parts of the
Field; he commanded me also to bring on some Troops to sustain a Battalion
which began to give ground to the Enemy. When I had executed his Orders, I
returned, but could not find him any where, and immediately it was reported
among us that he was killed. I thrust my self in among the thickest, to learn
the truth, and got nothing for my pains but two deep Wounds upon my Head and my
Shoulder, which however kept me not from being one of the last that made good
their Retreat into the Town. The ill success of this Day made them refuse to
let me into my Quarters; being much wounded, and not yet dressed, I was in
great distress, not knowing where to go, and was beginning to faint, when the
Patriarch of Candie, and his eldest Daughter, lighting upon me in that
Condition, charitably took me into their House. Their Assistance came very
seasonably; but what was then (...) to me, was like afterward (...) me.

The Patriarch's Daughter, whose Name was Eustochia, dressed my Wounds, and I
had reason to thank her for her Care; but I have always held this Maxim, That
Benesits received from a Fair Hand, are more obliging than those we receive
from a Deformed Object. Eustochia was one of the last; for she had the ugliest
Face I ever saw, which she concealed from me as much as she could; and my
Covntry-men embarked, and sailed away, without my knowing of it. I was
reckoned among the Slain, because I had not appeared in the Town since the
Battle; and my Host durst not own he had resus'd to take me in: so that our
Forces went away, and I was left behind.

When I was cured, Eustochia looked upon my Heart as a due Recompense for the
good Offices she had dene me; but though I owed her a great deal, I could not
extend my Gratitude so sar. She had a Sister, indeed, to whom I would willingly
have been beholden for my Life, and without that Tie, would have been glad to
have discharged to her the Obligations I had to Eustochia; who perceiving I
looked kindly on her, and guessing what Thoughts she had inspired me with,
immediately changed her Love into Hatred, and a desire of destroying me. As
nothing can be more Amorous than the Heart of a Greek, so nothing is more
Violent than their Resentment. The Town surrendered, as you have heard; and the
Turks made their Victorious Entry into it. Eustochia got acquainted with a
Janizary who deplored the loss of his Brother, that was killed in the last
Fight; she informed her self what kind of Man he was, what Station he had in
the Army, and then told him a few days after, she believed I had killed him.
The Janizary, without considering there was no likelihood of her knowing what
she told him, thought of nothing but revenging his Brother's Death, and
expressed great earnestness to have me in his power; which she engaged to bring
about, But her charitable Sister discovering her Design, would not suffer me to
perish so unjustly; and there being no time to be lost, took a Resolution as
bold, as it was generous.

She knew her Father was too weak a Man to oppose Eustochia's Intentions, and
so it would be Labor lost to meddle with him: But understanding (...) let the
Treaty of Capitulation be infringed, especially in any thing that concerned our
Nation, she ordered her Business so as to be brought before him, and spoke to
him thus in Greek, which he understood very well. I come, Sir, said she to him,
to desire Justice, not against any of your Soldiers, or the Officers of your
Army, but against my own Sister, whose wicked Mind has preval'd with her to
commit so black an Action, as I cannot think of it without horror. A young
Frenchman lay at my Father's House: It is true, my Sister, seeing his Life in a
great deal of danger, took a great deal of care of him, and has cured him of
two desperate Hurts; but now, to her shame, and his almost unavoidable
destruction, she has changed her mind, and would take away that Life she has
preserved. And so to add Imposture to her Eury she has made the Janizary
Ach^aec (...) Frenchman killed his Brother in the last Sally, and has promised
to put this innocent Victim into his Hands, which she sacrifices more to her
own Revenge, than to Achidec 's Grief. Begin now, Sir, to establish an Opinion
of your Equity, and take some speedy course, that my Sister may not have
leisure to execute her cruel Resolution.

Augusta (so was my Preserver named) pronounced these Words with so much Grace
and Courage, that they moved the Grand Vizir, who immediately sent me an
Officer, and twenty Soldiers; and they came very seasonably to me, for an hour
later Augusta's Pity would have done me no good. I was brought before the
Vizir, who was pleased not to dislike me: He had French enough to understand
me; but he speaks it not himself. Though I do not sing very well, Eustochia and
Augusta were sometimes delighted with my Voice. The last of them knowing the
Grand Vizir loved Music, let him know, that if he would command me to sing, I
was capable of diverting him: So that after he had asked me several Questions
concerning the Person and the Conquests of our Great Monarch, he fell
insensibly upon the Address of the French, and the Perfection to which they
have improved all Arts; particularly, Poetry, and Music. From this, he applied
himself to me, and with surprising Civility told me, he was informed I could
sing, and believed I would not deny him the satisfaction of letting him hear
me. I had learnt some of the famous Lambert's Tunes, which I sang to him the
best I could, and had certainly offended more curious Ears; but the Vizir was
very well satisfied with me. He sent for Achidec, and commanded him to do me no
Injury; nay, farther, took the pains to tell him, That what Eustochia had said
to him, was only to make him the Instrument of her Revenge; it being
impossible for her to know, with any certainty, that I had killed his Brother.

After that, the Vizir dismissed me, giving me a very fine Scimitar at parting.
Perhaps you may have heard, that one of the Articles of the Capitulation ran,
That those Candiots who had no mind to live under the Government of the Turks,
should have a Months time to withdraw whither they pleased. Some of them went
into Sicily, and others into Italy: for my part, I designed to embarque with
those who saild into Sicily, where the Messineses began to take Arms; but when
I mentioned it to my pretty Augusta, her Tears and Sighs overcame all my
Resolutions. I promised her not to forsake her, and assured her should always
dispose how she thought fit of a Life she had so generously preserved.

The enraged Eustochia set her Wits at work again to destroy me, and had like
to have succeeded, as you shall hear. You may be sure, after I got out of the
Patriarch's House, I went thither no more. Augusta desired a Kinsman of hers to
provide me a Lodging, where I might be while I staid there. Eustochia having
notice of it, cunningly suborned a Turk to ruin me; she told him, he must get
acquainted with me, and then put me upon Discourse of Religion. This Turk
understood Italian, which she knew I spoke; and that made her pitch upon him.
It is such an unpardonable Crime for a Christian to talk to a Turk about
matters of Religion, that now she thought she had laid an unavoidable Snare for
me.

The Turk thus instructed, made it his Business to be acquainted with me; to
insinuate himself into me, and make me the less shy of talking with him, he now
and then did me some small Kindness or other. At last, after several Discourses
upon indifferent Subjects, he drew me on by degrees to dispute with him about
the Mysteries of our Faith; which I did, without the least thought of
convincing him of those Truths, because I had always observed him to be an
obstinate Believer of the Alcoran. However, he so well remembered what I had
said of our Religion, that he did not lose one word; and then, as he and
Eustochia had agreed, went to the Grand Vizir, and informed him that I
endeavored to convert him. Never the least dreaming of this Design against me,
as I was coming one day from Augusta, I was seized by twelve Turks, who by
force dragged me into a dark Prison, abusing me all the way, as I guessed by
their usage of me; for I understood not their Language. Augusta hearing of my
Misfortune, presumed once more to go to the Grand Vizir, whom she endeavored
to persuade, that all this was but a continuation of her Sisters implacable
Fury against me. She represented me very incapable of the Crime I was accused
of, and besought him to suspend his Judgment, till she could find out some
means to clear the Truth. My Person and Voice had not been so disagreeable to
him, but that, as good luck would have it for me, he remembered both, and
allowed her twelve Days to justify me in. But fearing her Sister would make
use of the Patriarch's Authority to hinder her Endeavors, she retired to a
Relation's House of hers, that she might be at liberty to go abroad when she
pleased.

Several Days passed without her being able to learn any thing that could help
her to serve me; and the Term which the Grand Vizir set being ready to expire,
all the Town expected to see me Impall'd; when a young Wench, that lived in the
Patriarch's House, came to see Augusta in her Retreat, and told her, that
Eustochia often conversed with the Turk whom she had corrupted. Augusta
presently engaged the Maid to declare what she knew before the Vizir, and then
went to desire him to confront me with my Accuser. This Minister immediately
caused me to be brought before him, and sending for Eustochia and the Turk,
commanded him by Alla to speak the Truth, and what had moved him to accuse me
in that manner. My Presence, and the Oath he was obliged to take, so staggered
him, that he confessed Eustochia had hired him to say what he did against me;
that indeed I had talked with him of the Christian Religion, but that he began
the Discourse; and that far from using any Arguments to convert him, I had
only answered the Questions he put to me. The Grand Vizir thus satisfied of my
Innocence, condemned the Turk to the same Punishment which was intended for me,
He reproved Eustochia severely, commended Augusta's Generosity, and set me at
Liberty. And knowing the Patriarch was angry with Augusta for leaving him
without his Consent, he obliged him to forgivt her. I pressed him earnestly to
pardon the Turk, but to no purpofe; all I could get from him was, That such
Ossences as those were not to be forgiven.

From this time forwards Augusta was urgent with me to forsake a place where
soon or late I should certainly come to some mischief. I followed her advice,
extremely grieved to leave her exposed to her Sisters hatred. I expressed all
the gratitude to her at parting, which she might justly claim from an Heart fo
truly sensible of all the extraordinary favors she had done me. I set Sail
with some Candiots, who chose to retire into Sicily, and arrived there without
any accident. I staid there but a week, taking the opportunity of returning
into France upon a Merchant-Man that brought Silks from Messina. You may
imagine my Equipage was not very splended, all I had in the World was the
Scimiter the Grand Vizir gave me: But when I came to Toulon, I made what haste
I could to get to Marsellis, where I met with a Merchant who furnished me with
Money, and Clothes, and and Horses for my self, and my Servant. After some
small stay there, I came directly hither, where considering the report that was
spread of my Death, I question not but my return is very surprising.

Mezelon having concluded his Relation, we spent some time in asking him
abundance of Questions, all (...) answered with a great deal of Wit, which
furnished us with Discourse enough, especially about Augusta, on which Subject
I pinched him pretty close.

At last, Madam, Bernard came back to me; he had been at Yurin, and not finding
the Marquis de St. -- there, went from thence to Paris, though I gave him no
order to do so; but the kindness he had for me, made him presume upon on
Privileges which few of his rank are allowed. He told me my Husband was gone
from Paris, but no body knew which way; that the President was dead, and his
Lady retired into a Convent, that the Prince lived Peaceably with his Wife; the
Marquess de St. -- was desperately sick, and that the Duke had heard him relate
what had happened to me without betraying the least concern. I was as
indifferent as he, and minded what Bernard told me but little; for I learnt
nothing by it (...) what had passed in my business, nor was a jot the wiser how
to behave my self for the future. But the arrival of the good Hermit
interrupted my satisfaction a little; he excused his not having writ, or sent
to me, by reason of a Journey he was obliged to make as far as the Charterhouse
of Grenoble. and told me at his return he had learnt that Spichetti was like to
have died with grief, when he found I was escaped from him; and when he was
well of his Fever, writ word to my Husband, that if he would come to Avignon,
he would put me into his Hands; that my Husband came thither Post, and both of
them used their industry to discover where I was; that the Gardner being
suspected to have assisted my flight, had been very ill handled, and had told
them all he knew. And I believe, added the Hermit, if they continue to search
for you, it will be no hard matter for them to find you here. I desired him at
first to tell me what he had to say before Madam de Mezelon, and her Son and
Daughter, who with all the Civility in the World, assured me, I should suffer
no violence while I was there. Bernard disliked my trusting so many People with
my Business, and his melancholy upon that account made me bear with a great
many of his ridiculous Arguments. He perceived too, there was a good
understanding between Mezelon and me, which nothing but absence could hinder
from proceeding further. Therefore he advised me to go from thence; but I
wanted stronger Reasons to persuade me to that, than his Counsel: not but that
I apprehended I should be very miserable if my Husband once found me out; but I
could not find in my Heart to leave a place where I loved, and was sure I was
beloved.

One day, as the Hermit and I were discoursing what was the best course for me
to take, word was brought that some Strangers on Horseback desired to speak
with Madam de Mezelon, and her Son. Feliza 's Chamber, where I was, being over
against the Drawbridge, whom should I see at the Gate but my Husband, and the
Italian who conducted him thither?

I need not tell you, Madam, what Menaces to terrify, and what Arguments he
used to persuade Madam de Mezelon to deliver me to him. She resisted all he
could say with equal constancy, and resolved not to let me go, till his Reason
had got the better of his Anger. My Husband had so little to object to her way
of proceeding, that at last he begged of her to be the Mediatrix between us,
submitting all our differences to her, which she would by no means hear of till
I gave my consent. You may believe, Madam, my concerns were in too good hands
to decline this offer; so that our reconciliation might not appear forced, my
Husband was to withdraw for some days, afther which he and I were to have a
meeting, at which Madam de Mezelon should be present. Monsieur de Mezelon too
gave his word, that I should not leave his House till our Agreement was
perfectly concluded, or came to nothing. The good Hermit, who was still at
Mezelon, would not stir till he saw the issue of my Business, and was very
serviceable in appeasing my Husbands Mind, and disposing him to be reconciled
to me. But whether it were by Instinct, or particular Reasons, which he had
ground for, when he took leave of him, he desired him not to be so open to
every body, and to have a care whom he trusted.

The Italian was vexed to the very Heart, to see how fair a way we were in
toward an accommodation, and therefore to keep it back as much as he could, he
persuaded my Husband to go from Mezelon; but yet all the Reasons he could urge
were insufficient to hinder him from returning at the day appointed. I will
assure you, Madam, that how favorably soever I thought of Mezelon, I could not
but be sensibly touched at my Husband's mildness, and condescension. He found
me in my own Clothes, so modestly dressed, that he had no cause to find any
fault. The Testimony Madam de Mezelon gave him of my good behavior, calmed his
Mind extremely, and I had more reason to pity him, than to apprehend his
displeasure. I endeavored to justify my self in every thing had been told
him, not omitting any Circumstance that I had been accused of; but what most
surpised him, was, my asking him to clear me of the imputation of designing to
murder him. I freely confessed I had too easily entertained the Prince's, the
President's, and the Duke's Addresses; but when I acquainted him how Madam la
Presidente drew me into these kind of intrigues, and showed him how things
really were, he was sorry he had left me exposed to the Husbands Love, and the
Wives counterfeit Virtue. He imputed all the errors of my Youth to the
exceeding severity of the Rules he had prescribed, and his own wilfulness in
forcing me to be so great with Madam la Presidente. I forgot to tell you, that
Spichetti dreaded my discovering to my Husband how he had persecuted me, and
the Traitor had more weighty Reasons to keep him from coming along with him to
Mezelon: And indeed when I did inform him how much the Italian had injured me,
all which I proved by the Hermit who had heard of it by other Hands, and by my
own Servants who had been witnesses of his Villainy, he appeared to be mightily
troubled, and I needed to say little more to prevail with him to forgive all my
extravagances; so that this interview, which was to have been only the
forerunner of our Reconciliation, almost quite concluded it. I was really sorry
for all my indiscreet Actions, and was disposing my self to spend the Remainder
of my Life in such a manner as might efface all the ill Impressions he had
entertained of me; when of a sudden he fell into a Swoon, which at first we
attributed to the moving tenderness of our Meeting; but we altered our Opinion,
when coming to himself again, he complained of intolerable Pains, and then
relapsed so often into fainting Fits, that after enduring two days continual
Torment, they at last killed him.

He made a Will, in which he justified me of all he had laid to my Charge, and
gave me all that the Law could allow me, on condition I should marry Monsieur
de Mezelon. Having heard how faithfully Bernard and my Woman had served me, he
forgot not to reward them.

The more we examined his Distemper, the more reason we had to believe he was
poisoned; and he said something of it to him who was with him when he died. We
had him opened, and found evident Tokens of the Poison Spichetti had given him.
I sent to Avignon to apprehend him, but Heaven had already taken care to punish
him. He whom I sent, brought us word, that one of his own Servants had murdered
him, and was gone away with all his Money and Jewels.

My Husband's Death really afflicted me; but Time, and the Consolation every
body endeavored to give me by degrees wiped off my Tears. However, I would not
marry again till his Will was performed; and though Mezelon pressed me very
closely, I would not consent till I had been a Widow an whole year; and then,
to the great joy of his Mother and Sister, I no longer deferred the
Accomplishment of his Desires. Ever since, my only Care has been to please my
Husband, and by that means render my Life easy and innocent. After some
Business I have here is dispatched, I intend to go back to him again, and hope
I shall never have occasion to be from him any more.

The Countess of Marignan was extremely satisfied with the Relation Madam de
Mezelon had entertained her with, admiring the various Accidents of her Life.
But it growing late, she took leave of her, promising to meet her next day at
the same Place, and recompense her with an Account of her own Story.

The End of the First Part.
A Catalogue of some Novels and Plays Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes.
NOVELS. 1 ZElinda, a sam'd Romance. 2 Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3 Count
Brion. 4 Count Gabales. 5 Hatige, or the Amors of the King of Tamaran. 6 Mad.
Lavalier and the King of France. 7 Madam and the Duke of Guise. 8 Mad.
Colonna's Memoirs. 9 Queen of Majork, two Parts. 10 Don Sebastian King of
Portugal. 11 Heroine Musquetier. 12 Princess of Cleves. 13 Obliging Mistress.
14 Fatal Prudence. 15 Princess of Fez. 16 Disorders of Love. 17 Triumph of
Love. 18 Victorious Lovers. 19 Almanzor and Almanzaida. 20 Earl of Essex and
Qu. Elizabeth. 21 Neopolitan, or, the Defender of his Mistress. 22 Nicostratis.
23 Amorous Abbess. 24 Homais Queen of Tunis. 25 Pilgrim, in two Parts. 26
Meroveus, Prince of the Blood Royal of France. 27 Life of the Duke of Guise. 28
Extravagant Poet. 29 Memoires Gallant. 30 Instruction for a Young Nobleman.

PLAYS. 1 Tartuff, or the French Puritan. 2 Forced Marriage, or the Jealous
Bridegroom. 3 English Monsieur. 4 All mistaken, or the Mad Couple. 5 Generous
Enemies, or the Ridiculous Lovers. 6 The Plain-Dealer. 7 Sertorius, a Tragedy.
8 Nero, a Tragedy. 9 Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow. 10 Gloriana, or the
Court of Augustus Caesar. 11 Alexander the Great. 12 Mithridates King of
Pontus. 13 Oedipus King of Thebes. 14 Caesar Borgia. 15 Theodosius, or the
Force of Love. 16 Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 17 The Fond Husband, or
the Plotting Sisters. 18 Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night-Adventures. 19 Fool
turned Critic. 20 Virtuous Wife, or Good Luck at last. 21 The Fatal Wager. 22
Andromache. 23 Country Wit. 24 Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 25 Destruction of
Jerusalem, in two Parts. 26 Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 27
Misery of Civil War. 28 The Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. 29 Thyestes, a
Tragedy. 30 Hamlet Prince of Denmark, a Tragedy. 31 The Orphan, or the Unhappy
Marriage. 32 The Soldiers Fortune. 33 Tamerlain the Great. 34 Mr. Limber^^^, or
the ^^^^d Keeper. 35 Mistaken Husband. 36 Notes of Morocco, by the Wits. 37
Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 38 Virtue Betrayed, or Anna
Bullen. 39 King Leare. 40 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 41 Town-Fop, or
Sir Tim. Tawdery. 42 Rare en tout, a French Comedy. 43 Moor of Venice. 44
Country Wife. 45 City Politics. 46 Duke of Guise. 47 Rehearsal. 48 King and no
King. 49 Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding. 50 Maids Tragedy. 51 Grateful
Servant. 52 Strange Discovery. 53 Atheist, or the Second Part of the Soldiers
Fortune. 54 Wit without Money. 55 Little Thief. 56 Valiant Scot. 57
Constantine. 58 Valentinian. 59 Amorous Prince. 60 Dutch Lovers. 61 Woman
Rules. 62 Reformation. 63 Hero and Leander. 64 Love-Tricks. 65 Julius Caesar.
66 Fatal Jealousy. 67 Monsieur Ragou.


