A COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECY OF MICAH, By EDWARD POCOCK D. D. Canon of
Christ-Church, and Regius Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of
OXFORD.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, M.DC.LXXVII.

Imprimatur.

RAD. BATHVRST, Vice-Cancel. OXON.
JULY 19. 1676.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD SETH LORD BISHOP OF SARUM.
MY LORD,
THE concurrence of several reasons, (each of which were sufficient) have
moved me to offer to your gracious acceptance this Essay. First, my duty to
your Lordship as my Diocesan, who may justly challenge from me some account of
my employments. Secondly, that gratitude which obliges me to acknowledge your
Lordships many favors extended to me and mine. And thirdly the need of
patronage and protection that this Work has, in regard that there is in it
much stress laid on such part of Learning, (the Oriental I mean,) which of
late, if not all along, has had that unhappiness, as to be scarce able to keep
it self, not only from neglect, but contempt, as needless; at least of not
great use or necessity. In some places abroad where it formerly found great
encouragement, (if we may believe general complaints,) it has now little
regard, although I doubt not but that it will in good time recover its honor.
That it may not be so among us at home, it must ow to the favor and
countenance of men excelling as in authority and dignity, so in learning and
judgment; in which rank none being more eminent, so none will be more ready to
afford it then your Lordship, who have your self always been a lover of those
Studies, and by long experience know and have made known the usefulness of
them. I shall not here trouble your Lordship with giving an account of what is
in these Annotations done, that being the proper work of the Preface. I shall
only add that besides the former motives, I have a strong encouragement to
make this address to your Lordship from an assured confidence, that whatsoever
it be that I bring, being the best that I have at present, and proceeding from
those intentions with which it is offered, it shall by your Lordship be
favouredly accepted from the hands of him who is

MY LORD Your Lordships most humble Servant EDWARD POCOCK.

THE PREFACE.
THE main thing in these Annotations endeavored, is to settle the genuine and
literal meaning of the Text. Seeing it is often very differently rendered by
Interpreters, according to their different judgments, from what we read in our
English. Bibles; and that in them also we have various readings in the Margin,
I have labored as far as I could to find out the truth among them, by
examining such as I have occasion to take notice of, by the Original Hebrew,
which is the standing rule which was at first by the goodness of God for such
delivered to us by the Prophets and holy men divinely inspired, and has ever
since, by his wonderful Providence, been preserved incorrupt and sincere.

Of any that shall question it, we may ask when it was corrupted, whither
before Christ's time or since? If it be said before, and as an argument alleged
for it, that there is a Translation of greater antiquity then his time, viz. in
Greek, which so much differs from the Hebrew Copies which we now have, as to
show that in the Copy which the Authors thereof had, many things were read
otherwise then in these, we are not to be moved by it, except three things be
first made evident, 1. That the Copy which they had was a truer Copy then any
reserved among the Jews which might be derived to us from them. 2. That those
Interpreters strictly and precisely followed the letter of their Copy, and did
not give themselves liberty of expressing what they conceived to be the sense
and meaning, either more largely or in different words, or had not some notions
of the words which are not now so usually known. 3. That the Copies which we
have of their Version be genuin and uncorrupted, as they proceeded from them,
without mixture or alteration. Which things have not yet been sufficiently
proved, and I suppose cannot be.

Again, if it had been before Christ's time corrupted, it can scarce be doubted
but we should have heard of it from him, who so often reprehending the Jews for
their perverse Interpretations of it by the Glosses of their Traditions, we
cannot think but he would much more have reprooved them if they had corrupted
the Text it self.

And after his time it is no way probable that it could be altered or corrupted
by any concurring malice of the Jews, (as it must have been done by a general
conspiration for corrupting all the Copies, or else would have been a vain
attempt) seeing it cannot be doubted but that among so many thousands of them,
of whom many were converted to Christ, and among them diverse others (we may
well suppose) like Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures ( Act. 18. 24.) many had
in their hands true Copies of it, by which they would have discovered any
forgery. And from them, that there were Copies imparted to other Christians
also we have reason to think, when we find that among them for many years after
Christ the Scriptures of the Old Testament were read in their Churches in the
Hebrew language: for that it was so among the Syrians we have from a learned
All Tacriti c. 29.
man of that Nation, who in a Book that he wrote in Arabic, concerning diverse
heads of the Christian Religion, speaking of their manner of reading the
Scriptures in the Church, says (...), i. e. In ancient time the Books of the
old Testament were read in the Hebrew Tongue, till S. Ephraim forbad it: which
we cannot think was for any other reason, but because they looked on the Hebrew
as more genuine and authentic then any Translation, not that they had not then
Translations of the Scripture in their own Language, as we shall by and by show
to be more then probable.

For these and other reasons, even the care that the Jews themselves (as is by
all known and confessed) always took of writing it exactly true, as that
whereon their own preservation depended, we cannot on any probable grounds
question the integrity thereof. Yea a learned Lud. Capell. in Crit. desens. p.
572.
man, who is looked on to have labored as much as any to question the
integrity of the Hebrew Text, does confess that in Christ's time, and Ionathans
the Paraphrast, the Hebrew Books that they then had were the same that we now
have. And what then have we farther to be sollicitous about in this matter? For
of those was then the Book that our Savior stood up to read in the Synagogue,
and expounded by the same Spirit which first dictated what was therein written.
Luc. 4. 16, 17. etc. and the reading of which he justified by asking the
Lawyer, who would know what he might do to inherit eternal life, What is
written in the Law? how read thou? Luc. 10. 26. Those the Scriptures, which
he bad the Jews to search, as in which they thought to have eternal life, and
as which testified of him, Io. 5. 39. and the same th^se of which he says,
that He came not to destroy but to fulfill them: and that till Heaven and Earth
pass, one jote or title should not pass from them, till all were fulfilled,
Mat. 5. 17, 18. and which he so often cites and refers the Jews to, and the
fulfilling of which he made the rule of what he did and suffered. Which his
divine approbation of them, without questioning the Copies they then had of
them, may justly seem to us a testimony of the integrity of them at that time,
of greater validity then any human testimony from any different reading in any
Translation, to make us question it. However these arguments may be eluded by
such as will be contentious, yet they are such as may well sway with a sober
mind, that neither before nor after Christ's time the Hebrew Copies were
corrupted, and so ought to be our undoubted rule.

The forecited Id. p. 625.
Author says that Translations are to be examined by the original Text, if any
Copy of it be uncorrupted, and not that by translations: and that is that
therefore, which not doubting those Copies that we have to be so, I have
endeavored in part to do, so far at least as may serve to justify, or to give
account of, that Translation of our own which we follow; (and deservedly, it
being such and so agreeable to the Original, as that we might well choose among
others to follow it, were it not our own, and established by authority among
us:) which could not well be done without comparing it with others also, and
bringing all to the original Hebrew, as the test, as hitherto it has had the
honor to be esteemed, and will so still have, having on it that divine impress
which will maintain its right and dignity against all that can be opposed.

For the end proposed it was often necessary to look into the signification of
the words in that Tongue, and what several senses they are capable of, that it
may accordingly appear which of such as by several Interpreters are fastened on
them, will be best agreeable to the place in which they occur, and according to
the construction they are used in. For by the different understanding of them
is that great variety which is amongst Interpreters, of which account cannot be
given, much less they be though oftentimes reconcilable, or that all their
different Versions proceeded from one Fountain, or at least one reading: but
looking thereinto it will be made apparent that the variety proceeded not from
any variety in their reading, but from the variety of significations of one
word: among which some have, according to their different judgment, preferred
one, some another, yet so as that all have thought themselves to follow the
same Original, and ought not presently to be condemned, as disagreeable to it.
According to this respect, several places in the new Testament cited out of the
old, which according to the usual Translations seem to differ from them, as
there now read in the old, will be found not to differ at all from them,
according to another signification which the word, in which the difference is
placed, is as capable of as that by modern Translators usually given it, and by
them that follow those Translators looked on as having no other. As for
example's sake. Where we find, Heb. 8. 9. And I regarded them not, says the
Lord, cited out of Jeremy, c. 31. 32. where is in ours and other Translations
read, Although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord: a man would think
that these proceeded not from the same reading of the Hebrew Text, till
enquiring into the word (...) Baalti in that Language, he find that that has
both these significations to be an husband, and to despise, loath, or not have
regard to; and so (to omit other examples) in that signal place in this
Prophecy of Micah, c. 5. 2. which being cited Matt. II. 6. Thou Bethlehem
Ephrata art not the least among the Princes of Judah, will seem to flow from
another reading then what now is read in the Prophet, Though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah; till upon enquiry it be found that the word (...)
Tsair, used by the Prophet does signify as well great or illustrious, as
little. Then will the difference appear to be from the Interpreters taking,
some the one signification, others the other: and that therefore these places
might be rendered in the old Testament to the same purpose, that they are in the
new. One Translation therefore is not presently to be condemned, because it
differs from another, but both are to be tried by the Original; and when they
may both be found to agree to that, neither is rashly to be condemned, but with
due deliberation and discretion, that to be followed which may give the most
convenient meaning to the place; which may often be so doubtful a case, as that a
man, though of good judgment and a discerning spirit, may be put to a stand,
and will not dare rashly to determine on either side.

This having been observed by our Translators, they have with great modesty and
ingenuity, we see, put various readings or rendrings in the Margin of our
Bibles, as doubting which to prefer, and leaving it to the prudent Reader which
to choose; as if the one and the other were (as the Jews in such cases use to
speak) both the words of the living God; both true and agreeable as well to the
original words as to the analogy of Faith. And such modesty is by all in
interpreting the Scriptures very imitable, and being observed would prevent
many quarrels, in which the truth, by rashly contending for it, is lost, and
such uncharitably censured, as forsaking the truth, which did heartily seek it,
and perhaps did not err from it.

Now for these ends, viz. both of finding the one or several significations of
some words, where there was any dubiousness or difficulty, and the
convenientest meaning of them in the place, agreeably to the scope or context,
I have made use of (according to my skill) the best helps as I could meet with,
and those of several kinds. Such are, The comparing of such places, as the word
or expression that is to be explained, occurs in, elsewhere in the Scripture.
2. The inspection of several of the most approved Translations. 3. The use,
either of such Books as give the signification of single words, as,
Dictionaries, etc. or else labor to give the meaning of them as joined with
others, as, Commentators and Expositors. The Translations that have been looked
into are both ancient and modern; the more ancient, the Greek, (commonly called
the Septuagint) and the Latin, (known by the name of the vulgar Latin) and the
Syriack and the Arabic Versions. The Greek and Latin have been so long known
in all places in this Western part of the World, and so much by many has been
said of them, that it will be needless to give any account of them: but the
other, viz. the Syriack and Arabic, though well, and only, known in the
Eastern parts, so unknown among us, till the late noble Editions of the
Polyglot Bibles at Paris and London, that it may seem requisite to give some.
That the Syriack had anciently a Translation of the Scripture into their
Language, is manifest, and such as may challenge priority of the Greek it self,
if we may believe them. But for making the matter more clear, we may observe
that they have two Translations, the one done out of the Hebrew, the other out
of the Greek. Gregorius Abul Pharajius in his History, (which was printed at
Oxford in Arabic and Latin) thus tells us, that the Greek Version made by the
LXXII Elders in Ptolemeus Philadelphus's time, which was received not only by
the Greeks, but by most Sects of the Christians, yet was not followed by the
Syrians, especially the more Easterly ones: For that they had a Translation
which was called the Simple or plain Version, because the Translators did not
in it so much labor for elegance of words, which was conformable to the Copy
of the Jews: but (says he) the more Western have two Translations, that Simple
one, which was translated out of Hebrew into Syriack, after the coming of
Christ, in the time of Addaeus (or Thaddaeus) the Apostle; or as others affirm,
in the time of Solomon the son of David, and Hiram: and another more florid
made according to that of the LXXII out of Greek into Syriack, a long time
after the Incarnation of our Savior. For better understanding what he says,
and the opinion of those of that Nation, we may farther take notice of what an
ancient Bishop ( Soaded Bishop of Hadetha, cited by the learned Sionita in his
Preface to his Edition of the Psalms in Syriack and Latin) says, That as to
the Translation of the sacred Books it was thus, the Law, Iosue, Judges, Ruth,
Samuel, David, (or the Psalms) the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, and Job,
were done in the time of Solomon, at the request of Hiram King of Tyrus his
friend. The other Books of the old and new Testament in the time of Abagar King
of Syria, by the care of Thaddaeus and other Apostles. Their later Version I
suppose to have been made by Thomas Heracleensis: for so I find in a Syriack MS
(of which account is given in the Preface to the second Epistle of S. Peter in
Syriack, Greek and Latin, printed at Leiden, An. 1630.) a distinction made
betwixt the Translation which was made in ancient days, and the Translation of
Thomas Heracleensis. And so in the old Testament in the MS. Syriack Copy, is
there prefixed to one Version of the Story of Susanna, that it was according to
(...) the Translation of Heracleensis, (for there are two Versions of that
Story in the Copy, but neither of them may be supposed to belong to the ancient
simple Version, as neither probably any of the Apocryphal Books; before some of
which (as the first book of Esdras) is put, That they were conformed to the
Tradition of the LXXII, and at the end of it, that it was not found in the
simple Version, and so likewise before Tobit.) When this Tho. Heracleensis
lived I have not yet met with any certain Narration, only I find him signalized
in a Syrian Calendar among their Saints or holy men, by having his name among
those, to whose memory the 26. day of Haziran, or June, is consecrated, which
makes it probable that he is not of late standing; which will farther be
confirmed, if he be the same (as I suppose he was) of whom Schultingius makes
mention in his Bibliotheca Ecclesiastica, tom. 3. page 106. by the name of
Thomas Harchalanus, giving account of him out of a Catalogue of Missals made by
Ignatius Patriarch of Antioch, that he translated out of Greek into Chalde (as
he calls the Syriack) the Missals of John the Evangelist and of Clement, about
four hundred and seven years after Christ. But when the Syrians contend for the
Antiquity of their Version, we see it is for that other more ancient. But
besides what they say for themselves, wherein perhaps they may seem to go too
high, we have not only from the Greek Fathers, but from all our Copies of the
LXXII it self undoubted proofs of the very great antiquity of some Syriack
Version. In all the Editions that we have of the LXXII, (except the
Complutensian) as well that out of the very ancient Copy in the Kings Library,
as the rest from other Copies expressed, we have at the end of Job these words,
(...), etc. he is interpreted out of a (or the) Syriack Book, i.e. the Bible,
(for out of no other Book would they have taken words for authentic Text.)
Which shows that there was a Syriack book (or Translation) ancienter then any
of them: and that it was so written in those ancienter Copies, out of which any
of them were transcribed; they all of them, though in other things differing
between themselves, agreeing in it. And this plainly gives us to look on the
Syriack Version as very ancient, which is that which at present we say, and
withal seems a sufficient proof, that (as we above intimated) there was before
S. Ephraims time such a Translation among the Syrians in their own Tongue,
which they might have used, if they had not thought the Hebrew more authentic,
and as so, given that honor to it, as to use only it in their Churches. If
they had not then had any, his forbidding them to use the Hebrew had been a
depriving them of any use of the Scriptures of the old Testament, which we
suppose was not his mind to do, but only to cause them to be read in a more
intelligible Language, in which he is said to have written Comments on it.

But although this be as much as may suffice to our present purpose, yet having
fallen on the mention of this matter, it may perhaps not be amiss by the way,
to endeavor to give farther some little account of it, which if any think not
to be of much concernment, he may pass it over.

Whereas the last Chapter of Job in the Hebrew Text and such Translations, as
follow it, ends with the 17. verse, and these words, So Job dyed being old and
full of days, in the Greek called the Septuagint, are added to the quantity of
several verses more, and that so anciently that some of the Greek Fathers have
commented on them as authentic Text. Pro^m on the Catena on Job, printed at
London, 1637.
Olympiodorus says that they were delivered as so from the Apostles
themselves, and Polychronius that they were so accounted by the Fathers. There
is first added, It is written that he should rise again with those whom the
Lord should raise. Then follows what we mentioned, He (or this man) is
interpreted out of the Syriack book, dwelling (or that he dwelt) in the Land of
Ausitis (or Vz) in the borders of Idumea and Arabia: and his name was Iobab,
with other things concerning his wife and a son, and his Genealogy, as that he
was of the posterity of Esau, and the fifth from Abraham, and reigned in Edom
after Balat, etc. as likewise concerning his friends that came to visit him;
after which in the Copy printed according to that very ancient MS. in the Kings
Library is repeated again a briefer account of Job himself, having prefixed to
it as before, He is interpretted out of the Syriack book, but in other Copies,
this is not found. What use to make of this we shall after see. And it is by
diverse ancient and modern taken notice that Aquila and Symmachus, who
translated the old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek, concluded that Book as
the Hebrew does, but that Theodotion, who likewise so translated them, and
lived about 180. years after Christ, concluded it as the Septuagint does, with
Additions out of the Syriack Version.

But here may be objected against what we would thence infer concerning the
antiquity of that Syriack Version, what is by some of the Greeks said that by
the Syriack, named in those Additions to Job, is meant the Hebrew Tongue; to
that purpose makes what in an Anonymous Greek Author, (whose words were
imparted to me by my Reverend and most learned friend Dr Thomas Marshall)
prefixed in a MS Copy to Ioannes Melala, is said, viz. that it was Origens
opinion that it is so. Of what credit that Author is I know not, for it is not
likely that Origin thought or should say so. In that Commentary on Job, which
goes under his name, it is said that that Book was written first in Syriack,
and then done into Hebrew, being polished and completed by Moses. If so, then
the Syriack and Hebrew in his opinion were looked on as different. But that
Book is looked on as spurious, and the opinion a groundless conjecture. What
Origin thought may easily be collected out of his Epistle to Africanus, part of
which is set forth before the Text of Job, by the learned Patricius Iunius,
printed according to the MS copy in the Kings Library, where he says that
those words which follow in the Greek after the 17. verse of the last Chapter
are not found among the Hebrews, and therefore neither in Aquila, but in the
LXXII and Theodotion. Had he thought that by Syriack, out of which it is
expressly said they were taken, had been meant Hebrew, he could not have said
they had been wanting in the Hebrew Books. However, by others it is so said.
For so Nobilius in his various readings o the Greek tells us, that the Greek
Scholiast says that he calls the Hebrew dialect, Syriack, because of the
affinity betwixt them, and endeavors to prove it. Of that Greek Scholiast, I
can give no account but from him. But in Olympiodorus in the Catena on Job, we
have the same expressly affirmed, who having observed that Aquila and Symmachus
end where the Hebrew does, but Theodotion has the same additions that the
LXXII, then gives his opinion thus, The Hebrew dial^ct he calls in this place
Syriack; then confirms it with those very loose and unconcluding arguments;
because, the Syriack language is of very nigh affinity with the Hebrew, having
the same number of letters (VIZ. 22.) and then because Judea is comprehended
under the name of Syria.

But though this be by him and others, who perhaps looked not much into those
Tongues, affirmed, we cannot be much moved by it. For besides that no such
words are found in any Hebrew copy, which he himself confesses, and so
destroys what he would affirm, if Hebrew and Syriack be one, we cannot think it
an opinion generally received by the Fathers. Some of them certainly knew, that
to say Syriack and Hebrew were different things, and would not confound them by
calling one the other. Besides, what we have already said from Origin, S.
Chrysostom (who living long at Antioch in Syria, could not but know what was
meant by the Syriack language,) on the 48. Psalm, according to the Greek
division, in one verse, cites both the Syriack and the Hebrew, and as distinct
readings; and so Theodoret on Psalm 115. and on Jonah 3. 4. to omit many other
testimonies, several of which are found in the Greek Scholiast, and Nobilius's
Notes thereon.

And whereas, as the same Nobilius observes, some say that by Syriack is meant
Chalde, that signifies nothing, for it will be no more then to say, by Syriack
is meant Syriack: for these are at most but two Dialects of one Tongue, however
it has obtained that that which the Jews retained after their return from
Babylon, where they learned it, and lost much of their own, and framed much to
the rules of the Hebrew, be peculiarly called Chalde, as any that would know
more of it may see in the learned Preface of Ludovicus de Dieu, to his Grammar
of the Oriental Tongues. To this day diverse of the Syrians call themselves
Chaldeans, and their Tongue Chalde, and that which we call Chalde the Jews call
'(...) Arami, Syriack. And what then would, if this were granted, be thence
concluded, but that either the book of Job was written in the Chalde Dialect,
or else that there was in it a Translation of that Book in which those
additions were read as authentic Text when the Seventy translated it into
Greek, and they followed its authority. Neither of which I supposed will be
granted; for besides that, in the Chalde Paraphrast that we now have, no such
additions are found, it is manifest that that is of much later date then
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus his time, and that there was any other in his time in
that Dialect, which is now lost, none can prove, nor will any Christians easily
grant, although R. Azarias. See Buxt. de punctorum antiq. part. 1. c. 9. p.
126. etc. and R. Gedaliah cited by Hotinger. Philol. Sac. p. 205.
some Jews contend for it, and would have the Greek of the Seventy to have been
translated out of that, and not out of any genuin Hebrew copy, which is too
great a slurre to be cast upon it. There is therefore nothing said except they
mean it is the Hebrew which is called Syriack, and who should mean so? surely
not the Seventy, who by all are said to have been Jews; they would not so far
have profaned their holy Tongue (as they all call it, by way of excellency to
distinguish it from all others and Cozari l. 2. c. 68.
peculiarly Syriack) as to call it so, nor taken for authentic Text any thing
that they had not found in it, no, nor Theodotion himself, so long after them,
having that skill in Hebrew which he had, have confounded those names, nor any
ancient Greek who knew so much of it as to be able to translate it.

There was a time (as we have intimated) after the Jews return from Babylon,
when their Language had so much of Chalde, or Syriack, mingled with it, as that
it might have been as well called Syriack as Hebrew; yet even then was it
rather called Hebrew then Syriack, as appears in the new Testament. But sure
the ancient proper Hebrew, such as we now speak of, none could so call who had
any insight in those Tongues, except for some design; so that to say that by
Syriack is meant the Hebrew, must be the assertion of some Greeks, who were
either ignorant of those Languages, or else were unwilling to attribute too
much to the Syriack, or give preference to it, above the Greek Version, as
ancienter then it. They might as well tell us that Jacob spoke Syriack, when he
called the heap Galeed as well as Laban, who called it Genesis 31. 47.
Iegar Sahadutha. But if it be granted them that by Syriack in those words in
the Greek was meant Hebrew, how then will they unriddle how that, which,
according to them, was anciently a part of the Text in the Hebrew, and thence
as so, taken into the Greek, is now wanting in all the Copies in that Language,
and was likewise omitted by Aquila and Symmachus, who undertook the Translation
of the whole that was looked on as authentic? they will not be able to give
any rational account of this. But to us, who look on as meant by Syriack that
Language properly so called, it will be no difficulty. For if it be asked how
it should come to pass that those additions should so anciently come into the
Greek Version, being not in the Hebrew, but said to be taken out of the Syriack
book, the answer, I suppose, will be easy. Some anciently among the Syrians,
(whose custom of inserting Notes or Scholias in their Copies may be perceived
out of such as are taken notice of, in the various readings of the Syriack in
the Polyglot Bibles, gathered by the learned Mr Thorndike) had somewhere in his
Copy of the Syriack Translation to the book of Job added for explication sake,
according to what he had either by Tradition, or out of some History then
extant, received concerning the person of Job, that brief account of him, not
unlike to which, though not quite the same, there are found prefixed to it in
two Copies in that Language, which were made use of in the Edition of those
Polyglot Bibles, two in something different terms, and one shorter then the
other; as he that pleases, may see in the various readings of the Syriack in
that Book. This, those that copied out anciently, those Versions of the
Septuagint and Theodotion, (for it will be too much to say the Authors of them
themselves, especially of the first, if they were truly the Seventy, who
commonly bear that name) finding in some such old Syriack copy, thought worth
while to translate into Greek, and add in their own at the end. (Yea so, as if
in differing Copies they found such account given in differing terms, to take
notice thereof also, as appears by what is done in the ancient MS of the Kings
Library, as we have mentioned.) Which other transcribers after continued, till
what was so added was in time taken in as part of the genuine Text; with
inanimadvertency enough, seeing the Appendix, as is well noted in the various
Lections to the Francfort Greek Edition, does not redolere stilum Canonis,
savor of, or any way agree with, the style of the Canonical Text. And this
being observed, the meaning of those words, He (i. e. Job, his person not the
book, as the Author of the Comment, called Origen's, seems to think) is
interpreted, will be, account ^is given of him in the following words out of
the Syriack Book (or Version.) That expression is agreeable, as to the use of
the word (...) and (...) etc. ( to be interpreted,) in the new Testament and
other Authors, so to what is usual among the Eastern People, and peculiarly in
the Arabic Writers to call the account given of the Genealogy, name, and
History of any, (...) Tarjamatoho, his interpretation (as often in that famous
writer of lives Ebn Chalican, and others) and perhaps in the Syriack book might
be written (...) His Methtargam, He is thus interpreted, i. e. account is thus
given of him.

This conjecture is abundantly confirmed by what we read in Polychronius
forecited, who witnesses that those additions to Job, however by many received
into the Text, whose opinion himself followed because of the authority of the
Fathers, yet were by others rejected; They (says he) reject the Genealogy
which is in the end, because it is not in the Hebrew, and the Book is concluded
with those words, And Job dyed being old and full of days, and say that the
likeness of the name in the Genealogy of Esau, which is in the book of Genesis,
where mention is made of Iobab, gave occasion of error to some, and of making
that Scholion, or Note, and that in tract of time afterward, that which was
written in the Margin (or elsewhere) was by others taken into the Text.

However it were, yet these things which have been said, taken at the least
advantage, give testimony to the antiquity of the Syriack Version. That which
was mentioned in the ancientest Copies of the Septuagint and Theodotion, which
were seen and used by the Greek Fathers, and had such credit when they were
written as to be taken notice of as of great authority, and little less
authentic then the Text it self, must needs be ancient. I hope none will think
this to be eluded by saying that Job alone was then translated into Syriack,
and not other Books of the Scripture; this would be a supposition contrary not
only to the testimony of Syriack Writers and others, which ought not rashly to
be contemned, but to all reason.

Something to this purpose may be collected also out of the conclusion of the
Book of Job in the printed Arabic Version, in which that which makes the 18.
verse in the Greek, viz. It is written that he should rise, etc. is not found,
nor that which follows, He is interpreted out of the Syriack Book, but most of
the rest, (after a breach made) is, though somewhat different from what is in
Greek: for whereas in it, is said, that he was the fifth from Abraham, the
Arabic says he was the sixth, with some other differences in the Arabic it
self, but made more by the mistake of the Latin Translator, as he that shall
look into it shall easily perceive, as where instead of Asom, a proper name, he
puts nomen, because the word, so signifying, has the same letters with the
other. And then he concludes, saying that the Author of the Copy, out of which
he wrote it, says, that this Book was translated out of Syriack into Arabic.
Whether that Author meant it of the whole Book, or only of the additions, may
be doubted as also some other things which cannot be farther determined without
sight of his MS Copy. However, it appears that the Syriack Version was then in
great authority and veneration. I have been long in this digression, not
seeking to attribute more to the Syriack Version then may in reason be due to
it, but to vindicate to it that which it may justly challenge, as to its
antiquity. To return and proceed,

We reckon likewise among the ancient Translations, the Arabic, though all of
much later date then the former. In that Language there are several Versions,
some done out of the Hebrew, some out of Greek, some out of Syriack, and
perhaps one of late years done and printed at Rome out of the vulgar Latin; as
I was told by one of that Church, was intended, and I have seen some Sheets of
it, but I know not whether it were completed. However, that is none of those we
speak of. Those that I had to deal with are two, the one, that which is found
in the Polyglot Bibles, which when, or by whom, done is uncertain; it is
conformed mostly to the Greek; in this part, I mean, of the Minor Prophets; for
the whole Bible is apparently not of one Texture, but in some parts seems more
conformed to the Hebrew, (as in the Pentateuch) in others to the Syriack, in
others to the Greek, as he that peruseth it will find. The other is a
Manuscript, the use of which I had out of the store of my learned and very good
friend Mr Robert Huntington. There is no name of the Author expressed (that I
find) in the Copy. Whither it be the work of R. Saadiah Haggaon (a Jew famous
as for his other Works, so for his Translation of the Books of the old
Testament, out of Hebrew into Arabic) I have reason to doubt, seeing the
Prophecy of Isaiah, which is in the same Volume, differs from what I find in
another Copy of that Prophecy, which bears his name. And it is certain that
others of the Jews, besides him, did translate the Scriptures (or part of them)
into that Language, and therefore if it be any where by me cited as his, it is
not positively affirmed, and I almost think it is not his. Whose ever it be, it
seems to be of some antiquity, for it is not of late years that the Jews have
used to write in Arabic, as formerly they did, as is showed in the Preface to
Porta Mosis. Whither we should reckon Jonathan, who made a Paraphrase of the
Prophets, among Translators or Expositors, I something doubt, because taking
liberty of a Paraphrast, he rather makes his business to give the meaning then
the particular signification of the words, which is more the business of a
strict Translator; although every such Translator too may not amiss be looked
on as an Expositor or Commentator. This Paraphrase is of great authority with
the Jews, and is constantly affirmed to have been made much about Christ's time;
and I know not why we should question it. For those allegations against it,
whcih are brought out of that Paraphrase of the Law, which goes under the name
of Jonathan, and has besides the difference of the style, many things in it
savouring of greater novelty, signify nothing, that being confessedly none of
this Ionathans work, and therefore is as the other Paraphrases, on the other
Books, of much less authority (if any at all) then that of Onkelos on the Law,
or the true Jonathan on the Prophets.

Besides these ancient Versions, it was convenient to look on others more
modern; such are those of Pagnin, the Tigurin, Munster, Castalio, Iunius and
Tremellius in Latin, and Diodati in Italian, etc. which will be found sometimes
cited. These often differing among themselves, and from the ancienter, and from
ours, give us occasion to examine the words in the Hebrew, and to enquire more
narrowly into the grounds of the difference, and to see what the Original will
bear, that so we might be able to judge between them, which not seldom will be
an hard matter to do, and force us to leave the Reader to prefer that which
seems to him best in his own judgment, seeing that will bear more, by reason
of the different use and signification of the words that occur in it, and all
making a good sense. When I have occasion to cite the vulgar Latin, I have
mostly chosen to give it in the words of the Doway Translation into English out
of it, as that which perhaps would be judged more authentic then any rendering
of mine own. In the use of our English Translation I would desire the Reader to
have an eye to the marginal reading, together with what is in the Text.

Now for finding of the signification of the Hebrew words, besides the ordinary
Dictionaries, which are more common, the Reader will sometimes find cited R.
David Kimchi's Radices, or Roots, a Dictionary in Hebrew by him compiled for
the words used in the Scripture, from whom our ordinary Lexicographers borrow
much, and again Abu Walid, an ancienter Author then he, whom he often cites by
the name of Rabbi Jonah, as Aben Ezra does by the name of R. Marinus, his name
at length being Abu Walid Marun Ebn Iannahi Cordubensis, a very learned man,
and of great credit among them, called, Prince of Grammarians, who wrote diverse
Tracts about Grammatical matters, the last of which is his Book of Roots or
Dictionary expounding the Hebrew in Arabic, in which Language he wrote all.
There is nothing of his, that I know, printed, that which is cited is
Manuscript; so is also another Dictionary of R. Tanchum, which we made use of,
though not properly composed for Scripture words, but for such as occur in the
Misnaioth (or Text of the Talmud) and Maimonides, and an old Hebrew and Arabic
Glossary. Add to these the Heads of the Hebrew Concordance compiled by R.
Nathan, which have been translated into Latin by Antonius Reuchlinus, and also
by the learned Mr Nicolas Fuller, whose Translation is not printed, but in his
own hand writing remains in the Bodleian Library. Under this Head may come also
some Arabic Lexicons, which it was necessary to make use of, for seeking after
the signification of diverse Hebrew words, by comparing them with the same Roots
in the Arabic: a way necessary to be taken in regard that that copious
Language continuing in greater latitude then the Hebrew (from which it had its
original, and retains that affinity to that in the opinion of See Notae
Miscell. ad Portam Mosis, c. 1. p. 5.
some of the learnedest Jews, it may pass rather for only a Dialect of it then
a distinct Language from it) affords often the genuine significations of diverse
Roots, which are now lost in the Hebrew, and of several words which occur so
seldom in the original Text, (which is all that we have left of that Language
in its purity, and cannot contain all words) that it will be hard to find the
right meaning of them without that help, which therefore the most learned of
the Rabbis take and direct to, by making search into that neighboring
Language wherein they will be often found more common, and the meaning of them
be manifestly declared by the known use of them therein. What is said of the
Arabic Language, is to be said of the Syriack and Chalde, they also, together
with the Hebrew, being (...) of one family, as Aben Ezra speaks, only that they
are not, as now left, so copious as the forementioned.

These helps being used for finding of the signification of single words, on
which the sense mainly depends, it was yet farther convenient for giving the
meaning of them in the context or sentence in which they are placed in
construction with others, to consult Expositors or Commentators, and those of
several sorts, Jews and Christians: The Jews because, though they have now so
far lost their own ancient Language, that it is not any more common to them as
a vernacula, or Mother Tongue, but, what they have of it, they learn, as others
that study it do; yet do those of them who will get any Learning, so make that
their whole study from their childhood, that they are more then ordinary
versed in it, and get more skill in the Letter of the Scriptures, then usually
any others; at least did so, when those Writers which we have to deal with
flourished; so that their Comments are, and have been always thought to be,
very helpful for attaining the literal meaning of the Text, except in such
places as are Prophesies concerning Christ, or make for the Christian Religion
against them: in such they being obstinatly set on maintaining their Traditions
received from their Fathers, and with them combining against Christ, will be
sure to wrest them as far as they can from the right meaning. But then, that is
another reason why we should look narrowly into them, that where they pervert
any such Text, we may vindicate and rescue it out of their hands, that they may
not securely triumph among themselves, as if they had the Scripture on their
side against us. And that has been indeed no small part of my business in such
places, which has made me perhaps sometimes so long to dwell on them, as to
make me seem tedious to the Reader: but I knew not how well to avoid it without
betraving the cause, or giving up the buckler to them.

Those that we especially make use of, are Rabbi Salamo Iarchi, R. Abraham
Ezra, R. David Kimchi, and Isaac Abarbinel, (or as some call him, Abrabaniel)
who are all well known by name, as being printed and given account of by
Buxtorf and others, whose Expositions, where they might seem to the purpose, I
have as far as I could, labored to give a faithful account of, though to
prolixity, that if we be not always directly helped by them in finding the
truth, we might see how and wherein they err from it, and so by the discovery
thereof, be more earnestly stirred up to seek after it and embrace it. Besides
these, the Reader will find often cited one R. Tanchum, an Hierosolymitan, who
is less known, because never yet Printed, although as far as I can judge, he
might as well deserve to be so as some of the rest, as as much conducing in
diverse places to the understanding of the Text, as any of them. He wrote Notes
in the Arabic Language on the whole Old Testament (as himself declares) though
I have not had the happiness to see them on diverse of the Books thereof; on the
Prophets (all but Isaiah) I have. When he lived I know not, only it appears he
was after the time of Moses Maimonides, whom he often cites, and follows in
many things. To these may be added yalkut, a Book so called, being a collection
of diverse Allegorical Expositions on the Scripture. What other Hebrew Books are
cited, and are Printed, I shall not need give particular account of, seeing any
that desires it may have it in Buxtorfes Bibliotheca Rabbinica, and others. The
Christian Expositors, or other Writers, Greek, Latin, or others that are made
use of and cited, are such as are well known to all that look into such Books,
and any may know what concerns their Works by looking into them, and seeing
what account they give thereof in their Prefaces. That they are of different
Professions, it matters not in this business. We had to examine how far they
help for finding out the true meaning of the Text, not what their Opinions
otherwise were, it being more to be regarded what is said, then who said it,
and the truth abstracted from consideration of the person and his authority, to
be received at any hand. Their difference in their Expositions sends us again
to look more narrowly into the Text, and to see what that will bear, and which
of them best agrees to that by which all must be tried. And that they should so
much differ among themselves is no wonder, if we consider how great variety of
Opinions in explication of things there often is, where they are uttered in the
plainest terms, and the most known Language and usual phrase of the Times: how
much more then, when this Original Language here used, is so long time since
grown out of use, and many expressions in it, then doubtless, even by the
vulgar well understood, seem now as so many riddles, and much of the History
and Customs of those times quite forgotten? and even then in the Prophetic
Writings, there were some things that seemed dark, according to what we read,
Ezekiel. 20. 49. Ah Lord, they say of me, Does not he speak parables? So that all
helps for the making things plain that we have, though improved to the highest,
are little enough, if at best sufficient. One may perhaps do more then another,
yet none so much as not to leave more for others to do. It may not seem strange
therefore, that after so many Learned Commentaries written, others should yet
endeavor to make some things plamer, at least, and more known, by the help of
their labors, and by addition perhaps of some other helps which they had not
the use of; there will be room in this field while the World lasts, till we
come where that Tongue which is now so far lost, shall as some think, be again
the Universal Language.

As to this present Work, the thing first proposed was to have given the
meaning of the Text in brief Marginal Notes; but upon second thoughts, it was
deemed more convenient, that first a larger Exposition, wherein things might be
discussed, and the reasons and grounds of differing Opinions, as to the
Interpretation of doubtful places, laid open, lest what should be otherwise
positively said, might seem too magisterially spoken; which being done, out of
it may shorter Notes (if occasion serve) be taken, and the Reader be referred
for the justifying of them to the larger; and in them perhaps he may in some
places find that I dare not pass judgment for preferring one Exposition before
another, and there it is referred to him to take his own choice, or make use of
either as occasion shall serve, when more are agreeable to the words and
analogy of Faith, and give a good meaning.

I have not meddled with drawing from the Words inferences and conclusions. That
will be every man's own work when he has a settled meaning to ground on, without
which, they will be as a superstruction without a foundation. But what I have
done, the Reader, whose candor I beg wherein I have erred, or been defective,
or superfluous (as often having to deal with so many different Expositors, whose
Opinions I had to look into and give account of, I have, I doubt, been enforced
to be) will judge. If I have contributed any thing, though never so little, in
this kind, which may be to Gods glory and the Churches good, I have the utmost
of my desire, and humbly thank God alone for so far inabling me.

Authors cited in the Preface and following Work.
Abarbinel. Abendana. Michlal Yophe.
Aben Ezra. Abu Walid. Ainsworth. Arabic Version printed. R. Azaias. Arabic
Version MS. Biblia Buxtorphiana. Biblia Bombergiana. Biblia Complutensia. Doway
Bible. Bochartus. De Animalibus. Peleg.
Brennius. Buxtorfius, Vindicia contra Capellam, Lexicon Rabbinicum, Grammatica
Heb.
Calvinus. Calvisius. Capella. Critica Sacra.
Christophorus a Castro. Castalio. Chalde Paraphrast. Chrysostom. Cozari.
Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Lud. De Dieu. Diodati. Drusius. Dutch Notes. Ebn
Chalican. S. Ephraim (or Aphreim as in [Syriack) Estius. Flacius Illyricus.
Nicolam Fullerus, Miscellanea.
R. Gedaliah. Glassius. Glossarium Nebraeo Arabicu^. Golius. Greek Version of
the LXXII. Gregorius Abulpharagius. Grotius. Hackspan. Bishop Hall. Hammond.
Hieronymus. Hotinger. R. Japhet. Jonathau Paraphrast. R. Ju^ah. Junius. Kamus
an Arabic Dictionary. R. David Kimchi, Liber Radicum. Comment.
R. Joseph Kimchi. Vulgar Latin Translation. Cornelinus a Lapide. R. Lipman.
Nitzachon.
Lyra. Maimonides. Moreh Nebochim. Yad Hachazekah, etc.
Maresius. Mead. Menochius. Arias Montanus. Munsterus. Nobilius. Oecolampadius.
Olympiodorus. Onkelos Paraphrast. Origin. Pagninus. Paraeus. Pelicanus. Petrus
a Figueira. Piscator. Polychronius. Ravanella. Raimundus. Ribera. Emmanuel Sa.
R. Saadias. Sanctius. Sandys. Schindler. Schultingius. Sionita. Soaded. R.
Solomon Jarchi which from the first letters of his name is likewise called Rashi.
Stokes. Syriack Versions, two. Al-Tacriti. Talmud. R. Tanchum. Targum.
Tarnovius. Tertullian. Theodoret. Theodotion. Theophylactus. Thomas
Heracleensis. Thorndike's various readings of the Syriack. Tigurin Translation.
Tirinus. Tremellius. Various readings of the Grek in the Francfort edition.
Vatablus. Yalkut. Zamachshari lib. Asas.
A COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECY of the PROPHET MICAH.
CHAP. I.
VER. 1. The word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite, in the days
of Iotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria
and Jerusalem.
THIS Prophet is by the same name and title mentioned Ier. XXVI. 18. called the
Morasthite from the name of his City or place, where he was born or lived,
which, whether it were Moresheth mentioned ver. 14. Junius and Tremellius.
as Some think, or Mareshah ver. 15. and Ios. XV. ver. 44. Rab. Tanchum.
as many Others will have it, or some other place of that name, as it is hard to
determine, so not very material. That it was pertaining to the tribe of Judah,
and not of Ephraim, as Christophorus a Castro.
Some think, is more then probable, because in assigning the time of his
Prophecy, he names only such Kings of Judah, under whom he Prophesied, not any
King of Israel, which, if he had been a subject to them, it is probable he would
have done, (as Abarb.
a learned Jew notes) especially seeing his Prophecy concerns not Judah
alone, but the ten Tribes also, as those of Hosea and Amos do. Another R.
Tanchum.
Jew says it is manifest, that his Country was of those places, that belonged
to the Kings of Israel, for what reason he shows not. Vatablus.


Samaria and Jerusalem.] The first was the chief City of the Kingdom of
Israel, or the ten Tribes, the other of the Kingdom of the other two Tribes,
viz. Judah and Benjamin, and so under them is comprehended the whole of both
Kingdoms. God being provoked by their sins declares, that he will proceed with
great severity in judgment against them, and does it in such terms, as might
justly rouse them up from security, and awaken them to a speedy repentance.

2. Hear all ye People, hearken, O Earth, and all that therein is, and let the
Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his Holy Temple.
By People may be understood (as by most is) either the People of those
Countries, or of all others, and so by Earth either particularly that land, or
the whole habitable World, and the fullness thereof, that is, as it is well
expressed, all that therein is, all the inhabitants thereof, which fill it, and
occupy it. The People of that land are more peculiarly spoken to, and his
judgments particularly denounced now against them: yet what is said or done to
them, is for example to all others, Pelicanus, Oecalamp. Calvin. Deodat.
and they may be looked on as summoned to take notice thereof, and to consider
the justice of Gods judgments, and his way of proceeding against obstinate
sinners.

O Earth.] Though by Earth may well be understood the People on the Earth, yet
because of the words that follow it may seem to note the Earth it self, and so
shows, That such is the terror of the judgment that God denounces, as that
the Earth it self should be so moved, as if it were sensible thereof; and so
reproves their great Calvin.
stupidity, in that senseless Creatures are called on, as if they would sooner
hear then they. See Isaiah 1. 2. and XXXIV. 1. Ierem. VI. 19. and XXII. 29. the
like expressions: as also, cap. VI. 2. and elsewhere.

Let the Lord God be witness against you.] When those evils, that I denounce,
shall come upon you, he shall thereby convince you, that I faithfully declared
his will unto you, Tarnovius. Ab Ezra. R. Solomon, R. D. Kimchi.
and forwarn'd you of what should certainly be, except you did repent; and
consequently that you perished through your own wilful obstinacy, and your
refusing to give ear to my message from his part delivered to you. For
illustrating the expression, see Psalm. 1. 7. and especially Ruth 1. 24. and
Malach. III. 5.

From his holy Temple.] Tho this might in a convenient sense be understood of
the Temple at Jerusalem, and is so by Some, yet is by others a reason given
against that, because the temple was at Jerusalem, Drusius and Tarnovius.
and belonging then only to the Kingdom of Judah, whereas the judgments here
denounced concern the Ten Tribes also, who then had nothing to do with the
Temple. Although this reason seems not sufficient Abarb.
to others. However, by the most it is understood of Heaven, called his Temple
(as Psalm. XI. ver. 4.) Deodat
of which the Earthly Temple was a representation, God being also said to dwell
in it, Solomon saying that he built it for an house for the Lord to dwell in 1
Kings VIII. 13.

3. For behold, the Lord comes forth out of his place, and will come down, and
tread upon the high places of the Earth.
The Lord comes forth out of his place, etc.] God, who is every where present,
fills all places, and is bounded by none, is yet more particularly said to be
there, where he exhibiteth more peculiarly his Majesty and Glory, as in his
proper place; so in the Heavens, and so of old in the Temple at Jerusalem: and
he is Moreh Neb. l b. 1. cap 10. and 23.
said to come forth out of his place, and to come down to any other place,
Vatablus, Grotius, Tarnovius.
when he shows there more apparent tokens of his taking notice of what is done
there by men, (which before they might think him not to do, and to be absent
from them) and effects of his presence and power there by acts either of mercy
or judgment, for executing of which he is therefore here said to Isaiah XXVI.
21.
come forth, and to come down. Some, that in the former words by his Temple
understand the Temple at Jerusalem, here by his Place understand the same, and
by his coming Abarb. Calv.
forth out of it, the withdrawing the gracious tokens of his Majestatick
presence, which he was wont there to afford: and that he would not be confined
(as it were) to that place, but from his Rashi.
throne of mercy betake him to his throne of judgment, and show forth his
power every where in punishing them.

And tread upon the high places of the Earth.] Amos IV. 13.
All that is highest, exalted in the land, or among the People. Their towers,
and strong places, their princes, and chief ones shall he bring under, as a
thing that is most weak, and contemptible, trodden upon, or crushed by the foot:
none of them shall be able to resist him, or stand before him; R. Tanch. on
Amos IV. 13. Compare 2 Pet. III. 10, 12.
or showing himself to be high above the highest on Earth, as a Man is above
what he treads under his foot.

4. And the Mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be
cleft: as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a steep
place.
And the Mountains, etc.] Farther to express the terror, with which God will
proceed in judgment against them, he represents him as a consuming fire (as he
is said to be Deuteronomy. IV. 24. and IX. 3. and Hebrews XII. 29.) or as accompanied
with a fire that shall devour before him, and a great tempest round about him,
(as Psalm. I. 3.) or with burning coals going forth at his feet, Hab. III. 5.
for, says he, the mountains shall be molten under him, shall be consumed,
says the ancient Latin, shall be moved, or tremble, the Greek and Arabic,
which tho, as to what is meant, they come all much to on pass, yet as the word
properly signifies to melt or be melted, so that it ought so to be here
rendered, appears by what is subjoyned, as wax before the Fire. Neither may
this expression, that Mountains and Rocks should be molten, seem improper, if
we consider, what has of late time been seen in the Eruptions and flowing of
Mount Aetna, and is seen in other places (as Strombelo, etc. from which
continual streams of fire, and molten matter issue down) or what those that
make experiments that way will tell us may be done by fire on the hardest
Marble.

And the valleys shall be cleft.] u Hab. III. 9. it is said, thou did cleave
the Earth with rivers, so perhaps it may be here understood, that the vallys
should be cleft or rent with those fiery streams, that should come down from
those molten mountains, or, shall be rent and broken into pieces. By some it is
rendered, shall be dissolved, (so the Greek and Arabic,) but the proper notion
of the word is to cleave or to be cleft. The same word is used Genesis VII. 11.
where it is said, the fountains of the great deep were broken up. That these
words are not here literally to be understood, and according to what they
properly sound, as if these things, which are said, should really so be done,
is manifest, but by way of similitude, to express, that as great things should
be done, as those mentioned, viz. that God should in executing his judgments
appear with such irresistible power, that no persons, or places, tho they might
seem as strong as the Mountains, as firmly fixed as the Earth, should be able
to reendure before it, any more then Wax before the Fire, or, subsist and keep
together, and stand in their place, any more then waters powered down a steep
place; but as easily be brought down and destroyed, as Wax is molten before the
Fire, as speedily as Waters run down in such a place. By Mountains Tarnov.
Some understand, those that dwell on the Mountains, Grot.
or, Cities on the Mountains; R. Tanchum. Vatabl. Abarb. Hieron.
Others, such as were of highest degree, greatest power, and eminency among
them: and so on the contrary, by valleys, they understand the inhabitants of
the valleys, or Towns in lower places, or, those of lower condition: that the
scope may be, That none of any condition, or in any place, high or low, shall
be able to resist, or escape his punishment; it shall find them out, and reach
them all. These threats were made good in the destruction of Israel by
Salmanaser, of Judah by Sennacherib and Nebuchadnezzar.

5 For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the House of
Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? and what are the
high places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem?
For the transgression of Jacob is all this.] Of all this, that is threatened,
the cause is on their part: viz. the many provoking sins, of which the whole
family of Jacob, consisting now of the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, are
guilty. Jacob and the house of Israel, are both names, which may comprehend the
whole twelve Tribes, as denominated from their Father Jacob, who was also
called Israel. They are sometimes more particularly used to express the ten
Tribes as distinct from Judah and Benjamin. Here all the twelve Tribes seem
spoken of, Judah as well as the others being accused and threatened. Abarb.
Some think by Jacob to be meant all the twelve tribes, and by the house of
Israel more particularly the ten; C. a Castro Rib.
Others on the contrary, by Jacob the ten Tribes, and by Israel Judah with
Benjamin, because in the following words Iaco^ and Judah are distinctly named.
Yet Others also by both of them R. D. Kimchi.
think only the ten Tribes here meant, and that they are named because they
were most in number. It will not much concern us nicely to dispute about this,
seeing the judgments are denounced against them all; and when the words were
spoken, we suppose they all of them knew, how by these names they were meant
and spoken to. Isa. viii. 14. they are called both the houses of Israel, and in
this Prophecy c. III. ver. 1. and 9. we read, the heads of the house of Jacob,
and Princes of the house of Israel, when the Princes of Judah are manifestly
spoken of, who built up Zion with blood.

What is the transgression of Jacob?] Here by Jacob seem particularly denoted
the ten Tribes, because Samaria was the chief City of their Kingdom. Yet Abarb.
Others would have this name here also to comprehend all the twelve Tribes,
because, say they, Samaria was the cause of Idolatry, not only to those Tribes,
who were properly under the Kingdom of Israel, but to Judah also, which thence
took the infection.

What is? or, R. Tanch. Ab. Ezr. R. D. Kimchi.
as Others think it more properly rendered, Who is the transgression? i.e. Who
is the cause of the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? that is, the
King, or inhabitants of Samaria? which being the chief City of the Kingdom at
that time, corrupted all the other places thereof by its ill example. So, Who
is the high places of Judah? that is, Who is the cause that in several places
of Judah high places, contrary to the law, are built for false worship? Is it
not Jerusalem the Royal City? that is, the King, and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
who having first built such there, the infection thence spread it self through
the whole land of Judah, and they also did what they saw done at Jerusalem: for
looking on that as an holy City, they supposed nothing would be done there
which they ought not to follow.

6 Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a
vineyard; and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will
discover the foundations thereof.
Samaria as an heap of the field.] Samaria having been first in sin, shall be
first in punishment: which punishment is here described. He who, for the
wickedness of the inhabitants, makes of a City an heap, of a defenced City a
ruin Isa. XXV. 2. will cause her by the Assyrians his instruments to be made
R. Tanch.
as an heap of the field, or a wast hillock, or heap of rubbish in the field;
And as plantings of the vineyard, such places as are planted with vines, which
they use to plant on hillocks, as best thriving in such places: so that the
place where Samaria stood shall be as such a field only, and for such use, as
if there never had been there a populous inhabited City. This shall be brought
to pass by their rolling or throwing down the stones thereof (for it stood on
an hill) into the valley, when they shall have rased it to the very foundation,
and plucked up even the lowest stones that were covered with the Earth, so that
there be not left one stone standing upon another, Mat. XXIV. 2. Luc. XIX. 44.
(where the like destruction of the Temple and Jerusalem is described.) The
Latin renders it, as an heap of stones in the field, where a vineyard is
planted: Calvin. Jun. and Trem.
and so Some expound an heap of the field, an heap of stones gathered out of
the field, that they may not hinder them that work; and thrown up together,
afterward to be thrown out of the field, and dispersed; R. D. Kimchi. Abarb.
etc.
Others somewhat differently: but all make the scope to be the expression of
utter destruction and desolation. Compare cap. III. 12. and Ierem. XXVI. 18.
where the same thing that here is meant, is expressed in terms tending to the
same purpose. Ethnah, Ethnan.
That Samaria was thus ruined by the Assyrians seems manifest out of the 2 Kin.
XVII. 24. etc. where the People brought up by the King of Assyria, are said to
be placed in the Cities of Samaria, not in Samaria it self.

7 And all the graven Images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all the
hires thereof shall be burnt with the fire, and all the Idols thereof will I
lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall
return to the hire of an Harlot.
And all the hires thereof.] That we may know what is meant here by hires,
compare Hosea II. 12. where the Idolatrous People are taxed for saying of their
vines and figtrees, These are my rewards (or hire, for the word is of the same
root with this here, and differs only in the last letter) that my lovers, that
is, my Idols have given me. Add out of ver. 5. for she said I will go after my
Lovers, that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and
my drink. -- and what God says ver. 8. she did not know that I gave her Corn
and Wine and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold, which they prepared for
Baal, viz. for presents to Baal, or wherewith they made Baals, as cap. VIII. 4.
it is said, of their Silver and their Gold have they made them Idols. These
expressions being considered, it will appear that by hires, may be conveniently
understood all their wealth and good things, which they looked on as the gifts
of their Idols, and rewards of their service to them; or, those precious things
and rich donaries, which having received and gained from their own People, or
others their friends and partners with them in their Idolatry, they dedicated
to their Idols, or made Images of, or adorned them and their Temples with. And
according to this last interpretation Abarb. Vatab.
Some will have the Idols to be compared to harlots, and the Idolaters to their
Lovers, who bestow gifts on them for their hire and recompense of their
lewdness: Rib.
but this is by Others excepted against, because otherwhere in Scripture the
Idolaters are compared unto Strumpets, which prostitute themselves and their
Idols to their Lovers, or such to whom they prostitute themselves. This scruple
will be taken out of the way, if we consider what is said Ez. XVI. 31, 34.
(concerning Jerusalem) Thou have not been as an Harlot, in that thou scornest
hire. And the contrary is in thee from other Women in thy whoredoms, in that
thou give a reward [or hire] and no reward is given thee: and again ver. 41.
I will cause thee to cease from playing the Harlot, and thou also shall give no
hire any more. The same word being in those places used that is here, makes
manifest that it is used not only for such gifts and hire, as adulterers give to
Harlots, but for such also as more unsatiable Harlots give to Men, to hire them
to commit lewdness with them: and so if it be here understood of such gifts as
Israel gave to, not received from, her Idols, she may still be looked on as the
Harlot, and the Idols her Lovers, and the gifts the hire of an whore, not
received, but given by her. These shall be all burnt with fire, except such as
the enemy shall see fit to carry away. And so the meaning of the following
words will either be, and all the Idols thereof will I lay desolate, Chaldee
Par.
that is, take them out of the way, that they be no more worshipped; R. D.
Kimchi.
or, as Others will have by Idols meant, the Temples of their Idols will I
destroy; for she gathered them of the hire of an harlot: all those presents and
rich gifts, with which she made, or adorned her Idols, and their Temples, she
gathered of the hire of an Harlot, viz. from such as ran on whoreing after
those Idols, and prostituted themselves to false Gods; and they shall return to
the hire of an Harlot, R. D. Kimchi, R. Tanch. Abarb.
shall fall into the hands of those who are given to the like Idolatry, and by
them (namely the Assyrians) be employed in the worshipping and adoring of
Idols; as of the Calf of Bethel it is said, It shall be carried unto Assyria for
a present to King Iareb, Hos. x. 6. or else, according to the first
interpretation, Rib.
all the wealth that they looked on as a reward of their Idols to them, shall
return or be given to such, who should likewise look thereon as gifts bestowed
on them by their Idols, who, they thought, gave Samaria and all its spoils into
their hands, (as Belshazzar and his Lord's who drinking in the vessels that
were brought out of the Temple at Jerusalem, praised their God's of Gold and
Silver, etc. as if they had bestowed them on them, Dan. v. 3, 4.) Calvin.
Others think it needless so nicely to prosecute the words, but that they be
understood as a proverbial speech, That all their wealth which they acquired in
or by their Idolatro^s worship, and looked on as rewards from their Idols with
which they committed Spiritual fornication, as it was like the hire of an
Harlot, so should come to the same pass, as usually the hires of Harlots do,
which by the curse of God on them come to naught, and do them no good. Jun. and
Trem. Tarno.
There is another rendering of the words by Some given, viz. Because of the hire
of an Whore she gathered [them,] and while there is the hire of an Whore, they
are turned away, that is, they impute their wealth, and such things as they
enjoy, to their Idols, (as their hires or rewards from them) and while these
things remain to them, they are turned away from me, who indeed have given them
all, and forsake my service. But this seems more harsh.

8 Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will make a
wailing like the Dragons, and mourning as the Owls.
I will go stripped and naked.] That is, as one spoiled and stripped of his
garment, whether by others, and so left naked, Vatab. Tarnov.
or having himself, in token of extreme heaviness and sorrow, cast off at least
his upper garment, wherewith he was usually adorned. Rashi* Ab. Ez. R. D. Kimch.
Some expound it as one spoiled of his right mind and understanding, distracted
through extrenity of affliction and anguish of mind, and so casting away his
clothes, (which sense, viz. of foolish or distracted, they will have the same
word [(...) Sholal] to have Job. XII. 17, 19.) whether the Prophet speak this
of his own Person, Munst.
that in compassion to them he cannot but conceive the greatest sorrow, and so
will in all outward signs express it: or whether he speaks it as in their
person, to show what great affliction they shall be brought to, or in his own
person representing what shall befall them, as so Isaiah cap. XX. 2. is bid to
go naked and barefoot for a sign to the Egyptians and Ethiopians, that they
should be forced to do so, and therefore the Greek and the Chaldee Interpreters
expound these words of the People in the third Person, not as of the Prophet in
the first, that they should so go stripped and naked, and make a wailing, etc.

I will make a wailing like the Dragons, etc.] So almost all Interpreters
render the word (...) Tannim Dragons, only the ancient Syriack translation
renders it by (...) yorure, which in that Language, as their own Authors tell
us, signifies a kind of wild Beasts like a Dog, between a Dog and a Fox, or a
Wolf and a Fox, which the Arabians call from the noise that they make, (...)
Ebn Awi or wawi (...) and our English travelers and other Europeans by a name
borrowed from the People of those Countries, where they are more known then in
Europe, Iakales, which abiding in the fields and waste places, make in the
night a lamentable howling noise, in so much that Travelers unacquainted with
them would think that a company of People, Women or Children, were howling one
to another, as none that have traveled in the night in those parts of Syria,
etc. can be ignorant. And with him agrees an Arab version of Rabbi Saadias (as
is probable) rendering it (...) Benat awi, that is, Iakales. This translation
seems to carry more reason with it, then the rendering it Dragons; because, of
the hissing of Dragons, as other Serpents, we hear and read, but no where in
any creditable Author of their howling, or making such a noise, as may be
called wailing, or like to it. And the same will be confirmed by the authority
of a learned R. Tanch.
Jew, who observes it for an error in Expositors, that in this and some other
places they render Dragons, where they should render Iakales, viz. the Beast
which we mentioned. His note on this place is this, the truest Interpretation
is, that it is a Beast called (...) Ebn Awi, the property of which Beast is, to
gather together in the night, and to answer one another in crying and howling,
so that wailing is compared to the noise that they make. Much like he notes on
Jeremiah cap. IX. ver. 11. where what is rendered a Den of Dragons, according to
him ought to be, an habitation of Iakales (as there likewise the Syriack has
it, as also cap. X. 22.) and on Mal. I. 3. he also notes, that there it ought
to be so rendered Iakales, not dragons of the wilderness; as likewise Lam. IV.
3. Those wild beasts, not Seamonsters (as ours) or dragons (as others:) for,
says he, Serpents (as Dragons are) have no breasts, and in both those places
the Syriack renders it by the same word, which it here (as we said) uses. The
which was cause of this mistake in that last place he says is, because the
word which signifies Iakales in the plural number, is in writing the same with
that which signifies a dragon in the singular, both (...) Tannin, and so they
took them for one in signification: and the same cause we may think every where
to have given occasion to this mistake, viz. the likeness of the words of so
differing significations. To prevent such mistake from what he has suggested
to us, a rule may be thus summed up, that wheresoever we meet with (...) Tannim
or (...) Tannin or (...) Tannoth (for they are all one in sense) as plurals,
they signify those howling wild beasts inhabiting waste desolate places. But
where (...) Tannim (as Ez. XXIX. ver. 3. and XXXII. 2.) with (...) M. in the
singular (which Rabbi Tanchum says is substitute for ^ N.) or (...) Tannin in
the singular, or (...) Tanninim in the plural, they are to be rendered, Dragons,
or Serpents, or Sea Monsters, or Whales, or the like, according as they are
spoken either of such Creatures as are on the land, or in the waters. This rule
is confirmed by the Syriack translation which we mentioned, in that usually (I
think every where except Psalm. XLIV. ver. 19. where it renders (...) Tannim by
(...) Tenyono, which signifies calamitous or dolorous, as the learned Sionita
there notes,) where either of those three forms of the first rank is found,
there it renders it constantly by that word (...) yoruro, which we said
signifies that howling beast; but where either of the latter, Job 7. ver. 12.
Isa. 27. 1. and 51. 9. Isa. 91. 13.
there it uses another word, viz. (...) Tanino, which signifies a Dragon, or
Serpent like creature. And that these words so like in the letters in the
Hebrew, may have these different significations, may be farther made evident
from the like use of the Arabic Tongue, in which as (...) Tennin signifies a
Dragon or great Serpent, so (...) Tinan signifies a Wolf, to which the beast we
speak of is much like in kind, shape and conditions. [The Arabic version
likewise in several places renders it (...) Benat wawi, Iakales.] It may be
observed that usually where the Syriack puts (...) Yoruro, there the Chaldee,
which is but a different dialect of the same Tongue, puts (...) Yaruda with the
letter (...) D. in the last place, which the Translatours render Dragon, but
probably for no other reason then because they thought the Hebrew word, which
was rendered by it, so to signify. But it is not unlikely, that it ought to be
rendered as the Syriack is: because in those places, wherein the Hebrew word
manifestly signifies a Dragon, there he uses another word, as the Syriack
does. Probably therefore the Chaldee (...) Yaruda may in that dialect signify
the same, that (...) Yoruro in the Syriack, the one Dialect pronouncing that by
(...) D. what the other does by (...) R. Or it is not impossible, that the
(...) D. crept into the place of (...) R. by the mistake of such as transcribed
it out of the first ancient copies, reading and so writing (...) D. for (...)
R. it being well known how little difference there is between those two
letters, both in the Hebrew Alphabet, in which letters the Chaldee is written,
and likewise in the Syriack: so that it might be easy so to mistake, if this
may not seem too bold a conjecture.

And mourning as the Owls.] Or Ostriches, for so the ancient Interpreters
generally render it. Some more modern render Owls, which some Full. Misc. lib.
6. cap. 7.
learned Men prefer and defend. Bochart. de Animal. R. D. Kimchi in Rad.
Others again very learned are for retaining the old. They bring probable
arguments on both sides. But it is but conjecture against conjecture, there
being no way of certainly knowing by other helps, what the word did signify
among the Jews in ancient times, when the Scriptures were written; only it
seems manifest, c that it was a Bird keeping in desert places, and making a
doleful and mournful noise: and such that some sorts of Owls make is well
known. But it is affirmed also by Sandys his travels page 139.
Travelers of good credit, that Ostriches make a fearful skreeching
lamentable noise: so that it will be hard to determine. Mr. Fuller who would
have it rendered Owls, and perhaps more particularly Skritchowles, thinks that
the word should be more properly written Stritche-owle: so we find in the Doway
English-Bible Striches in this place: but perhaps the letter O is by the
Printers fault left out, and it should be Ostriches, for they render out of the
vulgar Latin.]

9 For her wound is incurable, for it is come unto Judah: he is come unto the
gate of my People, even to Jerusalem.
For her wound is incurable, [or grievous] or she is grievously Sick of her
wounds.] The causes of this lamentation are in the former words expressed, viz.
1. the desperatness and incurableness of the wounds of Samaria, or the
grivousness of what she suffered or should suffer by the Sword, Famine, Plague,
and Captivity, every one of which was a sore evil, with which she was
grievously afflicted. 2. The extent or far spreading of this wound, or these
evils. They did not seize on Samaria, or Israel alone, and there stop, but
proceeded and went on as far, as to reach Judah also. Tarn. Grot. etc.
Some look on this as denoting that evil, which was brought on the Cities of
Judah by Sennacherib, who so far proceeded, as to besiege Jerusalem it self,
some years after that Shalmaneser had taken Samaria, and carried Israel
captive. 2 Kin. XVIII. 9, 10, 11. and ver. 13, 17. and 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 1, 2,
etc. But others think this not enough Abarb.
for the meaning of the words, because this wound was not in^urable to
Jerusalem, which God delivered from the hand of Sennacherib, wonderfully
destroying his Army by the hand of an Angel, and bringing on him also
destruction, as appears 2 Kin. XIX. 35, etc. and 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 21, 22. and
Abarb.
therefore will have here the final destruction of Jerusalem, and the carrying
the Jews into captivity by Nebuchadnezzar to be pointed out, and to signify,
that as now Samaria and Israel, so afterward Jerusalem and Judah should be
grievously afflicted and destroyed, none being able to cure their wound, to
rescue them from destruction.

He is come unto the gate of my People] that is, the enemy, though not
expressed, because the Verb is of the Masc. gender, whereas the preceding
Nouns and Verbs are of the Feminine. R. Tanchum.
Others, it is come, viz. the thing or evil condition, the whole matter spoken
of, which may be in either gender uttered. -- Of my People, so Interpreters say
the Prophet speaks, because he was of the Tribe of Judah.

10 Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all: in the house of Aphrah roll
thy self in the dust.
Declare ye it not in Gath.] The like words are used 2 Samuel I. 20. in David's
lamentation Abarb
over Saul and Jonathan, whence R. D. Kimchi, Abarb. Drusius. Grotius.
Some look on it as an usual form in lamentations for some great national
calamity, intimating the greatness of it, being such as their enemies would
rejoice at, and therefore wishing it might be concealed, if possible, from
them, and counselling them not to make it known to them by any public
expression of sorrow, as weeping etc. Gath was a City of the Philistines,
Enemies to Israel and Judah Abarb. Vatablus
although then in possession of the Kings of Judah, and such as would rejoice
to hear what evil had befallen them.

In the house of Aphrah roll thy self in dust.] R. Tanchum.
Aphrah, a place (as some will) not far from Jerusalem, (perhaps the same with
Ophrah which is reckoned among the Cities of the Tribe of Benjamin Josh. XVIII.
23.) There, Abarb.
farther of from the Philistines, and that they may not take notice of it,
silently mourn, or roll thy self in Dust or ashes (for the word signifies
either.) R. D. ^ Kimchi.
Others, for the house of and belonging to Aphrah. (...) Abarb.
Others within Aphrah, viz. within thy own land, taking by this name to be
designed the whole land of Judah, which being laid desolate should be all dust
and dirt. Grotius
Others think the land of Ephraim to be signified by it, whose houses should be
ruined or turned to dust, or filled with it. The Prophet, in this and the
following verses, reckons up several places (whether belonging to Israel or
Judah) by alluding to the names of which he expresses the present or future
condition, which they should be brought to, together with others not named,
even the whole Land. De^dat
Others, because some of those names are not else where found in Scripture,
think, that they were not the usual proper names of the Cities of the Land, but
names put upon them by the Prophet, by which, and by descanting on them, he
might declare, what he had to say of, or to the People, for making them
sensible of what should befall them. Some Interpreters therefore retain them as
proper names, Lat. Vulg.
Others render the meaning of those names, Our's do both, in the Text giving us
the names, and in the Margin, the significations of most of them.

Roll thy self, etc.] Here (as in some other places) there are in the Original
Hebrew two readings, one in the Text, which is called Cetib, i.e. that which is
written; the other in the Margin, which is called Keri, viz. that which is
read, that which is read is (...) Hithpalleshi according to which it is
generally by Interpreters rendered as the word sounds, Roll thy self, as the
words of the Prophet speaking to the People: that which is written is (...)
Hithpallashi and sounds I have rolled my self, as if he speaking of himself
told them, what he did in his own person, mourning in secret for the calamities
hanging over the land, and so showed them by his own example what they should
do. Either sense is good, and both aim at the same end, whether taken, as a
precept, or an example.

11 Pass ye away thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked; the
inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel, he shall
receive of you his standing.
Pass ye away thou inhabitant of Saphir, etc.] Saphir signifies fair or
elegant. It is by Some taken for a proper name of a City so called. By others
as an Epithet of some place, thereby noted for its fair situation or beauty,
and Rib. Grot, etc.
they will have Samaria to be meant by it. Abarb. Mont.
Others understand it of the Daughter of Judah, or Jerusalem, which was
beautiful for situation, Psalm. XLVIII. 2. To this place or City, whatsoever it
be that is called by this name, it is denounced in these words, that to it and
its inhabitants shall be for their former beauty and glory now shame and
confusion. The other names also some apply to Samaria and Jerusalem, but the
exposition will be plainer by taking them for proper names of places.

The inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel.] Of
Zaanan in the margin is of the Country of flocks. Others the going out, for so
the Vulgar Latin has it, She went not out that dwells in the going out; the
word being by Some derived from a Noun (...) Zon, that signifies Sheep or
herd's of little Cattle, by Others from a root that signifies to go out, even
that by which here is an allusion to it made. But the simpler interpretation
will be to look on it, as a proper name, as the Text of our Bibles does. Saint
Hierome long since noted these passages of the Prophet in the preceding, this,
and the following verses, to contain such difficulties as that there is great
need of the assistance of the holy Spirit to explain them. He knew not how to
reconcile the Greek version and his own, and fit them to the Original, which
were all that he had them to do with. How much more difficult will it be to
reconcile so many Translations as have since come forth? The diversity between
them arises from the different acception of the words, some taking them to
signify one thing, some another, and from their different placeing them in the
construction. Our Translators endeavor to keep as near the words in the
Original as they can, and the meaning of them according to their rendering seems
this, That when Beth-ezel. (which was first taken by the Enemy) was led away
mourning, the Inhahitants of Zaanan came not forth to bewail with them, or
comfort, or help the, as standing on their own guard for fear of the Enemy, or,
R. D. Kimchi.
knowing that the same calamity should quickly befall themselves, and so they
should have enough to do to bewail themselves. [For] He shall receive of you
his standing, of you, O Inhabitants of Zaanan, though you remain longer then
those of Beth-ezel, [yet] he, that is, the Enemy, shall receive his standing,
that is, the reward for his labor, and time spent in beseiging, and taking
you: your spoil shall be his recompense. R. D. Kimchi. Michlal Yophi. Vatabl.
Drus. etc.
So both among the learned of the Jews and Christians, do diverse explain these
words. And according to this exposition Beth-ezel is looked upon as first taken
and destroyed. There is by R. Tanchum.
another learned Jew another rendering given, whereby Zaanan is said to be first
destroyed: he with some alteration, thus gives the meaning: The Inhabitants of
Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel, [or had not opportunity to
come forth etc.] which received its standing more then you, or remained longer
then you, or after you, that is, whereas they of Zaanan expected to have seen
those of Beth-ezel gone before them, and to have bewailed their calmity, it is
come to pass otherwise, and they retain their standing more than you of Zaanan,
or after you, and shall see your ruin and bewail you. He also citing Aben
Ezra's exposition gives this sense of it, the Inhabitants of Zaanan went not
forth to mourning [and also] Beth-ezel shall take or learn of you its standing,
that is, to keep it self at home, and not go forth to bemoan, or help its
neighbor; but he rejects it, as going contrary to Grammar, and the punctation,
in separating (...) Lemispad to mourning from Beth-ezel in construction, beside
that Beth-ezel keeping, or kept in by reason of its seige, as he supposes it
to be, cannot be so properly said to learn, what it did not of its own choice,
but was forced to. But this seems different from what our Printed Copies of
Aben Ezra have. There is yet another exposition, which offers it self thus. The
Inhabitant of Zaanan shall not go free or escape, for so the word (...) Yatsa
is used also to signify; the mourning of Beth-ezel, shall take from you ( O
Inhabitants of Saphir or of Zaanan) its standing or its measure, or conjecture,
that is, by seeing what you suffer, they of that place shall take guess, or
learn what shall befall them. This exposition seems to keep as close to the
letter as any, and is confirmed as to the first part of it by the Chaldee
Paraphrase, as to the latter by some of the learned Abu. Walid, (and see Ab.
Ezra.) R. Ta^chum in libro Murshed in the root (...) and (...)
Jews. [It may be brought nearer to the foregoing thus. The Inhabitant of
Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel; he shall take his guess
from you, that is, by you (of Beth-ezel or Saphir) learn what shall be his own
condition. In these expositions the names are taken as proper to places so
called, (which seems the plainest way) against which is denounced, that the
like evils shall overtake them; The others look on them rather as Epithers or
names put only in respect to the present occasion, to denote Samaria, or
Jerusalem, or Judah, or others. Abarb.
A learned Jew of that opinion to this purpose; that as for the Daughter of
Judah, which would not stir abroad to condole with her neighbor, but kept at
home still and quiet, the enemy should take from them the quiet and
tranquillity of their Kingdom, and remove them away into captivity; so rendering
that which our render standing, by stability, tranquilLity or quiet habitation.
To the same purpose some Christians also, as Arias Montanus. Iunius and
Tremellius thus render, The Inhabitant of the place abounding with flocks (or
cattle) shall not go forth, there shall be mourning in the places near
adjoining, which receive from you their subsistence. The Vulgar Latin thus, she
went not out, that dwells in the going out; the house adjoining shall receive
lamentation of you, which stood to her self. In such variety of expositions
(and more may be found) the reader may have liberty of choosing: he will be
hardly able to reconcile them.

12 12 For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good, but evil came
down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.
For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully, etc.] That is, R. Tanchum.
expected, that good should come, but it came not, but on the contrary evil
came etc. The margin has was grieved, the word signifying both to expect, or
wait for, and to be grieved or be in pain or sorrow as a Women in travel. They
were seized on with grief or sorrow, because (for so the particle (...) Ci
properly signifies) evil came down etc. Maroth therefore seems to be a City in
the neighborhood of Jerusalem, or one that had dependence on it, and so could
not but be involved in calamity, when that was distressed; and so grieved for
good, that is, for its want, and being deprived of that good which it hoped
for, or once enjoyed, by the coming of evil down unto the gate of Jerusalem, or
as far as the chief City, Jerusalem it self. See ver. 9. The name of Maroth,
Grot. Stoakes.
Some will have here by transposition of letters, put for Ramoth, viz. the
Cities singly called Ramah, of which there were more in the lands of Judah, and
Benjamin, and so, to comprehend them all, put in the plural number, and called
Maroth, bitter, or bitternesses, from the bitter calamities that should befall
them. Others translate the word Jun. Trem.
Rough places, Vulg. Latin.
Others Bitternesses. Abarb.
Others, think the whole Kingdom of Judah by this name designed, in respect to
the many evils in her, and sorrows that were to come upon them. But the taking
it otherwise then for the proper name of a City, does (as in the forenamed and
following places) but open a way to more uncertain conjectures, and doubtful
interpretations.

13 O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast: she is
the beginning of the sin to the Daughter of Zion: for the transgressions of
Israel were found in thee.
O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift Beast, etc.]
Lachish is said to R. Tanchum.
have been a City of Judah, nigh to the border of the ten Tribes, and so
reckoned up among the Cities belonging to Judah, Ios. XV. 39. against which
Sennacherib King of Assyria laid seige, 2 Kin. XVIII. 13, 14, and Isai. XXXVI.
1, 2. and said to have been one of the last defenced Cities that remained of
the Cities of Judah, when Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon came up with his
Armies to fight against Jerusalem, and against all the Cities of Judah that
were left, Ier. XXXIV. 7. Denouncing against this City the evils that were to
come upon it, he bids the inhabitants thereof to bind the chariot to the R.
Tanch. Gloss. Heb. Ar.
swift Beast (as Horses, Mules, or the like) or sadle the swift Beast, that is,
say R. D. Kimchi, Munster.
Some with good probability, Prepare for speedy flight from the Enemy which
shall come upon you, or to go away out of your Country. R. Tanch.
Others think, that it is spoken to them by way of derision, You that were wont
so to do, viz. to bind the chariot to the swift Beast, ( Abarb.
as formerly abounding in such things, and priding themselves therein) do so
now; as much as to say, that the case was now altered with them, Aben Ezra.
and they were not able to do as they were wont to do, when they could at
pleasure call for their Chariots and Horses. Grot. Stokes.
Others take it as if they were bid to make ready Chariots at the command of
the conquering Enemy, to conveigh his messengers from Lachish to Jerusalem, to
demand the City to be rendered up to him, (as he did Is. XXXVI. 2.) The Verb
(...) Retom rendered bind, is no where else found in Scripture, but ( R. D.
Kimchi.
as a learned Jew says) the sense requires that it be so taken. The Latin
Translation indeed renders the words otherwise, viz. Tumult of the Chariot of
astonishment to the inhabitants of Lachish. But why the Author thereof should
render this word (...) Retom, Tumult, or the Greek, a noise, or the following
word (...) Recesh, astonishment, no reason is given by those that follow that
Translation. As for the first word, wherever, besides in this place, a Noun of
the same root is found, it signifies a planet, whether Broom, a pliable plant
that is easily bound, or as Others will, Juniper, but never any thing like
tumult or noise. and so for the second, it is not found but Abu Walid.
in the signification either of horses, or such like swift beast, or else of
wealth and riches, whether in Cattle or other goods. But it may be observed as
to the first, that the same theme (...) Ratam, in the Arabic tongue, which is
of great affinity with the Hebrew, signifies both to break, or dash and beat in
pieces (from which the notion of tumult, and noise, or crashing is not much
different) and also to tie or bind on. For the second word (...) Recesh,
whether he took it to be of nigh signification to the word (...) Regez not much
different in found, and signifying fear, trembling, and great commotion, or
what other reason he had to render it as he does, is uncertain; for the Greek
takes it for horses, or horsemen, as in the Syriack also it signifies, and is
here put.

She is the beginning, etc.] The crime laid to the charge of the inhabitants of
Lachish, is, that She was the beginning of the sin to the Daughter of Zion, or
Jerusalem, viz. that she, being first infected with Idolatry received from
Israel (on whose land she bordered,) spread it abroad in the rest of the
Country, even as far as Jerusalem it self. Those sins, whereby Israel
transgressed, were found in her, and propagated from her, or by her. In the
first part of the verse it is said, She is, and in the latter, in thee, with a
change of persons, though speaking of the same. This is the exposition by the
most given, and is more easy and probable then that which Jun. Trem. R. Tan.
Some bring, viz. that the sin objected to Lachish is their rebellion against
King Amaziah, wherein they consented with, if not gave occasion to Jerusalem,
according to the history 2 Kin. XIV. 18. and so were transgressions in her like
those of Israel, or the tentribes, which rebelled against the house of David
from Ieroboams time and after.

14 Therefore shall thou give presents to Moresheth-Gath: the houses of Achzib
shall be a lie to the Kings of Israel.
Therefore shall thou give presents to Moresheth-Gath.] For these thy evil
doings shall thou be brought to that condition, that thou shall be fain to send
presents to those that are thine enemies, as Moresheth-Gath, a place or City of
the Philistines, to obtain assistance from them, (which shall be in vain to
thee:) or, as Some, by way of derision, give now present, etc. as thou wont;
or, as the margin has it, for Moresheth-Gath, that is Calv. Stokes.
to redeem and obtain favor for thy self, and thy neighbor City, if possible.
But the learned Jews will not have (...) Al, here tendered, for, but to signify
the same that (...) El, to, as in several other places it does. In this way
Moresheth-Gath is taken for the name of a place, or City, probably nigh or
belonging to Gath, a place often mentioned. Others considering the word
Moresheth as coming from the root (...) Yarash, which signifies to inherit,
accordingly translate it Greek and Vulg. Lat.
to the inheritance of Gath, and the word (...) Shilluchim which we render
presen^^, they render Emissaries (the word being from the root (...) Shalach,
to send) Rib.
they taking it to be as appliable to Persons, as things sent; which if they
take Menochius.
for messengers sent to implore assistance from them, the sense will be much to
the same purpose; but if, as Diverse Ribera, Doway Bible.
expound it, for scouts, or spoilers, as if the meaning were, that Lachish
being taken should afford to the King of Assyria Soldiers, which he should
together with his own send to make inrodes on the possessions of Gath, it seems
more harsh: and more yet to interpret it, that the King of Assyria Tirinus.
should send spoilers, etc. for it is spoken to, or of Lachish, that she should
give. Nor seems it plain with others to expound, Grot.
To the inheriter of Gath, that is, to the Assyrian, which has taken that City
for his inheritance and possession, thou shall give presents. Jun. Trem.
Others yet, Thou (...) Al, together with Moresheth-Gath (or the Town so
called, which once belonged to Gath, but was now in the possession of the
Benjamites) give presents to make thy peace. Abarb.
Others to Gath, that was once the inheritance of Judah, taken by David, since
again retaken and the inheritance of the Phil^stines, even thither thou shall
be compelled to send presents. But the first exposition seems the plainest.

The houses of Achzib shall be a lie, etc.] Though the houses of Achzib were
strong, and in them the Kings of Israel might put their trust, and hope for
help of defense, yet they did, or shall (for the time is not expressed whether
meant of the past, or present, or to come) fail their expectation, and be but a
lie unto them. Achzib is the name of a Town named together with Mareshah Ios.
XV. 44. and the same, or another of the same name mentioned Ios. XIX. 29. and
Iud. I. 31. as belonging to, or bordering upon the lot of the Tribe of Asher.
This name agrees with, or is derived from the word (...) Cazab which signifies
to lie, and therefore is by LXX. Lat.
Some here rendered the houses of lying, or vanity, which were for deceit, or in
vain, to the Kings of Israel, as if it were a farther Epithet or description of
Gath, or how they should prove to the Kings of Israel, by whom R. D. Kimchi.
Some think here meant the Kings of Judah; not of Israel as distinct from them:
so Abaz King of Judah is called King of Israel 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 19. Aharb.
Some think the Cities of the Philistines denoted by the houses of Achizib, so
called because of their falseness to Israel; or else the Cities of Judah which
failed Israel, when they expected help from them; or any other Towns,
Countries, or Nations, as Egypt or Assyria, from which Israel or Judah desired
help, but were deceived by them. However to the name of Achzib here is an
allusion in the following word (...) Aczab, which is rendered a lie, to show
what they should prove to them that trusted in them. R. D. Kimchi. and see
Targ. and Hieron.
There be also, who by the houses of Achzib, that should be a lie to the Kings
of Israel, think meant the houses of false worship in that City, wherein they
worshipped Idols, from which they in vain expected help.

15 Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah: he shall come
unto Adullam, the glory of Israel.
Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah.] He threatens,
that yet, or farther yet, he will proceed to bring unto the inhabitants of
Mareshah an heir, viz. an enemy, that shall take possession of them, and all
they have, as if it were his inheritance, and thrust them out; (for the word
(...) Yarash signifies both to inherit, and to disinherit, or thrust out.) The
name Mareshah including in it the signification of inheritance, here is, in
what is denounced against it, an allusion to its name. This City, by Aben Ezra.
most supposed to be the Country of the Prophet, is mentioned among the Cities
belonging to Judah, Ios. XV. 44. and see 2 Chronicles. XI. 8.

He shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel.] That this is the literal
rendering of the words as they ly in order, there is no doubt, and so gives
plainly this sense, R. Tanchum, Pelican, Calvin.
that the enemy, that heir of Mareshah, should proceed and come as far as to
Adullam, which is called the glory of Israel. Against which nothing may be
excepted, but that Adullam was a place of meaner condition then to be called
the glory of Israel; but perhaps there might be then reason either from it is
situation, or it is strength, or beauty, why it was so called, tho now unknown.
Many therefore like not this interpretation, but rather follow that, which our
Translators also give in the Margin. The glory of Israel shall come unto
Adullam. But then in telling what is meant by the glory of Israel, they do not
agree. Abarb. Hieron. Ribera. Sa.
Some take glory as spoken by way of Irony and derision, or of Antiphrasis, or
expressing things by their contrary, and to intimate disgrace and dishonor.
The same honor which Israel had, shall Adullam also have, viz. Shame, Ruin,
and Destruction. If this sense be embraced, then may the word (...) Cabod be
looked on according to another signification Rib. C. a Castro.
which it has of weight or heaviness, as if he should say, the heavy weight of
calamity, or burden, under which Israel is pressed, shall fall even on Adullam
also. 2. Ab. Ez. R. D. Kimchi. R. Tanchum. Vatabl. etc.
Others think, that the word heir is here again understood, the heir of, or he
that has seized on the glory of Israel, shall come as far as to Adullam. 3.
Maresius his French notes.
Others, the glory of Israel, that is, their wealth and riches, Michlal Yophi.
or peculiarly their Children, spoken of in the next verse (which are the glory
of their Parents) being taken away by the Assyrian conqueror, shall come, or
be brought by him to Adullam, whether he shall proceed to take that also. 4.
Grotius, Stokes.
Others think the Assyrian to be called the glory of Israel, as he in whose
friendship the Israelites formerly gloried, but now have all their glory taken
away by him. 5. Jun. Trem. Tarnov.
Others by it think to be meant Jerusalem, which was the glory, both of that
Land, and all the Earth: then the words must found according to the first
rendering in our Translation, he, that is, the heir (or conquering Enemy) shall
come unto Adullam, and to the glory of Israel, or, as Some Drusius.
reading it in the Vocative case, he shall come unto Adullam, and so near to
thee, or beyond thee O glory of Israel, O Jerusalem. In Calvin.
Some, the glory of Israel shall come to be but as Adullam, an obscure Cave, or
ignoble place, that Cave where David flying from Saul, hid himself, I Sam.
XXII. I. and where at other times he was 2 Samuel XXIII. 13. and 2. Chron. XI.
15. But it is mentioned not only as a Cave, but as a City, a royal City, Ios.
XII. 15. taken by Joshua and Israel, and transferred to the Tribe of Judah,
Ios. XV. 35. made a City of defense by Rehoboam 2 Chronicles. XI. 7. a City that had
villages belonging to it, Nehem. XI. 30. so that for all that is said, it might
for reasons then well known be called the glory of Israel. It may farther be
considered Oecolamp.
whether by the glory of Israel, may not be meant God himself, as if he should
say, that he by his justice on them manifesting his Glory, would come even as
far as to Adullam, in the inmost part of the Kingdom of Judah, giving all into
the hand of the Enemy. And while Adullam, and the other particular places are
named, See Abarb. who says, Maresha and Adullam here are names by which the
whole Kingdom of Judah is designed.
no doubt, the whole Land is understood thereby, and God's judgments denounced
to all of it, and so the next words will be directed, not to the last
particular City named, but to the whole land.

16 Make the bold, and poll thee for thy delicate Children, enlarge thy
baldness as the Eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee.
Make thee bald, etc.] God's judgments being thus gone out against thee, O thou
land of Judah, nothing remains, but that thou give up thy self wholly to sorrow
and mourning, and express thy grief in all outward signs thereof; which,
according to the custom of those times; was by plucking and cutting of the
hair, even to the bringing of baldness on themselves. See Ier. VII. 29. Amos
VIII. 10. Job. I. 20. The occasion of sorrow to her was very great, viz.
because the choicest of her People, called her delicate Children, those that
were tenderly and delicatly brought up by her, and most dear unto her, should
partly be slain, partly carried away captive by the enemy; and she (spoken to
as a mother) is bid to show great signs thereof, even to enlarge her baldness
as the Eagle which has lost her feathers; as of Eagles in Bochart. de Animal.
part. 2. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
general it is said, that at certain times they do: except we may think some
kind of Eagle, which is naturally bald, particularly alluded to.

Kamus in (...) and (...) Heb. (...) and (...) Levit. XI. 18.
CHAP. II.
VER. 1. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when
the morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the power of their
hand.
VVO unto them, etc.] How justly deserved those judgments were, which before,
and after are denounced against Israel and Judah, the Prophet makes manifest,
by a declaration of some of those sins, which the inhabitants of them were
guilty of. As here first, because the powerful ones among them (for which a woe
is denounced against them) did in the Psalm. XXXVI. 4.
night upon their beds, when they should have Psalm. IV. 4.
command with their own hearts, (and examined their ways to see what they had
done amiss, that they might amend it) devise iniquity and plot evil; not to
conceal it, as a work of darkness, R. Tanchum.
but that they might be ready to act it as soon as the morning light should
give them opportunity: and then did without delay practice it openly in the
light, and face Abarb.
of the Sun, without fear or shame, with all their might, as far as it was in
the power of their hands; because there was none, who by executing justice did
restrain them, but they were suffered to do what they could, and would. It may
be observed that the word (...) El, which is rendered Power, does also signify
God, and that is the reason, why the Ancient Vulg. Latin renders, because their
hand is against God: but the like expression being else where used, as Genesis
XXXI. 29. Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 32. Prove. III. 27. he renders it by having strength, or
being able: and so that here it ought to be rendered, is the more general
opinion of Interpreters; and that those, that interpret the words otherwise, as
some other Syriac. Greek.
Ancient versions likewise do, interpret them wrong.

2 And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them
away: so they oppress a Man and his house, even a Man and his heritage.
They covet fields, etc.] what they covet in their mind, R. D. Kimchi.
they strive to possess themselves of, by the force of their hands, whether
Abarbi.
their poorer neighbors lands, or houses, that ly convenient for them; which
if they will not part with to them on their own terms, they spare not to use
toward them all Aben Ezra.
fraudulent or violent courses, till they have gotten, what they have a mind
to, from them: according R. D. Kimch.
to the dealing of Ahab toward Naboth for his Vineyard.

3 Therefore thus says the Lord, behold, against this family do I devise an
evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go
haughtily: for this time is evil.
Against this family, etc.] i. e. This whole nation, the family, or posterity
of Jacob, this wicked People, do I devise or intend an evil of punishment, for
the evil of sin which they plot or devise; from which you shall not remove
your necks, nor be able by any means to free your selves, but shall be pressed
down with it, so that you shall not henceforward carry your selves proudly and
haughtily with heads lifted up: for the time shall be so evil and calamitous,
that you shall have no occasion, no heart, or power so to do.

4 In that day shall one take up a parable against you, and lament with a
doleful lamentation, and say, We be utterly spoiled: he has changed the
portion of my people: how has he removed it from me? turning away he has
divided our fields.
In that day shall one take up a parable against you.] One is here supplied, as
in such manner of speech else where. So Genesis XLVIII. I. one told Joseph, and
ver. 2. and one told Jacob. So that it may be rendered to the same sense, as
the Vulgar Latin has it, There shall be taken up a parable, or, Men shall take
up a parable, a doleful song with parabolical and figurative expressions.

And lament with a doleful lamentation.] The Margin says, that in the Hebrew
it is, with a lamentation of lamentations. There are here three words in the
Hebrew eloquently joined of much like sound, or agreement between themselves,
viz. (...) Nahah, (...) Nehi, (...) Nihjah. Of the rendering the two former of
which, there is no doubt but the first, as a Verb, signifies shall lament, the
second, as a Noun, Lamentation; but concerning the third doubt is made, Some
taking it as Noun Substantive, to signify the same with the second, viz.
Lamentation; and so the same signification repeated Rab. Tanch.
will be but as much as to say a great, or doleful Lamentation. So some Jews.
Others take it for an Epithet added to the second, from another root of
something different signification, which ours Dan. VIII. 27. renders, I
fainted. Others was broken; and so 'twill be as much as broken, or grievous,
and will still very well agree with that in the text of our English Bibles, a
doleful Lamentation. See R. Tanch.
Others take it as signifying, He that is then present or remaining, from the
word 1 Kings XXI.
(...) Hajah, that signifies, to be; and then 'twill express who it is that
shall take up that parable and make that Lamentation, viz. he that shall then
be, or remain: or See R. Solomon and Paraeus.
may it not as so be taken for an Epithet, and rendered a being lamentation, a
lamentation that is, i. e. that has being, or, is durable, or, is taken up in
the world. Others from the same root and signification render it, It is so, De
Dieu.
or it is done, and come to pass, shall he say, we be utterly spoiled, etc. or
Abarb. R. Tanchum.
as Others, shall lament with a lamentation for what is done, and say, etc.
These then being the significations, which the word as here written is capable
of, whereas the Latin renders A Song shall be sung with sweetness, it is manifest
it ought to be understood no otherwise, then Menochius. Tyrinus. See Greek
translat.
that it should be a mournful Song, or ditty, elegantly or musically composed,
and sung in an artificial tune: not that it should be pleasant, as to the
matter, which was a doleful lamentation: sweet it might be to the enemy, and
pleasing, but to the sufferers no further, then as thereby by venting the grief
of their hearts Chr. a Castro.
they might something allay, and assuage it. It Is disputed who it is that is
said, shall take up this parable and make this lamentation, or mournful Song.
R. D. Kimchi.
Some say the false Prophets, seeing their promises of good to come to nothing,
or to be turned clean contrary; Abarban. Montanus, Chapter a Castro. Deodat.
Oecolamp. Ribera. Tarnov.
Others, those that were oppressed by the more potent, and spoiled, spoken of
in the foregoing words; ^ Others, the insulting enemy; Others, every one, or
all of them, on whom these calamities should come. But the words being in the
Original Text put indefinity, y 'twill be convenient so to take them, as that
they, or, any that shall look on what they suffered, shall have occasion thus
to say, as in their person, (for the words are spoken as in their person,) or
according to Some, as we said, whosoever shall be then present, and with any
concern look on, what has befallen them.

We are utterly spoiled.] R. Judah. It in. Kimchi in Radic. (...)
Some will have it found, we are utterly spoiled of, or by our selves.

He has changed the portion of my People.] i.e. Their land; i. e. God has
taken it from them, and given it to others, changed the owners thereof: which
to express the Latin renders Sa. Rib. Chenoc.
The part, or portion, of my People is changed, rather then as the Doway
translation has it more obscurely, part of my People is changed, R, Tanch.
Some will have this to be read with an interrogation, as the following words
are by way of admiration! How does, (or, shall) he change the portion of my
People? Or else, by the portion of my People, to be meant God, who is called
the portion of Jacob, Ier. X. 16. and the meaning to be, Shall the portion of
my People change them, for another People, whom he shall cause to prevail over
them?

How has he removed it from me!] That is, the portion of my People. Turning
away he has divided our Fields, viz. R. Tanch.
God, or the enemy by his permission, or, as in the Margin, in stead of
restoring, he has divided (or, divides) our fields. The words in the Original
being in this verse very concise, are for that reason obscure; the latter words
as to a verbal translation ly thus, how shall, or how does he remove to me, to
turn, or to return, our Fields he divides: which words though then, when they
were spoken, and when the Hebrew language was in common use, and the things
spoken of before their eyes, known to all, they were doubtless well understood,
yet now that they may be put into another language, and in it made plain and
intelligible, will require some change of order, or a supply of something
understood. In that rendering which is in the Text and so Jun. Trem.
of our Bibles, there is not much alteration, only to turn or return it
expresses by turning away, i. e. in or by turning away, and the sense is
plain; except it be made a doubt, whether it be meant, turning away our Fields,
or turning away himself from us. As to that in the margin, there is intimated,
and briefly expressed in the word instead a supply of what R. D. Kimchi.
Vatablus and Michlal Yophi.
is by some in more words given, thus, when I expected, that he should have
restored our fields, he has divided them (to the enemy, or given them to the
enemy that divides them,) or, How is it, that he, (that is, the Enemy) takes
away that which is mine? Instead of restoring our fields, as we hoped, he
divides them among his own Soldiers or People. Others yet something otherwise
make their supplies, R. Tanchum.
some making this their meaning, how does he take away me, that is, my People
spoken of, or that he may turn over, or give up to the enemy our fields, that
they may divide them, or he divides them to others, or to the enemy; thinking
it necessary to understand either to the enemy, or to stranger, or some such
word. This is the interpretation and opinion of a learned Jew. Abu. Walid. in
the root (...).
Another more ancient, and of great repute among them, gives this as the sense
of this whole Lamentation; we are utterly spoiled, so that the enemy takes
away the fields [or lands] of my People from them. Ah and alas, how shamefully
or grievously has he removed us by driving us out, and divided our fields
violently taking them from us! He notes that the word (...) Leshobeb (which
Ours interpret in the text, turning away, and in the margin, instead of
restoring, and he renders by removing, or driving out,) is to be joined to the
foregoing words, and the following to be taken by themselves apart, and then
the word (...) Yamir, which Ours render, he has changed, (though he says it
properly signifies so,) he takes here to be in the same sense with the
following word (...) Yamish which Ours render removed it, (because changing is
nothing but removing a thing from its place;) the note of exclamation, how, he
looks on, as an expression of the grievousness, shamefulness, or
disgracefulness of a thing, with admiration at the strangeness of it, here as
in other Psam. LXXIII. 18. Isaiah X IV 13.
places. Of such translations as are in the hands of Christians some ancient
ones depart farther from the words in the Original, so that they cannot be
easily reconciled; as the Greek which renders, we are made very miserable, the
part or lot of my People has been divided by cord, or measuring line, and
there was none that hindered him, that he might turn away, or, that he might
restore, as the Arabic: and the Syriack as wide, the Robber shall spoil us,
and shall with a measuring line divide the part of my People, neither is there
any that restores our part by a measuring line. Those that are in Latin, and
more modern Languages, keep closer to the words, yet is there no small variety
among them. The Ancientest Latin renders, Doway Bible
part, or, the part, of my People is changed. How shall he depart from me,
whereas he returns, that will divide our regions! Others differ from it, and
among themselves, yet all so as to look on the words to have in their root the
same significations. But then in rendering them as here placed Actively or
Passively, or applying them to different subjects, or making their pauses or
distinctions diversely, make some difference in the sense. When the reader shall
have viewed them all, he will probably find good reason to like those rendrings
in our English Bibles given, as well as any, and acquiesce in them having his
liberty given him of choosing either that in the Text or that in the margin. But
it may be farther observed, that whereas the word (...) Shobeb which is by Ours
rendered in the Text, turning away, and in the margin restoring, and by most in
one of these significations, has also in the same manner written another
signification in the Scripture, viz. Isaiah LVII. 17. Jer. III. 14. and 22.
of Rebellious, Perverse, or Refractory. Some other learned Jews will have it
here to be taken in that sense, and to be an Epithet of the spoiler, or enemy.
Abarb.
So one of them, taking these as the words of such as were oppressed and had
their fields and houses by violence taken from them (as ver. 2.) gives the
meaning thus (and is therein followed by a learned Arias Mont.
Christian) the great ones of the Land spoil us of our inheritance, and so are
we spoiled by our selves; and for the iniquity of this violent oppression, my
People shall change their portion, going captives into another land. How, that
is, to what profit, does he take away mine inheritance, seeing within few days
the perverse rebellious one, viz. the enemy, the King of Assyria, that
blasphemeth God, shall divide our fields, and give them all to his servants?
This Interpreter would have the particle or letter, (...) L. prefixed to (...)
Shobeb, and usually signifying to, or for, here to signify nothing, but to
supply only the place of the particle of the Nominative case to wit (...) H.
Aben Dana.
Another embracing the same signification of the word, (...) Shobeb, but taking
the Lamentation to be uttered by some false Prophet, who saw all things succeed
contrary to what he promised, thus expounds the words, Shall we be utterly
spoiled by our enemies? Will he change the portion of my People? How can it be
that he should put and remove me from mine inheritance, seeing I am his People
and inheritance, to give it to a perverse rebellious one, a people that
blasphemeth God, which shall divide our fields? But if the words be taken
indefinitly, and not particularly applied either to the poor oppressed, or to
the false Prophets, but to any that shall take up this Lamentation as in the
person of the People, which seems better, then that word (...) Shobeb being
taken in this last sense, all things will be regular without addition or
alteration, and the plain meaning this, He divides (or has divided) our
fields to a rebellious obstinate one, i. e. the Idolatrous enemy, the Assyrian:
Or with an interrogation, Will he divide our fields to a rebellious one? And so
De Dieu.
Some of them also, who take the word in another signification, put an
interrogation at the end, Does he divide our fields to restore them? Or, that
they should be restored? i. e. Shall our fields which are divided to; or by the
enemy, return or be restored to us again? Stokes.
Others without an interrogation, in returning, or when he, (i. e. the enemy)
returns, he shall divide our fields. And so in those Interpretations that our
translators give, and others.

5 Therefore thou shall have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the
Congregation of the Lord.
Therefore, etc.] Here is not much difference about the signification of the
words, but only about the person to whom they were spoken: R. D. Kimchi.
Some looking on them, as directed to the false Prophets, who were the cause of
error, and mischief to the People, that this should be for a punishment to
them, that when the Lord should restore his People to their Country, they
should have none of their posterity left to challenge any lot or part in the
land, by cord or measuring line again to be divided among them. Aben Ezra.
Abarb.
Others, as directed to the oppressors spoken of, ver. 2. as a threat to them,
or a curse of the oppressed on them, that it should be for a just punishment to
them, and so it will be R. Tanch.
continued with the word therefore going before, ver. 3. Others take it as a
curse denounced against the whole family before mentioned ver. 3. or the whole
Kingdom of Israel, that Abarb.
Grot.
they should have no more any tribe return thither into that land, Grot
which should by their Judges have it by lot and line divided to them, as it
was of old in the Jos. XII^. etc
time of Ioshuah. Drusius.
Some think this spoken of the Assyrians: but that seems not to accord so well
with the context. The plainest way seems to look on it, as spoken to the whole
People, denouncing to them the irrecoverable loss of their Country, and that
they should no more return to it to be therein the congregation of the Lord,
which should divide it among themselves. A cord by lot, or a line and lot, or,
a line with a lot, or for a lot, whereby to measure out a lot: R. Tanch.
the same word that signifies a cord, is itself used for a lot or portion.

6 Prophecy ye not, say they to them that Prophecy: they shall not Prophecy
to them, that they shall not take shame.
Prophecy ye not, say they to them that Prophecy, etc.] There is in
expounding this verse also great variety among Interpreters, the ground of
which will be seen by considering the order and import of the words in the
Hebrew: in that there is one word thrice repeated with little difference in the
form, as (...) Al Tattiphu Yattiphun Lo Yattiphu, the prime signification of
which word according to its root, is to drop, or distill and flow, and to carse
to drop or flow; and, from fluid things translated to speech, it signifies to
instill words, to speak to, and particularly to Prophecy to, as much as to say
to drop words one after another to, and in this sense it is manifestly here, as
elsewhere, often used. In the first place it is put in the second person as a
command given to some, do not ye speak, or Prophecy; in the second place in
the third person, as spoken of what some did, or would, or, should do: and so
in the last place also with a negative put before it, as showing what they did
not, or would not, or should not do: and signify, put together, barely thus
much, do not, or ye shall not, speak, or Prophecy; they do, will or shall,
say, or Prophecy; they shall not, or do not, speak, or Prophecy, without
mentioning by whom these words are uttered, or to whom directed. Concerning the
signification therefore of the words, there is not much dispute amongst
Interpreters, but in applying them to the persons by whom they should be
uttered, and to whom directed, and of whom spoken, and for what reason, is much
difference; and so the supplies, which they add to make the sense clear
according to their mind, diverse. Some take them to be partly the words of the
People, partly the words of God, or the Prophet from God, but then differing in
the parting them. Ours, as it appears by their adding say they to them that,
make the first words to be the words of the People, loath to hear Gods
judgments denounced against them for their sins, and therefore forbidding them
that Prophesied, that is the Prophets of God, to speak or Prophecy to them such
things as they did; and the next words they seem to take for Gods saying by way
of concession to what they would have, they shall not prophecy to them: but
then the latter words rendered, that they shall not take shame, are somewhat
obscure, Whether do they mean, they shall not say to them, as their false
Prophets did, that shame and confusion should not come upon them, though they
continued in their evil ways; or that they may not take shame, and so repent
of their wicked course, and prevent that confusion which shall fall upon them;
or, that they themselves, viz. the Prophets may not take shame, i. e. be
shamefully or contumeliously used: for this sense some R. D. Kimchi.
Interpreters give. In the margin we have another reading, prophecy not as
they, viz. the false Prophets, prophecy, and then the words will be to be
looked on as Gods words, and the following to be understood in the first sense
with a change of the person, as if God forbad his Prophets to sooth them up in
their sins. A Jun. Trem.
much approved Latin translation takes them all as the words of the People, and
thus renders them, Instill not, say they, i. e. the People to the true
Prophets, Let these, viz. the false Prophets, instill, they do not instill or
prophecy according to them, i. e. as our Prophets, the false Propets, who say,
that shame shall not cleave to the people, i. e. that they shall not be put to
that shame, which Gods Prophets threaten to them. In which translation are many
things supplied which make it somewhat harsh; from which De Dieu.
a late very learned Man so far differs, as to take them all for the words of
God, or his Prophet, and those directed either to the false Prophets, to this
sense, prophecy not; should they prophecy? they shall not prophecy to these,
shame shall not depart from them, i. e. they shall not Prophecy, for shame is
decreed to them, which shall not depart or be removed from them; or else to the
true Prophets, to this purpose, prophecy not my prophets to this rebellious
people; should they prophecy to them? They shall not prophecy to them, least
shame should be removed or depart from them, which ought not to be removed. He
gives both these Expositions, but prefers the former. But it may be considered
that as yet no mention has been made of false Prophets. This learned Man also
differs from the former, in that he takes the word (...) Yissag, not to have
the signification of apprehending, taking hold on, or overtaking; but of
departing from, as Dru. and the Arab. version.
Some others also do, as particularly Drusius and an ancient Arabic
translation out of Hebrew, which has, prophecy not as they prophecy; they
shall not prophecy to these: shame shall not depart from them: and indeed it
has both those significations; but the most both of Christians and Jews take
it in the former: so the ancient Latin Interpreter which to this sense renders
the words, according to the Doway English translation, speak not speaking,
which is of doubtful sense, whether they mean speaking, i. e. saying speak not,
or speak not by, or in speaking as Pelican.
Some, and according to Menoc. Tirinus. Ribera. Sa. Men.
Others should rather be rendered, speak not ye that speak, i. e. ye Prophets,
it shall not drop upon these, confusion shall not apprehend them. It, that is,
say Some, the wrath by you denounced shall not fall on them (as if spoken by
some that did not believe the Prophets) nor any such confusion. Others, your
Prophesying shall not prevail on them, shall not work any shame in them: as if
spoken by God or some man counselling the Prophets. This variety there is in
the translations which are in the hands of Christians; and much more yet, for
Some interpret the word, (...) Laelleh, which is rendered to them or these, as
not to belong to persons but to things, Thus, Prophecy not, or if they
prophecy, let them not prophecy Castalio.
such things, least they take shame, Grot.
Others, Prophecy not ye prophets of the Lord, they shall prophecy, viz.
Isaiah, Osee, Joel, Micah, etc. they shall not prophecy, i. e. there shall
come a time when the Prophets shall cease to Prophecy to you. What other
modern translations or expositions any shall meet with, he may examine and
judge, by comparing with these mentioned, and by what has been said of the
signification of the words. The Jews also in their expositions differ among
themselves. Ab. Walid. in root (...)
One of them and he one of the ancientest, thus gives his sense of these words,
he says that they did take in ill part, or detest the admonitions of the
Prophets, and bid them to desist from speaking to them, and to leave of their
admonitions by way of reproof from God of them for their rebellions, as else
where he says Amos. V. 10. they hate him that rebukes in the gate: this is
that which he says of them, prophecy ye not, i. e. that they forbad the
Prophets to admonish and instruct them; which is like to what they, with whom
Isaiah had to do, said to him, Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the
path, cause the holy one of Israel to cease from before us. Is. XXX. 11. But
the Prophets did not hearken to them, or leave to warn, admonish, and rebuke
them, that is it which he says of them, they do or will speak, or prophecy,
i. e. they say to them prophecy, or speak not, but they do prophecy, or
speak; then of what he says (...) Lo Yattiphu Laelleh, they do not prophecy
to these, the meaning is, but it is all one as if they did not Prophesy to
these, not direct their admonitions to them, for they do not incline their ear
to them. Then afterward he says ver. 11. If a man walking in the Spirit and
falsehood, do ly saying, I will prophecy to thee of wine etc. he shall be the
prophet of this people, i. e. to him will they hearken and give ear, to what he
says. The last words shame shall not, or does not, apprehend them according to
him import, that no reproofs of the Prophet work on them, else for shame they
would cease from their rebellions. Aben Ezra. R. D. Kimchi.
Others of them take (...) Yattiphun in the second place in something a
different sense, viz. a more general, for speaking or saying: and then Abarb
One, taking what is spoken as the words of the poor oppressed, gives this
meaning, Prophecy ye not, say they, i. e. those oppressed ones to the
Prophets, they shall, or should, not prophecy to these (oppressors) for they
will not take shame, not be moved to shame by any thing that the Prophets say
to them. This he prefers before that of Others, who R Solomon, R. D. Kimchi.
interpret them as if the wicked of the People should say to the Prophets,
Prophecy ye not: Let them not Prophecy to these (wicked People,) that they be
not put to shame (for their labor.) R. Tanchum.
Another of them thus renders the words, taking them as a farther description
of those wicked ones, of which it is said, ver. 2. they covet fields, etc. that
they also did say this to the Prophets, thus, prophecy ye not say they; they
shall not, or, let them not prophecy (with change of the person repeating
again their prohibition of them, as if they instantly and continually said it
both to the Prophets and amongst themselves) shall not shame overtake these? i.
e. will not they be ashamed of such doings? or ought not shame to be brought on
such as these? This Interpretation keeps close to the words, but distinguishes
them otherwise then Others, do, who think the accent requires that (...)
Laelleh, rendered, to these, be joined to the foregoing words, not to the
following; but he thinks that not necessary always to be observed: but if the
accent be observed, then he says the meaning will be, They that prophecy not
to these shall not take shame, that is, shall be free from that shame and
contumely which they would put on them. In this multitude of opinions and
judgments, the Reader will see it necessary to use his own, and that without
danger of great error, none of these expositions being contrary to the Analogy
of Faith or found Doctrine. It may, seeing we are forced to be tedious, be
farther observed, that some ancient Versions take the word, which all these
render speaking, or prophesying, in an other sense, viz. to signify weeping.
So the Greek, Weep not with tears, neither let him weep over these: for he
shall not put away shame. And so the Syriack and Arabic, as to that word. And
indeed weeping is not far from that notion of dropping, or flowing, which we
said the root of the word has. But no Modern Interpreters think it meet to
follow them in this place.

The Syriack joins the last words to the following verse, Let that shame
overtake you which is spoken or denounced to the house of Jacob.

7 O thou that are named the house of Jacob, Is the Spirit of the Lord
straightened? are these his doings? do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly?
O thou that art named the house of Jacob, etc.] The meaning of these words as
consequent on the former will be in a brief Paraphrase thus, O thou that art
named the house of Jacob, but do not in thy doings make good that name, Is
the Spirit of the Lord straightened? Is his mercy, his will or power of promising
by his Prophets good things and effecting them, now restrained more then
formerly, when he did both, that now thou receivest only threatening messages by
his Prophets? Are these his doings? was he wont thus to deal? or, Are these
punishments and judgments that he denounces, his constant workds, or those
that he delights to do? Do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly? Does he not promise good things and give them to him that is upright
and walks in good ways? Do ye not perceive by his different dealings, in
that he wrought wonderful things for you while you walked in obedience to him,
and now forsakes you and gives you up to evil, now that ye forsake him and
rebel against him, that the cause, of this change is from your selves, and that
he always does good, but to them that strive to do good, and walk in his right
ways? And even now if ye would by these menaces of the Prophets be wrought on
to amend your ways, for which they are intended, would not these also be for
good to you, and a means of saving you from that destruction which you for that
end are warned of by them? The words so understood, are plainly inferred from
the foregoing words, as an answer to them who forbad the Prophets to speak to
them such harsh things as they did, as if either they delivered not to them
rightly Gods message, or had not received a full measure of his Spirit, or that
'twere in their power to speak otherwise then God bad them speak: and so their
folly is discovered, in that they laid it not to heart, that the cause why such
severe things were by Gods Prophets denounded to them contrary to such gracious
promises, which had been made formerly to the true house of Jacob, was not from
any ill mind in the Prophets, nor any change in God, who still continued to do
good to them that continued to walk uprightly in his ways; but from
themselves, who were so changed, that they retained nothing of Jacob but the
bare name, and by their wickedness made themselves incapable of receiving
better messages, or that God should deal better with them. And this seems the
plainest meaning of the words. Others differently interpret them, as Some, who
in rendering the words agree, but then give the meaning thus, Dutch Notes,
Diodat.
Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened, so as that you should silence his
Prophets? as if he were not able to direct them what to say, or should not have
liberty to cause them to prophecy and denounce what he pleases? or should not
have power by them to pronounce against you evil things and to bring them to
pass? Jun. Trem. Parae.
Are these his works? These things which you do such works as he requires from
you, or is pleased with; or, Are these such works as become the house of Jacob?
and do my words no good with him that walks aright? are they not pleasing to
him, promising to him good, and instructing and correcting him for his good?
That they are not such to you is through your own fault, Vat
Others, Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened, that he cannot now send Prophets
as well as formerly, tho you enjoin silence to them? Arab. Mss. R. Tanchum.
Others differ in rendering the first words. Some thus, Is this said among you,
O house of Jacob? Or, as Some, Is it thus said? Ought it thus to be said? or,
What is this that is said, O house of Jacob? or, What is the saying of the
house of Jacob? and then go on in the expounding the following words, Christ. a
Castro.
Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened, as that, if you silence these Prophets,
he cannot send others with as severe messages? Are these evils denounced the
works of God, or, are they not the effects of your Sins? But R. Tanchum.
a learned Jew will not have the words so read Interrogatively, because then
the following should be without an Interrogation, as expressing what he wonders
to hear them say, viz. The Spirit of the Lord is shortened: yet the Chaldee
Paraphrast seems so to take it, rendering, Is it right which the house of Jacob
say? And the author of the Vulgar Latin seems to take it as founding, (as the
Tugurine version has it) Is it not said by the house of Jacob? Or, without an
Interrogation, That which is said by the house of Jacob, is, etc. While he
renders See Abarb.
the House of Jacob has said: and then the following words are looked on as
the words of the house of Jacob, and expounded to this sense, Why do ye, O
Prophets, threaten such hard things to us? Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened,
his mercy restrained, that he will not do good to us? Christ. a Castro. Sa.
Menochius, Tirinus, Ribera. Pelicanus.
Are these his thoughts and works? viz. to prosecute revenge so as to destroy
us his People, and forget to be good to us? and then the next words, as the
words of God in answer to them, That he is good, and his promises good, and he
will do good, but to those that are good, not to such wicked ones as they are.
Lud. de Dieu.
A later learned divine differs from these foregoing, in the rendering of the
last words, instead of, Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly?
reading it, Are not my words good? viz. these words that I the Prophet speak,
that he walks with the upright: or, Shall not my words please you? they would
please you if you were upright, for he, that is God, walks with the upright.
The cause of this difference he takes from a Grammatical nicety, because,
says he, if those words (...) Hayashar Holec were to be rendered him that
walks uprightly, the Article or not of Emphasis (...) Ha should be joynd with
the Participle (...) Holoc and that put before the other Noun thus (...)
Haholec Yashar. But the first exposition is not liable to this exception, for
in that (...) Yashar is not taken as a Noun, but a Verb, and (...) Ha put
before it signifies which; as manifestly elsewhere it is, put with a Verb in
that sens, See R. Tanch and R. Kimchi.
as Josh. X. 24. (...) Hehalecu, which went with him, and 1 Chronicles. XXVI. 28.
(...) Hahicdish rendered which Samuel the seer had dedicated, and so Ezekiel. XXVI.
17. And so the literal rendering will be, he that is upright walking, or, going
on in the wales of God, the plain sense of which is, him that walks
uprightly: or, if it be taken as a Noun it is salved by understanding (...)
Derec way, i. e. that walks in the right way: so Aben Ezra, and R. David
Kimchi. The Ancient M. S. Arab version, which we cited, renders the whole thus,
It is said among the house of Jacob, Is the power of the Lord shorned? Were
these his Properties? Do not my words do good to him that is upright, walking
after obedience to God? Abarbinel and Arias Montanus following him, take them
to be the words of God to the People, who wondered that the Prophet should cease
from reproving the oppressors. The first exposition seems the plainest.

8 Even of late my People is risen up as an Enemy: ye pull off the robe with
the garment, from them that pass by securely, as Men averse from war.
Even of late, Marg. Yesterday.] The ancient Latin translatour makes of (...)
Veethmul the word so translated two words, or one compounded of two, and
renders it And on the contrary. Nor is he alone in this, Abu Wald. See Abarb.
An ancient and learned Jew so also takes it to be, tho they differ in their
applying it to the following words: the Latin rendering the whole verse thus
(according to the Doway English translation thereof) And on the contrary my
People is risen up as an adversary: from above the Coat you have taken away the
Cloak, and them that passed simply you turned into Battle, or War: but that
learned Jew to this sense, And against my People he, that is, the potent
oppressor before spoken of, or, every one of you, has set up He takes Lamed
for a Note of the accusative case.
an Enemy. It is, says he, in sense all on as if he had said, ye have set up
an Enemy, one person being put for another, as sometimes elsewhere, i. e. ye
cause to have power over them, and you set in wait for them such who shall
evil entreat them, and spoil them, according to what is elsewhere said, chap.
III. ver. 3. Who eat the flesh of my People, and flay their skin from them, and
Psalm. XXII. 18. they part my Garments among them. Then, he says, over against
you (i. e. wherever ye go, whoever ye come toward, or whomsoever ye meet with)
ye strip or spoil of his garment and robe, so that of them that pass by
securely, there are those who are like Men returning from War, viz. in as bad
a condition, by your ill dealing spoiled and robbed. This exposition is given
by that ancient Grammarian of great note among them upon particular examination
of the words, and it gives a good meaning, viz. Against my People ye set an
Enemy: who ever ye meet with (...) strip of his garment and covering, so that
of them who pass on securely there are those who are become as Rashi.
Men turning from War. Yet is he not, that I find, followed by others, who
generally take (...) Ethmul for one word, and to signify Yesterday, or, of
late, or, before now; and then in expounding the other words they differ among
themselves. One exposition given by some learned Jews, runs thus, R. Tanchum.
Abarb.
But Yesterday, or before now, my People i. e. Israel behaving themselves as my
People, stood up against the Enemy, were able to resist and prevail against
him, but now having forsaken God, you are so far from this, that at the sight
of a garment at a distance, taking it for the Enemies colors or ensign, or for
an Enemy coming to set on you, you strip off your clothes, and cast from you
your garments, that you may fly the lighter. And if you espy and but passing
securely and quietly on the way, you presently flee for fear of them with all
speed, as Men that return flying from War, or the Battle, for fear of the
Enemy pursuing them. And so may it be compared with what is said, Levit. XXVI.
36. The sound of a shaking leaf shall chase them, and they shall flee as
fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall where none pursues; Abarb.
or, you taking them for such as return from War, take fear and flee before
them. Ar. Mont.
A learned Christian also embraces this interpretation; only that the latter
words he expounds, that those that pass on quietly in their way, seem such as
return from War, i. e. You for fear casting away your garments, the traveller
that minds no such thing, finding them in the way, comes home with them as
if he returned laden with spoils from the War. To this also may our
translatours seem to point in their Marginal reading, viz. over against a
garment. R. Tanch.
Another Exposition is this, That God having before declared that his words do
good, that he promises and gives good things to him that walks uprightly,
shows now how incapable they are of hearing or receiving good from him, by
describing their ways contrary to his: as if he should say, But not to you
(whom yet he terms my People) who are become as enemies to me, resisting or
setting your selves against my Commandments both before and till now; viz. in
that you do wrong and violence for a robe or garment, which injuriously ye take
away from them that pass on in the ways, thinking themselves secure, as if
they fled in the time of war, and were gotten out of the reach of the Enemy;
or, who are glad when they are escaped out of your hands alive, after you have
taken those goods they had, as they use to do who are fled out of wars. And
this exposition is confirmed by what follows after in verse 9. The Women of my
People ye cast out, etc; as if he said, These injuries ye do abroad in the
ways; but within the Cities ye do them in another way, destroying Houses
through whoredom. To the same scope tend generally the modern translations, as
taking the words for a description of the perverseness, violence and rapine of
that People, though among themselves they something differ in expounding and
applying them. Calv. Gro.
Some, They that were Yesterday or heretofore, my People, now rise up in
hostile manner against me: ye take away the mantel from above their coat, i. e.
ye strip the poor both of their upper and under garment; they that pass by
peaceably are to you as those that return from War, i. e. are taken in War and
brought captives, whom ye may use as you please. Others, Yesterday of late, or,
before now, my People is risen up as an Enemy; against me say Some, Jun. Trem.
Tar. Aben Ez. R. D. Kim.
Others among themselves and against one another, referring it to the quarrels
of one of the two Kingdoms Judah and Israel against the other, and the injuries
and violences done in each of them by the oppression and rapine of the rich and
potent against the poor and weaker: De D^eu. R. Sal. Jar.
Others, before now, a good while since, my people has raised up, or made, me
their God an Enemy unto them by those their doings, the mention of which
follows, Ye pull of the robe with the garment. Pagn. edit. Tig. Christ. a
Castro. Vatab. Dutch Notes.
Others, differently distinguishing the words, He that was before my People, as
if he were an Enemy, rises up against a garment; ye pull of the robe from them
that pass confidently, or securely, i. e. if ye see any in a garment that likes
you, ye rise up in an hostile manner to take it away; Jun. Trem. Tar.
Others, when there is a robe ye pull of the Garment, i. e. tho ye have a
garment of your own, not for need but through mere injuriousness you pull of
the robe or clothes from them that pass by securely as Dutch Notes.
Men averse from War, not intending to enter into contention, or meaning to
wrong any; Others not much differently, being quiet from War, thinking now all
things quiet and safe; Others, whereas ye are removed from Wars; Others,
returning from the battle or War, having escaped thence, and so now no farther
fearing any Enemy; Vatablus.
Others, as men returning (i. e. you being as Soldiers returning) from war
bloody and insolent. Lud. De Dieu.
A modern learned Divine thinks the words may thus be rendered, But of late he,
i. e. God, has given up my People to the Enemy. Together with the mantel take
away the robe from those that pass on securely and return from war; cast out
the Women of my People etc. as if they were Gods commission and command unto
the enemy. But this seems harsh. Diodati renders thus, Moreover heretofore my
People lifted themselves up against the Enemy, but now ye laying wait against,
or, for garments, spoil of their mantle passengers which were in security being
in quiet from War. To some of these forementioned I suppose will be reduceable
what other modern translations any shall meet with. Some more ancient, as the
Greek, Syriack, and printed Arabic, are so wide from them, that they will not
easily be adjusted either with any of them or with the original Hebrew. The
Chaldes uses his liberty as a Paraphrast. Among all none seems to give to the
words their force better then that first of the Jewish Grammarian. It will not
be needful nicely to enquire into the difference between the two words, one of
which is rendered Robe the other Garment. The first See De Dieu.
(...) Salmah seems to denote a looser garment cast over the rest, the second
(...) Eder a closer more fitted to the Body. If we compare these words with
those of our Savior See Grotius.
Mat. V. 40. where is first named Coat the under, and after Cloak the upper
Garment, and Luke VI. 29. where on the contrary first Cloak, then Coat, this
will look much like a proverbial Speech, and the nameing of them both, whether
one or the other first or last, will signify the greedy violence of the enemy
stripping the poor Man not in part but of all that he has. A manuscript Arab
Translation thus renders, Yesterday my People resisted their Enemy, but now
over against a Garment, or at sight of a garment ye pull of (the Garment) from
(perhaps he means their clothes because of, or for fear of) those that pass by
securely being turned back from war. Or otherwise perhaps his meaning may be,
Heretofore, they made war with their Enemies, but now at sight of a garment
they fall to stripping those that pass by, etc. they from being valiant
Soldiers in War, are turned only Thieves and Robbers in time of peace.

9 The Women of my People have ye cast out from their pleasant Houses, from
their Children have ye taken away my Glory for ever.
The Women of my People have ye cast out from their pleasant Houses, etc.] The
different Expositions given of these words are reduceable to these two, Abarb.
See Vatabl.
First, that they did by violence cast out the Wives or Widows of those poor
Men whom they oppressed and spoiled of their possessions and inheritance, or
had slain, or driven away from their houses, wherein they had lived with their
Husbands and Children with comfort and content; and likewise by the same means
took away from their Children the glory of God for ever, i. e. Jun. Trem.
Tarnov. Deodat.
those rights and privileges which God in his law had given them, or that
glorious inheritance, which God had given them for a perpetual possession, and
brought them to so low and contemptible a condition, that the honor of being
Gods Children and People did no more appear in them: Or as Others, by depriving
them of their substance and patrimony, by enjoying of which they should have
had occasion to give praise and glory to me perpetually, you cause them being
deprived thereof to curse you, and murmur against me. Others, by hindering them
being robbed and spoiled from such honorable marriages, whereby they might
have left a Christ. a Castro. Tirinus.
posterity to my glory: Grot.
Others, by seduceing them to Idolatry, and causing them to follow it, ye have
caused my glory to cease among them for ever, Stokes.
that glory which I should have had from them, so that they think no more of
worshipping me. My glory says one, i. e. Peli.
my Temple, which by your sins ye have caused to be destroyed. But what had
those of the ten Tribes to do with the Temple? The same has another
exposition, ye have caused that no Children be left to praise me. Or may it not
be? My glory from them, the glory that I should receive from them, or the glory
that they should receive from me. Jun. Trem. Tig.
Some render the last words, and that for ever, i. e. this ye continually do.
Abarb.
A learned Jew interpreting the former part of the verse, as we have said,
distinguishes the words differently, and otherwise reads the latter part thus,
The women of my People have ye cast out from their pleasant houses together
with their Children, (that ye might take and posses their houses and their
Inheritance:) shall ye take (possess, or retain) my glory for ever? i. e. with
such your evil doings shall ye continue in my chosen land my glory the glory of
all Lands? No: as ye have cast out others from their pleasant houses, so will I
cast you out from my land, Arise ye and depart, etc. The second way, which
other expositors follow, is by interpreting what is said, the women of my
People have ye cast out, etc. Tar.
concerning divorce and parting betwixt Man and Wife, which some expound of the
causeless divorces by which those lawless Men spoken of did cast their own
Wives out of their houses in which they had lived long with content, and those
Wives not strangers or captives but of their own kindred and Nation which God
called his own People, and so took from them his glory, the glory of his
Covenant between Man and Wife, which redounded See Christ. a Castro.
to the Children born in lawful wedlock, and was taken away by the rescinding
and breaking that Covenant: or in that they lost those privileges, which from
the good agreement of their Parents would have redounded to them. R. Tanch.
Others, of such divorces which they caused between other Men and their Wives,
by committing lewdness and Adultery with them, or by R. Kimch.
giving their husbands occasion to suspect them, while without their leave they
violently went into the Houses of the poor (who are called by God his People)
where their Wives were, to rob and spoil them, so that the Husbands there
finding them, suspected their Wives of lewdness with them, and so they caused
them to divorce them and put them away out of their houses, in which they took
delight, and so from their little Children, whom by this means they deprived of
his glory, R. Tanch.
i. e. that grace and that sanctity which resided among them while they lived
in obedience to God, to which condition they should never again be restored by
reason of that their separation and dispersion, which these wicked Men were
cause of. Or by glory R Kinchi.
Some will have meant that conjunction between Man and Wife by God instituted
for those ends, which rightly observed are, as all his works and ordinances,
his glory for which and by which Men praise him. The Greek version of this
verse and Printed Arabic are far different from all other, and from the words
in the Hebrew. A manuscript Arabic translation (I suppose Rab. Saadias) the
women of my People ye thrust out of the Houses of their delightfulness (or
wherein they showed themselves delightful and pleasing to their husbands;) from
their Children ye take my Glory for ever.

10 Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted, it
shall destroy you even with a sore destruction.
Arise ye and depart, etc.] According to this rendering the sense is plain, R.
Tanch.
Prepare you for departure and removal from this land for it may not be, or, is
not convenient that it should be a resting place to you after such wickednesses
committed by you in it; but it shall destroy you, because it is polluted by
you, and that with a sore destruction: and the words well bear this rendering.
It is perhaps It is that which R. D. Kimchi follows.
the best: yet do some differently render, especially the latter words. The
ancient Vulgar Latin has to this sense, Arise and go, because you have no rest
here; for the uncleanness thereof it shall be corrupted with a sore putre
faction; so the Doway Version has it. The greatest difference in this from*
Ours is, that the word (...) Tameah, which Ours renders as a Verb is polluted,
is in it taken for a Noun, Jun. Trem.
as it is by others also, and rendered uncleanness; and the Verb (...)
Techabbel, which Ours render actively, shall destroy you, in it is rendered
intransitively or passively, as Some think it ought here to be taken, shall be
corrupted or destroyed: which they might be the more induced to do, because
otherwise you is to be understood, for there is nothing to signify it expressed
in the Original. And for that reason may it be also, that See Syriack and Tig.
Schindl. in (...)
Others render, Because pollution corrupts, or, as another, because of
pollution, which corrupts even with a great corruption; otherwise the meaning
in both is much one, and respect is had to the same signification of the root
or Verb (...) Chabal, which has, beside this of destruction or corruption,
other significations also, which some choose to follow: as namely (...) Chebel
signifies a Cord, and the author of that well approved Tigurin Latin
translation following this, renders, because it is polluted and corrupted and
the cord too much stretched: but he might have done well farther to have
explained his meaning: he is not for ought I find followed by any other. It
signifies also a company, and in this signification a noted Rabbin (Solomon
Iarchi) taking it, expounds the words, that it may be polluted it gathers
companies, which companies being met declare their counsels: and for
confirmation of his taking it in this signification he alleges the authority
of the Chaldee, It may be enquired whether here be not two rendrings in Chaldee
clapped into one out of different readings: that which is cited by Rab. Solomon
is only the latter.
who paraphraseth the words: Arise and be gone, this land is not an house of
rest to the wicked: that they may pollute it they do corruptly; that you may
defile it ye gather in companies to it, or against it. But neither is this by
many followed. It has the signification lastly of grievous pains and pangs,
such as of a woman in travel, and the Verb, to conceive and ^e in pains or
pangs of travel, with pain to bring forth; and this here has place in the
opinion of some learned Jews. Abu Walid. R. D. Kim. in Rad. Mich. Yophe.
One of them, taking the Verb (...) Techabbel in the first signification, and
the Noun* (...) Chebel in this last, interprets the words thus, Because it is
polluted by you it shall destroy you, and there shall be sore pains, viz, to
it, i. e. to you its inhabitants; R. Tanch. and see Ab. Ezra.
or, says he, the Verb also may be taken in the last sense, and then
interpreted, because it is polluted by wheredom, viz. spiritual, (that is,
Idolatry) and carnal, pains shall come upon it, and those pains or pangs sharp,
or grievous. And so does the manuscript Jewish Arab translation render them,
Arise and be gone, this is not a resting place for you; because it is polluted
it shall be in pangs, and the pangs shall be sharp. And the meaning thus will
be good and agreeable to the Scripture way of denouncing punishments to a
sinful Nation, viz. that the land defiled by their Idolatries and abominable
lewdness and all manner of wickedness, shall be pained as it were a woman in
travel and in pangs, desirous to be eased of them her burden, and not be at
quiet till she be delivered of them, and they cast forth of her. By the pains
and sorrows attributed to the land are noted those evils that R. Tanch.
shall sease on the Inhabitants thereof. The like expressions see Ier. XIII. 2.
and XLIX. 24. Psalm XLVIII. 6. Hos. XIII. 13. Isa. XIII. 8. with many other. As
for the meaning of the judgment here denounced, either according to the first
or this last interpretation it may be compared with Lev. XVI. 11. 25, 28. and
chap. XX. 22. the meaning is, that this land, which God had given them for a
rest, and they promised to themselves for a sure resting place, now being by
them contrary to his command defiled, should no longer bear them, but as a foul
Stomach corrupting what it has in it, violently vomit and cast them forth, or,
as a Woman at her full time desirous to be eased of her burden, should be
grievously pained, till it were rid of them, as being weary of them.

11 If a Man walking in the Spirit and falsehood, do ly, saying, I will
Prophecy unto thee of Wine and strong Drink, he shall even be the Prophet of
this People.
If a Man walking in the Spirit, and falsehood do ly, saying, etc.] Or, as in
the Margin, walk with the wind, and ly falsely. These interpretations are all
one in sense; for if (...) Ruach be rendered Spirit, then will it be, a Man
that pretends to the Spirit of Prophecy, whereas he has it not, but follows
his own false Spirit, which is no better then wind and vanity, See Ezekiel. XIII.
3. Hos. IX. 7. Jer. V. 13.
and the word signifies as well wind, as Spirit: so that the meaning will be,
Abu Walid. R. Salo. Jar. Ab. Ez. Abarb. R. Tanchum.
if any falsely pretending to the Spirit of Prophecy and inspiration from God,
but indeed walking with the wind, Schind* in (...) and see Abarb. Oecolamp.
Castal.
and following what is vain, and false, shall forge a lie, and say, he has
commission to prophecy unto them of wine and strong drink, i. e. to bid them
drink and be merry and to enjoy themselves, not fearing those evils, which the
true Prophets denounced to them, Tarnovius, Diodati, Drusius.
or that they shall have plenty of wine, and all good things or, shall say, I
will Prophecy to thee for wine, and strong drink, i. e. R. D. Kimchi.
Vatablus, Drusius.
If thou will give me a Cup of Wine, I will Prophecy and foretell good things
to thee, not Destruction and Calamity, as those do that tell thee, they are
sent with such sad messages from God, Even he shall be the Prophet of this
People, him will they readily accept of for such a Prophet as they would have,
and hearken unto him, whereas they will not hearken unto, or endure the true
Prophets, who reprove them, and denounce Gods judgments against them, if they
will not repent of their sins, and turn from them, but silence them, as verse
6. and see, Isa. XXX. 10. This way of expounding these words is so evidently
agreeable to them in the Original, that to enquire after others would rather
make them obscure, then add light to them. For as for that rendering of the
Vulgar Latin: Doway Transla.
would God I were not a Man having the Spirit, and that I did speak a lie? it
can hardly be fitted to the words in the Original. The particle (...) Lu, does
indeed signify would God as well as if. But then, what ground is there to add
the negative I were not? it would in this sense rather found, would God I were
a Man, etc. Again by what interpretation can this be made a wish befitting the
Prophet? He might perhaps wish, that no such severe message had bin sent by
him, as of destruction to those his People, out of his compassion to them; but
to wish that what by Gods command he spoke, were a lie, would be an injury, not
to himself only, but to the Spirit by which he spoke, the Spirit of truth, with
whom falsehood is not to be mentioned, much less either in word or wish
attributed to him. If he had only wished, that himself by his suffering might
have redeemed them, it had been an act of charity; but not to wish that God had
sent a lie by him. S. Paul says he could wish himself, even accursed from
Christ for his Brethrens sake, Romans IX. 3. i. e. suffer any evil to save them,
and win them to Christ, but not that the Gospel or Doctrine that he taught them
were a lie, rather then that they might suffer for refusing it.

12 I I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee, I will surely gather the
remnant of Israel, I will put them together as the Sheep of Bozrah, as the
flock in the midst of their fold; they shall make great noise by reason of the
multitude of Men.
13 The breaker is come up before them: they have broken up, and have passed
through the gate, and are gone out by it, and their King shall pass before
them, and the Lord on the head of them.
I will surely assemble O Jacob, all of thee, etc.] Very different opinions are
there concerning the Scope and meaning of these two verses, Some taking them as
a denunciation of judgment and utter destruction to them, as both before and
after is threatened by the Prophet from the Lord: Others as a promise of mercy
and restoration after dispersion, as it is usual in the Prophets to mingle
promises of mercy with threatenings of judgment. Others thirdly make them the
words of the false lying Prophets mentioned in the foregoing verse, bidding
them not believe the true Prophets threatening them with severe judgments, but
telling them, that however they threatened the contrary, it should be well with
them. The first of these ways is taken by diverse learned Men, both R. D.
Kimchi, Calvin. Paraeus, Drusius, De Dieu, Tirin. Gro.
Jews and Christians; and the words must then be expounded to this purpose,
That God threatens, that he will gather together the whole posterity of Jacob,
and the remnant of Israel, (for many of them had already been destroyed, or
carried away captives) i. e. all that remained both of the ten Tribes, and also
the two other of Judah, and Benjamin, in great multitudes, as flocks of Sheep
in Bozrah, a place noted for abundance of Sheep; that as a flock are gathered
into their fold, and there shut up, so they should be gathered into their
Cities and Towns, that they might be taken together, and there, by reason of
the multitude of them that were shut up, besieged, and distressed together, (
Grotius.
or by reason^ of the Enemies that in such great number surround them,) should
make great noise, and be much troubled, as a great flock of Sheep shut up in a
fold, are disturbed De Dieu.
when any comes in upon them: viz. because the breaker, i. e. the Soldiers of
the Enemy, who should break down their walls, should come upon them, and make
free passage for themselves, by breaking open their gates, to pass in and out;
or for themselves to enter, and to lead them out to captivity: and their King,
viz. the Enemies King, should pass before his Army to lead them on; and not
only so, but the Lord himself in the head of them, to give them victory over
those whom he has given up to be destroyed by them: and so this Prophecy may
be looked on as fulfilled in the taking of Samaria by the King of Assyria, 2
Kings XVII. 6. and of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Kin. XXV. 1. etc. Others,
who yet look upon it as then fulfilled, do differently expound the last verse,
to wit, that Tarn
by the breaker should be understood the Enemy, but then that for fear of him
they should make breaches themselves in their walls to get out at, and pass out
at the gates, to escape if they could by flight, their King himself leading
them the way, (as Jer. XXXIX. 4. and see Ezekiel. XII. 12.
of Zedekiah it is said, 2 Kings XXV. 4.) but being taken should be carried
captive, and they after him; and all this because the Lord was in the head of
them, i. e. the enemies, to execute the judgments that he had denounced against
that People. But this seems harsh to interpret them, in before them, first of
the Israelites, then in the same continued sentence, on the head of them, of
the Enemies. Others therefore expound it, shall Drus.
be on the head of them, i. e. over them for evil, and to execute his
vengeance on them, and to see that they shall not escape. Others, and the Lord
shall in the head, or beginning, i.e. before, forsake them, and withdraw his
presence, by which he was^ wont to protect and defend them; which R. Tanch.
a learned Jew notes to be a far fetched interpretation.

The second Exposition, viz. that in these words is a gracious promise of
restoration to Israel after their dispersion, is preferred Chald. Paraph. R.
Sol. Jarchi. R. Tanch. Abarb.
by many learned Men both Jews and Christians; with this difference, that the
Jews (the modern at least) understand it as a temporal restoring of the Kingdom
of Israel; the Christians of a Spiritual deliverance by Christ, and the calling
them into his Kingdom, and gathering them into his Church, together with the
called of the Gentiles, as one flock into one fold under one Shepherd. See Ioh.
X. 16. The words being so taken, we need not (says R. Tanch.
a learned Jew) look after any connection with the foregoing, or following, it
being not unusual to have gracious promises so mingled with threatenings of
judgments, where seems no coherence betwixt them. Or else the connection may be
made thus, Abarb.
says another, God having before threatened severe things against the People,
both in this and the former chapter, as that their inheritance should be laid
wast, and they cast out of it, be destroyed, and carried away captives; least
they should utterly despair of deliverance or Salvation, intermingles this
merciful promise of a gracious restoration, that he will again after the
dispersion with which he has threatened them, gather them together in as great
multitudes, as the sheep of Bozrah, and as flocks are gathered together into
their fold; so that there shall be a great noise by reason of their concourse,
as if their place were too strait and narrow for them. Isa. XLIX. 19, 20. And
then a flourishing, or mighty growing King, R. Tanch.
according to one sense of the word (...) Porets, or, a breaking King, shall
break through all Impediments (according to another signification of that word)
and beat down the Enemies; so that they following him shall, breaking through
all difficulties of gates shut against them, pass in and out as they please,
their King going before them, and the Lord being on the head of them, as leader
of the Vauntgard, i. e. to protect, and help them by his providence and mighty
wonders, and to hinder the Enemies from hurting them. Thus a learned Jew,
understanding the words literally; who in the mean while notes, though these
words be of the preter perfect Tense, have broken up, have passed, are gone
out, yet that they are to be understood as in the future, shall break up, shall
pass, shall go out; as such change of Tenses is not unfrequent. And so R. D.
Rim. and Rash. in Mss. for in Bux. Bibles these words are left out.
do others of (...), who follow the same way, take it as (...) ^^^phecy (...)
Leatid, belonging to the time to come, i. e. to the times of the Messiah, which
they deny yet to be come, and vainly expect, promising to themselves great
carnal felicity therein. The Pelic. Oecolamp. Diodat. Riber. Sa. Menoch.
Christian Interpreters, who look upon these words as a Prophecy of good
things, do look, as taught in the Gospel, after a more Spiritual meaning,
interpreting them as made good by Christ's calling, and gathering together,
into his Church, his fold, the Israel of God, his dispersed flock, who were
before as Sheep going astray; in which they should grow into great numbers,
like the flocks of Bozrah. The comparing with these words the x. chap. of Ioh.
to the 18. verse, will serve much for the illustration of them in this sense
understood. And in what numbers they came at first into the Church, the History
of the first times, as Act. II. 41. and chap. IV. 4. and elsewhere, and of
succeeding times all the world over, testifies. They usually understand by the
breaker, and by their King, the same person, viz. Christ, to whom that title of
breaker may well agree, for his breaking down all obstacles, the middle wall of
partition betwixt Jews and (...) Ephesians. II. 14. See Col. II. 15.
breaking open the gates (...) Hell it self, so that neither he himself could
be detained by them, nor his See Mat. XVI. 18.
be hindered by them, from following him into the Kingdom of Heaven, the gates
of which, having conquered Death, and triumphed over all Enemies, he set open
to them, so that they might without hindrance go in and out, and find pasture,
Ioh. X. 9. he going before them, and his sheep following him, ib. ver. 4. and
the Lord protecting them. It may be observed too, that if the word (...)
Haporets, be taken in that other sense mentioned, as it may signify one that
increases, or grows to power, it may likewise aptly be attributed to Christ
the King of the Church, who is called the Branch, Zech. III. 8. and VI. 12. and
of whom it is said, that of the increase of his government there shall be no
end, Isa. XI. 7. and the rod of the stemm of Iesse, and a branch that should
grow out of his roots, Isa. XI. 1. and a root of Iesse, whose rest should be
glorious, by whom God would set his hand again, to recover the remnant of his
People; and that he should set up an ensign for the nations, to assemble the
outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah, ib. ver. 10,
11, 12. To him that was promised to be as such, and was exhibited as such, and
has made good in himself what was promised, well may the title of (...)
Haporets, in this, or indeed in both senses agree. But if any think, that by
(...) Haporets, the breaker, and (...) Malcam, their King, should be meant two
distinct persons, let him hear, what the Ancient Jews (as cited R. D. Kimchi
and Abrab.
by the modern) say, for exposition of this place. Haporets, the Breaker, that
is Elias, and Malcam, their King, that is the Branch, the Son of David; and
then observe, what our Savior himself has taught us, that John Baptist was
that Elias which was to come, Mat. XI. 14. and Mat. XVII. 12, 13. and what the
Angel says of him, Luke I. 16, 17. that many of the Children of Israel he
should turn unto the Lord their God, and that he should go before him in the
Spirit and power of Elias, without fear, and with courage, as he, Grot. Mat.
XI. 14.
rebuking Sin, and removing it out of the way, to turn the hearts of the
Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make
ready a People prepared for the Lord: and how the Prophecy of Isaias is applied
to him preaching repentance, viz. that he was, as he says also of himself,
Ioh. I. 23. the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight: every valley shall be filled, and every
Mountain and Hill shall be brought low, and the crooked shall be made straight,
and the rough ways shall be made smooth, Luke III. 4, 5. and what our Savior
says, This is he, of whom it is said, Behold, I send my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee; and that from the days of John
the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it
by force. Mat. XI. 10, 12. men breaking as it were, and passing through the
gate, by his preaching repentance laid open, that they might go in and out: and
it will be easy to apply to him this title of the breaker: and so shall we have
in the words, a most illustrious Prophecy of Christ, and his forerunner John
the Baptist, which it will be no reason to let go, seeing the Jews themselves
so readily yield it to us. Especially, when the words most nicely examined,
will be more punctually appliable to this exposition then any other that is
brought, observing only to look for these promises to be Spiritually performed,
which the Jews expect only as Carnal; and because they have not yet had any
such temporal deliverance, think the Prophecy not yet fulfilled. Neither is it
by diverse Christans looked upon as yet completely fulfilled, but, in another
regard, viz. because it respects Christ's calling, and gathering of his, not
only here, into the fold of the Church militant, the Kingdom of Grace, Christ.
a Castro.
but hereafter into the Church triumphant, the Kingdom of Glory, in the
Heavenly Jerusalem. This needs not be looked on as a new exposition, but a
completion of the former, which it necessarily presupposes. The third way of
expounding the words is, of a learned i b. Ezra.
Jew, who takes the former of the 2 verses, to be the words of that lying
Prophet, spoken of in the foregoing verse, as if he should say to them, Drink
and be merry, and fear not, for the Lord has put into my mouth to say unto
you, that he will surely gather together all that are dispersed of you, and you
shall be in your Cities in great multitudes, as flocks of Sheep in their proper
folds and pastures; and thus the false Prophet leading them the way, they
follow like Sheep one after another, when one of them has gone out of a gap,
and even their King likewise does the like, the Lord, at their first breaking
out from his obedience, removing his presence, and providence from them. Thus
he is explained, by another R. Tanch.
of his Nation, who yet rejects his opinion, because these words were spoken
before the dispersion of the Israelites by Captivity; so that if they had been
a promise from their false Prophets, they should rather have told them, that
they should not be scattered, nor go at all into captivity, as the true
Prophets denounced, and not have prophesied to them of a return after
captivity. Yet, do Jun. Trem. Grot. etc.
Some Christians interpreters also so far follow him, as to think the former of
the two verses, to contain the words of the false Prophets, but so as retorted
by God upon them; that whereas they promised them, that they should be gathered
together, he would indeed so gather them, but not for good, as they falsely
promised them, but for evil, and a general destruction. It may be here
observed, that whereas the most take Bozrah for the proper name of a place,
noted for abundance of flocks, mentioned Isa. XXXIV. 6. and Ier. XLVIII. 24.
yet by Others, it is not taken for a proper name, but translated Chaldee Par.
Vulg. Lat.
in a Sheep Cote, or fold, taking it to be in signification like (...) Mibzar,
a fence, or, place of defense; Septuag. Syriack. Arabic.
Others, in tribulation, or Streights. Why Abarbanel and Montanus should take
Bozrah for Rome, there is no reason, tho it might be of old a place for feeding
Sheep.

CHAP. III.
VER. 1. And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the
house of Israel: Is it not for you to know Judgment?
2 Who hate the good, and love the evil, who pluck off their Skin from off
them, and their flesh from off their bones.
3 Who also ent the flesh of my People, and stay their skin from off them, and
they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the Pot, and as flesh
within the cauldron.
THat it may appear, how justly deserved Gods judgments, which he threatened to
execute o^ Israel, are, he proceeds to declare more particularly, the great
corruptions that were among them; and first the avarice and cruel oppressions,
exercised by such as had the Government over them. They who by their office
ought to know j^stice and judgment, and to direct the People in the wa^es
thereof, and encourage those that walked accordingly, and to show love and
favor unto them; were so far from doing according to their duty, that on the
contrary, they hated those that were good, and favored, and encouraged, those
that were evil, R. D. Kimchi.
or, hated to do good, and loved to do evil: yea, instead of cherishing the
good, did themselves pluck off their skin from off them, etc. by which
fig^rative expressions, are set forth their great oppression of them, and the
savage cruelty they used toward them, in respect both of their persons and
Estates, extorting from them, and violently and unjustly spoiling them of all
that they had to live by, that which was unto them as their skin, their flesh,
and their marrow; and in so doing, showed in themselves, Abarb.
by their several ways of extortion and oppression, as great cruelty, as would
be in a Shepherd, who should deal with the flock which he were to feed,
according to the literal expression of the words, that so thereby he might
luxuriously glut and feed himself.

4 Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them: he will even
hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in
their doings.
Then shall they cry unto the Lord.] What shall be the end or issue to them,
whose wickedness he has declared, he shows, viz. Grot.
that those heavy judgments, which he before denounced, shall certainly sease
on them; and then they not able to free themselves from them, and destitute of
all other helps, shall cry unto him for deliverance, as acknowledging him alone
able to save them; but all in vain, for in that time he will not hear their
cry, but be as one that turns his face away from such as put up their suit to
him, denying to show any regard to them. And he adds the reason of such his
aversation, or turning away from them, viz. because they behaved themselves ill
in their doings: by which illness of their behavior (by reason of the parti^le
(...) Caasher, signifying as, or even as, and because God often proportioneth
the punishment to the sin, rendering, as the Jews speak, Abrab.
measure for measure) may well be meant their stopping their ears against the
cry of the poor, whom they themselves oppressed, or would not deliver from
their oppressors, as they ought to have done, and their turning away their
faces from them, having no regard to them in their need: according to which
their inflexibility, will God now with great severity, in the time of their
great need, behave himself as regardless of them, and ^^ow himself inexorable
for all their cries. He will send against them an enemy R. D. Kimchi.
which shall deal as cruelly, and as unmercifully with them, as they did with
the poor; or more generally, As you formerly turned the back to him, Tirinus.
and would not hearken to him calling on you, so will he then behave himself
toward you, Iam. II. 13.

5 Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People err, tha^
bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace: and he that puts not into their
mouths, they even prepare War against him.
That bite with their teeth, etc.] Here God proceeds to declare the iniquity
of the false Prophets, of whom mention was made chap. II. 11. and to denounce
his judgments against them. Although the signification of the words be clear,
yet as to the meaning of them there are different expositions. By their biting
with their teeth, Christ a Castro* (although it be not Kimchi's exposition, as
^e would have it) Tirin.
Some, will have meant their bitter enveighing against the true Prophets who
denounced Gods judgments, whereas they on the contrary promised peace. Ab.
Ezra. R. D. Kimchi. R. Tanchum, Prove. XXVIII. 6.
Others, that while they spoke peace to that sinful People, and bid them to
expect it, and flattered them in their wicked ways, they did indeed bite them,
and occasioned hurt and mischief to them by thus deluding them. Rashi. R. D K.
R. Tanch. A^arbinel.
Others, that they were such, who while they had given to them what they might
bite with their teeth, or feed on, prophesied peace to such as fed them: which
may seem confirmed by the following words, showing that against such as did not
so treat them, they prophesied Evil, War and Destruction, and set themselves,
and stirred up others against them, to do them all the mischief they could,
which is called their preparing war against them; showing that they prophesied
for gifts and rewards, as ver. 11. and according to the rewards that they
received, proportioned what they prophesied either for good or bad.

6 Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision, and it
shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine, and the Sun shall go down
over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.
7 Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they
shall cover their lips, for there is no answer of God.
Therefore night shall be unto you, etc.] Of the judgment in these words
denounced against the false Prophets, the plainest meaning seems this, That
such confusion shall sease upon them, by reason of the great calamities that
shall befall them, expressed by terms of night, and darkness, and the going down
of the Sun, and the day being dark upon them: it shall be with them as with Men
in utter darkness, who know not which way to turn themselves, much less can
pretend to direct others, or show them which way to go: and when things shall
be so with them, they shall be ashamed and confunded, their impostures being
made manifest to all: and that what they pretended as messages from God
promising peace, being so far from being made good that the clean contrary is
happened: were mere delusions of their own, and being so now discovered, Aben
^Ezra. R. D. Kimchi.
they shall not dare to proceed in their former ways of false divinations, nor
pretend any revelation from God, but cover their lips, as Men put to silence,
not able to say any thing that shall be accepted, or daring once to open their
mouths. For it cannot be interpreted, as if God should now cease to put his
words in their mouths, or to send any message by them, for they never were
before employed by him, but pretended falsely to have received from him what
they spoke; which falsehood of theirs being now by the contrary events
discovered, they shall be so confounded with shame, as not to dare any more to
open their mouth to the People. R. Tanchum.
So that those last words, for there is no answer of God, seem not so much a
reason, why they now should hold their peace, viz. because God now refused to
answer or speak by them (for he had not at all done so) as to declare, that
these things which now came to pass, discovered that they never spoke by the
Spirit of God, and this discovery brought necessarily silence with shame to
them. Covering the lip was a custom of Lepers, Lev. XIII. 45. confessing their
uncleanness, a sign of sorrow and shame, a token of sorrow, Ez. XXIV. 17. 22.
Here it seems to signify the R. Tanchum.
stopping of their mouths from speaking.

8 But truly I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and
of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.
But truly I am full of power, etc.] He opposes himself to those seducers, his
commission, his faithfulness in executing of it, and his behavior to theirs.
They being not inspired by Gods Spirit, nor having any message or answer from
him, but led by their own erroneous Spirit, directed all that they spoke to
their own ends and advantage, and flattered such as fed them and made much of
them, and promised good unto them, with those that did not so, dealing
otherwise: but he is truly inspired by God, full of his Spirit, and by virtue
of that full of power, freely and without fear or partiality, without any self
respects or by^ends to utter the message with which he is sent from God; and of
judgment, by which to Grot. Tarn. Ribera, Sa, etc.
discern between right and wrong, and what and when to speak; and of might
without fear of Men or their greatness to speak it, even to declare unto Jacob
his transgression and to Israel his Sin, not respecting Persons or soothing any
in their evil ways, but boldly and freely reproving all of what condition so
ever, that so they may turn to God by repentance, or else know what judgments
they are to expect. And so by the word full of Judgment, u some understand the
judgments of the Lord to be denounced, as if he were by the Spirit moved to
denounce them; though Tarn.
Others prefer the notion of ability in discerning between things, and so
rightly applying what he should speak, and knowing how and when to do it.

9 Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of the
house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.
Hear this, ^e ^eads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of the House of
Israel.] The like compellation we had, ver. 1. That it may well agree to the
whole twelve tribes is no doubt, though after the division of them into two
Kingdoms, the name of Israel be often particularly given to the ten Tribes. See
Note on chap. 1. ver. 5. Here in this chapter in both places these titles seem
to many Interpreters to be attributed to the same; viz. those that were in
dignity and authority in both Kingdoms: but Abarb.
a learned Jew, considering that the judgments denounced in the former verses
may well concern the Kingdom of Israel, thinks by the Princes of the house of
Israel, in the first verse, to be meant those of that Kingdom as distinct from
Judah, and in those following this verse, seeing Zion and Jerusalem are
expressly named, and the judgments particularly concern them, by the heads of
the house of Jacob, and the Princes of the house of Israel, to be meant
particularly those of Judah, and them to be called by the same title with the
others, because they were like them in sins; as Isa. I. 10. they are termed
rulers of Sodom, and the Jews the People of Gomorrah, because their deeds were
like to theirs.

The power of the Spirit of the Lord in him he shows, by daring, even to
those of greatest authority, to declare their transgressions without fear of
their greatness, and to reprove them, for that whereas they ought to have known
judgment, (as he speaks ver. 1.) to have themselves walked in the ways
thereof, and caused others to observe them, they did clean contrarily abhor it,
and perverted all equity, all that was right, even setting themselves to do
what was contrary thereto as things hateful to them, and scorning to be guided
by the rules thereof which were contrary to their ends.

10 They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.
They build up Zion with blood.] So according to the sense it is rendered, as
being a farther description of the sins of those spoken to; otherwise the word,
being in the singular number^ and sounding he builds up, may be expounded
Aben Ezra, Kimchi.
Every one of them builds, etc. or, R. Saadi. Arab. version MS. R. Tanchum.
as still speaking to them, O thou which buildest, etc. or, Every one of you
which build up Jerusalem, i. e. build therein houses and palaces with blood
(or, that think it shall be built and inhabited when such things are done in
it.) With blood, that is therein shed, says the Chaldee, i. e. with wealth
gotten by the murdering violently or unjustly, putting to death the owners
thereof, which they did so frequently, that blood touched blood, Hos. IV. 2. or
Kimchi.
by money which they took of Murderers to save them contrary to the law, which
required life for life, blood for blood. Others R. Tanchum.
think that the word blood is not necessarily here to be properly taken, but
more largely, as elsewhere, for bloody heinous sins of several sorts; and
Kimchi.
Others more particularly for violence, fraud and oppression, by which the
goods, which are taken from the poor owners, that should thereby sustain the
life of themselves and their families, were See Ecclus. XXXIV. 21. 2. See
Christ. a Castro.
as their blood, and the taking them from them as shedding their blood.

R. Tanch.
Others refer the word build, not to those unjust rulers spoken of, but to God
the builder of Zion, and to be spoken by way of admiration or interrogation to
this sense, Shall God (or, shall I? as in the person of God) build up, or
establish Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity? that is when such sins
are committed in it: Abarb.
or, Did he build Zion with blood, or, Jerusalem with iniquity? And this sense
would well agree with what preceeds and follows; but the other meaning is more
received.

11 The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire,
and the Prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord,
and say, Is not the Lord among us? no evil can come upon us.
The heads thereof judge for reward, etc.] He proceeds to declare the Sins of
all sorts of those, by whom the People ought to have bin governed and directed
in the right way. The Heads, (who were by the law forbidden to take any gift,
lest they should be perverted, according to what is said Exodus XXIII. 8. Thou
shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the wise, and perverteth the words of
the righteous, and again to the very same purpose is repeated Deuteronomy. XVI. 19.)
do judge for reward, and accordingly for gain wrest judgment, being guided in
their sentence by the bribe they receive, and not by the merits of the cause.
The Priests, whose lips should keep knowledge, and at whose mouths they should
seek the Law, as being the messengers of the Lord of Hosts, and by him given
for teachers and right interpreters of his Law, Mal. II. 7. They teach for
hire: their mouths are opened only to those that will give to them: and then
will teach them not so much the truth as pleasing things, such as they shall
desire, not what they ought to hear. And whereas no Prophet should undertake
that function but such as were sent by God, and such should impartially deliver
his message, without respect of persons, fear or flattery, or any by-ends,
there were among them many that pretended to be Prophets, who divined for
money, and that they might get thereby, vented false visions, and feigned
messages from God who never sent them. See Ezekiel. XIII. 6. etc. ( following the
ways of Balaam who loved the ways of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. II. 15.) To any
that would believe them and put into their mouths, V. 5. and reward them for
it, they would undertake to foretell such things as should best like and please
them, and sooth them up in their ways; to others the clean contrary: in sum,
all these, in that corrupt state so without regard to justice and truth, made
their gain not Gods glory their end, and yet for all this would Isaiah XLVIII.
2.
flatter themselves with vain hope of security and confidence in God and his
presence among them. He had owned them for his People, chosen Sion for his
habitation, promised to dwell in the Temple at Jerusalem; Kim. Abarb Grotius.
they had there the Ark of his Covenant, and the signs of his Majestatick
presence, so that they thought him even tied to a perpetual residence among
them; and so long as he was among them, they thought themselves sure that no
evil could come upon them, he would not cast of his People, nor let his City
and his Temple be destroyed. Such vain confidence in the Lord by them who
forsook the Lord and his ways, and yet hoped not to be forsaken by him, see
described likewise Jeremiah VII. 4. and 8. etc. where he shows on what terms
only he would continue his presence with them and defend them; which conditions
seeing these here observe not, how vain and groundless their confidence is, the
issue shall show, and that is in the next words declared.

12 Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem
shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house, as the high places of the
forest.
Therefore shall Zion for your sake, etc.] They seemed to think for Zions sake,
and Ierusalem's, and the house of the Lords sake, they should be secure,
however they behaved themselves; but God declares, that on the contrary for
their sakes and the evil of their doings, whereby they had made those places
which should have been kept holy to him Jer. VII. 9. etc.
a den of Robbers, of Murderers, Adulterers, Idolaters, and the like, even
those places themselves should be given up to utter ruin and destruction; his
anger toward the People should extend it self even to the place it self which
was defiled by them, it no longer retaining its holiness then they continued
holy. For your sake shall Zion be plowed as a field, etc. These words are cited
Ier. XXVI. 18. where it is showed that they were spoken in the days of King
Hezekiah. Plowed as a field, the buildings thereof being all thrown down, it
shall be laid plain as a field which shall be plowed, or Grot. Christ. a Castro.
which the Enemy shall plow up, that he may leave no sign of a place ever
inhabited, or a sign that it should never more be inhabited; And Jerusalem as
an heap of stones, the stately buildings thereof being demolished, not one
stone left in order on another, but all thrown down, Mat. XXIV. 2. and laid in
rude heaps. And the mountain of the House. The mount Moriah, on which the
glorious Temple stood, As the high places of the forest, as hillocks on which
trees and weeds should grow, as in a wild place, not regarded or inhabited by
Men but only by wild beasts. Hos. II. 12. All these are expressions of utter
ruin and desolation. The latter words rendered, high places of the forest (or
of a wood) a Abarb.
learned Jew says may be rendered, as high places of the Psalm. lxxx. 13.
boar of the forest, in reference to what was done to that place by Adrian the
Emperor, who to make the place more odious to the Jews, Calvisius an. Christ^.
135.
set up in several places of the City the Images of Hogs and other things
detestable to them; and he would have this Prophecy to respect what was by the
Roman Emperors done when they destroyed Jerusalem, when one under Titus who
destroyed it, Calv. an. 123.
plowed up the ground where it stood, in token that none might without the
Emperors leave build any more any house there, and when such things were done
by Adrian, who built there a City which he called Aelia, and built up and down
in several places Idols Temples. But however this Prophecy may seem to him and
others to See Christ a Castro.
extend it self so far, and then to the utmost of the letter to have been
fulfilled, or the whole of what is here said done, yet we may justly look upon
it as limited to a shorter time, and sufficiently, as to making good these
descriptions of great desolation, fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem and
the Temple by the Chaldeans, by whom the City and Temple were made heaps of
rubbish or dust, Neh. IV. 2. 2 Kin. XXV. and 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 19. in the time of
King Zedekiah, till when, though it was before spoken, it seems to have bin
differred on their repentance, as is intimated in the forecited Ier. XXVI. 19.
though to the other also, in respect of the things done agreeable to these
expressions, it may not unfitly be applied. See also R. Saadias his Arab
translation, And the mountains of the house shall be Chapels, or houses of
other worships, or, as some say, a wood.

CHAP. IV.
VER. 1. But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the
house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the Hills, and People shall flow unto it.
But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of
the Lord, etc.] According to Gods usual method, in the midst of judgment
remembering mercy, here are to those grievous judgments before denounced,
subjoined gracious promises of great mercy. In the foregoing words he
threatens an utter desolation to the mountain of the Lord; here he promises a
gracious restoration establishment and exaltation: in those the obstinate
sinners are given to understand the severity of Gods unavoidable judgments to
them; in these penitent believers are given to expect his mercies, that never
fail those, who are qualified to receive them. How far the mountain of the
house in the foregoing words, and the mountain of the house of the Lord in
these, agree or differ, in what is signified by that expression, will appear in
what shall follow.

In the last days, etc.] That by the last days (though more generally may be
signified any time to come after, yet) are here meant the days or time of
Messiah or Christ, is so far agreed on both by R. D. Kimchi, Abarb^nel.
Some Jews of as good authority as any, (giving, I suppose, the common received
opinion among them) and most Christians, that if any think otherwise, we have
not reason to be swayed by their authority. But though both Jews and Christians
so far agree as to the signification of the words, yet in their applying them
is there great difference; the Jews denying the promised Messiah to be yet
come, the Christians believing, and acknowledging him to be long since come:
the Jews looking for his Kingdom as of this World; the Christians looking on it
as Spiritual: and so what the Jews say is not performed, understanding the
words literally according to the outward sound, the Christians acknowledge to
have been already made good, and according to the true meaning and import of
the words in an higher and Spiritual meaning, understood as they ought to be,
performed. All the advantage that we may expect from the Jews, is a concession
that such or such passages have respect to the promised Messiah, or to Christ
and his times, how they are accomplished we must learn from the History of the
New Testament and Christian Interpreters.

In the second chapter of Isaiah ver. 2. etc. we have much the like expressions
as here, as if one of these Prophets had borrowed words from the other. Whether
one did make use of the others expressions, as of words already known to the
People, or for what end, we need not further enquire; it is sufficient to know,
that Gods Prophets did not steal his word one from another, as it is said of
those false Prophets, Ier. XXIII. 30. but that being all full of power by the
Spirit of the Lord, chap. III. 8. they spoke as they were moved by that Spirit,
which representing to them sometimes like visions, moved them to utter and
declare them in like words and expressions. So Isaiah and Micah here: so in
Obadiah ver. 4. etc. and Ierem. XLIX. 9. and 16. and in the one and other are
they the words of the same living God, suggesting to them what to speak, and
inspiring them to declare the same things in the same language.

The mountain of the house of the Lord, etc.] That is, according to the letter,
the mountain on which the Temple, called the house of the Lord, stood, viz,
mount Sion, or that part called mount Moriah. Of this the Jews understanding it
(the soberer of them) to omit some wilder and absurd expressions at least
(though we may think they meant not to be understood literally, as if hill
should be set on hill for exalting it) observe, that by saying, it shall be
established on the top of the mountains, and exalted above the hills, is not to
be understood that it should be increased in measure of height, but should be
made illustrious by glorious privileges conferred on it, tokens of Gods
peculiar grace and favor and presence in it, and the Temple on it: in
consideration and admiration of which, many People should with reverence and
respect look toward it, and in great multitudes flow unto it; for the word
(...) Nahar^ in the Original seems to signify both these; first to look, or
set the eyes upon, and secondly to flow like waters of a river continually
flowing: in this latter sense it is, as by our, so R. Solo. Ab. Ezra. R. D.
Kimchi, Abar^.
by most Interpreters rendered: but some learned R. Saadias, Abu Walid, R.
Tanchum.
Jews prefer the former. The scope of both will be much one, viz. to show what
great respect, and regard, and affection People shall have to it, as to a place
more eminent and desirable then all others, by reason of the Glory that God
shall confer on it, and the privileges that he shall bestow on, and in it.
Those privileges here promised are so great, as R. Tanch.
that the Jews, minding temporal concerns, do not acknowledge to have been
under the second Temple after their return from captivity made good, and
therefore yet expect the coming of a Messiah, under whom they shall enjoy them.
But Christians looking on them as concerning Spiritual things, acknowledge them
to be already made good by the coming of Christ, and setting up his spiritual
Kingdom by the preaching of the Gospel, and the gathering of People to it. If
we look on the place here called the mountain of the house of the Lord
according to the sound of the letter, even that was highly exalted and made
illustrious, filled with his Glory at his coming, the glory of the latter house
standing on that (according to what is Prophesied Haggai II. 9.) greater then
of the former, made so, See Grotius in Haggai.
not so much by the external pomp of it, as by his presence, and the miracles
by him and his Apostles wrought, and the Holy Ghost, and many graces by him
conferred in it. And with what respect People may be said to have looked up to
it and flowed unto it, appears by that early conversion of so many out of every
Nation under Heaven, as are reckoned up, Act. II. 5, 9, 41, 46, 47. Chap. IV.
4. This, if we should so far restrain the name of the mount of the house of the
Lord, sufficiently proves this Prophecy in great measure made good in respect
to what was done in it, and about it. But that we may see the more evident
f^lfilling of the whole, it will be convenient to take those words in a larger
acception, with many, if not most of Christian Interpreters, so as to denote
the Church or See Paraeus Isa. 2
Kingdom of Christ, which from thence had its rise, and of which that mountain
and house of the Lord, or Temple was a type, so that it may well bear its name:
which also, in the words of Christ See Dr. Hammond.
Matthew. V. 14. may be compared to a City that is set on a hill, more
illustrious indeed then Jerusalem it self, or any the most eminently placed and
exalted Cities, yea Kingdoms: and then in the large spreading of the Doctrine
of it, by so many converts and so many Nations looking and flocking unto it,
will the utmost that can be expected from the words be made good. What is said,
shall be established, a learned Abarb.
Jew observes to be an expression denoting continuance or perpetuity, that it
shall continually remain on its settlement; and this well agrees to the Church
of Christ, of which he says, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Mat. XVI. 18. Some of great note
from of old, by the mountain of the Lords house, will have Christ himself to be
here understood: but whether it be understood of Christ the head, or the Church
his body (that Temple built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Chrsit himself Ephesians. II. 20, 21.
being the chief Cornerstone, in whom all the building fitly framed together
grows unto an holy Temple of the Lord) See Tirinus on Isa. II. 2. and Paraeus
on Micah.
as they are one, so the scope and meaning will be one; although the former
acception of the words is most followed.

2 And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the Law shall go forth of Zion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
And many Nations shall come and say, Come let us go up, etc.] In what
multitudes and with what zeal and affection, not only Jews but Gentiles also,
whom God promised to Christ for his inheritance, Psalm. II. now made one willing
People of God, Psalm. CX. 3. the middle wall of partition, which before
separated them, being broken down, should flock to the Church of Christ, he
here expresses, in that they should mutually exhort one another, saying, Come,
etc. The thing signified being done, Ribera, Tar.
though those words should not be expressly by them spoken, is that which makes
good the expression; although we cannot doubt, but often among them such
exhortations to stir up one another to embrace the Doctrine of Christ, have
been in words used, as well as we hear, Joh. I. 45.
Andrew exhorting his Brother Simon, and ver. 46.
P^ilip Nathaniel, and Joh. IV. ^9.
the Woman of Samaria those of that City to come unto Christ. Nor need we look
on it as any sufficient ground of cavil for the Jews, that all these Nations
came not in person up to Jerusalem, and the mountain where the Temple stood;
that is not the thing required; but the coming in to Christ, and embracing the
Gospel, which began first to be preached at Sion, and from thence went forth
into other Nations, is (though done at the greatest (distance from Jerusalem,)
a going up to the mountain of the Lord, exalted above all other mountains, the
Church, which now extends it self wide on the face of the whole earth, where
they may now as properly and acceptably worship God, as formerly in the Court
of the Gentiles, at the mount of the material house of the Lord. That hour is
now come, Ioh. IV. 21, 23. The house of God is the Church, 1 Timothy I. 15.

And he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, etc.] The
end which they are to propose in their coming into the Church, is here showed
to be, not that they may obtain Wealth, Worldly honor and Dignities, but that
they may learn his will, that they may know how they ought to walk; and
accordingly they must resolve to walk in his ways, which lead to Salvation and
true happiness, which he alone teaches. They seek not Temporal but Spiritual
good things; for his Kingdom (as he declares) is not of this World, John
XVIII. 36. The mistake of those things, which were to be expected from Christ
at his coming, did at first keep the Jews from acknowledging him, and ever
since hinders them from coming in to him. To learn of his ways and walk in his
paths is not that felicity which can satisfy their expectations from him; but
here we are taught, that that ought to be the chief thing desired in his Church
and Kingdom, that we may know his ways and be happy in practicing and doing
accordingly, otherwise to know them will be vain.

For the Law shall go forth of Zion, etc.] These words, which by most are taken
for the words of the Prophet, (though Aba^binel.
by Others for the words of those People speaking among themselves, the matter
will be all one) declare the reason why they should go up to the Mountain of
the Lord that they might learn his ways, viz. because there only should be
had, and thence proceed the true and clear knowledge of God and his ways. Of
old the Law went forth from Mount Sinai, and then seated it self as it were in
Sion, and was even the peculiar of the Jews, for then he showed his word unto
Jacob, his statutes and Judgments unto Israel, but dealt not so with any other
Nation; and as for his Judgments they were not known to them. Psalm. CXLVII. 19,
20. but in the last days here spoken of, the times of Christ, it was to go
forth of Zion, and from Jerusalem, there first to be divulged, but not confined
to it, but to be preached all the World over, and communicated to all nations,
according to our Saviors Commission to his Disciples, that they should go and
teach all Nations, Mat. XXVIII. 19. which being accordingly by them (who were
to be witnesses to him both in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth) executed, their sound went into all the
Earth, and their words to the ends of the World. Romans X. 17, 18. and that Law,
that Word, viz. the Gospel, which by this means went forth of Zion, and
Jerusalem, must all of all Nations, that will learn of the ways of God, and be
instructed rightly to walk in his paths, embrace and attend to, as the only
Doctrine that teaches what ought to be known of him and his will, and how to
please him, and so to obtain those good things promised to the obedient
subjects of his Kingdom.

3 And he shall judge among many People, and rebuke strong Nations afar off;
and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning
hooks: Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither shall they
learn War any more.
And he shall judge among many People and rebuke, etc.] Who is this that shall
judge and rebuke? The Lord, R. Tanchum.
say some, mentioned last in the foregoing words; his Word, Abarb. See Christ.
a Castro.
say Others, there likewise mentioned: which without doubt shall be done by the
mediation of one constituted by him, which shall divulge such truths as should
be received from him: Ribera.
Others, Sion, or the Mountain or house of the Lord, that is, the Church. Some
Jews of great learning and Authority among them expressly say, Messiah, though
not expressed, is here meant (according R. D. Kimchi, Aben Ezra.
to the manner of Scripture, leaving the person which is necessarily
understood, unnamed) that he is the teacher, in the former words, the judge and
rebuker in these spoken of; and so diverse Christians; and this way taken
comprehends all the rest, God in the Church judging by Christ, and he by his
word: for the Father having set Christ as King upon his holy hill of Sion,
Psalm. II. 6. has committed to him all Judgment, and the Scepter by which he
judges or rebukes among People is his Word, by which he instructs them in
his ways and governs them; and by this he shall judge, distinguish, and
teach them to discern between right and wrong, that they may walk in the ways,
and observe the rules of Justice and Charity, whenever, or wheresoever they
be or live, and rebuke them that do otherwise then they ought, that they may
amend their ways. The King Messiah (says a R. D. Kimchi.
learned Jew) shall as Lord over all nations judge among them, so as that if
any have quarrels or differences with others, they shall make addresses, or
refer the matter to him, and he shall bid him that has done wrong, to do right
to his Neighbor. He shall compose all quarrels and differences between them.
He shall Christoph. a Castro. Abar^.
judge and rebuke not by the sword or spear and violence, but by his word and
Spirit. The effect of which his so judging and rebuking shall be, that being
wrought on and disciplinated by his word, they shall lay aside all Animosities
and dissensions, and desire to live in peace one with another, which is
expressed by saying, they shall beat their Swords into plow-shares, etc. i. e.
they shall be so averse from War one with another, that they shall turn their
Instruments of War, (as having no more need of them, or resolving no more to
use them) into such as are proper and necessary for times of peace, (an
expression contrary to what is used, Joel III. 10. for expressing times of War
and tumult, Beat your Plow-shares into Swords, etc.) This being promised as the
effect of Christ's reigning and the Preaching of the Gospel, which we call the
Word of God, the Jew, who acknowledges not Christ to be yet come, requires us
to show how this has been made good under the Gospel, that so we may prove
this Prophecy to have been made good, and so Christ to be come? For answer to
which objection several things are said, as first Tar.
that these words are figurativly to be understood, not precisely according to
the sound of the letter, not so much of outward peace in the World, as of
inward peace of Conscience, that peace which being justified by Faith we have
in God, Romans V. I. that which Christ promises to his, that they shall have in
him though they have trouble in the World, Ioh. XVI. 33. and this peace have
Christians always found, and shall find in Christ: he left it with his and
will continue it to them.

Secondly, that the Gospel is a Doctrine of peace, commending it to Men and
disposing their minds to it; so that whosoever as much as lies in them live
not peaceably with all Men Romans XII. 18. live not according to the rules
thereof, and Animosities, Wars, and dissensions argue a deficiency of Faith in
Men, and that they Paraeus.
have not ascended up to the Mountain of the house of the Lord, nor learned (as
they ought) his ways to walk in them. But seeing the word of Christ
instructs to bear wrongs and not to revenge, etc. and disposes to peace, and
requires it, it may be well said, that by the preaching thereof Men should be
so disposed, as that See Sanc.
they should beat their Swords into ^ low-shares, etc. that they should not
leavy War any more.

Thirdly, Some Rib. See Christ. a Castro.
think this made good in that about the time of Christ's coming, there was peace
in the known World under Augustus, in token of which the gates of the Temple of
Ianus at Rome were shut, as after again under Nero, etc. but that peace seems
to others not much to respect this peace, as not being an effect of Preaching
the Gospel.

Fourthly, it may seem rather to have been fulfilled in what is said, that when
great multitudes were converted to Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, See
Act. II. 42. and 44. etc.
they were all of one heart, and one Soul, Act. IV. 32. and as the Doctrine
farther diffused it self, so did also peace and charity, among all those many
and of different Nations that received it, so far as that it was a Note and
character of Christians See Tertullians apology page 35. Edit. R^galt.
acknowledged by the unbelieving Heathens, who were forced to say of them with
envy and admiration, See how they mutually love one another. If it continued
not so, it argues (as we said) in Men a falling as from their first love, so
too much from the Faith, and is a sign of those perilous times that the
Apostle foretold should come in the last days, 2 Timothy III. 1. etc. They that
faithfully adhere to Christ, and sincerely love him, will still be known to be
his by their loving one another, and living peaceably as far as is possible
with all Men: and of such only Ribera.
to some seems this Prophecy to be spoken, and to have respect not generally to
all Men, but to the Godly, and true Believers, who have always endeavored,
and always will endeavor to make it good, and show it fulfilled in
themselves. If any think not these answers sufficient, but expect a more
literal fulfilling of the words by a general peace in the World, they must
expect See Grot. de Very.
what time will hereafter produce; and if they be the Jews, that this answer
may suffice them, and that there is no force from the Argument to prove that
the Messiah is not yet come, will appear from what diverse of their own Doctors
say, that the time or Kingdom Chelec. page 361. edit. Cochi.
of Messiah lasts on Earth many thousand of Years, (doubtless to the end of
the World.) So that if ought spoken as concerning his time be not yet
fulfilled, it may be longer expected without denying him to be yet come. Again
as to them, their Doctors also say, See Ra^mund out of Sha^at.
that weapons of War shall not cease even in the days of Messiah, but only in
the World to come: and so do some See Deodati, etc. Isaiah 2. See Christ. a
Castro, Paraeus.
Christians interpret these words, as that they are to have their full
completion in the World to come after the second coming of Christ. But the
Prophecy may seem rather to respect what shall be done in this World then that
to come, and we may well rest satisfied that it is already performed, even in
respect S. e Jerome. to Junia and Fratella.
of that outward concord, which followed among many different Nations the
Preaching of the Gospel.

4 But they shall sit every Man under his Vine, and under his fig tree, and
none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.
But they shall sit, etc.] A figurative expression of great Security and
Tranquillity, 1 Kings IV. 25.
else where likewise used, the effect and sign of peace; and so is to be
understood, as the former promise of peace, whether of outward or inward
Tranquillity: which that they may without doubting expect, is added for
confirmation, that the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, who can and will make
good whatsoever he says without fail, however improbable at present it may
seem.

5 For all People will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk
in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.
For, etc.] This particle shows these words to have dependence on something
before said, and to give a reason of what was said; and they seem spoken by the
Prophet in the name of those, who should go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and
to the house of the God of Jacob, and learn of his ways, and walk in his
paths, and had promise of peace and security to them; rendering a reason why
they might certainly expect a performance of those good things promised to
them, viz. from their acknowledging him only for their God; adhering to him,
and constantly walking in obedience to him, and affiance in him. For as all
People will walk every one in the name of him, whom they take for their God,
and use so to do; so they by a constant walking in the Name of the Lord, will
evidence, that they acknowledge him for their God, and so have reason to expect
the good things which he has promised, and will without fail perform to those
that (as they resolved to do) constantly cleave to him, faithfully serve him,
rely and depend on him, and his protection and favor. This exposition may be
illustrated by what is said, Ier. II. 11. Has a Nation changed their Gods,
which are yet no Gods? But my People have changed their Glory for that which
does not profit. It was formerly the perverseness of Israel according to the
flesh, that they would forsake the Name of God, and his worship, and follow
vain Idols; but here the true Israel of God, the faithful members of his Church
(out of what Nation soever called) unanimously profess constantly and for ever
to adhere to him alone, as constantly as other People did to their Gods, and in
so doing may justly promise to themselves the benefits of his providence and
protection, out of which they will not, by their own fault and de^ection from
him, put themselves. And according to this Exposition the word (...) Veanachnu
rendered But we, will be rather rendered, And we, ^s it properly signifies. A
Grotius.
learned Man gives the meaning thus, No marvail that God should have so
singular a care over us: for other Nations, for performance of their matters,
call every one on their Gods; but we do and ever will walk in the Name of our
God the true God. Sanct.
Another, No marvail that we shall be safe, or secure, seeing we have God for
our Protector, against whom neither our Enemies, nor any other Gods can
prevail. The sense, I suppose, according to them, must thus be made up, As long
as we adhere to the true God, no fear but we shall have his promises of
security made good to us; seeing the Nations that are against us trust in false
Gods, which can neither help them, nor annoy or hurt us, under the protection
of our God, to whom we constantly cleave. Some of the R. D. Kimchi Mss. and see
Aben Ezra.
Jew Doctors thus expound the words, Till that time all People shall walk in
the name of their Gods, for they shall not return to the right way, till that
time when the King Messiah shall turn them into the right way: but we of the
house of Israel will walk in the Name of our God for ever; though the Temple be
destroyed, and we led captives out of our Land, yet will we not change our God
for another, but walk in his Name always. Abarb. So Montanus also
distinguishes the words, and compares Galatians IV. 8. and 9 and Ephesians II.
11, 12.
Another thus, For all People, which now walk every one in the Name of his God,
and we also the Sons of Israel, all of us, both we and they, in that time will
walk in the Name of our God, etc. The connection of Inference, I suppose, in all
these must still be the same, viz. that therefore they will faithfully expect
that those blessings of peace and security, which God has promised, shall be
made good to them: which profession the Prophet makes in the name of those that
are spoken of, that shall come in to God, as joining himself to them. See
Montanus and Sanctius.
Some give the meaning thus, Although other People shall worship other Gods,
yet the faithful believers will constantly acknowledge and worship the one true
God, and serve him alone. And by them the particle (...), (which we render,
for) is taken (as sometimes it is) for a word of alteration only, as much as to
say, certainly, or although.

6 In that day, says the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will
gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted.
In that day, says the Lord, etc.] In that day* at that time, (ver. 1. called
the last days) when God in judgment remembering Mercy, shall graciously visit
and redeem his People, he says, that he will assemble, or gather, or, as Some
will, R. Solomon Jarchi.
heal (for in 2 Kings v. 3. 6.
that signification also is the word used, and may here well enough be
applied,) her that halteth, or is R. Tanchum. Septuagint. Arab. version.
lame, broken or maimed, i. e. such of Israel as are weak and helpless,
inwardly and outwardly afflicted, so that they are not able to bear up and
support themselves, and so justly likened to a poor, lame, maimed Sheep, that
is not able to go upright, or keep her way. This seems a more simple
Interpretation then that of Abarb. Ar. Montanus.
Some, who would have this Epithet given to them as the posterity of halting
Jacob, Genesis XXXII. 31. and perhaps then that of Others too, who would Ilierom.
Ribera, Menochius.
have it to denote their wavering or unsteadfastness in their Religion, and the
service of God, in which regard they are elsewhere said to halt, 1 Kin. XVIII.
21. though the word be there different in the Original; (although such halting
was cause of their other halting or fainting under afflictions thereby pulled
on them.) The word here used, is elsewhere also used for fainting, or failing
for want of strength to go upright, as Psalm. XXXVIII. 17. and Ier. XX. 10. And
in Zephaniah III. 19. the same Epithet is used that is here, and in the same
sense, and has the same word subjoyned to it, viz. her that is driven out,
etc. I will gather her that is driven out from her own Country, and from the
more visible presence of God, and his protection, which they had in manifest
manner formerly enjoyed, cast out by God, and from him, Tarnovius.
whom being her husband she had like an Adulteress forsaken, and dispersed
among the Nations: And her that I have afflicted, sent evils and afflictions
upon, and evil entreated, for the Sins of my People (as the Chaldee adds.)
These Epithets here being in the Feminine Gender, it may be inquired what the
Person, or Substantive understood, to which they are to be applied, is, whether
the house of Jacob, or, the Kingdom of Israel, (without distinguishing between
that of Judah, and that of the ten Tribes, as some Abarbinel.
Jews do, applying the first to the one, and the second to the other) or
Ribera, Menochius, Tarnovius,
Synagogue, or Congregation, or Dutch Notes.
Daughter of Sion, or Jerusalem, mentioned ver. 8. Or else whether the Feminine
Gender here be put (as usually) for the Neuter, and so may be rendered or
understood, whatsoever halteth, etc. i. e. all that halt, and are driven out,
all Israel, all or any of them who are in such condition. But (which will still
be to the same sense and purpose) if we shall (as a R. Tanchum.
learned Jew directs) for the better perceiving the meaning of these words,
compare them with what is said, Ezekiel. XXXIV. 16. I will seek that which was
lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which
was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick, etc. where the Epithers
are as here in the Feminine Gender, her that was lost, etc. and manifestly
agree to Sheep, or Cattle, to which the weak of Gods Flock, that is, of the
People of Israel are compared; and withal consider how it is the usual custom
of the Scriptures to call Gods People, his Sheep, and to compare such as are
distressed, or go astray among them, to silly weak or lost Sheep, as Ier. L. 6.
My People has been lost Sheep, and ver. 17. Israel is a scattered Sheep:
considering I say, these things, it may seem very agreeable to understand here
likewise, Sheep, or, Cattle, the weak or distressed of Israel (Gods peculiar
flock:) and then will this Prophecy appear manifestly to be fulfilled in what
Christ says, Matthew. XV. 24. that he was sent to the lost Sheep of the house of
Israel; and his commanding his Apostles to go to the lost Sheep of the house of
Israel, and to preach to them, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; and to
heal the Sick, to cleanse the Lepers, to raise the Dead, and to cast out
Devils. Matthew. X. 6. etc. This his bringing them into his fold, the Church, by
his own Preaching, and that of his Apostles and Disciples, was a more signal
and illustrious assembling of her that halted, and gathering her that was
driven out and afflicted, then any restoration of theirs, or bringing them
home to their own Country from among the Nations where they were dispersed.
That did but make way for this greater healing of their breaches, and better
benefit to them; in description of which proceeding, he says, ver. 7.

7 And I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off, a
strong nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion, from
henceforth even for ever.
And I will make her that halted a remnant, etc.] God reserving them for better
things, though they be distressed, and dispersed, will not suffer them utterly
to fail and be lost, or perish, but so preserve them, that there shall be a
remnant that shall return and increase: yea tho now they be cast far off, and
seemingly in a lost condition, they shall become a strong Nation. Which promise
may appear manifestly made good in the flourishing and growing condition of the
Church, from beginnings low in the sight of Men, growing to such a height and
greatness, as it has attained both for extent multitude and power, by the
calling into it first the lost Sheep of Israel, that remnant according to the
Election of grace that should be saved, Romans IX. 27. and XI. 3. in so great
multitudes, as appears by the History of the Acts of the Apostles, and then
those of the Gentiles also, which were before aliens from the common wealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, and so every way far off,
out of all parts of the World, in such abundance, as it is ever since to this
day, as that in all regards they may be justly called, not only a remnant which
should continue without fear of failing, but a strong Nation, against which the
gates of Hell it self have never since been, or ever shall be able to prevail:
(that we may not confine this appellation of a strong Nation only to the
Apostles, who were for the effecting of this Luke XXI. 49. 21. 15.
endued with power from on high, and with a mouth and wisdom, which no
adversaries were able to gainsay or g resist (as Rib. Sa. Menoc.
Some seem to do;) nor yet Hierom. Tar.
to the strength and undaunted courage of the Martyrs; but extend it, as due,
to the whole Church, in regard to their multitude above any Nation, and their
Spiritual strength.)

This part of this Prophecy, though it might seem (as Some will) partly
fulfilled in the return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity, and R.
Tanch. Tirinus.
that form of a Kingdom which under Zorobabel they were restored to, and under
the second Temple which was then built; yet do the following words plainly show
that it cannot be said to have been wholly then fulfilled, and that what was
then done in the restoring of Jews and Israelites from their dispersion, was
but to prepare and make way for greater things after to be done under Christ,
for the making good of what is here promised; for it follows, and the Lord
shall reign over them in Sion from henceforth even for ever. Now that this has
not been according to the letter, and in any temporal respect fulfilled to the
Jews, is manifest; all form of government being long since cut off from them,
and Zion (that place properly so called) in the hands of their Enemies;
sometimes one Nation, sometimes another having born rule there. But take Zion
(as it is usual) for the Church, and in that God has from the first beginning
reigned, and ever does, and for ever shall reign over his in Christ in it. It
is said of Christ, Luc. I. 33. that he should reign over the house of Jacob
(his Church) for ever, and that of his Kingdom there shall be no end. Wherefore
Munster.
Some not absurdly make these words an argument for proof of the Divinity of
Christ, because he is here called by Jehovah the proper Name of God. It will be
all one to say, the Lord, i. e. God the Father in Christ shall reign, or Christ
the Lord shall reign, or reigns over his in Sion, he and his Father being
one. What has been intimated in these words will farther be confirmed in the
next verse.

8 And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the Daughter of Zion,
unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the
Daughter of Jerusalem.
And thou O Tower of the Flock, the strong hold of the Daughter of Zion, etc.]
O Tower of the Flock. The word rendered Flock, and so otherwise signifying,
being in the Hebrew (...) Eder, there is some difference between Expositours
concerning the Interpretation of it; Some looking on it as the proper name of a
place. A place so called is mentioned, Genesis XXXV. 21. Christ. a Castro. Tirinus.
beyond which it is said Israel, i. e. Jacob spread his tent, after he had
journyed from Bethlehem, (about a miles distance from it) where they conceive
the Shepherds to have been abiding, when the Luke I. 8.
Angel brought to them the good tidings of Christ's birth, and so of that his
Kingdom, that first dominion here spoken of. Others taking Bethle^em it self to
be meant by it, will have what Grot
is here prophesied, to be the same that is repeated chapter V. verse 2. and
there to be explained. But others think it the Name of a Tower at the gate in
the walls of Jerusalem Jun. Tremel. Deodati.
called the Sheep gate, Nehemiah III. 32. through which Tirinus
some conceive Christ to have rid into Jerusalem when he was received with
Hosanna's. But by others more probably is here thought to be designed the Tower
of David, Ab. Ezra.
or rather all Jerusalem it self, which was as it were the Tower and fold of
Gods Flock, Israel, because (say Some R. D. Kimchi, R. Tanchum.
of the Jews) all Israel there convened, or were gathered together three times
in the year, as a flock in their Some think it so called from its poor
condition. See Calvin.
fold: and the same to be likewise called in the words subjoined, the strong
hold of the Daughter of Sion. The word rendered strong-hold is (...) Ophel,
which beside this signification, is also the proper name of a Place at
Jerusalem, or in the wall thereof, as Nehem. III. 26. etc. and 2 Chronicles. XXVII.
3. and XXXIII. 14. It has also the signification of obscurity and darkness,
attributed by Some to it, as (...) Aphal another word of like sound signifies,
and is accordingly here Chald. Greek, Vulg. Lat.
interpreted, though to no perspicuous sense, which we shall not here therefore
insist on, but take it, as by Ours well rendered, to denote whole Jerusalem,
though perhaps properly signifying a part thereof. And that which then we are
to take notice of is, that as the name Jerusalem it self and Zion are taken in
the Prophetical Scriptures not only precisely for those places properly so
called, but for the Church of Christ, of which they were Jun Tremel. Deodat.
types and figures, and which had its first visible rise and beginning in or
from them, and thence spread it self; so that these, and other like
denominations, and appellations given to them, sometimes may and ought to be
applied to that and understood of it: and that the Prophecies, seeming to be
spoken to them, do contain more then can be restrained, or limited to them, and
necessarily are to be expounded of it: and in such latitude must these
appellations of Tower of the Flock, and strong hold of the Daughter of Sion, be
here taken. And indeed, they more deservedly agree to that which is the fold of
Christ's Sheep, and that mountain established in the top of the mountains, and
exalted above all hills, ver. 1. that Temple so firmly built on a Rock, that
nothing can shake it, nor the gates of Hell prevail against it, then they ever
did to that Jerusalem of men's building, though in its time the glory of the
whole Earth, and after by Man again destroyed. This it will be necessary to do,
that we may see how the following promise has been made good. To this it
evidently has, but not to that: and to this therefore 'twill appear more
properly to belong, then to that. The promise made is, Unto thee shall it come,
etc.

Unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion of, etc.] R. Sol. Jarchi. See
Abarbanel.
Some of the Jews, by a nice observation of the accent in the word, rendered
shall it come, so distinguish the words, as if this word had reference to the
remnant of halting Israel, of her that was cast far off, mentioned in the
foregoing verse; and so the words to found, Unto thee shall it, that is, that
remnant that halted, or of her that halted, etc. come, and to thee shall come
the first dominion, which is the Kingdom of the Daughter of Jerusalem. But
Aben* Ezra. R. D. Kimchi, R. Tanchum.
Others of them will not have here any consideration to be had of that
distinction, but rather the two Verbs of the same signification to be referred
to the same Subject, to wit, the first dominion, only for confirmation sake,
and to sound, Unto thee shall arrive and come the first dominion, etc. i. e.
Unto thee shall certainly come the first Dominion, Abarb.
which shall be the Kingdom to the Daughter of Jerusalem, or, Kimchi.
such as was the Kingdom of the Daughter of Jerusalem. And this Emphasis is
well expressed in our Translation by some little transposition of the words,
and understanding the last as a repetition of the former, that this Kingdom or
Dominion should come to the Daughter of Jerusalem. But this makes no great
difference or difficulty. It is to be enquired what is meant by the first
Dominion, and how that came to Jerusalem, or in whom what is promised was to be
made good. By the first Dominion may be understood such a Dominion and Kingdom
as was at first to them under David and Solomon, (so the Jews mostly understand
it;) or the chief Dominion; or thirdly that the Dominion should in that first
place come to the Daughter of Zion or Jerusalem. Now how in any of these senses
or all of them, it came, or it was to come to them, and in whom it was seated,
or in whom it was to be, or is, made good to them, is the main enquiry. In
Zorobabel first (say some R. Tanchum.
Jews) and under the second Temple it was made good to them. But sure Zorobabel
never ruled in that greatness and splendor as to be compared to David and
Solomon, or that his Dominion might be equalled to theirs over Israel. And he
that relates that opinion of theirs, confesses that in these prophecies are
greater things (as those in the first verse) spoken, then can be said in him to
have been fulfilled, or under the second Temple, though this and some other
passages he thinks to belong to those times, but that the other are yet to be
expected; and says withal, that by Some all these Prophecies are looked on as
belonging to the times of Messiah, the speedy coming of whom he and they
earnestly desire. And that indeed seems the opinion of most of them, viz. that
these are things not yet fulfilled, looking on them as carnal and temporal
promises of an Earthly glorious reign of Messiah on Earth, wherein he shall
rule over all Israel, all the twelve Tribes, as Abarb.
David and Solomon did, having his seat at Jerusalem, which shall never more be
destroyed, which state of his power they look on as signified by the first
Kimchi.
Dominion. And that this Prophecy was anciently looked on as respecting the
Messiah, is plainly declared by the Chaldee Paraphrast (of great antiquity and
authority among them) who makes him by the Name it self of Tower of the Flock
to be described, thus rendering it, And thou, O the Messiah, or Christ of
Israel, which art hidden because of the Sins of the congregation of Zion, unto
thee shall the kingdom come, and the first (or ancient) Dominion shall be to
the Kingdom of the Congregation of Jerusalem. So that on all hands, as well the
most of the Jews as Christians, will it be agreed that this Prophecy was to be
fulfilled in the Messiah, and respects his Kingdom, and the times under him;
but with a vast difference between them, the Jews looking on it (as we said) as
a promise of an Earthly Kingdom in this World which is not yet come, nor any
Messiah, in Earthly pomp and splendor to assert it, yet revealed, for their
Sins as the Chaldee intimates retarded; but that such a one shall come, and
make good what they expect agreeable to the litteral sense of the words
according to their interpretation: but Christians firmly believing the promised
Christ to be already come, and to have made good all that by virtue of the
Prophecies was to be expected in that way that they are to be understood, to
wit in a Spiritual way, and of better things then the things of this World. And
to him do we say, and to the Sion and Jerusalem here meant, viz. the Church,
that the words may, as they ought to be, in their best and highest sense and
full latitude be applied. To him, and in him, to Jerusalem did the first
Dominion, i. e. that of David and Solomon, come. So the Angel of him, that the
Lord God should give unto him the T^rone of his Father David, and that he
should reign over the house of Jacob for ever, Luc. I. 32, 33. over the whole
house of Jacob, all the twelve Tribes; and not only over them, but that his
Kingdom (he set by God on his holy Hill of Sion) should take in the Heathen
also for his Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his possession,
as David Prophesies of him, Psalm. II. 7, 8. So that under him is no difference
between Judah and Israel, no nor between Jew and Gentile, all believers in him
being as one all the Israel of God Gal. I. 11. 28. Coll. III. 11. Ephesians. II.
12, etc. To him was given Dominion and Glory and a Kingdom, that all People
Nations and Languages should serve him, and his Dominion be an everlasting
Dominion, Dan. VII. 14. Unto all whom the sound of his Kingdom went forth, Romans
X. 18. And so in the second Notion the first, that is, the chief Dominion came
to the Tower of the Flock to Jerusalem in and by him, a Dominion and Kingdom
greater and larger then that of David or Solomon, or any other. David in Spirit
therefore called him his Lord, Psalm. CX. 1. Mat. XXII. 44. and of himself he
witnesses, and his witness is true, that he was greater then Solomon, Mat.
XII. 42, and has therefore deserved a Name given him, King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, Rev. XVII. 14. and XIX. 16. Prince of the Kings of the Earth, chap.
I. 5. None of their dominions were ever like his for extent or duration. David's
and Solomon's were in all their greatness but Types of his, their Kingdom, being
even quite overthrown; and the Acts XV. 16. 8
Tabernacle of David, which was fallen down, was in him raised up to a greater
height and more excellent manner then ever it was in under the Jews. Thirdly,
to the Tower of the Flock, to Sion and Jerusalem, to the Nation of the Jews in
and by our Lord Christ, came the first Dominion, i. e. there it was first set
up and divulged by the Preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom to the Jews and
lost Sheep of Israel, there he himself proclaimed it, and showed his Disciples,
that repentance and remission of Sins should be Preached in his Name among all
Nations beginning at Jerusalem, Luc. XXIV. 47. and so S. Paul tells the Jews,
that it was necessary the Word of God should have been first spoken to them,
Act. XIII. 46. And it may perhaps not be impertinent to observe, that he was
even at first acknowledged for the expected King at Jerusalem by much People,
when riding on an Ass into the City (whether through that gate which was
called the Sheep gate, and properly denoted by (...) Migdal Eder the Tower of
the Flock Tirinus.
as Some think, or not, it will not concern nicely to enquire; by which fact of
his is said to be fulfilled what was spoken by the Prophet, Tell ye the
Daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes to thee meek and sitting upon an Ass,
etc.) he was received by the acclamations of great multitudes, saying, Hosanna
to the Son of David, etc. Mat. XXI. 4, 5. etc. or, as St. John has it,
Hosannah, Blessed is the King of Israel that comes in the Name of the Lord,
Ioh. XII. 17. or as in St. Mark XI. 10. Blessed be the Kingdom of our Father
David that comes in the Name of the Lord, which comes nearer to these words
of the Prophet here, and so Luke XIX. 38. So far were they convinced by the
great Miracles that he showed, such as were before never showed, and his power
not only over Men (as when he drove out of the Temple those that profaned it)
but over seas and winds and Devils themselves, that they could acknowledge him
no less; and therefore, had he not declined it, would have by force made him a
King in another manner then he would be so acknowledged, viz. an Earthly King,
Ioh. VI. 15. And so far it appears, this opinion of him prevailed among the
People, that it was put in as an accusation against him by those that would not
acknowledge him, that he said he was a King, Luc. XXIII. 2. though it was not
he himself but the People that said it; and in respect to that common vote did
Pilate say, bringing him forth to the Jews, Behold your King, and put for the
superscription of his accusation on the Cross, The King of the Jews, (Mar. XV.
26. and the other Evangelists) giving him indeed, though but in scoff, his
just title; at which the chief Priests offended, desired him to change it, and
not to write, the King of the Jews, but that he said, I am the King of the
Jews, Ioh. XIX. 21. though he never said it, nor challenged to himself any such
Kingdom as they pretended contrary to Cesars; but only such, as he himself told
Pilate, that was not of this World, Ioh. XVIII. 36. And that was it indeed
which was his crime with them, because he challenged only such a Kingdom. Had
he came in the lower power and splendor of an Earthly King, they would, the
chief of them, have been as forward as the common People were to have
acknowledged him; whose Dominion, because he did not so, they rejected, and for
the same reason do their posterity still deny and reject it, and so will not
acknowledge those Prophecies, as this and other like, concerning his Kingdom to
have been in our Lord Christ fulfilled, but still vainly look for another in
whom they should be fulfilled to them, in a Kingdom that is of this World,
wherein keeping his seat in an Earthly Jerusalem reedified, he should rule over
Judah and Israel, by force of Arms subjecting the rest of the World to them.
But we having learned from himself the nature and manner of his Kingdom wherein
he rules, and which he, beginning at Jerusalem, so miraculously propagated
through the whole World, not by carnal Arms and force, but by the power of his
Spirit and Word, do see and cannot but acknowledge the utmost of what by virtue
of this Prophecy could be expected, made good in and by him; and that it
plainly belongs to him. After all this, may be taken notice of yet another
construction of the Words, by some Grot. Stokes,
followed, yet tending still to the same purpose, Thou, O Tower of Eder, (or
the Flock) that is, Bethlehem, that art obscure, to thee shall come the
Daughter of Zion, and there shall come from thee the first Dominion, that is,
the Kingdom to the Daughter of Jerusalem, such a King or Kingdom which shall
bear rule in Jerusalem, i. e. in thee Messiah the King of Jerusalem shall be
born: which though some say may be partly applied to Grot,
Zorobabel, yet no otherwise they say then as he was a type of Christ, who was
to spring of the same race. In sum these words, however they be interpreted,
are a Prophecy concerning Christ and his Kingdom, which cannot be eluded: in
him and by him, are they in the ampliest manner, and in none other Person ever
yet were, fulfilled: he it is that should come, and in vain do the Jews look
for another to come and bring an Earthly Dominion and Kingdom to them.

9 Now why do thou cry out aloud? Is there no King in thee? Is thy
Counselor perished? for pangs have taken thee, as a Woman in travail.
Now why do thou cry aloud, etc.] Having in the latter end of the former
chapter denounced very heavy judgments against the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and in the foregoing verses of this made very gracious promises of great good
things, now in what follows he so mingleth a repetition of both threats and
promises, as to show, that the one does not hinder nor cross the performance of
the other, but that both shall in their time have their due accomplishment,
successively one after the other, first the judgments then the promises, though
by the evils which they should suffer, they might seem to have cause to
despair of ever seeing good again. In the first place to show the certainty of
the evils to come on them, he, to whom all things to come are present and
whatsoever he has determined is as already done, speaks to them as if they
were already befallen them, and expostulates with them concerning their
behavior under them, as savouring too much of infidelity and distrust.

Now why, etc.] What is the cause of all thy sad complaints, of those
expressions of grief, like those of a Woman's pangs in travail in Childbirth?
(which is in the Scripture an usual expression of great Sorrows.) Is it because
the Enemy has deprived thee of thy King and Counselors, under whose conduct
and government thou formerly enjoyed'st tranquillity and comfort? This seems
the most litteral and simple sense of the words, and in this way they may be
compared with what is said, Hos. XIII. 10. as the words are by many rendered,
and well bear, Where is thy King now that he may save thee, or thy judges, etc.
The History of their being bereaved of King and Counselors, is read in the
XXIV. and XXV. chap. of the 2 Book of Kings And from the words so expounded,
may be inferred and will be included that, which Abe^. Ezra. R, D. Kimchi,
Drusius.
Others give as the sense of them, Is there no King in thee? that is, Is not
God, for all this that thou suffer being deprived of thy Earthly King, thy
King and thy Counselor, so that thou might in him find strength and
comfort to support thee, and from him counsel to direct thee, and by him be at
last delivered from all these evils? But at present she i. e. Jerusalem, or
the Church of the Jews, deprived of all visible comfort, has no King of her
own Nation to protect her, no senate nor Counsel to direct her, and God her
Heavenly King has for the present withdrawn the wonted signs of his visible
and gracious presence and protection from her; and therefore may she seem to
have just cause of bemoaning her condition in most passionate signs of grief:
and therefore by way of concession bespeaks he her in the next verse.

10 Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, O Daughter of Zion, like a Woman in
travail: for now shall thou go forth out of the City, and thou shall dwell in
the field, and thou shall go even to Babylon: there shall thou be delivered,
there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine Enemies.
Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, etc.] Or as some change the Imperative
into the Future, by way of ascertaining her that these things she must for a
while endure, Thou shall be in pain, thou shall be as in labor,, or, as a
Woman in travail, in great anguish. For thou shall certainly go forth out of
the City; she shall be forced to ly abroad broad in the fields, without house
or home of her own, and then led into captivity as far as to Babylon: so that
indeed she has visible occasions of great sorrow. But those sorrows, though
great as of a Woman crying out in labor and travail, yet shall be as hers also
in another respect, viz. that they shall end in joy, Ioh. XVI. 21. for there
even in Babylon, where she might fear utterly to perish, and that her name and
posterity should utterly be cut off, does the Lord promise to save her, and
redeem her out of the hand of her Enemies, that had done such despite unto her.
So that here is joined to a certain denunciation of judgment, a certain promise
of deliverance again from it: that they may not despair under what they shall
suffer, but with patience and comfort expect the joyful issue in Gods good
time; which is also the scope of the following words. But before we proceed to
them, we may take notice of a different exposition of the ninth verse, from
what has been given, which we then omitted that we might not interrupt the
sense; it is of Chaldee Paraphrast. R. Sol. Jarchi* and see Abarb.
Jewish Interpreters of good authority among them, fastening another
signification on the word rendered cry aloud, to wit, Why do thou seek to make
friends to thee, viz. the Egyptians and Assyrians, that they may save thee
from those evils which God for thy rebelling against him has threatened to
send on thee, and why does the approach of the Enemy affright thee? Do thou
not consider that he is thy King and Counselor, and that in turning to him
would be thy only safety? But now forgetting him and seeking to others, and
finding them not able to save thee, pa^gs have taken hold of thee, and thou art
greatly distressed; and thou have great cause so to be. Be in pain therefore,
and bow down thy self as fainting under sorrow; for now, according as he has
determined, shall thou go into captivity; but he then that is thy King still,
when he has so humbled thee, will in the midst of judgment remember mercy and
deliver thee. etc. This according to that rendering would be the nearest
meaning: but this Interpretation though ancient is by few followed. But
following our Translation, (with which most others agree) there may also be
given another exposition, something different from the former, Now why do thou
cry out, etc. Is there not a King in thee? Have thou not counselors and
directours, to save thee? These she once asked, Give me a King and Princes,
Hos. XIII. 10. and she had them, and in them trusted; but now doubting that
they are not able to save her, and fearing the force of her Enemies, she in
anguish as a Woman in travail; and deservedly, for for all that they can do to
help her, She shall be driven from her home, and led away captive to Babylon.
Yet that she may not despair, she is assured of help from the Lord, who, when
she has been made to know, how vain all other helps are, will show his power
in delivering her, even then, when there seemed no hope to be left to her: and
so will there be a plain connection also between these and the following words.
But the first exposition may seem the plainest.

11 Now also many Nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her be
defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.
Now also many Nations, etc.] In these words and the following, he gives a
father representation to her of what evil shall befall her for a time, and
then an assurance that she shall in the end overcome all that afflict her, and
by the might of the Lord prevail over them, and bring them under. But though
this be evidently the Scope of this and the following verses, yet (for making
it plain) are some difficulties to be cleared: as first, who those many Nations
were that are spoken of: secondly when they here spoken of had these promises
of victory made good to them: and before some forms of expression in the words
are to be explained for the better understanding the ground of these queries,
and the solving of them. Those many Nations that are gathered against Zion
shall say, Let her be defiled. R. Tanch.
The word signifies sometimes, pollution, or, defilement by Sin, so Ier. III.
1. Shall not the Land be greatly polluted? and Numb. XXXV. 33. Ye shall not
pollute the Land wherein ye are, for blood it defiles the Land. And this
signification seem they to respect not only who render it as Ours; or they more
manifestly Vatab. Calvin. See Chald. Paraph. R. Solomon Jarchi, Kimchi, Munst.
who render, She shall Sin, or, be wicked; and they again who render shall be
condemned, or, be guilty, or, be obnoxious: but they also who render, Vulg. Lat.
Let her be stoned, viz. as a defiled adulteress: and perhaps the Greek also,
who looking not so much on the signification of the words, as their meaning,
render it, Let us insult, (although they change both number and gender.) For
what will be the intent of all these but as much as to say, Let her be looked
on as defiled with Sins and made loathsome to her God, and so being forsaken by
him let her be dealt with as such, despitefully used and destroyed, that we may
insult over her; we cannot now doubt of being able so to use her. But then
defiled here will be referred not only to express her guilt, but rather the
miserable condition they hope to bring her to, in polluting her with blood and
slaughter, and contemptuously using her, without respect to her former
holiness, and as much as in them lies abolishing all signs thereof. In much
like sense seems the word desiling (though the word in the Hebrew be differing,
yet of like signification) to be taken for contemptuous using or destroying, as
it is said, Josiah defiled the high places, 2 Kin. XXIII. 8. and Ez. VII. 24.
God threatens, that their holy places should be defiled by the heathen, and Ps.
LXXXIX. 39. Thou have profaned his Crown, by casting it to the ground. In much
like sense may the word here be understood. It has also another signification,
of doing hypocritically, or, being an hypocrite; and Some See Arias Montanus
and Christ. a Castro.
here choose to take that. So the Tigurine version, she was an hypocrite. The
intention must still be, Let her have the condemnation or punishment of, or, be
used as a profane hypocrite (for the word is not of the Preter-tense but of the
Future, and is rather after this notion to sound She is, or let her be, then
She was, or has bin.) In fine, it is an expression of their desires, that all
manner of mischief and shame might befall her to her utter desolation (like
theirs, Psalm. CXXXVII. 7) and their hopes to see it that they may rejoice at it
and insult over her, as is farther expressed by the next words, and let our Eye
look upon Zion, let us see our desire upon her, as the word is likewise used,
Psalm. LIVE. 7.

12 But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his
Counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor.
13 Arise, and thresh, O Daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn Iron, and
I will make thy hoofs brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many People: and I
will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of
the whole Earth.
But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, etc.] So they thought, and so they
wished, as was aforesaid, that Zion should by their hands be laid perpetually
desolate; but the Lord had other ends; to chastise his People by them, but then
to return their malice on their own heads, and to bring that final destruction,
which they intended to others, on themselves. Such difference betwixt Gods
counsel and thoughts, and the thoughts of the Enemies of his People which he
makes use of sometimes, for humbling and chastising his People, see likewise
described, Isa. X. 5. and following verses. He when he has done his work by
his Enemies, shall again in mercy receive his People into favor, and destroy
those to whom for a time he gave power over them; which destruction he
expresses by saying, he will gather them as sheaves into his floor, and
bidding the Daughter of Zion in his might, to arise and thresh them, trample on
and triumph over them, for that he will enable her so to do; for that end he
will make her horn Iron, and her hoofs Brass, that she may beat in pieces many
People, that is, he will give her irresistible strength and power so to do. In
these expressions, the like to which are else where used, is manifestly alluded
to the custom in those Countries, both of old and still, to bring the corn,
after it is gathered in, made up in sheaves, into a floor in an open place, and
then laying the sheaves in order, to lead about oxen over them, drawing after
them a pair of dented Iron wheels, or, as in some places, planks stuck with
sharp flints driven into them, that so the Corn may be trodden or forced out by
the hoofes of the Oxen, and the straw by the wheels or flints broken in small
parts like chaff; and then the Corn purged from the straw is laid up for the
use of Men, and the straw for the ordinary food for their Cattle. This custom
is elsewhere alluded to in Scripture, Deu. XXV. 4. This being observed, it
easily will appear to be the meaning (as was said) that their Enemies should be
gathered for destruction, and they should have power given them, to bring them
under and utterly subdue them. Some Deodat. Ludovicus de Dieu.
learned Men because the expression is borrowed from the treading out of Corn,
which the Oxen do not by the use of their horns, but their feet and hoofes,
think it more convenient here, not to understand by horn the horns on the head,
(although by these strength is else where rendered) but the horny substance on
the feet of the Cattle, to wit, their hoofes, which by saying he will make Iron
and Brass, is meant (as also if the word horn be properly understood) that he
will give them unwearied strength and irresistible power in subjecting and
prevailing over their Enemies. The Chaldee therefore without mentioning horn,
or, hoof, renders, I will make the People in thee strong as Iron, and their
remnant firm as Brass. The subduing of their Enemies seems farther expressed by
the following words also, and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, etc.
Of consecrating or devoting spoils and goods taken from Enemies, read in Numb.
XXXI. 28. and ver. 50. etc. and Ios. VI. 17. and 19. and to omit the custom of
other Nations in consecrating spoils taken from their Enemies to their Gods,
Nebuchadnezzar may seem to have consecrated the vessels taken out of the Lords
house to his Idols; for he carried of the vessels out of the House of the Lord
to Babylon, and put them in his Temple at Babylon, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 7. in the
house of his Gods, Ezra I. 7. That which we take notice of is, that the
consecrating and devoting the goods and spoils of the Enemies, imports and is a
signal and memorial of their defeat and destruction. So that the Christ. a
Castro. Men^ch, Tirinus.
words are a repetition, or continuation of Gods promise of victory to his
People over those many Nations which should be gathered against them, and of
his denuntiation of destruction to those Nations. But then who are by those
Nations meant, and how, or when this Prophecy was, or was to be, made good on
them, are the things to be inquired: and they may be joined together. First as
for those Nations Christ. a Castro, Menoch. Tirinus
Some insisting on the particle now, in what is said, Now also many Nations are
gathered against thee, as if it denoted something nigher at hand then the
Chaldeans coming against Jerusalem and to be done before that, will have to be
understood those that came up in the Army of Senacherib King of Assyria in the
fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, whose gathering together, and taunting
insulting speeches, and threats against Jerusalem are described in the X. and
XXXVI. and XXXVII. Chapters of Isaiah, as also, 2 Kings XVIII. 19. And that the
prophecy of destruction to those Nations with its expressions was made good on
them, they prove from the History in the forecited places, which says, that
when they were gathered together to set upon Jerusalem, the Angel of the Lord
went forth, and slew in the night an Hundred fourscore and five Thousand in the
Camp of the Assyrians, and all the leaders and Captains, so that Senacherib,
after all his proud brags and insultations, returned home with shame unto his
own land. To what may be objected, that here the Daughter of Zion is bid to
arise and thresh, etc. and that she should beat in pieces many People, but that
she had no hand in this, but all was done by the Angel of the Lord; it may be
answered, that what was done by the Lord for her sake, though by other
instruments, Deodat.
is not unfitly attributed to her, and she is called to trample on and triumph
over them, whom in her behalf, and for her sake, he had brought under her feet;
and it may be well said that the Lord had by his utter destraction of them,
According to the notion of the word (...) Hechera^^ti.
devoted them and their gain and substance to himself. So that we need not
inquire after the truth of what Tyrinus out of Josephus, but in Josephus no
such thing is expressed.
Some affirm (perhaps without any good grounds) that Hezekiah consecrated to
the Lord many spoils taken from those Assyrians; though it may be taken notice
of, what is said, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 23. that upon the victory many brought gifts
unto the Lord to Jerusalem. But Others think, that there ought not that stresse
here to be put on the Particle Now, as to the designing of the time, but R. D.
Kimchi.
that the import thereof here is for assurance, that what is spoken shall as
certainly come to pass in the time by God determined, as if it were already
done, and therefore that to be said to be done now, which was a good while
after without fail to be done. Rib. Grot.
Some Others therefore understand by the many Nations, such as were in the Army
of the Chaldeans, by whom Jerusalem was taken and destroyed, and the Jews
carried away to Babel. But what victory had the Jews ever over them? (the like
objection to what was against the former opinion.) The answer must be, God gave
them into the hands of the Medes and Persians to be threshed and destroyed, so
that the Jews then in captivity under them might justly insult and triumph over
them, and what God did by others for their sakes be attributed to them. And the
consecrating their gain to the Lord, Grot.
Some think to be made good by Gods bringing it to pass, that the vessels by
them taken out of the house of the Lord were sent back again. Others, looking
on this as no satisfactory completion of this prophecy alone, Sanctius.
think it ought to be extended to the times of the Maccabes, and that in their
History may be found that, whereby all that is here spoken may be well said to
have been fulfilled. But with none of these are the Jews satisfied, and
therefore look on this Prophecy as not yet fulfilled, but to belong to the
times of the restoring their captivity, the bringing down all their Enemies,
and reestablishing their Kingdom under the Messiah, whom they yet expect, and
Ab. Ezra.
by those many Nations understand, Some, of them which at that time shall come
up with Gog and Magog, being, though they promise to themselves the destruction
of Zion, R. D. Kimchi.
by God stirred up and gathered together, that they may be themselves
destroyed: Others, the Armies of the Romans, by whom Jerusalem was sacked, and
the second Temple destroyed, and also such Abarbinel.
Armies of the Christians and of Saracens also, as afterward invaded, or shall
hereafter at that time of restoring the captivity, be gathered by God to that
place, and there be destroyed, or, (as before) the Armies of Gog and Magog; and
according to their several fancies expect the fulfilling of all these things
here said: whose dreams as Chrians do deservedly reject, so in this do they (at
least diverse of them) join issue with them, that what ever else may be said
otherwise to have been done toward the fulfilling of the things here said, as
to the destruction of the Assyrians, or the Chaldeans, or those of diverse
Nations in the time of the Maccabes, yet the full completion of them to belong
to the times of Messiah or Christ, (not yet to be expected, as the Jews would
have it, but already come) under whom they have been and are manifestly
fulfilled. But then things are Spiritually (as before was observed) not
carnally to be understood, and the Daughter of Zion not to be the Earthly
Jerusalem, but the Church of Christ, which indeed (as was above said) from
Jerusalem took its first rise, and thence spread it self over the face of the
Earth, and brought under many Nations and much People. With what rage and
malice both at the beginning and in succeeding times they gathered themselves
against her, is manifest: yet were they by the power of Christ, the sword of
his Spirit, and Scepter of his word, and by those whom he employed furnishing
them with weapons, not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong holds, and to the casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
should exalt it self against the knowledge of God, and to the bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, gathered into his floor,
brought down, and put under his feet, willingly subjecting themselves in
obedience to him, and consecrating and dedicating themselves and their
substance to his honor. Did we look on things after the flesh, or according to
worldly concerns, it might not be hard to show that the Christians (under Godly
Emperors) have had so great victories over the insulting Enemies of the
Church, as might according to the letter of this Prophecy be justlier said to
have been a fulfilling thereof then any things by those of the Jewish Church:
but Christ having declared his Kingdom not to be of this World, we are not so
much to judge of his conquests by what has been wrought by the Arm of flesh,
though by his power and in his Name, as by those wrought by the Sword of the
Spirit, not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this World, against spiritual wickedness
in high places, Ephesians. 6. 12. against the rebellious minds of obstinate Men to
the subjecting all to himself. It is observed by Calvin.
some concerning this Prophecy, that it is to be in fulfilling to the second
coming of Christ, ( for he must reign till he has put all things under his
feet, 1 Cor. XV. 25.) In that day certainly will it appear how the things here
spoken (as every other word of God) have without the failing of one title, been
fully made good, though perhaps till then, Men will not well agree concerning
the manner how, or time when.

CHAP. V.
VER. 1. Now gather thy self in Troops; O Daughter of Troops: he has laid
siege against us: they shall smite the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the
cheek.
NOw gather thy self in Troops, O daughter of Troops, etc.] It will not be easy
in few words to give account of the different expositions of these words, which
are found in Interpreters, or to pass judgment between them. They differ in
giving the signification of some of them* and then in applying them. The
grounds of which that we may see, it is to be observed that the root (...)
Gadad (from whence is the word (...) Tithgodedi, rendered by Ours Gather thy
self in Troops, and the word (...) Gedud rendered Troops) has two
significations usually attributed to it, one of gathering together in troops,
the other of Cutting, and hence have Interpreters, according to their different
judgments, taken occasion of different interpretations. As for the first word
Pagninus, Rash^, Jun. Tremel. etc.
Some taking it from the first of those significations, render it, Now shall
thou gather thy self together, or, Gather thy self together in Troops, or,
Troup together; Others, Michlal Yophe, Munster. Drusius, and see Kimchi.
Thou shall be compassed and beset with Troops, or, invaded by Troops, or
Interlineary.
Now shall thou go forth in Troops, or Thou Castalio.
shall make an impression or, give an onset, and the like. To this seems the
Greek also to have respect, rendering it, Now shall be shut or blocked up the
Daughter with a shutting or blocking up, that is, so shut or blocked up with
Troops surrounding her, Calvin.
that she shall not be able to go forth. Although if we should take their
meaning from the Arab printed version, which mostly follows the Greek, and here
renders, Now shall be hedged up the Daughter of Ephraim with an hedge, one
might think, that by mistake of a letter, they derived it from (...) Gadar,
which signifies to hedge, or, wall about, instead of (...) Gadad to gather in
Troops, putting (...) for (...) which differ in the Hebrew very little. Others
preferring the latter signification, render, Vulg. Lat.
Some, Thou shall be destroyed, or, spoiled; Grot.
Others, Thou shall be cut off; R. Tanch. Abarb.
Others, Thou shall be wounded. The same word, in the form here used, is also
elsewhere used for cutting ones self in token of sorrow or mourning, Deuteronomy. XIV.
I. and may perhaps in that sense be here appliable, Now cut thy self, etc.

Accordingly do they differ in rendering the Noun, Some rendering, O R. Tanchum.
Daughter of Troup, or Troops; (or, Thou that have an Army, or Armies,) Others,
Vulg. Lat.
Of the spoiler, or robber, Grot.
Others, Daughter of the cutter off.

More difference yet is there in the application of the words as to the person
spoken to. To Jerusalem, say Some, are they directed, and all of them concern
her, so as to show what shall befall her and the reason why, to this sense, O
Jerusalem Daughter of the spoiler, or robber, (which art full of spoilers and
robbers, or which have great store of military Troops,) now shall thou be
spoiled, thou which did lay siege against, or in hostile manner deal with us,
See in Christ. a Castro.
the Prophets and messengers of God, and in which they shall smite the judge of
Israel, Christ himself, with a rod on the cheek. This sense is harsh in respect
both to the construction and to the coherence. For if there be any coherence
between these and the following words (as there manifestly is) these things
must be fulfilled before Christ was to be born in Bethleem, and so he that was
after to be born could not be he that is here said should be smitten. (which
exception lies against all others Aben Ezra. Capell. Crit. Sac. page 246.
who would have by this judge of Israel to be understood the Messiah, or
Christ, however differently they expound the former words.)

It is a clearer sense which is given by others, who taking Jerusalem for the
person spoken to, in the former part of the verse, take their Enemies as spoken
of in the latter part; so making it a repetition or farther declaration of
those evils above threatened to Jerusalem, which she should certainly expect to
undergo; and telling by whom, and in what manner, or how far they should be
inflicted on her: and that, whether the former words be interpreted in that
signification already mentioned, or in the others also above spoken of. If in
the same signification that those expositors already mentioned take them, then
thus, Now, ere long, thou shall be spoiled, Pelicanus.
O Daughter of the spoiler, or robber, etc. for he, that is, the Enemy, has
laid siege, i. e. shall certainly do it, (speaking of the thing Tanch.
as already done, in token of the undoubted certainty of it in its time by God
determined:) and shall so far prevail, and bring them under, as by way of
contempt to smite the judge (or judges, taking here the singular in the sense
of the plural,) i. e. the chief Men, the Governnours and Rulers of the People
of Israel, with a rod upon the cheek, as being in their power to abuse them and
deal with them as they pleased.

Of the same concern as to the Jews do Others also make this passage, who yet
render the first words in the other of the two significations mentioned, viz.
of being gathered in troops* whether thus, Now thou shall be invaded or
compassed by hostile Troops O Jerusalem, therefore Kimchi.
deservedly called Daughter of Troops, i.e. the assembly or rendezvous and
meeting place of Troops that come against thee: he (the Enemy) has laid siege
against us, (of Jerusalem) i. e. shall certainly, in that time determined,
besiege, etc. Or, Calvin.
Now shall thou be gathered in Troops, or, all thy troops be gathered, and shut
up together in thee, not able to go forth, O Daughter of Troops, (which had,
and were wont to send forth many troops:) for he, (that is, the Enemy) has
laid siege, etc. Or Imperatively, (as the Future Indifferently may be rendered
either as Future or Imperative) Now, (things being thus ordered by God) gather
thy self in Troops, thou Daughter of Troops, Deodat. Dutch-notes.
that were wont to have and send out many troops to spoil others, now assemble
thy troops, and gather all thy forces together, to resist the Enemy, and save
thy self if thou can: all shall be in vain; for he, the Enemy, has laid
siege, shall as certainly lay seige as if it were already done, against us (the
Prophet speaking in the person of the People, or making himself one of them;)
and shall so far prevail, as to smite even the judge of Israel, with a rod on
the cheek, i. e. most contumeliously use the chief among us, abuse and vili^y
them; which is the import of that expression.

According to these expositions, Jerusalem, or the People of the Jews, is here
bid to expect those evils before intimated, chap. V. 9, 10, 11. and told that
they shall certainly and inevitably befall them before they shall enjoy those
good things, and obtain that redemption and victory promised there, ver. 10,
12. God has threatened the one in the first place, and promised the other after
to succeed, and in making good both in their due time, will he show his
veracity. This verse concerns the evils that they shall suffer, and then in the
following is farther assurance given of their, redemption, and Redeemer, or,
Savior. Against these latter interpretations, there is no apparent objection
from either the signification, or construction, or coherence of the words, with
either what preceeds or follows; yet do Others prefer a different way of
expounding them, by understanding, the person spoken to of the Enemy, not of
Jerusalem it self. But great variety is there between them in assigning who is
the Enemy then meant. It will not be needful to insist on that exposition,
though of a very ^rias Mont^nus.
learned Man, which would have these words directed against Gentilism, or
Heathenism in general, all those false Religions which set themselves against
Christ and Christianity, and contumeliously used and derided them, and
persecuted them, to tell them, that though they abounded in Troops and number,
yet they should be brought to naught by the preaching of the Apostles, and the
prevailing power of the Gospel: for this rather shows how the words may be
applied, then gives the prime litteral meaning of them, which we seek for. But
who is then the Enemy spoken to and of? Rome, or the Romans say Vatablus.
Some, and their forces under Titus which sacked Jerusalem, to this sense, Now
toeu shall assemble thy Troops, O Daughter of Troops, (Rome, that have so many
Troops) that thou m^yest lay siege against Jerusalem, and thy Men shall smite,
etc. Or, as others Lyra. Christ. a Castro.
Now shall thou be spoiled or cut off, or compassed with Troops, O Jerusalem,
Daughter of Troops: for, thine Enemy, viz. the Romans, shall lay siege and
prevail against thee; or as a Abarb.
learned Jew, Now cut and make bald thy self (viz. in token of sorrow as Deuteronomy.
XIV. I.) for the many evils that thou shall suffer, O Daughter of Troops, thou
which sentest so often many troops to distress Jerusalem and lay her wast (viz.
the Romans and other Nations with them;) for God at length in his appointed
time, shall bring thee there to take vengeance of thee, in the place where thou
did that mischief. Abarb.
Which vengeance God will bring on them for two causes mentioned. First,
because they laid siege against Jerusalem, when they took it, and destroyed the
second Temple. Secondly, because they used contumeliously the chief of the
Jews, whom they carried captives, as is showed by the expression of smiting
with a rod upon the cheek. These, though otherwise differing, yet in this
agreeing, that they understand by the Enemy spoken of, the Romans who took
Jerusalem and destroyed the Temple, are all liable to a common objection, viz.
that the things here spoken according to the series of the words, were to be
fulfilled before that ruler in Israel, prophesied of in the words next
following, to wit the Messiah, was to come forth out of Bethleem, that is, to
be born there; whereas the siege and destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple
were after Christ's time. To the same exception, lies open also the opinion of
other R. D. Kimchi, Michlal Yophe.
Jews, who by the Enemy here pointed out understand the numerous Armies of Gog
and Magog, which they will have to be yet to come against Jerusalem long since
destroyed. But if they say this objection touches them not, because they hold
the Messiah is not yet come, we must answer, that we are assured by the
fulfilling as of all other Prophecies concerning him, so of that immediately
following, (as in the consideration of it will appear) that he is already come,
and that Jesus our Christ was he, and therefore their obstinate denying of that
truth, does not justify their error or mistake in this interpretation, which
perhaps they therefore take up, that they may seem to have some color for that
grand error and their obstinacy in it, by saying such things ought to be done
before the coming of the Messiah, which are not yet done, and that therefore
they cannot believe him to be yet come. As for what Ribera, Chapter a Castro.
Some answer here, that the particle Now, seems to import a time nearer to the
Prophets uttering this Prophecy, then the coming of the Roman Armies was, it is
perhaps not much to be insisted on, because that See Kimchi and Abarb.
may be interpreted of its due time, or time determined for it by God, to whom
even what was farthest of, was then as present. Chapter a Castro. Menochius,
Tirinus.
But Others therefore more probably by the Enemies here meant understand the
Assyrians^ under Senacherib (whom also they understand by those many Nations
mentioned chapter IV. 11.) and that these words are a threatening of cutting
off, or destruction to them. What is else where threatened to them, see Isaiah
X. 12. etc. and chap. XXXIII. I. and what destruction befell them chap. XXXVII.
36. etc. as likewise, 2 Kings XIX. 35. etc. Against this exposition, appears
nothing in the words, or context, which may be objected, if Senacheribs sending
a great Army to Jerusalem by Rabshakeh, and Rabshakehs insolent carriage
toward the King and his Messengers, and reproachful language, and Senacheribs
own blasphemous letter to the same purpose, may seem sufficient to make good
what is said, he has laid siege against us, they shall smite the judge of
Israel with a rod on the cheek; and Chapter a Castro.
then may the former words be expounded either, Tirinus.
Now in the mean while shall thou gather together thy Troops, O Assyria
Daughter of Troops, and bring the Army which shall lay siege, etc. or in the
other signification, Now shall thou be cut off, or destroyed, O Daughter of
Troops, or, the spoiler Chapter a Castro.
that usest to send out thy troops to spoil others. Yet do others prefer to
apply what is said, to the Babylonians or Chaldeans, who with numerous Armies
did both besiege and take Jerusalem, and despitefully used the King Zedekiah,
and slew his Sons, and then put out his eyes, and bound him with fetters of
Brass, and carried him to Babylon, and slew also their Priests and Nobles, 2
Kings XXV. I. and that whether the former words be expounded according to the
one of the forementioned significations, or the other, either to this sense,
Now gather thy self in Troops, or, prepare thy Army, O Daughter of Troops,
which may lay siege against us and smite, etc.] for so far shall thou prevail:
but then those judgments denounced, chapter. IV. 12. shall befall thee, and
Israel shall have a redeemer, as follows here in the next verse: Or, Now in the
time appointed shall thou be spoiled, O Daughter of Troops, or owner of that
Army which laid, (or shall lay) siege against us, and which sm^te (or, shall
smite, etc.) or, Now shall thou be cut off, or, spoiled, O Babylon Daughter of
the cutter off, or, spoiler, (viz. Grot.
Nimrod the great spoiler) who have laid siege to us and smitten, etc, or,
Pelicanus.
Now shall thou cut and tear thy self for sorrow; O Daughter, etc. But among
all that go this way (against which lies no apparent exception) none more
perspicuously makes out the sense, together with the coherence and
construction, then a learned R. Tanchum.
Jew, thus. Having described what should befall them, that they should be led
captive to Babylon, and how the Chaldeans should prevail over them, and then
promised that in a short time they should be released, he declares that it
should be by cutting off the Empire of the Chaldeans, as it came to pass; and
therefore, as addressing his speech to them, says, Thou shall be wounded, or
Be thou also wounded, or cut with the sword of the Enemy, that is, taste of that
which thou have made us taste, O Daughter of Troops, i. e. owner of that Army
which has laid, i. e. shall surely lay (for it was not yet done, according to
the usual language of the Prophets, speaking of what shall certainly be as
already done) siege against us, and which shall smite the judge of Israel with
a rod on the cheek, meaning their contumelious usage of their King Zedekiah, i.
e. This shall befall thee, because thou have done these things in besieging us,
and despitefully using our Prince and King. And then having intimated what
contempt shall befall the house of David, he subjoins (according to Gods usual
method) a declaration of what dignity they shall again attain to, in the time
of their restoration, saying, But thou Bethleem, etc. So will the coherence of
the words one with another be manifest, and that there is in these words a
Prophecy of the first (i. e. the Babylonish) captivity, and the first
restoration, i. e that from that captivity, and not meant as some other, as we
have seen, would have it, of the destruction of Jerusalem, and second
captivity, as they call it, by the Romans, from which they are not restored.
And what he subjoins, And thou Bethleem Ephratah, etc. will be a promise to the
house of David of the return of the Kingdom to them, to be expected in the time
of the Messiah. And so according to this way of exposition, is a plain way
made, to the consideration of those words, which concern the Kingdom of the
Messiah, whom they expect, and we say is already come, viz.

2 But thou Beth-leem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in
Israel: whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.
But thou Bethleem Ephratah, etc.] These words being a Prophecy concerning him,
in and by whom God would make good to his People that redemption, and those
good things promised to succeed the evils, which they should first suffer,
describe him by the place of his nativity, and condition of his person; as will
appear by considering them in order. Thou Bethleem Ephratah, i. e. Bethleem of
Judea, Mat. the II. 1. or which was in the land of Judah, as there ver. 6.
where these words are cited, it is called, and so also Bethleem Judah Iud.
XVII. 7. XIX. 1. and Ruth I. 1. etc. in which Book, chap. IV. 11. is the Name
of Ephratah also mentioned, both being names of the same Town, as appears from
Genesis XXXV. 19. and both here joined distinguish it from another Town called by
one of them, to wit Bethleem, which was in the lot of the Tribe of Zabulon
mentioned, Ios. XIX. 15. In this Town here spoken of did David's Father live,
and he was born, 1 Samuel XVII. 12. Ioh. VII. 42. Though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah. These words cited, Mat. II. 6. are there read, Thou art not
the least among the Princes of Judah, which sense seems almost contrary to
what is here read, according to the ordinary Translations ( art little.) To
solve the seeming contrariety, expositors have sought out several ways,
amongst which are these. First, that which our Translation gives, by supplying
the word though as understood. Secondly, that of others reading the words
interrogatively, Art thou little? and that of De Dieu.
Others, It Is little that thou be, etc. By all which the sense will be brought
to be near the same in both places. But the plainnest way of reconciling them
seems that which R. Tanch.
a learned Jew, who probably never knew what is written in St. Matthew, and
would certainly never have strained to say what should make for justifying the
Gospel, or advantage of Christians, gives us, which is this, that the word
(...) sair here used in the Hebrew, and by Interpreters usually rendered little,
has two significations, viz. little, and great, or of great note and esteem,
and that in this latter sense it is here to be understood in this place. That
the word has both these significations (as many other words have both in the
Hebrew and other languages, and in contrary senses) he proves See Porta Mosis,
Chaldee Paraph. and Zach. XIII. 7. in Syriack and Greek, and Arab.
by instancing in other places, in which though frequently it signifies little,
it is to be rendered, great, or chief, or Prince. (The same is affirmed Abu
Walid. Gloss Heb. Arab.
by others of good authority and among the chief Masters of their language.) His
words are toth is purpose; Whereas others take this as spoken by way of
diminution to that City or Family of that Tribe, as if it were not worthy to
have the Kingdom over Israel peculiar to it, unless God had peculiarly chosen
David because he was acceptable in his sight, from whom their Grandfather they
inherited that right, it is a better way to understand the word, (...) Tsair in
the contrary notion, of Chief, or ruler, that the meaning may be, thou shall be
chief, Prince, or ruler among the thousands of Judah. So that if that rendering
of their ancients in reporting this Prophecy in St. Matthew, viz. not least
(which is all one which great in renown) had been showed him, he must have
acknowledged it to be the true meaning of the word in the Prophet. And with
great Emphasis seems that word here put which signifies at once both little and
great, or, of great renown, to show that as some other things which are little
in bulk or quantity, are yet in other regards of more esteem and value above
others in sight greater, so it was with Bethleem, though perhaps otherwise
little in number, bigness, or account, among the thousands of Judah, or, as in
St. Matthew, among the ^rinces of Judah, which in sense is all one, alluding to
the custom of the Israelites See Hammond on Matthew. II. and See Sam. X. 19.
Exodus XVIII. 25.
of dividing their Tribes into thousands (as among us the Shires are divided
into Hundreds) over every one of which thousands was a Prince or chief: so that
to say among the thousands, or Princes (viz. of those thousands) is all one The
same word which is here used and signifies a thousand, Judge. VI. 15. is
rendered family, and so here is by Some Rashi, Abarb.
Jews expounded families, by R. D. Kimchi.
Others, Cities. To say then, thousands, or Princes of thousands, or Families,
or Cities, will be in this regard as to the meaning all one. And though in any
regard Bethleem among these might according to the one signification of the
word be accounted little, yet indeed the other signification did deservedly
agree to that place, of being not least, yea great and illustrious, even chief
and Prince among them. That by which it was so ennobled follows, because, out
of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel, i. e. that
it was to be the birth place of the great ruler by God promised to Israel to
save them.

Out of thee shall he come forth. That is, in thee shall be born, for so this
word that signifies to come forth is Grotius.
else where used, as Genesis XXV. 25. and Isa. XI. 1. And that in this sense it is
here to be taken appears by that answer, which by the chief Priests and Scribes
of old was given to Herod the King enquiring of them where Christ should be
born, Mat. II. 5. 6. they readily answering to him, that he was to be born in
Bethleem of Judea, because it was so spoken in the Prophet here, that out of
Bethleem should come a Governor that should rule Gods People Israel; and
likewise by what we read, Ioh. VII. 41, 42. where some by mistake thinking that
Christ, because he had been much conversant in Galilee, was born there, thought
that a sufficient proof to deny him to be the promised Messiah, because (as
from this Prophecy I suppose they had their only ground which they took for
undoubted) that he was to come of the Seed of David, and out of the Town of
Bethleem where David was. None could they then acknowledge for the Christ, who
was not born in that Town. And to their Interpretation must we stick that we
may not give advantage to the latter Jews, who think it sufficient for the
fulfilling what is here said, that he was to have his extract from Bethleem, R.
D. Kimchi, Abarh.
from the lineage of David who was there born, though himself was born else
where; probably to avoid that argument of the Christians of old, who thought it
a proof, (as appears out of his Book against the ^ews chap. XIII. edit. Rigalt.
Tertullian) that Christ was already come, because Bethleem was now brought to
ruin and not inhabited by the Jews, that there might be any probability of any
other Christ then him whom we acknowledge to be born there. In our Lord Christ
did both these concur, that he was both a Isa XI. I.
branch out of the root of Iesse the Bethleemite, Luke II. 4.
of the house and lineage of David, and also (God so directing it by his
providence) born in Bethleem. So that in him all that can be by this expression
in this Prophecy understood or expected, was fully completed: as also what is
farther expressed, that he, that was to come forth out of Bethleem, to have his
rise thence, and that for the place of his Nativity, was to be ruler in Israel.
Who he is, that is spoken of as so, is inquired. An ancient Ly a.
Commentator mentioning some, who would have it Hezekiah, says of them that
they do more Iudaize then the Jews themselves, for so little do the things here
spoken of agree to Hezekiah who was not born in Bethleem, (if he were not born
before this promise of one to be born, as probably he was) that the Jews
themselves would not go to attribute them to him. And the same censure will in
great part take hold on those who attribute them to Zorobabel, who neither was
born there, and in whom such other things as are here spoken For so R. Tanchum
confesses on ver. 3.
cannot by any means be said to have been made good. For though by what is
delivered by some Theophylact on the second of Matthew.
ancicient Fathers of the Christian Church, we may think that heretofore some
Jews did avow the person here spoken of to be Zorobabel: yet, those Chaldee
paraphrast R. Solomon, R. D. Kimchi, Abarb. R. Tanchum, Nitzachon.
who better considered the matter, and have given us their mind in writing, say
no such thing, but unanimously (none we suppose contradicting) affirm, that
person to be the Messiah, or King Messiah: in which so far they agree with us
Christians, but with great difference otherwise, they affirming the words to
note such a Messiah, as is not yet come, and laboring from these and the
following words to prove it, we, that he that is here promised, the true
Messiah, is already come, and that these words prove that he is so, and that it
appears from them, that our Lord Jesus Christ is he that should and did come
forth of Bethleem, and be ruler in Israel. As this is here foretold of our
Savior Christ, so when he was now to be born into the World, the Angel
bringing to his Mother the good tidings thereof, faith Luke I. 32, 33. The Lord
shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end; and this was
made good in him. But here the R. D. Kimchi, Nitzachon.
Jews object, Jesus ruled not in, or over Israel, but they ruled over him, and
put him to Death, and as yet neither do believe in him or serve him. The answer
to which is easy: they did indeed and had power over him so far, but not to
hinder or impair his Dominion over them here promised: but more to discover the
true Nature of it, which they were, and continue mistaken in, and to further
the manifestation and propagation of it, not only over Israel in the narrow
sense wherein they appropriate it to themselves alone, who are Israel according
to the flesh only, but over the whole Israel of God, all those that truly know
him and believe in him, and are his chosen People. Herein was the mistake of
their ancestors, and is still theirs, that they expected him to be a carnal
ruler, whereas his dominion was to be spiritual, as he declares that ^his
Kingdom was not of this World, which duly observed is an answer to all their
cavils. Had his Kingdom been of this World, his servants would have fought that
he should not have been delivered to the Jews. Ioh. XVIII. 36. and whose
service ^could he not in that kind, have commanded, whose Mat. V^. I. 27. ^uk.
VIII. 25
command even the winds and waves, yea the Devils themselves obeyed? who by his
word cured the Blind, Deaf, Dumb, and lame, and every way impotent, raised Men
from Death to Life, and could have obtained from his Father more then twelve
legions of Angels for his guard, Mat. XXVI. 53. Or could he not the bare breath
of his mouth, have made all his Enemies fall to the round, as he did some of
them that came to take him? Ioh. XVIII. 6. But then how should the Scriptures
have been fulfilled, Mat. XXVI. 56. thus far it behooved him to suffer, for
fulfilling them, and through Luke XXIV. 26.
suffering, enter into his Glory. It behooved him to be lifted up upon the
Cross that he might draw all Men to him, Ioh. XII. 32. His so far submitting
himself did not diminish but increase the Glory of his Dominion. That
blasphemous scoff of the ancient Jews, Mat. XXVII. 42. Marc. XV. 32.
If he be the King of Israel let him now come down from the Cross and we will
believe in him, could not then hinder many as well of the Jews as of other
Nations from coming in to him, and believing that he was truly the King of
Israel, and the obstinacy of many of their posterity in still persisting to
say, we will not have this Man whom our Ancestors Crucified Luke XIX. 14.
to reign over us, must not beat us off from acknowledging this Prophecy so far
fulfilled in him, as that he was the person here spoken of, that should come
forth to God out of Bethleem and be ruler in Israel; but, considering how all
the other Prophecies seeming to them to cross this, were together reconciled
and jointly fulfilled in and by him) to infer with the Apostle Peter, Acts, II.
36. therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
that same Jesus, whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ. Those that do
otherwise and will not acknowledge him so, do not prove him not to be so; but
themselves not to be the Sea Romans IX. 6.
Israel of God, though insisting on the outward privileges of the flesh they
call themselves Israel. That is the true Israel in which he rules, not by a
carnal Scepter or Weapons, but by his word, of which his Scepter the greatest
part of the World has so many years seen and acknowledged the power: and that
therefore which most concerns us, is, not being moved by the groundless cavils
of Jews, or any other against his Dominion, by yielding him willing obedience,
to approve our selves in the number of those, in and over whom he rules, so
shall we approve our selves to be the Galat. VI. 16.
true Israel of God, whilst others falsely and in vain so call themselves. Where
he is not ruler, there is no true Israel.

Whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, or, (as in the
margin) the days of eternity. He goes on in describing of him, who he says
should come out of Bethleem, and be ruler in Israel, by another more eminent
coming or going forth then that from that place, even before that place was,
^from all Eternity, which is so signal a description of the Divine generation
before all time, or, that going forth from everlasting of Christ the Eternal
Son of God, God of the substance of the Father begotten before all worlds, and
afterward in time (according to what is said, that he should come forth of
Bethleem) made Man of the substance of his Mother and born in the World, as
that it appears that this Prophecy belongs only to him, and could never be
verified of any other. Yet the R. D. Kimchi, Abarbinel.
Jews who deny the Divinity of Christ, endeavor to put us off from this proof
of it, or, our so applying the words to him by another interpretation, viz.
that these words import no more, then that his going forth, viz. his
extraction, should be from David, between whom and him here promised should be
a long time, a great number of years and ages, and so according to them it
should so only be rendered, from of old, from days of age, or, antiquity, i. e.
a long time since, and not from everlasting or before time, (and so Grotius.
others who are not Jews following their exposition, think that the words may
well enough be applied to Zorobabel who was of the posterity of David, who was
originally from Bethleem, and so had anciently his extraction thence. But this
the Jews themselves do not say, who (as was before showed) do not apply them to
him, but to a Messiah, whom they yet expect to come of the lineage of David.)
Another R. Tanchum.
Jew expounds them in something different words, viz. the causes of whose
production have been from of old, and who has been from long time soretold of
and promised. But the same answer will serve to all these, that we may not let
go the plain meaning of the words, which our Translation gives us, as an
evident proof of Christ's eternal generation, and so of his Divinity, seeing he
that is Eternal must confessedly be God. Our answer will best be framed by
taking the words in order, and first that the word (...) Motsaothaw, rendered
whose goings forth, does manifestly and properly so signify it cannot be
denied, and that it necessarily implies, in the Person of whom it is spoken, an
having been or gone forth actually, when or before the Prophet spoke these
words. In the former words where he speaks of his being born in after time
(which was to come to pass after the uttering this Prophecy) he puts the Future
tense [ shall come forth,] but here speaking of a going forth, which was before
that time from of old, the preter tence must needs be understood, and is well
supplied in our Translation, by [ have been,] the Verb substantive being
according to the usual property of the Hebrew language not expressed but
understood. We say it is well supplied by the tense denoting the time past; for
the future can here have no place: it will be no sense to say a thing shall be
from of old: that would be to confound past and to come in one. This going
forth having been from of old, cannot be said to have been made good, by the
being of the person spoken of in his ancestors loins, nor by the causes of his
being having been of old. That would note only that there was then a
possibillity of his coming forth, not be properly called an actual going forth,
as it is here called, no more then 'twould be proper to say, that in Adam's
time all Men had their goings forth, or were then born and in actual beings,
because they were all then in Adam's loins, and there were then causes which
should in after times produce them. To say then that the person here spoken of
had his goings forth, because he was to come forth out of the family of David,
after this was spoken, can be no proper exposition of this word, because it
denotes goings forth that had actually been, not that were to come. Neither if
he had been actually born in David's time, or any of hisancestors before him
(although neither he nor any of his ancestors are here expressed) could this
make good what follows in the next words, from of old, from everlasting, or,
from days of Eternity. But then the rendering of those words also must be
vindicated from the glosses of the Jews, who would have them to signify only
from some long time ago, (some hundreds of years) and not from Eternity, or
before time properly so called. We say therefore, that as the words here used,
(to wit, (...) Kedem, by our Translatours rendered of old, and (...) Olam,
rendered Everlasting) do sometimes signify, the first, time long since, and the
latter, long duration of time, whether past or to come; so they do also signify
Eternity, of days and time, (that we may so, in the language of Scriptures,
which speak to Men in their own way of speaking, call that Eternal continuance
which was before time or days properly so called.) We need not seek far for
proofs of this. That in Proverbs VII^. 22, 23. may suffice for a testimony of
both, where the Heavenly Wisdom says, God possessed me in the beginning of his
way, (...) Kedem Miphalau Meaz, before his works of old, and I was set up,
(...) Meolam, from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was. That
both those words there signify Eternity is manifest by the context, this being
said to be before the Earth was: and it is manifestly to be expounded, R.
Solomon Jarchi.
as one of their own there glosseth it, before the Creation of the World, or,
as Aben Ezra.
another understands it, of priority of Eternity, by priority of necessary
existence, not of time properly so called, because time was afterward created.
To this may be added, as for this use of the former word (...) Kedem, that in
Psalm. IV. 19. He that abides (...) Kedem, of old, i. e. from Eternity: and for
the second, i. e. (...) Olam, what is said, Psalm. XC. 2. (...) Meolam ad Olam,
necessarily rendered from everlasting to everlasting: to omit the many other
places, where it is necessary so be understood. And as for that word too which
is rendered from days, that also is used sometimes to signify that Eternity in
which was no distincton of days or parts of time; so Isa. X^III. 13. (...)
Mi^om any hu, word for word Compare Psalm. II. 7.
from the day I am he; that is, as the Jews themselves interpret, and ours
rightly render, before the day was, i. e. from Eternity. And so God is called
according to the usual exposition, the ancient of days, Dan. VII. 9. not that
he is circumscirbed by days of the greatest number or antiquity, but Eternal.
Now if these words singly, any of them, may denote Eternity; how much more,
being all put together, in that order as here, must they increase and heighten
the signification; and show that, of the person here spoken of, as having
actual goings forth, the nature of which is so described when the words were
spoken, they are in the most improved signification to be taken? Which will be
farther confirmed by adding that advantage, which is not only urged by
Tarnovius, Glassius, Hacspan.
diverse Christians, but suggested by that Kimchi.
Jew himself, who most earnestly endeavors to deprive us of this proof for
Christ's being God of the substance of the Father, coeternal with his Father. To
this he argues, That the Christians concluding from these words, that Jesus is
God, because he had his goings forth from of old, etc. and their saying, Who is
from days of old but God? is false, because God was before the days of old;
And whereas they say his goings forth were from of old, from days of Olam,
(age or long ago) implies that then he went forth; but God is ancient, (or,
Eternal) without beginning: And what is said from Olam to Olam, i.e. from age
or antiquity, and to age, thou art God, signifies from before age or the World,
as he says there, before the Mountains were brought forth: and so what is
said, Proverbs VIII. 23. I was set up Meolam, from Olam, or Age, or Antiquity,
is, before Olam, or Age, or the World, as he there adds or ever the Earth was.
In this his obscure way of arguing is to be observed, that he misreports the
opinion of the Christians, as if they said, Then, in age or ancient time,
Christ went forth (i.e. had his beginning and was not before) whereas God had
no beginning: whereas we do not say so, but that he had his going forth or
emanation from the Father, his Eternal generation without beginning of time, or
priority; but so as that he is coeternal with the Father. And so what he says,
as if we give to Christ a beginning of his going forth, comes to nothing, as a
mere fiction of his own. But what he adds, is that which makes whollyto our
advantage, i.e. that the prepositive letter or Particle Mim, which is here put
to these words, may be, and in the places cited ought to be understood, as
signifying not only from, but before. And so then may it here also be
understood, and so is Hacspan. Tarnovius, Glassius.
by diverse learned Christians; and will so prevent any advantage, that may by
any be taken from attributing here to Kedem, of old, or, Ye^e Olam, days of
age, any narrower signification, then that of Eternity; by rendering it, before
what was of old, or, the beginning; or before days of Age, (before any days
or age began,) which then will be all one with from everlasting; and so our
conclusion still be confirmed, that the person here described by his goings
forth, of that nature as the words necessarily require, must be Eternal. No
other sense will agree to the words spoken of goings forth, which were in
actual being when the Prophet spoke this; nor can they agree to any that then
were not in being, as has been showed. And that the words are to be applied to
our Lord Christ, and were spoken of him, has been also showed. All the cavils
and objections of the Jews have nothing in them that may shake our Principles,
or weaken our belief in him, but rather confirm them; and at once show, with
what vain hopes they deceive themselves, while they will have these words to be
a promise of a Messiah, and yet, denying the true Messiah, in whom they are
fully made good, expect one by virtue of them, to whom they can by no means
agree, viz. one who had had no actual goings forth, when these words were
spoken, nor yet has, and they do not expect that he should have, till he take
his whole actual being, as other Men do, at the time of his birth, being till
then only in the loins of his ancient stock: whereas these words cannot be
verified of any person, but such a one as may say, as Christ of himself, Ioh.
VIII. 58. Before Abraham was (much more before David, yea, before Adam, before
the ancientest of times) I am, by an Eternal being. Out of what has been said
may likewise appear, (although Calvin does not deny that Christ's Eternal being
and Divinity may hence be proved,) the invalidity of another exposition,
Calvin. Bren.
by some, though interpreting the words concerning Christ, so expressed, as to
give advantage to the Jews, viz. that these goings forth of Christ, are still
to be understood, as the former words, of his being made Man and born at
Bethleem, which is said to have been from days of Eternity, because from all
Eternity it was decreed, that there in time he should be born. But, why these
goings forth, from of old, from everlasting, which the person spoken of is said
to have had when this was spoken, cannot be the same with that coming forth
which he should have afterward in time to come, out of Bethleem, by being born
there, has been showed. Again, it cannot with any propriety of speech be said,
That Gods decree makes things actually to have been, before ever they were
produced in the time determined for their production, (except other
circumstances make it necessary so to understand it, as according to some
Revelations XIII. 8. but of that place, see Dr. Hammond, who otherwise
understands it.) Though by virtue thereof all things are present to God, and as
certain to be as if they already were; yet it will not be language intelligible
to Men, by taking away all distinction of times, to say, such a Man has been
already born into the World, because God has decreed he should be born. Add,
that if it were sufficient so to understand the words, here would be nothing
more said of this eminent person here signally pointed out, by some great thing
peculiar to him, by which he should be known and distinguished from all others,
then might be said of any other ever after born in Bethleem, of all which it
might be also verified, that their goings forth thence had been from of old,
etc. because their ancestors lived there, and God had decreed they should be
born there. This exposition then cannot be sufficient or satisfactory.
Whosoever will soberly and seriously and without partiality consider the words,
shall perceive in this verse, the person spoken of (who is Christ the true only
Messiah) described, by a twofold emanation, coming, or going forth; the first
in order of the words his birth as Man, in time, after this Prophecy uttered,
at Bethleem; the other his Eternal emanation or generation from the Father,
which he had when this was spoken, and from all Eternity, before the beginning
of time or days properly so called. The first of these though singular to him,
in that it was without concurrence of an Earthly Father, yet in this common to
him with others, in that he was born of a Woman in time, and in Bethleem, and
so shows him to be a Man: but the other wholly peculiar to himself and
distinguishing him from all others, because it was from Eternity before all
time, and so shows him to be God Eternal and one with the Father. Before we
pass from the words, one thing more may be observed, to wit, concerning the
wonderful aptness and suitableness of the word, (...) Motsaoth or goings forth
here used, to the thing spoken of, in as much as the same word (...) Motsa,
coming, or, going forth, is used for expressing a word, which is the production
and going forth of the mouth, as Deuteronomy. VIII. 3. (...) Motsa Pi, and (...) Motsa
Shephataim, the going forth of the lips; it is therefore very appositly and
significantly here used to express the going forth, or eternal generation, of
him who is called the word of God, of whom it is said, Ioh. I. 1. In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the
same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, etc. Which
words show the same that here is said, that Christ (there called the word) had
his goings forth before all time without beginning to be, being Eternal with
the Father, and gave certain evidence and demonstration of that his Eternal
being, or goings forth before time, by creating and giving goings forth to time
it self, and all things that are dated or measured by time; which Jun. Tremel.
Pet. a Fig. See Tarnov.
Some also will have here signified: though doubtless his own Eternal being, as
distinct from his birth at Bethleem, is the thing here chiefly described, and
not only the manifestation of it in his works in time even at the beginning of
it.

3 Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which travelleth
has brought forth: then the remnant of his Brethren shall return unto the
Children of Israel.
Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which travelleth has
brought forth, etc.] How these words are inferred from the foregoing, as the
word therefore shows them to be, will be the better perceived, when we shall
have inquired into the meaning of them. Many and different expositions are
given of them: that we may see which to prefer, some of them are to be taken
notice of. Talmud. lib. Yoma. c^p. 1.
The Jews report a saying of some of their ancient Doctors grounded on what is
here said, That the Son of David, i. e. the Messiah, should not come till the
Kingdom of wickedness (or, Yalkute.
as Others read, the fourth Kingdom) had over spread the whole World for nine
months, as it is said, therefore will he give them up, until the time that she
that travelleth has brought forth, etc. Kimchi.
This the latter Jews cite, but do not much insist on the explication of it.
Perhaps they received ( Abarb.
says one) by tradition from the days of the Prophets, that exactly so long
the trouble spoken of should endure, according to the time of a Woman's going
with Child. But seeing they labor not farther to inquire, or cannot tell us,
what their ancestors meant, it will not concern us to trouble our selves about
it; but rather to look, what Expositions they themselves give. Such are, First,
R. Tanch.
That God will leave Israel, or deliver them to their Enemies, till their
condition shall be like the condition of one that is with Child, near her time
of bringing forth; and then shall the (promised) ruler, and his near relations
appear, and return to be, or become a ruler over the Children of Israel, as he
says, and the remnant of his Brethren shall return unto the Children of
Israel. Or, as R. D. Kimchi. Michlal yophi.
Others express it, In the day of Salvation (when God will bring Salvation to
Israel) he shall deliver them into great tribulation, so that pangs shall take
hold of them, as pangs of a Woman in travail, as he says in Daniel XII. 1. and
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation
even to that same timethen the remnant of his Brethren, i. e. of the Messiah,
i. e. the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, which were left, when the ten Tribes
were led captive, shall return unto, i. e. with, the Children of Israel, the
ten Tribes, viz. they and these, all of them shall return to their Land, and
the King Messiah shall rule over them. Or, as Abarbinel.
another says, the ten Tribes shall go up first into the Land of Israel to war
against the Christians, and other People of the East, and North, and then their
Brethren of Judah and Benjamin shall return, or come unto them, according to
his fanciful explication of the foregoing verse.

The construction of the words according to this exposition must be with a
supply, unto a time like the time of her [i. e. a Woman] that brings forth
[or was with Child] and has brought forth. But this supply of like the time is
harsh, and has no grounds for it; as neither to say, that this denotes a time
of sorrow and pangs. Those are yet while she is in travail, and has not yet
passed her labor, and brought forth. When she has once brought forth, and is
delivered of the Child; her anguish is turned into joy, because Joh. XVI. 21.
a Man is born into the World. And here is nothing in these words, that
signifies pain or anguish, but it is only said word for word, until the time
that she that bears has brought forth. Secondly, R. Tanchum.
another exposition, by some of them given, is, by expounding He not of the
Lord, but of the ruler promised to come forth out of Bethleem, and the word,
shall give them up, by shall permit, or suffer, or leave, or let alone, (as it
is used Genesis XX. 6. therefore suffered I thee not to touch her, word for word
gave I thee not, etc.) Thus the Messiah shall suffer them, i. e. shall defer
his coming to them [or helping of them] till such a time, as in the former
explication. Or, as Thirdly, Others give the meaning, Till the time that she
that bears has brought ^orth, i. e. till the time of birth be come, the time
of appearance for him, and them; according to what is said in Isaiah I X. 6.
Unto us a Child is born, etc. or, as he says, Isaiah LXVI. 8. Zion travailed,
she brought forth her Children. Or, yet Fourthly something different, as Lipman
in Ni^zakon.
another has it, He should give them up, i.e. that they shall continue in
captivity, till the time that she that travaileth, etc. i.e. Zion, of which he
says, chap. IV. 10. be in pain and labor to bring forth, O Daughter of Zion,
like a Woman in travail, and that in Isa. I.XVI. which we have seen, without
farther explication of the meaning of this bringing forth: and then, that the
meaning of the words, and the remnant of his Brethren shall return unto the
Children of Israel is, that they all shall be comprehended under [the name of]
Israel, and shall not be any more as two Nations, nor any more divided into two
Kingdoms. These expositions have we from the Jews, which we have thus more
largely related, because it is in a Prophecy concerning the Messiah, in which
is the great controversy between them and us, least it may be said, that we
follow our own opinions without taking notice of what they say.

Now as for Christian expositours there is among them also great difference in
giving the meaning of this verse, Calvin.
Some of giving it, as if it should signify, That therefore, because things
should be so ordered, as before spoken, by God, he would give up the Jews for a
while to be grievously afflicted; but their afflictions should have a joyful
issue, as the sorrows of a Woman in travail, which when she has brought forth
are turned into joy; and that to such a Woman he compares the Body of the
People of the Jews; so that their sufferings under the hand of their Enemies
are, Grotius.
according to them, compared to the pangs of a travailing Woman, their
deliverance to a happy birth. Or, 2ly that before the coming of the Messiah
(Christ) the Jews should be delivered up for a certain time to suffer great
afflictions, and then Messiah should stand up, etc. Munster. Vat. edit. Steph.
in fol.
Others, He shall deliver them up unto the time, that the Church shall by a
spiritual birth ( See Dutch Notes.
the conversion of Gentiles by the Preaching of the Gospel) bring forth, and
the remnant of the Jews also with those of the ten Tribes shall turn unto him.
Vatabl. Ed. 4to and 8^ Hierom. Lyra. Tarnov. See Casta.
Others, far otherwise as to the first words, Therefore will he permit them,
that is, bear with the Jews, and suffer them (who were afterward to be
destroyed by the Romans) so long to live and remain in their Country being
returned from the Babylonish captivity, till the Church by the preaching of the
Gospel has brought in many Brethren of the Gentiles, as well as Israelites, in
the time betwixt the passion of Christ and the destruction of Jerusalem; or
much to that purpose, as One in few words gives it, See Christoph. a Castro and
Pelican.
Till the Synagogue has brought forth Christ, or the Church, or till Ribera.
Gentilism hitherto barren, has brought forth Sons to God, Brethren to Christ.

And there is yet another Interpretation brought, in which by these words,
until the time that she that travaileth has brought forth, is understood the
blessed Virgins bearing, and bringing sorth Christ: which though Calvin.
Some look on as forced, yet is by Others preferred before the rest, and will
perhaps upon the examination be found the most simple proper and genuine among
them. To the farther explanation of it may be premised, that the word rendered
therefore, may signify also, but yet, notwithstanding, or nevertheless,
agreeable to its signification in the Arabic tongue, and as R. Tanchum on Hos.
II. 14.
some observe it sometimes to signify in the Hebrew; and then the words yield
this meaning, Because God has determined, that that ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, shall in time come forth
out of Bethleem, and be there being made Man born of a woman; therefore till
that time, till she which is to bring him forth has there brought forth, will
he give them up to be afflicted, and troubled, and not presently show to them
his promised Salvation in full manner: but then after that he is come forth and
manifested, his Brethren the converted Gentiles by Faith being become Children
of Abraham, and so Brothers to this ruler, and Deodat.
to the true Israel, shall return unto him, and be all together faithful
subjects and members of his Kingdom, and he shall stand, and feed or, rule them
all, etc. Or else, Though God has certainly decreed and promised to give
Salvation unto Israel, by him whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everlasting; yet he has determined with all, that he shall come forth unto him
out of Bethlehem: and therefore notwithstanding the certainty of this Salvation
by him promised, it shall not presently be manifested to them, but he will
defer it, till she that should bring him forth, has there brought him forth;
and then shall it be manifested by his calling into his Kingdom the remnant of
his Brethren, the Heathen, that shall be converted to him, who shall together
with those of Israel turn unto him, and he shall stand, and feed, or rule among
them in the strength of the Lord, etc. What is there in this explication that
is forced either as to the plain and proper signification of the words, by all
agreed on, or as to the connection? And this Prophecy so understood will well
agree with that of Isaiah VII. 14. where, as a sign of Salvation to them, and
to point out the time when it shall be brought to them, it is said, Behold a
Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, which is the same that is here promised,
and said to have been made good by the blessed Mother of Christ, her bringing
him forth in Bethleem, Mat. I. 22, 23. These two Prophets Isaiah and Micah
lived at the same time, and in their Prophecies were directed by the Spirit of
God to speak sometimes the same things, as appears by what we have seen,
chap. IV. 1, 2. and so both agree concerning the birth of Christ of a Virgin,
or Mother in Bethleem, that he might be the Savior of the Israel of God all
the World over: for the promise of God was not only to Israel according to the
flesh, but to all also that were afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
should call, Acts II. 39. and all these are called the remnant of his brethren,
even those that were before aliens from the Common Wealth of Israel, and afar
off, are now in Christ made one with them, Ephesians. II. 12. etc. all breathren
among themselves, and all Brethren to Christ their ruler. Having taken on him
their nature in the flesh, he is not ashamed to call them so, as the Apostle
speaks Heb. II. 11. confirming it out of Psalm. XXII. 22. where in the person
of Christ he says, I will declare thy name unto my Brethren. And there is no
reason to take the name of Brethren here in a narrower sense, then to
comprehend all the remnant, whom the Lord shall call, Joel II. 32. whether the
Jews or Gentiles, and to restrain it with some only to the Jews, though they
were nigher of Kin to him according to the flesh, and were first invited to
come in. We are taught of Christ himself to give the word this latitude, when
to the Jews who appropriated that name to those who were merely related unto
him in the flesh, he gives answer, that whosoever should believe in him, and do
the will of God, is his Brother, and Sister, and Mother, See likewise Mark III.
35.
Math. XII. 46. etc. or as Luke VIII. 22. My Brethren are these which hear the
word of God and do it. Now he, that great ruler in Israel, whose goings out
were from everlasting, being come forth in the time appointed out of Bethleem,
and being there born of a Woman, and so 1 Timothy III. 16.
God manifested in the flesh, and having called those his Brethren unto him,
and set up his Spirital Kingdom among Men, it is added,

4 And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of
the Name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide: for now shall he be great
unto the ends of the Earth.
And he shall stand and feed, etc.] He shall persist, and continue to feed, or
set himself to feed, i. e. he shall with all care, and prudence, watchfulness,
and diligence, and tenderness, rule, and guide, and conduct, and provide for,
and supply with necessaries his Subjects, which are his flock, as a good
Shepherd (to which good Princes, and rulers are usually likened) does his
Sheep. And this he shall do in the strength of the Lord, not as an ordinary
Man, but as one, who has extraordinary, and plainly divine power conserred on
him from the Lord to enable him so to feed and rule, not to be hindered, or
overpowred by any that would oppose him, or do wrong, or violence, and
prejudice unto his flock under his protection: and in the Majesty of the Name
of the Lord his God, so as plainly to evidence, that the Majestatick Exodus
XXIII. 21.
Name of the Lord his God is in him, that God has glorified him, and is
glorified in and by him; and under the protection of his great power and
Majesty, they his Subjects shall abide, be in a sure and steadfast condition,
secure against all other powers: for now, when he shall enter on his rule,
shall he be great unto the ends of the Earth, extending his Name, Glory, and
Dominion as wide as the World, and to the utmost parts thereof. These
expressions (says a R. Tanchum.
Learned Jew) evince, that the ruler here spoken of can be no other then the
Messiah; not Zorobabel, who never attained to this height and happiness. So say
we; and that our Lord Christ is the here and elsewhere promised Messiah, and
that all here spoken evidently agrees to him as fulfilled in and by him, who is
that ruler in Israel, that Joh. X. 14.
good and great Shepherd of Gods Flock, which stands and feeds them
continually, that in ib. ver. 9.
safety they go in and out and find pasture, and defends them in the strength
of the Lord ( all power being given to him in Heaven and in Earth, Matthew
XXVIII. 18.) so that they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out
of his hand; for no Man is able to pluck them out of his Fathers hand, who is
greater then all; and he and his Father are one. Ioh. X. 28, 29, 30. In his
Name does he keep them, ib. ver. 11, 12. and they shall therefore abide, never
miscarry under his protection. For he is and will be with them allway unto the
end of the World. Mat. XXVIII. 20. and in gathering and guiding his, will show
and extend the greatness of his power and his glory Mat. XXVIII. 19. Acts. i.
8. Romans x. 18.
unto the ends of the Earth, among all Nations, as it is this day, and ever
shall so be. He shall be great, that is, the name of the Messiah, says Kimchi.

But while we apply these words to our Lord Christ, another R. Lipman in
Nitzachon.
Jew steps in and endeavors to raise cavils and objections out of them against
us. Having said that Christ is not acknowledged as ruler by Israel, which has
been already answered; he adds and argues from what is said, in the Majesty of
the name of the Lord his God, that therefore he (here spoken of) has a God,
and therefore is not himself God: and if they say this is spoken of him as Man,
or in respect of his Manhood, Was Man from of old, from everlasting? again,
This King has Brothers; again. Is it not so that at his birth no new thing
happened? only they say that at the hour of his Death he reigned. Further, His
Dominion is not to the ends of the Earth, etc.

His words are short, but so as his meaning appears; and he thence infers that
hence is proved, that the promised Messiah is not yet come. But these are
slight cavils, and signify nothing to us, who profess that our Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God, is God and Man, God of the substance of the Father
begotten before the Worlds, and Man of the substance of his Mother born in the
Word, perfect God and perfect Man, equal to the Father as touching his Godhead,
and inferior to the Father as touching his Manhood. In these words is nothing
that may cross what we hold and believe, but fully confirms it. In that the
Messiah here spoken of had his goings forth from of old from everlasting, it is
manifest that he is God, as has been before showed: in that he was in time to
come forth out of Bethleem, and God is called his God, and Men his Brethren, it
is manifest that he is also Man, partaker of flesh and blood. But do we
therefore say, that Man, or flesh and blood was from everlasting, or eternal?
By no means, but that he that was Eternal God before time, was in time made
Man, and so though in the first respect one with the Father, coequal to him,
God himself, yet in the latter respect, after him and inferior to him: so that
one Christ is both God and Man, yet without confusion of substance and natures.
So that if what is affirmed of him according to one nature should be objected
as not agreeing to the other, and so a proof against its being in the same
person, will be no more, then if any should object against him that affirms,
the reasonable Soul of Man is incorruptible, that therefore he affirms the
body, which together with that Soul makes one Man, to be also incorruptible. As
he is one God with the Father, so is he the Lord and God of Men, (as Thomas
acknowledged him, Ioh. XX. 28.) as he is Man inferior to the Father, so he
calls Men his Brethren, and their God his God. Ioh. XX. 17.

Why he should here take occasion of objecting, that no new thing happened at
his birth, I know not. Had there not, it might be an answer to him, that
Maimonides Yad. Tract. Melichim. cap. ult.
his own greatest* Doctors tell him, that no new alteration in the World ought
to be expected at the coming of the Messiah. But we know there did happen such
strange things as never did at the birth of any other, as (not to mention that
he was born of a Virgin without Father on Earth, as never any other was) that
strange star, the appearance of which made those wise Men from the East coming
to Jerusalem to ask without doubt or more ado, Where is he that is born King of
the Jews? Mat. II. 1, 2. and that glorious apparition of the Angel, Luke II.
10. proclaiming to the Shepherds, I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall
be to all People, for unto you is born this Day in the City of David (which is
Bethleem here spoken of, and the thing here spoken of it) a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord. What he adds, only at the hour of his Death (or concerning the
hour of his Death, for his words are obscure) they say that he reigned, seems
to intimate, as if he fancied that Christians, because they could not avoid
that objection, That no strange thing happened at his birth, did therefore date
his Kingdom from his death; or else that he upbraids us, that we say, that he
that was overcome by Death reigns. Be his meaning what it will, his objection
is of no force against us, who profess that Christ was both born King, and all
the time of his living on Earth evidently showed himself so, by such means, as
we have formerly seen; insomch that Nathaniel convinced by what he saw, plainly
confesses him so, Rabbi thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel,
Ioh. i. 49. and the People not doubting of it, would needs have taken him by
force to make him a temporal King as he showed himself a spiritual one, Ioh.
VI. 15. besides their openly proclaiming him so, Mar. XI. 10. Luke XIX. 38. and
that his Death whereto he humbled himself, did not (notwithstanding the
blasphemous scoffs of the chief among the Jews, Mat. XXVII. 42. Marc. XV. 32.)
evidence that he was not a true King or put an end to his Kingdom, but more
advanced it, and did but serve to draw his Subjects (even a great part of the
World) all Men unto him, Ioh. XII. 32. And at that too, as ignominious as they
sought to make it, happened such strange and unusual things, as made the
centurion, and those that were with him watching Jesus, to confess him not an
ordinary King, but to say, Truly this was the Son of God, Mat. XXVII. 54. Marc.
XV. 36. So far was he from having his power lessened by his Death, that by it
he overcame Death it self, and destroyed him, that had the power of it, that is
the Devil, Heb. II. 14. and in his Cross triumphed over them, and all infernal
powers, openly and discernably to all that would not shut their eyes, Coll. II.
15. Then his resurrection after his Death ( that not being able to hold him,
Act. II. 24.) which he made evident by so many ways, as we find in the
Gospels, and by appearing so many times, and to so many witnesses, (as is
recorded, 1 Cor. XV. 4, 5. etc.) and then his ascending visibly into Heaven in
the sight of his Apostles, Acts I. 9. Mar. XVI. 19. make it most evident, that
the same Jesus, whom they crucified, God made both Lord and Christ, Acts XXI.
36. and that he is the Messiah, the ruler in Israel here prophesied of, and
that we are to look for no other. But says he, his dominion is not unto the
ends of the Earth. Here call we in the whole World to witness against him. He
living in Germany (far enough from the land of Israel) could not but know how
far and wide over the face of the Earth the Dominion of Christ has spread it
self, and in how many Nations he is acknowledged as Lord, and King, and his
name adored, and magnified: so that he would not have made this cavil, except
he had willingly stopped his ears, and shut his eyes, or would not understand
what he heard, or perceive what he saw; such obstinatness does his way of
arguing discover. There is nothing therefore in what he has said, that may
take us off from applying these words of the Prophecy hitherto to our Lord
Christ, and affirming them to be all in him fulfilled in their true and utmost
meaning. His cavils out of the following words are of like nature, as in due
place will appear.

But before we pass from these words one thing more may be observed, viz. that
the word (...) Veyashabu, by Ours rendered, and they shall abide, is Chaldee
Paraphrase Vulg. Latin.
by some Others rendered shall return, or, shall be converted: into the reason
of which it will not be needful nicely to inquire, whether it were because
instead of what is now read (...) Veyashabu, which signifies and shall abide,
they did read (...) Veyashubu, which signifies they shall return; or whether
reading it, as it is now read, they thought it to signify the same that (...)
Yashubu, taking the words (...) Shub, and (...) Yashab, to agree in the
signification of turning also, as they sometimes do in the other of abiding, as
appears by what we read, Ps. XXIII. 6. where (...) Veshabti, by consent of all,
is rendered abide, or, dwell, though the theme (...) Shub, most usually denotes
to return. They that follow this interpretation make the meaning to be, That
many shall be turned and flock in to Christ, because now he shall be great, or
that now he may be great, unto the ends of the Earth. But there is no reason to
forsake our Translation, and the exposition before given.

5 And this Man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into our land:
and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven
shepherds, and eight principal Men.
6 And they shall waste the Land of Assyria with the Sword, and the Land of
Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian
when he comes into our Land, etc.
And this Man shall be, etc.] A learned Jew R. Tanchum.
says of these words, that though the signification of the words be plain, yet
the meaning and sense of the whole is very abstruse. In this they and
Christians agree, that what is spoken in them agrees to the Messiah and his
times or Kingdom. But in the application thereof must needs be a vast
difference, they saying that the promised Messiah is not yet come, and so (the
most of them) that the things here spoken of are not yet fulfilled, but are to
be accomplished, when the Messiah shall come: we, that the Messiah, who is our
Lord Christ, is already come, and so the things by him and under him fulfilled,
and in fulfilling, as they ought to be understood, and that no other Messiah is
to be expected, nor other accomplishing of these Prophecies. The truth will
appear by going over the words in order.

This Man shall be the peace. There is nothing in the Original Text expressed
that signifies Man; but the words barely sound, This shall be peace, without
mention of person or thing, which has caused difference among expositors
according to their different understanding of what is to be supplied, as
pointed to by the particle this. Some understand it of the person before spoken
of, as our Translatours, who therefore add Man, This Man shall be peace. The
same do many other expositors understand both Christians and Jews also. So R.
D. Kimchi.
one of them, It is to be understood of the Messiah, because he shall be the
cause of peace, as it is said, and he shall speak peace to the Nations, Zech.
IX. 10. that great blessing was he to be the Author of to his: and therefore
our Lord Christ being the only true Messiah, of him is, agreeably to the words,
here said, He is our peace. Ephesians. II. 14. At his birth, was by the Heavenly Host
proclaimed peace on Earth, Luke II. 14. and he entering on his ministry, while
he was on Earth, came and preached peace to them which were afar off, and to
them that were nigh, Ephesians. II. 17. and when he was again to leave the World, he
bequeathed peace to his, gave it to them, and left it with them, Ioh. XIV. 27.
So that well might it be said of him by way of Prophecy, This Man shall be
peace, or, the peace.

And this supply of the person may seem as agreeable to the meaning of the
words as any.

But then of us, i. e. of Christians, who thus understand the words as
affirming that our Lord Jesus Christ shall be peace, or, the peace, may be
demanded by the Jews or others, what peace we mean; or, how that peace, which
we say he is the Author and establisher of, may agree with that description,
which is given of it in this and the following verse, to wit, such as should be
made good by repelling the Assyrian, by raising against him seven Shepherds,
and eight principal Men, by wasting the land of Assyria with the Sword, and the
land of Nimrod, etc. and by delivering from the Assyrian, etc. To which we have
to answer, that these expressions are figurative, and so the litteral
signification of every word is not nicely to be insisted on, so we may but have
the whole meaning appositly given.

That diverse expressions of such benefits as were promised to be made good
under the Messiah are figuratively to be taken, is that which cannot be denied,
and by the learned of Maim. in Melac. cap. ult. and in his Epistle of the
Resurrection.
the Jews themselves confessed: as for instance, that which is likewise a
description of the peace by him to be effected, that Esa. XI. 6. etc. Heb. II.
14. 1 Cor. XV. 57.
the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with the Kid,
the Calfe with the young Lion, and a little Child should lead them, etc. and
the Lion should eat straw with the Ox, etc. and all this should be because the
Earth should be full of the knowledge of the Lord, which none will say those
beasts are capable of, or expect there should be such a strange change in their
nature. And it must therefore be confessed, that the expressions are
figurative, and denote only that great change in the natures and dispositions
of Men which shall be wrought by the Doctrine of Christ, and that mutual accord
in love and meekness which thereby they shall be disposed to. And why may not
these words be understood so too, i. e. figuratively? They must needs so be, if
we read, This Man shall be peace, that is, the peace here described shall be
wrought by the Messiah (for reasons which will by and by appear.) And so
figuratively taken, what do they but, under the type of a complete temporal
peace to the Jews, represent to us that more excellent spiritual peace, that
comprehensive blessing of peace with God, peace among themselves (and as far as
in them lies, peace with all Men) and peace within themselves, not to be
disturbed by the assaults of any enemies thereof, which is by Christ given to
his Church and the members thereof, the Subjects of his Kingdom, and wrought by
the preaching of the Gospel, maugre all that shall oppose it?

The Assyrians and Chaldeans were then the known Enemies of the Jews, such as
invaded their land, and trod in, or entered into their palaces, and wasted all
things; if now God should raise unto them any, under whose conduct they should
not only repel those Enemies, but pursue them, and wast their land, and wholly
subject them so as that they should no more have cause to fear them, would not
this be a very great blessing, a bringing in and establishment of a most
desirable peace, and a thing mavelous in their eyes, the greatest they could
then wish for? By representing this therefore to them to be done, he figures
out that greater blessing, that desirable peace, which that Messiah, whom in
the foregoing words he had promised, and described, should be the author of,
and make good by conquest of more malicious and potent Enemies then the
Assyrian or Chaldean, even Satan himself with all his infernal host (whom with
his own weapons and in his own territories he has vanquished; through Death m
having destroyed him that had the power of death, and given to his the victory
over Death, and the sting of it, sin) and the principalities and powers and
rulers of the darkness of this World and spiritual wickedness in high places,
Ephesians. VI. 12. and all the World that lies in wickedness, and the Enemies of the
truth which with unappeasable malice constantly seek to invade the Church and
infest the members thereof, and to disturb their peace. Against all these, and
all that can be named, will he secure it to them, and continually raise up such
a sufficient number of such as shall maintain his truth and beat down
whatsoever shall oppose it, and furnish them with the irresistible power of his
spirit for that end, so that none shall be able to take from his that true
peace which he gives. With him is power also to secure to his an outward
peace, and to raise up such as shall bring under all that shall infest that
also.

And this also he often does by wonderful means, as he sees most for his glory
and the good of his Church. But that we do not look on as the thing here
principally meant or promised, but that spiritual peace of a more divine
nature, which we have spoken of, according to what he promises, Ioh. XVI. 33.
that in ^im they should have peace, though in the world they should have
tribulation, bidding them therefore to to be of good cheer, because he has
overcome the world; which words of his seem a summary of what is here spoken
and prophesied of.

If any of such who so read the words, This Man shall be peace, that is, the
Messiah, like not of this way of expounding them, but say, whether Jews or
others, that under the Messiah, they ought according to the proper sound of the
letter to be fulfilled, On Micah v.
St. Hierom teaches us thus to argue with them, These things spoken here as to
be effected by Messiah are either fulfilled, or yet to be expected and not
fulfilled. If they say they be fulfilled, let them give us the History thereof
by authority of ancient Books confirmed, and tell us when the Assyrians and
Chaldeans were ever subjected to the Jews, conquered and governed by them; (we
may add, if they say they are, let them then confess that the Messiah, who they
confess was to be the author of that peace, by the conquest of those Enemies,
and delivering them from them, is already come.) But it is not likely, that they
will say this. If then they say that they are not yet fulfilled, nor Messiah
yet come, as they do, Judaei in adventu Christi quem sibi simulant haec omnia
juxta literam futura esse contendunt, Hieronymus. and see R. Sol. Jarchi, and
R. D. Kimchi and Abarbinel.
but that they expect that they shall be, according to the sound of the letter,
fulfilled when he shall come, and that if the Assyrian shall offer to invade
them, (as in the Prophets time he did) the Messiah with his Princes and
chieftains, denoted here by seven Shepherds, and eight principal Men, shall so
subd^e them, as to deliver them from all further fear of annoiance from them,
we then demand, Where are their palaces in any land, that they may call their
own, for the Assyrian to enter into and tread in? Where (if they had such) any
Assyrians (they being so long since cut off from being a Nation) to tread in
them? Shall the Messiah, that he may fulfill these things according to the
letter, build up for them palaces, which may be trodden in, and raise Assyrians
out of the dust, who have so long ceased to be a known Nation, to come and
tread in them, that so he may drive them out of Isreal's land, and waste theirs
with the Sword? This would be such a strange miraculous change in the course of
the World, as the greatest of their Doctors (as we have said) will not admit
them to expect at the coming of the Messiah: and for this reason is it that, as
above we intimated, these words must necessarily be understood figuratively, if
understood as to be effected by Christ, because that before his coming these
Nations, viz. Assyrians and Chaldeans, had been so utterly destroyed, as not to
be reckoned among Nations, much less to be in any such power as to invade the
land of Israel, and annoy them in hostile manner: and much more now stands the
case so.

This objection seems R. Tanch.
to one among the Jews (no less learned nor observant of his own advantages
then others) so evidently pressing and so unanswerable, that he plainly
professes, that what is here spoken cannot be looked on as a promise of things
yet to come, and to be expected: There is, says he, no signification (or
place) for a promise that Assure (or the Assyrians) shall in time to come be cut
off or destroyed by the Sword, seeing they are perished and cut off already, so
that there is now no remainder of them, by which they are known to be: and this
makes him look after other ways, by which the words may be expounded, so as
not to suspend their fulfilling on the coming of the Messiah; as first, not
referring the word this to the person before spoken of, or what is before said
of him, but to what is after in the following words described, and so supplying
thing, or time, viz. this thing shall be our peace, or the condition of our
peace, at that time by this shall our peace be procured, or established, viz.
that when the Assyrian shall come, etc. then we shall raise, etc. So making it
a consolation to Israel in those days, who stood in fear of the Kings of
Assyria, and were threatened that they should be led into captivity by them, but
are here promised (to fortify them against that fear and put an end to it)
that after that another Nation should rise up against them (that is, against
the Assyrians) with many Princes and commanders, who should revenge their
quarrel on them, intimating, that the King of the Chaldeans should prevail over
them and destroy them; as, says he, it is expressly foretold in the Prophecies
of the Prophets in many places, and as it was actually brought to pass: (for
otherwise this promise can signify nothing, if it be interpreted of the many
commanders and Captains of the forementioned ruler, as if they should with
their Sword destroy those, who were already destroyed, long before that ruler
was born.) Or else he says, there may be another exposition given, by reading
the word, (...) Shalom, which is rendered peace, in the signification of
recompense, or reward, as (...) Shillam, (...) Shillum, ((...) Shalmon, other
forms from the same root do signify, that so the words may sound, and this
shall be the recompense of Assure, who, or because he, (taking (...) Ci when to
denote here as much as Asher, who or because he) shall come into our Land, viz.
that there shall rise up against him such as shall bring him to ruin as
before: and this exposition he likes of, and thinks that no objection ought to
be made against it from Grammar rules concerning change of Vowels in
construction, and distinction of accents, seeing they are rules that do not
always unalterably hold.

This Rabbin plainly denies and takes away from those of his own Nation and
sect all ground of any argument from these words, whereby they would prove
against Christians, that the Messiah is not yet come, because that is not done
by our Lord Christ, which they expect should be done by the Messiah; but does
not in his expositions say any thing which may contradict what we believe, that
our Lord is the Messiah spoken of in the foregoing verses, and that all that by
virtue of this prophecy was to be expected from the Messiah has had it is due
accomplishment, though he do not look on these present words as spoken of his
person; in which some among Christians agree with him also, and do not
understand by this, this Man, or person, but Drusius, Grotius.
Some taking it for a note of time, This time shall be a time of peace, or,
then shall be peace and prosperity, when, i.e. after, the Assyrian and Chaldean
shall have invaded our Land, etc. for then we shall raise, (to wit by our
prayers to God) against him seven Shepherds, viz. Cyrus with other Kings, and
eight principal Men, viz. great Peers or Captains and rulers, Jeremiah LI. 28.
and they shall subdue with their weapons the Land of Assyria, and Babylon, and
free us, so that we shall not any more fear their coming into our Land, and
treading in our borders, as we did before. Others not much from the same
purpose, so joining that particle with peace, as to denote the condition of it,
as after described, viz. See LXX. and see Christ. ^ Castro.
This shall be our peace, or thus the condition of it, and it thus acquired,
viz. by the destruction of the Assyrian Army, which invaded Israel, by the
Angel of the Lord (they might add, and of his Kingdom by the Chaldeans) and of
the Chaldeans who sacked Jerusalem, and led them captives, by Cyrus and Darius,
and those many Princes with them (whom by their Prayers to God they raised up,
that they might perform this work) who subdued and destroyed both Assyria and
Chaldea. And then some take it as to the connection to depend on what went
before, viz. For now shall he be great unto the ends of the Earth, as if this
here were promised before hand to come to pass Idem ex Theo.
as a pledge of that promise of Christ and his greatness, that seeing this come
to pass, they might not doubt of that.

But if this exposition be followed, the words should seem rather to have
respect to what is before promised, chap. IV. 10. etc.

Among all these expositions, that of the Christians first of all mentioned is
most followed, and (as we have showed) has nothing in it why it should be
excepted against; but withal there is no danger in following any of the rest,
except that only of such of the Jews, who expect yet a literal fulfilling of
these things by the Messiah, and would therefore prove him not to be yet come,
because they are not yet so fulfilled. The vanity and absurdity of which
opinion has been sufficiently showed, and is evident.

Having thus at large spoken of different opinions concerning the meaning of
these two verses in general, occasioned chiefly by their different applying of
the first word This, it will be convenient to look more particularly into the
import of some other of the words in them, to see how they are, or may be
accommodated to those different meanings, that we may accordingly judge thereof.

And first concerning Assure, (or the Assyrian) and the Land of the Assyrian,
and the Land of Nimrod, some take these to be both as one, and that by the Land
of Nimrod, is meant no other R. Tanchum. Buchart. Peleg. p. 260.
then Assyria, viz. Nineveh and its territories or provinces. Others
distinguish them so as by the Land of Assyria, to understand that distinctly,
which was usually so called, under the Dominion of Nineveh and the Kings
thereof; and by the Land of Nimrod, R. D. Kimchi, Aben Ezrah, R. Sol. etc.
that of the Chaldeans in the Land of Shinar under the Kings of Babel, in which
Nimrod began first to reign Genesis X. 10. and out of that Land went into Assyria,
and built Nineveh (according to the Margin in our Bibles, which translation a
very Learned Man Bocha^tus
prefers, and is of the first opinion.)

As the name of Assyria is sometime so used as to comprehend Groti^s.
both these, so it is manifest that at other times they are taken as distinct
Kingdoms, and came severally to invade the Jews; first the Assyrians, who took
Samaria and destroyed the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and then the Babylo^ians
or Chaldeans, who took Ier^salem and captivated the Jews; and they themselves
were severally destroyed, but both many years before Christ's being born at
Bethleem; and therefore these Names (as we have seen) by those who understand
the words here spoken as a description of things to be done by Christ after his
coming in the flesh, are not properly understood according to the letter, but
so as to denote any Enemies, especially Spiritual, representing them as
terrible, fierce and malicious, as the Assyrians were then to the Jews; See
Castalio.
nothing could then express a greater Enemy or in higher terms then the Name of
Assyrian, a name most* formidable to them.

A Jew of great note, Abar inel.
who properly understands these words, and expects the Prophecy yet literally
to be performed by his Messiah, and so interprets them, as to denote that in
the latter days the Assyrians and Babylonians shall be at peace with Israel,
and come no otherwise then peaceably into their Land, and shall be obedient to
their King, having Jerusalem for his Metropolis, and ruling over the whole
World, starts occasionatly a question, Why those Nations are here named, and
not Edom (which in his language are the Romans, or generally Christians?) and
makes his answer to this purpose, Because Edom, or the Edomites, are the chief
of their Enemies, and therefore they shall have no mercy, but be utterly cut
off, whereas the others on their subjecting themselves shall be received to
terms of peace. So he shows his good will and desires, but confers nothing to
the true meaning of the words.

Such Mead.
as by Assyrians and Babylonians take here to be meant Gog and Magog, seem to
have no good ground for their opinion from the words, nor will it be easily
made appear that they are here meant.

When Ashur shall come.] The particle (...) Ci, rendered when, and so properly
signifying, yet having other uses, is by Solomon, R. D. Kimchi.
Expositours differently taken, by some for when, by others for if, by others,
after that, by others, because, or for that, as they can best suit it to their
several expositions, and in the sixth ver. by some Grot. and see R. Kimchi.
least that, and so in this also by a Jewish Arabic Translatour.

Seven Shepherds and eight principal Men. That is, See Aben Ezra. D. Kimchi,
Tanchum, Abarbinel, and see R^bera.
many, say Interpreters; seven it self being sometimes put for an indefinite
number denoting many, and much more eight being added to it, as in like manner
the same expression is used, Ecc. II. 2. Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight, and others not unlike elsewhere of the number of seven and seventy; for
to take these precisely to signify the number expressed, is that which
Interpreters agree to be no way necessary or agreeing to the scope of the words.

Some ancient Jews indeed seem so to take them, and reckon them up by name,
viz. the seven Shepherds to be, David in the midst, In Kimchi, Seth Enoch and
Methusala; but in a manuscript as we have put it. This is ^ ad out of the
Talmud, Succal^. cap. v. fol 92.
Adam, Seth, and Methusalem, on his right hand, Abraham, Jacob, and Moses, on
his left; then the eight principal Men, Iesse, Saul, Samuel, Amos, Zephaniah,
In Kimchi and Lipman Ezekiah; so that the Boo^s and Copies differ: and Yalkut
for Amos has Amram.
Zedechiah, Elias, and Messiah; but the latter Jews wonder on what ground or
tradition they did this; and what ever it were, R. Tanchum.
one of them plainly says that it makes nothing to the exposition of the
present words (and therefore though in several Books and Copies there be some
difference in reckoning up those names, it is not material, one name may serve
as well as another, none of them serving to the purpose.)

Tarnovius.
What some also think, that in the naming of seven Shepherds or rulers, there
is an allusion to the number of seven Princes and Counselors of the Persians,
mentioned Esther I. 14. and Ezra VII. 14. may seem also an observation of more
nicety then much to be insisted on.

That which on all hands both by Jewish and Christian expositors will be agreed
on, is, that the import of the expression in this place is, that God so
ordering it there shall not want many, and those sufficiently qualified with
such endowments and power as is requisite, to maintain and make good against
all opposers and Enemies thereof, that peace which is here promised, to those
to whom it is promised; and those so qualified are here called Shepherds, and
Principal Men, or Princes of Men.

Both these titles R. D. K^mchi. R. Tanchum.
Some take to signi^ie the same thing, viz. Rulers, Governors, Commanders,
Chiestains, chief Men: which they that more literally expound the words,
understand of military Men, or Warlike commanders; See Dutch notes and others.
they that expound them figuratively, of Governors and Pastors of the Church
of God, and Ministers of the good thereof, and propagators and defenders of the
truth, endowed with the Spirit of God, and thereby enabled for performance of
that office. That difference which Jun. Tr^mel. Tarnov. De Dieu.
some make, as if the latter (viz. (...) (...) Nesiche Adam, Princes of Men)
did denote such as were taken out of the common sort of Men, because Adam the
common name of Man, is often taken for an ordinary Man, in distinction from
(...) Ish, a Man of greater quality, and so did import, that by God should the
meanest of the People raise up many, who should be so qualified and enabled, as
that they should be able to perform that which is here said they should maugre
all the opposition of most potent Enemies, however true it is in it self, yet
may perhaps to some not seem to be of that weight, as that it may be much
pressed or insisted on as a necessary meaning of the words undeniably concluded
from them.

These, who ever they be, it is said shall be raised against him, i. e. against
the Enemy, denoted by the name of Assure or the Assyrian. Or, says a learned
Kimchi.
Jew, it may be rendered with him, that is with the Messiah before spoken of, as
to denote, that they should by him be set on work, and be employed under or
with him in that work which he has to do.

But this interpretation is neither by himself preferred, nor by others
followed; however it would alter nothing in the scope and meaning of the words:
as neither will that much which is by Paraeus, and see Deodati.
Some said, That by the naming this number Shepherds and Princes, is signified,
that this promised Messiah should be a greater defense to them, then the help
and force of seven Shepherds or Princes, which were Men, could be; so that it
shall be abundantly sufficient that they have him to oppose against all
Enemies, and in confidence of that they are introduced as supposing themselves
to have such forces.

These also, who ever be understood by them, it is said that they shall waste
the Land of Assyria with the sword, etc.

They shall waste, In the Margin of our English Bibles, is put, Heb. Eat up.
The word (...) Raau, in the Hebrew is such as may indifferently be deduced
either from the word (...) Raah, to feed, feed on, or, eat up, or from (...)
Raa to break, and accordingly by some is taken in the one, by some in the other
of these notions. R. Solomon R. D. Kimchi.
Some therefore would have it rendered shall break (i. e. destroy or rule over
with Tyranny,) Others shall feed, i. e. feed on, or Eat up, i. e. likewise
destroy; for R. Tanchum.
that feeding, which is for the good of the Cattle that feed, is the
destruction and consuming of that which they feed on, or eat up.

So that the meaning here of the word as taken from either of those roots, will
be the same in effect, still destruction, and is well expressed by our
Translatours by the word waste.

And the Land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof. In the Margin our
Translatours read, or with their own naked Swords. The word in the Original,
(...) Petacheah, being from the same root with (...) Petechoth, psalm. LV. 21.
rendered drawn Swords, and with (...) Petachim, which signifies, Doors, Gates,
or, Entrances, makes Interpreters doubt which to take. Our Translatours, as
loath to determine, put one in the Text, the other in the Margin.

If it be rendered Swords, then to say with their own Swords, will be as much as
to say, they shall turn their own Swords upon them, or conquer them with their
own weapons, such as they find in their own Land, for the word with that affixe
which it has put to it, will literally sound, with the Swords of it, that is,
of their own Land, and not with their Swords, i. e. the Swords of the
Conquetours; or else (as one R. Tanchum.
notes in a little different signification of the word, which he supposes it
to have) with the edges of that Sword mentioned, for so he thinks the word also
to signify the mouth, or edges of the Sword. So as that the meaning may be,
They shall deal with their land or with them according to their own dealings, so
make use of the Sword toward them, as they have used it toward others. If it
be rendered entrances, Idem.
then will the meaning be, that they shall conquer their Land, and slay them in
their own gates, and entrances of their own Country.

Yet some of the Jews, who are for a literal interpretation of the words, and a
fulfilling them accordingly, will not have it so far literally understood, as
that they should by virtue of what is said, destroy and cut them off with the
Sword; for, says Abarbinel.
one of them, the Prophet here promises peace and not war, and therefore the
meaning only is, that they shall openly and manifestly every where rule over
them in their Land and Cities.

R. Lipman.
Another of them says, that by Swords here spoken of are to be understood
those punishments that should come on them, viz. the Assyrians, from Heaven by
virtue of the prayers of Israel, according to what is said, Isa. XXXI. then
shall the Assyrian fall with the Sword, not of a mighty Man, and the Sword not
of a mean Man shall devour him, etc. viz. because he was destroyed by an Angel.
So that though hence may seem to be concluded, that even after the coming of
the Messiah there shall be Wars, yet it is probable, that these seven Shepherds
and eight Princes of Men, shall have no need of using the Sword against Assure;
so that they themselves here do not think that the literal signification of
every word ought strictly to be insisted on.

But according to that figurative acception of the words embraced by most
Christians, which we in the first place mentioned, the meaning will be evident,
That by the might and power of Christ, and such as shall be by him qualified
and commissioned for the spreading and maintaing of his truth, all that oppose
it shall be brought under and made to yield as evidently, as when an Enemy
(such as the Assyrian then was to Israel) is by many commanders and their
forces beaten in his own Country, and with his own Weapons, forced from him and
turned back upon himself, so that he shall not be able to create farther
disturbances.

And he shall deliver, i. e. the Messiah or ruler in Israel, Christ, by his own
power, the Ministry of those whom he shall qualify and employ for maintaining
his truth and his peace, shall deliver us from the hands of such Enemies as
shall assault us, that we shall not have need to fear them. They (says he that
renders it recompense instead of peace, as we have seen) i. e. those denoted
by the seven Shepherds and eight principal Men, (so taking the Verb here put in
the singular number to stand for the plural (...) Hitsil, for (...) Hitsilu,)
shall deliver us from the Assyrian that invadeth us and makes incursions on
us; Or, that he may no more come, etc. David Kimchi, Chaldee and Syriack.
as some. Thus may it seem convenient to take notice of the signification of
some of the words, that so they may be adjusted and accommodated to that
exposition which shall be embraced as the scope shall direct and require. Our
Translation renders, thus shall he deliver us, i. e. by these means: but that
which they render Thus, properly signifies, And, and is so by most rendered,
though the meaning will be one.

7 And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many People, as a dew from
the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor
waits for the sons of men.
8 And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, in the midst of many
people, as a lion amongst the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the
flocks of sheep, who if he go through, both treads down, and teareth in
pieces, and none can deliver.
And the remnant of Jacob shall be, etc.] A learned Jew makes here a question,
whether these words are by reason of the Note of connection and, to be joined
with the words immediately preceding, viz. (as he would have it rendered) and
this shall be our peace, or, (as he rather thinks it should be understood) and
this shall be the reward of Assure, etc. and so to be understood of the happy
condition, which they enjoyed after their return from their Babylonish
captivity under the second Temple, or to be referred and bear respect to the
other words that went before, viz. the sixth verse, and he shall stand and
feed, etc. and so to be looked on as a promise, the fulfilling of which is yet
to be expected, when their yet expected Messiah, shall be come: no
inconvenience or absurdity he thinks will be, to which soever it be applied.

This observation of his concerning the connection of the words, it will not be
amiss to observe, because among Christian expositours Grotius, Tirinus.
there are Some, who interpret what is here said, as to refer it to the Jews
that returned from the Babylonish captivity, and their condition before Christ's
coming: and if their opion be followed, then perhaps will the connection be more
proper with the words immediately foregoing. Others, to the times of Christ
after his coming in the flesh: and then may they be referred to all, not from
the fourth verse only, but from the second also in a continued series, but with
difference from what that Jew would have it, not as a promise which is not yet
fulfilled, but which has been already made good, and is still in making good,
and shall be so till Christ's coming again at the end of the World.

The remnant of Jacob, etc.] In chapter IV. 7. he promises, that she that
halteth, or was afflicted, should be made a remnant. By the remnant of Jacob
here Grot.
Some understand those that should of them return from Babylon; Aben Ezra.
Abarbinel, and see Pelican.
Others those of them, that should any where be left of them among the Nations,
and could not return home, R. D. Kimchi.
Others, those of them that should remain with God after they were tried or
refined in the furnace of affliction, according to what he says, Zech. XIII.
19. And will refine them as Silver is refined. Vatablus edit. 4to and 8to
Ribera. Menoch. Christ. a Castro.
Diverse of Christian Interpreters expound it of the Apo^stles, and Apoitolick
Men, and such as should succeed them in the Church for propagating the
knowledge of Christ and his Gospel. But probably this title may be extended to
as many as the Lord should call, to all to whom the Apostle says the promise
was, Acts II. 39. That remnant which should be saved, Romans IX. 27. the Remnant
according to the election of grace, Romans XI. 5. those whom our Savior calls
his little Flock, Luke XII. 32. by a title well answerable to this of remnant
of Jacob, or in a word to the whole Church and true members thereof, which in
respect to the many, that are out of it, are but a remnant, and that remnant a
remnant of Jacob, though not all according to the flesh sprung from him (as the
first of them who were called were) yet all by faith the Israel of God.

To this remnant (how ever taken) are here great promises made, and peculiar
privileges attributed, and those set forth under two similitudes of differing
nature in different respects, in one they being compared to Dew, in the other
to a Lion. 1. They shall be in the midst of many People, as the dew from the
Lord, as the showers upon the Grass, etc. Of these words are two somewhat
different expositions given, the one of which makes them a description of the
condition of that remnant of Jacob in respect to themselves, how it shall be
with them by the blessing of God; the other in respect to others* or how they
shall be to others among whom they are; the first R. D. Kimchi, Abarbinel,
Munster, Grotius, Deodati.
attributing those latter words, that tarrieth not for Man, etc. as an Epithet
not to grass, but to Dew from the Lord and showers upon the grass, and makes
out the meaning to this purpose; That as the dew and bigger rain, which falls
on the grass, is only from God, and Compare Psalm. 110. and 3. and see Flac.
Illyr. and Rayan.
so disposed of as he will, without Man's help or disposal, so the remnant of
Jacob shall depend only on God, and his goodness, not on Man's help, or
contrivance, or assistance, and by his help and blessing shall in the midst of
many People, many Enemies encompassing and exposing them, be yet preserved and
maintained, so as still to subsist and wonderfully to increase to the
admiration of those many that shall behold them. According to this exposition
it will not perhaps be amiss (as a Divine of Calvin.
great note observes* by dew, or rain on grass, to understand grass, or fields
of grass, nourished, or refreshed by dew and rain, without the help and
cultivations of Men, by the sole hand and blessing of God.

The second way of exposition is, by referring those words that tarrieth not
for Man, to the grass, by Gods watering it with dew and rain from Heaven,
cherished and caused to grow and flourish; and so the meaning will be, Vatab.
edit. 4to and 8to Ribera, Menoch. Dutch Notes Christ. a Castro.
that that blessed remnant shall be in the midst of those many People, among
whom they are dispersed, by whom they are entertained, and received, and
hearkened to, as beneficial to them, as dew from the Lord, as showers on the
grass, which cause them to grow, and flourish without the help of Man; their
Doctrine shall drop on them as rain, their speech distill as the dew, as the
small rain on the tender herbs, as the showers on the grass. Deuteronomy. XXXII. 2. so
they by their Heavenly Doctrine and good example and communicating of Spiritual
blessings, shall cause them, who are otherwise as uncultivated herbs and
plants, to grow in grace and flourish in the house of God, and bring forth
fruit unto him only by his blessing, and not by any art of Man; Or, (as
Abarbinel.
a learned Jew thinks the words may be expounded) without expecting reward from
Men. To which may be added perhaps not unfitly, that they shall be thus
beneficial to all among whom they live, by drawing down Gods blessings on them
for their sakes, as Laban confessed, that God blessed him for Jacobs sake, Genesis
XXX. 27. and by coaling and mitigating Gods wrath, which otherwise would
speedily burn them up, if these were away, as the moistning dew and showers
preserve the grass and herbs from the scorching of the Sun (see Genesis XVIII. 26,
etc. and XIX. 22. and Mat. XXIV. 22. Mark XIII, 20.) This may be looked on as
comprehended in, though not the main intention of, the words.

A Jewish Abarbinel.
Doctor expounding these words in this manner also, viz. as describing how the
remnant spoken of shall be in behavior toward these many People in the midst
of which they are, makes the meaning of them to be, That they shall be loving
to, and deal kindly with, those that deal courteously with them, and do good to
them, as dew does to the grass, and that of their own good nature, without
respect to profit or reward: to them, he means, and to them alone, being of
contrary behavior to others, as will appear by what he says on the next
words. And if this be all, that he thinks meant, surely he falls far short of
showing the duty and property of true Israelites (who by this remnant are
meant) who are taught to do good to all Men, Galat. VI. 10. to love not only
those that love them, but also even their Enemies, and to good to them that
hate them. Mat. V. 44. that they may be Children of their Heavenly Father, who
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. so must they be as the dew from
the Lord, and as rain by him given in the midst of many People, striving to
extend their good to all those many, that as many as are capable of receiving
good by them may receive it. Mean while he may suggest to us another property,
which the comparing them to dew and showers requires in them, viz. softness and
gentleness in their behavior, in the midst of those, or amongst those, that
will receive them, and hear them; which will the better bring us to the
consideration of what is meant in the second similitude, which is, that they
shall be as a Lion, etc. They, which shall be gentle and soft in their
behavior, as communicative of all good to those that will receive the truth,
shall against all that oppose it, though many and strong, be of a Lionlike
courage, and by God be enabled with power to beat and tread down all before
them, and prevail over them, so as none may resist them, as a Lion does over
the beasts of the forest, and a young Lion over the flocks of the Sheep. This
their power may well be described by the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. X. 4, 5,
6. in that by the weapons of their Warfare, which are not carnal, but mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds, they cast down imaginations,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: so has Christ
promised to them, a mouth and wisdom, which all their adversaries shall not be
able to resist, Luke XXI. 15. This was made good in the Apostles, and such as
have since succeeded them in their employment, and administration of Christ's
Kingdom, and others the true members thereof, and he will never leave his
Church destitute of a remnant of such valiant defenders of the truth, and
conquerers (through the power of his Spirit) of what is contrary to it: though
all the powers of Hell join their forces against them, they shall disperse them.

Tirin. Grot.
Some learned Men refer what is here spoken to the times after the Babylonish
captivity, and especially those of the Maccabes, wherein the Jews under valiant
commanders overcame diverse strong Enemies, and with Lionlike courage set on
them and brought them under; which though it may be granted, and their
victories looked on as a fulfilling what is here spoken in part, yet sure it
will appear to have been more evidently and fully made good since Christ's
coming into the World, and setting up his Spiritual Kingdom among men by these
conquests by his little flock obtained over the Devil and the World, Sin and
error, never so deeply rooted and strongly backed, and all that may be
comprehended under those names by the Apostle given them, Ephesians. XI. 12. of
principalities, powers, rulers of the darkness of this World and Spiritual
wickedness in high places.

The conquering and dispersing these (as by the Church of Christ in the power
of his might and invincible force of his Spirit has been wonderfully done) and
converting rebellious sinners, are things of a higher nature, and signs of a
greater strength and courage, then any that is showed in the conquering and
destroying the greatest and most potent Nations that ever were on the Earth, as
to any temporal dominion or concerns, in as much as the bringing the minds of
Men into subjection is harder then the forceing their bodies. And sure though
Gods remnant have promises of temporal things as well as of Spiritual, yet
where such are mentioned as concern them as members of Christ's Kingdom (as the
things here spoken of from the second verse all along have been showed to be)
it is manifest, that they chiefly relate to their Spiritual estate, the things
thereto pertaining being the peculiar privileges of his Church and flock as
so, being a Kingdom not of this World, and the happiness of that and them being
according to those to be valued, whereby their dignity may be made appear not
so much by their being great in this World, as their being great in the Kingdom
of Heaven, and their prevalency not over temporal and carnal, but over
Spiritual Enemies, which are worse, and require a greater force then those to
subdue them; in the conquering of these is the strength of the Lion of the
tribe of Judah chiefly seen.

A^arbinel.
The Jew last cited says, that as Israel shall deal kindly with those that
have showed kindness to them, so on the contrary shall they deal with their
Enemies that have done ill to them, behaving themselves toward some of them,
to wit the Assyrians, as a Lion among the beasts of the forests, killing whom
they please; and toward others, viz. the Edomites (so they call Romans or
Christians) to whom they have greatest hatred, as a young Lion among the flocks
of Sheep, utterly destroying them, and suffering none to escape. You may see in
them still the leaven of their old Doctrine in their false interpreting of the
Law, by Christ reproved, Mat. V. 43, 44. Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and
hate thine Enemy; but the Jews generally R. D. Kimchi.
in expounding these words run on in their old error, which they will not
retract, viz. that the things here spoken concern a time not yet come, viz.
when those Nations by this Man mentioned, or, (as others of them) when Gog and
Magog shall come to fight against Jerusalem; because they will not acknowledge
the Messiah, on whose coming the fulfilling of them depends, to be yet come:
and again in that they expect them to be fulfilled, only in a gross literal
sense, by a bloody Massacre of their Enemies with the edge of the material
Sword. We may make use of them as for finding out the signification of the
words, as in other places, so in such passages of the Prophets also as concern
Christ, his coming, and Kingdom, and the privileges thereof; but as to the
sense in such we must expect to have it as wide from the truth, as they can
wrest it, being obstinatly resolved not to acknowledge him as yet come.

9 Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries, and all thine Enemies
shall be cut off.
Thine hand shall be lift up, etc.] Thine hand (O Remnant of Jacob.) That
seems the nearest person to be understood, Thou shall have the upper hand or
victory over all that oppose thee. Others refer it to God, Thy hand Drusius,
Christ. a Castro.
O God, Sa* Menoch.
or, O Christ: it will come all to one pass; they doing what they do by the
power of his might, and he being exalted and magnified in them by what they do
by his power. What is to be understood here by the cutting off of the Enemies
See Hierom. Ribera and Tarnov.
may be taken from the former verse, they shall be cut off from being Enemies,
all (if understood of Men) that makes them Enemies to Christ, and his Church,
their sins and errors taken out of the way. Some Abarbinel.
of the Jews read, let thy hand be lift up, understanding the Enemies as
before, viz. adversaries to denote the Sons of Esau, and Ismael, still looking
for what is spoken as yet to come, as we have said.

10 And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that I will cut off
thy Horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy Chariots.
11 And I will cut off the Cities of thy Land, and throw down all thy strong
holds.
12 And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thine hand, and thou shall have no
more Soothsayers.
13 Thy graven Images also will I cut off, and thy standing Images out of the
midst of thee: and thou shall no more worship the work of thine hands.
And it shall come to pass in that day says the Lord, etc.] Here, that the
connection of the words may appear, is questionable, what is the time designed
by that day, and who the person, or persons here spoken to are. Some among
Grot. and see Christ. a Castro, and Stokes.
Christians think, that the connection is between these words and the first
verse, as if all coming between were a parenthesis, and that the day here
spoken of is the same with that wherein the things there mentioned were to be
made good, and that the person here spoken to is the same that there, namely
Babylon, and that what here follows are threats and comminations to her,
answerable to those things, that are elsewhere in Jeremy, and other Prophets
threatened to her.

R. Tanchum, so Cyril. Alexand.
A learned Jew thinks the words to be coupled not with the promises immediately
preceding, but with the threats, that were before by our prophet denounced
against the Jews, and Israelites, as containing farther threats, and so the
time to be the same, in which the things before in this Prophecy threatened
against them shall have effect by their Enemies coming on them, and they still
the persons spoken of and to, and the words also to have connection with what
follows, chap. VI. 1. Hear ye now what the Lord says.

But to Others both Jews and Christians (the most of them) this breach seeming
wider then so to resume the connection of the words; they refer what is now
spoken to the words immediately preceding, and will have the time to be that
wherein the things therein mentioned should be fulfilled, and the persons still
spoken to, Israel (or the remnant of Jacob) and the words, though seeming to
have the form of a threat, yet to be indeed a gracious promise of that peace,
and security, which they shall enjoy, and have no need of seeking other helps,
such as they and other Nations then ordinarily made use of, but relying on God
alone, and cleaving faithfully to him, shall find him all sufficient to them
Calvin, Drusius.
yea therefore will he take from them such things, that they may learn to
depend upon him: R. Sol. Jarchi, Ab. Ezra. R. D. Kimchi, Abarbinel. and R.
Tanchum mentions this way of interpreting though he approves it not.
so the Jews to this sense, I will cut off thy Horses, etc. i. e. I will by
giving thee firm and secure peace cause that thou shall have no need of
multiplying Horses, or Chariots, or walled Cities, or strong Holds: or, for
fear of the Enemies to fly to Witchcrafts, and Enchantments, or to Soothsayers
to direct thee when to fight with success, nor for want of help in me to betake
thy self to Idols, and to worship them. So that the cutting off, and destroying
those things to them, and depriving them of them, will be in their sense the
cutting off and destroying their Enemies, the fear of whom made them formerly
fly to them.

They do likewise cite their Chaldee Paraphrase, who goes in a different
strain, rendering, I will cut off the Horses of strangers from among thee, and
their Chariots, and the Cities of the People, and destroy all their strong
Towers, and I will cut off also Witches from amidst thee, and thou shall have
no Soothsayers, I will also cut off the Images of the People, and their statues
out of the midst of thee, and thou shall no more serve the works of thine
hands, and I will root out the plantations of the Gentiles from amidst thee,
and destroy thine Enemies. This Paraphrase R. D. Kimchi.
they cite, as in confirmation of their own expositions; with which it agrees
indeed as to that, which they make the scope in general, to denote, that they
shall enjoy peace and security, and trust in God, and serve him alone; but in
this, much differs from it and from the text, in that what is attributed
according to them, to Israel, is in it attributed to their Enemies, their
Horses called their Enemies Horses, of which they give no reason; perhaps they
might think they meant Israel themselves, tho in respect to them they instead
of their name put in their Enemies, etc. lest the words, that seemed to import
ill unto them, might be joined with it, as else where Kimchi. R. Tanch. etc.
See Kimchi de Rad. in (...)
by the Enemies of David they will have to be understood David, as 1 Samuel XXV.
22. and by the Enemies of the Lord the Lord himself, 2 Samuel XII. 14. making
there the meaning to be, thou have provoked the Lord, whereas the letter sounds
the Enemies of the Lord.

But a Ribera; and see Sa. Menoch. and Tirinus.
Christian Interpreter makes farther use of the Paraphrasts expression, viz.
for confirmation of his opinion, that these things here spoken belong to the
times after Christ, and that the persons spoken to are not only those of
Israel, but of all other Nations, that should be converted to Christ, because
else an objection might be made against it, for that after the return from the
Babylonish Captivity, and when Christ came, and since, the Jews were not guilty
of Idolatrous worships and Witchcrafts, etc. that they should be promised to
have them cut off from them, and that therefore the words cannot be looked on
as a promise of good to them, and therefore that the Horses and Cities and
Witchcrafts and Idols are to be understood of such as were among other Nations,
who were to be converted to Christ, and so be made the remnant, and Israel of
God, i. e. that those things in which they did before trust, and so hardly
receive the Gospel, he would now take away, or at least make them no longer to
be the cause of their resisting the Gospel, but that all should yield and give
place to it. But though that which he says be true as to the main, viz. that
Gods Israel comprehends as well the Gentiles that were to be called in to
Christ's Church, as the Jews, and that there were among the Jews no Idols, or
Idol worship at Christ's coming, and that this promise was to be fulfilled as
well to the believing Gentiles as Jews, yet that there is need to interpret the
words therefore, as if by the things named were to be understood those among
the Gentiles, because at Christ's coming no such were among the Jews, or that
the Chaldee Paraphrast meant them of those, is neither evident, or need to be
insisted on, or scrupled at, because the Prophet seems to speak of things as
they were in those times when he spoke, and to say that in future time, when
God would fulfill his word here spoken by the Prophet, he would cause that it
should be otherwise; they whom he speaks of should not make use of or confide
in such things as they now did. That in the Prophets time such things were
among the Jews, and they peccant in forsaking God to rely on them, appears by
what is said in the Prophet Isaiah who was contemporary with Micah, Isaiah II,
6. etc. Therefore thou have forsaken thy People the house of Jacob, because
they be replenished from the East and are Soothsayers, etc. Their Land also is
full of horses, neither is there any end of their Chariots, their Land also is
full of Idols, they worship the work of their own hands.

Where we see are reckoned up such things, as are here mentioned, and their Sin
showed to be their relying on and pleasing themselves in them to the neglect of
God and his ways; so that well may here be understood that he says, that for
the future, the time here pointed at, he would cause that it should not be so
with them, (and hence by the way may be taken another conjecture why the
Chaldee Paraphrast should instead of thy Horses and Chariots, etc. put the
Horses of strangers, etc. viz. because these things they had from other People.
(So R. Solomon.
Some expound thy horses, i. e. the help of Egypt which thou relyest on to
furnish thee with Horses) or learned the use of them from other People, and
used them as the did. But we need not be much inquisitive after his meaning,
that being to be reduced to the Text, and not the Text to that. Mean while,
that these words are to be looked on, as a promise for good to those whom they
concern, viz. a promise of peace and security in God alone, and encouragement
to rely on him alone, without dependence on any humane helps or ways, rather
then a menace of evil to those spoken to, we may well be inclined to think by
the application of much the like words to the peaceable condition of the
Kingdom of Christ, See R. Sol. and R. D. Kimchi on that plae.
Zechariah IX. 10. I will cut off the Chariot from Ephraim, and the Horse from
Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off, and he shall speak peace unto
the Heathen.

14 And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee: so will I destroy
thy Cities.
So will I, (or and I will) for so in the Hebrew) destroy the Cities. In the
Margin is put, or Enemies, and so the Chaldee Paraphrast takes it. The word
(...) Areca in the Hebrew signieth both these, Cities, and Enemies, and so is
that meaning to be given to it, which the sense of the place requires, or shows
to be most convenient. Here therefore according to their several judgments some
take one, and some the other. It is not unfitly observed by a R. Tanch.
learned Jew, that if here the words be taken as a menace, or denouncing evil,
then it must necessarily to make congruous sense be rendered Cities, but if it
be taken as a prediction of good, then it may be rendered either way. To what
may be said, that it is not here to be taken for Cities (though diverse
Interpreters so take it) because he had before said, I will cut off the Cities
of thy Land, ver. 11. some answer, that Christ. a Castro. See Ab. Ezra.
there are meant Cities of defense, here Cities of Idolatrous worship, in which
were their groves and Idols Temples.

15 And I will execute vengeance in anger, and fury upon the Heathen, such as
they have not heard.
And I will execute vengeance upon the Heathen such as they have not heard of]
On that former exposition of most Christians, which interpret the preceding
words from ver. 10. as a promise of good unto the Church and Beleivers, this
will kindly follow, as showing how much contrary it shall be with such as
receive not his Doctrine and refuse to obey. Having so disposed of things for
the good and security of his Subjects, on his Enemies he will execute
vengeance. But then most of them render the last words which have not heard, or
will not ^ear, hearken to his word, or Doctrine, or because they would not hear
the law, says the Chaldee, the preaching of the Gospel say Christians, and so
refer the Relative which to the Heathen. But the words are capable of that
rendering which Ours give, and is by Calvin. Drusi^s.
Some others also approved, by referring it to the vengean^e spoken of, viz.
which or such as they have not heard of.

That R. Tanchum.
Jew which (as we saw) takes the foregoing words as a threat against Israel, or
the Jews here does not take (...) Goim, (Nations, or People) for the Heathen,
but for the People of Israel or those Nations and People, (viz. Israel and
Judah,) that God would take vengeance on them for their refusing to hearken to
him, making it a continuation of the commination.

That Abarb.
other Jew which expounded Isreal's being as dew, etc. of their being kind and
profitable to them that dealt kindly with them, expounds this, that God will
severly punish those that would not hearken to them to pity and show kindness
to them. Such as make the Bab^lonians or C^^ldeans the persons spoken to, and
here threatened with de^^ruction: by those Grot.
that will not hear, understand such of those Nations under that Empire as
should oppose Cyrus, and refer to Isa. XLV. 1. etc.

There is another Jun. and Tremel.
Translation of great note, which making the words from the tenth verse to the
end, a promise of good by Christ to his Church, gives yet a different
construction of them from what we have seen, viz. For it shall be in that day,
says the Lord, when I shall have cut off thy Horses out of the midst of thee,
etc. (i. e. have much afflicted thee, and so purged thee from thy wicked doings
and the instruments thereof) that I will destroy thy adversaries, and execute
vengeance on the Nations which have not heard. But this construction seems much
more harsh, than that which is commonly received, and by our's given; although
our's seem to express much the same that those translatours would have, by
putting ver. 14. So will I destroy, instead of what others put, and I will
destroy, especially if, as in the Margin, we read, their Enemies.

CHAP. VI.
VER. 1. Hear ye now what the Lord says, Arise, contend thou before the
mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.
2 Hear ye, O mountains, the Lords controversy, and ye strong foundations of
the Earth: for the Lord has a controversy with his People, and he will plead
with Israel.
HEar ye now what the Lord says, etc.] Although it be not necessary perhaps to
seek for a connection between every chapter, or all other passages in the Books
of the Prophets, in as much as they spoke them at several times, and so when
they committed them to writing, set them down as they were spoken, without
necessary dependence of every part one on another, and so this might be looked
on, as Grot.
a new address (as the Prophet was by the Spirit moved,) to the People: yet of
the coherence between it and the foregoing parts of this Prophecy, we may not
unfitly take an hint from a Jewish ^barbinel.
Doctor to this purpose; that whereas God had sometimes threatened to them heavy
judgments to the destruction both of Samaria and Jerusalem, Israel and Judah,
and then again given them gracious promises, of victory over their Enemies, and
great tranquillity and prosperity, lest any should thence take occasion to
suspect, that his ways were not equal, and he not constant in his purposes,
but various and changeable, one while intending and declaring one thing, then
another, and repenting him at one time of what he had said or done at another;
he here bids the Prophet to declare the methods of his proceedings to them, by
rehearsing what he had done for them, and their forefathers, and what just
things no way grievous were required of them, and how they behaved themselves
toward him, and laying open what transgressions they were guilty of, that so
it may appear, that he was always inclined to mercy and to do them good, but
that they by the unequal temper of their behavior, and perverse rebellious
carriage, provoked him to use severity toward them, and to deal with them in
judgment, that he might not seem a patronizer of wickedness; the cause was from
themselves and not from any inconstancy in him, the change in them, not in him,
who was still the same, the Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, etc. but
that will by no means clear the guilty, etc. Exodus XXXIV. 6, 7.

For making this evident therefore, the Prophet thus begins and bespeaks them,
Hear ye now ye People of Judah and Israel what the Lord says, etc. The Lord
says it, and therefore it requires their due attention, the Lord says unto
him, Arise, (O Micah) contend thou before the mountains, etc. The Margin has,
with the Mountains, for so the particle (...) Eth more usually signifies, but
it is by the Hebrew R. David. Kimchi.
Grammarians observed here to denote as much as (...) El to, or before, in
presence of the Mountains. The Mountains and hills (says a Abarb.
learned Jew) are dead inanimate things, and cannot be guilty of Sin, why then
should he reprove them? The sense then must be (says he) rebuke and reprove
the sin of this People with such vehemence, publicly, and with so high a
voice, that even those insensible Creatures the Mountains and Hills may hear
it; as much as to say, Contend with or reprove this People in the presence of
the Mountains, and that so loudly and vehemently, as if thou would make even
those things, that have no sense of hearing, the very hills, to hear thy voice.

Jun. Trem.
Some render, with the Mountains, and let these hills hear, i. e. those of
Iudaea that mountanous Country: and then the Mountains and Hills may be taken
for Grot.
the Inhabitants of them. A. Lapide, Tyrin. Tarnov.
Others think them cited as if they were guilty, because on them they
worshipped Idols and committed abominations. Others again R. Tanc^um. Vatab.
Ribera.
both Jews and Christians, by Mountains and Hills take the Princes and great
ones to be meant, as sometimes in Scripture they are by those names designed,
and then the particle With, must in its usual sense be understood, (but the
controversy seems more general with all People.) The Chaldee Paraphrase is
cited by the R. D. Kimchi. Abarb. and see R. Tanchum, and R. Solom.
Jewish expositors as rendering Mountains by Fathers, and Hills by Mothers; as
if he should call on Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Sarah, Rebeccah, Leah and
Rachel, in their graves, to hear how ill they had requited the Lord for all his
goodness showed to them, (and so in some See Bib. Reg. Buxt. Polyglot, etc.
Editions of the Chaldee it is read: but in others, and those more common,
otherwise, viz. Mountains and Hills, as in the Hebrew.)

But there is no need of taking Mountains and Hills in any other then their
proper signification, Ainsw. in Deuteronomy XXXII. 1.
it being agreeable to the language of the Scripture Isa. I. 2. Micah. I. 2.
elsewhere, when God speaks, or any thing is spoken from him, and in his
Name, the more to affect the hearts of Men, and make what is spoken to sink
into them and be attended to, to call in Heaven and Earth and lifeless
insensible Creatures as witnesses against them, and judges between God and
them, for the solemnity of the matter, and to show the justness of what he does
or says, and how more senseless and stupid they are in not harkening and
obeying then any of those lifeless Creatures, which obey all his will as
readily as if they had ears and were of quickest hearing. As they speak loudly
without voice to declare Psalm. XIX. 3. Luc. XIX. 40. Ho^. II. 21.
the glory of God, and witness to his truth, so do they hear without ears when
the Lord speaks. Israel therefore refusing to hearken to the Lord, out of these
does he raise up such as shall hearken to him, and call on them so to do.

Hear ye O Mountains the Lords controversy, and ye strong foundations of the
Earth. Instead of Hius in the first verse, here in the second verse is put ye
strong foundations of the Earth (or, ye strong* ones the foundations of the
Earth:) so are the Mountains and Hills called, as the strongest and firmest
parts of the Earth, and therefore Compare Deuteronomy. XXXII. 22. and Psalm. XVIII. 7.
likened to the pillars or foundations thereof. Abarb.
They that by Mountains understand the Kings and chief Princes of the World,
seem by these to understand their deputies and Magistrates, who do as it were
sustain the pillars thereof, Psalm. LXXV. 3. But it seems most convenient, as
declaring the Majesty of God, to retain (as we said) the proper signification
of the words, Mountains and Hills.

These being summoned (as fit witnesses for their con^tancy and stability) to
hear, he decla^es what they are called on to hear, viz. the Lords See Hos. IV.
1.
controversy with his People, and his impleading them for matters between him
and them. He that is Sovereign Lord of all, and cannot do any unjust thing, nor
could be accused of injustice in doing what he will with his own, much less in
punishing them who have done otherwise then they should, in rebelling against
him and transgressing his commandments, yet with wonderful condescension, puts
himself as it were on equal terms with this rebellious People, and Grot.
Pelican.
choosing rather to manifest his justice and equity then the right and power of
his Dominion, calls in all Creatures to be witnesses and judges between
himself and them, of the justness and even necessity of his proceeding with
them. That he may before all be justified in what he speaks, and Ps. li. 4.
cleared in his judging (or contending) even themselves being judges, he gives
in his reasons, and calls on them to give ^n theirs, or any arguments they can
produce for themselves in their behalf, according to what he elsewhere says,
Isa. XLIII. 26. let us plead (or Vulg. Lat.
let us be judged) together, declare thou, that thou may be justified; if
thou have any thing whereby thou may justify thy self, produce it, and let
it be heard.

3 O my people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee?
testify against me.
O my People what have I done unto thee, etc.] Thus he begins his plea with
them, by calling on them to produce what exceptions they have against him and
his service; for their forsaking it might seem to import, as if he had ill
treated them, and been an hard master to them. he bids them therefore, if they
have any thing to say for themselves against him in that kind, to produce it. O
my People, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? Aben
Ezra, R. Dimchi.
Some for explication add, What evil have I done unto thee? viz. that thou
should thus behave thy self toward me, as thou do: Wherein have I wearied
thee? What commands have I given thee, or what have I required to be done of
thee, the doing of which might be a trouble and wearisomness unto thee? because
they were apt to say, What a weariness is it? Mal. I. 13. So that to this
expression, will be agreeable what we have in the New Testament, His
commandments are not grievous, 1 Ioh. V. 3. and what our Savior says, Mat.
XI. 30. My yoke is easy and my burden light.

Others much R. Solomon, Abarbinel.
differently expound the first words, not understanding Evil, but Good, What,
i. e. how much, good have I done unto thee? how great mercies showed to thee?
And then the following words much as before: and wherein I have wearied thee by
my commandments, what trouble thou have been put to in doing them, testify thou
and declare. The Chaldee paraphraseth the former part of the verse, what good
have I said that I would do to thee, and have not done it? which meaning may
agree with either of the foregoing: and the latter part thus, and what hard [or
grievous] infirmity have I multiplied upon thee? See Deuteronomy. VII. 15. VIII. 4.
Exodus XV. 26.
as if she had respect to his preserving them continually in health in all
their travel through the desert: and so some Others understand this, not so
much of Gods not wearing them with his commandments, as of his Chapter a Castro.
not having in any kind put them to hardship and difficulties in their coming
out of Egypt, and travel in the desert, through which he bare them as on Eagles
wings Exodus XIX. 4. and Deuteronomy. XXXII. 11. etc. and led them through the deep as
an Horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble, Isa. LXIII. 13. etc.

But the first of these expositions, as to the whole verse seems more naturally
to flow from the words, and may be compared with and confirmed by what he
says, Ier. II. 5. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are
gone from me? etc. and ver. 31. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, and a
land of darkness? the meaning of which a R. Tanchum.
learned Jew thus gives, Have I put upon them any great dif Christ hid till his
second coming in six respects.
ficulty, or burdened them with any hard command, that they are fled from mine
obedience?

Testify against me.] He challenges them to produce their grievances, if they
have any against him, before those Mountains and Hills summoned in to witness
between them. If they have no such things on their part to produce, he has his
great benefits conferred on them and their forefathers, by which he deserved
and might justly challenge their faithful obedience, to produce on his part:
which therefore, to convince them of their great ingratitude, he proceeds to
recite.

4 For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the
house of servants, and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
5 O my people, remember now what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam
the Son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the
righteousness of the Lord.
For I brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, etc.] For the particle (...)
Ci, so rendered, y Others render otherwise, as Jun. Trem.
When, Kimch.
But, surely, R. Solom. Jar.
Although, and the like: but the coherence is by none made plainer then by
reading it For, as it plainly signifies.

I brought thee up, etc. and redeemed thee out of the house of servants, i. e.
out of the house or place of Chald. Greek, etc.
servitude or bondage, where thou were a servant. The words are the very same,
that are used in the preface to the ten Commandments both Exodus XX. and Deuteronomy.
V. and there rendered the house of bondage, and has the same meaning here.

Diverse Kimchi, Abarb. Vatabl. and others.
both Jews and Christians mention here another reason of this appellation of
house of servants, viz. that Egypt may be called so in respect of the Egyptians
themselves, who were inheritors of that curse laid on their forefathers Cham,
and his Son Canaan, that he should be a servant of servants unto his Brethren,
Genesis IX. 25. But this (however otherwise true) seems here rather a nicety not
much to be insisted on, See Christ. ^ Castro.
though this may seem to heighten the greatness of the benefit of his redeeming
them thence, where they were in most vile bondage and low condition, servants
to servants.

And I sent before thee Moses, Aaron and Miriam.] The Chaldee thus paraphraseth
these words, And I sent before thee three Prophets, Moses to teach the
tradition, (or way, so I suppose (...) Mesirah, rather is, then tradition which
is (...) Masorah) of judments, i. e. to give them Laws; Aaron to make
propitiation for the People; and Miriam to instruct the Women. ( Aaron has the
title of Prophet given him, Exodus VII. 1. and Miriam of a Prophetess, Exodus XV.
20. where she went before the Women in singing praises to the Lord for their
deliverance from the Egyptians; and they both seem to challenge that title, as
belonging to them, as well as unto Moses, Number. XII. 2.) These he says he sent
before them, i. e. gave them for guides to them to go before them, to conduct,
instruct, lead, and assist them, both in their going forth of Egypt, and in
their passage through the wilderness.

R. D. Kimchi.
Some by his saying, that he sent them before them, understand, that he before
hand, before their going forth out of Egypt, sent them to give them the joyful
news of their deliverance, and prepare them for it. These being both true, and
the word comprehending both, both may be looked upon as meant, to the minding
them of all those benefits, that God made these three his instruments of
conferring on the Israelites, from the first beginning of his great work of his
redemption of them out of Egyptian bondage, as long as they continued together
amongst them, which was even till the time of the next great work or benefit
here particularly mentioned, viz. what concerns the story of Balak and Balaam,
and so all from their first moving to come out of Egypt, until they came to
Shittim, all God's wonderful works and mercies toward them, as in the Books of
Moses recorded; for before what is mentioned of Balak, Miriam died Number. XX. 2.
and so did Aaron, Numb. XX. 28.

The putting them in mind therefore of what was done as well after their
decease as before, is ushered in with a new address, O my People, remember now
what Balak King of Moab consulted, etc. consulted, i. e. Abarb.
what counsel he took, viz. how he might by any means bring about their
destruction. The story of what was agitated betwixt Balak Number. XXII. 4.
King of Moab, and Balaam the Josh. XIII. 22.
Soothsa^er* is recorded, Numb. XXII, XXIII. XXIV. Balak finding himself unable
to accomplish his designs on Israel by force of Arms, thought to do it by
bringing God's curse upon them, for which end he sends for Balaam (who it seems
had then the repute of an holy Man and great Prophet) to come and curse them,
for I wot, says he, that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou
cursest is cursed, Number. XXII. 6.

How willing Balaam was to have complied with him in this pernicious design, is
manifest by his carriage in the relation of the History, but God would not
suffer either of them to have their will. Balak hired against Israel Balaam to
curse them, nevertheless the Lord their God would not hearken unto Balaam, but
turned the curse into a blessing unto them, Deuteronomy. XXIII. 4, 5. Ios. XXIV. 10.
Whenever by building altars and offering sacrifice he sought to procure a
curse against them, the message that was put into his mouth to return to Balak
was a blessing, which he could not choose but utter. So that he being forced to
it said, how shall I curse whom God has not cursed, or how shall I defy whom
the Lord has not defied? Number. XXIII. 9. and, behold I have received
commandment to bless, and he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it, verse 20.
He confessed that no enchantment could prevail against Israel, verse 23. and in
fine therefore instead of cursing them, plainly pronounces blessings upon
them, and curses and destruction to those who would have had them cursed and
destroyed, Number. XXIV. 15. etc. So that Balaks design in getting Balaam to curse
Israel Ab. Ezra, R. D. Kimchi, Abarbinel.
seems that which is intimated by, remember what Balak consulted; and Balaams
blessing them instead of cursing them, that referred to by those words, and
what Balaam the Son of Beor answered him.

But there is one thing more in that History to be taken notice of for the
fuller understanding of what is here spoken, and that is, that though Balaam
could not by his curses prevail to hurt Israel, yet he sought and taught Balak
by another way to attempt it, viz. by seduceing them to do that, which if done
by them should certainly pull down Gods curse on them, viz. Fornication and
Idolatry. Ains. on Number. XXXIV. 16.
This is by some thought to be intimated in what he says to Balak, Number. XXIV.
14. I will advertise or counsel thee. But though no such counsel is there more
fully expressed, yet it is afterward, cap. XXXI. 16. where Moses reproving the
People for saving alive the Midianitish Women, says, behold, these caused the
Children of Israel through the Counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against
the Lord in the matter of Peor, to which also reference is made Rev. II. 14.
where it is said that Balaam taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the
Children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
Fornication. That counsel of his is there called the Doctrine of Balaam, and
that may, not perhaps unfitly, be here included in what Balaam answered to
Balak, as calling to mind, as a great Sin of their forefathers, so together a
signal mercy of God, in not suffering that counsel to prevail to the utter
destruction of them, but to end in the punishment of part of them only (viz.
twenty-four thousand Number. XXV. 9.)

And this Ribera, Men^chius, Ti^inus.
Some look on as chiefly here referred to, joining with these words the
following, namely, from Shittim to Gilgal, making the meaning thus to be, And
what pernicious counsel Balaam gave for working mischief to them in their
passage betwixt Shittim and Gilgal, viz. that in all that way (as far as his
dominions extended) he should send into the camp of Israel of the fairest of
his Women, to entice them to Fornication, and consequently to Idolatry; that so
by that means, which he could not do by any enchantments, he might prevail to
bring Gods curse upon them: which counsel if it had taken effect, had certainly
done what he intended. For being begun to be practiced in Shittim, we see how
it provoked God to send a plague among the People to the destruction of twenty
four thousand, Number. XXV. 9. and had it been seconded or continued in their
further march toward Gilgal, had probably brought destruction on the whole
People before they could arrive there, but was defeated by God's so timely
taking notice of it, and by the early punishment of those that were at first
seduced, and afterward by the Numb. XXXI. 17.
cutting of the Midianitish Women, who were intended to be a snare to them. So
that the plot was dangerously on Balaams part laid, and God's great mercy in
defeating it was very conspicuous, and worthy to be had in remembrance.

But Others do otherwise expound these words, Tanchum.
some taking by the words, from Shittim to Gilgal, to be denoted the several
stations to which Balak took Balaam, that he might view the Camp of Israel, and
curse them, (viz. those named, Number. XXII. 41. and chap. XXIII. 14. and 28.) but
See Chapter a Castro. and Ribera.
those places were not between Shittim and Gilgal, but eastward of Shittim, to
the west of which Gilgal was: and if it be said, that it is meant, that thence
he might see their camp, as it lay between Shittim and Gilgal, it will be again
answered, that the camp then Number. XXII. 1. and XXV. 1.
pitched in the plains of Moab, did not reach farther then Shittim, nor seems
to have been extended farther toward Gilgal.

Others therefore, R. D. Kimchi, Munster, Vatablus, Grotius, Abarbinel.
both Jews and Christians, disjoining the words, from Shittim unto Gilgal from
these, and what Balaam answered him, and repeating the word, remember, as again
having influence on these, thus supply the sense; And remember those things
which I did for thee in the way from Shittim to Gilgal, from Shittim in the
plains of Moab cast of Jordan, where they sinned, (in the matter of Peor, Number.
XXV. 3. 18.) and deserved all to be cut off, had not God been merciful to them,
unto Gilgal on the other side of Jordan in the promised land. Jos. (...). 1.
At Shittim they abode till after Moses his Death. From thence after Moses's
Death Iosuah conducted them over Jordan (the waters of which were, as formerly
the waters of the Red Sea under the conduct of Moses, miraculously divided to
let them pass through as on dry land) unto Gilgal, where they first encamped
in, and took firm possession of that promised land, which ever since they had
enjoyed: and there God renewed his Covenant with them by renewing Circumcision,
which had been omitted in their journeyings through the wilderness, and so
rolled away from off them the reproach of Egypt; for which cause the place had
its name Gilgal, (which signifies rolling) Ios. V. 9.

So that as in the former words they are put in mind of all the great things,
that God did for them under the conduct of Moses, and in his time, summed up
Ios. XXIV. 6. etc. so in these of those under the conduct of Ioshuah and after
his Death: and so, in sum, of all that he did from his first beginning to
redeem them from bondage, and bringing them out of Egypt through the Red Sea,
through the desert and through Jordan, till he had settled them in the promised
land: and so consequently of all that he did afterward for them there, in
driving out to their Enemies and settling them in it till this very time,
wherein they had so far provoked him by their unthankful and rebellious
behaviors, that he thought of casting them again out of it, and threatened by
the mouths of this and other Prophets so to do, except they should prevent it
by serious and speedy repentance, and new obedience, which all the Prophets,
calling on them in his name, could not persuade them to.

All these things with the notorious circumstances attending them, and variety
of transactions, whereby God manifested his infinite wisdom, power, justice,
mercy, and truth, in his miraculous preservation of them, and destruction of,
and defeating the counsels of their Enemies, in his punishing them sometimes
for their rebellions, yet in great mercy sparing and preserving the main body
of them, and not suffering any good promise, that he had made to their Fathers
to fail, till he had fulfilled all, do these comprehensive heads of the story
expressed put them in mind of. There was no need of reciting all particulars,
they being things that they could not be ignorant of, being recorded in the
Books of the Law and Ioshuah, and by mouth from the Fathers, (according to
God's command) all along from the time that they were first done, related to
them; only they laid them not to heart, to make that use of them as they ought
to have done, thence to take occasion of continued thankfulness, expressed in
faithful adherence and obedience to God; so that they might justly be thought
and said to have forgotten them: and therefore are by a brief mention of these
main heads put in mind of them, and bid to remember them, that so they might
know the righteousness of the Lord.

Righteousness.] (...) Righteousnesses; a word of latitude, according to
several Acts in which Moreh Nevochim. Nic. Fuller concord.
righteousness shows it self, as of giving or doing what is right and just,
uprightness in dealing, justice in judgments, and in dispensing punishments,
and rewards, mercy, and beneficence, fidelity, and veracity, and justness in a
cause: and to all it is appliable according as the place where it is used
requires, and is here therefore differently interpreted by Pisc. Tarnov. Dutc^
Notes; see R. Tanchum.
expositors; Some, his just dealings in all matters betwixt Israel and their
Enemies, and in what concerned them among themselves according to their
different behavior, when they rebelled and when they obeyed, when they sinned
and when they repented; Call. Diodat. Grot. Drusius, R. Tanchum.
Some, the great mercies of the Lord showed to them, and benefits conferred on
them; Vat. Ribera Tirinus, Menoch. Sa. Deodat, etc. and Christ. a Castro.
Some, the faithfulness of the Lord in making good all his promises made to
their forefathers, notwithstanding all those impediments, which stood in their
way, through the Enemies endeavors and their own rebellions and Sins.
Whichsoever of these be taken, the thing will be true, and the word may well be
taken in its full latitude as it comprehends all these and ought of like kind,
for examples of all its meanings and all that it can import, will be afforded
in the histories pointed out, and they will instruct them to know the
righteousness of the Lord taken in what sense or notion you will; yea, though
we should not look back on all those passages from Egypt to Gilgal* but only on
those from Shittim to Gilgal; as some seem more particularly to refer these
words only to them. So the Chaldee paraphrase. Have not great things been done
for you, from the plain of Shittim to the house, or place, of Gilgal, that the
righteousness of the Lord might be made known? Junius and Tremellius.
and some Christian interpreters, who for making the words as they suppose the
plainer, (though the usual reading seem more plain) render thus, That thou
may acknowledge the righteous dealings of the Lord from Shittim to Gilgal,
and say, etc.

But though all these may (as we said) agree to the sense of the words, and be
looked on as true, yet if we look to the words foregoing, wherein God says
that he has a controversy with Israel, and calls on them, as it were to plead
the case, and debate the matter with him, before witnesses, that it may appear
on which part the right stood, or the fault lay, that he has taken up a
quarrel against them, it will seem perhaps a closer and more natural way of
making the inference, or giving the meaning to expound them, that ye may know
(or that it may be known for the word is only (...) Lemaan Daat, to know; or,
for knowing, without expressing the person) the righteousness of the Lord, i.
e. The word righteous is so used Genesis XXXVIII. 26. Deuteronomy. XXV. 1. Jer. XII. 1.
that the right of the cause is on his side, and he is very just in what he
does now, in accusing thee of ingratitude, and threatening to punish thee for
it, that there is no injustice in his doings (and so may it be compared with
that expression, Psalm. LI. 4. above mentioned.) Those great things done for
them which he calls to their mind, and pleads, are manifest evidences on his
part against them, to justify him: they having nothing to answer for
themselves, or testify against him, what shall they do but as men wholly
convicted, and in great confusion, say as follows.

6 ^ Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high
God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?
7 Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul?
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, etc.] This abrupt, passionate, form
of speech seems to require something to be understood, and supplied, whereby it
may be joined to the preceding words, and that Junius Tremellius, Grot* and
see R. Tanchum.
Some would have to be and may say: which then must be understood with some
caution, not as if the Prophet should suggest to them words, which he thinks
convenient that they should, or he would have them to say (because they are
such as he could not but know were not to be said, being not agreeable to the
ways of worship for making atonement, and pacifying God, by God himself in
the law prescribed, who would not be pleased with any other things then what he
himself chose, being not profited by any, nor accepting of any, but what
himself approved) but rather mentioning them as such, which probably they would
be ready to say, being convinced of Gods righteousness in his plea, and having
nothing to testify against him, or answer for their own justification: as if
they should say, We confess Gods righteousness, and acknowledge all that he has
said to be true, and that he has better deserved at our hands, then we have
repayed him, and would be glad therefore by any means, and on any terms to make
our peace with him. If offering those ordinary oblations, which the law
required (which as speaking in their person he may seem to intimate they would
say they had not failed in) will not suffice, what else shall we do? be it
offerings of things never so expensive (as by those hyperbolical expressions of
thousands of rams, and ten thousands of rivers of oil seems denoted) or things
never so dear, or precious to us, our Children, yea the dearest of them, our
first born, all of these would we willingly offer for making atonement for our
sins, whereby we have provoked him, and for appeasing him, if all would do.

Not much different as to the meaning will be what R. D. Kimchi. Aben Ezra. Chapter
a Castro.
others supply, viz. If any of you (or every one of you for his particular)
shall say, wherewith shall I come before the Lord, etc. On all hands it will be
agreed that the words are spoken by the Prophet, as in the person of the People
(agreeable to what their behavior showed to be the thoughts of their hearts)
as a reply to what God has said in his plea against them for evidencing his
own righteousness, and their great ingratitude, whether we look on them as an
acknowledgment, that they are convinced of their own guiltiness, and desire to
acknowledge their sins, and repent of them, which they would testify by any
means, if they knew what would be accepted, or suffice in that kind: tacitly
implying that he had not wearied them in any service, but See Abarbinel.
that there was nothing so wearisome, or troublesome, or expensive, which for
pleasing him they ought not to do, or would not willingdo; or whether as a
justifying of themselves, See Pareus
That all was true indeed that God had said; and as for themselves if they had
been defective in their duty, and so displeased him, it was through ignorance,
because if they might be informed what would please him, were it never so great
a matter, they would willingly do it.

However it be, the Prophet by putting this question in their name in these
terms, R. Tanchum, Corn. a Lapide.
makes way for informing and instructing them in the true means of pleasing
God, which, as in answer to their question, he declares in the following words.
But before we come to those words, wherein he positively sets down, what things
God required, and was to be pleased with, we must necessarily suppose a denying
the things in this question on their parts expressed to be pleasing, or
acceptable to him, viz. multitude of oblations and sacrifices above what he
required in his law, as if by the greatness and preciousness of them their
pardon were to be bought out. Offerings and sacrifices were indeed in the law
of Gods own institution, but those all of such nature as God might, for all
that he had commanded, justly ask, wherein have I wearied thee? They were
neither so costly, nor so many, as that they had reason much to be aggrieved
at; they were all of such things as were at hand easy to be gotten, and of the
store wherewith he had blessed them, so that See Lev. v. 11. cap. XII. 8. and
cap. XIV. 21.
if any were poorer then others, in many of them regard was had to his poverty.
And that they might know, that it was not the value or great price of the
offering that he ooked after, appears, in that for greater sins oblations Moreh
Nevochim. lib. 3. cap. xlv^. Grot. on Levit I. v. 3.
of lesser value were enjoined, and for Grot. de satisfactione cap. x. and on
Psalm. (...).
some great sins none at all; that thereby the heinousness of them might
appear. And to think therefore, that by adding to the sacrifices, which God had
prescribed in the law, as by changing single beasts into thousands of the best
sort, or in stead of beasts to offer, to sacrifice, the dearest of their
Children, could be no safe rule to go by in seeking to appease the wrath of God
for their sins, and present themselves acceptable in his sight. Prove. XXX. 6.
They were not to add to, no more then to diminish from what he commanded Deuteronomy.
IV. 2. and XII. 32. Therefore did their offerings even of such things as he
allowed and required to be offered at any time please him, because offered in
obedience to his commands, and of such things, for such ends, in such a manner,
and with such a mind in them rightly prepared and disposed according to his
will in his word declared, not for any thing otherwise of intrinsic goodness
in the things themselves, or the value or multitude of them which he esteemed.
And for this cause, because they thought otherwise, and neglecting those other
circumstances, whereby the offerings were to be made acceptable, and were never
without them, thought to please him with sacrifices, and oblations, as if the
bare offering them and external performance, were as much as he required, and a
sufficient performing of their duty, whereby they should gain his favor, is it
that we often hear him reproving them even for their legal sacrifices, and
rejecting them with indignation, as things which he delighted not in, but even
loathed and hated, as Isa. I. 11. etc. 66. 3. Ier. VI. 20. Amos V. 22. etc. and
as things that though by them he thought good under the law to exercise them in
obedience to him, and Calv.
to instruct them and bring them to repentance and faith, yet were not Moreh
Nevochim. lib. 3. cap. XXXII. See Abarb. gand so the Syriack and Arabic
translations.
his prime and main intention, nor things which merely of themselves could
please him; as appears, Ier. VII. 21, 22. etc. Here therefore is most true what
l some say, though it seem not the proper construction, or interpretation of
the words, while they would thus read and expound them, Shall I give, or offer
in sacrifice my first born? This would be my transgression, (it would be a very
great wickedness and not fit for me to do;) or shall I offer for a sacrifice
the fruit of my body? this would be the sin of my soul; and how shall I do this
great wickedness? It is certain, that however with the greatest zeal and show
of desire to be reconciled to God, they should have pretended, and been willing
to have done any such thing, (and ought if he had required to have been
willing) yet this (as the case stood) had been but more and more to provoke not
to appease him, by offering such things never by him required, as though of the
greatest esteem in their own eyes, yet were to him an abomination, Jer. VII. 31.
however in their Idolatrous worships they were commended and looked on as most
meritorious acts. And therefore this question, for what end soever put by the
Prophet in their person does so necessarily include a negative answer [No, thou
shall not come before the Lord with such things; he will not be pleased with
thy giving such things] that taking it as granted, he does not farther insist
on it, but proceeds in positive terms, to instruct them what is pleasing to
God, and what good for them to do, and required, that they may in acceptable
manner come before him, and that they may find acceptance with him.

8 He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, etc.] This is an answer given by the
Prophet to the question in the preceding words, put as in the person of the
People, or any of them, and gives a full resolution to the main of the
question, viz. what it is wherewith the Lord would be pleased, though not such
as perhaps they who would put the question in such terms as it is put, did, or
would expect, for they make their question concerning things without
themselves, by what in that kind they might please him, as taking it for
granted that by such things God was to be pleased: not making question of any
thing within themselves, or how their own hearts and minds were to be disposed,
and their conversation was to be ordered. But the answer respects only this,
with exclusion of the other, as without this not worth the mentioning, and of
no value, yea rather abominable in the sight of God. Their whole Flocks and
Herds, yea their dearest Children would they part withal to make satisfaction
for their sins, See Calv.
but mention not the parting with those sins, or rectifying their inward man,
and amending their ways. This in their eyes was a great offer, a way to gain
acceptance, but he shows them that in this they were clear mistaken, God
looking to them and their behavior, not the greatness, or costliness of their
offerings; and therefore that if they would in acceptable manner come before
him, and have him pleased, they must bring with them, not what seems good in
their own eyes, but what he has showed them to be good, and has required, so
that without that it is in vain to talk of, or pretend to offer any other gift,
though never so costly, or of things without themselves, never so dear to them.

This, except willingly, they could not be ignorant of, so that they might have
made themselves answer, or not needed at all to put this question, for he had
showed it to them, and declared it in his Law, wherein he had plainly set down
all that he required of them. Yet does the Prophet summarily repeat it to them,
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, etc. What but these
things? so as that all other things required are but in order to these, or with
supposal of these, and without these neither good nor required; so where he
seems to reject those Sacrifices which otherwise the law enjoined, as by them
offered, he does explain what was the main thing by him intended, and required,
so as that without it the outward performances signified nothing. So Isa. I.
11. etc. when he had showed that the multitude of their sacrifices to him was
to no purpose, etc. he says, Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, etc. So Ier. VII. 22, 23. telling them that he
spoke not to their Fathers concerning sacrifices, he adds, but this thing
commanded I them, saying, obey my voice, etc. And so Amos V. 22. etc. telling
them, that he will not accept their burnt offerings, etc. that they may know,
wherewith to be accepted, he adds, verse 24. But let judgment run down as
waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. To the same purpose, Hos. VI. 6.
says he, I desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then
burnt offerings: as Samuel told Saul, 1 Samuel XV. 22. Has the Lord as great
delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord?
See Psalm. L. 14.
Behold to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of rams.

These and the like pl^ces all aim at the same thing that the words of the
Prophet here, though the terms be different, all showing that the offering of a
Man's self to God, by forsaking his sins, and ordering his conversation aright
before him, is that which is good and acceptable in his sight, and required
more then, and preferred before, all oblations, and outward pompous ceremonious
performances or show of worship to him; and all speak that which was before
said in the law (and is noted in the Margin of our Bibles in this place,) And
now Israel what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, to keep the commandments of the Lord
and his statutes, etc. Deuteronomy. X. 12. 13. There being put the same question that
here, what does the Lord require of thee? but, with what follows as in answer
to it, shows the duty required in both places to be the same, and the words to
aim at the same thing, though in sound they differ.

Now the whole of that duty is here comprehended in three parts, or summed up
under three heads. First, To do justly. Secondly, To love mercy. Thirdly, To
walk humbly with God. To which will easily be reduced all the commandments of
the law; those concerning our duty to our neighbor, and our behavior toward
him to the two former; those concerning our duty to God and our carriage before
him to the last. To do justly, to give to every one, whether superiors, equals,
or inferiors their due, to do in all things what is equal and right, not
oppressing any, nor def^auding them, in dealing with them in any kind, not to
hurt them by word, or deed, nor injure them in their persons, estates, or good
name, or any thing belonging to them.

It comprehends (says a R. D. Kimchi.
learned Jew) all those commands, which are concerning a Man's behavior, or
dealing, between a Man and his neighbor. R. Tanchum.
Another, says that what it imports is justice and equity, and implies the
taking away all fraud and injuriousness between Men, and likewise comprehends
the avoiding such greediness in following the desires, or lusts, as is hurtful
to the Soul, and such excess in pursuit even of such things as are needful, as
is hurtful to the body, in as much as (...) Mishphat Judgment, right, or just
dealing, is the bringing of every one that has right to his right.

Tirinus.
Some Christians so far extend it as to comprehend all that is due from a man
to God, to men, and to himself, that in all these he give to each what is his
due and right, and perform what Justice requires. Rib^ra. Chapter a Castro.
Others restrain it to a man's doing justice, or judgment in judging himself
impartially for his sins, not indulging to them, or sparing them for his own
sake, or the love he has to them, but condemning them in himself, and himself
for them, and so laboring by judging himself, by casting away his sins and
repen^ing of them, to prevent that he be not judged of the Lord.

In all these ways the word may be perhaps not unfitly applied, and in other
like which it may in its latitude comprehend, and so (as S^e Ta^novins.
some will have the meaning to be) to require obedience to God in all that he
requires to be done (all his commandments being true, just and righteous, and
the perfect rule of justice.)

But comparing these words with those that follow, verse. 10, 11, 12. we may
think doing justly to be more particularly here referred to what is required in
men's dealings between themselves, and others, or their behavior in their
dealing with them, and so are a summing up of the duties of all the
Commandments of the second Table, containing our duty toward our neighbor,
and requiring the performance of them, according to the rule of justice.

And if there be ought, which the rule of Charity may add in the performing of
them, above what men willing to do no more then in rigor of justice they may
think required of them, that is showed in the next words to be amongst that
good which God also requires of them: viz. To love mercy, not only to give to
every one what they might in justice (...) Abarb.
according to men's Laws and known right require, but to be kind, merciful,
pitiful, exercising all acts of Charity and beneficence, which the Letter of
the Law would not force them to, whereby they might be in any kind helpful to
any, and remitting of their own right for the good of others, not being harsh,
cruel, hard hearted, toward them, or exacting upon them; and this willingly,
cheerfully, and out of choice, and without expecting recompense from them, as
the word Love imports. And this also referres to the Commandments of the second
Table, as the meaning of them is summed up by our Savior, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, Mat. XXII. 39. Mark XII. 31. agreeable to that
comprehensive rule of his, All things whatsoever you would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them. Mat. VII. 12. and to that precept of the
Apostle, To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices
God is well pleased. Heb. XIII. 16. Such he here requires. For the question
being put concerning what Sacrifices would be acceptable to God, the answer
mentions not any such as were named, as by them intended, but shows this See
Hos. VI. 6. above cit^d.
to be good, and required.

These two heads seeming thus to refer to, and comprehend the duties of the
second Table, the third comprehends those of the first, viz. And to walk humbly
with thy God [or to humble thy self to walk, or in walking with thy God.] To
walk with God is to frame the life and conversation in respect to God, or for
what concerns a man's behavior before him, or toward him in all things, that
man concern a man betwixt him and God, or pertains to his duty toward him: so
the sense here seems to require that it be understood, though elsewhere it may
seem to signify to adhere to God, and Ribera.
to please him, as Genesis V. 24. it is said Enoch walked with God, which by the
Apostle is interpreted ^e pleased God. Hebr. XI. 5.

In, or for, such walking, it is required of a man, that he humble himself.
This humbling himself or humility is requisite and is to be showed, in his
doing, in his suffering, and in his assent, or believing. 1st In doing, by his
ready taking on him his yoke, and submitting to all his Commandments without
grudging, or resisting ( Aben Ezra.
contrary to that stiff-neckedness so often complained of in the Jews) and not
looking on his own performances as profitable to God, or deserving ought Chapter a
Castro.
from him, but saying when he has done all, I am an unprofitable servant, I
have done what was my duty to do (as our Savior teaches us to say, Luke XVII.
10.) Calvin.
contrary to pride, or confidence in his own doings, and requiring an abasement
of himself, out of consciousness of his own ill deservings, and a relyance only
on Gods mercy and goodness for acceptance, and so working out his Salvation
with fear and trembling. ^hil. II. 12.

Secondly, in s^ffering, viz. He^. XII. 5. Tarnov^us.
that he take in good part whatsoever God shall please to lay on him, and
humble himself in the sight of God, James IV. 10. and under his mighty ^and, I.
Peter V. 6. and in whatsoever he shall suffer according to the will of God,
committing the keeping of his Soul to him in well doing, as unto a faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. IV. 19. without grudging and repining against him, as if he
suffered more then he deserved.

Thirdly, in his assent, and believing, by not replying in any thing against
God, Romans IX. 20. nor murmuring, nor disputing against any of his commands,
Phil. II. 14. b^t re^dily assenting to all that he has said, or required to be
believed, as undoubtedly true, and to what soever he has commanded, as
necessary to be obeyed, and performed, however contrary the one may seem to
man's reason, or the other to his interest, A^arbin^l.
not raising doubts, or scruples against either, and acquiescing in his
revealed truths and will, without searching after the hidden things of God, or
things too high for men to comprehend.

Others (most R. D. Kimchi, R. Tanchum, Abarbinel.
of the Jews) render the word (according to a signification of it used in their
Rabbis) to walk in secret, i. e. in s^ncerity, and uprightly, as heedfully in
secret, where no eye of man sees, as in public in the sight of all, so making
it their end to please God and approve themselves to him, not to make a
Pharisaical show before men, or gain applause from them. Such behavior as our
Savior commends in Alms, Prayer, Fasting, and consequently all such acts of
Piety, as require, not men, but God, which sees in secret, to be witness to,
and judge of them, Mat. VI. 1. etc.

This little differs from the former meaning; they necessarily go together,
sinceri^y and humility, and they cannot be one without the other, both
excluding all pride, and ostentation, and stubbornness, and contradicting.

There are other Translations which render Vulg. Lat.
to walk sollicitous with God, Gre^k, Syriack, and A^abic.
others to be ready or prepared to walk with God. We need not go to prove, that
the word has these significations, as wel^ as the two former, for as long as
it signifies either of the former, either of these will be included in the
meaning, and not ill express it for whosoever walks humbly, or sincerely with
God, will be very sollicitous in the performance of his duty, that he avoid all
things offensive to God, contrary to his will, or word, and be very diligent
also in serving him, ready to assent to all that he shall say, and to submit to
all that he shall require his obedience in.

The words however taken, manifestly (as we said) refer to the Commandments of
the first Table, comprehending, as R. Sol.
a learned Jew notes, the acknowledging of one God, and the loving him with all
the heart, and with all the soul; and so plainly agrees with that sum of that
Table given by our Savior in the forecited Mar. XII. 29, 30. The Lord our God
is one Lord, and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, the performance
of which, together with the other (summing up the second Table) which there
follows, but is here put in the first place, (as they cannot be separated by
any that will please God, and walk uprightly with him) the Scribe there says,
agreeable to what is here intimated, is more then all burnt offerings and
sacrifices, which were never required, nor accepted, but as subservient to
these necessary duties, at all times and at all places good and required,
whereas those were not in themselves absolutely good, nor required, nor
accepted, but with regard to time and place and other circumstances, yea when
not rightly offered Prove. XXI. 27.
abominated, even such as were otherwise permitted by the Law, how much more
such which Jer. VII. 31.
God commanded not, neither came into his heart, such as some in the foregoing
verse mentioned. Now the Jews, or Israel^tes, as appears by the following
verses, stood guilty of the neglect and breach of all these duties of doing
justly, v. 10. etc. of loving mercy, v. 12. of walking humbly, sincerely, or
carefully with God, v. 16. and so long as they continued so, it wa^ in va^ for
them to enquire with what Sacrifices they may come before the Lord, or he may
be pleased and appeased. If they should offer all things most dear to them,
they shall not be able to appease him, or turn away his wrath: He continues to
cry out against them for their sins, and threaten them with his severe
judgments, as See Aben Ezra, of this way of conn^xion.
the following part of the Chapter declares.

9 The Lords voice cries unto the Ci^y, and the man of Wisdom shall s^e thy
name: Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.
The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of Wisdom shall see thy
name: Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.] That there is difficulty in
this verse appears by the different expositions that are given of it, according
to the several judgments of Interpreters. The plainest amongst which seems
that, which is given by diverse both Jews and Christians, agreeable to what our
Translators read in the Text, which a learned R. Ta^ch^m.
Jew thus expounds; By the City is meant either Samaria, or Jerusalem, and
whereas in the Text is said only Wisdom, there is to be supplied Man [the man
of Wisdom] will see thy name, i. e. will apprehend the greatness of thy power,
and learn it; and that which he cries, or proclaims, is what is said, Hear the
rod, i. e. take notice of the punishment, and know who has stirred it up, and
prepared or ordered it, using the name of rod for punishment, because
punishment is inflicted by it, or it is an instrument of punishing. R. D.
Kimchi.
Another much to the same purpose, The Lords voice, that is, the word of the
Prophet prophesying in the name of the Lord, cries to the City, that is, the
People of the City, viz. Jerusalem, or Samaria, calling on them to return by
repentance; but when I the Prophet, says he, proclaim thy words in the midst
of that City, only he that is a man of Wisdom among them will see in the midst
of his heart thy glorious name, and that it is meet to bow before it when the
Prophet mentions it, and mentions his word, but other men will not see: and
that man of Wisdom says to them, Hear the rod, i. e. the rod of punishment,
saying, hear how grievous this decree is, and hear who has appointed this
decree to bring it, for he that has appointed it, can bring it to pass, as he
has appointed it, because there is power in his hand.

These explications seem to give the meaning of the words in the plaine^t
sense, and most agreeable to the letter of the words, of any; yet will it be
expedient for the judging of this, to take notice of others given by
Interpreters both ancient and of great authority.

The Chalde Paraphase thus expounds them, Or perhaps, the voice of the Prophets
of the Lord cry unto the City.
With their voice the Prophets of the Lord cry unto the City, and the Teaclers
fear the name [of the Lord.] Hear o King and Rulers, and the rest of the People
of the Land.

A Jewish R. Solomon,
Rabbin notes, that he interprets not according to the letter: yet need we not
therefore with Grot.
some, who approve the sense by him given, conjecture that he read the words in
the Hebrew text, otherwise then they are now given: he might take the liberty
of a Paraphraser, to give more at large (not tying himself close up to the
words) that which he took to be the meaning. Only we may observe, that what
those before rendered viz. (...) yireh
to see, he will have to signify fear; and so do others also (as we shall see;)
and what is by them rendered rod he seems to take for scepter (as it seems
elsewhere taken) as Psalm. CX. 2. and so to denote the King, or Ruler to whom
it belongs, and then perhaps he might take the following words to signify, And
he who (or whosoever) espouses, or owns it, i. e. acknowledges himself a
subject to that Scepter, or to those that hold it, which are the rest of the
People of the Land. This seems nearer then to introduce a different reading (as
Grotius does for (...) Vmi yeadah, reading (...) Rame veadah.) But this man
has the liberty of a Paraphrast.

Among those that only translate, the LXX. or Greek render, The voice of the
Lord shall cry to the City, and shall save those that fear his name. Hear, o
Tribe, and who shall adorn the City? The vulgar Latin, The voice of the Lord
cries unto the City, and Salvation shall be unto them that fear thy name. Hear
o Tribe, and who will approve it?

In these it is manifest, that what is in the first mentioned Translation
rendered Wisdom, viz. (...) Tus^iah, is taken for Salvation, or safety, not
because they read the word in the Hebrew otherwise then now it is, as Capel us
Crit. ^c. p. 277. See Buxtorf. Vindic. page 682.
some think, but because they took it to signify Salvation, as it is elsewhere
also rendered in the Greek, as Job. XXX. 12. and Prove. II. 7. both in the Greek
and vulgar Latin. That likewise which is rendered see, they take to signify
fear, as the Chalde does, the words that signify the one and the other being
very near in sound, and differing only in the last letter, for as (...) ^ireh
with (...) He in the end does signify shall see, so (...) yir^ with yod in the
end signifies those that fear, or are fearing. And it was anciently an opinion
of R. Japhet in Aben Ezra and R. Tancaum.
a Jew of note, that the (...) He or H in the end was but substituted for i or
yod (as quiescent letters having the same sound are not unfrequently put one
for the other without change of the signification) and the word had the
signification of fear, and the sense to be, they will learn Wisdom, that fear
thy name. Though Aben Ezra thought he was out, yet many we see of great
authority are of the same opinion with him, so far as to take the word in the
signification of fear.

Then as to the word (...) Matteh, which is rendered rod, they preferring
another signification, which it elsewhere often has, render it Tribe. The last
word also which we render appointed it, the Greek rendering shall or will adorn,
may seem to refer it to another root, viz. as if it were a future tense from
(...) Adah to adorn; yet it may be probable enough that they might think the
word (...) yaad, which more usually signifies to appoint, order, or prepare,
might so far extend it self, as to signify also to adorn. And the Latin gives
to it the signification of approving, and the Syriack of testifying to,
rendering the whole verse, The voice of the Lord upon the City preaches
doctrine to those that fear his name, Hear, o Tribe, him who witnesses;
although these also may seem to refer the word to another root, as a more
Munster.
modern Translator, who gives it the same signification, does seem to some to
have done, viz. See Tarnov^us.
to that root from whence is (...) Ed a witness, and is by them blamed, in
regard that no such form, as the word is now read in, can thence be regularly
deduced. But the Author of that modern Translation shows them to be out in
their conjecture concerning his reason of so rendering it, seeing he in a
Munster in his Hebrew Dictionary (...) test-ficatus est.
Dictionary by him compiled, does to the root or verb (...) yaad, for which
they supposed him by mistake to have taken another, give in the first place, as
the prime of all, the signification of witnessing, as he will have a word from
the same root also to signify, Job. IX. 19. as the vulgar Latin there also so
renders it: so that if he be mistaken it is not because he mistook the root,
but because he gave to the root a signification that they think it has not,
but he thought it to have.

Farther yet, by reason of the different acception of the words, much variety
is there among Interpreters, both Jews and Christians. As for the Jews, I
suppose R. Saadias, thou^h he put not his name.
one of good antiquity who translated the Scriptures out of Hebrew into
Arabic, renders the words, The voice of the Lord of the Worlds cries or
proclatmeth to the City, and he that has Wisdom [or understanding] will
proclaim in thy name (...) besmeka, or will declare thy name, Hear the rod, and
who has threatened it [or with it.] The greatest difference in this is, that
the word rendered shall see he seems to render shall show, or declare, or make
known, although otherwise the word which he uses (...) yonadi in another way
of construction, viz. not with the preposition Be, but with an accusative case
may signify shall, or will know, or see, as well, as to make known or declare,
and in which sense he took it may be doubted.

Another of good note (viz. R. Solomon Iarchi) thus expounds the words to this
meaning, The voice of the Prophets of the Lord to the City, who preach to them
repentance, and the Prophet cries or preaches to them (...) Tushiah] Wisdom,
[even the Prophet] which sees thy name, that sets his heart to understand and
see thy ways, [so that (...) Tushiah, Wisdom, is referred to the word cries
going before] Incline your ear, and hear the rod of revenge or punishment which
shall be upon you or chastise you, which the Prophets warn you of, and hear who
it is which has appointed that revenge (or punishment) whether he has power
to make good what he has decreed. This exposition differs but little from what
we saw in the other Jews, and takes the words much in the same signification.

But another, R. D. Kimchi says his Father so interpreted it.
a learned man, and of some antiquity, differs much in the acception of one
word, viz. (...), lair, which others render to the City, and interprets it to
awaken or stir up, viz. to repentance: and that the word may so signify, and
(as to the present verse, if taken by it self) would make a good sense is no
doubt, but that the construction of the words so ordered, as to refer to it in
the 12th verse, require that it should be a noun, and signify to the City, it
being there said the rich men thereof, or of it, i. e. the City called unto and
spoken of; and none else of them therefore follow his opinion.

There is yet Abarbinel.
another Jew of great name among his Nation, yet of latter standing then any of
the aforementioned, and who had seen what they said (and perhaps the ancient
Latin too) who cavils against the first mentioned interpretation, and then
gives another much different from it, and all the rest. His eavils against that
interpretation are, that there is no need of saying the voice of the Lord
cries to the City, if it be understood that the Prophets of the Lord spoke and
preached concerning (or against) the City Jerusalem or Samaria, seeing it is
known that this whole Book is Prophesies of the Prophet. Then that if the word
(...) yireeh, shall see, be referred to the noun (...) Tushiah, Wisdom, it
ought to have been (...) Tireeh in the feminine gender, as the noun is. Then
that wisdom has not eyes to see with, and a name is not a thing to be seen:
and if it be said that here is understood (...) Ish, the man, which is of the
masculin gender, it will yet be to be objected, how it can be said that the man
of wisdom shall see his name; it should be rather said, shall hear (or, hear
of) thy name. The exposition that he, rejecting this, himself gives, taking the
word. (...) Matteh, which we render rod in a clean different signification,
which it is also capable of, is to this purpose: That those of Judah and
Jerusalem above all ought to do justly, and all that God requires, because the
City Jerusalem was that to which above all other Cities the voice of the Lord
cried, i. e. to which the privilege of Prophecy was even peculiarly belonging;
and thy name, o Jerusalem, intimates or imports Wisdom, making the words (...)
yireech shalem, of which he says the name of Jerusalem is compounded, viz.
from what Abraham said the Lord (...) yireeh will see, and shalem, as the City
was called in Melchisedeks time, and (...) yireeh Tushiah, shall see wisdom, to
import the same thing, and citing in confirmation of his opinion what their
Doctors say, The air of Jerusalem makes wise. Hear ye,] both he that perverteth
or turns aside the voice of the Lord, and declineth or turns aside himself
from doing those things which are in the foregoing verse showed, to be good and
required; and he that has espoused or addicted himself to wisdom, or that
Godly course; or else, and him that has appointed it to come upon them, so
that the meaning is, He that perverteth the voice of the Lord, and turns it
contrary to what it commands, he is truly a wicked person, and worthy of much
punishment, but he that espouseth or takes to himself wisdom shall be
delivered from it. This is the import of his words, in which his cavils or
objections against the former interpretation, are f^ivolous. To the first he
cannot himself dissemble that there is an answer before hand given by supplying
the man, which he cannot deny to be allowable here as well as in (...) Any
T^phillah, I am prayer, i. e. a man of prayer, Ps. CIX. 4. and as for the
other, viz. that it were proper to say shall hear, not shall see thy name,
seems captiously sought, that by disparaging that interpretation he might make
way for his own; for he well knew that the word signifying see, is not
restrained only to the sight of the eyes, but taken as well for the sight of
the mind See R. Tanchum on Jer. II. 31.
to perceive, to understand, to be aware of, to take notice of, to observe, to
consider, and the like, yea even to hear also, and what is the office of other
senses, as well as of the seeing, or else why may he not as well quarrel at
what is said, Ier. II. 31. See ye the word of the Lord; and Ex. XX. 18. and all
the People saw (...) K^loth, the voices, or thunderings, and, see the smell of
my son, Genesis XXVII. 27. As for his own exposition, it is so far fetched and so
harsh, that few we may suppose w^^l embrace it: and we had not need to have
mentioned it, but for the great name and credit of the man, lest any should
think that so famous an Expo^^tor had said something better then others, which
had not been taken notice of. It is his custom to censure others, and to strive
to bring something that others had not said, but not always better, as
manifestly here.

There is yet difference betwixt modern Christian Interpreters, some taking the
words in the same way and order of construction as they are in the text of our
translation; and the difference betwixt them is from the different
significations that they take the words in. The first word (...) Tushiah, which
is rendered the man of wisdom [by supplying the man] Munster.
others making the same supply, render the man of safety, or Salvation shall
see thy name. See Christ. a Castro, and see Ar. Mont.
Others without that supply, wisdom shall, etc. Of the proper signifi^ation of
the word more shall be said by and by.

Then the word rendered shall see Ar. Most.
others render shall fear, which one thus explaineth Grot.
, When the voice of the Lord cries to the City it is wisdom (or the part of
wisdom) if any shall (or for any to) fear thy name, i. e. revere or dread thy
Majesty. They seem to think it more proper to say one shall fear thy name, then
shall see, etc. yet in this is no impropriety, seeing having those acceptions
which we have before seen; and to say they shall see his name in the Prophet
that cries in his name, i. e. perceive that the name of his God is in him, that
the word is not the word of man, but the word of God, and evidenceth his power
and Majesty; is very intelligible language, and will amount to as much as to
fear, and necessarily produce it. But it cannot be doubted that the word (...)
yireeh more regularly and Grammatically signifies shall or will see, then fear.

Fart^er, the words rendered who has appointed, Jun. Tremell.
some of them render who calls for it, Munst. Calvin.
others who attests it, or bears witness to it, and the like: but these are
without difficulty reconciled.

Jun. Treme^ Capell. Tarnov. Dutch Notes.
Others do beside the different acception of some words clean invert the
construction, in the middle part of the verse, putting that last which others
put first, and rendering it, and thy name shall see, or does see that which is,
i. e. as some of them explain it, whatsoever is done in the City, in as much as
all things are open to thine eyes, and thou see all the wickedness that is
committed in the City, or the ver^ being of whatsoever is, as it is, and
whatsoever is most secret and hidden in it, therefore thou criest unto it, i.
e. the inhabitants of it, and reprehendest them, and threatnest them for their
e^il doings, and they ought to hearken, those reprehensions and threats ought
to be heard, harkened, and attended to.

That which makes them choose thus to place the words in the construction, and
to prefer this rendering before the other, seems to be, because that they
suppose it to be more agreeable to analogy of Grammar, because in joining (...)
yireeh ^o (...), and rendering it wisdom shall (or will) see, the noun rendered
wisdom is the feminine gender, and the verb shall see the masculine; but to
this we suppose a sufficient answer has been See Tarnovius and Buxtorf.
Vindic. p. 682.
already given by saying that (...) Ish, a man, or the man, which is of the
masculine gender is here understood, and so the verb answers to that. And it
would be easy to illustrate it by other examples besides that already cited out
of Psalm CIX. 4. in which the thing expressed implies and denotes the person in
whom it is, or to whom it pertains, as Prove. XIII. 6. Wickedness overthrows
sin, i. e. the man Abe^ Ezra.
of sin or sinner, and Prove. XX. 1. Wine, for a man of wine, with other like
taken notice of by See Glass. Gram. page 488.
Grammarians. And again, it is not unusual to find a verb of the masculine
gender coupled with a noun of the feminine form, as in (...) Amar k^heleth, if
that be to be accounted a feminine Eccl. I. 2. and Eccl. VII. 8. A gift
destroys the heart. The noun (...) Mattanah signifying gift is feminine, and
the verb (...), yeabhed, destroys, mas^. with many others also which See
Buxt-Gram. Lib. II. cap. 10.
Grammarians observe: so that here seems no objection in prejudice to that
translation.

As for the signification of (...) Tushiah, which in our text is rendered
wisdom, and they render that which is, it will be convenient to speak
something, because it will have influence on all the Translations for adjusting
them. It is taken to come from a verb (...) yashah (though not in use, but
(...) yesh put for it) which signifies to be or exist, or be in being, or have
existence, and this noun thence derived to signify primarily being, existence,
solidity, or firmness, and thence to be translated to signify the Law and
wisdom, and any good and right action, because, says R. D. Kimchi here, and in
Rad. where Elias Levita s^ies according to R. Levi Ben Ger om, that this noun
properly signifies any right, or good way, or law, which it is conveni^nt for a
man to con^o in himself to, and that therefore the law and wisdom are denoted
by that name, (...) Tushiah.
Kimchi, the Law and wisdom remain firm and permanent when all other things
turn to nothing. It is sometimes translated by our Translators wisdom, as here,
and so Job VI. 13. and C. XII. 16. and Prove. XVIII. 1. sometimes sound wisdom,
as Prove. II. 7. and C. III. 21. and C. VIII. 14. sometimes substance, as Job.
XXX. 22. or as in the Margin wisdom, sometimes enterprise, or as in the Margin
any thing, Job. V. 12. sometimes the thing as it is, Job. XXVI. 3. or that
which is, as Job. XI. 6. and here in the Margin, sometimes working (or work) as
Isaiah XXVIII. 29. These are most, if not all, of the places in which this word
occurs in the Scriptures, in which how it is by other Translators rendered who
pleases may see, and judge which comes nearest the signification of the root. It
is enough to our present purpose to see how ours have done it: and then when it
shall be observed that it is equally agreeable to Grammar rules, which of the
two nouns be put first in the construction, whether the noun (...) Tushiah,
which the first interpretation puts foremost, as it stands in place so in
construction, rendering the man of wisdom shall see thy name, or (...) Shemeca
thy name, which the last puts first in the construction Thy name shall or does
see that which is, it will be left to the Reader to choose which he will to
follow, for among all the Translations cited, these two seem the simplest and
le^st forced. An^ s^e Diodat. and the Dutch Translation.
Diverse, as we said prefer the latter; our Translators, that the Reader may
have his liberty, give both, the one in the text, the other in the Margin; by
putting the first in the text they seem most to incline to that, and upon due
consideration it may seem reason to agree with them in it to this sense, The
voice of the Lord by the Prophet cries unto the City to stir them up to
repentance, and who so is wise will, O Lord (and cannot but) see thy name in
that Prophet, and acknowledge him to be thy Messenger, and the word in his
mouth to be thy word and not his own, while he cries, It would not be far from
this to render, with a mod^rn Jew, The voice of the Lord cries, and the man of
wisdom which sees thy name (i. e. the Prophet) cries Hear etc. Aben-dan^ in
Michl^l yophe.
Hear the rod, and who has appointed it, hear what severe judgments are
threatened against you, and who it is that threatens them; he that is able to
bring to pass whatsoever he says, that so being aware hereof you may seek to
make your peace with him by timely repentance, for as the case stands, you are
in manifest danger. There are grievous sins with you to provoke him to use
great severity, and the judgments that he has determined to bring upon you,
except you prevent him by breaking off your sins by repentance, are very
severe. That Gods justice and righteousness may [in all this cont^oversy v. 2.]
appear, both their sins contrary to what God requires of them, v. 8. and his
judgments that he denounces against them, are in the following verses
declared, See Calvin on verse. 6. etc.
all that he might bring them into the right way, and they might escape the
danger being warned of it.

VERSE. 10. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?
Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked? etc.]
Such difference is there between Interpreters in the rendering of this verse
also, that it cannot but seem strange, till the reason and ground of that
variety be looked into. That rendering which our Translators put in the Text is
agreeable to what the Chalde Paraphrast, the ancientest of Jewish Interpreters
has, (understanding in him as well as in the Hebrew in, viz. in the house, or
at the house, otherwise his words may sound, Is there yet the house of the
wicked, treasures of wickedness?) and to what an ancient Arabic translation
done out of the Hebrew has, and some of the best Abu Walid, R. Solomon, D.
Kimchi.
Hebrew Grammarians, as well skilled as any in their own language direct to,
and diverse modern Munster, etc.
Interpreters follow. But our Translators give in the Margin another rendering
also, viz. [Is there] yet unto every man an house of the wicked? The difference
betwixt this and the former is from hence, that what is in the former rendered,
are there, is in this rendered every man; and that interpretation of the word is
by many likewise, both Jews and Christians abetted, viz. the rendering of the
word by man, and then making the construction so as it is in the Marginal
rendering, or [Is there] ^et a man of a house of the wicked etc. any that has,
or, has any man, or, every man Grot.
an house gotten by wicked means, and treasures heaped together by rapin,
unjustice, and like ways, etc. or to like purpose. Another, every man in the
City is not only wicked by himself, Abarbinel.
but has also scant measure. Another, Abu walid.
O man, is there yet in the house, etc. Some by the same work take to be
signified not barely a man, R. Ta^chum.
but a man of greater degree and dignity, and expound it, Is the man of renown
and dignity, or great place among them, (or without an interrogation, the man
of, etc. is etc.) yet in the house of the wicked, taking part or going shares
with him in raking together by fraud and oppression, and for this means using
false and scant measure, which is abominable, hateful, and displeasing unto the
Lord? Ab. Ezra.
Or, notwithstanding all that the Lord has cried, his house is still as the
house of the wicked, filled with treasures wickedly gotten, etc.

Abendana in Michlol yophe.
A modern Jew takes it to signify the man, i. e. says he, that man of wisdom,
viz. the Prophet, spoken of in theforegoing verse, and then in reference both
to the preceding and following words thus expounds it, The man of wisdom that
sees thy name, cries aloud to them in the streets and open places, Hear the
rod, and who has appointed it; and besides this he goes into the houses of the
wicked to reprove them for their doings, and to warn them, and yet they give
not heed unto him to turn from their evil ways; that is it which he says, yet
the man is in the house of the wicked, as much as to say, while as yet the
Prophet is in the house of the wicked, wherein are treasures of wickedness and
scant measure, which is abominable, crying with (or uttering) the voice of the
Lord, and reproving him for his iniquity, and saying unto him, Shall I count
them pure, etc. and threatening him with evil from the Lord, saying, thou shall
eat but not be satisfied, etc. even then this very while, while the man, the
Prophet, reproves and warns the wicked in his house, the statutes of Omri are
kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their evil
counsels, and leave the good counsel of the Prophet, and will have none of his
reproofs. This exposition, as novel and differing from all others, I thought
good to set down at large, that the Reader might judge of it; perhaps he will
find some harshness in it.

Another acception of the word we have yet in some Versions very ancient, and
of great authority, in which it is rendered fire. So the Greek, coupling it with
the preceding words according to their Version, who shall adorn the City? shall
fire and the house of the wicked treasuring up treasures of wickedness? etc.
Doway Tr^nslat.
So the vulgar rendering it, as yet there is fire in the house of the impious,
treasures of iniquity, and a lesser measure full of wrath. So the Syriack also,
and the printed Arab, who follows here the Greek, take it to signify fire; and
a R. Joseph Kimchi, R. D. Kimchi's Father. See Ki^chi in lib. Rad. in (...).
See James v. 3. See Rib^ra.
learned Jew also, who expounds it, There shall be yet, or perpetuall^, a fire
in the house of the wicked, by reason of the treasures of wickedness, etc. i.
e. those treasures unjustly gotten shall be as perpetual fire to consume him,
and all that he has. This of his expounding it will be convenient to observe,
that it may not be thought necessary to say, that those others which take the
word in this signification did read otherwise then is now usually read in the
Hebrew, viz. (...) Haesh instead of (...), for it is certain that he did not,
and why should it be thought they did? that he did not we shall presently see,
in giving the reason of this variety of rendrings: the reason is a seeming
ambiguity in one word, viz. (...) Haish in which (...) ha makes not in it self
ought as to to the signification, but as it is subservient to the following
syllable (...) Ish, either as a particle of interrogation or admiration,
according to some, Kimchi.
who say that the vowel pathach which it has, shows it here to be; or as an
article put before a noun according to others. Then the word (...) Ish written
only with aleph, having the vowel Chirek, that is (i) underwrit, for being a
consonant in the Hebrew language (though put as answering to A the first letter
of our Alphabet, which is it self a vowel) has no found of it self, but
according to the vowell that is joined with it, and therefore as having here
the vowell Chirek (i. e. i) it is read (...) ish, so if it had the vowel Tzeri
(i. e. e) it would be read (...) Esh, which undoubtedly signifies fire, and the
Kimchi R^d. in (...).
forementioned learned Jew thinks it, though read with Chirek, or i, to have
here the same signification, as other words that he instanceth in, viz. Job.
XLI. 12. though it be there written (...).
(...) chen, and (...) chin, (...) ben and (...) ^in have the same
signification when written with tzere, i. e. e, and when written with chirek,
i. e. i, the first grace, the second a son, and so therefore he would have it
to be rendered fire, as likewise others (as we said;) not because they read it
otherwise then it is now usually read. But others think the difference of the
sound and vowell to import a difference in the signification too, and therefore
looking more to the sound then the letters, take it here to be the same in
signification with the word (...), which sounds, as this does Ish, and
signifies a man, It is a Rabbi^ical descan^ of Aba^bia^l, that perhaps it is
here wri^t^n without that le^t^r, to intimate tha^in the house of the wicked
man, shall be a fi^e ^o blown, Job. XX. 26. which shall consum^ it.
though that be usually written with another letter, viz. yod [or i] between
(...) and (...), which serves only to make the vowel longer, and otherwise
makes no difference in the sound, for that it is not unusual to have that
letter omitted in the expressing the vowel without altering the signification.
And that so it is both here and also II Sam. XIV. 19. the only other place
where the word is found thus written; and in both they would therefore have it
signify man (and there our Translators seen so to have taken it.) Others,
thirdly, seeing it is neither written as (...) Esh, fire, nor (...) man, take
it to have a different signification from either of them, viz. the same with
the word (...) yesh, and to denote that which in our language, is agreeing to
it in sound, is, or is there, or in the plural number are there: so both here
and in that other place (II Sam. 14.) will they have it See R. Sol. Ja^chi, R.
Isai^h, R. Levi o^ the II Sam. 14.
to signify: (and by the way it may be observed, that in that place the Greek
and ancient Latin so render it, though here otherwise, It is not (i. e. not
possible) to turn.) And for confirmation of this makes not only the authority of
the ancient Chalde Paraphrast, who, as we said, so here renders it, but the
word also which he in that dialect expresses it by, viz. (...) Ith, which (as
also the same See de Dieu on the pl^ce.
in the Syriack dialect) seems made from this, only by changing (...) sh into
(...) t, as is usual in words taken in those dialects out of the Hebrew, as
also (...) Ais See Kamu, and Golius in (...)
in the Arabic here used in the ancient MS Translation, which all write this
word with Aleph in the beginning, as here it is written, and use it to signify
is. (It may be observed also that (...) See Kimchi, Rad. ^n (...) and Schi^dle^.
written full, with all the letters that it usually has when it signifies a
man, is by some of the Jews said to signify is, or are, or there be, Prove.
XVIII. 24. and so there rendered by the Chaldee and Syriack Interpreters.) This
rendering has as good authority, and as probable proofs for it as any, and
therefore do we look on it as well preferred to be read in the Text by our
Translators, seeing it makes the clearest sense of any; and so the words of
this verse are (as indeed according to any of the Translations) a reproof of
those spoken to, or of, for notorious injustice, and sins, contrary to what God
requires in the first place, V. 8. viz. to do justly, and that whether spoken
R. Solomon Ja^ch, Kimchi on this place, and in Rad. Va^abl.
by way of question, or admiration, that after so much calling on, and warning,
they should p^rsist in their wickedness, and continue to do such things as they
are charged withal; or whether as if God, in the person C^lvin.
of a Judge, did question and examine them concerning those things, that so
their guilt, and his justice in punishing them, might be made manifest. The
things they are charged with are, that they retain still in their hoases
treasures of wickedness, goods gotten by ill and unjust means, and that for
lucres sake they keep scant measures, whereby to give forth in their selling
less then they should, and as it is added in the ^ext verse, wicked or false
balances, and deceitful weights, C^ald. Kimchi, G^otius.
light ones to fell wi^h, and heavy ones to buy with. For the scant measure our
Translators put in the Margin Measure of leanness, to show that the word so
signifies literally in the Hebrew, but by that every one will easily perceive
to be meant that which is scant, or less then it should be, not of just
bigness: and such measure is said to be abominable, hateful to the Lord, and
highly provoking him to anger, as also are false balances and deceitful
weights, as Prove. XI. 1. A false balance is an abomination unto the Lord, and
Prove. XX. 10. Diverse weights and diverse measures, both of them are alike
abomination to the Lord. And so false balances are not good, V. 23. So Amos
VIII. 5. they are reproved for making the Ephah (which is the word here rendered
measure, it being the name of the measure chiefly Grot.
of dry things) small, and the shekell great, and falsifying the balances by
deceit. All these are contrary to the express Commandment of God, L^vit. XIX.
35, 36. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight,
or in measure: just balances, just weights, and a just Epha, and a just hin
shall ye have; and Deuteronomy. XXV. 13, 14, 15, 16. Thou sh^lt not have in thy bag
diverse weights, a great and a small, nor in thine house diverse measures, etc.
For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are an abomination
unto tie Lord thy God, they cannot be in themselves pure or justifiable, nor
will God in any wise justify them, or account them just, as in the next words
follows.

11 Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights?
Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances? etc.] In the Margin ^ur
Translators put, ^or, shall I be pure with? etc. The word (...) Ezceh in the
form that it is here put, may seem most regularly to signify I shall be pure or
ju^^ intran^^ely; and if so here taken, mu^t be understood, as if the Prophet
should speak in the person of any of the people, R. D. Kimchi.
or to show what every one of them ought to say with himself, the question
importing a denying of the thing, and to be as much as to say, I cannot
certainly be pure or just with such things, and so implying, As I would be
co^nted pure therefore, I ought to put them from me, or else I shall jus^^ be
punished by God, or R. Tanchum.
as some think the letter (...) He prefixed, signifies rather an affi^mation
then a question, a report of what every one of them did sa^, Cer^ainly I shall
be pure though I use false balances, etc. or with a supply of, Will thou say I
shall be pure, etc. or as if the Prophet should speak in his own person,
Abar^^el.
Should I, though a Prophet, and taking heed to the rest of my ways, be pure
if I used false balance, etc. no surely; much less then, they who are otherwise
also wicked, and add this to their many other transgressions hereafter
mentioned, with which alone it were impossible they should be looked on as pure
or innocent.

The Chalde, and Greek, and Syriack changing the person, Shall they, or he, be
justified, seem to have had regard to the meaning more then to the word, which
is in the first person, Shall I, etc.

Vulg. Lat. See R. Tanchum, Munster, Jun. Tr^m^l. Grot.
Others, both Jews and Christians, as ours in the Text, take the word here to
signify tra^sitively, and to be spoken as in the person of God, Shall I justify
or account them pure, and deal with them as so? A Christian Calvin.
Interpreter of great note, who takes the words in the same signification that
ours do, yet proposes another meaning, which he says will perhaps be
presenable to this purpose, Are^ there yet, etc. i. e. yet a little while and
the treasures of wickedness shall not be found in the house of the wicked, etc.
for they shall be violently taken from them, for God will not justify them, nor
defend them in such doings, but will severely punish them for them. But the
former sense seems plainer.

12 For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof
have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.
For the rich men thereof are full of violence, etc.] These doings of theirs,
here charged on them, are Abarbinel.
contrary to that second head of those good things which God requires of them,
verse 8. viz. to love mercy, for to that is violence (such as he described C.
II. v. 2.) apparently cont^ary. For, or R. Tanchum.
as for the rich man, etc. or, so it is that the rich men thereof are, etc.

[Thereof] i. e. of the City mentioned, v. 9. are full of violence, i. e. R. D.
Kimchi.
have their houses filled with goods taken away from others by violence and
oppression, or are wholly given to violence and oppression, even they who have
enough of their own, and need not to take from others; and the inhabi^ants
thereof, the other inhabitants thereof, says a learned R. D. Kimchi.
Jew, that have not so much power in their hands, for any advantage to
themselves, spare not to ly and speak deceit.

i barb.
Another expounds this of the inhabitants thereof in general, that they speak
against God, or falsely concerning him, saying, The Lord s^eth us not, or the
Lord has forsaken the Earth, as those Ezech. C. VIII. 12. and C. IX. 9. or as
he says, Hos. VII. 13. they have spoken lies against me, and so he makes what
is here spoken contrary to that third thing required, v. 8. viz. to walk humbly
or sincerely with God: but of their sinning, contrary to that, he seems more
clearly to speak, v. 16.

13 Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee
desolate, because of thy sins.
Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, etc.] Having declared
some of those sins for which he cried unto the City, he now in part describes
that rod which he bad them to hear, those punishments with which he appointed
to chastise them.

I will make sick, thee O City, or inhabitant of the City, so Va^ab.
supplying the person which in the Hebrew is not expressed; in smiting thee, I
will so smite thee as to make thee sick. As thou by using violence and
oppression have made sick the heart of the poor oppressed, so will I by my
Abarb.
grievous and severe punishments make thee sick, or a^flict thee, by a grievous
stroke, and by bringing desolation on thy sins, or on on thee for such thy
iniquities, [or as Kimchi.
Some according to another signification, to cause men to wonder and be
astonished at my severe punishing thee for thy sins.] Instead of I will make
thee sick, several ancient Greek, Sir. Arab. Vulg. Lat.
Interpreters render, I also will begin to smite thee, or I have began to smite
thee, and so also some more Munst.
modern; the occasion of which seems a likeness between (...) Chalal and (...)
Chalah, the roots of those verbs, whereof one signifies to make sick, the other
to begin: so that they thought the same signification to belong to both. For so
Munster in his Dictionary shows himself to have done, putting this word, as he
says, according to the opinion of some under the root (...) Chalal, yet
reading it, as it is usually now read, whereas more regularly it should belong,
as others put it, to (...).

14 Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied, and the casting down shall be in the
midst of thee, and thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver: and that which
thou deliverest, will I give up to the sword.
Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied, etc.] He here more particularly Abarb.
reckons up some of those punishments with which he will strike them, and make
them sick, and to languish or be wasted even to desolation. And for punishment
of their greediness of heaping up more then enough by unlawful means, he
threatens that they shall eat, but not be satisfied, viz. the curse of God
going along with what they eat, it shall Kimchi. See Drus.
not satisfy nor nourish with wholesome nourishment, but shall, as the Chalde
and some other See R. Solomon, and see Tarnov.
Jews add for explication of the following words, breed in thee Verse. Syriac.
evil diseases, and pains in thy bowels, which shall bow thee down, and cause
thee to couch and stoop. It is not meant, says Abarbinel.
one of them, of want or scarcity of what they might eat, but that the
digestive faculty in them should be vitiated, weakened, and corrupted, that it
should not perform its duty, and so though they eat they should no: be
satisfied. Both these are elsewhere called the breaking of the staff of bread,
viz. the not giving virtue to nourish, and taking away sufficiency. But Ribera,
G^ otius.
others understand it of scarcity and want of what may satisfy them, that which
they have to eat shall not be sufficient for that purpose: and so where the
very same words occurs, Levit. XXVI. 26. it seems to be understood: and the
following words, thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee, Kimchi, Dutch
Notes.
others take as a description of a differing punishment from the former,
expounding in the midst of thee, not of their bowels, but of their City or own
Country, in that thou shall be brought low before thy carrying into captivity,
there thou shall with many evils, which shall bring thee down, be asfflicted in
the Siege; or, the cause of your destruction shall not be so much from without
from others, as from within your selves, Ribera. Menoch.
your own sins shall pull it on you, or, Calvin.
though no enemy from abroad should infest thee, there shall befall thee evils
at home, as in thy own bowels, by which thou shall be consumed, and brought
down through the Curse of God upon thee. These senses are not so different but
that they may all be comprehended in the words.

Thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver, etc.] What they shall take hold
of, and what not deliver, or what is the meaning of these phrases, is
questioned. The Ab. Walid. Ab. Ezra, R. D. Kimchi.
Jews for the most part expound it of taking hold of seed or conception, and
not delivering to be not bringing forth a mature birth, but miscarrying by
abortion, not being safely delivered; as if he should say, Thy women shall
conceive and be with child, but shall miscarry, and not bring forth. The word
(...) Tasseg is such as may be rendered either in the second person masculin,
Thou shall take hold, or in the third person feminine, she shall take hold, and
so the other verb (...) Taphlit, either thou shall not deliver, or she shall
not deliver: and Calvin.
some learned men like well that it should so be taken in the third person s^e,
i. e. the woman, or thy wife. But this need not nicely to be insisted on, as
making a difference; for if it be said of a Nation or Inhabitants of a City,
Thou shall conceive but not bring forth, it will easily be understood to be
meant, thy women in thee, and so, and that which thou deliverest, i. e. those
children which thy women bring forth, or are delivered of, will I give up to
the sword to be slain by the enemy, and so will the second person be kept, as
in the other words, Thou shall eat, etc. Thy casting down, etc. thou shall sow,
etc.

Abarb. (...).
Another Jew, who makes the sense much the same, yet refers this word (...) to
another root, so as to signify See Cant. VII. 2.
shall encompass or shut up, meaning their wombs should through corrupt humors
be as shut up. (so it is said Genesis XX. 18. that God had closed up all the wombs
of the house of Abimelech) But this, though coming to the same purpose, yet as
to the derivation of the word seems far fetched.

Diodat.
Others by that which they should take hold of, think meant their goods, or
part of them if they could: but i^ is manifest that what is spoken of must be
persons from what follows, that they shall be given up to the sword. Ribera, Sa.
Others, therefore, understand it of their children. R. Sol.
Others rendering the word a little differently, Thou shall overtake the
enemies, which lead away thy sons and daughters into captivity, but shall not
rescue them, and if thou rescue any of them, their end shall be to be destroyed
by the sword. Jun. Trem. l. Pis^ Tarnov.
Others yet, understanding the things spoken of to be their wives and children,
and what is most precious to them, yet interpret the verb in a far different
sense, viz. Thou shall remove them out of the way, and hide them, to save them
if thou can, but shall not be able to save them from the enemies hand; and
what thou savest for a while, I will at last deliver to the sword: and it is
manifest that the word is used in both these significations, whether written
with (...) Samech or (...) Shin, as we said C. II. v. 6. Calvin.
Others make the person spoken to, the Land or City, that shall end^avor to
hold fast and keep safe her people, but not be able to do it.

15 Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reap: thou shall tread the olives, but
thou shall not anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but shall not drink wine.
Thou shall sow but shall not reap, etc.] The like judgments are threatened
Levit. XXVI. 16. and Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 30. and forward to verse. 38, 39, 40, 41,
etc. Amos V. 11. Hagg. I. 6. Kimchi.
Sweet Wine, i. e. grapes to make sweet wine; for they are them that are
troden', not the wine it self. Abarbinel goes particularly to adapt the
judgments to their sins against what is required V. 8. but not so fully to the
purpose.

16 ^ For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of
Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels, that I should make thee a desolation, and
the inhabitants thereof an ^issing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my
people.
For the statutes of Omri are kept, etc. In the Margin our Translators put, or
He does much keep the statutes, etc.] The reason is because the word (...)
yishtammer is such as may signify either passively it is kept, or it shall be
kept, for it is the future tense, but that is used to signify the present, and
sometime also the time past, especially when it has the letter (...) V before
it, which signifies and; or else he does warily keep or shall keep it. And
whereas the verb is of the singular number, and the noun joined with it
(according to the first rendering) of the plural, that is easily salved by an
usual observation in such cases, by understanding every one of the statutes,
which would be the singular, and so it is by the Aben Ezra, Kimchi, R. Tanchum.
Jewish Interpreters salved: and so in the second rendering, He does much keep,
etc. to make it agree with what preceds spoken to them in the second person,
and with what follows and ye walk (in the plural number and second person) may
be supplied, See Pi^c.
every one of you does keep.

A learned R. Tanc^.
Jew here observes, that when a Nation or People is spoken to, that sometimes
they are spoken to or of, in the masculin gender, sometimes in the feminine,
sometimes in the singular number, sometimes in the plural; and we may add that
it is likewise not unusual to Glass. Gram. sacr. p. 910.
change persons without interruption in the sentence, so as that the same
person may seem to be spoken of, as absent, and to, as present in the same
sentence: and this being observed, will keep the Reader from being troubled
with such seeming difference, where it occurs; and therefore the vulgar Latin
and Syriack, though not observing the third person used in the Original, but
rendering in the second Thou have kept, may be thought to have given the meaning
well enough. What See Vatabl. Calvin, Chapter a Castr^.
others give for the meaning, literally rendering the word in the future, The
statutes of Omri etc. will be kept, as if it were by way of prediction, and he
should say, that notwithstanding all that had been or should be said, or done
to them, they would continue still in their perverseness, and run on in their
wicked Idolatrous courses; seems not so proper to the place, wherein they seem
charged with sins that they were already guilty of, rather then to tell them
what God saw they they would do, till they had pulled upon themselves utter
destruction.

The sins that they are here accused of, are the keeping the statutes of Omri,
and the works of the house of Ahab, and walking in their counsels, by which
what is meant will easily be discerned, by looking into the History of those
two Kings of Israel, as set down in the 16th Chapter of the first Book of
Kings, where is showed how both Omri and his son Ahab set up and established
such wa^es of Idolatry, as Jeroboam had brought into Israel; and did even worse
things to the preve^ting and extirpating the true worship of God, and from them
did the Kings of Judah learn to do the like, and establish, as by a law, the
like wicked ways and things as they did, among the Jews also: for so of
Iehoram, King of Judah, it is said, that he walked in the way of the Kings of
Israel, as did the house of Ahab, II Kings VIII. 18. and verse. 27. of his son
Ah^ziah, that he aid evil in the sight of the Lord, as did the house of Ahab,
as also II Chron. XXV. 6. etc. and XXVI. 3. so of Ahaz II Kings XVI. 3. so of
Manassch King of Judah, II Kings XXI. 3. so that whereas there is difference
betwixt Interpreters whether the things here spoken be meant of Samaria or
Jerusalem, or Israel or Judah, or both, from the words themselves there is no
certain direction, for determining either on the one side or the other, except
there were some way to show whether this particular part of the Prophecy were
spoken before the taking of Samaria, or after it (as Abarb.
some think it was) inasmuch as our Prophet prophesied in the days of Iotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah (in the 6th year of whose Reign Samariah was taken, II Kings
XVIII. 10.) both concerning Samariah and Jerusalem; and it is manifest that
both Kingdoms were guilty of these sins, of keeping the statutes of Omri, and
all the works of the house of Ahab, and walking in their counsels, as it is
said of Ahaziah, that he walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, because his
mother was his counselor to do wickedly, and that he did evil in the sight of
the Lord, because they were his counselors, after the death of his father to
his destruction, and he walked after their counsel, II Chron, XXII. 3, 4, 5.

As for these sins, they are manifestly contrary to what is required in the
third place, V. 8. viz. to walk humbly or sincerely with God, whereas he
required that they should acknowledge him alone the only true God, and worship
him in those ways by himself prescribed, they forsaking him, set up and
worshipped false Gods, according to the statutes and ways by those wicked
Kings introduced, and followed therein their counsels, directions and
prescriptions. What heavy judgments on their so doing should ensue the next
words declare, viz.

That I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing,
etc. Therefore ye shall bear, etc.] Here is that change of persons and numbers
and genders, which we before mentioned. Thee in the second person singular,
inhabitants thereof (i. e. of that City) in the third person and feminine
gender, and ye shall bear, the second person plural masculin, all spoken of the
same person, viz. the City, or the Inhabitants thereof.

That I should make thee.] That does not here denote the final cause or
intention, as if for this end God would ^ave it so, that they should do such
things that he might bring them to destruction, or that it was Dr^s. Tarnov.
their intention by so doing to pull on themselves destruction, but to show the
necessary consequen^e from their wicked doings to his judgments, that seeing
they continued perverse^y in such their doings, it would necessarily follow
(justice so requiring) that they should by him be so punished, and he would
make them a desolation, or as the Margin So the Syriack.
an astonishment, which will necessarily follow on the other, viz. when all
that behold how a Nation lately so flourishing was made desolate, should be
astonished (as Ier. XVIII. 16. and XIX. 6.) (the word indifferently signifying,
and so including both) and the Inhabitants thereof an hissing: That they that
see what is befallen them, shall hiss at them in token of scorn and derision.
The like expressions are used in several other places, as Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 37. 1
Kings IX. 7, 8. 11 Chron. XX^ X. Ier. XXV. 9, and 18. and C. XXIX. 18. and
XLIX. 17. and ^I. 37. Lam. II 15, 16.

Therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my People. As to the signification of
these words, Interpreters do not at all differ, yet in the giving of the
meaning of them in other words do much differ, R. Tanchum, Ab. Ezra, D. Kimchi.
Vatabl.
some thus expounding them, Reproach, in lieu of that reproach wherewith ye
have reproached my People, i. e. the poor innocent oppressed ones [which the
violent oppressing rich and great men have reproachfully and contumeliously
used] the reproach which the Heathen shall cast upon you shall be a recompense
or punishment of that. Jun. Tremel. Tarn. etc.
Others, that reproach wherewith in my Law I threatened my People if they should
forsake me; and those whom I had chosen to my self for a peculiar People, and
done so great things for, as are called to their mind, V. 4, 5. justly deserve
for their unthankfulness and rebellions against me. Gro^ Stokes, Ribera.
Others, ye (O ye rich men, V. 12.) shall bear the reproach of having pulled
all those evils on my People; they shall lay the reproach and shame on you for
it. Aba binel.
Others looking on this as spoken to the Kingdom of Judah and Jerusalem, after
that Samaria was taken, and the Israeli^es, or ten Tribes carried captives,
take it as a threat that the like should befall Jerusalem as had befallen
Samaria, and that the same reproach which the ten Tribes (whom they think meant
by my People) had suffered, the other two should also ere long bear, and
shamefully be led into captivity, as they already were, and their Kingdom also
be laid wast. Id. and see Calv.
Or that they should not think to wear out the shame of their evil doings among
other Nations, but should still continue to be reproached, for that being the
People of God, they had forsaken him, and by their evil doings had provoked him
to cast them out of his Land. Calvin.
Some by reproach understand those greater punishments which they should bear,
for that having been by God owned for his People, they had not esteemed as they
ought their privilege, nor behaved themselves worthy of it; (compare Amos III.
2.) or as the Reverend Diodate expresses it, the ignominious punishment for
having profaned the name and title of being my People and Church by your sins,
according to what is said, Ezech. XXXVI. 20. And when they entered unto the
Heathen whither they went, they profaned my holy Name, when they said to them,
these are the People of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his Land (and see
Romans II. 24.) and others perhaps otherwise give the meaning; so that the words
plainly signifying as they are in our Translation rendered, it will be left to
the judgment of the Reader to take that exposition, which he conceives to give
the most genuine and fullest meaning of them. What additions to, or difference
from other Translations are in this verse found in the Greek, and Arab.
such as follow them, will not be to our purpose much to insist on, or inquire
into, that intended by us being to see what expositions the Hebrew, as now read
(of the sincerity and incorruptness of which reading we make no doubt) will
admit, that so the Reader may take his choice, seeing Nobilius, Capellus, ^pag.
251.
they that make it their business to adjust and justify that Version, give no
good account of it; only whereas some, because they render not of my people,
but of the peoples, think they read not (...) Ammi as is now read, which
usually signifies my people, but (...) Ammim, which most frequently is used for
peoples; it is by See Buxt. vind. page 626. and Not. Mi^cel. ad Port. Mosis, C.
4. p. 60. Aven. Gramm. p. 422.
others manifestly proved that there is no necessity to say so, in as much as
plural numbers, though more regularly ending in (...) M, yet often are without
it.

CHAP. VII.
VERSE. 1. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer-fruits, as
the grape-gleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired
the first-ripe fruit.
WOE is me, for I am as when they have gathered the Summer fruits, etc.] The
Prophet in the former part of this Chapter (whether in his own person, or in
the person of the Church, and company of the true worshippers of God, as the
state of things in those times which he describes stood) sadly complains of the
great and general corruption of those times, which has made Grot. Stokes.
some to think, that he rather spoke by way of prediction of things as they
should be in the following times of Manasseh, then as they were in the days of
Hezekiah, that good King and great reformer of Religion, under whom he seems to
have spoken these things: for he prophesied in the days of Iotham, Ahaz and
Hezekiah. But if we consider that Ahaz was a very wicked King, and promoted to
the utmost both Idolatry and all abominations of the Heathen, and the ways of
the Kings of Israel, II Kings XVI. 2, 3, etc. we may well think, that not only
in his time (in which also our Prophet lived and uttered part of his
Prophesies) but in the succeeding times of Hezekiah also (at least till the
Reformation by him made) there were great corruptions of manners among the
People, as well of Judah as Israel (to both which it is said he prophe^ied) as
appears out of the History, and the great need there was of a reformation, both
of their worship and manners, and the great pains and care that Hezekiah was
p^t to in effecting it, as appears II Kings XVIII. 4. and II Chron. XXIX. 3,
etc. and his declaration of their great wickedness, and the heavy judgments
that they had thereby pulled on Judah and Jerusalem, expressed there, v. 8, 9.
in much like terms as we have here, c. VI. v. 16. viz. that the Lord delivers
them to trouble, to astonishment, and hissing, etc. so that as our Prophet
Micah even in the times of Hezekiah prophesied, and spoke to all the People of
Judah, saying, that Zion should be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem should
become heaps, by which means Hezekiah was moved to fear, and besought the Lord,
and to the utmost of his power sought to reform what was amiss, and the Lord
repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them, Jer. XXVI. 18,
19. So may it be perceived, that in the times before Manasseh, there was
occasion enough for the Prophet to utter this complaint. But whatever the times
that he particularly speaks of were, the corruption of them it appears was very
great, which he thus both bewaileth and describes,

Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the Summer fruits, etc.] or as
in the Margin, as the gatherings of Summer, as likewise the Syriack Version
has it. Some of the ancient Translations otherwise. The Drus.
Greek, as he that gathers ears let fall in the harvest; the Doway Transt.
vulgar Latin, as he that gathers in Autumn the clusters of the vi^tage, and
modern Jun. T^emel, Pisc. Tarn.
Interpreters also differently, as when the Summer fruits are intercepted or
taken away (so that a Traveller seeking such wherewith to refresh himself, can
find none.) These all, however they differ in the expression of their meaning,
yet seem not much to differ about the signification of the words in the Hebrew,
but all do take the first word (...) Asphe to have in it the signification of
gathering, and the second (...) Kaits the signification of Summer or Summer
fruits: and in the intention of the expression they likewise, as they are
usually expounded, seem to agree, viz. that it is to denote the paucity of
godly men then among them, that there were no such remaining among them, as
were to be accounted of. So that if the words be looked on, as spoken in the
Prophets own person, it will seem a complaint much like that of Eliah, 1 Kings
XIX. 10. That he, even he was left alone, that truly and sincerely worshipped
God, and he could scarce find any other: or a bewailing of his condition that
it was his lot to live or prophesy in such a time, wherein Abarb.
there were very few good and pious men to be found. It was as hard and rare to
find them as good figs or grapes Compare this expression with Is^iah XVII. 6.
after the time of in-gathering or vintage. Which makes him wish that he had
lived in those former times, when there were such as were like the first ripe
fruits, excelling in their kind, and they not a few, but as a full harvest or
vintage. Or if as spoken in the person of the people of God, or his Church, or
Nation (as a learned K. Tanch.
Jew speaks) which seems most convenient and agreeable to the place, then will
it be a complaint of that Church or Company of the paucity of truly pious men
in her, as rare and hard to find, as good fruit after the Summer fruits are
diligently gathered in, or clusters of grapes after the vintage: few will be
found and those not very good. For so we may well suppose the qua^ity and
imperfection of those that are to be found to be in these words complained of,
as well as their paucity for number. This the forementioned learned Jew well
suggests to us by his saying, that by the gatherings of the Summer, or Summer
fruits, are meant or signified such fallings or fruits as are gathered up by
the poor, which either falling in time of gathering, and so being fouled,
sullied, marred, or stained, or otherwise naught, the owners think not worth
the taking up, or gathering them in, but leave them behind for who so will to
take them up. So Jeremy XXIV. good m^n are r^p^esented to the Prophet by good
^igs, and evil m^n by evil ^igs.
So that here by this similitude seems intimated not only, that there were but
few good men left, but that those few also that went for such, and had some
good thing in them, yet came far short of those good men in former ages, as
short as fallings or refuse fruits left behind, of those that were carefully
gathered for their goodness, or some few sour grapes left on a Vine do of such
a cluster as a man would choose to eat. (So R. Solomon observes, the C^alde
Paraphrast by the gatherings of Summer fruits to have understood while he
renders the last figs ill refuse figs.) Better might be desired, but scarce
found, that is it which he says, my soul desires the first ripe fruit, i. e.
such truly virtuous men as the primitive times did produce, such as excelled
other men, as far as the first and kindly ripe fruits, do such after-growing,
unkindly fruits as come not at all to maturity and perfection. That by first
ripe fruit such of the best sort and most grateful in their kind are meant, is
manifestly more agreeable to the use of the like expression, Hos. IX. 10. and
to the sense of the place, then with Hierom. Pelican. See Christ. a Castro.
some to understand it of unripe fruit, not yet come to maturity: as if the
Prophet should say, that seeing the scarcity of good men and difficulty to find
them, he was content even with such as he could find, for he rather with
earnest longing does desire better then he could find. What reason he had for
his complaint thus made in his own or the Churches name in figurative terms in
the next words he farther explains, saying,

2 The good man is perished out of the earth; and there is none upright among
men: they all lie in wait for blood: they hunt every man his brother with a
net.
The good man is perished out of the Earth (or as in the Margin) the godly or
merciful man.] Our English word good we^l answers to the Hebrew word in the
Origin^l (...) Chasid, which signifying both a ho^y godly or pious man, or a
kind mer^ifull man, has occasioned some little difference betwixt
Interpreters: Vulg. Latin, Greek.
some rendering it the holy or godly man: Jun. Tremel. Pagnin. Tig.
others the kind or merciful man. To both these is the Hebrew word applyable,
and so is our English to such a one as has regard both to his duty to God, and
expresses that in an holy and godly conversation, and to his duty to man
expressing that in acts of C^arity or mercy and doing good to others; both
these in observance of the Commandments concur to the making up (...) Chasid, a
good man; they will not, where there is sincerity, be separated, and such the
Prophet desires to find, but can find none of them, they are perished out of
the Earth or Land, (for of that part of the Earth, that Country where he lived
of Judah and Israel he speaks:) such have formerly been, but now are dead and
gone, and it is in vain to seek for them, for there is none ^pright among men.
Among such as are now living in the Land, i. e. See Est^u^, Doway Bible,
Grotius.
s^arcely any to be found, for that we may so understand it as to the greater
part, and not precisely, that there was not any one single such man on the
Earth, we may observe what the Lord answered to Eliah, complaining in like
manner that he was left alone, and there was none that feared God, 1 Kings XIX.
14, and 19. and Romans XI. 3, 4. and so is this complaint like those which we
have, Ps. XII. 1. and XIV. 3. and Romans III. 10, 11, 12. which at least import
the great paucity and scarceness of good and upright men, which are so few in
respect of those which are otherwise, that it may in respect of the generality
be said there are none such, they are lost among the multitude. That he has
just reason to say so, he farther makes evident by describing the contrary
behavior of the generality, viz. See Hos. IV. 2.
That they all lay wait for blood, and hunt every man his brother with a net.

Lie in wait for blood] i. e. to take away the lives of men, or, as Christ. a
Castro, Vatablus.
some, to spoil them of their substance, and what they have, which is to them
as their blood, and wherewith their life is sustained: probably both are
comprehended in the name See Note on c. III. 10.
bloods (for it is the plural number) and coveting of other men's goods and
rapine, often ends in cruelty and murder. That men greedy of gain may obtain
their prey they will not spare to take away the life of the owners thereof, See
Diodate's Notes on Pro. 1. 19.
Prove. I. 19. and by all crafty cunning and hidden means do they seek, and take
occasion to effect this.

They hunt every man his brother with a net.] As a Hunter, Fowler, or Fisher
that spreads his net, uses all arts to get his prey into it, that he may catch
it, and destroy it, so do these use all possible arts, whereby they may ensnare
any, by whose destruction they may gain ought to themselves. This rendering is
plain and proper, and the meaning of it perspicuous; yet do some (and those of
the ancientest Interpreters) render otherwise, viz. they hunt every man his
brother to death or destruction, So Ver^. Tig.
so the Chalde, Syriac, and vulgar Latin. The reason of this diversity is
manifest to be from hence, because the word (...) Cherem signifies a net and
also destruction, and it cannot be thought that they who rendered it according
to one signification, were not aware of the other, because in other places they
use it, but took that which they thought here most agreeable to the sense and
meaning of the place. So they that here render it destruction or death, Habbac.
I. 15. render it net. Here they thought it seems that of destruction more
agreeable to what goes before They lay in wait for blood, and tending to the
same sense. They that render with a net, understand the preposition (...) Be
(as if it were (...)) they that to destruction, the letter (...) L, as if it
were (...) See Drus. and Schindl^r in (...).
Lec^erem.) The (...)
Greek rendering the words they afflict with affliction, or straiten with
straitning every one his neighbor, seem rather to have given the meaning, then
to have attended to the literal signification of the words. They that seek
after various readings, might perhaps say, that here instead of (...) yatsudu,
they hurt, they seem to have read (...) yatsuru they straiten or afflict, and
instead of (...) Cherem, a net, (...) Hereb, much, or some other word: but such
conjectures are no safe or sure way of solving difficulties, or reconciling
differences. The meaning will be otherwise well enough made up, by saying that
by straiten with straitning, or afflict with affliction, they would express
what is by the Prophet in figurative terms expressed, inasmuch as the Hunter's
intention by laying his net, is to bring those creatures, which he would catch,
into a strait, that so he may have them at his pleasure, and use them how he
will.

3 That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the Prince asks, and the
Judge asks for a reward: and the great man utters his mischievous desire: so
they wrap it up.
That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the Prince asks, etc.] In
these words, wherein he farther taxes the great corruption, avarice, and
cruelty, of such especially who were in authority, and ought to have done
justice, and seen it done, and those that were rich and potent, there is some
difficulty. A learned Drusiu^.
man well versed in the language of the Scripture, confesses that this place
did long and much perplex him, that he could not satisfy himself in the
interpretation of it, and perhaps was not at last satisfied. And such different
expositions are brought of it, that the Reader who takes notice of them, will
perhaps be put to use his best judgment and discretion, to choose which he may
prefer and satisfy himself with. The former part of the verse, in which is the
chief difficulty, consists briefly of these words (...) Al Haraa for evil, or
to do evil, (...) Cappaim, hands, or both hands, (...) Liheitib, to do or make
good, or to do well. From the understanding of these words, and joining them in
construction one with another, and either taking them, so as to make a distinct
period of themselves, or in conjunction with the following words, the Prince
asks, etc. arises that diversity of interpretations: the more ancient
Translations thus rendering, viz. the Greek, for evil do they prepare (or make
ready) their hands, and so the Arabic following them; the Vulgar Latin, the
evil of their hands they call good. The Chalde Paraphrase, they do evil with
their hands, and do not do good. The Syriack accordingly, their hands are
prepared (or ready) to do evil, and they do not do good. Among more modern
Interpreters there is yet more variety. Of the Jews R. Salom. see Abarb.
some thus expound the first words by themselves, also, For the evil (or for a
reward of the evil) of your hands, do ye hope that he will do good unto you?
(or, as a MS copy reads, that I will or shall do good unto you?) Ab. Ezra, from
R. Marinus. And see Aba^b.
Others taking the letter (...) L prefixed to the last word, to import here, as
sometimes it does, for, or instead of, thus, for the evil of your hands,
because it is to you instead of doing good, is, or shall this come: or as R.
T^nch.
another expounds it, For evil two hands, i. e. two portions, instead of doing
good, i. e. they render double of evil, for, or instead of, good. This seems
very obscure, and would be plainer thus, for doing, or to do evil, i. e. They
do of evil twice as much as they do of good, or double evil to what, or instead
of what, they should do of good.

R. David Kimc^i, and M^clal yophi.
Others will have the words to be thus expounded, They set themselves as for
the evil that is in their hands, that they may do it well, i. e. confirm it, or
do it effectually or thoroughly, that they may take bribes: so that in their
opinion the meaning of the word, to do well, is to do firmly or throughl^.
Against which Abarb.
another of them excepts, because it is improper to sa^, a man may do ill well;
but to that may seem an easy answer, that the doing it well, imports not any
goodness in the thing that is done, but earnestness and putting to force in
doing it: which in other See Drus.
Languages is not unusual to say, that a man does such a thing well, when he
thoroughly and earnestly does it, though the thing it self be not good. And
therefore do ours with other Jun. Trem. Tig. Drus. Tarnov. and see Dutch Notes.
modern Translators and Expositors take this meaning. The meaning which he that
excepts against this, gives, is, When any desires to have any evil, that is in
the hands of any, or is done him by the hands of any, rectified, any wrong or
injury done to him redressed by those that are in authority, they to do him
right, require bribes and gifts; so that the remedy shall be ^orse to him than
the damage that he has suffered, and desires to have made good to him, and
will cost him more. This meaning does a late learned Lud. de Die^.
man likewise give, viz. that it cannot be obtained of those that are in
authority and place of Judicature, to defend and do right to an innocent
oppressed man against him that is of wicked hands, without giving them bribes
and rewards; so that the words may run, to do good or right against him that is
of wicked hands, the Prince asks, etc. or, Is good and right to be done
against him that is of wicked hands? (i. e. if right be to be done, etc.) or
the hands are (i. e. ought to be) for doing good, or right, against evil, or
interrogatively are the hands for doing right against evil? but they abuse
their hands, instead of doing right with them, they use them only to take
bribes, the Prince asks, etc. But there seems no reason to depart from that
sense which our Translators follow; understanding by earnestly, fully, with
diligence, and the utmost of their power. It seems well to agree to the words,
except we shall think it a plainer way to render it, for evil (or to do evil)
two or both hands [viz. Grot. Stokes.
are ready] or they hunt with both hands, but to do good, the Prince asks,
etc. that the meaning may be, They are ready with both hands, i. e. with all
their might to do evil, they have two hands for that, but must be hired and
largely bribed to do good. Whereas the Chalde (as likewise the Syriack)
renders, and do not do good. A learned Grot.
man thinks that instead of (...) Leheiti^, which signifies to do good, he read
(...) Lo hetib in two words, which signifies he has not done good, but there
is no necessity to say so, but rather that he read it as it is now usually
read, and took the letter ^ L to import, as we said some think it to do, as
much as, for or instead of, and so gave the meaning of it in equivalent terms;
for to say they do evil and do not do good, is all one with, they do evil
instead of doing good.

The Prince asks, and etc. Here are three sorts of persons accused of
combining together for the perverting of justice, described by their several
titles, the Prince, the Judge, the Great one. First Abarb.
the Prince, i. e. either the King or chief Ruler, or the Magistrate, he that
should oversee all, and look that judgment be impartially done, even he looks
after bribes, and requires presents from those that seek for justice. Kimchi.
Others by the Prince understand such as are in chief authority under the King,
who, because it were a shame for him to ask, do ask gifts for him. Secondly the
Judge, he that should determine the cause and pronounce sentence according to
right, without respect to persons in judgment, Deuteronomy. I. 17. and not take any
gift, Deuteronomy. XVI. 19. he is R. Tanch.
for a reward, or asks a reward, and is swayed by what he hopes to gain, or
that which shall come to his R. D. Kimchi.
share of the money given, not by the merits of the cause. And the great man,
i. e. say Idem.
some, he that is great in the Kings Court, Abarb.
others the Advocate, the Pleader, or he that is to set things in order for a
legal proceeding, and to inform the Judges, and instruct those that have Suits
in Law, and order their Plea to the best advantage. Calvin, and R. Tanch.
Others, any great, potent, or rich man. He utters his mischievous desire, or
as in the Margin, the mischief of his soul, i. e. either the mischief which he
has conceived within himself; or as Ki^chi, R. Tanch.
some, that which shall be, or prove mischief to himself, or as diverse Chald.
Greek, Syriac. and Latin.
ancient Translations the desire of his soul. If the great man be taken in
either of the two former significations, the meaning will be, either, that
these three one under another, jointly conspire to set Justice to sale, not as
right, but as their own gain and advantage shall require, and be advanced by,
though it will end in the destruction of their souls; or as Ribera, and
Christ. a Castro.
some ^ (though perhaps not so appositly to the place) that whatsoever the
Prince, though never so illegally, requires from any, both the Judge and the
great man do further his desire in it, and care not what, how contrary to Law,
Right, and Justice soever they say, or pronounce in his behalf for effecting
his designs, out of hope and advantage to themselves too, and that they may
share in the gain. But if it be taken in the third signification, then the
meaning will be, that the great or rich man, who has in his mind or desire to
get any thing by wrong from any other See Chap. II. 1, 2.
poorer or weaker than himself, and who has done wrong in any kind, seeing
both the Prince and Judge have both their hands open to receive gifts and
bribes, is not afraid or ashamed to utter what mischeivous design he has in
his mind, being sure of their assistance in whatsoever he desires; and so how
unjust soever the cause be, yet by their mutual compliance, they make it firm
on his side, or so wrap it up and involve it, that the right shall not appear.
The verb (...) yea^^etuha rendered they wrap it up, being in the plural number.
Aben Ezra refers it to the People that hear it, and readily confirm it with
their suffrages
seems to include the three sorts of persons mentioned, viz. the Prince, the
Judge, and the Great man, showing that they all conspire in that which is done.
The signification of it may be taken either from (...) Aboth, first, as it
signifies a cord strongly twisted, whence is said See Eccles. IV. 12.
Isaiah V. 18. that draw sin, as with a Cart rope, and so it will be to twist
strongly together, so as it cannot be easily undone or broken; and so the
meaning will be, that the matter however weak in it self, as being altogether
unjust, is by these three twisting it up made as firm and strong as a See
Grotius.
threefold cord, that it shall prevail against right, and not by any that has
better right on his side be dissolved; or secondly as it is spoken of a tree or
bough with many thick branches or leaves folded, and as it were twisted one
with another, and so to signify they branch out or divide into many branches
the matter (as some learned Ab. Walid. and R. Tanch.
Jews expound it) or probably, they make intricate the matter, as thick
branches of trees complicated and wrapped together, so that men may not easily
discern between the right and the wrong, nor distinguish one from the other.
Agreeable to which meaning seems the rendering of the Vulgar Latin, they trouble
it, i. e. confound, or, make confused the matter: and this signification is
agreeable to that of the word (...) Abatha in Arabic, to mingle together or
confound, in which language likewise (...) Aphatha with change of the b into p
or ph is to twist or rest, although in this signification also it may be
understood as the former, to make difficult or hard to be solved. Then the
Pronoun affixed to that Verb which signifies it, is regularly appliable so
(...) Havoth Napsho R. Tanch.
rendered his mischeivous desire, or mischief of his Soul, i. e. that
mischievous unjust design which the great rich man has conceived in himself,
and now utters, that by the assistance of the Prince and Judge whom he has
gained by promise of bribe, it may be justified and made to prevail against any
that oppose it.

This signification of mischief, or naughtiness, or calamity, or destruction,
or the like is agreeable to the often use of it in the Scripture; that other,
which some ancient Interpreters (as we said) give it, is confirmed by the
frequent use of the same word (...) Hawa, in the Arabic tongue, in that notion
of desire.

[In the Francfort Edition of the Greek Bible 1597, it is observed in the Notes
or various Lections, that this verse, etc. in the Greek differs much from the
original Hebrew, and so it does both from that and all other Translations
(except such as were out of the Greek) that it will be in vain to seek to
reconcile them; it being there read and the Judge speaks peaceable words, it is
the desire of his Soul, and I will take away, etc. But it is more our business
to see what the Hebrew will bear, and what rendrings best agree with it.]

4 The best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper then a
thorn-hedg: the day of thy watchmen, and thy visitation comes; now shall be
their perplexity.
The best of them is as a briar, etc.] Of them, whether of those forenamed, the
Prince, the Judge, and the Great man (as Abarb.
some) or more Vatah. in fol.
generally, of all the whole multitude of the People, of the present generation
(agreeably to what was said v. 2.) is like a briar, or thorn; and he that is
the most upright among them, is as a bough of thorns Chald. R. Tanch. vulg. Lat.
out of an hedge made of thorns, or sharper (as is well supplied) then a
thorn-hedge. Both these words rendered briar and a thorn-hedge are joined
together, Prove. XV. 19. and there rendered an hedge of thorns. So mischeivous
are they, that there is no dealing with them without receiving hurt from them,
as he that Compare it with II Sam. XXIII. 6, 3.
meddleth with thorns, or handles, or goes through a thorn-hedg, cannot escape
either having his hands pricked, or his flesh or clothes rent, or receiving
some mischief.

The day of thy watchmen and thy visitation comes, etc.] The word (...)
Metzappeh, as likewise (...) Tzopheh (from the same root signifying to look
abroad or about, to spy, and sometimes to look for, or expect, etc.) properly
signifying a watchman, one that is set in some eminent place to look about and
spy what he can discover, as the approach of enemies, or other comers to a
place, or any likelihood, or occasion of danger, and give report thereof to the
Inhabitants, that they may be aware of it, is in the Scripture applied to
Prophets from the likeness of their office, who were also anciently called
seers, I. Sam. IX. 9. as Ezekiel. III. 17. and XXXIII. 7. as for the same reason
it may be attributed to other Calv. Pareus.
Teachers or Governors, who have oversight and care of People, or ought to
watch for their good, and take care, or warn them to take care to prevent any
evil, that they may see coming on them: and of such Governors, is the word by
some understood. Now what titles or epithets soever did belong to true
Prophets, no doubt, false Prophets did pretend to and take to themselves, and
those that were deluded and seduced by them would attribute to them.
Accordingly is this name here understood by some of true Prophets, by some of
false ones. Those that understand it of the true Prophets, thus give the
meaning; The day of thy watchmen, i. e. which the Prophets, whom God gave as
watchmen to thee to warn thee of the danger and destruction, which, if thou
should continue in thy sinful courses, would certainly come upon thee; did
forewarn and tell thee of, is now (because thou obstinately go on in them)
Ab. Ezra. Dras. Grot. Rib. etc.
come, is now at hand, and thy visitation, the time that God will visit and
punish thee for thy iniquities, is (according to their words) come.

Now (suddenly) shall be their perplexity either of those Ab. Ezra.
mentioned, the Prince, the Judge and great man, and such as before indulged
all liberty and freedom of wickedness to themselves and perplexed others, or,
more R. Tanch.
generally as if he had said to the People, now shall your perplexity be, now
shall you be brought to confusion; such change of persons being not unusual in
speaking to, or of any. Those that understand it of the false Prophets, give it
either thus, 1. The day of thy false Prophets, who made thee trust on lies,
thou shall now see what it will prove, whether good or bad. For behold the day
of visitation for thine iniquities is come, now shall be their perplexity, i.
e. R. D. Kinchi.
the perplexity of those false Prophets: or as Vat. edi^. 4^ and 8^.
others explain the same meaning, in the day wherein thy false Prophets said
that all things should be happy and prosperous unto thee, shall thy visitation
come, i. e. God shall punish thee, and now shall they be perplexed in mind, i.
e. God shall punish them for the injury done by them to the poor. And to this
interpretation seems reduceable the Chalde Paraphrase, and R. Solomon Jarchi.
others explaining it, in the day that thou did expect or look for good, the
day of the visitation of thy wickedness comes. Or else 2^y Vata^, in sol. and
Munst.
The day of thy false Prophets, the day wherein they shall be punished; shall
come; for shortly shall come the day of thy visitation. To which is reduceable
the exposition of others, who explain it in the day of, ( i. e. Lud. de Dieu.
when thou shall see) the day, that is, the destruction of thy Prophets, know
that thy punishment is come: (where by Prophets I suppose he must mean false
Prophets.) The like way of construction follow Calv. Par.
they, who (as we said) understand by watchmen, the Governors, Princes, or
Magistrates. To either of these expositions agree the words, as in our
Translation read. But a Abarb.
Jew of later standing, who had seen what those ancienter said, pretends to
give a prope^^ meaning of the words, and denying the word which is rendered
watchmen, to be put here as a title either of true or false Prophets, will
have the words thus rendered (as still having respect to those before named, the
Prince, the Judge, the Great man, joining together in seeking for bribes and
gain, and setting justice to sale.) In the day (or all the time) that they are
looking after, (for so sometimes the word may signify, viz. to expect or look
for,) or expect thee to bring to them gifts or rewards: heed shall be given to
thee, cognizance of thy cause shall presently be had, and no longer: when they
have gotten all they can, and they expect no more from thee, thou may seek
for justice, but no regard shall be had to thee, or notice taken of thy cause.
But now the Land being laid desolate, they shall be in perplexity, and have no
more occasion of spoiling in matter of Judicature. This man (as has been
elsewhere said) loves to go different from others, and to pretend to understand
the words better than they did: but however his meaning may please any, his
construction of the words here seems harsh. Another R. Tanch.
Jew ancienter than he (but whose works have never yet been printed) taking the
word watchmen, in its more litteral sense, thus expounds it, The day comes,
or is at hand, that thy watchmen (those that are set on high places, to spy or
discover afar off what is coming and give report thereof) So also may Ab.
Ezra's words be understood.
shall say, thy visitation comes, i. e. the enemy or thy punishment comes. Or
else, says he, the day of thy watchmen, i. e. the enemies who expected or
waited for thy destruction, i. e. the time that they waited for, and the day
wherein thou shall be visited with punishments for thy evil doings. Now shall
you be brought to perplexity and confusion. With this man (as to the first way)
agrees also a Christian C^stalio.
interpreter of good note, who expounds it, The day of war, when thou shall set
watchmen on thy walls, comes, suddenly shall men be in a hurry or tumult. If
this meaning please any, the words in our Translation may be accommodated to it
also.

5 Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors
of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom.
Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide, etc.] The word
(...) Alluph rendered a guide, is N. Fu ler Conc. MS.
else where put to signify a Prince, a great man, a chief man, or leader, etc.
and so is by Graec. Vul. Lat. Lyra, Vatab.
some here taken. Against ^ which a learned R. Tanch. See Chal. Par and Syriac.
Jew excepts, as not well agreeing to this place, where he complains of the
defect of faithfulness, and friendship amongst men, and the falseness and fraud
that was amongst those who were of nearest relation, and had greatest ties of
friendship betwixt them: and thinks therefore the word here to be much of like
signification with the foregoing, friend, and to denote a companion, or
familiar friend and acquaintance, with whom a man has used most familiarly to
converse. Which is the mind also of a learned Christian, viz. On the place, and
on Psalm. LV. 13, 14.
Lud. de Dieu. Another learned R. D. Kimchi. See Munst. Vat. Grot.
Jew, understands it of an Elder Brother, viz. as he that ought to be the
leader and director of the rest of the family. Ab. Ezra. S. e Chr. a Castro.
Another takes it to signify here an husband, who is by that title else where
called in respect of the wife, viz. (...) Alluph, the guide of her youth See
Jer. III. 4.
Prove. II. 16. that so as in the next words, the husband is counseled not to
trust his wife; so in these, the wife should be cautioned not to trust her
husband, See Ab^b.
to show the great corruption of the times, when man and wife must beware of
one another. This exposition may seem perhaps too nice, though of a serious
man. To any of these significations, will our English word, Guide, well fit,
whether any superior by whom we ought to be faithfully directed, or any equal,
whose advice we would take and trust, and repose our selves with confidence in.

That Jewish Doctor, Abarbinel, who as before we said loves to go different
from other Expositors, here by a friend, understands, the Judge before
mentioned, by a guide, the Prince, and that these he forbids to put any trust
in, yet withal warns a man not to speak ill of them, or curse them, not so
much as in the greatest privacy, betwixt himself and his wife, according to
what is said, Eccles. X. 20.
curse not the King no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich in thy
bedchamber. Which exposition of his, as we can see no reason to follow, though
some Ar. Mont. See Chr. a Castro.
Christians follow it, so much less, those allegorical ones, which he brings
out of former Rabbis, enigmatically applying the words to the evil
concupiscence, to God, and to the Soul, and the like; which it will be much
besides the purpose to rehearse, much more to make use of.

Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom.] i. e. Utter not
even to thy wife that which thou would have to be kept secret, lest she
divulge it to thy prejudice: for so wicked and false are all, neglecting all
obligations, that even she that is one with thyself, will deceive and betray
thee.

6 For the son dishonoreth the father, the daughter rises up against her
mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a man's enemies are the
men of his own house.
For the Son dishonoreth the Father.] Not only those that are equal with a man,
but those also that are inferior to him, and depend on him, and are by all Laws
of duty most bound to respect him, and to endeavor to preserve his safety and
reputation, cast off all the respects that they ow by the Laws of God and
nature, as in these relations here mentioned: and are ready to do him all
disgrace, despite and mischief. So that he need fear not only enemies from
abroad; in his own house and family he shall find them, even among those from
whom he might expect the greatest love and respect. Much the same expressions
in Which the Prophet here bewails the corruption of his times, does our Savior
use in declaring such perilous times as should be under the Gospel also, Mar.
XIII. 12. Luke XXI. 16. Compare II Tim. III. 1, 2, 3. etc.
Matthew. X. 21. and verse. 35, 36. And his counsel to be wise as Serpents, and
harmless as Doves, and to beware of men (there verse. 16. and 17.) agrees well
with our Prophets caution here, not to trust in any of them. By the enumeration
of these several instances is made good what was said, verse. 2. the good man is
perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright among men, and that may
seem sufficient for the connection between these and the preceding words. Yet
others (not unfitly) make these words to follow as a more full explication of
that perplexity which verse. 4. he said should be upon or among them, viz. that
so great it should be, as should make them forget all Londs of relation, all
duties owing from one to another, and every one shifting for themselves, and
looking after their own concerns and safety, take no care of, nor show any
respect to those, whom they owed most to, but so behave themselves toward
them, as if they were strangers and enemies, so that there was need of
cautioning them that would be safe, not to put confidence in any of them. (What
some would have this caution to import, that they should not trust or put
confidence in their false Frophets, Romans X^I. 18. II Pet. II, 3.
who by fair speeches would deceive them, and with feigned words make
merchandise of them, may by way of inference be accomodated, viz. Lyra. See
Chr. a Castro. Ribera, Pelic.
If the nearest relations shall not be faithful, much less will it be safe to
put trust in those whose end is to deceive; but is not that which the Letter
seems to aim at.)

7 Therefore I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my
salvation: my God will hear me.
Therefore will I look unto the Lord, etc.] The times being so corrupt, and
such danger from all sort of men, no fidelity in, no security from, even those
who ought to be a man's greatest helps, and supports, what shall a man do?
whither shall he betake himself for refuge? The Prophet speaking as of himself,
in the person of any Drus. Grot.
godly and prudent man, or of the true R. D. Kimchi.
Israel, or Gods People, or Ierasalem, or in the R. Tanch.
person of that Nation in captivity, leads by his example the way, and shows
that God alone is to be trusted on in such times of difficulty, who is a rock
of Salvation, a sure refuge, and in his due time will not fail to hear and
answer them, who wait on him, as shall be best for them; he will not fail or
frustrate their expectation, they shall not in vain rely on him.

The Prophet having hitherto denounced judgments now (according to the custom
of the Prophets) R. Kimchi.
draws toward his conclusion with consolatory words and promises.

8 Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit
in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.
9 I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.
Rejoice not against me O mine enemy, etc.] It will easily be conceived that
the Prophet here speaks in the person of the Church, or Nation of the Jews,
looking on her self, as now under hard pressures, and in that captivity under
the hand of her enemies, which the Prophets had foretold, and bid her to
expect; and in that regard comparing her self to a poor, distressed dejected
woman, and her enemies to a proud, imperious, insolent dame, insulting over
her, as quite cast off, and given up irrecoverably to destruction, and
destitute of all hope. Who is her enemy that she speaks to? Babylon, say R.
Salom. Hierom. and many others.
many, more particularly, Jer. L. 11.
which led her captive, and triumphed over her. Others understand it rather of
Idumaea, or the Edomites, who are every where set forth as the most inveterate
enemies of Israel, that had Ezekiel. XXXV. 5.
a perpetual hatred against them. And though they themselves were not able to
do them so much mischief as others, yet they made it up in spite, and when ever
any calamity befell them, rejoiced greatly at it, and insulted over them, and
did the best they could to help against them. Obad. ver. 10, 11, etc. That both
of these may be here well joined under that title, may appear by what is said
respecting both of them, Psalm. CXXXVII. 7, 8. Nor will it be inconvenient to
take in with them any other that did show like hatred to the Jews at that time,
and rejoiced at their calamity, all those her enemies, whose behavior toward
her is described, Lam. II. 16, 17.

Some of the Jews will have particularly to be meant See Vatab. Edit. 4^ and 8^.
Rome, or the Romans (whom they usually call Edomites, and under that name
comprehend other Christians) whom they look on as their D. Kimchi, and
especially Abarbinel, of whose opinion see also on C^ap. V. 5, 6.
greatest enemies, and expect and pray for their destruction more earnestly
then for that of the Mahometans or any other, and have much less kindness for.
But there is more then expression of their hatred to them in this their
interpretation, for from this granted they would make an argument to persuade,
that the Messiah is not yet come: at whose coming they expect that these their
enemies shall be totally destroyed. That which she says to her enemy is,
Rejoice not against me? etc. She represseth the enemies taunts, and takes
comfort to her self from her assurance that things shall not always continue
in that condition with either of them, as they now are, but there shall be a
change, to her for better, by the mercy of God to whom she will turn by
repentance, and steadfastly cleave, and to her insulting enemy who contemned God
and despitefully used his People for the worse, by his Justice in due time
exserting it self, though for a while conniving at them, or making use of them
for the correction of his children, and bringing about his ends for his own
glory, not to give them cause of boasting of themselves, and their own might.
Of such Gods method in correcting his People, and taking vengeance on those
whom he makes use of as his instruments for that end when they grow proud and
insolent, see Isaiah X. 5, 12, etc. and C. XXXIII. V. I. Ier. XXX. 8, 10, etc.
and other like places. As for her self she says, when I fall I shall arise, R.
Ta chapter
when, if, or though, I fall from my dignity, be deprived of power, or fall
into calamity, I shall by Gods help be restored and raised again.

I shall arise] The word is of the preterperfect tense, and word for word
signifies, I have risen, to show the certainty which she has of it, R. D.
Kimchi.
according to the usual expression of the Prophetical style, speaking of those
things, which by virtue of his promise or word are to be expected, as of things
already done or come to pass. This is the usual and received exposition; but
there is among the Jews u one, who thinks it more convenient to take the words,
I have fallen and I have risen, as they are in the form, so in the
signification of the preterperfect tense, thus, Rejoice not against me, o mine
Enemy, because of my captivity, in which I now am, as thinking that I shall not
come out of it any more, seeing the wrath of God is kindled against me, for
behold I have formerly many times fallen into captivity, as in Egypt and
Babylon, and have risen or recovered from those falls, and returned from those
captivities, and so shall it now be, That although I sit in darkness, the Lord
shall be a light unto me, and after this darksome night shall arise (to me,) a
bright light, as at other times it has been, because this my fall has not
been a thing that has come by chance, but by the Providence of God for
punishment of my sins, to which is a determined time, and therefore when I
arise he will redeem me. It Is true, that I do in this my captivity, bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, but this is not to
be perpetual, but till he has pleaded with me his controversy, and inflicted
on me that punishment which I ought to bear according to mine iniquities. And
so likewise is to be understood, and execute my Judgment, i. e. that judgment
which it was due to execute on me. And when Aba^b.
he has made an end of doing this, then shall he bring me forth to the light,
from the darkness of my captivity, and then shall I behold his righteousness,
viz. the righteousness and mercies that he will exercise toward me. To this
purpose he. But though a convenient meaning might be made of the words by
interpreting those words in the preterperfect tense, and from help formerly
afforded from God, faithful penitents may have assurance upon unfeigned
repentance of finding the like again, when any calamities befall them, and they
may to that purpose make use of these words on occasion: yet we cannot here go
along with that Doctor in as much as he seems to drive at a false end, (as we
have already said on this present verse) and taking the deliverance from the
Babylonish captivity, which seems here particularly intended, only by the way,
looks for the completion of this Prophecy by a deliverance and restoration
from the captivity or exile that they are now since Christ's time under, by a
destruction of the Romans or Edomites, as he calls them (as we said) which he
has not from these words any ground to expect.

When I sit in darkness, etc.] Darkness is often put in Scripture to signify
adversity, misery, calamity or trouble, as on the contrary light, for
prosperity, joy and happiness. R. Ta^ch.
Here the unhappy condition of captivity may seem called, and compared to,
darkness, by reason of the withdrawing of Gods Providence, or its seeming to be
intercepted, in comparison of what appears of it, in the time of Salvation,
Compare Lev. XXVI. 44.
although it in it self be still remaining, and shall, that darkness being
dispelled, again with much luster show it self to the comfort of the penitent
and patient sufferer. The Lord who now seeming to be withdrawn from him, has
left him as in darkness, shall again lift up the light of his countenance upon
him, and be a light and comfort unto him. In assurance of this she says, I
will bear the indig^ation of the Lord, i. e. R. Tanch.
she will patiently bear the punishment, that he has seen fit to inflict on
her, as being sensible that she has justly deserved it, (saying, because I
have sinned against him,) and will expect, till being reconciled to her, he
shall plead ^er cause, and execute Judgment for her sake on her Enemy, who
being by God made an instrument for correcting her, insulted over her, as if
she were worse then her self, and used the occasion put into her hand to wreak
her own spite, not to execute Gods command. When he has thus performed his
whole work of chastisement upon her, then will he return in mercy to her, bring
her forth to light, restore to her comfort, and the joy of his Salvation, and
she shall behold his righteousness, which he will exercise toward her in
delivering her, and recompensing vengeance on her enemy, Drus. R. Tanch.
or his goodness, loving kindness, and faithfulness, the word including all.
Having thus declared her own condition, and what she assures her self of, she
proceeds to declare what her enemy is to expect.

10 Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which
said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her: now shall
she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.
Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which
said, etc.] She that now See the like taunts Psalm. XXII. 7, 8. and X^II. 10.
and Mat. XXVII. 43.
insults over me, as if I were utterly forsaken and cast off by God, and
derides me for still putting my trust in him, who she thinks either cannot or
will not deliver me, seeing ^he good hand of God upon me, in my gracious
restoration, shall in that strange alteration, which she shall see in things
concerning me contrary to her desire, whereby the Lord will approve himself
still my God; have enough to cover her with shame, by being frustrated in her
expectation, but much more from what shall befall her self: for from the height
of her pride shall she be cast down into the lowest and basest condition, to be
even trod down and trampled upon with all contemt, as the very dirt and mire of
the streets. And whereas now she cannot please her eyes more with any thing
then her looking on my misery, then, on the contrary shall my eyes behold and
look on her in her despicable condition, to their full satisfaction. See the
like use of the word, Psalm. LIVE. ult. and LIX. 10. and Micah IV. 11. The word
rendered she shall see, as taking it for the third person future feminine,
others take for the second masculin, as likewise the following verb, and thus
render the words, as in the Margin, and thou will see her that is mine enemy,
and cover her with shame. But the former is the more received interpretation,
and there is no reason to depart from it.

This Prophecy, if applied to Babylon and the Chaldeans, was then fulfilled
when Babylon was taken, and their Empire destroyed by the Medes and Persians,
Dan. V. 30, 31. and it is Tarn.
observable, that that great turn of their fortune was made in that very night,
when Belshazzar with his Nobles did insult afr^sh and lifted up themselves
against against God, and his People that trusted in him alone, and praised
their own Gods of gold and silver, etc. as it is in that Chapter verse. 2, 3, 4.
Chapter a Castro, Menoch. Tirin.
They that apply it to the Idumeans, look on it as made good, either when they
were taken also by the ^haldeans, not many years after Jerusalem, or after the
return of the Jews when they were overthrown by the Maccabees, ^ib. 1. cap. V.
3, etc. Of destruction threatened to them, see Jeremy XLIX. 7, etc.

Some of the Jews (as we have intimated) would have us look on it as a Prophecy
not yet fulfilled, but hereafter by the destruction of the Romans, by whom they
were since ^arried out of their Country, and such, under whom they are still
thence detained, to be fulfilled. By their false principles on which they go,
they are necessitated so to do: their Ancestors having denied and rejected
Christ when he came, and God having rejected them so long since for it, which
they are resolved not to acknowledge, but to persist still in like obstinacy,
have nothing to pretend as a color for it, but that those Proph^sies of a
temporal deli^erance from the hands of all their enemies to be wrought (as they
would have it) by the Messiah are not yet made good. And these enemies they
will have p^rticularly to be the Romans, (on whom they bestow the name of
Edomites ^ so passing over the Babylonish captivity, before which our Prophet
spoke ^hese things, and their restoration from it, (of which he plainly
prophesied that, which was by what fell ou^ in their carrying to Babylon, and
the destruction both of their other enemies that then insulted over them, and
of Babylon it self afterward, and their restoring to their own Country again,
e^idently and signally made good;) fix new times, and uncertain periods, that
so they may still foster their error, and keep up their posterity in a vain
hope of having those, and the like Prophesies (which have long since been
according to the true intent made good) yet fulfilled according to their own
groundless desires, as they have kept themselves for many hundreds of years
past.

To this purpose is it what a R. D. Kim^hi.
Doctor of great note among them expressly says, that the enemy here spoken of,
and bidden not to rejoice is Rome the wicked, under whose power their captivity
had been prolonged above a thousand years (when he wrote this, and some
hundreds of years are past since.) This I particularly take notice of, because
the name Rome is here in some Editions of that Author left out, and in a
Man^script so blotted out as yet to appear, by order it seems of the
Inquisitors. Although by the Epithet, which is left behind, viz. the wicked, is
sufficiently understood what they mean, to warn such as look into the Jewish
writers that they do consult se^eral Editions or Manuscript Copies if they have
them at hand, if they would see what the Jewish writers say in such places
where they meddle with Christians. By the same means is it, I suppose, that in
another of their Commentators, R. Salomo Iarchi, in some Copies manuscript and
printed is put, mine enemy, i. e. Babel and Rome, but in others is put Edit.
B^xt.
Babel and Persia, in others Last Venice edit. fol.
Aram. In this Digression it may likewise be observed, that in some editions of
the Chalde Paraphrase is here put, Ed. Venet. Bomberg.
Rome mine enemy, though in other Editions the name Rome is not found. And it
may well (according to the conjecture of a learned Pe^. fig. Of d^ v^ rs thing
foisted into the text of the Targum, (or Chalde Paraph^ase) or alt red in it,
see Buxt. L^x. in (...) and (...) and (...).
man) be thought to have by some latter Jews been put in, for adding authority
to their opinion. For it Jonathan, the Author of the Paraphrase on this, and
the other Prophets were so ancient, as he is taken to be, it is not probable
that it was ever put in by himself, though in those Paraphrases of other Books
which were not so ancient, it be no wonder to see such glosses of their own,
agreeable to their own opinions, put in.

11 In the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the decree be
far removed.
12 In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the
fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from sea to sea,
and from mountain to mountain.
13 Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate, because of them that dwell
therein; for the fruit of their doings.
In the day that thy walls are to be built, etc.] That there is no small
difficulty in this and the following verse, appears by the irreconcilably
different expositions which are by Interpreters given of them, in respect both
to the person spoken to, and the things which are spoken concerning that
person. As to the person pointed to by the word or pronoun thy, on stating of
which much depends the understanding of what is either promised, or threatened,
some will have to be meant Jerusalem, or the Nation of the Jews, Gods Church or
People; Others, on the contrary, the insulting enemy before mentioned, who ever
she be. If Jerusalem or the People of the Jews be meant, then will it be a
promise of good to them, which according to R. Tanch. Vul. Lat.
some will be to this purpose. In the day that the Lord shall again build up
thy walls, (or there shall be a day wherein thy walls shall be built up and) in
that day shall the decree be far removed (or Calvinand Schindler.
that day shall far remove thy decree) i, e. say Chal. Paraph. Ab. Ez^a, and R.
Tanch.
some, the decrees and exactions of thy enemies whereby they exacted tribute of
thee, or tyrannically ruled over thee, and oppressed thee: or as Chr. a C^ stro.
others, the decree made for hindering thee to be rebuilded, viz. the decree
made by Artaxerxes, Ezra. IV. 21. these shall be no longer in force against
thee, but thou shall be freed from them, and enjoy thy liberty. Lud. de Dieu.
Others, the decree shall be far extended or go far abroad, i. e. the decree of
punishment to be brought on thine enemies. In that day also he shall come unto
thee, etc. i. e. say Id. and Chapter l. Paraph.
some, he, i. e. any of thy dispersed, captive, exile children that shall be in
any of the places after named, shall come home and return unto thee: Calvin.
others, there shall be, that shall come unto thee from all those parts, viz.
such shall be the glory of Jerusalem again after her restoration, that See
Chap IV. 1. 2.
many of all Nations shall flock unto it. Not far from this is that expositions
of R. Tanch
some Jews, That day shall certainly be, and in it shall be subject unto thee
the inhabitants of those Nations, [ i. e. I suppose such of them as shall join
themselves to the Jews, and join with them in serving their God, not as if all
those Nations should be subjected to them.] This restoration of Jerusalem (as
is by Tarnov.
some observed) was made good, and the Prophecy corporally and typically
fulfilled after the seventy years of the Babylonish captivity, See Ezra. I. and
Neb. III.
when the Jews had liberty again to return to their Country, and build their
City and Temple: but spiritually and principally, L. de Dieu, Tar^.
when the Kingdom of Christ was after his coming spread through the whole
Earth, and the decree went forth far abroad, i. e. the doctrine of the Gospel;
that decree mentioned, Psalm II. 7, 8. by virtue of which, he was to have the
heathen given him for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for
his possession, and by the doctrine of the Kingdom they were to be called in to
him from all parts. Surely that this higher manner of the fulfilling this
Prophecy, by building the spiritual Jerusalem i. e. the Church of Christ, may
well be attended to, and chiefly looked on by Christians, and so compared with
what is said, Amos IX. 11, etc. that God would raise up the Tabernacle of David
which was fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, etc. and so applied as
that is, Acts XV. 16, 17. ^is not to be controverted: but we rather at present
look after the plain literal fulfilling of it, which it long since so fully
had, that we may on good grounds say; that the Jews in vain and without reason
look for it as yet to come.

If the word (...) yirchak signify to go far abroad, and be divulged, as we
have seen v some to interpret it (though Caly.
others question it, because it more usually signifies to be removed, or put
far off) then might it, being applied to the decree of Cyrus, Ezra I. or of
Darius, Ezra VI. be expounded thus, Then shall the decree for thy restoration
be sent or promulged far and wide, and by virtue thereof thy children from all
those parts where they are captives, shall come unto thee, though literally
understood, and not only of the promulging of the Gospel, according to that
exposition formerly given.

Again, it may be considered whether, by the decree, may not be understood, the
decree of God by his Prophets denounced, concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, the captivity of the Jews, and the laying their Land desolate for
their evil doing, and so the promise to be, that when God in mercy shall see
time to restore again Jerusalem, that then the decree shall cease, be as it
were laid aside and reversed, and then shall her exile children come again to
her from all parts, though their Land, mean while, by virtue of that decree
shall be desolate, etc.

By the decree, Pelican.
some who more spiritually interpret the words, understand human Laws and
Traditions contrary to God, which shall give place to God's, and be removed to
make way for that, and that then diverse of all Nations shall come in unto the
Lord. These ways of expounding the words are there, if they be looked on as
spoken to and of Jerusalem, as our Translators by citing in the Margin, Amos
IX. 11. seem to do, and not without good reason. But others, as we said, will
have them directed to the enemy, and then is there farther variety of
expositions. Grot.
Some by the enemy meaning Babylon or the Chaldeans, and thus giving the
meaning, it will be a day, i. e. a long day, or long time e're thy ruins shall
be repaired: In that day of thy being trodden under, the power of sending abroad
decrees among the Nations Vat. Thy Tribute shall be far removed, or denied thee.
shall be far from thee, (according to that expression, Nahum II. 13.) In that
day he, i. e. Cyrus shall come unto thee from Assyria, and to thy fenced
Cities, and shall subject to himself the places, or Regions here described.

And the Land, i. e. Chaldea, shall be desolate with it is inhabitants, because
of their many impieties and slaughters, and rapins, by them formerly committed.
This sense is given by a great learned Grot
man, but seems somewhat harsh. Bren.
Others taking the words as referred more generally to the enemy, (without
particularly designing who is meant) thus, At that very time when thou shall
establish thy Kingdom, and rise up with all thy might against me, the decree of
God shall be far and wide extended, and his judgment shall come on thee, who
have so contumeliously used me, from Assyria, etc. i. e. from one Nation to
another, till all mine Enemies be destroyed. A learned R. Tanch.
Jew, likewise taking it as spoken to the Enemy in that large sense, looks on
it as a threatening from the Jewish Nation to them, that she shall be revenged
on them for their insulting over her, says that the meaning may be, At the
time that you shall think to plaster or make up your buildings, the decree of
God shall be far removed from you, concerning it, i. e. he shall determine the
contrary. That day shall certainly be e're long, and shall (appear made good)
in the Countries here named, by their being taken by Nebuchaduezzar, or
afterward: Assure or Assy^ia being in the first place named as Isreal's Enemy,
that at that time prevailed over them, and led them captives, etc.

Others of the Jews, who look on the words as directed to the Enemy, more
plainly speak out their mind, that by the Enemy they mean the Romans or
Christians: so R D. Kimchi.
one of them, therefore; Speaking concerning the Enemy he says, In the day
that thou think to build up thy walls with the spoils of Israel, when thou
shall come with Gog and Magog into the Land of Israel, in that day shall the
decree be far removed, i. e. that day shall be to thee to the contrary, and thy
decree, which thou determinest over the Nations, and Israel which thou rulest
over: that day shall come even to thee, That day of the salvation of Israel is
a day of the Lord, and to thee, the Enemy shall come to destroy thee, from
Assure, etc. and the Land shall be desolate, viz. the Land of the People (...)
with them that dwell therein. Abarb.
Another thus expounds it, that the sons of Ed^m, i. e. the company of
Christians shall come up to conquer Jerusalem, which, since Titus destroyed it,
had been in their hands, and was taken from them by the Ismaelites, or
Mahometans. The Kingdom of Edom (says he) shall go up thither to build their
walls; but the matter shall not succeed according to their thoughts, for in
that day the decree shall be far removed, that is to say, The decree which was
in their hands, i. e. the custom, of taking it as at other times they had done:
and how that decree shall come to be removed (or altered) he shows, saying,
that is a day and it shall come unto thee, i. e. that is a day, a peculiar
signal day, a day unto the Lord, and to thee, o Enemy, shall it come, even to
thy neck shall it reach. And so he mentions that against the Kingdom of Rome
shall come the Kingdoms of Assyria, and of the sons of the East, that is it
which he says from Assyria and the fortified II Kings XVII. 6.
Cities, which he supposes to be Chaleath and Chabor, by the River Gozan, and
the Cities of the Medes, of which Joseph Ben-Gorion says, that the People of
them Alexander the Macedonian did shut up within the Mountains that they should
not come forth. These, the Prophet says shall now come forth against this
Enemy, and by saying from (...) Matsor, or the fortress even to the River, he
intimates that the ten Tribes also which were there in restraint and captivity,
shall come against them, and the other People which are in the North-East even
to the River, viz. Euphrates, which is between Jerusalem and Babel shall all
come up against them.

And because the Christians shall some remain in Ships on the Sea near the Land
of Israel, and others be on the Land, therefore he first reckons up the People
that shall come against them by Land, from Assyria, and from the fortified
Cities, and from the fortress, and then prophesies that there shall come
against them that are on the Sea, strong Nations also by Sea, which is that
which he says, and from Sea, i. e. on the Sea shall they come from Sea, and
then from Mountain to Mountain, as much as to say, also of the Inhabitants of
the Mountains shall come against them: and so in fine, the Land of Israel in
which the War shall be, and multitude of People shall be gathered together,
shall be desolate because of them that dwell therein, viz. those Nations which
live in it for making War one with another; and all this shall be for the fruit
of their doings, by which they did evil to Israel. And whereas the In the
Copies that we have there is no such thing expressed.
Chalde Paraphrast interprets it of the Land of the Nations, that that should
be desolate by reason of the slaughter and destruction of the Inhabitants, that
also, says he, is true.

Thus have we from him a long story as punctually told us, as if he had with
his eyes seen it already acted, and as confidently affirmed as if his
exposition were as authentic as the text it self, and had been dictated to him
by the same spirit, as the words thereof were to Micah: but such is it as the
words afford no ground for. Consider when Micah prophesied, and what happened
after, of the taking of Jerusalem, and the captivity of the Jews, and their
restoration, and coming from all parts again to Jerusalem, after the Land had
for seventy years been desolate for their sins; and that if there be any thing
beyond this in an higher sense to be looked after, it was fully made good in
the setting up the Church, the Kingdom of Christ, and by so many Nations being
called into it by the preaching of the Gospel; and it will easily appear that
this Prophecy has in the utmost extent of it been long since so fulfilled, as
that these Jews looking for a farther completion of it, by freeing them in such
a way as they fancy from their present condition, will (as we before intimated)
evidently appear to proceed only out of obstinacy to maintain and make good
their groundless supposition, that the promised Messiah is not yet come, but
yet to be expected as a temporal Savior, whose Kingdom should be of this World.

Beside these ways of expounding, some taking the words as directed to
Jerusalem, or the Nation, or Church of the Jews, others to their Enemies, there
is yet another, which seems to part them between them, given by one of their
ancienter Commentators, viz. R. Sa^mo Iarchi, who taking the first words as
referred to the Enemy, which said, Where is now thy God? as if she also said to
Jerusalem, The day wherein thy walls should be built, which thou expectest, the
decree of that day is far removed, i. e. the time of it shall be prolonged, it
shall never come: then makes the following to be the Prophets answer to this
purpose, That day which you mock at, saying it is lost, it is come to nothing,
is a day reserved, and kept with God, and shall not be frustrated, and shall
come even to thee, O Enemy, to wast (or destroy thee) from Assure, which was the
first, or chief of those that did us mischief, and the fortified Cities, i. e.
and unto the fortified Cities, which Jonathan the Paraphrast calls Churmani the
great; (perhaps Armenia) and the strong City or fortress is Rome, as he says,
who will bring me into the strong City, Psalm. LX. 9. and CVIII. 10. and they
say in the Midrash of Elleh ^addebarim Rabba, (i. e. the great allegorical
exposition of Deuteronomy,) that is Rome, etc. This we give at large out of a
manuscript Copy, because in the ordinary printed Copies, both the name of Rome
and other words are wanting. And the Land shall be desolate, i. e. (says he)
the Land of the Nations.

It may seem tedious that we have reckoned up all these ways of expounding
these words; but perhaps it was necessary, lest any finding any of them omitted
might suspect that it had in it something apposite, or of moment for
understanding the Text, which was not taken notice of.

Having now the chief of such Interpretations as are given, any may use his own
judgment, and I suppose none will seem plainet, and more agreeable to the
words, then the first, taking the words as spoken of, or to Jerusalem, or the
Nation, or Church of the Jews, that to her is promised, that there should be a
day, wherein her walls should be built, and in that day her exile children
should come again to her from several places of their dispersion; though it
should not be till after the Land, for the evil of their doings, should be
desolate, and they be removed from it; before the making good of this gracious
promise, that judgment or punishment before threatened should take place for
chastisement of them for their sins. The particle ^ V rendered notwithstanding,
by it self signifies simply and: but according as the words, among which it is
placed, be construed or understood, will have other meanings, as here according
to our Translation, notwithstanding, i. e. though these things be promised, yet
before they come to pass, the Land shall be desolate, etc. or, these things
shall be, though the Land be made desolate, or as in the Margin, after that the
Land has been desolate these things shall be.

As for the places named in the 12th verse, there is no small difference in
assigning them, Interpreters according to their exposition of the other words,
seeking to fit them to it. R. Tanch.
They that look on the words as a promise of an happy restoration of the Jews,
take them as a description of those places in or about Assyria, and beyond it,
where they were detained, and from whence they should return; whether (...)
Matsor be taken for the name of a place, or for any fortified City, and the
whole Country to be denoted, both that of it which was about it is Rivers, and
on or about it is Mountains, or Tarn.
else a description of the Land to which they should return to possess it, by
all its borders, both for length and breadth; there being in both these
Countries, See Deuteronomy. XI. 24. Ezech. X^VII. 13. etc. Joel II. 20.
places to which the words may be applied. Grot.
They that look on them as a threatening destruction to Babylon or the
Chaldeans, take them as a description of those places and Countries which Cyrus
King of Persia should subdue, and take from the Chaldeans, by the strong Cities
understanding Babylon, Borsippa, and other like; by the River, Euphrates; by
from Sea to Sea, from the Persian Gulf to the Syrian, or that part of the
Mediterranean Sea; by from Mountain to Mountain, from mount Taurus to mount
Carmel. See R. Tanch. and R. D. Kimchi.
Others look on them as a description of the Countries of those Enemies of the
Jews, which bordered on their Land, as Egypt (designed by the words from Sea to
Sea) and the Idumeans (or Edom) Moabites and Ammonites denoted by from Mountain
to Mountain, i. e. mount Hor, about which these Countries did ly, which
Nebuchadnezzar should also take. According to these and the like grounds, do
they appropriate the descriptions here given to different places. All that we
can say is, that without doubt, when these words were spoken it was well
understood what places were meant by the descriptions given of them; but now so
long after, whatsoever can be said, is but by conjecture, and cannot be
certainly affirmed, so as to conclude for one opinion, to the silencing and
taking away pretense of probability from all others.

Having been thus long on these words, we shall not dismiss them without taking
notice of what is said in the Dutch Annotations (as translated into English on
the 13. verse.) viz. that by the Land they rendering it, this Land, is to be
understood the land of Canaan, and what is said, it shall become a desolation,
this happened first in the time of the Babylonian devastation, and afterward
in the time of the New Testament, and continues so to this very day. In this
Note seems to be some confusion, for it seems to make these two desolations,
viz. that occasioned by the Babylonians, so many years before Christ, and that
by the Romans, after Christ, to be one continued desolation, or both in this
one Prophecy to be prophesied of, whereas the long distance of time, and the
restoration of Jerusalem after the first devastation and the condition of the
Jews coming between, shows them to be of different and distinct consideration
as to the letter of what was spoken, though what was spoken of one, may in
another sense be applicable to the other.

Again, what Drusius says, that by some the 11, and 12. verses are understood
as of denuntiation of punishment to his people for their sins, and then V. 13.
is to be understood of Israel; I know not by whom it is, or how made out. I
suppose they must then understand the words as spoken to the Jews or
Israelites, In the day that thou think to build up thy walls and fortify thy
self against thine Enemies, thy decree (or determined purpose) shall be far
removed, or frustrated. In that very day wherein thou think to secure thy
self, shall the Enemy from all parts, and into all thy quarters come unto thee,
and the Land shall be by them made a desolation, etc. The words taken by
themselves might bear this sense, but as here they stand considering what went
before, verse 8. etc. When I fall I shall arise, etc. expressions of assurance
of comfort and salvation, and what follows to the same purpose, verse the 14.
to the end of the Chapter; it will appear, that if they be looked on as spoken
of Gods People, they are consolatory, and a promise of good, though, that those
who continue in their wickedness may not snatch at them, and thence take
occasion to encourage themselves in evil; it be added, (to show that these
things shall not be made good to them, but upon repentance, and after they have
been chastised for their sins, according to the Prophesy going before to that
purpose) notwithstanding the Land shall be desolate, etc. or (this shall be)
after the Land has been desolate because of them that dwell therein for the
fruit of their doings. If they be looked on as comminatory, they will more
properly seem to belong to the insulting Enemy, as declaring what shall betide
her for her pride and insolency and like behavior.

14 Fe^d thy People with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwell
solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them f^ed in Bashan and
Gil^ad, as in the days of old.
Feed thy people, or as in the Margin, (...), etc.] the word being used in both
senses, the first simply, the 2d figuratively. A learned R. Tanchum. And see R.
D. Kimchi.
Jew notes that these words uttered in form of a prayer, are a good promise,
and declaration (or Prophecy) of what should be, according to the usual custom
of Prophecies, that God would keep them by his Providence. On the contrary it
is by R. Saadias, or who else it is that translated the Psal^rs into Arabic,
with some Notes upon them. MS.
another noted on the LXIX. and ^IX. Psalm, that the Imprecations and curses
there used, are not properly curses by him wished against his Enemies, but
rather denuntiations or foretelling of such evils, as God would send upon them,
which he directed him, as elsewhere other Prophets, in such forms to utter.
That which the Prophet either for the People, or in the name of the People asks
(and by asking shows that God will so bring it to pass) is, Feed thy People
with thy rod. The word as it more generally signifies a rod cut from a^ tree,
to be carried in the hand, so is figuratively used, sometimes for a Scepter,
sometimes for a Shepherds staff, with which he guides or directs, and orders
his Sheep. And according to his using it in driving, ordering, or directing
them, is his behavior toward them, expressed, (and so the behavior of Princes
or Governors, who are usually compared to Shepherds toward the People, or
those that are under them, likened to a flock or sheep.) So in the Arabic
tongue, by one (...) or (...)
that has a smooth, soft, or gentle rod, or staff, is expressed, one that
gently rules and guides his flock; by one that has (...) or (...) Zamac^shari
i^ lib. Asas.
a rough and hard slaff, one that roughly or harshly behaves himself toward
them; according to which Psalm II. 9. that which we render, thou shall break
them with a rod of Iron, is rendered by Graec. Sy^ and Vulg. Lat.
some, thou shall feed or rule them with an Iron rod, to express severe dealing
toward those spoken of. Contrary to which is that Psalm XXIII. 4. Thy rod and
thy staff, they comfort me. Nic. F^ller Concord.
It is an instrument both for direction, and correction, to guide, and to
restrain, as the Shepherd sees to be needful. R. Tanch.
And so by it here will be meant Gods care over them for their good and
preservation, by directing them to what is good for them, and keeping them from
evil, his watchful and peculiar Providence over them, who are called by a
Note of peculiarity his People, the flock of his heritage, as elsewhere, the
Lord having taken Israel to be unto him a People of inheritance, Deuteronomy. IV. 20.
and chosen them to be a special People unto himself above all People that are
on the face of the Earth, Chap. VII. 6. For the Lords portion is his People,
Jacob the lot of his inheritance. Chap. XXXII. 9. so therefore every where in
Scripture called, and owned by him, viz. as his People, and so also his flock,
Isaiah XL. 11. and Ezekiel. XXXIV. the eighth, and several other verses: and so
his People, and the Sheep of his Pasture, Psalm c. 3. and so our Savior calls
his Church, ^is Sheep, Ioh. X. 27. and his flock, Luke XII. 32. These he prays
(says Abarbinel) that he will feed or govern henceforth with his own rod, and
not with the rod of the Enemy, because they are, says he, the flock of thine
heritage.

Which dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel, etc. These words
being concise, it has caused diversity of expositions, of which before we give
farther account, we may observe that the particle in, viz. in the wood is not
expressed in the orig^nal text, but supplied as understood: and again
concerning Carmel, that it is a name of a Mountain. Bochart. de Animalibus, p.
1. lib. 2. c. 48.
Two Mountains are observed to be called by this name, one in the Northern part
of Judea, near the Sea, in the confines of Assure and Zebulun, of which is
mention in the History of Elijah, 1 Kings XVIII. 19, 20. and 42. verse. and in
the History of Elisha, II Kings II. 25. and IV. 25. The other more Southerly in
the mid land near Hebron in the lot of the Tribe of Judah, of which is mention
in the History of Saul, 1 Samuel XV. 12. and in which, it is said that Nabals
possess^ons were, 1 Samuel XXV. 2. and to this Mountain they refer usually what
is spoken by the Prophets, concerning the pastures of Carmel, as Ier* L. 19.
Amos I. 2* and here: although, as a lea^ned Ibid.
man observes, they may aptly enough be referred to that Carmel which Elijah
did frequent. A learned R. D. Kimchi in dict.
Jew observes that this name was given to the Mountain or place so called, as
being a place of Fields, and Trees, for that the word does otherwise signify a
place of Trees, Fruits and Fields (abounding in Corn or Grass) and therefore is
so rendered elsewhere a plentiful or fruitful Field, as Isa. XVI. 10. and
XXIX. 17. and XXXII. 15. and Ier. IV. 26. and XLVIII. 33. (so in our
Translation, for in diverse others the name Carmel is retained as a proper
name.) The name also signifies a full green ear of Corn, as Levit. II. 14. and
elsewhere. We may by the way also note that the word (...) yaar rendered Wood,
is also elsewhere sometime joined with this word Carmel, as Isaiah X. 18. the
glory of his Wood, and of his Carmel, which ours render of his Forest and of
his fruitful Field, and XXXVII. 24. the Forest of his Carmel, as if in Carmel
were a wood or forest. Bashan also and Gilead were places noted for plenty and
richness of pasture; a Land for Cattle, Numb. XXXII. 1. Deuter. XXXII. 14. and
elsewhere often. Again we may observe that several See Chr. a Castro.
In^erpreters do differently distinguish the words, some joining the words in
the midst of Carmel, with those that go before, others with those that follow.
These things being observed, we shall the better perceive the grounds on which
they that give different expositions go, and how to discern or judge betwixt
them.

Among the several expositions we have these, 1st, that of the Chalde
Paraphrast, Feed thy People with thy word, the People of thine inheritance, in
the Age (or World) which is to be renewed; (he means perhaps after their return
from captivity) they shall dwell (or let them dwell) alone, which were solitary
in the Wood, and they shall dwell (or let them dwell) in Carmel, and they shall
feed (or let them feed) in the Land of Mathnan, i. e. Bashan, and Gilead as in
the days of old. In reference to this, and other expositions may be observed
that it was foreprophesied as a blessing, that Israel should dwell alone, etc.
Numb. XXIII. 9. and Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 28. in safety and security, without
dependence on other Nations, or fear from them, or mixture with them. 2ly. That
of a learned Jewish R. D. Kimchi, taking it as by way of promise from God t^a^
it shall be so with them.
Expositor, which dwell, i. e. that they may be alone in their Land, and no
other People with them. In the Wood, in the midst of Carmel, i. e. Let them
dwell in the Wood as in Carmel, which is an inhabited place, of Fields,
Vine-yards, and Trees; as if he should say, they shall then dwell (or let them
then dwell) confidently or securely in the Wood, which is a place of hurtful
beasts, and not be afraid of them, as a man that dwells in the midst of
Carmel where there is no cause of fear, as he says, Ezekiel. XXXIV. 25. 3dly.
They shall dwell safely in the wilderness and sleep in the Woods. R. Tanch.
Another of them, Feed, them which dwell solitarily (separated to the service
of God, after that the other Nations are cut off) as [in] the Wood (or Forest)
in the midst of Carmel; so let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, i. e. all those
other Countries being free to them in their possession and occupation, none
hindering them, as Woods on the Mountains are free to all that will, to feed, or
gather wood in them; so let those rich places be free to them. 4ly. Abarb.
Another, O Lord our God, feed thy People Israel with thy rod and staff, not
with the rod of the Enemy, because they are the Sheep of thine heritage, and
therefore, them dwelling alone in the Wood, in the midst of Carmel, feed, so as
that these Sheep may obtain to dwell securely alone, and no other dwell with
them in their Wood in the midst of Carmel, thereby denoting the Land of Israel,
and Jerusalem, because Carmel was a place of good Fields and Vine-yards, and so
shall the Land of Israel become again good, fruitful, and green, or
flourishing. Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, which are Countries on the
other side of Jordan, (as in the days of old) when Reuben and Gad, and half
the Tribe of Manasseh were in them.

These expositions have we from the Jews. Amongst Christians is yet farther
variety. Pelican. Calvin. Chr. a Castro etc.
Some to this purpose giving the meaning, Feed thy People, etc. those which now
being scattered among strange Nations, the Chaldeans and others without any
Pastor or guide, are as if, they dwelt solitarily in a Wood exposed to dangers,
do thou feed again in the midst of Carmel, and bring back, that they may feed
again in Bashan and Gilead in their own Countries, as in the days of old, i.
e. in security and prosperity under thy protection, as their Forefathers did.
This much agrees with the Chalde, and to the same sense are the words, as in
our Translation read, ^perspicuously paraphrased by a learned and famous Bishop
Hall's ^ar.
Bishop of our Church, In this mean time, viz. of the desolation of the Land, O
God take thou care of thy People, Oh do thou feed and govern them by thy
gracious protection, lead thou this flock of thine heritage, which now dwell
solitarily in the wilderness of their captivity, into the midst of thy
fruitful pastures of Carmel, let them feed in the rich Fields of Bashan and
Gilead, as in former times. Others, though not differing in the signification
and sense of the words, yet diversely pointing them, Ribera.
make part of them the words of the Prophet, part the words of God, as if the
Prophet having said, Feed thy People with thy rod, etc. which dwell solitarily
in the wood, God should answer in the midst of Carmel shall they feed, and in
Bashan and Gilead, i. e. they shall be brought back from their captivity, and
possess their rich Land again, as formerly from their coming to it out of Egypt
till their captivity. Or^ as some Tirin.
others, the Prophets words are, feed thy People; etc. which now dwell in their
captivity, as in a wood, (feed them I say) in the midst of Carmel; and Gods
answer, they shall feed in Bashan and Gilead to the same sense that before.
Chr. a Castro.
Others, feed them dwelling in the wood of their captivity among the Chaldeans,
as securely as if they were in the midst of Carmel; then adding by way of
assurance, when thou have brought them back they shall feed in Bashan, etc.
Ibid.
Others, that dwell solitarily in the wood, i. e. without mingling themselves
with other Nations, that they may serve thee alone, etc. These all agree in
this at least, that they make the first words to be the words of the Prophet by
way of petition to God, and so including a prophecy of what shall be
accordingly. But there is a learned Sanct.
Commentator, who looks on them all, as the words of the Prophet to Israel,
bidding them, and so comforting them with assurance that they should, feed
their own People, their own Sheep, as they had, for the time of their
captivity, fed their Enemies Sheep, served them; but should hereafter be their
own men, look in safety, security, and liberty after their own affairs in their
own Land. ^But this exposition is not so agreeable to the words, as that we
should forsake that wherein others agree to follow it. However in this all
hitherto agree, that the words contain a Prophecy of the Jews return from
captivity to their own Land, and that they should there be in security under
the protection of God, live in plenty and prosperity, and be supplied with all
things good for them, as Sheep in those rich pastures under the conduct of a
good and careful Shepherd. See Chr. a Castro.
Others take other ways, looking on the words as the words of God the Father
to Christ, bidding him to take care of his Church, and to feed them with
Evangelical food: or See Diodat. and Pisc.
at least as the words of the Prophet to Christ, praying him that he would
bring Israel into his Church, and feed and guide them, though destitute of
help, like Sheep in Woods. Jun. Tiem.
Others, as the words of God to the Pastors of the Church, Christ's fellow
laborers, prescribing to them how they should take care of the flock, of which
he had made them overseers, under the Type of the ancient Church. Dutch Notes.
Others, as the words of the Church to Christ, the chief Shepherd of the Church
praying him that he would feed his People, i. e. his Church scattered all
abroad upon the Earth, and ha^ed by the children of this World, (with his
staff) i. e. his word and spirit, those his flock of Sheep, as they are often
compared, that dwell alone as a separated People, not intermixed with the rest
of the World, with Sects and Heretics, (for which reason they are also often
persecuted and driven into solitudes) and yet living in safety and confidence
against all Enemies, and Hell gates under the protection of their Shepherd,
etc. But though these are pious meanings, yet we look on as more apposite to
our purpose, and giving the natural meaning of the words, the former
expositions, and among them, that Bishop Hall's Par.
Paraphrase, Which as we said, is agreeable to them, as in our Translation read,
making the persons, speaking, spoken to, and of, the Prophet, God, and the
Nation, or at least the Church of the Jews, implying (as we said) a prophecy,
or gracious promise of return out of captivity to their own Land, and that
under the protection of God, taking care of them as his People, his flock and
Sheep, they should enjoy all things necessary, and conducing to their well
being in abundant manner, set forth by a similitude of Sheep feeding in those
rich Pastures named. Although withal it cannot be doubted that all these good
things promised to the Jews are in a higher manner made good to the Church of
Christ, and all faithful believers rescued from sin and Satan, and brought
back into his Fold; who, as he says, shall be saved under his protection, and
go in and out, be kept in safety and security, and find pasture, i. e.
spiritual food for their Souls of his word and Sacraments, and all things
conducing to their comfort and eternal good. And to this ultimate fulfilling of
this Prophecy under Christ, does the Chalde Paraphrast seem to point, making
them as a prayer to God that he would feed his People with his word, in the age
that was after to be renewed, as above was said. This Paraphrase is said to
have been composed some thirty years before Christ. This place will be well
illustrated by comparing it with another, promising the same blessings in very
like expressions, Ier. L. 17, 18, 19.

15 According to the days of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt will I show
unto him mavelous things.
According to the days of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt, etc.] These
words are generally looked on, as spoken in the person of God, in answer to
that former petition of the Prophet, Feed thy People, etc. assuring him that he
will so do; and that he may not doubt of it through any seeming difficulties,
puts him in mind of those former great things which he had done for their
Fathers in bringing them with his mighty power out of Egypt, with mighty signs
and wonders. He that could do that, can do this; his power is still the same;
of that they cannot doubt, and he assures them he will do it; though
considering their forlorn condition, how low, and weak they are, how many and
potent their Enemies, and what great obstacles are in the way, it cannot be
done without showing unto them mavelous things, like those of old, such as
shall be wondrous in their own eyes, and in the eyes of all that behold them:
so that they shall say among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for
them, Psalm. CXXVI. 2. yea that in some respects that which God would do, in
their bringing back from Babylon, and their other dispersions, and their
wonderful restoration, should be rather more mavelous, then what he did in
the days of their coming out of Egypt, appears by what is said, Ierem. XVI.
14, 15. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that it shall no more be said,
The Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel, out of the Land of
Egypt; But the Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel, from the
Land of the North, and from all the Lands, whither he had driven them, and I
will bring them again into their Land that I gave unto their Fathers. With much
the like words, Chap. XXIII. verse. 7, 8. which seem to make as if in, and for
effecting the latter deliverance, even greater marvels were wrought and greater
power showed then in the first. For what reasons it may be so said, will not be
to our present purpose to enquire, our present words representing them as alike
mavelous; and they were both manifestly Tarnov.
types of that greater deliverance by Christ wrought, and those more mavelous
things by him done, for the delivering of his People from the power of Hell and
the Devil. And so may we look on the words both here, and in those places of
Jeremy, as directing us to that wonderful deliverance, for a fuller and higher
completion of these Prophesies, then was either by the deliverance in bringing
them out of the Egyptian bondage, or Babylonish captivit^, though more
immediately the words point at those, and in this the expressions of the Jews
themselves will concur, viz. that the final completion of these Prophesies, is
to be by what should be done by Christ or the Messiah. So Kimchi on Jeremy XVI.
14, 15. says, that what is there said shall be made good in the days of the
Messiah, (as likewise Abarbinel, as being the opinion of their ancienter
Doctors.) But mean while, though thus far in words they agree with us, yet in
the application of them to the matter spoken of, there is a vast and
irreconcilable difference. For we say, that as for any temporal deliverance by
these words foretold, it was made good in a mavelous manner by bringing back
the dispersed Jews from the Babylonish captivity. But as for that more
mavelous delivery, by this typified and given them to look for under the
Messiah it is wholely spiritual (his Kingdom being not of this World) and has
been accordingly fulfilled by rescuing his People (and those as well Gent^les,
as Jews) from a worse captivity under a more potent Enemy, then either the
Egyptian of old, or Babylonian afterward, even the Devil, and the power of
Hell. But the Jews, that they may look for, by virtue of these Prophesies, a
temporal restitution from the captivity they are now under, since their
rejecting of Christ, passing by that deliverance from the Babylonish captivity,
as a small thing, though God set so signal a character on it, apply the words
to that which they yet expect, without any grounds of a promise to be wrought
for them, by their Messiah's subduing all Nations to them, especially the
Christians, whom they hope to see totally cut off, as has been above said, and
his making them Lords over them in this World. We have already seen those
mavelous things done, and still doing, which make us expect no other of a
different kind, which would indeed be less then what has been already done.
Thy coming out of Egypt.] R. Tanchum, Calv.
Thine, O Prophet, or People, in thy Fathers. I will show unto him.] i. e. the
People of Israel. The change of persons spoken to in Scripture is frequent, and
does not alter the meaning: all is meant of the People.

16 The Nations shall see and be confounded at all their might, they shall lay
their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.
The Nations shall see, and be confounded at all their might, etc.] These again
seem to be the words of the Prophet, describing the effects of those mavelous
things that God would work: so unlikely was it that the Jews being in that low
and servile condition, which they were brought to in the Babylonish captivity,
should be restored to be again a Kingdom, and flourishing Nation, that the
Nations seeing what mavelous things God had showed in restoring them, could
not but wonder, and be confounded to see all their own might, which they
trusted in, brought to nothing; and those whom they so much despised to be
advanced to that height, and power, that they are not able to hinder or hurt
them; So the most.
some by their might, understanding the might of the Enemies themselves, Jun.
Trem. Tarn. Stokes.
others, the might of the People that are saved. And the manifests signs of
their confusion, and consternation should appear, in that they should lay their
hand upon their mouth, be silent and mute, as not knowing what to say, nor
daring to speak against God or his People, nor able to contradict what they
saw. With this expression may be compared, Chap. III. 3, 7. and Exodus XI. 7.
Ios. X. 21. Judge. XVIII. 19. Job V. 16. and XXI. 5. and XL. 4. Psalm. CVII. 42.
And that their ears should be deaf: so ungrateful should be the things that
they heard, as that they should be astonished by hearing them, and being not
able to bear them, even stop their ears against them, as wishing themselves
even rather deaf then to hear such mavelous things, as God had done for those
whom they hated. This their confusion is also expressed in the next words.

17 They shall lick the dust like a Serpent, they shall move out of their holes
like worms of the Earth: they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall
fear because of thee.
They shall lick the dust, as a Serpent, etc.] Those insolent Enemies who erst
while so proudly insulted and triumphed over Gods People, and magnified their
own strength, shall now be brought to the lowest, and most abject condition, as
if they were worms and no men: which is elegantly set forth by these
expressions, They shall lick the dust as a Serpent: so cast down shall they be,
so humbled as not to be able to raise up themselves, and so through fear behave
themselves, as if they were condemned to the same Genesis III. 14.
posture and food, with that accursed creature. The like expression have we,
Psalm. LXXII. 9. Isaiah XLIX. 3. And they shall move out of their holes like
worms (or creeping things) of the Earth. The word (...) yirgezu, rendered, move,
is such as is taken Abu Walid. Kimchi.
usually to signify a trembling motion, or motion with perturbation, whether
spoken of a bodily moving from a place, Nic. Ful^er Concord.
or of the mind being moved with some passion, as of fear, or anger, or the
like; the effects of which are commonly seen in the trembling motion, or
gesture of the body also. It is therefore by z some rendered, they shall be
disturbed: b by others, they shall be moved with fear, or tremble, or the like.
The word in our Translation includes the latitude of the word, any motion with
its circumstances of fear, and disturbance, or the like, which it seems here to
intimate. The word (...) Misgeroth rendered holes, being from a b word that
signifies to shut up, or shut in, properly denotes a place wherein any is so
shut in, or remains, any enclosure, and may therefore be applied to a dwelling
place, a Castle, or hold. It is used elsewhere for a Prison; as Psalm CXLII.
7. and Isaiah XXIV. 22. and by some of the Jews taken for chains, as whereby
Prisoners are restrained, Psalm. XVIII. 45. where ours render it close places,
as likewise II Sam. XXII. 46. still the same notion of the word is retained,
and so in this place, whether it be rendered (as by ours) out of their holes,
with respect to the worms, or creeping things of the Earth; their holes being
to them the places wherein they are enclosed; or as by Aben Ezra, R. Tanchum.
etc.
others in respect to the men (the Enemies) that are compared to them, their
mansions, or strong holds, wherein they shut themselves up for security; it
will be necessarily suggested to us that as worms, or like creeping things move
themselves with confusion out of their holes, when the Earth is disturbed about
them: so the Enemies of Gods People should in confusion, and tumultuously, with
fear and consternation, leave their mansions, and strong holds, wherein they
thought to be secure, not able to lift up themselves against God, and those by
him sent against them, or made to prevail over them; Grot.
so that they shall deliver up to them the places wherein they trusted. The
words are still an expression of great confusion, disturbance, and
consternation, which shall befall them; and the reason of that consternation to
them is in the next words given, because they shall be afraid of the Lord our
God, etc. This is the import of the usual expositions, which are among
themselves easily reconcilable. But there is a Abarb.
Doctor of the Jews, who here (as often as we have elsewhere intimated) takes a
different way from others, and will have the word rendered, holes, to signify
captivity, (although that also would be from the same notion) and the sense to
be, that the Enemies of Israel, being cast down wounded, shall tremble, by
reason of, or in revenge of the captivity which they brought on Israel, God now
taking vengeance on them, for the evils they did to those his People in their
captivity. But his exposition is so harsh, and violent, that few, I suppose,
will follow it. R. Salomo Jarchi.
Another, by reason of their own restraint, they shall be afraid of the Lord
our God, and shall fear because of thee; so submissively and humbly shall they
behave themselves, through fear of God, who has done such mavelous things in
exalting those, whom they erst while trod upon, and triumphed over, and casting
them themselves with all their might down to the ground; so may these words be
looked on, as the cause of that great consternation in the former described, or
else they may be looked on as an effect, or farther des^^ip^ion of their
con^^ernation, that they shall now be really Jun. Tr^m. R. D. Kimchi.
afraid of God, whom before they As Pharaoh, Exodus V. 11. and Senacherib, II
Kings XIX. 10. and here, v^r. 10.
despised and reproached, and with fear and crouching address themselves to
him, as forced to acknowledge that there is none besides him.

And shall fear because of thee. Here is a change of the persons; as if with
admiration addressing his speech to the Lord, he now on a sudden spoke to him,
of whom he was speaking. Except, with R. D. Kimchi, Dru^.
others, we should look on it as a turning to Israel, or the People of God, for
w^om he did such mavelous things to the conf^sion and conste^nation of their
enemies. As if he said they shall be afraid of the Lord, whom they see to be
our God, and they shall also fear thee, whom before they insulted over, saying
to thee, where is the Lord thy God? ver. 10. now seeing him to own thee in so
signal a manner by those great things that he does for thee. The scope of his
words will be still the same, viz. to set ^orth both the goodness, and the
greatness of God, manifested in the mavelous things, which he does for the
delivery and exaltation of his dej^cted People and destr^ction and bringing
down of their proud Enemies, both which, viz. the goodness and power of God, he
proceeds also to admire and magnify in the following verse, in another regard,
viz. the taking away that which was the cause to them of their former misery, (
see verse. 9.) that so it may not prevail to keep them still miserable.

18 Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy.
19 He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea.
Who is a God like thee that pardons iniquity, etc.] Jun. Trem. and so an
Arab. MS. Version.
Some, that they may with greater Emphasis give the meaning of the word (...)
El in our Translation simply rendered, God, render it, a mighty God: and sure
the mightiness both of his power and mercy is so evidently exerted, and made
manifest in the following acts mentioned, as that the Prophet by his question
here put, denying (as that is the manifest force of the expression in form of
admiration, or interrogation, and so therefore by Chald. Syriac.
some rendered negatively,) that any besides him can do those things, asserts
him to be the one only true God, and that there is none among all that were
ever worshipped by the Heathen to be compared to him, and that he and only he,
is infinite in mercy and power, and so able to do such things. The acts
mentioned are, that pardons iniquity, with the others subjo^ned, as
concomitant, or farther explications of it. This is a Title or property which
God challenges to himself; and whereby he proclaims himself that he is a God
pardoning, or forgiving iniquity, Exodus XXXIV. 7. and Number. XIV. 18. where the
words in the Original are the same that here, and this was always accounted
the property of God alone: so say they, Mar. II. 7. [ Ribera.
He gives repentance and spares or takes away the punishment.]

And passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage.] Passes by,
i. e. winketh at, and does not rigorously enquire into it to take vengeance for
it to the uttermost, but as one that Gro^.
passes by a thing that he will not take notice of, does not impute to* the
remnant of his heritage their transgressions; those (say some, both R. D.
Kimchi.
Jews and Christians) who shall be left remaining of the Jews at that time when
God shall restore them from captivity. Above c. IV. 7. God promises to make
her that halted a remnant, the People of his inheritance shall not so be
destroyed, though they be chastised, and though the wicked be cut off from
among them but that an holy seed, a S^e Calv. Isa VI. 13. and II. 1^. Jer.
XXIII. Ezekiel. VI. 8. Joel II. 32.
remnant shall be preserved, and saved, Romans IX. 27. and to these is the
promise here made, not to all in general. He that is a God forgiving iniquity,
will yet by no means clear the guilty; i. e. says the Chalde, the guilty that
will not repent, or turn, and be converted, as he says in the same place,
Exodus XXXIV. 7^* but to those that turn to him he will show mercy, as is here
described, and they for their paucity in respect to the others, who perhaps
would call themselves his People, but go contrary to him, are called the
remnant of his heritage, and of these he does not say that they are altogether
See Ab^rb. and Kimchi.
innocent, and without sin, but supposing their repentance intimated, verse. 9.
that he will pardon, or take away, their iniquity, and pass by their
transgression because they are his heritage, not for their See Calv. on V. 19.
deserts, but of his own free mercy, it being his property not to retain anger
for ever, to be implacable in his wrath because he delights in mercy; so is
his nature often described, as, besides the forecited places of Exodiu and
Numbers, in many others. I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep
anger for ever, Ier. III. 12. and see Psalm. CIII. 8, 9. though they have
nothing in themselves to deserve it, yet says he, I, even, I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy
sins; Isaiah XLIII. 25. This property of mercy (as all others) in him is
unalterable, and therefore as he has formerly showed mercy to his People, so
will he again do, he will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, which
according to the ordinary use of that word, turn, Drus. Grot. and others. See
Psalm. ^XXI. 20. Return, and quicken, i. e. quicken again.
may either be expounded, he will again have compassion upon us, as he has
formerly used to have, or else with respect to what went before. He retains
not his anger for ever,] He will after he has chastised us, for our
iniquities, by which we have provoked his wrath, in mercy Drus.
turn again from his wrath, he will not in anger shut up his tender mercies,
Psalm. LXXVII. 9. but will P^al. lxxx. 3. and Zac. I. 3.
turn us to himself, and turn himself to us, and have compassion upon us,
according to what is said, Jonah III. 9. with like use of the word, Joel II. 14.
who can tell if God will turn, and repent and turn away from his fierce anger
that we perish not? and Zach. I. 3. Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of Hosts,
and I will turn unto you, etc.

He will subdue our iniquities.] The word subduing, or bringing down or under,
which is Drus.
usually applied to the bringing under Enemies, is here well applied to sin,
the worst of Enemies, and the subduing of which is a token of greater power
then the bringing under any bodily Enemies: in the subduing these will the
greatness both of Gods mercy, and power appear; in sin is considerable both the
power whereby it prevails on men, captivating, and inthralling them to it
self, and the R. Tan^h.
evils which it pulls on men, or punishments, that it makes men liable to; the
taking away both these, the word subduing will include and require, and both
these will God do for his People, by giving them grace, and power to resist
sin, and shake off its yoke, and by taking away the punishment thereof, and
sreeing them from it. The same is meant by Grot. Vat.
those that render and expound he shall put their iniquities under his feet, as
things that he will not look upon any more, but put out of sight, and mind,
quite suppress, or not suffer to rise up and come in sight. In the new
Testament are several expressions which agree to this, and make for
illustrating it, as, destroying the body of sin in Gods children, that they
should not henceforth serve it. Romans VI. 6. that is, should not reign in their
mortal bodies, ver. 12. nor have dominion over them, ver. 14. that God shall
bruise or tread Satan under their feet. He will so subdue, and put under their
iniquities, that they shall not farther have dominion over them, nor Dutch
Notes.
rise up in judgment against them. To express further the certain, and utter
abolition of them, he adds, Thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the
Sea.] Those things which are so drowned in the bottom of Sea, and covered by
it, are looked on as out of sight, out of mind, out of regard, no more likely
ever to be taken notice of again. Arius Mont. Ribera, etc.
Some here think an allusion to be had to a custom used amongst the Jews, who
when they would have any thing to be put away out of memory or regard, and from
further use, would des^ine it to be cast into the salt Sea, or Sea of Sodom. Of
which custom, or expression, some examples out of their writings are brought by
the learned Doctor Lightfoot in his Centuria Chorographica, c. 5. (and see him
on Matthew. XVIII. 6.) but whether any such custom among them was in our Prophets
time, may be questioned. Others think him to allude to the drowning of Pharaoh
and his Host (the Egyptians) in the red Sea, of whom it is said, The Sea
covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters, Exodus XV. 10. of whom he
said, Chap. XIV. 13. See the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show you to
day, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever. Especially he having said above, verse. 15. According to the days
of thy coming out of Egypt, I will show unto him mavelous things. But however
without looking after allusion to any particular custom, or History, the Scope
of the phrase according to the customary expression of all Nations and
Languages will be manifest, so as to signify, that God will blot out their
iniquities, (as he speaks, See Jer. L. 20.
Psalm. LI. 9.) cover them, and no more suffer them to be in his sight, or
remembrance to provoke him to anger, or to rise up against them for their
destruction. Here again (as has been observed,) and in the following words, is
a D. Kimchi. So the Pronouns, us, our, their.
change of persons, the third, and the second, He, and thou promiscuously used,
as sometimes speaking of God, sometimes to him, yet without making more
difference in the sense then if he had in all the verbs used the same, either
the third or (rather as a R. T^nchum.
learned Jew thinks) the second: which makes that some See G^aec. Vulg. Lat.
Sir. and Arab.
Translators have not thought necessary so exactly to set them down, as they
are in the original, but to put one in the place of the other, the sense being
still the same, as to any that peruse them will appear.

20 Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou
have sworn unto our Fathers from the days of old.
Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, etc.] That which gives him assurance,
that God will do for them those good things mentioned, is Gods faithful promise
made from of old to them, in their Forefathers, which he had confirmed by his
Oath, and to it put his seal, which the Jewish Talmud Sabbat. c. v. p. 55.
Ikka^im part. 2. c. 22. Bux^. L^x. mag. in (...) Aman.
Doctors do not unfitly say, is truth: so that by these Heb. VI. 17, 18.
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, established, it
could not fail, but give always firm consolation to those who had right in it.
And from it therefore does the Prophet here give assurance, that God will so as
he described, have mercy on them; neither their Enemies, nor sins shall be able
to hinder it, because so it was necessary that he might perform, and in so
doing should perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which he had
sworn, etc. That by Jacob, and Abraham, are meant, not only their persons, but
their posterity is on all hands agreed, the promises pertaining to, aand having
been made good, more to their posterity, then their persons. Here is usually
made a question concerning the different meaning of truth, and mercy, and why
one is said to be performed to Jacob, the other to Abraham. The ordinary
answer, both by diverse R. D. Kimchi, R. Tanchum.
Jews, and See Chr. a Castro.
Christians, is, that the good promises of God as made to Abraham at first,
were mercy, mere mercy, but in respect to Jacob, truth. Gods truth was engaged
to make good to him, and his posterity, as heirs to Abraham, what of free mercy
was promised to him, and his seed: which is an easier exposition, and more
agreeable to the words, then what Rab. Salom^ gives, viz. as if the promise
which he should make good to Jacob, were the reward of Abraham's goodness, which
he showed in teaching his Sons to keep the way of the Lord. But here Abarb.
other questions are also started, as, why Isaac is not here named as well as
Jacob and Abraham, and why Jacob is named before Abraham: but what ever
pleasing or probable answers are, or may be given to these questions, it seems
not convenient at all to make them. For this would be to question why the holy
Spirit by the Prophets spoke as he did, and not as men would think fit he
should have spoken, as if they were fit to teach him, or prescribe a method to
him. We shall not therefore insist on them, only we cannot but take notice,
what occasion that fierce Jewish Doctor Abarbinel takes in his answer to the
first of those questions, of venting (as on all occasions he does) his malice
against Christians, while he thus says, Because from Abraham came Ismael, and
the Assyrians, which shall hereafter be at peace with Israel, therefore he
says, that when God shall perform the truth to Jacob, i. e. the truth of those
things which he revealed to him in the Vision of the Ladder, Genesis XXVIII. 12,
etc. wherein, he says, God showed to him all that concerned both the
captivity, or dispersion of his posterity, and their restoration therefrom, in
the redemption, or restoration of his seed, He will show mercy also to
Abraham, in that the Assyrians, the Sons (he says) of Keturah, which came from
him, and the Sons of Ismael shall receive the Law of God, and shall be subject,
or submit themselves to Israel. But he makes no mention of Isaac, because Esau
who came from him, shall have no portion, or inheritance in the Law of God, nor
in the peace of Israel, for there shall be none left remaining to Esau. This is
his precise determination of the question, in which his aim appears to be, to
cut off the posterity of Esau from any lot, or part in those blessings promised
of old to Abraham, and from all mercy. But though Isaac be not named, yet was
not his son Esau then in his Grandfather Abraham's Loins, as well as other of
his posterity, and so under him comprehended as well as they; though Jacob (as
to the Land of Promise) carried away the blessing of the inheritance: and so
did Isaac from Ismael, and the Sons of Keturah? And what is here to exclude him
more then them? Besides the Promise made to Abraham is of larger extent,
reaching to all Nations, and families of the Earth, Genesis XII. 3. and XVIII. 18.
and XXII. 18. Among those all sure those of the progeny of Esau also must be
included. And though Isaac be not here expressly mentioned, yet is he according
to the judgment of the Chalde Paraphrast, who adds his name, manifestly
comprehended, and understood, and to him the like Promise was made as to
Abraham, that in his seed should all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis
XXVI. 4. Ecclus. xliv. 22.
With him he did establish also the blessing of all men and the Covenant, so
that though he made it rest more peculiarly upon the head of Jacob, and the
right of primogeniture being transferred to him, his posterity enjoyed the
promised Land; yea and as for spiritual blessings they had the preemmence also,
in that they had the R in. III. 2.
Oracles of God committed to them, his Law to direct them for obtaining the
promised blessing: and to them did Romans IX. 4.
pertain the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the
Law, and the service of God, and the Promises; yea and that of them according
to the flesh, Christ that promised seed Gal. III. 16.
in whom the blessing was to be extended to all the Nations, and kindreds of
the Earth, came: and therefore at his coming, he was first sent to bless them,
Act. III. 26. And it was necessary that the glad tidings thereof should first
be published to them, Act. XIII. 32, and 46. yet was there by virtue of the
Promise made to Abraham, and repeated to Isaac, mercy also, and a blessing for
all other Nations that should come in. Why shall Esaus posterity be excepted
against, and utterly excluded, even Isaacs Sons, to whom he gave also a
blessing, though inferior to Jacobs, when as the word all is general without
limitation? and we see Am. IX. 12. a Promise of the reception of the remnant of
Edom also, as well as of other Nations. But what do we plead for Esau's
posterity, when it is manifest that the Jews quarrel is not here against them
that are really so, but against those whom he, with others of them, is pleased
to bestow that name or title upon, viz. Christians, without any See the reasons
in Buxtorf's Treatises, at the e^d of Cozari.
reason at all, but what is absurd, ridiculous, and altogether false. Only,
the Edomites, or Esau, were a name most hateful to them, (contrary to the plain
Command, Deuteronomy. XXIII. 7. Thou shall not abhor an Edomite.) and therefore to
show their irreconcilable hatred to them, they would call them by that name, We
have no reason to take it to our selves, nor acknowledge it: but with greater
reason then they who are 1 Cor. X. 18.
Israel only after the flesh, do all true Christians (of what Nation soever,
and from whom soever descended) challenge to themselves the name of Israelites,
to be the Gal. VI. 16.
Israel of God, and being of the Faith of Abraham, to be the children of
Abraham, Gal. III. 7. and so to have right to the truth, which God had by oath
confirmed to Jacob, and his mercy to Abraham, to whom was before preached that
Gospel, in thee shall all Nations be blessed, v. 8. for the Promise was not to
Abraham, or to his ^eed through the Law, but through the righteousness of
Faith, Romans IV. 13. and is sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of
the Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father
of us all, ibid. v. 16. On refelling his calumny therefore in calling
Christians, Ed^mites, or Esauites, and excluding us in that notion from any
part in that mercy to Abraham, we shall not longer stand, it having no other
ground then the inverterate malice of those who have refused their own mercy
toward those, who have embraced and laid hold on it. That we may return
therefore from this digression to the words of the Prophet, we may from the
words, and concessions of him, who has occasioned it by this his question and
answer to it, take advantage for our summing up of what is given us to
understand from them; as 1. that the mercy in them mentioned, belongs not
only to Israel after the flesh, but to those of other Nations also, as he
allows to the children of Ishmael and Keturah, who shall come in to God, by the
obedience of Faith, and so become of his Israel, being of Israel's Faith. 2ly.
That the mercy here promised was to be made good at, and by the coming of the
Messiah, which is meant by the time of Redemtion, or restoration by him
mentioned. Thus therefore as to the scope of the words we conclude, that these
words, as a conclusion of the former Prophecy concerning the restoration of
the Jews, and the confusion of their Enemies, contain an assurance of a
temporal or corporal deliverance to them, and were accomplished when God
remembering his Covenant made with their Forefathers, accepting of their
conversion, pardoning their sins, and blotting out their iniquities, did free
them from the Babylonish captivity, and bring them back into the promised Land;
but that the expressions are such as giving to expect all that by virtue of
Gods truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, and oath to their Forefathers, was
to be expected, seem to include a Promise of Christ, that seed of Abraham, in
which all the Act. III. 25.
kindreds of the Earth were to be blessed, Heb. II. 16.
with all the benefits of his Redemtion, and so were by him fulfilled in an
higher manner, not of giving to the Jews any victory over all Nations, and
earthly possessions, and dominion as they fondly expect, (as we have above
showed, and the Author we have last mentioned, here plainly intimates in his
words cited) but of rescuing all that come in to him, and lay hold on his
Redemtion, both Jews, and Gentiles of all Nations, out of the hands of worse
Enemies then the Babylonians, even sin and Satan, and making them Citizens, not
of the Earthly, but of the Heavenly Jerusalem, heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and conferring on them all spiritual blessings. This also being comprehended in
these words, was fully made good by Christ's taking on himself the seed of
Abraham, and coming into the World for the work of our Redemtion, and setting
up his Kingdom among men, and calling them without exclusion of any Nation or
condition, into his Church. Thus to understand the words of Christ, and his
Kingdom we learn, both out of the Hymn of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of
Zachary in the first Chapter of S. Luke, in both which much like the same
expressions are used as here: and in the first it is said that by Gods sending
of Christ, he had helped his servant Israel in remembrance of his mercy, as he
spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever, verse. 54, 55. and
in the other, that God had visited, and redeemed his People, and had raised up
an horn of Salvation for us, in the house of his Servant David, as he spoke by
the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the World began; That we
should be saved from our Enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us; To
perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant;
the oath which he swear to our Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us,
verse. 68, etc. In Christ therefore was that which is here mentioned, Gods truth
to Jacob, the mercy to Abraham, which he had sworn unto the Fathers from the
days of old, performed: in him fully, Mercer. on Amos IX. 13.
yet so as to be still in performing unto the Worlds end, by his calling into
his Church, both Jews and Gentiles, and offering his Salvation to them, and
blessing them with all spiritual blessings, which Salvation that the Jews will
not acknowledge but reject, and him that brought it, to expect only a temporal
restoration by one whom they fancy yet to come, is their mere groundless
obstinacy, envying the extent of Gods boundless mercy promised in the seed of
Abraham to all Nations, for which we pity them, and desire God that he would
open their eyes, that they may see, and acknowledge, and lay hold on his
Salvation, Luke II. 30, etc.
which he has prepared before the face of all People, a light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the glory of his People Israel.

Thus much as to the words of this Prophet. We may only add an observation,
which the forementioned Jew takes from an ancient Abarb. out of Siffie, in
which Book it is^ p. 60. at the beginning of his Exposition of Deuteronomy. XXXIII.
and see Yalkut.
Author of theirs; viz. that there is not any denuntiation of hard things to
Israel, which is not concluded with promise of merc^. Among other instances (as
out of Moses, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Jeremiah) he brings this conclusion of Micah's
Prophecy, in which after several Judgments, he shuts up all with words of
comfort. And very remarkable in that kind is indeed this conclusion, which to
show how greatly God delights in mercy, is uttered in words giving assurance of
mercy, not only to Israel after the flesh, upon their repentance, but to all
that shall in Christ, the promised seed by Faith, lay hold on his Promise made
to Abraham, and in him to all the kindreds of the Earth, so that the Gentiles
also reading it, cannot but glorify God, and rejoice with his People, and sing
unto him that Hymn which the Romans XV. 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 117.
Apostle shows to be fitted to them, viz. O praise the Lord all ye Nations,
praise him all ye People, for his merciful kindness is great toward us, and
the truth of the Lord endures for ever, praise ye the Lord.

The LORDS Name be praised.
Some things to be taken notice of, and inserted in the places cited.
MICAH 4. 5. in the Note on that Verse, the last line of the first Column,
after, rendered, add, by many, But we, will be rather rendered as it is by ours,
And we, etc. at the end of the Note, for alteration, read, asseveration, etc.
and add; Vatablus in his Notes in the Edition in folio by Robert Stephens
says, that this expression of walking in the Name of God, or the Lord, etc. is
an Hebraisme, (why it need so be called I know not) he says here that the
meaning of it is, to worship or serve God. The like expression occurs, Zach.
10. 12. they shall walk up and down in his Name, and there in the lesser
Editions of those Notes in 4^ and 8^, he says the meaning is freti auxilio
Dei, trusting on the help of the Lord. And indeed both those does it manifestly
seem to imply, 1. To own God for their God, and to cleave only to him, and him
duly and faithfully to worship, invocate, serve and obey, and to conform their
lives to his will and precepts, which is called walking with God, Genesis V. 22.
or before him, Genesis XVII. 1. as the contrary behavior, walking contrary to
him, Levit. XXVI. 21. 2ly, To have affiance in him to place their trust and
confidence in him, and on him, whose Name is a strong Tower, Prove. XVIII. 10.
to rely professing that their help is in the name of the Lord, Psalm. CXXIV. 8.
These Notions of walking in his Name, however they may be considered as
distinct, yet cannot be severed in the subject so as that they should be one
without the other. For he that does not rightly own God, and cleave to him
alone, and faithfully serve him, cannot have any grounds to rely or trust on
him for good and protection, but he that does adhere to him, and duly serve
him, may with confidence depend on him, and shall find from him assured
protection. These meanings will easily be made out of the use of the single
words, which they have besides their proper signification, as walking is used
for living or framing the course of ones life, or conversation, behaving or
deporting oneself, or continuing in any course of living, and as the Name of
the Lord is used either for his doctrine, worship, Religion, will and
commandment, or else his power, assistance, blessing and protection. They will
live in constant fear of him, and obedience to him, and without fear of any
others in confidence of his assistance and protection. To walk in the Name of
God will be to give up their selves to him, either as the object of their
worship, or of their confidence: the expression here we look on as including
both these and that seems the full import of it.

Micah V. 3. page 51. col. 2. line 15. read; of some foregoing passages, as c.
IV. 13. and the 1. verse of this Chapter. p. 52. col. 1. l. 9. after what they
say, add, Besides these, there is also another exposition hinted by Abarbinel,
as extravagant as any of the other: viz. Therefore, i. e. because the Children
of Israel forsook the House of David (of which the Ruler ought always to have
been) God shall give them up into their Captivity, until the time that she
which travells has brought forth, in many distresses and sorrows, so declaring
that the destruction of the ten Tribes should be for that sin; And as for Judah
and Benjamin, which did not forsake David their King, yet they also shall go
into Captivity as well as the other, wherefore he says, and the remnant of his
Brethren shall return unto the Children of Israel, i. e. to go into Captivity
as they went. Thus he says the words may be also interpreted; but I suppose
none else will so think, except some who as he will seek to say any thing,
without considering whether it agrees with the words, or makes any probable or
tolerable sense (as this Exposition plainly does neither) rather then embrace
the true meaning, if it make against what they are obstinately set on.

Micah c. V. immediately after the 14. verse add,

And I will pluck up thy Groves out of the midst of thee.] Of what use
consecrated Groves were anciently, in the times of Idolatry, we may easily
perceive out of the ancientest Records, viz. the Books of Moses, as Exodus
XXXIV. 13. where Israel being forbidden to make any Covenant with the Amorites
and Canaanites, and other Idolatrous Nations, are commanded to destroy their
Altars, break down their Images, and cut down their Groves (as wherein they
worshipped, or did honor to their Idols) as appears again, Deuteronomy. XII. 2. 3. Ye
shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the Nations, which ye shall
possess, served their Gods, upon the high Mountains and upon the Hills, and
under every green Tree, and you shall overthrow their Altars, and break their
Pillars, and burn their Groves with fire. So we read that Israel served Baalim
and the Groves, Judge. III. 7. and again c. VI. 25, 28. we read of Baals Grove;
and the Israelites to keep them from Idolatry are commanded not to plant a
Grove of any Trees near unto the Altar of the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. XVI. 21.
notwithstanding which command, as Israel afterward fell to Idolatry, so they
fell also to planting of Groves to the honor of Idols, and worshipping them in
them. So Maacah the mother of Asa, made an Idol in a Grove, 1. Kings XV. 13.
And Ahab setting up the worship of Baal made a Grove, I. Kings XVI. 33. and had
his Prophets of the Groves, c. XVIII. 19. so of the Grove in Samaria we have
mention, II Kings XIII. 6. and that the Israelites doing things that were not
right against the Lord, set them up Images and Groves, ibid. c. XVII. 9. 10.
and made them molten Images, even two Calves, and made a Grove, v. 16. and that
Judah left the Lord their God, and served Groves and Idols, II Chro. XXIV. 18.
by comparing which and like places will here easily be understood what is meant
when he says, He will pluck up their Groves, viz. that he will take away those
parts of Idolatry also, whether the words be taken with some as directed to the
Chaldeans, or with others to the Israelites, the use of Groves in the worship
of their Idols having been cowmon to both, So will I, etc.

ERRATA.
PAGE 1. Column 2. l. 28. read Judgments. p. 2. c. 2. line 24. read one. p. 3.
l. 1. infere sist, or. ibid. l. 43. ^insere (,). post Israel. p. 5. c. 2. l.
30. r. That. p. 7. c. 1. l. 13. post Aphrah infere (i. e. dust) ibid. l. 57. r.
-- lashti. p. 9. c. 2. l. 54. insere (*) ante some, and post Trem. in Margin.
p. 11. c. 2. l. 23. r. off. ibid. l. ult. post to insere (z) p. 13. marg. l. 3.
r. Menoch, l. 4. (...). p. 14. c. 2. l. 4. r. article. p. 16. c. r. 1. l. 31.
post -- ring, infere them. p. 17. marg. l. 1. ante Christ. infere but he
approves it not. p. 23. marg. l 1. post Tarn. infere Joseph Kimchi. ibid. post
Drus. infe^e R. Joseph Kimchi in R. Dav. Kimchi. p. 32. c. 2. l. 54. post
Nations infere, on. p. 33. l. ult. post rendered ins. by many, ibid. c. 2. l. 1.
r. rendered, as ours read, ibid. l. 47. r. asseveration. p. 37. c. 2. l. 7. r.
concern us. ibid. l. 51. r. come. p. 44. c. 2. l. 26. r. vengeance, he says,
p. 51. c. 1. l. 51. pro and. r. with. p. 54. marg. Melachim. p. 60. c. 2. l. 1.
r. and the. p. 61. c. 1. l. 23. r. be. ibid. c. 2. l. 23. r. -- vation. p. 62.
c. 2. l. 23. r. VI. p. 65. c. 2. l. 23. r. Israel, on. p. 67. c. 2. l. 51. r.
wearying. p. 68. l. 47. r. Preface of. ibid. l. 56. r. -- Father. p. 71. l. 10.
r. and it. c. 2 l. 46. r. willingly. p. 72. l. 42. r. ends, and in. p. 83. l.
1. dele on. p. 78. l. 13. r. it seems. p. 88. l. 25. r. men, among. For. p. 89.
c. 2. l. 53. r. good, a. p. 90. l. 54. r. hope of adv -- c. 2. l. 46. r. wrest.
p. 92. l. 7, 8. dele parentheses. p. 94. c. 2. l. 26. r. of Gods Promise. p.
96. l. 24. -- cy, they have. ibid. l. 31. -- mites) and so. p. 97. l. 8. r. the
decr^e. p. 98. l. 44. post over, infere shall be far removed. p. 100. marg.
post MS. infere see Note on Hosea IX. 14. p. 102. l. 8. dele 3dly. and insere
3dly Post woods. l. 10. p. 104. c. 2. l. 12. r. manifest.

It was not soon enough observed that this Table was drawn up in Latin; the
English Reader, therefore, may every where in it for post read after; for
insere, insert, for ante, before, for ult. last, for ibid. there also; for
dele, blot out. Other mistakes, as literal faults, mispointing, etc. are left
to the judicious Reader's correction.


