PLUTARCH's Lives the thierd Volum.



THE Third Volume OF PLUTARCH'S LIVES.

Translated from the Greek, BY SEVERAL HANDS.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges-Head in
Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street, 1693.

LIVES contained in this Volume.
PYrrhus, translated by Dr. Croune. Page 1. Cajus Marius, Mr. Stapleton. Page
70 Lysander, Mr. Boil. Page 154 Sylla, Mr. Davis. Page 204 Cimon, Mr. Morgan.
Page 284 Lucullus, Mr. Thornburgh. Page 327 Nicias, Mr. Rymer. Page 411
Crassus, Mr. Amhurst. Page 472 Eumenes, Page 548 Sertorius, Dr. Brown. Page 575
A Chronological Table to the Third Volume of Plutarch's Lives.
The Olympiad. The Year of the Olympiad. After the building of Rome. After the
Worlds Creation. Before the Com. of Christ. The Julian Period. Pyrrhus. 123 1
465 3662 286 4426 Caius Marius first time Consul. 168 2 646 3843 105 4607
Lysander. took Athens. 93 4 348 3545 403 4309 Sylla Consul. 173 1 665 3862 86
4626 Cimon overthrew the Persians. 78 1 285 3482 466 4246 Lucullus. 177 2 682
3879 69 4643 Nicias. 91 1 337 3534 414 4298 Marcus Crassus, first time Consul.
177 3 683 3880 68 4644 Eumenes. 114 2 431 3628 320 4392 Sertorius, the Battle
of Sucro. 175 4 676 3873 75 4637

PYRRHUS.
THE LIFE OF PYRRHUS.
From the Greek, By William Croune, M. D. Fell. of the Coll. of Physicians.
VOLUME III.
OF the Thesprotes and Molossians after the great Inundation, the first King
some write was Phaeton, one of them who in Pelasgus's Company came into Epirus:
Others tell us Deucalion and Pyrrha having built a Temple at Dodona, settled
there among the Molossians. In after time Neoptolemus, Achilles's Son,
transplanting a Colony, possessed these Parts himself, and left a Succession of
Kings after him, named Pyrrhidae (for he in his Youth was called Pyrrhus) and
of his Legitimate Children, one born of Lanassa Daughter of Cleodes, Hyllus his
Son, he named Pyrrhus also. From him Achilles came to have Divine Honors in
Epirus, under the name of Aspetus in the Language of the Country: After these
first Kings, those of the following middle times becoming barbarous, and so
rendered both in their Governments and Lives obscure; Tharrytes is said to be
the first, who, by adorning Cities with Greek Manners and Learning, and Laws
acceptable to Mankind* left any Fame of himself. Alcetes was the Son of
Tharrytes, Arybas of Aleetes, and of Arybus and Troas his Queen, Aeacides: He
married Pthia the Descent of Pyrrhus.
Daughter of Menon the Thessalian, a very brave man* living at the time of the
Lamiac War, and of highest Command in the Confederate Army next Leosthenes. To
Aeacides, were born of Pthia, Deidamia and Trojas Daughters, and Pyrrhus a Son.
The Molossians afterward falling into Factions, and throwing off Aeacides,
brought in the Sons of Neoptolemus, and such Friends of Aeacides, as they could
take, were all cut off: Pyrrhus yet an Infant, and searched for by the Enemy,
Androclides and Angelus had stolen away and fled; but being obliged to take
with them a few Servants, and the Women that nursed the Child, it made their
Escape more difficult and slow; Pursued by Enemies while an Infant hardly
escapes.
so being overtaken they delivered the Infant to Androclion, Hippias, and
Neander, faithful and able young Fellows, giving them in charge with all
imaginable diligence to reach Megara, a Town of the Macedons; and themselves
partly by entreaty, and partly by force, stopped the course of the Pursuers till
very late in the Evening* at last having hardly forced them back, they joined
those who had the care of Pyrrhus: But the Sun being already set, and they near
the utmost point now of their hopes, were on the sudden defeated; for coming to
the River that runs by the City, it looked very dreadful and rough, and
endeavoring to pass over, they found it was not fordable; for some late Rains
had swelled the Water, and made it run very foul: The darkness of the Night
added to the horror of all, so that they durst not adventure of themselves to
carry over the Child and the Women that attended it; but perceiving some of the
Country People on the other side, desired they would assist their passage, and
showed them Pyrrhus, calling out aloud, and importuning them, but they could
not hear for the noise and roarings of the Water: Thus time was spent while
those called out, and the others did not understand what was said, till one
recollecting himself, pill'd off a piece of Bark from an Oak, and writ on it
with* the tongue of a Buckle, expressing the Necessities and the Fortunes of
the Child, and then rolling it about a Stone, which was made use of to give
force to the Motion, threw it over to the other side; some report they fastened
it to the end of a Javelin, and darted it over, when they on the other Shore
read what was on the Bark, and considered the shortness of the time, instantly
cutting down some Trees, and lashing them together, came over to them; it fell
out, he who first got Ashore, and took Pyrrhus in his Arms, was named
Achilles, the rest were helped over by others as they came to hand: Thus being
safe, and out of the reach of pursuit, they addressed themselves to Glaucias then
King of Illyria, and finding him at Court sitting with the Queen, they laid
down the Child before them: The King began to weigh this affair, fearing
Cassander a mortal Enemy of Aeacides, and being in a deep consideration, said
nothing for a long time; while Pyrrhus scrambling about, got hold with his hand
on his Robe, and so helping himself upon his feet against the knees of
Glaucias, first moved Laughter, and then Pity, as a little humble crying
Petitioner. Some say he did not lie grovelling before Glaucias, but catching
hold of an Altar of the Gods, and spreading his hands about it, raised himself
up by that, which Action Glaucias surpised with an ominous action of the
Child, resolves to protect him.
to Glaucias seemed to have in it something of divine, and immediately gave
Pyrrhus into the Queen's Arms, commanding he should be brought up with his own
Children; a little after the Enemies sending to demand him, and Cassander
himself offering two hundred Talents, he would not deliver him up; but when he
was twelve years old, bringing him with an Army into Epirus, made him King;
Pyrrhus in the Air of his Face had something more of Fierce, than of the August
of Majesty; he had not many Teeth, but all above was one continued Bone,
Instead of upper Teeth one Bone.
divided with small Lines, resembling the spaces of a Row of Teeth; it was a
general belief he could cure the Spleen by sacrificing He touches for the
Spleen.
a white Cock, and with his right foot gently pressing upon the Spleen of the
Persons laid down on their backs a little to one side, nor was any so poor or
inconsiderable as not to receive the benefit of his Royal Touch, if he desired
it; after the Sacrifice he accepted the Cock as a Reward, and the Present was
almost welcome to him; the Toe of that foot was said to have a divine Virtue;
for after his death, the rest of the body being consumed, this was found unhurt
and untouched by the Fire; but of these things afterward. Being now about
Seventeen years old, and the Government in appearance well settled, he took a
Journey out of the Kingdom to the marriage of one of Glaucias's Sons, with whom
he was brought up, at which time the Molossions again rebelling, turned out all
of his Party, ri^^ed his Exchequer, and gave up themselves to Neoptolemus:
Pyrrhus having thus lost the Kingdom, and in want of all things, applied
himself to Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, that married his Sister Deidamia,
who while she was but a little Miss, they used to call Alexander's Wife Son of
Roxana; but their Affairs after proving unfortunate, when she came to Age,
Demetrius married her. At the great An early Warrior,
Battle of Ipsus, where so many Kings were engaged, Pyrrhus taking party with
Demetrius, though yet but a Youth, routed those that encountered him, and highly
signalized himself among all the Soldiery; after when Demetrius's Fortunes
were low, he did not forsake him then, but secured for him those Cities of
Greece, with which he was entrusted. Upon Articles of Agreement made between
Demetrius and Ptolomy, he went over an Hostage into Egypt, and both in
Hunting, and other Exercises, gave His exercises.
Ptolomy a lively demonstration of his Courage and Strength. Here observing
Berenice in greatest Power, and of all Ptolomy's Wives, highest in Esteem for
Virtue and Understanding, he made his Court, and paid his respects principally
to her; for he had a particular Art of obliging the Great for Care of his
Interest.
his own Interest, and easily overlooked such as were below him: In Diet very
elegant but temperate; so that among all the Temperance.
young Princes then at Court, he was thought most fit to have Antigone for his
Wife, one of the Daughters of Berenice by Philip, before she married Ptolomy.
After this Match, advancing in Honor, and Antigone being a very good Wife to
him. having settled a Fond of Money, and raised an Army, he so ordered matters,
to be sent into his Kingdom of Epirus, and arrived there to the great
satisfaction of many, from their hate to Neoptolemas, governing in a violent
and arbitrary way. But fearing lest Neoptolemus should enter into Alliance with
some Neighbor Princes, he came to Terms and Friendship with him in an equal
share of the Government: Sometime after there were those who secretly
exasperated them, and fomented Jealousies of one another. The cause chiefly
moving Pyrrhus, is said to have had this beginning. It was customary for the
Kings in Parasso, a Province of Molossia, after Sacrifice to Mars, to enter
into a solemn Covenant with the Epirots; they to Govern according to Law, these
to preserve the Government, as by Law established. This was performed in the
presence of both Kings, who were there with their particular Favorites, giving
and receiving many Presents: Here Gelon, one faithful to Neoptolemus, taking
Pyrrhus familiarly by the hand, presented him with two pair of draught Oxen,
these Myrtilus his Cup Bearer being then by, begged of Pyrrhus, who not giving
them to him, but another, Myrtilus extremely resented it. which Gelon took
notice of, and inviting him to a Treat (where as some report he debauched him
too after drinking, being in the Flower of his Youth) he entered into discourse,
persuading him to adhere to Neoptolemus, and destroy Pyrrhus by Poison;
Myrtilus received the Design, as praising and consenting to it, but indeed
privately discovered it to Pyrrhus, by whose Command he recommended Alexicrates
his chief Cup Bearer to Gelon, as a fit Instrument for their Design, because
Pyrrhus was very desirous to have proof of the Plot by several Evidences; so
Gelon being deceived, Neoptolemus, who was as much deceived by him, and
imagining the Design went prosperously on, could not hold, but for Joy vented
it among his Friends, and once at an Entertainment at his Sister Cadmia's,
spoke very frankly of it, thinking none heard but themselves. Nor was any there
but Phenaretate the Wife of Samon, who had the care of managing Neoptolemus's
Flocks and Herds. She being turned toward the Wall upon a Pallet, seemed fast
asleep; but having heard all that past unsuspected, next day came to Antigone
Pyrrhus's Wife, and told her what she heard Neoptolemus say to his Sister;
which Pyrrhus understanding, for the present said little, but on a Sacrifice
day, making an Invitation for Neoptolemus, killed him; being satisfied before
that the Great men of the Epirots were his Friends, advising him to rid himself
of Neoptolemus, and not love one who shared the least point in the Government
with him, but follow his own inclination in undertaking his greater Designs,
and a just ground of suspicion already appearing* prevent Neoptolemus, by
taking him off first. In memory of Berenice and Ptolomee, Builds the City
Berenicis.
he named his Son by Antigone, Ptolomee, and having built a City in the
Peninsula of Epirus, called it Berenicis. From this time Pyrrhus designs mighty
Things.
he began to revolve many and vast things in his thoughts; but his first hope
and design was particularly laid near home, and he found means to engage
himself in the Macedonian Affairs under this pretension. Of Cassander's Sons,
Antipater the eldest both killed Thessalonica his Mother, and expuls'd his
Brother Alexander, who sent to Demetrius entreating his assistance, and also
called in Pyrrhus; but Demetrius being retarded by multitude of business,
Pyrrhus coming first demanded in reward of his Service the City of Nymphaea and
the Seacoasts of Macedon, and of their new Conquests Ambracia, Acarnania, and
Amphilochia. The young Prince giving way, he took possession of these
Countries, and secured them with good Garrisons, and kept for Alexander himself
the other part of the Kingdom which he gained from Antipater. Lysimachus
designing to send aid to Antipater was involved in much other business, but
knowing Pyrrhus would not disoblige Ptolomee, or deny him any thing, sent
pretended Letters to him as from Ptolomee, desiring him to give over that
Expedition, upon the payment of 300 Talents to him by Antipater: Pyrrhus
opening the Letter quickly discovered the fraud of Lysimachus; for it had not
the accustomed Style of Salutation, The Father to the Son health, but King
Ptolomee to Pyrrhus the King health; and reproaching Lysimachus, he
notwithstanding made a peace, and they all met to confirm it by a Solemn Oath
upon Sacrifice: a Goat, a Bull, and a Ram being brought out, the Ram on a
sudden fell dead, which although some only laughed at, Theodotus the Priest
forbid Pyrrhus to swear, declaring Heaven by that portended the death of one of
the three Kings, upon which he refused to ratify the peace. The Affairs of
Alexander being now in some kind of Settlement, Demetrius arrived, and 'twas
evident he came undesir'd, and struck a Terror into Alexander; after they had
been a few days together, their mutual Jealousy made them design upon each
other; but Demetrius taking advantage of the first occasion was before hand
with the young King, and slew him, and proclaimed himself King of Macedon.
There Jealousies between Pyrrhus and his Brother-in-Law Demetrius.
had been formerly no very good understanding between him and Pyrrhus; for
besides the inroads he made into Thessaly, the innate disease of Princes,
Ambition of greater Empire, rendered their Neighborhood formidable and
suspected, especially since Deidamia's death, and both having seized Macedon,
they came foul upon the same thing, and the difference between them had the
fairer colors: Demetrius having entered into a War with the Aetolians and
subdued them, and left Pantanchus there with a considerable Army, marched
directly against Pyrrhus, and, Pyrrhus (as he thought) against him, but by
mistake of the ways they past by one another, Demetrius falling into Epirus
wasted the Country, and Pyrrhus meeting with Pantanchus prepared for an
Engagement. The Soldiers falling in pell-mell, there was a sharp and great
Fight, especially where the Generals were. Pantanchus in courage, dexterity,
and strength of body, being confessedly the best of all Demetrius his Captains,
and having both Resolution and Conduct challenged Pyrrhus to fight hand to
hand; on the other side Pyrrhus not less than any of the Kings in Valor and
Glory, and Glories in his Descent from Achilles.
esteeming the Honor of Achilles rather due to him for his Courage than his
Blood, advanced against Pantanchus through the Front of the Army; First, they
used their Lances, then came to a close Fight, and managed their Swords both
with Art and Force, Pyrrhus receiving one wound but returning He fights single
with Pantanchus,
two for it, one in the Thigh, the other near the Neck, repulsed and overthrew
Pantanchus, but did not kill him outright, for he was suddenly rescued by his
Friends: the Epirots raised with the Victory of their King, and admiring his
Courage, forced through and cut in pieces the close Body of the Macedonians,
and pursuing those that fled, killed many, and took 5000 Prisoners. This Fight
did not so much exasperate the Macedonians with Anger for their Loss, or with
Hatred to Pyrrhus, as it caused an Esteem, and Admiration of his Virtue, and a
great Discourse among those that saw what he did and were engaged against him
in the Action: They thought his Countenance, and Swiftness, and Motion expressed
those of the Great Alexander, and that in How Pyrrhus imitated Alexander the
Great.
him they beheld Shadows, and Resemblances of his Vivacity and Strength in
Fight; other Kings in Purple and Guards, and a formal bending of their Necks,
and speaking in a lofty tone only Pyrrhus in Arms, and Action representing
Alexander. Of his Knowledge in Military Order and Discipline, and his Great
ability that way we have the best Writes Commentaries of Military Discipline.
information from the Commentaries he left behind him about this Argument:
Antigonus being asked who was the greatest Soldier, said Pyrrhus, if he lived
to be *old, meaning those only of his own time; Hannibal Hannibal's Judgment of
Pyrrhus.
of great Commanders esteemed Pyrrhus for Sufficiency and Conduct the first,
Scipio the second, and himself the third, as is reported in the Life of Scipio.
In a word, What he held the only Philosophy of Kings.
he seemed ever to make this all his Thought and Philosophy, as the most Kingly
part of Learning, other Curiosities he held in no Account. He is reported, when
asked at a Feast whether he thought Python or Caphisias the best Musician, to
have said Polysperchon was the best Soldier, as becoming a King only to
enquire and understand such things. Toward his Familiars he was mild, and not
easily incensed, forward and ready in answering Kindnesses, so that when
Aeropus was dead, he could not bear it with moderation, saying, he indeed had
suffered what was common to humane Nature, but condemning and blaming himself,
that by puttings off and delays he had not returned his kindness in time; for
our Debts may be satisfied to the Creditor's Heirs, but the acknowledgement of
received Favors not paid in, while they to whom it is due can be sensible of
it, afflicts a good and a worthy Nature. Some thinking it fit that Pyrrhus
should banish a certain illtongu'd Fellow in Ambracia who had spoke very
indecently of him; let him rather, said he, spoke against me here to a few,
than rambling about to a great many. And others who in their Wine had made
reflections upon him, being afterward questioned for it, he asked them whether
they spoke such words; one of the young Fellows told him: Yes, Sir, those very
words, and should have said more if we had had more Wine; at which smiling he
discharged them. After Antigone's death he married several Wives to His
Marriages and Issue.
enlarge his Interest and Power. He had the Daughter of Antoleon King of
Paeonia, Barcenna, Bardyllis the Illyrian's, Daughter, Lanassa Daughter of
Agathocles the Syracusian, who brought with her in Dowry the City of Cercyra
taken by Agathocles: By Antigone he had Ptolomee, Alexander, by Lanassa, and
Helenus the youngest by Barcenna; he brought them up all in Arms, hot and eager
Youths, and by him sharpened to war from their very His Sons all bred to War.
Infancy. It Is said when one of them yet a child, asked him to which he would
leave his Kingdom, he replied, to him that had the sharpest Sword, which was
much*like that Tragical Curse of Oedipus to his Sons.

-- Divide not as the Common Rout,
But with the Sword each cut his portion out.
So unsociable and brutal are the measures which Ambition takes. After this
Battle Pyrrhus returning gloriously home, entertained himself with the sense of
his own Honor and Greatness of Mind, and being called Eagle by the Epirots: By
you (says he) How Pyrrhus accepts the Appellation of an Eagle.
I am an Eagle; for how should I not be such while I am born up by your Arms as
on Wings? A little after having Intelligence that Demetrius was dangerously
sick, he fell on a sudden into Macedon, intending only an Incursion, and to
harrass the Country; but was very near seizing upon all, and taking the Kingdom
without a blow: He marched as far as Edessa unresisted, great numbers
deserting, and coming in to him: This danger excited Demetrius beyond his
Strength, and his Friends and Commanders in a short time got a considerable
Army together, and with all their Forces briskly attacked Pyrrhus, who coming
only to pillage would not stand a Fight, but retreating lost part of his Army,
as he went off, by the close pursuit of the Macedonians. Demetrius although he
had easily and quickly forced Pyrrhus out of the Country, yet did not slight
him, but having resolved upon great Designs, and to recover his Father's Vast
Preparation of Demetrius.
Kingdom with an Army of 100000 men, and 500 Sail of Ships, would neither
embroil himself with Pyrrhus, nor leave the Macedonians so active and
troublesome a Neighbor; and since he had no leisure to continue the War with
him, was willing to treat and conclude a Peace, and to turn his Forces upon the
other Kings: Articles being agreed upon, the Designs of Demetrius quickly
discovered themselves by the greatness of his preparation. And the other Kings
being alarmed, sent to Pyrrhus Ambassadors and Letters, expressing their wonder
that he losing so fair an Occasion; would rather stay till Demetrius was ready
to fight, and being now able to chase him out of Macedon, involved in designs
and disturbed, would expect till he were at Leisure, and grown greater, and
bring the War home to his own door, and fight for their Temples and Sepulchers
in Molossia: Especially having so lately by his means lost Cercyra and his Wife
together. For Lanassa had taken offense at Pyrrhus for too great an inclination
to those Wives of his that were Barbarians, and so withdrew to Cercyra, and
desiring to marry some King, invited Demetrius, knowing of all the Kings, he
was most ready to entertain an offer of Marriage from fair Ladies; so he sailed
thither, married Lanassa, and placed a Garrison in the City. The Kings having
writ thus to Pyrrhus, did themselves likewise find Demetrius work, while he was
delaying and making his preparations; Ptolomee setting out with a great Fleet,
drew off many of the Greek Cities, Lysimachus out of Thrace wasted the upper
Macedon, Pyrrhus also taking Arms with these, marched to Beraea, expecting, (as
it fell out) that Demetrius drawing his Forces against Lysimachus would leave
the lower Country without Supplies. That very Night he seemed in his Sleep to
be called by Alexander the Great, and approaching saw him sick a-bed; but was
received with very kind Words and much Respect, and promised a sudden
assistance: He making bold to reply; How, Sir, can you being sick assist me?
With my Name, says he, and mounting a Nisaean Horse seemed to lead the way: At
the sight of this Vision he was much assured, and with swift Marches
overrunning all the Interjacent Places, takes Beraea, and making his Head
Quarters there, reduced the rest of the Country by his Commanders: When
Demetrius received Intelligence of this, and perceived likewise the Macedonians
ready to mutiny in the Army, he was afraid to advance farther, lest coming near
Lysimachus, a Macedonian King, and of great Fame, they should revolt to him. So
returning, he marched directly against Pyrrhus, as a Stranger and hated by the
Macedonians; while he lay encamped there by him, many coming out of Beraea
infinitely praised Pyrrhus as one invincible in Arms, a very Illustrious
Prince, and treating those he had taken kindly and obligingly; several of these
Pyrrhus himself sent privately, pretending themselves Lacedaemonians, and
saying, now was the time to be delivered from the severe Government of
Demetrius, by coming over to Pyrrhus, a gracious Prince, and a lover of
Soldiers: By this Artifice a great part of the Army was moved, and looking
every The Army of Demetrius revolts to Pyrrhus.
way about, sought for Pyrrhus. It hapn'd he was without his Helmet, till
understanding they did not know him, he put it on again, and so was quickly
remarked by his lofty Crest, and the Goat's horns he wore upon it; Then the
Macedonians running to him, desired the Word, others clapped Oaken boughs upon
their Heads, because they saw them worn by the Soldiers about him. Some took
the confidence to say to Demetrins himself, that he would be well advised to
withdraw, and lay down the Government. And he indeed finding the Mutinous
humor of the Army agreeable to that sort of Discourse, privately got away
disguised in an old Hat, and a common Himself escapes with difficulty, in a
mean disguise.
red Coat. So Pyrrhus became Master of the Army without fighting, and was
declared King of the Macedonians. But Lysimachus now arriving, and affirming
the defeat of Demetrius, was in common performed by both, and that the Kingdom
ought to be shared between them, Pyrrhus not extremely assured of the
Macedonians, and in doubt of their Faith, consented to the Proposition of
Lysimachus, and divided the Country and Cities between them accordingly. This
was for the present useful, and prevented a War; but shortly after they found
the partition not so much an avoydance of dissatisfactions, as an occasion of
more Complaint and Difference. For to Ambitious Princes ill Neighbors.
such whose Ambition neither Seas nor Mountains, nor the forsaken Deserts can
limit, nor the bounds dividing Europe from Asia, confine their vast desires;
it is hard to say how they should forbear injuring one another, when they touch,
and are close together. These are ever naturally in War, envying and seeking
advantages of one another; They make use of those two Words, Peace and War, as
of Money, not so much guided by Justice, as when it falls out to be for their
Interest, and are really better men when they openly enter on a War, than when
they give to the mere forbearance of doing wrong only for want of opportunity,
the sacred Names of Justice and Friendship. Pyrrhus was an instance of this,
for setting himself against the rise of Demetrius again, and endeavoring to
hinder the recovery of his Power, as it were from a kind of Sickness, assisted
the Greeks, and came to Athens, where having ascended the Acropolis, and
offered Sacrifice to the Goddess, and the same day came down again, told the
Athenians he was much pleased with their kindness, and the confidence they had
of him; but if they were wise, advised them never to let any King come Pyrrhus
his Advice to the Athenians.
thither again, or open their City Gates to him; he concluded also a Peace with
Demetrius, but a little after he was gone into Asia, at the persuasion of
Lysimachus tampper'd with the Thessalians to revolt, and besieg*d his Cities in
Greece; finding he could make better use of the Macedonians in War than in
Peace, and being of his own Inclination not much given to rest; at last having
routed Demetrius in Lycia, Lysimachus who had secured his Affairs, and nothing
to do, immediately turned his Forces upon Pyrrhus, who was in Quarters at
Edessa, and falling upon and seizing his Convoy of Provisions, brought first a
great Scarcity into the Army, then partly by Letters, partly by spreading
Rumors abroad, he corrupted the principal Officers of the Macedonians,
reproaching them they had made on their Master who was both a Stranger, and
descended from those who The Macedonians revolt from Pyrrhus, just as they had
done before from Demetrius.
had ever been Servants to the Macedonians, and thrust the old Friends and
Families of Alexander out of the Country: The Macedonian Soldiers being much
prevailed upon, Pyrrhus withdrew himself with his Epirots and Auxiliary Forces,
relinquishing Macedon just after the same manner he took it: Thus Kings have no
reason to condemn the People changing for their Interest, who in that do but
imitate them, as the great Instructors of Unfaithfulness and Treachery; holding
him the bravest that makes the least Account of being an honest man. Pyrrhus
having thus retired into Epirus, and left Macedon, Fortune gave him a fair
occasion of enjoying himself in quiet, and peaceably governing his own
Subjects; but he who thought it a Pyrrhus uneasy without War.
nauseous Course of Life, not to be doing mischief to others, or receiving some
from them, as Achilles could not endure repose,

-- But languish'd there,
When left alone, desiring Noise and War,
served his inclination of this pretense of new business. The Romans were in
War with the Tarentines, who not able to go on with the War, nor yet give it
over, by The Occasion of his War with the Romans.
reason of the bold and ill advised Harangues of Popular men, desired to make
Pyrrhus their General, and engage him in this War, as of all the Neighboring
Kings the most at leisure, and the greatest Soldier. The more grave and
discreet Citizens opposing these Counsels, were run down by the noise and
violence of the Multitude; which when they saw, they came no more into the
Assemblies; only one Meton a very sober man, the day this Public Decree was to
be ratified, and the People all placed; like one quite drunk, with a withered
Garland and a Torch in his hand, and a Woman playing on a Flagellet before him,
came dancing into the Assembly; and as in great Multitudes met at such popular
Assemblies, no decorum can be well observed; some clapped him up, others laughed,
none forbid him, but called to the Woman to play, and him to sing to the
Company, and when they thought they went about it; It Is very well done of you
(says he) Tarentines, not to hinder any from making themselves merry that have
a mind to it, while it is yet in your power, and if you are wise you will still
keep and enjoy this Freedom, for you must change your course of Live, and eat
other Diet when Pyrrhus comes to Town. These words made a strange impression
upon many of the Tarentines, and a confused Murmur went about, that he had
spoke much to the purpose; but some who feared they should be sacrificed if a
Peace were made with the Romans, reviled the whole Assembly for so tamely
suffering themselves to be abused by a lewd drunken Sot, and crowding together
upon Meton, thrust him out; so the Public Order was passed, and Ambassadors
sent into Epirus, not only in their own Names, but of all the Italick Greeks,
carrying Presents to Pyrrhus, and letting him know they wanted a General of
Fame and experience, that they could furnish him with very great Forces made up
of Lucanians, Messapians, Samnites, and Tarentines amounting to 20000 Horse,
and 350000 Foot: This did not only quicken Pyrrhus, but raised an eager desire
of this War in the Epirots. There was one Cineas a Thessalian, a man in
appearance of very good Sense, a Disciple of the great Orator Demosthenes, and
of all who were in the highest Fame at that time for speaking well, seemed as
in a Picture, to revive most in the minds of the Audience the memory of his
huge force and vigor of Eloquence, and being always about Pyrrhus, and by him
employed to several Cities, confirmed that of Euripides,

-- That force of Weighty Words
Can out do all that is done by conquering Swords.
And Pyrrhus was used to say, that Cineas had taken more Towns with his Words,
Pyrrhus his great Esteem of Eloquence.
than he with his Arms, and always did him the honor to use him in his most
important occasions: This Person seeing Pyrrhus with all diligence preparing
for Italy, entertained him one day at leisure with this kind of discourse: The
Romans, Sir, are reported to be great Warriors and Conquerors of many warlike
Nations; If God permit us to overcome them, how should we use our Victory? Thou
ask (said Pyrrhus) a thing of it self evident. Cineas represents to Pyrrhus,
he had all that already, which he sought by the labors and hazzards of War.
The Romans once conquered, there is neither Greek or Barbarous City will
resist us, but we shall presently be Masters of all Italy, whose Greatness, and
Force, and Strength it is more fit any should be ignorant of, than your self.
Cineas after a little Pause, and having subdued Italy, what shall we do next?
Pyrrhus not yet discovering his intention; Sicily, replied next he holds out
her Arms to receive us, a fortunate and populous Island, and easy to be
gained; For since Agathocles left it, Faction and Anarchy, and the licentious
humor of the Demagogues only prevails. You speak, says Cineas, what is hugely
probable, but shall the possession of Sicily put an end to the War? God grant
us (answered Pyrrhus) Victory and Success in that, we will use those as
forerunners of greater things, who can forbear Libya and Carthage then within
reach? which Agathocles even when forced to fly from Syracuse, and passing the
Sea only with a few Ships, had almost surpised. These Conquests once
perfected, will any deny, even that Enemy who now pretends to despise us, dare
not make any further resistance? None, replied Cineas, for then it is manifest
we may with such mighty Forces regain Macedon, and make an absolute Conquest of
Greece, and when all these are in our power, what shall we do then? Said
Pyrrhus smiling, we'll live at our ease, my dear Friend, and drink all day, and
divert our selves with pleasant discourse. When Cineas had lead Pyrrhus with
this Argument to this Point: And what hinders us now, Sir, if we have a mind to
be merry, and entertain on another? Since all things necessary for it are at
hand without trouble, to which through much blood and great labor, and
infinite hazzards, we design at last to arrive? With this talk he rather
afflicted Pyrrhus under the consideration of what happiness he lost, than any
way altered his purpose, being unable to quit the hopes of what he so much
desired. And first, he sent away Cineas to the Tarentines with 3000 men;
presently after, many Vessels for Transportation of Horse, Galleys, and flat
bottomed Boats of all sorts arriving from Tarentum, he shipped upon them 20
Elephants, 3000 Horse, 20000 Foot, 2000 Archers, and 500 Slingers: All thus in
readiness he set Sail, Pyrrhus his Fleet dispersed by Storm.
and being half Seas over, was driven with the Winds blowing hard at Nore
(contrary to the Season of the Year) and forced to Leeward; but by the great
skill and resolution of his Officers and Seamen he bore with the Land, and kept
the Italian Shore with infinite Labor, and beyond Expectation; the rest of the
Fleet could not get up, and some of the dispersed Ships being beaten off from
the Coast of Italy, were driven into the Libyan and Cicilian Sea; others not
able to double the Cape of Japygium, were overtaken by the Night, and a very
boisterous and grown Sea, throwing them upon a dangerous and rocky Shore, they
were all very much disabled, except the Admiral; and she while the Sea bore
upon her Sides, resisted with her Bulk and Strength, and avoided the force of
it, till the wind coming about, blew directly in their Teeth from the Shore,
and the Vessel keeping up with her Head against it, was in danger of opening by
the raking of the Sea over her; on the other hand to suffer themselves to be
driven off to Sea again, which was very raging and tempestuous, and the Wind
shifting about every way, seemed to them the most dreadful of all their
present Evils. Pyrrhus rising up threw himself over board, and his Friends and
Guards strove eagerly who should be most ready to help him, but Night and the
Sea with its mighty roaring and breaking off again from the Shore made it
extreme difficult Himself in Great danger.
to save him; so that hardly by daylight the Wind being quite laid he got a*
Shore almost breathless, and indeed hugely weak'ned in Body, but with high
courage and strength of Mind resisting his hard Fortune; the Massapians, upon
whose Shore they were thrown by the Tempest, run with all diligence to help
them in the best manner they could, and met with some of the straggling Vessels
that had escaped the Storm; in which were a very few Horse, and not quite 2000
Foot, and two Elephants; with these Pyrrhus marched straight to Tarentum, and
Cineas being informed of his Arrival, drew out his Forces to meet him; when he
entered the Town, he did nothing unpleasing to the Tarentines, nor put any
force upon them, till his Ships were all in Harbor, and the greatest part of
the Army got together; then considering the People as neither able to preserve
themselves nor secure others, unless they were necessiated to it, and
intending, while he engaged for them in the Field, to remain at home bathing
and feasting themselves; His severe Discipline unpleasing to the Tarentines.
he first shut up the Places of Public Exercise, and their Walks, where vainly
solicitous they fought for their Country only in discourse of Wars; he
prohibited likewise all Solemn Festivals, Revels and Jollities as unseasonable,
and called them to Arms, being most severe and inflexible in Listing men fit
for Action and Service. Upon which many left the Town, unaccustomed to such a
Discipline, calling it mere Slavery not to live in Pleasures. He now received
Intelligence that Levinus the Roman Consul was upon his March with a great
Army, and plundering Lucania as he went. The Confederate Forces were not come
up to him, yet he thought it very indecent to suffer so near an approach of an
Enemy, and neglect it; and drew out with his Army, but first sent an Herald to
the Romans to know if before the War they would decide the differences between
them and the Italicks by a course of Justice, and make use of his Mediation to
determine them; but Levinus returning Answer, that the Romans neither accepted
him as Arbitrator, nor feared him as an Enemy, Pyrrhus advanced, and Encamped
in the Plain between the Cities of Pandosia and Heraclea, and having notice the
Romans were near, and lay on the other side of the River Lyris, he rode up to
take a view of them, and seeing Pyrrhus his Judgment of the Roman's Encamping.
the Order, the appointment of the Watches, the Excellent Form, and, in a word,
the whole Scheme of their Encampment, he was amazed, and calling one of his
Friends next to him; This Order, says he, Megacles, of a Barbarous Nation, is
not at all Barbarous, we shall see afterward what they can do; and growing a
little more thoughtful of the Event, resolved to expect the arriving of the
Confederate Troops. And to hinder the Romans (if in the mean time they should
endeavor to pass the River) he planted men all along the Bank to oppose them,
but they hastening to prevent the coming up of those Forces he looked for,
attempted the Passage with their Infantry, where it was fordable, the Horse
getting over in several places, so that the Greeks fearing to be surrounded,
were obliged to retreat; which Pyrrhus understanding was hugely surpised, and
commanded his Foot Officers to range their men in Battalia, and continue in
Arms, himself with 3000 Horse advanced, hoping to attack the Romans as they
were coming over, scattered and disordered; but when he saw a vast number of
Shields appearing above the water, and the Horse following them in good order,
drawing up his men in a closer Body, himself in the Head of them began the
Charge; he was very remarkable His first Engagement with them.
by the bravery and Glistering of his Arms, which were exceeding rich, but more
by the things he did there, which gave signal proof that his Fame had not
out-gone what he was able effectually to perform; but especially when exposing
his hands and Body to the Fight, he bravely His Courage without Passion.
repelled all that engaged him, managing the Battle with a steady and
undisturbed Reason, and such a presence of mind, as if he had been quite out of
any Action himself, flying from place to place, and assisting those whom he
thought most oppressed by the Enemy. Here Leonatus a Macedonian, observing one
of the Italians very intent upon Pyrrhus, riding up toward him, and changing
places as he did, and moving as he moved: Do you see, Sir, said he, that
Barbarian on the black Horse with white feet? he seems to me one that designs
some great and dangerous thing; he looks constantly at you, attends on you only
full of Fury and Violence, and takes no notice of others; Good Sir, have a care
of that Fellow. Leonatus, said Pyrrhus, it is impossible for any man to avoid
his Fate; but neither he nor any other Italian shall have much satisfaction in
engaging with me. While they were in this discourse, the Italian placing his
Spear and quickening his Horse rid furiously at Pyrrhus, and run his Horse
through with his Lance; at the same Instance Leonatus ran his through, both
Horses falling. Pyrrhus his Friends surrounded him and brought him off safe,
and killed the Italian, bravely defending himself. He was by Birth a Tarentine;
Captain of a Troop, and named Oplacus. This made Pyrrhus use greater caution,
and now seeing his Horse give Ground, he brought up the Infantry and ranged
them in order, and then changing his Robe and his Arms with Megacles one of his
Friends, and obscuring as it were himself in his, charged upon the Romans, who
received and engaged him, and a great while the Success of the Battle remained
undetermined; and it is said there were seven Turns of Fortune both of pursuing
and being pursued: This change of his Arms was very opportune for the safety of
his Person, but had like to have overthrown his Affairs, and lost him the
Victory; for several falling upon Megacles, the first that gave him his mortal
wound was one Dexter, who snatching away his Helmet and his Robe, rid presently
to Levinus, holding them up, and saying aloud he had killed Pyrrhus. These
Spoils being carried about, and shown among the particular Ranks, the Romans
were transported with Joy, and gave a huge Shout, but mightily discouraged and
terrified the Greeks. Pyrrhus understanding what had happened, rid about the
Army with his face bare, stretching out his hand to his Soldiers, and telling
them aloud it was He. At last the Elephants principally distressed the Romans,
their Horses, before they came near, not enduring them, went back with their
Riders; upon which he commanded the Thessalian Cavalry to charge them in this
disorder, and gave The Roman Army routed.
them a total rout with great effusion of Blood. Dionysius affirms near 15000
fell of the Romans. Hieronymus, no more than 7000. On Pyrrhus's side, the same
Dionysius makes 13000 slain, the other under 3000; but they were the flower of
his men, as well of his particular Friends as Officers in whom he always most
confided, and made use of in greatest occasions: Beside, he possessed himself
of the Romans Camp which they deserted, and drew off several Confederate
Cities, and wasted the Country round about, and advanced so far, that he was
within about 37 Miles of Rome it self. After the Fight many of the Lucanes and
Samnites came in and joined him, he chid them for their delay, and appeared
extremely satisfied and raised in his thoughts that he had defeated so great an
Army of the Romans with the assistance of the Tarentines alone. But the Romans
did not remove Levinus from the Consulship, (it being reported Caius Fabritius
should say, That the Epirots had not overcome the Romans, but Pyrrhus had only
the better of Levinus: insinuating their loss was not through want of Valor,
but Conduct) but filled up their Legions, and listed presently fresh men,
talking high and boldly of War; which struck Pyrrhus They not at all
discouraged.
with amazement. He thought it advisable, by sending first to make an
experiment, whether they had any inclination to treat, thinking that to take
the City and make an absolute Conquest, was no work for such an Army as his was
at that time, but to settle a Friendship and bring them to terms, would be
highly honorable after his Victory. Cineas was dispatched away, and applied
himself to several of the Great Ones, with Presents for themselves and their
Ladies from the King; but not a Person They refuse Pyrrhus his Presents and
Offers of Peace.
would receive any, and answered as well Men as Women, That if any Agreement
were publicly concluded, they should be ready for their parts to express all
Respect and Service to the King; and Cineas discoursing with the Senate the
most soft and obliging things in the World, yet was not heard with kindness or
inclination, although Pyrrhus offered also to return all he had taken in the
Fight without ransom, and promising his assistance for the entire Conquest of
all Italy, asking for himself only their Friendship, and Security for the
Tarentines, and nothing farther: Many seemed well inclined to a Peace, having
already received one great Defeat, and fearing another from an additional Force
of the Italick Greeks joining with Pyrrhus. Here Appius Claudius, a man of
great Honor, Appius Claudius his Speech against a Peace with Pyrrhus.
but who in respect of his Age and want of Sight not intermedling with Affairs,
declined the fatigue of Public Business: after these Propositions had been
made by the King, hearing a report that the Senate was ready to vote the
Conditions of Peace, could not forbear, but commanding his Servants to take him
up, was carried* in his Chair through the Forum to the Senate House; when he
was set down at the door, his Sons, and Sons-in-law took him up in their Arms,
and going all close round about him, brought him into the Senate: Out of
reverence of so worthy a man, the whole Assembly was respectfully silent, and
he a little after rising up himself; I bore, says he, until this time the
misfortune of my Eyes with some impatience, but now having heard of those
unhandsome Debates and Resolves of yours, and so dishonorable to the Glory of
Rome; it is my great affliction, that being already blind, I am not deaf too:
Where is now that Discourse, of yours that has made such a noise in the World,
that if He had come into Italy, the Great Alexander, and dared to attack us
when we were young men, or our Fathers, who were then flourishing, he had not
now been celebrated Invincible, but either flying hence, or falling here, had
left Rome more Glorious? You demonstrate now all that was but foolish Arrogance
and Vanity by your fears of the Molossians and Chaonians, ever the Macedonian's
Prey, and trembling at Pyrrhus, who was himself but an humble Servant to one of
Alexander's Lifeguard; and here, not so much to assist the Greeks that inhabit
among us, as flying from his Enemies at home, he ranges about Italy, and dares
promise you the Conquest of it all by that Army which has not been able to
preserve for him a little part of Macedon: And do not persuade your selves,
that making him your Friend is the way to be rid of him, but to bring more
Forces over, contemning you as easy to be reduced, if Pyrrhus goes off without
doing you reason for the Affront he has put upon you; nay, receiving also this
reward, of having rendered even the Tarentines and Samnites capable of laughing
at the Romans. When Appius had done, every man The Romans reject all Overtures
of Peace till Pyrrhus be first gone out of Italy.
was eager for War, and Cineas dismissed with this Answer, That when Pyrrhus
had drawn his Forces out of Italy, then if he pleased, they would treat with
him about Friendship and Alliance, but while he staid there in Arms, they were
resolved to prosecute the War against him with all their Force, though he
should have defeated 1000 Levinus's. It Is said, that Cineas while he was
managing this Affair, made it his Business, with an exact Care to inspect the
manners of the Romans, and perfectly understand their Methods of Government.
Afterward in discourse with the Grandees of the Court, he told Pyrrhus, among
other things, the Senate seemed to The Roman Senate.
him an Assembly of Kings, and for the People, he feared least they should
(...) thought to fight with the Hydra, or Se^pent of Lerna fen; for the Consul
had already raised twice as great an Army as the former, and there were a great
many times over the same number of Romans able to bear Arms. Then Caius
Fabritius Caius Fabritius.
came in Ambassy from the Romans to treat about the Prisoners that were taken,
one whom Cineas had reported to be a man of highest consideration among them
for a right honest man and a great Soldier, but extremely poor. Pyrrhus
received him with much Kindness, and privately would have persuaded him to
accept of his Gold, not for any evil purpose, but calling it an Argument
Contemns Riches, though extremely poor.
of Respect and hospitable Civility; upon Fabritius's refusal, he pressed him
no farther, but the next day having a mind to discompose him, who had never
seen an Elephant before, commanded one of the largest completely armed to be
placed behind the Hangings, as they were talking together, which being done,
upon a Sign given, the Hanging was drawn aside, and the Elephant raising his
Trunk over the head of Fabritius, made an horrid and ugly noise; He gently
turning about and smiling, said to Pyrrhus. Neither your Money yesterday, nor
this Beast to day make any Impression upon me. At Supper amongst (...) sorts of
things that were discoursed, but more particularly of Greece, and of the
Philosophy there, Cineas by accident had occasion to speak of Epicurus, and
explained what they held about the Gods and the Commonwealth, placing the chief
Happiness of Man in Pleasure, and declining Public Affairs as an Injury and
Disturbance of an happy Life; removing the Gods afar off both from Kindness or
Anger, or any Concern for us at all, to a life wholly without Business and
flowing in Pleasures. Before he had done speaking, Fabritius cried out, O
Hercules! said he, to Pyrrhus, may Pyrrhus and the Samnites entertain
themselves with this sort of Opinions as long as they are in War with us.
Pyrrhus admiring the Wisdom and Gravity of Much admired by Pyrrhus.
the man, was the more transported with desire of making Friendship instead of
War with the City, and apart entreated him, after the Peace should be
concluded, to accept of living with him as his Chief Minister of State, and
Generalissimo of his Armies. Fabritius told him softly, Sir, this will not be
for your advantage, for they who now honor and admire you, when they have had
experience of me, will rather choose to be governed by me, than by you, so great
a man was Fabritius. Pyrrhus heard him say this unmoved, and without any
Tyrannick Passion; nay, among his Friends highly commended the great mind of
Fabritius; and Entrusted the Prisoners to him alone, on Condition, that if the
Senate should not vote a Peace, after they had conversed with their Friends,
and celebrated the Festivals of Saturn, they should be remanded, and
accordingly they were sent back after the Holy Days; It being Decreed pain of
death for any that stayed behind. After this Fabritius taking the Consulate, a
Person came with a Letter to the Camp, writ by the King's principal Physician,
offering to take off Pyrrhus by Poison, and so end the War without farther
hazard to the Romans, if he might have a Reward proportionable to his Service.
Fabritius enraged at the Villainy Discovers to Pyrrhus a Design to poison him.
of the man, and disposing the other Consul to the same Opinion, sent
dispatches immediately to Pyrrhus to caution him against the Treason. His
Letter was to this effect; Caius Fabritius and Quintus Aemilius, Consuls of the
Romans, to Pyrrhus the King, Health. You seem to have made a very ill Judgment,
both of your Friends and Enemies. You will understand by reading this Letter
sent to us, That you are in War with honest men, and trust Villains and Knaves;
we have not discovered this to you to insinuate into your Favor, but lest your
ruin might bring a reproach upon us, as if we had ended the War by treachery,
not as able to do it by force: When Pyrrhus had read the Letter, and made
strict Enquiry into the Treason, he Executed the Physician, and for
acknowledgment of this Civility of the Romans, sent to Rome the Prisoners
without Ransom, and again employed Cineas to negotiate a Peace for him: but
whether they believed it too great a kindness from an Enemy, or two great a
Reward of not doing an ill thing to accept their Prisoners so, released to them
as many of the Tarentines and Samnites; but would admit of no debate of
Alliance or Peace till he had removed his Arms and Forces out of Italy, and
sailed back to Epirus in the same Ships that A second Engagement with the
Romans.
brought him over: After, his Affairs bringing on a second Fight, when he had
refreshed his men, he decamped, and meeting the Romans about the City Asculum,
being incommoded by a woody Country, unfit for his Horse, and a very swift
Current of the River, that the Elephants, for want of sure treading, could not
get up with the Infantry: After many wounded and many killed, the Night put an
end to the Engagement; next day designing to make the Fight on even Ground, and
have the Elephants among the thickest of the Enemy, he caused a Detachment to
possess themselves of those incommodious Grounds, and mixing Slingers and
Archers among the Elephants with great Courage and Fury, he advanced in a close
and well ordered Body; and the Romans not having those advantages of retreating
and falling on as they pleased, which they had before, were obliged to fight
man to man upon plain Ground, and hastening to disorder the main Battle before
the Elephants could get up, they made bloody work with their Swords among the
Macedonian Spears, not sparing themselves in the least; to wound and kill was
all their thought, without regard of what they suffered: after a long and
obstinate Fight, the first giving Ground is reported to have been where Pyrrhus
himself engaged with extraordinary Courage; but they were most put to it by the
mighty Force of the Elephants, the Romans not being able to make use of their
Valors, but as it were overthrown by the irruption of a Sea or an Earthquake,
thinking it better to give way than die without doing any thing, and not gain
the least advantage by suffering the utmost Extremity; the Retreat to their
Camp not being far. Hieronymus says, there died Six Thousand of the Romans, of
Pyrrhus his men, the King's own Commentaries report 3550 lost in this Action.
Dionysius of Halicarnasse neither gives an account of two Engagements at
Asculum, nor allows the Romans were certainly beaten, and that once only after
they had fought till Sunset, both Armies were unwillingly separated by the
Night. Pyrrhus being wounded by a Javelin in the Arm, and his Baggage plundered
by the Pyrrhus's Reply to one that gave him Joy of his Victory.
Samnites, that in all there died of Pyrrhus his men and the Romans above
15000, and then both retreated. It Is said, Pyrrhus replied to a Gentleman that
gave him the Joy of his Victory; That such another would utterly undo him; for
he had lost a great part of the Forces he brought with him, and almost all his
particular Friends and principal Commanders: There were no others there to make
Recruits, and he* saw the Confederates very slow in their motion. On the other
hand, as from a Fountain continually flowing out of the City, the Roman Camp
was quickly and plentifully filled up with fresh men; not at all abating in
Courage for the losses they sustained, but even from their very anger gained
new Force and Resolution to go on with the War. Among these difficulties he
fell again into vain hopes and businesses that hugely distracted his Mind; for
at the same time some Persons arrived from Sicily, offering into his hands the
Cities of Agrigentum and Syracuse, and that of the Leontines, and begging his
assistance to expulse the Carthaginians, and rid the Island of Tyrants; Others
brought him News out of Greece, that Ptolome called Ceraunus, was slain in a
Fight, and his Army cut in pieces by the Gauls, and that if he came now in
time, the Macedonians were at a great loss for a King. Here he began extremely
to accuse Fortune for bringing him so many occasions of great things all
together at a time, and considering that by grasping at both, he should lose
one of them, was a Pyrrhus goes into Sicily.
long time balancing in his thoughts: But the Affairs of Sicily seeming to
promise him matter of the greater business, Africa lying so near, he turned
himself to them, and presently dispatched away Cineas (as he used to do) to
make Terms beforehand with the Cities. Then he placed a Garrison in Tarentum,
infinitely against their Wills, and requiring him either to perform what he
came for, and continue with them in a War against the Romans, or leave the City
as he found it, he returned* no pleasing Answer, but commanded them to be quiet
and attend his time, and so sailed away. Being arrived in Sicily, what he had
designed in his hopes, was confirmed effectually, and the Cities frankly
surrendered to him. Wherever his Arms and Force were necessary, nothing at
first made any considerable resistance, for arriving with 30000 Foot, and 2500
Horse, and 200 Ships, he totally routed the Phaenicians, and overturned their
whole Government; Eryx being the strongest Town they held, and having a great
Garrison in it, he resolved to take it by Storm: The Army being in readiness to
give the Assault, he put on his Arms, and coming into the head of his men, made
a Vow of Plays and Sacrifices to Hercules in Honor, if he signalized himself
in that day's Action before the Greeks that dwelt in Sicily, as became his
great Descent and his Fortunes. The Sign being given by sound of Trumpet, he
dissipated first the Barbarians with his Shot, and then brought his Ladders to
the Wall, and The mighty personal Valor of Pyrrhus.
was the first that mounted upon it himself, and the Enemy appearing in great
Numbers, he beat them back, some he threw down from the Walls on each side,
others he laid dead in a heap round about him with his Sword, nor did he
receive the least wound, but seemed very terrible in his Aspect to the Enemy;
and gave a clear Demonstration that Homer was in the right, and pronounced
according to the truth of Fact; that Fortitude alone of all the Virtues is
often inspired with Furious and Enthusiastic Transports. The City being taken
he offered to Hercules most magnificently, and exhibited all Varieties of Shows
and Plays. A sort of Barbar^us The Mamertines.
People about Mesena, called Mamertines, gave much trouble to the Greeks, and
put several of them under Contribution. These being numerous and valiant (from
whence they had their Name, as much as to say, Martial in the Latin Tongue) he
first intercepted the Collectors of the Contribution*Money, and cut them off,
then beat them in open Fight, and destroyed many of their Places of Strength.
The Carthaginians being now inclined to Composition, and offering him a round
Sum of Money, and to furnish him with Shipping, if a Peace were concluded, he
told them plainly (aspiring still to greater things) there was one way for a
Friendship and right understanding between them, if they wholly abandoning
Sicily, he would consent the African Sea should be the limit between them and
the Greeks. And being heightened with his good Fortune and the Strength of his
Forces, and pursuing those hopes, in prospect of which he first sailed thither,
his chief aim was at Africa: He had abundance of Shipping but very ill
Equipped, and when he began to press Seamen, not Pyrrhus disobliges the
Sicilians.
carrying himself fairly and obligingly toward the Cities, but forcing them in
an haughty and insolent way, and menacing them with punishments; whereas at
first he was not so, but more winning than any other, by a sweet manner of
Converse, ready to believe, and uneasy to none; now of a Popular Prince,
becoming a Tyrant by this severe proceeding, he got the name of an ungrateful
and a faithless man. However they gave way to these things as necessary,
although they took them very ill from him; and especially when he entertained a
Suspicion of Thion and Sostratus, men of the first Quality in Syracuse, who
invited him over into Sicily, and when he was come, put the Cities into his
power, and were most instrumental in all he had done there since his Arrival,
and would neither suffer them to be about his Person, nor leave them at home.
Sostratus out of fear withdrew himself, then he charged Thion as in a
Conspiracy with the other, and put him to death; and now the Scene of his Affairs
was changed, not by little and little, nor yet all at once, but a mortal hatred
being raised in the Cities against him, some fell off to the Carthaginians,
others called in the Mamertines, and seeing Revolts They revolt from him.
in all places, and desires of Alteration, and a Potent Faction against him, he
received Letters from the Samnites and Tarentines, who were beaten quite out of
the Field, and scarce left able to secure their Towns against the War,
earnestly begging his He is called over again into Italy.
help: This served as a Color to make his relinquishing Sicily, no Flight, nor
a Despair of good Success, but in truth, not being able to keep it, which was
as a Ship laboring in a Storm, and willing to be out of her, he suddenly threw
himself over into Italy. It Is reported that at his going off, he looked back
upon the Island, and His Prophetic farewell to Sicily.
said to those about him, How brave a Field of War do we leave, my Masters, for
the Romans and Carthaginians to fight in, which as he then conjectured fell out
indeed not long after. When he was just ready to Sail, the Barbarians having
conspired together, he was forced to a Fight with the Carthaginians in the very
Road, and lost many of his Ships, with the rest he fled into Italy. There were
about 1000 Mamertines had crossed the Sea a little before, but afraid to engage
him in open Field, only setting upon him where the Passages were difficult, put
the whole Army in Confusion, two Elephants fell, and a great part of his Rear
was cut off; he therefore coming up in Person, repulsed the Enemy, but was
hugely in danger, among men trained long in War and enraged: his being wounded
in the Head with a Sword, and retiring a little out of the Fight, had heightened
the Enemy, one of which, advancing a good way before the rest, large of Body,
and in bright Armor, with an haughty voice, challenged him to come forth, if
he were alive: Pyrrhus in a great rage, violently turned himself among his
Guards toward him, and storming and beswear'd with Blood; he was terrible to
look upon, and breaking through his own men, got before and stroke the Barbarian
on the Head with his Sword such a blow, as with the strength of his Arm, and
the excellent temper of the Weapon, passed downward so far, that in a moment,
his Body being cut asunder, fell in two pieces; this stopped the course of the
Barbarians, amazed and confounded at Pyrrhus, as one more than man: So that
continuing his March all the rest of the way undisturbed, he arrived at
Tarentum with 20000 Foot, and 3000 Horse; where reinforcing himself with the
choicest Troops of the Tarentines, he advanced immediately against the Romans,
who then lay encamped in the Territories of the Samnites, whose Affairs were
extremely shattered, and their Councils broken, having been in many Fights
beaten by the Romans. There was also a discontent among them at Pyrrhus, for
his Expedition into Sicily, so that not many came in to join him: But he
divided his Army in two Parts, and commanded the first into Leucania, to oppose
one of the Consuls there, that he should not come in to assist the other; the
rest he led against Manius Curious, who had posted himself very advantageously
near Beneventum, and expected the other Consul's Forces, and partly, because
the Priests had frighted him with ominous Birds and Sacrifices, he resolved to
remain there. Pyrrhus hastening to attack these before the other could arrive,
with his best men, and the most courageous Elephants, marched in the Night
toward their Camp, but being forced to go round about, and through a very woody
Country, their Flambeaus failed them, and their Soldiers lost their way; a
Council of War being called, while they were in debate, the Night was spent,
and at the break of Day, his approach was discovered by the Enemy, as they came
down the Hills, which put the whole Camp into much disorder and tumult, but the
Sacrifices being auspicious, and the time absolutely obliging them to fight, he
drew out of the A third Fight with the Romans.
Trenches, and fell in with their Vantguard, and having routed them, all the
Army was in a Consternation, so that a great many were cut off, and some of the
Elephants taken. This success drew on Manius fighting into the Field, and in
plain Ground, he totally defeated one Wing of the Enemy; on the other hand,
being oppressed by the Elephants, and forced back to his Trenches, he commanded
out those who were left to guard them, standing thick on the Ramparts, all in
Arms and fresh men; these coming down from the Fort, and charging the
Elephants, forced them to retire, and in the Flight turning back upon their own
men, caused a huge disorder and confusion, which at once brought the The Romans
now at once gain both Victory and Empire.
Romans both Victory and Empire; for now having got the Fame of Invincible,
both for their Conduct, and Courage, and Glory as well in this Action as in a
great many others, they soon overrun Italy, and not long after Sicily too.
Thus fell Pyrrhus from his Italian and Sicilian hopes, after he had consumed
six Years in these Wars, and Pyrrhus held the best Soldier of all Princes of
his Time.
though unsuccessful in his Affairs, yet preserved his Courage unconquerable
among all these Misfortunes, and was held for Military Experience, and Personal
Valor, and Undertaking, much the bravest of all the Princes of his time, but
what he got by great Actions, he lost again by vain Hopes, and by new desires
of what he had not, kept nothing of what he had: So that Antigonus used to
compare him to one who at Antigonus his Character of him.
Dice threw excellently well, but knew not how to make the best of his Game:
Returns home out of Italy.
He returned into Epirus with 8000 Foot, and 500 Horse, and for want of Money
to pay them, was fain to look out for a new War to maintain the Army. Some of
the Gauls joining him, he fell into Macedon, where Antigonus, Son of Demetrius,
governed, designing to plunder and waste His fresh Successes there.
the Country, but after he made himself Master of several Towns, and 2000 men
came over to him, he began to hope for something greater, and adventured upon
Antigonus himself, and meeting him at a narrow Passage, called the Straits, put
the whole Army in disorder, but the Gauls who brought up Antigonus his Rear,
were very numerous and stood firm, and a brisk Fight happening, the greatest part
of them were cut off. They who had the charge of the Elephants, being
surrounded every way delivered up both themselves and the Beasts: Pyrrhus
taking this advantage, and advising more with his good Fortune, than his
Reason, boldly set upon the Conquers Antigonus.
main Body of the Macedonian Foot, already surpised with Fear, and troubled at
the former loss, so that they declined any Action or Engagement with him, and
he holding out his Hand, and calling aloud, both to the Superior and
Underofficers by Name, brought over the Foot from Antigonus; who flying
privately, kept only some of the Sea-Towns. Pyrrhus among all these kindnesses
of Fortune, thinking what he had effected against the Gauls the most
advantageous for his Glory, hung up their richest and goodliest Spoils in the
Temple of Minerva Itonis with this Inscription,

These Shields of the brave Gauls, Great Goddess! I
Offer to Thee, gained in full Victory
Over Antigonus. It Is no strange thing
For Pyrrhus, who from Aeacus does spring.
After this defeat in the Field, he quickly took in the Cities, and having
Aegis in his Power, beside other hardships put upon them, he left in the Town a
Garrison of Gauls, some of those in his own Army, who being insatiably desirous
of Wealth, instantly dug up the Tombs of the Kings that lay buried there, and
took away the Riches, and insolently scattered about their Bones. Pyrrhus in
appearance made no great matter of it, either deferring it by reason of other
extraordinary business, or wholly passing it by, out of a fear of punishing
those Barbarians; but this made him hear very ill among the Macedonians, and
his Affairs being yet unsettled, and brought to no firm Consistence, he
notwithstanding entertained new visionary hopes, and in raillery called
Antigonus Impudent, that he had not put on a mean Habit, but still wore Purple:
Cleonymus the Spartan arriving and inviting him to Pyrrhus invited against
Sparta.
Lacedaemon, he frankly embraced the Overture, Cleonymus was of Royal Descent,
but seeming too Arbitrary and absolute, had no great respect nor credit at
home. And Areus was King there. This was the occasion of an old and public
grudge between him and the Citizens; but beside that Cleonymus in his old Age
had married a young Lady of great Beauty and Royal Blood, Chelidonis Daughter
of Lectychides, who falling desperately in Love with Acrotatus, Areus his Son,
a Youth gay and airy; rendered this Match both uneasy and dishonorable to
Cleonymus; for there was none of the Spartans who did not very well know how
much his Wife slighted him; so these Domestic Troubles added to his Public
discontent. He brought Pyrrhus to Sparta with an Army of 20000 Foot, 2000
Horse, and 24 Elephants, but so great a preparation made it evident to the
whole World, that he came not so much to gain Sparta for Cleonymus, as to take
all Peloponnesus for himself, yet he expressly denied this to the Lacedaemonian
Ambassadors, that came to him to Megalopolis, affirming he came to deliver the
Cities from the Slavery of Antigonus, and vowing to send his younger Sons to
Sparta (if he might) to be informed with Spartan Education, that so they might
be better bred than all other Kings. With these pretensions amusing those who
came to meet him in his March, as soon as ever he entered Laconia, he began to
plunder and waste the Country, of which the Ambassadors complaining, that he
began the War upon them before it was proclaimed. We know (said he) very well,
that neither you Spartans, when you design any thing, use to talk of it
beforehand. One Mandracidas, then present, told him in the broad Spartan
Dialect; An yau be a God do us no harm, for wee'se harm Here Plutarch himself
changes his style into the broad Poric.
none, and if yau be a mon, ther'se be some auther as stout as yau. He now
marched away directly for Lacedaemon, and being advised by Cleonymus to give
the Assault as soon as he arrived, Pyrrhus (as it is said) fearing least the
Soldiers entering by Night, should plunder the City, answered, they might do it
as well next Morning, because there were but few Soldiers in Town, and
unprovided by reason of his sudden approach, for Areus was not there in Person,
but gone to aid the Gortynians then in War, Pyrrhus too secure of Success,
loses the opportunity of taking Sparta.
and it was this alone that saved the Town, because in regard of the small
number of Soldiers, and the scarcity of Provisions he despised it as not
tenable, and so imagining no Defense would be made, sat down before it that
Night: Cleonymus's Friends and the Heilots, his Domestic Servants, had made
great preparation at his House, as expecting Pyrrhus there at Supper. In the
Night, the Lacedaemonians held a Consult, to Ship over all the Women into
Crete, The great Resolution of the Spartan Ladies.
but they unanimously refused, and Archidamia came into the Senate, with a
Sword in her Hand, in the Name of them all, representing how unkindly they took
it, to think they would survive the ruins of Sparta. It was next resolved to
draw a Trench in a Line directly over against the Enemies Camp, and at each end
of it, to sink Waggons-in the Ground, as deep as the Naves of the Wheels, that
so being firmly fixed, they might obstruct the passage of the Elephants. When
they had just begun the Work, both Maids and Women came to them, those had
their Clothes trussed up about their Linen, and others in their Shifts only, to
assist the Elder sort of men; As for the Youth that were next day to engage,
they left them to their rest, and undertaking their proportion, they themselves
finished a third part of the Trench, which was in breadth six Cubits, four in
depth, and 800 foot long, as Phylarchus says. Hieronymus makes it somewhat
less. The Enemy beginning to move by break of day, they brought their Arms to
the young men, and giving them also in charge the Trench, exhorted them to
defend and keep it bravely, as a most worthy thing to conquer in the view of
their whole Country, and glorious to die in the Arms of their Mothers and Wives
falling as became Spartans. As for Chelidonis, she retired with a Halter about
her Neck, resolving to die so, rather than fall into the Hands of Cleonymus, if
the City were taken. Pyrrhus himself in Person labored with his Foot to force
through the Shields of the Spartans ranged against him, and to get over the
Trench, which was scarce passable, because the looseness of the fresh Earth
afforded no firm footing for the Soldiers. Ptolomee, Pyrrhus's Son with 2000
Gauls, and some choice men of the Chaonians went about the Trench, and
endeavored to get over where the Wagons were, but they being so deep in the
Ground, and placed close together, did not only make his passage, but also the
defense of the Lacedaemonians very troublesome; yet now the Gauls had got the
Wheels out of the Ground, and were drawing off the Wagons toward the River,
when Young Acrotatus seeing the danger they were in, passing through the Town
with 300 men, surrounded Ptolomee undiscerned, taking the advantage of some
hollow ways, till he fell upon his Rear, and forced them to wheel about,
thrusting one another into the Ditch, and falling among the Wagons, and at
last they with much ado were cut off with a very great slaughter; the Elderly
men, and all the Ladies saw this brave action of Acrotatus, and when he
returned back into the Town to his first Post all covered with Blood, and
fierce and elate with Victory, he seemed to the Spartan Dames more gallant and
beautiful than ever, and they envied Chelidonis so worthy a Lover. And some of
the old men followed him, crying aloud, Go on Acrotatus, enjoy Chelidonis, and
get brave Fellows for Sparta. Where Pyrrhus himself fought, was the hottest of
the Action, and many of the Spartans did gallantly, but in particular, one
Phyllius signalized himself, and killed most of those that pressed upon him;
and when he found himself ready to sink with the many Wounds he had received,
retiring a little out of his place behind another, fell down among their own
men, that the Enemy might not carry off his Body. The Fight ended with the day,
and Pyrrhus in his Sleep dreamed he threw Lightning upon Lacedaemon, and set it
all on fire, and seemed to rejoice at the Sight; and in this Transport of joy
waking, commanded his Officers to get all things ready for a second Assault;
and interpreting his Dream among his Friends, that he should take the Town by
Storm, several assented to it with admiration; but Lysimachus was not pleased
with the Dream, and told him he feared, lest as Places struck with Lightning
are held Sacred, and not to be entered; so the Gods might by this let him know
the City should not be taken. Pyrrhus replied, All these things were but idle
talk, full of uncertainty, and only fit to amuse the Vulgar; but you my brave
Men, with your Swords in your hands, should always think of that Verse of
Homer. (...)


It Is the only good presage,
That for Pyrrhus you engage.
Changing the last Word of his Verse, and surprising them in raillery, with
putting in the Word (...) for (...), he got up, and drew out his Army to the
Walls by break of Day; the Lacedaemonians in resolution and courage, made a
defense even beyond their power, the Women were all by, helping them to Arms,
and bringing Bread and Drink to those that desired it, and taking care of the
wounded: The Macedonians attempted to fill up the Trench, bringing huge
quantities of Materials, and throwing them upon the Arms and dead Bodies that
lay there all covered over; while the Lacedaemonians opposed this with all
their Force, Pyrrhus in Person appeared on their side of the Trench, and the
Wagons pressing on Horseback toward the City, at which, the Soldiers who had
that Post, making a great Noise, and the Women shreiking and running about,
while Pyrrhus violently pushed on, and in Person beating down all that disputed
his way; his Horse received a shot in the Belly, with a Cretan Arrow, and
flouncing as he died, threw off Phyrrus on slippery and very steep Grounds, at
which, all about him being in a Confusion, the Spartans came boldly up, and
making good use of their Arrows, forced them off again. This caused Pyrrhus to
retreat a second time, thinking the Lacedaemonians would abate of their vigor,
when almost all of them were wounded, and very great numbers killed outright:
But the good Fortune of the City, either resolving to make the utmost
Experiment of the bravery of her own Citizens upon her self, or giving a
demonstration how great a power she has in dubious Accidents, the
Lacedaemonians having now but very slender hopes left, brought Ameinias, the
Phocian, one of Antigonus's Commanders, from Corinth to their assistance, with
an Army of Strangers, and they were no sooner received into the Town, but Areus
their King, arrived there himself too from Crete with 2000 men more: The Women
upon this went all home to their Houses, finding it no longer necessary for
them to meddle with the business of the War; and they also were sent back, who
though under age, were by necessity forced to take Arms; the rest prepared to
fight Pyrrhus upon the coming of these additional Forces, who was possessed
with a more eager desire and ambition than before to make himself Master of the
Town; but his Designs not succeeding, and receiving Pyrrhus draws off from
Sparta.
fresh losses every day, he gave over the Siege, and fell to plunder the
Country, determining to winter thereabout. But Fate is unavoidable, and a great
Feud happ'ning at Argos between Aristeus and Aristippus, two principal
Citizens, after Aristippus had resolved to make use of the Friendship of
Antigonus, Aristeus to prevent him invited Pyrrhus thither; and he Pyrrhus sent
for to Argos.
always revolving hopes upon hopes, and taking advantage from good successes to
embrace occasions of more, and when things went unprosperously, to make up
those defects by doing better another time, he neither made Losses nor
Victories the bounds of his receiving or giving Trouble, and so presently went
for Argos. Areus by frequent Ambushes, and lining the Hedges where the ways
were most unpracticable, cut off many of the Gauls and Molossians that brought
up the Rear. It was told Pyrrhus by one of the Priests that found the Liver of
the sacrificed Beast imperfect, that some of his near Relations would be lost;
in this Tumult and Disorder of his Rear, forgetting the Prediction, he
commanded out his Son Ptolomee, with some of his Guards to their assistance,
who quickly getting out of the narrow ways, marched up to them, and the Fight
being very warm where he was (for the most select men of the Lacedaemonians
commanded by Evalcus, were there engaged) one Oraesus, of Aptera, in Creet, a
stout man and very swift, running on the one side of the young Prince, as he
was fighting bravely, gave Ptolomee one of his Sons killed.
him a mortal wound and slew him; he falling, those about him turned their
backs, the Lacedaemonian Horse pursuing and cutting off many, were got into the
open Field engaged with the Enemy before they were aware, without the Infantry;
Pyrrhus, who had received the ill news of his Son, and was infinitely afflicted
at it, drew out his Molossian Horse against them, and charging in the Head of
his men, satiated himself with the Blood and Slaughter of the Lacedaemonians,
always indeed appearing an invincible Hero, and mighty in Arms, but now
exceeded all he had ever done before in Courage and Force: Then riding up
furiously to Evalcus, he declining a little to one side, had almost cut off
Pyrrhus his Hand in which he held the Reins, but lighting on the Reins only,
cut them, at the same instant Pyrrhus running him through with his Spear, fell
from his Horse, and on foot as he was cut in pieces all those choice men that
fought about the Body of Evalcus, and the obstinate fury of the Commanders on
both sides brought this great loss to Sparta, even when the War was now at an
end: Pyrrhus having thus offered so many as it were in Sacrifice to the Ghost
of his Son, and made his Fight a kind of Funeral Show, converting much of his
Grief into Rage against the Enemy, marched away to Argos. And having
Intelligence that Antigonus kept the high Grounds, he encamped about Nauplia;
the next day he dispatched an Herald to Antigonus, calling him persidious, and
challenging him to descend into the plain Field, and fight with him for the
Kingdom; he answered, his Conduct should be measured by Antigonus's answer to a
Challenge Pyrrhus.
Times as well as by Arms, and that if Pyrrhus had no leisure to live, there
were ways enough open to death. To both the Kings also came Ambassadors from
Argos, desiring each Party to retreat, and not suffer the City to fall into the
hands of any one of them that had a great honor for both. Antigonus was
persuaded, and sent his Son an Hostage to the Argives; but Pyrrhus, although he
promised a recess, yet sending no Hostage, he was much suspected. At this time
a great Prodigy happened to Pyrrhus, for the Heads of the Sacrificed Oxen lying
apart from the Bodies, were seen to thrust out their Tongues, and lick up their
own gore. And in the very City of Argos, a Priestess of Apollo Lycius, ran
about the Streets, crying, She saw the City full of Carcasses and Slaughter,
and an Eagle coming out to fight, and presently vanishing again. In the dead of
the Night Pyrrhus He enters the Town by Night undiscovered.
approaching the Walls, and finding the Gate called Diamperes set open for them
by Aristeas, was undiscovered till such time as all his Gauls had entered, and
took possession of the Market place, but the Gate being too low to let in the
Elephants, they were fain to take down their Towers, and put them on again in
the dark, and in disorder; so that time being lost, the City took the Alarm,
and the People, some run to Aspis, the chief Citadel, and others to other
Places of Defense, and sent away to Antigonus to assist them, who coming pretty
near, made an halt, but sent in some of his principal Commanders, and his Son
with a very considerable Force; Areus came thither too with 1000 Cretans, and
some of the briskest of the Spartans, and all falling on at once upon the
Gauls, put them in great disorder. Pyrrhus entering in with a mighty Noise and
Shout at a place called Cylabaris, when the Gauls returned another Cry to them,
it did not express Courage and Assurance, but the Voice of men distressed, and
that had their hands full. Therefore Pyrrhus in haste pushed on the van of his
Horse that marched but slowly and dangerously, by reason of the Drains and
Sinks, of which the City was full. In this Night-Engagement, there was infinite
Infinite confusion on all hands in the Night.
confusion both in those that acted, and those that commanded, mistaking and
straggling in the narrow Streets; it was impossible to make use of Conduct or
Order in that darkness and variety of Noises and strait Passages; so both sides
continued without doing any thing, and expecting Daylight. At the first dawn,
Pyrrhus seeing the great Citadel* Aspis full of Men, was disturbed, and
remarking among many Figures dedicated to the Marketplace, The Sight of a
Figure in the Marketplace, strikes him with horror.
a Wolf and Bull of Brass, as it were ready to attack one another, he was
struck with horror; reflecting upon the memory of an Oracle, that formerly
predicted, Fate had determined his Death when he should see a Wolf fighting
with a Bull. The Argives report these Figures were placed in memory of a thing
that fell out anciently there: For Danaus, when he first invaded those Parts,
passing by the ways called Pyramia in Thyreatis, as he marched toward Argos,
espied a Wolf fighting with a Bull, and imagining the Wolf to represent him
(for this Stranger fell upon a Native as he designed to do) stayed to see the
Issue of the Fight, and the Wolf prevailing, after he had offered his Devotions
to Apollo Lycius, he assaulted and carried the Town, Gelanor, who was then
King, being displaced by a Faction: And this was the Cause of dedicating those
Figures. Pyrrhus quite out of heart at this Sight, and seeing none of his
Designs succeed, thought best to retreat, but fearing the strait Passage at the
Gates, sent to his Son Helenus, who was left without the Town with a great part
of his Forces, commanding him to break down part of the Wall, and assist the
retreat if the Enemy pressed hard upon them: But what with the have and
confusion of the Person that was sent, he delivered nothing clearly; so that
quite mistaking, the Young Prince, with the best of his men, and the remaining
Elephants, marched straight through the Gates into the Town to assist his
Father. Pyrrhus was now making good his Retreat, and while the Marketplace
afforded them Ground enough both to Retreat and Fight, frequently repulsed the
Enemy, that bore upon him; when he was forced out of that broad place, into a
narrow street leading to the Gate, and fell in with those who came the other
way to his assistance, they not hearing him call out to them to give back, and
coming on very briskly of themselves, were also pushed forward by others
behind, who poured in at the Gate: Besides the largest of the Elephants falling
down on his side, in the very Gate, and terribly braying, lay in the way of
those that would have got out. Another of these already A remarkable kindness
of an Elephant to his keeper.
in the Town, called Nicon* striving to take up his Rider, who after many
wounds received, was fallen off his back, bore forward upon them that
Retreated, and thrusting as well Friends as Enemies, tumbled them all
confusedly upon one another, till having found the Body, and taken it up with
his Trunk, he carried it on his Tushes, and returning in a great Rage, trod
down all before him. Being thus pressed and crowded together, not a man could
do any thing singly, but wedged so close, as it were one Mass, the whole
multitude rolled and swayed this way and that altogether, they did very little
Execution upon the Enemy, either in their Front or Rear, but very much harm to
one another; for he who had either drawn his Sword, or directed his Lance,
could neither advance it again, nor put his Sword up, but wounded their own
men, as by chance they were thrust together, and so fell dead one among
another. Pyrrhus seeing the mighty Storm and Confusion of things, took off the
Crown he wore upon his Helmet, by which he was distinguished, and gave it to
one nearest his Person, and trusting to the goodness of his Horse, rid in among
the thickest of the Enemy, and being wounded with a Lance through his
Breast Plate, but not dangerously, nor indeed very much, he turned about to him
that struck him, who was an Argive, not a man of any Illustrious Birth, but the
Son of a poor old Woman: She was looking upon the Fight among other Women, from
the top of an House, and perceiving her Son engaged with Pyrrhus, and
affrighted at the Pyrrhus almost killed by a Tile thrown off an house by an old
Woman.
danger he was in, took up a Tile with both Hands, and threw it at Pyrrhus,
which falling on his Head, below his Helmet, and bruising the Vertebres of the
lower part of the Neck, his Eyesight was taken away, his Hands let go the
Reins, and sinking down from his Horse, fell just by the Tomb of Lycimnius; the
common Soldiers knew not who it was; but one Zopyrus, that served under
Antigonus, and two or three others running thither, and knowing it was Pyrrhus,
dragged him to a Threshold hard by, just as he was recovering a little from the
blow; Zopyrus drawing out an Illyrian Sword, and ready to cut off his Head,
Pyrrhus when half dead, terrifies a Soldier so with a Look, he could hardly cut
off his Head.
Pyrrhus gave him so fierce a Look, that confounded with Terror, and sometimes
his Hands trembling, and then again endeavoring to do it, full of Fear and
Confusion, he could not strike him right, but cutting over his Mouth and Chin,
it was a long time before he got off the Head: This was quickly known to a
great many, and Alcyoneus hastening to the place, desired to look upon the
Head, and see whether he knew it, and taking it in his hand, rid away to his
Father, and threw it at his feet, while he was sitting with some of his
particular Favorites: Antigonus looking Royal Generosity of Antigonus.
upon it, and knowing it, thrust his Son from him, and struck him with his
Cane, calling him wicked and barbarous, and covering his Eyes with his Robe,
fell a weeping, when he reflected upon the instances of the change of Fortune
in his own Family, both in his Grandfather, and his Father, and caused the Head
and Body of Pyrrhus to be burned with all due Solemnity: after this, Alcyoneus
discovering Helenus under a mean disguise, in a poor thred*bare Coat, used him
very respectfully, and brought him to his Father: When Antigonus saw him, This,
Son, (said he) was done much more Nobly than before, but yet there is a defect,
that you have not taken off that old Coat, which is a Scandal to us who have
got the Victory; and then treating Helenus with great kindness, and as became a
Prince, restored him to his Kingdom of Epirus, and gave the same obliging
Reception to all Pyrrhus his principal Commanders, after he had reduced the
whole Army under his Obedience.

THE LIFE OF CAIUS MARIUS.
Englished from the Greek, By Miles Stapleton, Fellow of All Souls College in
Oxon.
VOLUME III.
1. WE are altogether ignorant of the Of the Names of the Romans.
third Name of Caius Marius; as likewise of that of Quintus Sertorius that
possessed himself of Spain; or of Lucius Mummius that destroyed Corinth: though
this last was Surnamed Achaius, from his Conquests; as Scipio was called
Africanus, and Metellus, Macedonicus, whence Posidonius draws his chiefest
Argument to confute those that CAIUS MARIUS.
(...)

hold the second to be the Roman proper Name, as Camillus, Marcellus, Cato; for
so they had but two Names would have none proper; and he did not foresee, that
by the very same reason he must rob the Women absolutely of their Names; for
none of them have the first, which Posidonius imagines the proper Name with the
Romans. Now of the other Names, one was common to the whole Family, as the
Pompii, Manlii, Cornelii (and with us Grecians, the Heraclidae, and Pelopidae)
the other Titular, adopted to them either from their Natures, or Actions or
Affections, and Shapes of their Body; as Macrinus, Torquatus, Sylla; such also
is Mnemon, Grypus, or Calimicus among the Grecians. But of the variety of
Names, the irregularity of Custom, would we insist upon it, might furnish us
with Discourse enough.

2. We have seen Marius's Effigies in Marius's Statue.
Stone at Ravenna in Cisalpina.
Gallia, very agreeable to that roughness and Sowreness of his behavior
remarked by all Authors; for being naturally valiant and warlike, more
acquainted also with the Discipline of the Camp than of the City, he could not
moderate his Passion, when in Authority. He is said, neither to have much
studied Greek, nor ever to have made use of that Language in any matter of
consequence; as thinking it ridiculous to bestow time in that Learning, the
Teachers whereof were little better than their Slaves. So after his second
Triumph, when at the Dedication of a Temple, he presented some Shows after the
Greek Fashion, coming into the Theater, he only sat down, and immediately
departed. Wherefore, as Plato often used to say to Xenocrates the Philosopher,
who was seemingly of a more than ordinary rigid disposition: Prithee, good
Xenocrates, sacrifice to the Graces; so if any could have persuaded Marius to
pay his Devotions to the Greek Muses and Graces, he had never brought those his
incomparable Designs both in War and Peace, to so unhappy a Conclusion, or
plunged himself into a turbulent and unpleasant old Age through his Passion,
ill timed Ambition, and insatiable Avarice; but this will farther appear by and
by, from his Actions.

3. He was born of Parents altogether His Parentage.
obscure, indigent, and that supported themselves by their daily labor; his
Father of the same name with himself, his Mother called Fulcinia. He had passed
a considerable part of his Age before he saw and tasted the pleasures of the
City; at first he lived in Cirraeaton, a Village in the Territory of Arpinum, a
life compared with the City delicacies, harsh and rustical; yet temperate, and
much resembling the ancient Roman severity. He first listed himself in the War
against the Celtiberes; when Scipio Africanus besieged Numantia, where he soon
signalized himself to his General, by his Courage, very far above his Comrades;
and particularly, by his so cheerfully complying with Scipio's Reformation of
his Army, before almost ruined by Pleasures and Luxury. It Is reported too, that
he challenged, or at least encountered and vanquished an Enemy in his General's
sight, wherefore he had several Honors conferred upon him; and among the rest,
when at an Entertainment, a Discourse arising about Commanders, one of the
Company (whether really desirous to know, or only in Complaisance) asked
Scipio, where the Romans, after him, should obtain such another General? Scipio
gently clapping Marius of the back, who sat next him, replied; Here, perhaps.
So promising was his Nature, that in his very Youth, there appeared Omens of
his future Greatness, and from his low beginnings the height of his advancement
might be collected.

4. Marius fired with* this Speech of Scipio, as with a Divine Oracle, took the
courage to apply himself to the management of Public Affairs, and by the
assistance of Caecilius M^tellus (on whose Family, he as well as his Father,
had continual dependence) obtained the Office of Tribune of the People. In
which place, His Tribuneship.
when he would have made a Law concerning Voting, which seemed to lessen the
Authority of the great Men in matters of Judicature) the Consul Cotta opposed
him, persuaded the Senate to declare against the Law, and call Marius to an
account for it: But he, while this Decree was preparing, coming into the
Senate, did not behave himself like a young man newly and undeservedly advanced
to Authority: But taking as much courage as his future Actions would have
inspired into him, threatened Cotta, unless he recalled the Decree, to clap him
in Prison; and turning to Metellus, asked his Vote; Metellus rising up,
concurred with the Consul, whereupon Marius calling for an Officer, commanded
to take Metellus too into Custody; who though he appealed to the other
Tribunes, yet not one of them assisted him; so that the Senate immediately
complying, repealed the Decree.

5. Marius, now famous among the People for this Exploit, confirmed his Law,
and was henceforth esteemed of an undaunted Courage and Assurance, as well as a
vigorous Opposer of the Senate in favor of the Commons. But he immediately
lost this their Opinion of him by a contrary Action; for when a Law concerning
the distribution of Corn was proposed, he very vigorously contradicted the
Citizens, and carried it, making himself equally honored by both Parties in
gratifying neither, contrary to the Public Interest. After his Tribuneship he
was Candidate for the Office of chief Edile; for His standing to be Aedile.
there are two Orders of them, one called Curulis, from the Stool on which he
sat when he executed his Authority; the other inferior, is called Aedilis
plebis: as soon as they have chosen the former, they give their Voices again
for the latter: Wherefore Marius, when he was apparently like to be put by the
greater, immediately changed his Design, and stood for the less; but because he
seemed too forward and opiniatre, he was disappointed of that also. And though
he were in one day twice frustrated of his desired Preferment (which never
happened to any before) yet he was not at all discouraged; but a little while
after sought for the Praetorship, and was near suffering a Repuse, and then
too, though he was returned last of all, was nevertheless accused of indirectly
acquiring it.

6. Cassius Sabaco's Servant, who was observed His Praetorship and accusation.
within the Rails among them that voted, chiefly occasioned the suspicion; for
this Sabaco was an intimate Friend of Marius, and being called to appear before
the Judges, alleged; That being thirsty, by reason of the heat, he called for
cold water, and that his Servant brought him a Cup, and as soon as he drank,
departed; however he was excluded the Senate by the succeeding Censors, and not
undeservedly neither (as was thought) either for his false Evidence or
Intemperance: Caius Herennius was also cited as Evidence; but pleaded that it
was not customary for a Patron (for so the Romans call their Advocates) to
witness against his Clients, and that the Law excused them from that
disobligement: Now both his Parents and himself were always Clients to the
Family of the Herennii, and when the Judges would have accepted of this Plea,
Marius himself opposed it, and told Herennius, that when he was first created
Magistrate, he ceased to be his Client, which was not altogether true: For it
is not every Office that frees Clients and their Posterity from the observance
due to their Patrons, but only that to which the Law has assigned a Sella
Curulis. Notwithstanding, though at the beginning of the Suit it went somewhat
hard with Marius, and he found the Judges no way favorable to him; yet at last
their Voices being equal, he was beyond expectation acquitted.

7. In his Praetorship he got not much Honor, yet afterward obtained the
farther Spain; which Province he is said to have cleared of Thieves, when as
yet it was not thoroughly settled in Peace, and much wasted by the late Wars; and
the Spaniards in those days thought Robbery a piece of Valor. Returning to the
Affairs of the City, he trusted neither to Riches nor to Elequence, with which
the leading Men chiefly took the People; but the Citizens having his fierce
disposition, indefatigable pains and popular way of living in high esteem, he
acquired by these Offices great Wealth and Power; so that he made a very
honorable Match with Julia of the His Wife.
Renowned Family of the Caesar's, to whom that Caesar was Nephew, who was
afterward so great among the Romans, and who by the relation he had to Marius,
was popular with that Party; as in his Life we have observed. They attribute to
Marius both Temperance and Patience, of which latter he gave a pregnant
instance in an operation of Surgery; for having (as it seems) both his Legs
full of great Tumors called Varices, and being troubled at their deformity, he
determined to put himself into the hands of an Operator: where without being
tied, he stretched out one of his Legs, and silently, without changing
Countenance, endured most excessive torments in the cutting, never either
flinching or complaining; but when the Surgeon went to the other, he suffered
him not; saying, I see the Cure is not worth the Pain.

8. The Consul Caecilius Metellus being His Deportment in the War against
Jugurtha.
declared General in the War against Jugurtha in Africa, took with him Marius
for Lieutenant; where he putting himself upon the performance of dangerous
Actions and honorable Adventures, neglected Metellus's Glory and the serving
his Interest, as others before him had practiced; for attributing his Honor of
Lieutenancy not to Metellus but Fortune, which had presented him with a proper
opportunity and Theater of great Actions, he exerted his utmost Courage. That
War too affording several difficulties, he neither declined the greatest, nor
disdained undertaking the least of them; but surpassing his Equals in Counsel
and Conduct, and matching the very common Soldiers in Labor and
Abstemiousness, he strangely won their Affections; for the voluntary partaking
with them in their Labor seems to be an easing of them; inasmuch as they
apprehend it to take away the constraint and necessity of working. It is the
most obliging sight in the World to the Romans to see a Commander eat the same
Meat with his Soldiers, or lie upon an ordinary Bed, or assist the Work in the
drawing a Trench and raising a Bulwark; for they do not so much admire those
that conferr Honors and Riches upon them, as those that partake of the same
labor and danger with themselves; but love them better that will vouchsafe to
forward their work, than those that encourage their idleness.

9. Whilst Marius was thus employed, and thereby won mightily upon the
Soldiers, he immediately filled both Africa and Rome with his Fame, and some
too wrote home from the Army, that the War with Africa would never be brought
to a Conclusion, unless they chose C. Marius Consul, whereas Metellus was
apparently incensed; but was more especially grieved at the Calamity of
Turpilius. This Turpilius Turpilius*
had from his Ancestors been a Friend of, and kept constant Hospitality with
Metellus; and now being made by him Overseer of the Workmen, was concerned in
this War, where commanding a Garrison in Vacca a considerable City, and
trusting too much to the Inhabitants, because he treated them civilly and
kindly, he unawares fell into the Enemies hands, for they received Jugurtha
into the City, yet nevertheless at their request Turpilius was dismissed safe,
and without receiving any Injury; whereupon he was accused of betraying Marius
an Enemy to him.
it to the Enemy. Marius, being one of the Council of War, was not only violent
against him himself, but also incensed most of the others, so that Metellus was
forced (much against his Will) to put him to death. Not long after, the
Accusation proved false, and when others were comforting Metellus, who took
heavily the loss of his Friend. Marius rather insulting and arrogating it to
himself, boasted in all Companies that he had lodged a Fury in Metellus's Soul,
by forcing him to put to death his dearest Friend.

10. Henceforward they were at open variance; and it is reported, that Metellus
should say, drolling upon Marius then present. Oh Sir, you design to leave us
to go home and stand for the Consulship, would not you be well enough contented
to be Consul with this Boy of mine? Now Metellus's Son was very young; yet for
all this Marius being M^rius goes to Rome.
very importunate to be gone, after several delays, he was dismissed about
twelve days before the Election of Consuls; and performed that long Journey
from the Camp to Vtica (a Sea Town) in two days and a night, and there doing
sacrifice before he went on Shipboard, it is said, the Augur told him, that
Heaven promised him some incredible good Fortune, and such as was beyond all
expectation. Marius not a little proud of this Omen, began his Voyage, and in
four days with a favorable wind, passed the Sea; he was extremely welcome to
the People* and being brought into the Assembly by one of the Tribunes, he sued
for the Consulship, mightily inveighing against Metellus, and promising either
to slay Jugurtha, or take him alive.

11. He was elected with great Applause; His first Consulship.
but presently levied Soldiers contrary both to Law and Custom, listing several
Slaves and poor People; whereas former Commanders never accepted of such; but
bestowed Arms, like other Favors, with Honor on deserving Persons; every one
esteeming his Wealth as a pledge for his good performance. These were not the
only prejudices against Marius; but some haughty See his Speech in Salust.
Speeches, uttered with great arrogance and contempt, grieved the Nobility
extremely; as that he should say, he took the Consulship as a prey from the
effeminacy of the wealthy and nobler Citizens* and tell the People that he
gloried in the wounds he received for them, more than others in the Monuments
of the Dead and Images of their Ancestors, often speaking of those Commanders,
Bestia and Albinus, that were unfortunate in Africa, said, that they were
indeed men of very good Families, but unfit for War, and such as miscarried
through want of experience; and asked them that were about him, if they did not
think that their Ancestors had not much rather have left a Posterity like him,
since they themselves grew famous not by Nobility, but by their Valor and
great Actions? This he did not say merely out of Vanity and arrogance, or that
he were willing without any advantage to reproach the Nobility; but the People
always delighting in Affronts and scurrilous Contumelies against the Senate
(whereby they measure greatness of Spirit) continually encouraged him in it,
and instigated him not to spare the most worthy Persons, so that he might
thereby gratify the Multitude.

12. As soon as he arrived again in Africa, Metellus's grief for giving place
to him.
Metellus now not able to bear up under the violence of the others Envy, and
Vehemence of his own Passion; That having finished the War, and nothing left
but to secure the Person of Jugurtha, Marius now grown great merely through his
Ingratitude to him, should bereave him both of his Victory and Triumph, he
could not stand the Interview; but of himself retired, whilst Rutilius his
Lieutenant surrendered up the Army to Marius, which the just wrath of the Gods
returned upon his Head in the end of the War; for Sylla deprived him of the
glory of the Action, as he had done Metellus; the manner of it I shall lay down
in a word or two, having more particularly insisted upon it in Sylla's Life.
Bocchus was King of Mauritania, and Father-in-law to Jugurtha, yet sent him
little or no assistance in his War, pretending his unfaithfulness, though
really jealous of his growing Power; but after Jugurtha fled, and in his
distress came to him as his last Sanctuary, he received him indeed as a
Suppliant, rather because ashamed to do otherwise, than out of real kindness;
and when he had him in his power, he openly entreated Marius on his behalf, and
vigorously interceded for him, giving out that he would by no means deliver
him, yet privately designing to betray him, he sent for L. Sylla, Quaestor to
Marius, and who had sometimes befriended Boccchus in the Army. Jugurtha
delivered to Sylla.
When Sylla relying on his word came to him, the African began to repent of his
purpose, and often changed his mind, being for several days unresolved with
himself whether he should deliver Jugurtha, or retain Sylla; at length he fixed
upon his former Treachery, and put Jugurtha alive into Sylla's possession.

13. This gave the first rise to that sad and deplorable Civil War, which
almost ruined the whole Roman Empire; for many that envied Marius, attributed
the Success wholly to Sylla; and Sylla himself made him a Seal, wherein was
engraven Bocchus Sylla provokes Marius.
betraying Jugurtha to him, and this he constantly used; whereby he highly
provoked Marius, a man extremely ambitious and jealous of a Rival in his Glory,
his Enemies especially promoting the Dissension, and ascribing the beginning
and chief business of the War to Metellus, and the conclusion to Sylla; that so
the People might give over admiring and esteeming Marius as the worthiest
Person. But these Envyings and Calumnies were soon dispersed and wiped off from
Marius, by the eminent danger that threatened Italy from the The Cimbri, though
a Northern People, yet having routed Mallius and Caepio in Spain and Gallia,
came immediately from those Parts to Rome.
West; for the City had great need of a good Commander, and fought about whom
she might set at the Helm, to repel the Inundation of so great a War; and when
not of the Noble or Potent Families appeared Candidate for the Consulship, they
created Marius, though then absent.

14. Now Jugurtha's Defeat was just noised about, when the News of the Invasion
The Teutones and Cimbri.
of the Teutones and Cimbri began: at first it exceeded all credit, as to the
number and strength of the approaching Army; but at length that report proved
much inferior to the Truth, for they were 300000 effective fighting men;
besides a far greater number of Women and Children. Their pretense was the
seeking New Countries to sustain their so great Multitudes, and Cities where
they might settle and inhabit; as they had heard the Celtae before them had
expulsed the Tyrrheni, and possessed themselves of the best part of Italy. Now
these having had no Commerce with the Southern Nations, and coming from
Countries far remote; no man knew what People they were, or whence they came,
that thus like a Cloud hovered over Gallia and Italy: yet by their gray Eyes
and the largeness of their Stature, they conjectured them to be some of those
Germans that dwell by the Northern Sea: besides that the Germans call their Not
Thieves, though Latrones now generally signifies in the worse sense.
Soldiers Cimbri.

15. There are some that say, that the Country of Celtae, through the largeness
and extent of the Place, reaches from the farthest Sea and Northern Climes to
the Lake Maeotis Eastward, and to that part of Scythia which is near Pontus;
and that there the two Nations mingled together: that they did not swarm out of
their Country all at once, or on a sudden, but at a certain Season every year;
still going forward at several times, gave disturbance with their Wars to the
whole Continent; whereby, though each Party had several appellations, yet the
whole Army was called by the common name of Celtick-Scythians. Others say that
they were a small parcel of the Cimmerii, anciently well known to the Grecians;
who upon some Sedition raised among the Scythians, passed all along from the
Lake Maeotis to Asia, under the Conduct of one Lygdamis; but the greater and
more warlike part of them still inhabit the remotest Regions lying upon the
farther Ocean. These they say, live in a dark Woody Country, hardly penetrable
by the Sunbeams, by reason of their many high and spreading Trees; which also
reach inward as far as the Hercinian Forest; that they are under that part of
Heaven, where the Pole is so elevated, that by the Declination of the
Parallels, the Zenith of the Inhabitants seems to be but little distant from
it; and that their Days and Nights being almost of an equal length, they divide
their Year into one of each. This dismal Country gave Homer S. Odyss. 11.
occasion for the Fiction, that when Ulysses would call up the dead, he retired
into the Country of the Cimmerians; as conceiving it either Hell it self, or a
place nearest to it; and that from hence those People, who were anciently
called Cimmerii, and then (though not from their manner of Life) Cimbri, came
into Italy; but this is rather Conjecture then an Authentic History.

16. However, most Writers agree, that the number of this Rascality was not
less, but rather greater than was reported. They were of an invincible strength
and fierceness in their Wars* and came on with the same irresistible violence
as a deavouring flame; nor could any withstand their fury in their march, but
all, as many as they assaulted, were trodden down and hurried along as their
Prey. Several of the greatest Roman Commanders with their whole Armies, that
were set for the Defense of Gallia Transalpina, were ingloriously overthrown;
who indeed by their faint resistance chiefly gave them the boldness of marching
toward Rome: for having vanquished all they set upon, and being well laden
with Plunder, they resolved to settle themselves no where till they should have
raised the City, and wasted all Italy. The Romans being from all Parts alarmed
with this News, sent for Marius Marius's second Consulship.
to manage the War, and nominated him the second time Consul; though the Law
did not permit any one that was absent, or that had not stayed a certain time
from his first Consulship to be again created: yet the People rejected all
Opposers; for they considered this was not the first time, that the Law gave
place to the Common Interest, nor the present occasion less urgent than that,
when contrary to Law, they made Scipio Consul; then not fearing the destruction
of their own City, but desiring the ruin of that of the Carthaginians.

17. This prevailed, and Marius bringing over his Legions out of Africa on the
His Triumph.
very first day of January (which the Romans reckon the beginning of their
Year) he received the Consulship, and then also entered into Triumph, showing
Jugurtha a Prisoner to the People, a Sight beyond their expectation; for none
could hope to subdue that Province while he lived; so cautelous was the man in
complying with all the turns of Fortune, and to his Valor had the addition of
a great share of Craft. It Is said, that when he was led in Triumph, he fell
distracted, and was afterward thrown into Prison, where some forcibly tore off
his Clothes; and others whilst they strove for his Golden Pendant, with it
pulled off the tip of his Ear; and when he was cast naked into the Dungeon,
full of horror, yet forcing a smile, he cried out, O Heavens! How intolerably
cold is this Bath of yours? where for six days struggling with extreme hunger,
and to the very last minute seeming desirous of Life, he was over taken by the
just reward of his Villainies. In this Triumph was brought (as was reported) of
Gold 3007 pound weight, of Silver Bullion 5775, of Money in Gold and Silver
Coin 17028 Drachms. After the Solemnity, Marius called together the Senate in
the Capitol, and entered the Court insolently, whether through inadvertency, or
too much puffed up with his good Fortune, in his Triumphal Habit; yet presently
observing the Senate offended at it, he went out, and putting on his ordinary
Purple Robe, immediately returned.

18. In his Expeditions he appeared in His disciplining his Army.
the Head of his Army, and trained them in their exercises while they marched;
using them to labor and weariness, to long and tedious Journies, and compelled
each Soldier to carry his own Baggage, and provide his own Victuals; insomuch
that thence forward such as were very laborious, silently without grumbling
doing their work, were called Marius's Mules. But some think there was another
occasion of this Proverb; that when Scipio besieged Numantia, he being careful
to inspect not only their Horses and Arms, but their Mules and Carriages too,
and see how well equipped and in what readiness each one's was, Marius brought
forth his Horse, which had fed extremely well, and a Mule in better case,
stronger and gentler than those of others; whereupon the General was very well
pleased with, and often mentioned, Marius's Beasts; insomuch that when they
would droll in the praise of a continual drudging, laborious Fellow, they
called him Marius's Mule.

19. But to proceed; Very great good His good Fortune.
Fortune seemed to attend Marius; for the Enemy in a manner changing their
course, and falling first upon Spain, he had time to exercise his Soldiers, and
confirm their Courage; and which was most considerable, to show them what he
himself was. For that fierce humor of his in Authority and inexorableness in
punishing, proved both just and advantageous to those that did not use to do
amiss, and were not stubborn in their faults; and his turbulent Spirit, stern
Voice, and sour Aspect, which were in a little while grown familiar to them,
they esteemed terrible not to themselves, but only to their Enemies. But his
Uprightness in judging did more Hih Justice.
especially please the Soldiers, whereof this is a remarkable instance. One C.
Lucius his own Nephew, had a command under him in the Army, who was a man in
other respects not notoriously debauched, but much given to the unlawful Love
of young men; he particularly loved one that was under his Command called
Trebonius, with Trebonius.
whom notwithstanding his many solicitations, he could never prevail; at length
one Night he sent a Messenger for him, and Trebonius came (for it was not
lawful for him to refuse when he was sent for) and being brought into his Tent,
as Lucius endeavored to force him, he drew his Sword and ran him thorough.
This was done whilst Marius was absent; who, when he returned, appointed
Trebonius a time for his Trial; where whilst many accused him, and not any one
appeared in his Defense, he himself with an undaunted assurancer elated the
whole matter, and brought witness that he had often resisted Lucius's
importunity; and that though he had given him considerable Presents, he had
never consented to him. Marius admiring, and very much pleased at it, commanded
a Garland (the usual reward of Valor) to be brought, wherewith he himself
Crowned Trebonius; as having performed an excellent Action, at a time that very
much wanted such good Examples.

20. This being told at Rome, proved no Marius's Third Consulship.
small help to Marius toward his Third Consulship; to which also conduced the
expectation of the Barbarians at that time of the year, the People being
unwilling to trust their Fortunes with any other General but him; however their
arrival was not so sudden as was imagined, but the time of Marius's third
Consulship was again expired. The Election coming on, and his Colleague being
dead, he left the Command of the Army to Manius Aquilius, and hastened to Rome,
where several eminent Persons being Candidates for the Consulship, Lucius
Saturninus (who more than any of the other Tribunes, swayed the Populace, and
of whom Marius himself was very observant) made an Harangue to the People,
advising them to choose Marius Consul; but he seeming to decline the Office, as
one pretending never to be ambitious of it, Saturninus called him Traitor to
his Country, that in such apparent danger would desert the War. And though it
was not difficult to discover that he was assistant to Marius in putting this
Sham upon the People; yet they considering, that the present Juncture very much
required his rough Discipline, and his good Fortune too, voted him the fourth
time Consul, and made Catulus His Fourth Consulship.
Lutatius his Colleague, a man very much esteemed by the Nobility, and not
unagreeable to the Commons.

21. Marius having notice of the Enemy's approach, with all expedition passed
the Alps, and pitching his Camp by the River Rhone, he took care first for
plentiful Supplies of Victuals; lest at any time he should be forced to fight
at a disadvantage for want of Necessaries. The Carriage of Provision for the
Army from the Sea, which was formerly long and chargeable, he made speedy and
easy; for the mouth of the Rhone, by the Reflux of the Sea, being barred and
almost filled up with Sand and Dirt, the Passage there became narrow,
difficult, and dangerous for those Ships that brought their Provisions. Hither
therefore bringing his Army then at leisure, he La Fosse Mariane.
drew a great Trench, and thereby turning the course of a great Trench, and
thereby turning the course of a great part of the River, brought it to a
convenient Haven, deep and fit to receive Ships of considerable Burden, as
also having a calm and easy opening to the Sea; and this still returns the
name it took from him.

22. The Enemy dividing themselves into two parts, the Cimbri chose to go
against Catulus higher up through the Country of the Norici, and to force that
Passage. The Teutones and Ambrones to march against Marius by the Seaside
through Liguria, whereupon the Cimbri were longer before they arrived in Italy.
The Teutones and Ambrones with all expedition passing over the interjacent
Country, appeared to be an incredible number, and of a terrible Aspect, much
different from all others in their ordinary Speech, and Shoutings, they taking
up a great part of the Plain with their Camp, challenged Marius to Battle; he
seemed to take no notice of them, but kept his Soldiers within their
Fortifications, and sharply reprehended those that were of too forward and
eager a Courage, and who would needs be fighting, calling them Traitors to
their Country; and telling them they were not now in pursuit of the Glory of
Triumphs and Trophies, but how they might repel such an impetuous Tempest of
War, and save Italy.

23. Thus he discoursed privately with Marius's Policy.
his Officers and Equals, but placed the Soldiers by turns upon the Bulwarks to
survey the Enemy, and so made them acquainted with their shape and voice (which
were indeed altogether extravagant and barbarous) and he caused them to observe
their Arms, and way of using them, so that in a little time what at first
appeared terrible to their appprehensions, by often viewing became familiar;
for he very rationally supposed, that the strangeness of Foreign things
conduces very much to the rendering them formidable; and that by our better
acquaintance with them, even those things, which are naturally terrible, lose
very much of their frightfulnss. Now this daily converse did not only diminish
some of the Soldiers fear, but their Indignation warmed and inflamed their
Courage, when they heard the threats and insupportable insolence of their
Enemies; who not only plundered and depopulated all the Country round, but also
with great Contempt and Resolution threatened to storm their Trenches.

24. Hereupon such like Complaints of the Soldiers as these came to Marius's
ears. His Soldiers Complaints.
What Effeminacy does Marius see in us, that he should thus like Women lock us
up from encountering our Enemies? Come on, let us show our selves men, and ask
him if he expect any others that must fight for our Liberty: Shall he always
employ us in servile Offices, when he would draw Trenches, cleanse places of
mud and dirt, and turn the course of Rivers? In such Works as these, it seems,
he will exercise us; then return home, and brag of these great performances of
his Consulships to the People. Or does the defeat of Carbo and Caepio, who were
vanquished by the Enemy, affright him? Surely they were much inferior to
Marius both in Glory and Valor, and commanded a much weaker Army; at the worst
it is better to be in Action, though we suffer for it like them, than to sit
idle Spectators of the destruction of our Allies and Companions. Marius not a
little pleased to hear this, gently appeased them, pretending that he did not
distrust their Valor, but that he took his measures as to the time and place
of Victory from some certain Oracles.

25. He used solemnly to carry about in Martha a Prophetess.
a Litter, a Syrian Woman, called Martha, a supposed Prophetess, and to
Sacrifice by her directions. She had formerly been driven away from the Senate;
to whom she addressed her self, offering to inform them about these Affairs,
and to foretell future Events, whereupon she betook her self to the Ladies, and
gave some experiments of her skill, especially to Marius's Wife; who sitting to
see the Gladiators combat, she foretold which of them should overcome; and was
for this and the like Predictings sent by her to Marius, and the Army, where
she was very much admired, and for the most part carried about in a Litter;
when she went to Sacrifice she wore a Purple Robe lined and buttoned up, and
had in her Hand a little Spear trimmed with Rubans and Garlands. This Farce
made many question, whether Marius did really give any credit to her himself,
or only played the Counterfeit when he showed her publicly to impose upon the
Soldiers.

26. But what Alexander Mindius relates Vultures appear.
about the Vultures, does really deserve admiration; that always before his
Victories there appeared two of them, and accompanied the Army; which were
known by their brazen Collars (for the Soldiers, when they took them, put these
about their Necks, and so let them go, whereupon they in a manner knew and
saluted the Soldiers) and whenever these appeared in their Marches, they very
much rejoiced as at an Omen of good Success in that Expedition. But of the many
Prodigies, Other Prodigies.
that then were taken notice of, the rest were but of the ordinary stamp; as,
that it was reported at Ameria and Tudertum (two Cities in Italy) there were
seen at Nights in the Sky, flaming Darts and Shields, now waved about, and then
again clashing against one another, resembling those postures and motions
Soldiers use in their fighting; that at length one Party retreating, and the
other pursuing, they all disappearing Westward. Much about the same time came
Batabaces one of Cybele's Batabaces.
Priests from Pessinunce, and reported how the Goddess had declared to him by
her Oracle, That the Romans should obtain the Victory, and no small Glory in
this War. The Senate giving credit to him, and voting the Goddess a Temple to
be built in hopes of a Victory; Aulus Pompeius a Tribune prevented Batabaces,
when he would have gone and told the People this same Story, calling him
Impostor, and ignominiously pulling him out of the Rostra; which Action chiefly
got repute to the Fellow's report; for Aulus had scarce dissolved the Assembly,
and returned home, when so violent a Fever seized him, that it was notoriously
known and in every bodies Mouth, that he died within a week after.

27. Now the Teutones, whilst Marius lay quiet, ventured to attack his Camp;
from whence, being encountered with showers of Darts, and losing several of
their men, they determined to march forward, hoping to recover the other side
of the Alps without opposition, and packing up their baggage, they passed
securely by the Roman Camp, where the greatness of their number chiefly
appeared by the long time they took in their March; for they were said to be
six days continually going on in passing Marius's Fortifications; they marched
pretty near, and revilingly asked the Romans, if they would send any
recommendations by them to their Wives? for they would shortly be with them. As
soon as the Enemy was gone by, and continued their motion, Marius began to
move, and follow them at his leisure; always encamping at some small distance
from them; choosing also convenient places for his Camp, and strongly fortifying
it, that he might quarter with the greater safety. Thus they marched till they
came to Aquae-Sextiliae, whence the Alps were but little distant, where Marius
put himself in readiness for the Encounter.

28. He chose a place for his Camp of considerable strength, but where was
scarcity of Water; designing (as was reported) by this means to put an edge on
his Soldiers Courage, whereat when several were not a little grieved, and
complained of thirst; he pointing to a River that ran near the Enemy's Camp:
There, says he, you may have drink, but at the expense of your Blood. Why then,
replied they, do you not lead us to them, that we may have something that is
liquid though it be Blood? But, says he, in a softer tone; Let Us first fortify
our Camp; whereupon the Soldiers for all their repining durst not but obey. Now
as a great The Battle begun by Slaves.
company of their Boys and Pedees having neither drink for themselves nor
Horses, went down to that River, some taking Axes, others Halberts, and some
two Swords and Darts with their Pitchers, resolving to have water though they
fought for it. These were first encountered by a small party of the Enemies; for
most of them were after bathing at dinner, and several were then too bathing
themselves (for the Country thereabouts abounds very much with hot Springs) so
that the Romans fell upon them whilst they were enjoying themselves, and very
much transported with the wonderful pleasantness of the place. Upon hearing
their shouts (more still coming in) it was not a little difficult for Marius to
contain his Soldiers, so much concerned for their Servants, and the more
warlike part of the Enemies, who had overthrown Mallius and Coepio (they were
called Ambrones, and were in number one with another above 30000) taking the
Alarm, stood to their Arms.

29. These, though they had sufficiently filled their bellies, yet retained
their minds undisturbed; and though they indulged themselves even to
Intemperance, yet did they not rush on like madmen disorderly or sending forth
confused noises; but all of them dancing and clashing their Arms, in a kind of
Consort, often repeated their name Ambrones; either the better to encourage one
another, or to strike the greater terror into their Enemies. Of all the
Italians in Marius's Army, the Ligurians were the first that charged; and when
they understood that the Enemy's confused Shout, was calling themselves
Ambrones, they also echoed the same word, which was an Ancient Name of their
Country. This Acclamation, bandied from one Army to the other before they
joined, the more incensed the Germans; so that their Officers on either side
encouraging them, they strove with all possible vehemence the one to overshout
the other, taking it mutually for an Omen of Victory, and a great Incentive of
their Courage.

30. The River divided the Ambrones; The Fight.
and before they could draw up all their Army on the other side of it, the
Ligurians presently fell upon the Van, and began to charge them Hand to Hand.
The Romans too coming to their assistance, and from the higher Ground pouring
upon the Enemy, forceably repelled them, the most of them (one thrusting
another into the River) were there slain, and filled it with their Blood and
dead Bodies. Those that got safe over not daring to make head, the Romans slew
as they fled to their Camp and Carriages; where the Women meeting them with
Swords and Halberts, and making an hideous outcry, set upon those that fled as
well as those that pursued; the one as Traitors, the other as Enemies; and
mixing themselves with the Soldiers, with their bare Arms pulling away the
Romans Shields, and laying hold on their Swords, endured the wounds and
slashing of their Bodies to the very last with undaunted Resolution. Thus the
Battle seems to have happened at that River rather by accident than by the design
of the General.

31. After the Romans were retreated from the great slaughter of the Ambrones,
Night came on; but the Army was not caressed as it used to be, with Songs of
Victory, drinking in their Tents, and kind mutual Entertainments, and (what is
most welcome to Soldiers after an happy Conquest) quiet sleep: But they passed
that Night chiefly in Fears and Tumults; for their Camp was without
Fortifications and Trenches, and there remained several Thousands of their
Enemies as yet unconquered; to whom were joined as many of the Ambrones as
escaped. There were heard at Night sad Mournings, nothing like the sighs and
Groans of Men; but a kind of salvage howling and roaring, joined with threats
and Lamentations, proceeded from so great a multitude, which the neighboring
Hills and hollow Caves of the River echoed about and filled the whole Plain
with an hideous Noise; insomuch that the Romans were not a little afraid; and
Marius himself was astonished with apprehension of a confused tumultuous
Night-Engagement. But they did not stir this Night or the next Day, but were
employed in consultation how to dispose and draw themselves up to the greater
advantage.

32. Of this occasion Marius made good use: for there were beyond the Enemies
some woody Cliffs and Valleys well shaded with Trees, whether he sent Claudius
Marcellus very secretly with 3000 Soldiers, giving him orders to post them in
ambush there, and show themselves at the Rear of the Enemies, when the Fight
was begun* the others whom he had refreshed with Victuals and Sleep, as soon as
it was day he drew up before the Camp, and commanded the Horse to march into
the Plain, which the Teutones perceiving, could not contain themselves till the
Romans should come down and fight them on equal terms; but hastily arming
themselves, they inconsiderately ran toward a Hill hard by, where the Romans
were drawn up. Marius sending Officers to all Parts, commanded his men to stand
still and keep their Ground: when they came within reach, to throw their Piles,
then use their Swords, and joining their Shields, repel the Enemy; for he
showed that the steepness of the Ground rendered the Enemies Charge infirm, and
abated the force of their blows; nor could their Shields be joined close
together, the inequality of the Ground hindering the stability of their Bodies.

33. This Counsel he gave them, and The second Battle.
was observed to be the first that followed it; for he was inferior to none in
the exercise of his Body, and far excelled them all in resolution. Wherefore
the Romans vigorously opposed, and by that means forced them to retreat from
the Hill; the Ambrones, as soon as they had put their Van in a posture of
resistance, found those in the Rear very much disordered: for Marcellus had not
let slip the opportunity, but as soon as the Shout was raised among the Romans
on the Hills, he encouraging his men, fell in upon the Enemy behind, and
running and shouting routed those nearest him; and they breaking the Ranks of
those that were before them, the whole Army was immediately filled with
confusion; they made no long resistance after they were thus broke in upon, but
having lost all Order, fled.

34. The Romans pursuing them, slew and took Prisoners above 100000, and
possessing themselves of their Spoil, Tent* and Carriages, voted as many of
them as were not purloin'd, to Marius's share, which, though so Magnificent a
Present, yet was generally thought less than his Conduct deserved in so great a
danger. Other Authors do not agree about the division of the Plunder and number
of the slain. They say, the Inhabitants of Massilia hedged in their Vineyards
with the bones, and that the Ground enriched by the moisture of the putrefied
Bodies (which was soaked in with the rain of the following Winter) yielded at
the season a prodigious Crop, which seems to confirm Archilochus's Relation who
said, that the Fallows were fatted by them. Now it is an observation not
improbable, that extraordinary Rains usually fall after great Battles; whether
it be, that some Deity washes and cleanses the polluted Earth with showers
from above, or that blood and corruption steaming forth a moist and gross
Vapor, thicken the Air, which by reason of its tenuity is subject to
alterations arising generally from the smallest causes.

35. After the Battle, Marius chose out from amongst the Barbarians Spoils and
Arms, those that were whole and handsome, and that would make the greatest show
in his Triumph; the rest he heaped upon a large Pile, and offered a very
splendid Sacrifice. Whilst the Army stood round about with their Arms and
Garlands, himself attired (as the fashion is on such occasions) in a Purple
Robe, taking a lighted Torch, and with both Hands lifting it up toward Heaven,
was then going to put it to the Pile, when some of his Friends were espied with
all haste coming toward him on Horseback; whereupon every one remained in
great silence and expectation; when they came near, they alighting, saluted
Marius, and bringing him the News of his fifth Consulship, delivered him
Letters Marius's Fifth Consulship.
to the same purpose. This gave the addition of no small joy to the Solemnity.
which the Army expressed in a Warlike kind of rejoicing and acclamations, and
the Officers again crowning Marius with a Lawrel-wreath, he set fire to the
Pile and finished his Sacrifice.

36. But whatever it be, which permits us not the enjoyment of Prosperity pure
and sincere, but still interchanges humane Affairs with the mixture of good and
bad, whether Fortune or Providence, or the necessity of the Nature of Things,
within a few days Marius received an account of his Colleague Catulus, which as
another Cloud in this Serenity and Calm terrified Rome with the apprehension of
an imminent Storm. Catulus, who marched against the Cimbri, despairing of being
able to defend the tops of the Alps; lest, being compelled to divide his Forces
into several Parties, he should very much weaken himself, with all expedition
returned to Italy, and posted his Army by the River Athesis; where blocking up
the Passages on both sides the River with strong Fortifications, he made a
Bridge, that so he might go to their assistance that were on the other side, if
so be the Enemy having forced the narrow Passages, should storm the Fortresses.
The Barbarians came on with such Insolence and Contempt of their Enemies, that
to show their Strength and Courage, rather than out of any necessity, they went
naked in the showers of Snow, and through the Ice and deep Snow climbed up to
the tops of the Hills, and from thence, placing their broad Shields under their
bodies, let themselves slide from the Precipices along their vast slippery
Descents.

37. When they had pitched their Camp at a little distance from the River, and
surveyed the Passage, they began to cast up their Banks, Giant-like, tearing up
the neighboring Hills; and brought Trees pulled up by the roots, and heaps of
Earth to the River, therewith damming up its course, and with great heavy
Materials rowlled down the Stream and dashed against the Bridge, they forced
away the Planks which supported it; whereat the greatest part of the Roman
Soldiers very much affrighted, left their Camp and fled. Here did Catulus show
himself a generous indulgent General, in preferring the Glory of his People
before his own: for when he could not prevail with his Soldiers to stand to
their Colors, but saw how cowardly they all deserted them; he commanded his
own Standard to be taken up, and running to the foremost of those that fled, he
led them forward, choosing rather that the disgrace should fall upon himself
than his Country; and that they should not seem to fly, but, following their
Captain, to make a retreat. The Barbarians assaulted and took the Fortress on
the other side Athesis; where admiring at the few Romans there left; who had
shown themselves of an extreme great Courage, and had fought worthy their
Country, they dismissed them with an easy Composition, swearing them upon
their Brazen Bull; which was afterward taken in the Battle, and they say,
carried to Catulus's House, as the chief Trophy of the Victory.

38. Thus falling in upon the Country, destitute of defense, they wasted it
extremely, whereupon Marius was presently sent for to the City; where when he
arrived, every one supposing he would Triumph, the Senate too unanimously
voting it, he himself did not think it convenient; whether that he were not
willing to deprive his Soldiers and Officers of their share of the Glory; or
that to encourage the People in this juncture, he would make the honor of his
Victory give place to the present Fortune of the City; deferring it now to
receive it afterward with the greater Splendor. Having left such Orders as
the occasion required, he hast'ned to Catulus, whose drooping Spirits he very
much raised, and sent for his Army from Gallia: as soon as it came, he passing
the River Po, endeavored to drive the Barbarians out of that part of Italy
which lies South of it.

39. But they pretending they were in expectation of the Teutones, and
wondering they were so long in coming, deferred the Battle; either that they
were really ignorant of their Defeat, or at least were willing to seem so (for
they very much abused those that brought them such News) and sending to Marius,
required some part of the Country for them and their Brethren, and Cities fit
for them to inhabit. When Marius enquired of the Ambassadors who their Brethren
were, and they calling them Teutones, all that were present fell out a
laughing; but Marius scoffingly answered them, Do not trouble your selves for
your Brethren, for we have already provided Lands for them, which they shall
possess for ever. The Ambassadors perceiving the jeer, railed at him, and
threatened that the Cimbri would make him smart for it, and the Teutones too
when they came. And they are not far off, replied Marius, it will be very
unkindly done of you to go away before you have taken leave of your Brethren;
saying so, he commanded the Kings of the Teutones to be brought out, as they
were, in chains; for they were taken by the Sequani before they could make
their escape from the Alps. This was no sooner made known to the Cimbri, but
they with all expedition came against Marius, who then lay still and guarded
his Camp.

40. It Is said, that against this Battle Marius He allows the fashion of the
Piles.
first made their Javelins after a new fashion; for before at the place where
the Wood was joined to the Iron, it was made fast with two Iron-pins; now
Marius let one of them alone as it was, and pulling out the other put a weak
wooden peg in its place; contriving it so, that when it was stuck in the
Enemy's Shield, it should not stand right out; but the wooden peg breaking, the
Iron should bend, and so the Pile sticking fast by its crooked point, should
weigh down the Shield. Now Baeorix, King Baeorix.
of the Cimbri, came with a small Party of Horse to the Roman Camp, and
challenged Marius to appoint the time and place, where they might meet and
fight for the Country. Marius answered, That the Romans never consulted their
Enemies when to fight, however he would gratify the Cimbri so far; and so they
pitched upon the third day after; for the place, the Plain near Vercellae;
which was convenient enough for the Roman Horse, and afforded room for the
Enemy to display their Numbers.

41. They observed the time appointed, and drew out their Forces against each
other. Catulus commanded 20300, and Marius 32000, who were placed in the two
Wings, leaving to Catulus the Main Battle. Sylla, who was present at the Fight,
gives this Relation, saying withal, that Marius drew up his Army in this Order,
out of malice to Catulus; for he hoped, with his Wings stretched out farther,
to fall in upon the Body of the Enemies Army [it being customary in that manner
of embattelling, that the Army should represent a Crescent; the two extreme
Points much advancing, and the main Battle remaining behind] and to rout them
before Catulus and his Army should be able to charge them. They observe
likewise, that Catulus himself alleges this in vindication of his Honor,
accusing this enviousness of Marius. The Infantry of the Cimbri marched quietly
out of their Trenches, having their Flanks equal to their Front; (every side of
the Army took up thirty (furlongs) their Horse, that were in number 15000, made
a very splendid appearance. They wore Helmets, whereon were the gapings of wild
Beasts, and other strange shapes, which they heightning with Plumes of
Feathers, appeared greater than they were; they had on Breastplates of Iron,
and white glittering Shields; and for their offensive Arms, every one had
two-edged Darts, and when they came hand to hand, they used great and heavy
Swords.

42. They did not fall directly upon the Front of the Romans, but turning to
the right, they endeavored to enclose them by little and little, getting the
Enemy between them and their Infantry, who were placed in the left Wing. The
Roman Commanders soon perceived the Design, but could not contain the Soldiers:
for one happ'ning to shout out, that the Enemy fled, they all hastened to pursue
them; whereupon the Barbarian Foot came on moving like a great Ocean. Here
Marius, having washed his hands, and lifting them up toward Heaven, vowed an
Hecatomb to the Gods; and Catulus too in the same posture solemnly promised to
consecrate a Temple to the Fortune of that day: they say that Marius having the
Victim showed to him, as he was sacrificing, cried out with a loud voice, The
Victory is mine.

43. However in the Engagement, they that write Sylla's Life, say, that Marius
was very unfortunate; for a great dust being raised, which (as it might very
probably happen) almost covered both the Armies; he, as soon as he had charged
them, leading his Forces to the pursuit, missed of the Enemy; and having passed
by their Army, for a good space wandered up and down the Field; mean while the
Enemy by chance engaged with Catulus; and the heat of the Battle was chiefly
with him and his men, among whom Sylla says he was. The Romans had great
advantage of the heat and Sun that shone in the faces of the Cimbri; for they,
though very well able to endure cold, as having been bred up in cool and shady
places, (as we observed before) were yet overcome with the excessive Heat: they
sweat extremely, and were much out of breath, being forced to hold their
Shields before their Faces; for this Battle was fought not long after the
Summer Solstice; or, as the Romans reckon, about the third of the Calends of
August, then called Sextilis. The Dust too gave no small addition to their
Courage, in as much as it hid the Enemy, for they could not afar off discover
their number; but every one advancing to encounter those that were nearest to
them, they were come to fight hand-to-hand before the sight of so vast a
multitude had struck terror into them.

44. The Romans were so much used to labor, The Romans well exercised.
and so well exercised, that in all the heat and toil of the Encounter, not one
of them was observed either to sweat, or to be out of breath, insomuch that
they say Catulus recorded it in commendation of his Soldiers. Here the greatest
part and most valiant of the Enemies were cut in pieces; for those that fought
in the Front, that they should not break their Ranks, were fast tied to one
another with long Chains put through their Belts. As they pursued those that
fled to their Camp, they met with a most horrid Tragedy; the Women standing in
Mourning by their Carriages, slew The Cimbrian Women's cruelty.
all that fled; some their Husbands, some their Brethren, others their Fathers;
and strangling their little Children with their own hands, threw them under the
Wheels, and Horses feet, and then killed themselves. They tell of one that was
hanging on the very top of a Wagon, with her Children tied dangling at her
heels; the men for want of Trees, tied themselves, some to the horns of the
Oxen, the necks of others were fastened to their legs, that so pricking them on
by the starting and springing of the Beasts, they might be torn and trodden to
pieces. Yet for all they thus massacred themselves, above 60000 were taken
Prisoners, and those that were slain were said to be twice as many.

45. The ordinary plunder Marius's Soldiers forcibly took away; but the other
Spoils, as Ensigns, Trumpets, and the like they say, were brought to Catulus's
Camp, which he used for the best Argument that the Victory was obtained by
himself and his Army. Whereupon some Dissentions arising (as it often happens)
among the Soldiers, the Ambassadors from Parma being then present, were made
Judges of the Controversy; whom Catulus's men carried about among their slain
Enemies, and manifestly showed them that they were slain by their Piles, which
were known by the Inscriptions, having Catulus's Name cut in the Wood:
nevertheless the whole Glory of the Action was ascribed to Marius, by reason of
his former Victory and under color of his present Authority. The Populace more
especially stiling him the third Founder of their City, as having diverted a
danger no less threatening than was that when the Gauls sacked Rome; and every
one rejoicing at home with his Wife and Children sacrificed to the Gods and to
Marius; and would have had Marius and Catulus Triumph.
him solely to have the honor of both the Triumphs. However he would not do
so, but Triumphed together with Catulus; being desirous to show his Moderation
even in so great Circumstances of good Fortune; besides, he was not a little
afraid of the Soldiers in Catulus's Army, lest if he should wholly bereave
their General of the Honor, they should endeavor to hinder him of his Triumph.

46. Marius was now in his Fifth Consulship, How Marius got his sixth
Consulshiy.
and he used for the Sixth in such a manner as never any before him had done;
he took the People by the hand, and ingratiated himself with the Multitude by
his Complaisance, thereby not only derogating from the Public Grandeur and
Majesty of his Office, but acting also contrary to his own inclination, that so
he might seem popular and obliging, for which nature had never designed him. He
was, they say, exceeding timorous through his Ambition in any business which
concerned the Government, or was handled in Public Assemblies; and that
undaunted presence of Mind he always showed in Battle against the Enemy,
forsook him when he was to Harangue the People; being one that was apt to show
very great Concern either at their commendation or dispraise. It Is reported,
that having at one time made free of the City 1000 men of Camerino, who had
behaved themselves valiantly in this War; and this seeming to be illegally
done, some or other calling him to an account for it, he answered, that the Law
spoke too softly to be heard in such a noise of War: however he himself
appeared to be more concerned and astonished at that noise which was made by
the Assemblies. The need they had of him in time of War procured him his Wealth
and Dignity; but in Civil Affairs when he despaired of getting the first place,
he was forced to betake himself to the favor of the People, never regarding to
be a good man, so that he were but a great One.

47. Whereupon he became very odious to all the Nobility, and especially
fearing Metellus, who had been so ingratefully used by him; and who, being
truly virtuous, was naturally an Enemy to those that managed the People, not
for the public good, but for their private pleasure. Marius therefore
endeavored to banish him the City, and to this purpose he contracted a
familiar Acquaintance with Glaucias and His Faction with Glaucias and
Saturninus.
Saturninus, a couple of daring resolute Fellows, who had a great company of
poor seditious People at their beck; by their assistance he enacted certain
Laws, and gathering some Soldiers, he placed them in the Assembly, and by this
Faction oppressed Metellus. And as Rutilius relates (in all other respects a
faithful and authentic Historian, but indeed privately an Enemy to Marius) he
obtained his Sixth Consulship, by distributing vast Sums of Money among their
Tribes, and so too bought their Votes to put by Metellus from the Office, and
to elect Valerius Flaccus his Instrument rather than his Colleague in the
Consulship. The People had never before bestowed so many Consulships on any one
man, except on Valerius Corvinus only; and he too, they say, was forty five
years between his first and last; but Marius from his first ran through five
more with one push of his good Fortune.

48. In the last of which especially he contracted a great deal of hatred, by
committing several gross misdemeanors in compliance with the irregular desires
of Saturninus; among which was the murder of Nonius, (...), seems to be a
mistake for (...).
whom Saturninus, because he stood in competion with him for the Tribuneship,
slew; and afterward being Tribune, made a Law about the division of Lands and
fields, wherein it was provided, that the Senate should come and swear to
confirm whatever the People should vote, and not to oppose them in any thing.
Marius in the Senate cunningly feigned to be against this Clause of the Law,
and said, that he would not take any such Oath, nor any else, he thought, that
were wise; for if there were no ill Design in the Law, it would be an affront
to the Senate to be compelled to give their approbation, and not to do it
rather willingly or by persuasion. This he said, not that it was agreeable His
Design to entrap Metellus.
to his own Sentiments, but that he might thereby entangle Metellus in an
unavoidable snare; for making a great part of his Virtue and Gravity to consist
in deceit, he made very little account of what he had openly professed to the
Senate; he knowing too that Metellus was one of a fixed resolution, and (as
Pindar has it) that esteemed Truth the greatest Principle of Heroic Virtue,
designed by this his refusal of the Oath in the Senate to ensnare him by making
him refuse the Law also; and thereby to cast such an Odium upon him with the
People, as should never be wiped off. Which accordingly succeeded to his wish;
for as soon as Metellus had declared that he would not swear to it, the Senate
adjourned.

49. Within a sew days Saturninus citing the Senators to make their appearance,
and pressing them to take the Oath, Marius stepped forth, (whereupon was a
profound silence, and every one very intent upon him) and bidding farewell to
those fine smooth Speeches he had before made in the Senate, said; That he was
not grown so obstinate as to do any thing to the prejudice of so good a design;
but would willingly swear and submit to the Law, if so be it were one (which
Caution he added as a Pretext for his Impudence.) The People extremely pleased
at his taking the Oath, mightily extolled and applauded him, the Nobility were
very much ashamed and vexed at Marius's Inconstancy; but they were forced, for
fear of the People, to swear in order till it came to Metellus's turn. But he,
though his Friends followed and entreated him to take the Oath, and not to
plunge himself irrecoverably into those Penalties which Saturninus had provided
for them that would not take it, would not flinch from his resolution, nor
swear; but according to his usual custom, being ready to suffer any thing
rather than do a base unworthy Action, left the Forum telling them that were
with him, That it was base to do any thing that is ill, and common to do well,
where there is no danger; but where there is, even in despite of that, to do
well was the property of a good man.

50. Hereupon Saturninus put it to the Vote that the Consuls should declare
Metellus banished, and that none should entertain him: there was enough too of
the basest of People ready to kill him; and when many of the better sort were
extremely concerned for, and gathered about Metellus, he would not suffer them
to raise a Sedition upon his account; but more advisedly left the City, saying;
Either when the posture of affairs is mended, and the People repent, I shall be
recalled; or if things remain in the present posture, it will be best to be
absent. But how great Favor and Honor Metellus received in his Banishment,
and after what manner he spent his time at Rhodes in Philosophy, we shall more
opportunely show you when we write his Life.

51. Marius, for this piece of Service done him, forced to connive at
Saturninus, now arrived at the very height of Insolence and Force, had unawares
occasioned such a flame as could not now be easily quenched, but by Outrages
and Massacres directly tending to Tyranny and the Subversion of the Government;
for standing in some awe of the Nobility, and withal flattering the Commonalty,
he did a very His double dealing with the Senate and Commons.
cowardly and dishonest Action. When some of the great men came to him at night
to stir him up against Saturninus, he let him in unknown to them at the other
door; then making the same pretenses of doing his necessary occasions to both,
he ran from one Party to the other, and staying one while with them and another
with him, he instigated and exasperated them one against another. At length,
when both the Senate and Equestrian* Order, agreed together, and showed their
resentment at it, he filled the Marketplace with Soldiers; and by cutting off
the Aqueducts, he forced those that retreated to the Capitol to surrender for
want of Water: they in this distress submitted themselves upon the Public
Faith, whom he endeavored all ways imaginable to preserve, but without
Success; for when they came into the Forum, they were all basely murdered.
Hereupon equally odious both to the Nobility Why he was not Candidate for the
Censorship.
and Commons, when the time was come to create Censors, though he were the most
likely man, yet he did not petition for it; but fearing the disgrace of being
repulsed, permitted others his Inferiors to be elected; yet he pleased himself
in giving out, that he was not willing to disoblige too many by a severe
inspection into their Lives and Conversations.

52. There was now an edict preferring to recall Metellus from Banishment; this
he vigorously, but in vain, opposed both in his Discourse and Actions: yet at
length desisted; for the People unanimously voting for it, and he not able to
endure the sight of Metellus's Return, made a Voyage to Cappadocia and Galatia;
giving out that he was to perform some Sacrifices, which he had vowed to
Cybele; but had indeed another reason for his departure, which was not to be
discovered to the People. He being one altogether ignorant of Civility and
State Affairs, had received all his advancement from the War; and then too
supposing both his Power and Glory would by little and little decrease by his
lying quiet and out of action, sought by all means to lay the Foundation of
some new Commotions, and hoped too that by setting at variance some of the
neighbor Kings, and by stirring up and exasperating Mithridates especially,
who was then apparently making preparations for War, he himself should be
chosen General against him, and so furnish the City with new matter of Triumph,
and his own House with the Plunder of Pontus, and the Riches of its King.
Wherefore, though Mithridates had entertained him with all imaginable
obligingness and respect, yet he was not at all wrought upon or softened by it;
but said, O King! either endeavor to be indeed more potent than the Romans, or
else quietly His Impudence to Mithridates.
submit to their Commands. With which he almost astonished him, having indeed
often heard the Fame of the bold speaking of the Romans, but was now first
acquainted with that Impudence.

53. When Marius returned again to Rome, he built an House close by the
Marketplace, either (as he himself gave out) that he was not willing his
Clients should be tired with going far, or that he imagined it would cause the
greater Concourse at his Gates: yet this was not the true reason neither* but
because being inferior to others in obliging Conversation and the Arts of
Courtship, like a mere Tool and Implement of War, he was thrown aside in time
of Peace. Amongst all those, whose brightness eclipsed his Glory, he was most
extremely incensed against Sylla, who had received his Rise from the hatred
which the Nobility bore Marius; and had made his disagreement with him the
first step of his Preferment. When Bocchus King of Numidia, who was styled the
Associate of the Romans, dedicated some Trophies of Victory in the Capitol, and
by them the Picture of himself His dispute with Sylla.
in Gold delivering Jugurtha to Sylla: Marius upon this was almost distracted
with rage and Ambition (as though Sylla had arrogated this Honor to himself)
and endeavored forcibly to pull down these Presents: Sylla on the other side
as vigorously resisted him, but the War of the Confederates then on a sudden
threatening the City, put a stop to this Sedition just The Consederates War.
ready to break out. Now the most warlike and best peopled Countries of all
Italy conspired together against Rome, and were within a little of subverting
the Empire; their chief strength consisting not only in their Weapons and the
Valor of their Soldiers; but standing upon equal terms with the Romans, as to
the Courage and sufficiency of their Commanders.

54. This War so various as to its Encounters, and so uncertain as to its
Success, what Glory and Power it conferred upon Sylla, of so much it deprived
Marius, who seeded not to be very brisk in his Charges, but was for the most
part guilty of Delays, Retreats and almost Cowardice; whether it were, that his
Age had quenched that heat and vigor he was formerly Master of (for he was now
above sixty five years old;) or that, as he himself said, having some distemper
in his Nerves, and his Body unfit for Action, he had for mere shame ventured
upon some Expeditions above his strength. Yet for all this he came off Victor
in a considerable Battle, wherein he slew 6000 of the Enemies, and never gave
them any advantage over him. Nay, though he was once surrounded by the Works of
the Enemy he contained himself; and though insulted over, braved, and
challenged, yet he seemed not much concerned at it. There goes a report, that
when one Or Popedius.
Publius Silo, a man of the greatest Worth and Authority among the Enemies,
said to him; If thou be that great Captain Marius, come to a Battle; he
answered, If you be such an one, force me to fight. And another time, when the
Enemy gave them a good opportunity of a Battle; and the Romans through fear
durst not charge, so that both Parties retreated; he called an Assembly of his
Soldiers, and said; It is no small question whether I should call the Enemies
or you the greater Cowards, for neither dare they face your backs nor you
theirs.

55. At length pretending to be worn out with the Infirmity of his Body, he
laid down his Command. Afterward when the Italians were worsted, several at
Rome, by the Interest of those that led the People, sued for Employment in the
War with Mithridates. Sulpitius Tribune of the People, a bold resolute Fellow,
contrary to every body's expectation bringing in Marius, declared him Proconsul
and General in that War; whereupon the People were divided, some were on
Marius's side, others voted for Sylla* and jeeringly bad Marius go to his Baths
at Baiae to cure his Body worn out, as himself confessed, with Age and
Catarrhs. Now Marius had indeed there, about Misenum, a Villa more effeminately
and luxuriously furnished than became a man employed in so many and great Wars
and Expeditions. This same House Cornelia bought for 75000 Denarii, and not
long after Lucius Lucullus for 250000: in so short a time did the Luxury and
Effeminacy of the Romans increase. After all this, Marius very ambitiously and
Marius affects to be thought young.
childishly affecting to shake off his Age and weakness, went into the Field,
where exercising himself with the Youth, he showed himself still nimble in his
Armor, and expert in riding; though indeed he were grown less active in his
Age by reason of his great belly, and his inclining to fatness and corpulency.

56. These Actions of his pleased some that went to see his vainglory in those
Justs and Exercises; but the better sort that saw him, pitied his Avarice and
Ambition, that from a beggar growing so extremely rich, and from nothing
becoming so great, would know no bounds of his good Fortune, nor be content
with being admired, and quietly enjoy what he had already got; but, as if he
still were in extreme poverty, should at so great an Age leave Glory and
Triumphs to go into Cappadocia and the Euxine Sea, to fight Archelaus and
Neoptolemus, Mithridates's Generals. Marius's pretenses for this Action of his
seemed very ridiculous; for he said he had a mind himself to educate his Son in
that War. This soon ruined the City, which had been a long time sick of such
practices, when Marius had once found so opportune an Instrument for the
public destruction as Sulpitius's Insolence.

57. This Fellow in all other respects admired Sulpitius's Riot.
and imitated Saturninus; only found fault with his Cowardice and backwardness
in his Designs; he therefore made no such foolish delays, but got 600 Horse
about him as his Guard, which he named Anti-Senators; with these Assassines he
set upon the Consuls whilst they were at the Assembly, and took the Son of one
of them, who fled from the Marketplace, and slew him. Sylla being hotly
pursued, took into Marius's House, which none could suspect (by that means
escaping those that sought him, who hastily passed by there) and it is said was
safely conveyed by Marius himself out at the other door, and came to the Camp.
Yet Sylla in his Memoirs positively denies that he fled to Marius, but that he
was carried thither to consult of those matters, to which Sulpitius would have
forced him against his Will to consent; that he, surrounding him with drawn
Swords, hurried him to Marius, and restrained him thus, till he should go
thence to the Market place, and put such a Conclusion to these Affairs as his
Masters the People would approve.

58. Whilst these things were acting, Sulpitius having obtained the sole Power,
decreed the Command of the Army to Marius; who making preparations for his
March, sent two Tribunes to receive the charge of the Army from Sylla. Sylla
hereupon exasperating his Soldiers (which were six Legions, or about 5000
Horse, and 30000 Foot) brought them to Rome, who first falling upon the
Tribunes Marius had Sylla drives Marius from Rome.
sent, slew them; and Marius did as much for several of Sylla's Friends in
Rome, and made many of the Slaves free, that he might have their assistance in
the War; whereof they say, there were but three that answered his expectation.
He, for some small time, made head against Sylla's assault, but was soon
over-powred and fled; those that were with him, as soon as he had escaped out
of the City, were dispersed, and Night coming on, he hast'ned to a
Country House of his, called Solonium. Hence he sent his Son to some
neighboring Farms of his Father-in-law Mutius, to provide Necessaries; himself
went to Ostia, where his Friend Numerius had prepared him a Ship, and not
staying for his Son, he took with him his Son-in-law Granius, and weighed
Anchor.

59. Young Marius, as soon as he came to Young Marius's escape.
Mutius's Farms, and had ordered some small matters, the day breaking, he was
almost discovered by the Enemy; for there came thither a Party of Horse that
suspected some such matter; whom when the Steward perceived, he hid Marius in a
Cart full of Beans, then putting to his Team, and driving toward the City, he
met those that were in search of him. Marius thus conveyed home to his Wife,
took with him some Necessaries, and came at Night to the Seaside, where going
on board a Ship that was bound for Africa, he went away with it. Marius the
Father, when he had put to Sea, with a good gale passing along the Coast of
Italy, was in no small apprehension of one Geminius, a great a man at
Tarracina, and his Enemy; and therefore bad the Sea men hold off from that
place: they were indeed willing to gratify him, but the Wind rising at Sea,
and making the Waves swell to a great height, they were afraid the Ship would
not be able to weather out the Storm, Marius too being indisposed and Seasick,
they with great difficulty reached the Haven at Circaeum.

60. The Storm now increasing, and Marius's distress.
their Victuals failing, they put to Shore, and wandered up and down they knew
not whither (as it usually happens in great Distresses;) they always shun the
present as the greatest evil, and rely upon the hopes of uncertainties; for
the Land and Sea were both equally unsafe for them, it was dangerous to meet
with People, and it was no less so to meet with none, by reason of their want
of Necessaries. At length, though late first, they light upon a few poor
Shepherds, that had not any thing to relieve them; but knowing Marius, advised
him to depart as soon as might be, for they had seen a little beyond that place
a Party of Horse that were gone in search of him. Whereupon finding himself in
a great straight, especially because those that attended him were not able to
go farther, being spent with their long fasting; he turned aside out of the
Road, and hid himself in a thick Wood, where he passed the Night in great
distress. The next day pinched with hunger, and willing to make use of the
little strength he had, before it were all exhausted, he traveled by the
Seaside, encouraging his Companions not to desert him in the last of his
hopes, for which he reserved himself, relying on the credit of some old
Prophecies.

61. That when he was yet but very His good Hopes.
young and lived in the Country, he brought home in the skirt of his Garment an
Eagle's Nest, wherein were seven young ones, which his Parents seeing and much
admiring, consulted the Augures about it, who told them, that he should become
the greatest man in the World, and that the Fates had decreed he should seven
times be possessed of the Supreme Power and Authority. Some are of Opinion that
this really happened to Marius after the same manner we have related it;
others-say, that those men who then and through the rest of his Exile heard him
tell these Stories and believed him, have recorded a Relation altogether
fabulous; for an Eagle never hatches more than two; besides they give Musaeus
the Lie, who speaking of the Eagle, say, That she lays three Eggs, hatches two,
and nourishes but one. Whatever this be, it is certain Marius in his Exile and
greatest Extremities would often say, that he had still a prospect of a Seventh
Consulship.

62. When Marius and his company were now about twenty furlongs distant from
Minturnae, a City in Italy, they espied a Troop of Horse making up toward them
with all speed, and by chance also at the same time two Ships under sail;
whereupon they ran every one with what speed and strength they could to the
Sea, and plunging themselves into it, swam to the Ships. Those that were with
Granius seized upon one of them, and passed over to an opposite Island called
Aenaria; Marius himself, whose Body was heavy and unwieldy, was with great
pains and difficulty born above the Water by two Servants, and put into the
other Ship. The Soldiers were by this time come to the Seaside, and from
thence commanded the Seamen to put to Shore, or else to throw out Marius, and
then they might go whither they would. Marius besought them with tears to the
contrary; and the Masters of the Ship, after some consultation, which inclined
first to one then to the other side, resolved at length to answer the Soldiers,
that they would not throw out Marius. As soon as they were gone in a rage, the
Seamen immediately changing their resolution, came to Land, and casting Anchor
at the mouth of the River Liris, where it overflowing makes a great Marish;
they advised him to Land, refresh himself on Shore, and take some care of his
discomposed body, till the Wind came fairer, which, say they, will happen at
such an hour, when the Wind from the Sea will calm, and that from the Marshes
rise. Marius following their advice, did so, and when the Seamen had set him
on Shore, he laid him down in an adjacent Field, suspecting nothing less than
what was to befall him. They, as soon as they had got into the Ship, weighed
Anchor and departed, as thinking it neither honorable to deliver Marius into
the hands of those that sought him, nor safe to protect him.

63. He thus deserted by all, lay a good while silently on the Shore; at
length, recollecting himself, he traveled very disconsolately through by-ways,
till wading through deep Bogs and Ditches full of Water and Mud, he stumbled
upon the Old man's Cottage that looked after the Fens; and falling at his Feet,
he besought him to assist and preserve a man, who if he escaped the present
danger, would make him returns beyond his expectation. The poor man, whether he
had formerly known him, or were then moved with his Venerable Aspect, told him,
that if he wanted only rest, his Cottage would be convenient; but if he were
flying from any body's search, he would hide him in a more retired place.
Marius desiring him to do so, he carried him into the Fens, and bad him hide
himself in an hollow Cave by the River side, where he laid upon him a great
many Reeds and other things that were light, and would cover, but not oppress
him. But within a very small time he was disturbed with a noise and tumult from
the Cottage, for Geminius had sent several from Tarracina in pursuit of him;
whereof some happ'ning to come that way, frightened and threatened the poor
Old Man for having entertained and hid an Enemy of the Romans. Wherefore Marius
arising and Marius is taken and sent to Minturnae.
uncovering himself, plunged into a puddle full of thick muddy water; and even
there he could not escape their search, but was pulled out naked of Clothes,
but covered with mire, and in that pickle carried away to Minturnae, and
delivered into the Magistrate's Power; for there had been a Proclamation
through all those Towns, to make public search for Marius, and if they found
him to kill him; however the Magistrates thought convenient to consider a
little better of it first, and sent him Prisoner to the House of one Fannia.

64. This Woman was supposed not very Fannias's kindness to him.
well affected toward him upon an old account. One Tinnius had formerly
married this Fannia; from whom she afterward being divorced, demanded her
Portion, which was considerable; but her Husband accused her of Adultery; so
the Controversy was brought before Marius in his Sixth Consulship; when the
cause was examined thoroughly, it appeared both that Fannia had been incontinent,
and that her Husband, though he knew her to be so, had married and lived a
considerable time with her: So that Marius was severe enough with both;
commanding him to restore her Portion, and laying a small Fine upon her by way
of disgrace. But Fannia did not then behave her self like one that had been
injured, but as soon as she saw Marius remembered nothing less than old Affronts;
took care of him according to her ability, and very much comforted him. He made
her his returns, and told her he did not despair, for he had met with a very
lucky Omen, which was thus; When he was brought to Fannia's House, as soon as
the His good Omen.
door was open, an Ass came running out to drink at a Spring hard by, and
looking very pertly and briskly upon Marius, first stood still before him, then
brayed aloud and pranced by him. Upon which Marius making his observation,
said, That the Fates designed his safety to be procured rather by Sea than
Land, because the Ass neglected his dry Fodder, and turned from it to the
Water. Having told Fannia this Story he commanded the Chamber Door to be shut,
and went to rest.

65. Mean while the Governors and Senators A Gaul attempts to kill him.
of Minturnae consulted together, and determined, not to delay any longer, but
immediately to kill Marius; and when none of their Citizens durst undertake the
business, a certain Soldier, a Gaul or Cimber (the story is told of both) went
in with his Sword drawn to him; the Room it self was not very light, that part
of it especially, where he then lay, was dark, from whence Marius's Eyes, they
say, seemed to the Fellow to dart out flames at him, and a loud voice to say,
Fellow, dare thou kill C. Marius? The Ruffian hereupon immediately fled, and
leaving his Sword in the place, rushed out of doors, crying only this, I cannot
kill C. Marius. At which they were all at first astonished, afterward pitied
him, and reversed their Sentence, and were even angry at themselves for making
so unjust and ungrateful a Decree against one who had preserved Italy, and whom
it was base not to assist to their utmost. Let him go, say they, where he
please to banishment, let him find his Fate somewhere else; we beg pardon of
the Gods for thrusting Marius distressed and deserted out of our City.

66. Whilst they were taken up with such He is brought by Minturnae to the Sea.
like thoughts, there came a great company about him, and conducted him toward
the Seaside, where though every one was very officious to him, and all made
what haste they could, yet a considerable time was spent; for there was a Grove
called Marice (which the People thereabouts held sacred, and suffered nothing
that is brought into it to be carried out again) this lay just in their way to
the Sea, and if they should go round about, they must needs come very late
thither. At length one of the Old men cried out and said, there was no place so
sacred, but they might pass though it for Marius's preservation; and thereupon
first of all taking up some of the Baggage that was carried for his
accommodation to the Ship, passed through the Grove, all the rest immediately
with the same readiness accompanying him. [He afterward had the Picture of
these things drawn and placed it in a Temple thereabouts.] One Belaeus having
by this time provided him a Ship, Marius there went on board, and hoisting
Sail, was by chance thrown upon the Island Aenaria, where meeting with Granius
and his other Friends, he sailed with them to Africa. But their water failing
them in the way, they were forced to put in at Erycine in Sicily, where was a
Roman Quaestor presiding over those Places, who had almost taken Marius going
on Shore, and killed sixteen of his retinue that went to fetch Water. Marius
with all expedition loosing thence, passed over to the Isle Meniux, where he
first heard the News of his Son's escape with Cethegus, and of his going to
implore the assistance of Hiempsal King of Numidia.

67. With this News being somewhat comforted, he ventured to pass from that
Isle toward Carthage. Sextilius a Roman was then Praetor in Africa; one that
had never received either any Injury or kindness from Marius, yet he hoped he
would out of mere pity lend him some help. He was now scarce got ashore with a
small retinue, when an Officer was sent to him, and meeting him, said,
Sextilius the Praetor forbids thee, Marius, to set foot in Africa; if thou
do, he says, he will put the Decree of the Senate in execution, and treat
the as an Enemy to the Romans. When Marius heard this he wanted Words to
express his Grief and Resentment, and for a good while held his peace, looking
sternly upon the Messenger, who asked him what he should say, or what answer he
should return to the Praetor? Marius answered him with a deep sigh; Go tell him
that you have seen C. Marius sitting upon the Rubbish of Carthage: very
appositely applying the example of the Fortune of that City to the Change of
his own Condition.

68. In the interim, Hiempsal, King of Hiempsal's designs upon young Marius.
Numidia, often changing his Designs, treated young Marius and those that were
with him very honorably; but when they had a mind to depart, he still had some
pretense or other to detain them; and it was manifest he made these delays upon
no good designs; however there happened a strange accident (as it sometimes
falls out) that made well for their preservation. The hard Fortune which still
attended young Marius, who was of a very comely Aspect, nearly touched one of
the King's Concubines, and this pity of hers was the beginning and pretense for
her Love. At first he declined the Woman's solicitations, but when he
perceived that there was no other way of escaping, and that she caressed him
with greater kindness than one that designed only the gratifying her
sensuality, he complied with her Love, and being thereupon set at liberty by
her, he escaped with his Friends, and fled to his Father Marius. As soon as
they had saluted each He makes his escape.
other, and were going by the Seaside, they saw some Scorpions fighting, which
Marius took for an ill Omen, whereupon they immediately went on board a little
Fisher-boat, and made toward Cercina, an Island not far distant from the
Continent. They had scarce put off from Shore when they escaped some Horse sent
after them by the King, with all speed making toward that very place from which
they were just retired; so that Marius thought that in all his Life he had
never escaped a greater danger.

69. At Rome it was discovered that Sylla Cinna raises a Sedition.
was engaged with Mithridates's Generals near Baeotia, whilst the Consuls from
a Tumult were fallen to downright fighting, wherein Octavius prevailing, drove
Cinna out of the City for affecting a Tyrannical Government, and made Cornelius
Merule Consul in his stead; but Cinna raising Forces in all Parts of Italy,
carried on the War against them. As soon as Marius heard of this, he resolved
with all expedition to put Marius returns to Italy.
to Sea again, and having leavied in Africa some Maurusian Horse, and a few
others that came to him out of Italy (which all together were not above 1000)
he with this handful began his Voyage. Arriving at Telamone, an Haven in
Hetruria, and coming ashore, he made several of the Slaves free; many of the
Countrymen also and Shepherds thereabouts (that were already Freemen) at the
hearing his name came flocking to him to the Seaside; he persuaded the most
warlike of them, and in a small time got together a competent Army, wherewith
he filled forty Ships. Now he knowing Octavius to be a very good man, and
willing to execute his Office with the greatest Justice imaginable, and Cinna
to be suspected by Sylla, and then in actual War against the established
Government, And joins himself with Cinna.
determined to join himself and all his Forces with the latter: he therefore
sent a Message to him to let him know, that he submitted himself to him, as
Consul, in whatsoever he should command him.

70. When Cinna had very joyfully received him, calling him Proconsul, and
sending him the Fasces and other Ensigns of Authority, he said, that Grandeur
did not become his present Fortune; but wearing an ordinary Habit, and letting
his hair grow from that very day he first went to banishment, and being now
above threescore and ten years old, he came slowly on foot, as designing to
move Peoples compassion; (thus his naturally rough Aspect became more so, when
joined with his nasty Garb) which yet did not make him appear as though his
mind were dejected, but exasperated, by the change of his condition. Having
performed his Ceremonies to Cinna, and saluted the Soldiers, he immediately
prepared for War, and soon made a considerable alteration in the posture of
Affairs. He first cut off all Provision from the Enemies Ships, and plundering
all the Traders, possessed himself of their Stores; then bringing his Navy to
the Seaport Towns, took them, and at last treacherously became Master of Ostia
too; pillaged the Town, and slew a Multitude of the Inhabitants, and making a
Bridge over the River, he took from the Enemy all hopes of Supply from the Sea;
then marched with his Army toward the City, and posted himself upon the Hill
called Janiculum.

71. The Public Interest did not receive Octavius's ill Conduct.
so great damage from Octavius's unskilfulness in his management of Affairs, as
from his omitting what was necessary, through his too strict observance of the
Law: for he, when several advised him to make the Slaves free, said, That he
would not commit the protection of his Country to Servants from which he then,
in defense of the Laws, was driving away Marius. When Metellus (Son to that
Metellus, who was general in the War in Africa, and afterward banished through
Marius's means) came to Rome, and was esteemed to be a much better Commander
than Octavius; the Soldiers deserting the Consul, came to him, and desired him
to take the Command of them and preserve the City; that they, when they had got
an experienced valiant Commander, should fight courageously and come off
Conquerors. But Metellus offended at it, commanded them angrily to return to
the Consul; whereupon for very spite they revolted to the Enemy. Metellus too
seeing the City in a desperate condition, left it; but a Company of Chaldeans,
Priests and Interpreters of the Sibyls Books, persuaded Octavius, that things
were in a good condition, and kept him at Rome. Now he was a man of all the
Romans the most upright and just; one that kept up even the Formalities of the
Law inviolable in his Consulship; but fell I know not how into some weaknesses,
giving more observance to Impostors and Diviners, than to men* skilled in Civil
and Military Affairs. He therefore, before Marius entered the City, was pulled
down from the Rostra, and murdered by those that were sent before by Marius;
and it is reported there was a Chaldean Inscription found on his breast when he
was slain. Now it is a thing very unaccountable, that of two such Famous
Generals, Marius should be often preserved by the observing Divinations, and
Octavius ruined by the same means.

72. Whilst Affairs remained in this posture, Marius and Cinna are called to
Rome.
the Senate assembled, and sent Ambassadors to Cinna and Marius, desiring them
to come into the City peaceably and spair the Citizens. Cinna as Consul
received the Embassy sitting in the Sella Curulis, and returned a kind obliging
answer to the Messengers: Marius stood by him and said nothing, but gave
sufficient testimony by the sowreness of his Countenance, and the sternness of
his Looks, that he would in a short time fill the City with Massacres. As soon
as the Council arose, they went toward the City, where Cinna with a strong
Guard entered; but Marius stayed at the Gates, and dissembling his Rage, said;
That he was then an Exile and banished his Country by course of Law; That if
his Presence were necessary, they must by a new Decree repeal the former Act by
which he was banished, as if he had been a religious observer of the Laws, and
as if he entered into a City free from fear or oppression. Hereupon the People
were assembled, but before three or four Tribes had given their Votes, he
throwing off his Mask and Pretenses of Marius's cruelty.
the Justice of his Banishment, came into the City with a select Guard of
Slaves, which came in to him, whom he called Bardiaei. Those Fellows by his
Orders murdered a great company at his express Command, and as many at his
private beck. At length Aucharius a Senator, and one that had been Praetor,
coming to Marius, but not being resaluted by him, they with their drawn Swords
slew him before Marius's Face; and henceforth this was their token immediately
to kill all those who met Marius, and saluted him, were taken no notice of; or
not answered with the like Courtesy: so that his very Friends were not without
dreadful apprehensions and horror, whenever they came to attend him.

73. When they had now butchered a great number* Cinna grew more remiss and
cloyed with Murders; but Marius's rage was still fresh and unsatisfied, and he
daily fought for all that were any way suspected by him. Now was every street,
and every corner of the City filled with those that pursued and haunted them
that fled and hid themselves; and it was remarkable that there was no more
confidence to be placed, as things stood, either in Hospitality or Friendship;
for there were found but a very few that did not betray those that fled to them
for shelter. Wherefore the Servants Cornutus preserved by his Servants.
of Cornutus deserve the greater praise and admiration; who having concealed
their Master in the House, took a body of one of the slain, cut off the head,
put a Gold ring on the Finger, and showed it to Marius's Guards, and buried it
with the same Solemnity as if it had been their own Master. This trick was
perceived by no body, but so Cornutus escaped and was conveyed by his
Domestics into Gallia.

74. Marcus Antonius the Orator, though Marcus Antonius slain.
he too found a true Friend, had ill Fortune. The man was but poor and a
Plebeian, who entertaining a man of the greatest rank in Rome, and kindly
furnishing him with what he had, sent his Servant to get some Wine of a
neighboring Vintner; the Servant carefully tasting it, and bidding him draw
better, the Fellow asked him what was the matter, that he did not buy new and
ordinary Wine as he used to do, but richer and of a greater price; he without
any design told him as his Croney and Acquaintance, that his Master entertained
Marcus Antonius whom he concealed. The villainous Vintner, as soon as the
Servant was gone, went himself to Marius then at Supper, and being brought into
his Presence, told him, he would deliver Antonius into his hands; as soon as he
heard it, it is said he gave a great shout, and clapped his hands for joy, and
had very nigh rose up and gone to the place himself; but being detained by his
Friends, he sent Annius and some Soldiers with him, and commanded him to bring
Antonius's head to him with all speed. Now when they came to the House, Annius
stayed at the door, and the Soldiers went up stairs into the Chamber; where,
seeing Antonius, they endeavored to shuffle off the Murder from one to
another; for so great it seems were the Graces and Charms of his Oratory, that
as soon as he began to speak and beg his Life, none of them durst touch or so
much as look upon him; but hanging down their heads, every one fell a weeping.
When their stay seemed something tedious, Annius followed after, saw Antonius
discoursing, and the Soldiers astonished and quite softened by it, for which he
checked them severely, and went himself and cut off his head.

75. Catulus Lutatius who was Colleague Catulus kills himself.
with Marius and his Partner in the Triumph over the Cimbri, when Marius had
told those that interceded for him and begged his life, that he must die, shut
himself up in a room, and making a great fire smothered himself. When maimed
and headless Carcasses were now frequently thrown* about and trampled upon in
the streets, People were not so much moved with compassion at the sight, as
struck into a kind of Horror and consternation. The villainies and punishment
of the Bardiaei.
The outrages of those that were called Bardiaei was the greatest grievance
imaginable; for they murdered those that had been their Masters in their own
Houses, abused their Children, and ravished their Wives, and were uncontrolable
in their Rapine and Murders, till those of Cinna's and Sertorius's Party
taking Counsel together, fell upon them in the Camp, and killed them every man.

76. In the interim, as by a certain turn of Fortune, there came News from all
Parts, that Sylla having put an end to the War with Mithridates, and taken
possession of the Provinces, was returning into Italy with a great Army. This
gave some small respit and intermission to these unspeakable Calamities, when
they thought that a War threatened them; whereupon Marius Marius's Seventh
Consulship.
was chosen Consul the Seventh time, and appearing on the very Calends of
January, the beginning of the Year, he threw one Sextus Lucinus from the
Tarpejan Precipice, which was no small Omen of approaching miseries both to
their Party and the City. Marius himself now worn out with Labor and sinking
under the burden of his Cares, could not bear up his Spirits flagging with the
apprehension of a New War, and fresh Encounters and Dangers, which he had by
his own experience found formerly very troublesome* He considered too that he
was not now to hazard the War with Octavius or Merula, commanding the
unexperienced Multitude or seditious Rabble; but that Sylla himself was
approaching, the same who had formerly banished him, and since that driven
Mithridates as far as the Euxine Sea.

77. Perplexed with such thoughts as His discontent and death.
these, and calling to mind his Banishment, the tedious wanderings and dangers
he underwent both by Sea and Land, he fell into great Troubles, nocturnal
Frights and unquiet Sleep, still fancying that he heard some telling him, That
the Den, though of an absent Lion; is dreadful; above all things fearing to lie
awake, he gave himself over to drinking and sotting at Nights very unagreeable
to his Age; by all means provoking Sleep, as a diversion to his Thoughts. At
length there came an express Messenger from the Sea, giving him such an account
of Affairs as overcharged him with fresh Cares and Frights; so that what with
his fear for the future, and what with the weight and tediousness of the
present, having some small disposition to it, he fell into a Plurisie, as
Possidonius the Philosopher relates, who says he went to, and discoursed with
him when he was sick, about some business relating to his Embassy. One Cajus
Piso an Historian tells us, that Marius walking after Supper with his Friends,
when they fell into a discourse about his concerns, and reckoned up the several
changes of his Condition, that from the beginning had happened to him, he said,
that it did not become a prudent man to trust himself any longer with Fortune;
and thereupon taking leave of those that were with him, he kept his bed seven
days, and then died.

78. Some say he very much betrayed his Ambition even in his Sickness, and fell
into an extravagant frenzy, fancying himself to be General in the War against
Mithridates, acting such postures and motions of his body, as he used when he
was in the Battle; with frequent Shouts and loud Acclamations, with so strong
and invincible a desire of being employed in that business as he possessed
through his Pride and Emulation. He, though he had now lived threescore and ten
Years, and was the first man that ever was chosen seven times Consul, possessed
of such a Palace, and so great Riches as were sufficient for many Kings, yet
complained of his ill Fortune; that he must now die before he had attained what
he desired. Plato when he saw his death Plato.
approaching, thanked his God and Fortune; First, that he was born a man and a
Grecian, not a Barbarian or a Brute, and next, that he happened to live in
Socrates's Age. And so indeed they say Antipater of Tarsus, in Antipater.
like manner at his death recollecting what prosperity he had enjoyed, did not
so much as omit his happy Voyage to Athens; thus returning to every favor of
his indulgent Fortune with the greatest acknowledgments, and retaining it to
the very last in his memory, than which Man has not a more secure Treasure.
But on the contrary, Persons foolish and ungrateful to God and Nature, lose the
enjoyment of their present prosperity by fansying something better to come;
whereas by Fortune we may be prevented of this, but that can never be taken
from us. Yet they reject their present success, as though it did not concern
them, and do nothing but dream of future uncertainties; and in this they have
but what they deserve, for till they have by Learning and Education laid a good
Foundation for external Superstructures; in the seeking after and gathering
them, they can never satisfy the unlimited desires of their mind.

80. Thus died Marius on the Seventeenth Day of his Seventh Consulship, to the
great Joy and content of Rome; which thereby was in good hopes to be delivered
from the Calamity of an Insolent, bloody and fatal Tyranny; but in a small time
they found, that they had only changed their old Master for another young and
vigorous; so much cruelty and salvageness did his Son Marius show in murdering
the Young Marius.
Nobility: At the first being esteemed resolute and daring toward his Enemies,
he was named the Son of Mars, but afterward his actions betraying his contrary
disposition, he was called the Son of Venus. At last he was besieged by Sylla
in Praeneste, where he endeavored by all means to save his life, but in vain;
for when the City was taken, there being no way of escape, he slew himself.

THE LIFE OF LYSANDER.
By the Honorable Charles BOIL of Christ-Church.
VOLUME III.
IN a treasury of the Acan^^ii at Delphos this is one of the Inscriptions,
BRASIDAS AND THE ACANTHII (...) THIS FROM THE ATHENIANS. From he^^e many are of
(...) statue within the Temple (...) for Brasidas, but it is rather Lysander's,
whom it represents exactly with his Hair in its full growth, and a long comely
Beard, both after the old LYSANDER.
Lacedaemonian fashion. The account of this custom is not to be placed so low
as some people would have it; it not being true that the Argives shaved
themselves for grief after a great overthrow, and that the Spartans on the
contrary flushed with victory let their Hair grow beyond its usual length;
neither can we allow that because the Bacchiadae when they fled from Corinth to
Lacedaemon, seemed mean and despicable, upon account of their being shaved. The
Lacedaemonians for that reason began to esteem long Hair. This custom may be
traced very easily from Lycurgus, who used to say, That Hair made handsome men
appear more beautiful to the eye, and the unhandsome more terrible.

It Is generally agreed that Aristoclitus Lysander's Father, though he was not
immediately ^^^^ded from royal ancestors, was howev^^* some way, related to the
Family of the Heraclidae. Lysander himself was bred up under much hardship, and
behaved himself all along wit^^^ due respect to the disciplin^* and manners of
his Country. He was (...) and above all sort of pleasure, that alone (...)
arose from a sense of honor, (...) that attends just and generous Actions; and
to indulge this pleasure was very excusable at Sparta, where their yough was
fire'd with an early desire of Glory, taught to be dejected under disgrace, and
raised by commendation. And he that was insensible of these, was looked upon as
one of a mean spirit, and incapable of aspiring to any thing that is great or
manly. That emulation then and thirst after fame which appeared in the whole
course of Lysander's Life we have no reason to blame him for; it came from his
Country, and education; but another fault he had which was purely his own; He
paid too servile a deference and more than became a Spartan, to great men; and
where his interest was concerned, bore the frowns of men in Authority something
too patiently. Which however by some is reckoned no small part of Policy.

Aristotle, where he observes that great wits are generally inclined to
Melancholy (instancing in Socrates, Plato and Hercules) says too, that
Lysander, though not in his Youth, was in his declining Age subject to it. But
that which peculiarly distinguished his Character, was the way he had of making
poverty sit well upon him, and of keeping his mind steady and untainted under
the greatest affluence. For he reserved nothing for himself out of all those
spoils of Gold and Silver that he brought from the Attick War, but liberally
dispersed 'em among his Countrymen, who upon this increase of riches began to
value 'em as much as they despised 'em before. Another instance of his generous
disposition was this, when Dionysius the Tyrant would have presented his
Daughters with some Garments of a rich Embroidery, he refused 'em, with that
handsome excuse, That they were fit only to make unhappy faces more remarkable:
But this temper wore off by degrees; for being sent Ambassador some time after
to the same Tyrant who offered him the choice of two Vests, I like this best
says he, and modestly took both.

After a long continuance of the Peloponnesian War, when the Athenians had
received a great blow in Sicily, and were under fearful apprehensions of a
total overthrow both by Sea and Land, Alcibiades being recalled from
banishment* managed the War with such success that he quickly changed the whole
scene of Affairs, and after some engagements, made the Athenians equal in naval
power to the Lacedaemonians, who now began to be sensible of their dangerous
condition, and were resolved to exert themselves more vigorously. They knew
this design required greater preparations and a bold Commander. After the
strictest enquiry they found none of more ability for this service than
Lysander.

In discharge of this new Office he went to Ephesus, and found that City
particularly well inclined to him, and withal wholly in the interest of the
Lacedaemonians, though at that time in very mean circumstances, and almost
overrun with the barbarous Persian customs, by reason of their frequent
commerce with 'em, being situated opportunely enough to invite the great
Officers of that kingdom often to reside there. This kind reception he met with
from the Ephesians engaged him to pitch his Tents among 'em. He commanded all
Victuallers to be brought into their harbor, and built a dock for his capital
Ships, and by this means their ports were frequented by Merchants, their
exchange was full of business, and their Shops had a plentiful Trade; so that
this City is so far obliged to Lysander that it ought to date from that time
the hope and rise of the greatness and splendour with which it now flourishes.
But hearing that Cyrus was now at Sardis, he went thither chiefly to acquaint
him with the treachery of Tissaphernes, who though he had a commission to
assist the Lacedaemonians against the Athenians, upon some solicitation from
Alcibiades (as 'twas suspected) acted remissly, and by neglecting to pay his
Soldiers, had occasioned the ruin of his Fleet. Cyrus was easily persuaded to
believe the truth of this accusation, for he had before heard an ill character
of Tissaphernes, and was himself particularly disobliged by him. Lysander by
these means, and the opportunities he had of being familiar with the young
Prince, entirely gained his affections, and by affable conversation, and due
respect, engaged him strongly on his side. Cyrus to show how great a kindness
he had for Lysander, after he had splendidly entertained him, desired him to
deal freely, and assured him whatsoever he asked should be granted. Lysander
was so modest as only to ask a small addition to the Sea-men's pay. Cyrus was
taken with his generous answer, and made him a present of ten thousand pieces
of Silver. Lysander managed this to the best advantage, and out of his own
stock liberally increased the Sea-men's pay; by this encouragement to his
Soldiers, in a short time he quite wasted the Enemies fleet, for many of the
common Soldiers were glad to go over to that party where the most money was
stirring. And those few that staid behind behaved themselves with a great deal
of indifferency to their Officers, and often mutini'd. Though he had thus
drained and weakened his adversaries, he durst not engage 'em, because
Alcibiades who was their admiral, had the advantage of him in the number of
Ships, and had been better experienced, and hitherto more successful in
whatever enterprise he undertook either by Sea or Land.

Alcibiades having occasion to go from Samos to Phocea, left Antiochus his
Vice Admiral, who to upbraid and provoke Lysander, sailed to the very mouth of
the Harbor at Ephesus, and impudently passed by him with a great deal of noise
and scorn. Lysander who was too high spirited, not to resent this open affront,
with two or three Ships immediately pursued him, but when he saw fresh supplies
come to the relief of Antiochus, he called up more to his assistance, and in a
little while the whole Fleet was engaged. Lysander soon got the better, took
fifteen of their Ships, and set up a Trophy. The people of Athens were highly
displeased at Alcibiades, and turned him out of their service, who being now
disrespected and slightly spoken of by the Soldiers in Samos, left the Army and
withdrew to Peloponnesus. This fight was no farther considerable than as
Alcibiades's misfortune made it so.

Lysander while he had a little respite, sent a choice number of bold and
prudent men to Ephesus, with instructions, to form themselves into Companies,
and apply themselves to Policy and business, upon promise that as soon as the
Athenians Government was broken, their Democracy should be dissolved, and they
made Governors in their respective Cities; by this contrivance, he secretly
made way for the Decemviri, and all other innovations which afterward
succeeded in that Commonwealth. For he kept his word with his Friends, and
still promoted those that acquitted themselves well in any Office, to higher
honors and preferments, and to comply with their covetous humors, was himself
or Accomplice in all their injustice and oppression. So every body endeavored
to ingratiate himself with Lysander; to Him only people made their Court and
application, and promised themselves all that was Great or Honorable, while
the chief power of the Republic was lodged in him. Wherefore as soon as he left
'em they were very uneasy under his Successor Callicratidas, whose Actions
indeed showed him to be Great and Just, yet the people were all along
discontented with his Conduct, which favored too much of Dorick plainness as
they called it, that is, true Honesty and Sincerity. It Is true, they admired
his virtue as men do the Beauty of some Hero's statue, but their desires all
this while were bent upon Lysander, the loss of whose Favor and benevolence
they were so sensible of, that some of 'em expressed their Concern with Tears.
Nay, he drew off their Affections yet more from Callicratidas, for he sent back
to Cyrus the residue of that money he had received from him for the Soldiers
pay, and scornfully said, Let Us see now how you, Callicratidas, can support the
Charges of the Army. I have resigned that Fleet to you which Commands the whole
Ocean. This empty and affected vanity, Callicratidas thus handsomely reproved.
First pass the Athenian Navy at Samos, after that resign me your Command, and
then I Will confess you have delivered up to me that Fleet which rides master of
the Seas, for till it dares face the Enemy there, it can scarce, I think, claim
that Title. No says Lysander, I have done with it now, it is wholly under your
conduct, so he sailed off for Peloponnesus.

Callicratidas was left in great perplexity, for he had brought no money from
home with him, neither could he raise any, the People had been too much
oppressed to endure another Tax. The only refuge he had was to beg Supplies, as
Lysander had done, from some foreign Prince. And he was the most unqualified of
any man for this employ, for he was of so Noble and generous a Spirit, that he
could sooner brook Slavery under a Grecian Enemy, than bring himself to flatter
and caress a Barbarian, who had nothing to value himself upon but his Gold.
However necessity forced him to Lydia, and when he came to Cyrus his Palace, he
bid one of the attendants tell him, Callicratidas was come to wait upon him.
The Servant replied, The King is not at leisure now, he is drinking. Well, says
Callicratidas, (without any design of an Affront) I Will stay till he has done.
The Lydians upon this answer took him for some ill bred Clown. So when he saw
himself laughed at, and slighted by the Barbarians he withdrew a while, but
upon his return not gaining admission, he resented it so highly, that he went
immediately to Ephesus, reflecting with indignation upon those mean wretches,
that first cring'd to Barbarians, and encouraged 'em to be proud, only because
they were rich; he farther protested to some of his Friends, that as soon as he
arrived at Sparta, he would make it his business to reconcile the differences
among the Greeks, and unite 'em against the Barbarians, or at least persuade
'em so far, as never to accept assistance from their hands against one another.
These resolutions indeed were worthy of Callicratidas, whose virtue and bravery
were not inferior to the greatest of the Lacedaemonians, but he was unhappily
taken off, after he had lost the victory at Arginusa, before he could put 'em
in execution.

The prospect of affairs looking now very dismally, the Confederates sent an
Ambassy to Sparta to desire that Lysander might be chose Admiral, expressing
very earnestly the great confidence they had of success under his Conduct.
Cyrus too dispatched Letters thither to the same effect. Now there was a Law
among the Lacedaemonians that obliged 'em never to conferr that command twice
upon the same person, yet they were desirous to gratify their Allies; so they
gave one Acacus the Title, but Him the power. This news was received with great
satisfaction by the chief Magistrates of the Republique. For he had long since
raised their expectations, and given 'em hopes, that the Democracy should soon
be put down, and the whole Government devolve upon them.

Whoever takes an impartial view of these two Generals, will find in
Callicratidas an open and sincere carriage, in Lysander craft and cunning, for
he owed most of his success in War to some underhand trick, and never scrupled
to prefer Interest to Honesty; he thought nature had fixed no difference
between truth and falsehood, and so made advantage the measure of both. When he
was told, 'twas below the character of one descended from Hercules, to rely
upon Stratagems in War, he turned it off with a Jest, and said, When the Lions
strength fails, we must take in the Fox's subtilty. He gave a remarkable
instance of his disposition this way at Miletus. For when his Friends whom he
had promised to help in subverting the present Government, had changed their
Opinions, and sided with the contrary party, he pretended openly to be much
pleased with their proceedings, and to desire a reconciliation, but secretly
thus contrived their ruin. First he provoked 'em to set upon the multitude,
and as soon as they had raised a tumult he himself came up to the head of 'em,
and in the ears of the common people gave 'em a severe reprimand, but privately
fomented the disturbance, and assured 'em of his assistance. This treacherous
management of his encouraged the Rebels to stay in the City where they were all
killed just as he had designed. Androclides takes notice that this deceitful
temper ran through the whole course of his Life; for he says, he cheated
Children with foul play, and men with perjury, and all along followed the
example of Polycrates. Though it is inexcusable in a General to imitate a
Tyrant, and very disagreable to the character of a Spartan to use his Gods more
contemptibly than he does his Enemies, for he that over-reaches his Adversary
by a false Oath, declares he fears Him, and despises the Gods.

Without any farther reflection upon Lysander's vices, let us return to his
Conduct. We left the Fleet under his Command, yet he thought he had too few
Ships, to encounter the Enemy with, and too many to lie still, so he cruis'd
about some neighboring Islands, and surpised Aegina, and Salamis, from whence
he steered his course to Attica, where he waited upon Agis, and with great
Ostentation, as if he had been Master of the Seas, drew out his Fleet before
him, but hearing that the Athenians pursued him, he made off, not without some
confusion, toward Asia, and finding the Hellespont open without any guard, he
attacked Lampsacus by Sea, whilst Thorax at the same time besieged it by Land,
and as soon as the Town was stormed, he gave his Soldiers the plunder of it. In
the mean while the Athenian Fleet consisting of an hundred and eighty Sail,
were going for Elis, but having intelligence that Lampsacus was taken, they
altered their measures and put in at Sestos, whence after they had taken in
Provisions, they went to the River Egus, where they were just opposite to the
Enemy, which was still cruising about Lampsacus. Amongst the Athenian
Commanders Philocles was one, the same that formerly stirred up the common
People to a Rebellion, and moved once in Council to cut off the right Thumb of
every Captive, that they might be disabled from managing any Weapon, and yet be
serviceable to 'em in handling the Oar. The two navies now were in sight of one
another, and every body expected an Engagement the next morning; but Lysander
had quite other designs; he commanded all the Seamen on board, as if they were
to fight by break of day, and gave 'em a strict charge to be in readiness upon
the first sign; he gave the same orders to the Infantry who lay upon the shore:
About Sunrising the Athenian Fleet drew up in a line directly before the
Lacedaemonians, and gave the challenge, but Lysander would not accept it,
however he heart'ned his men, bid every one keep his post and be silent. So the
Athenians at evening were forced to retire, and the same game was played over
for three or four days together.

Upon this news Alcibiades came up to 'em out of Peloponnesus, and finding some
fault with the situation of the Camp, and the ill management of some things
relating to the Fleet, met with a scornful rebuke from Tydeus that sent him
back again. When he was gone they offered Battle as they had done several times
to no purpose; Lysander, when he saw 'em returning with disdain and (as they
thought) security to their Harbors, dispatched some few light Vessels to
observe their motion, and bid the Captains, row back as soon as ever they saw
the Athenians Land, and lift up the Golden Shield from the fore deck, upon
which sign he would immediately make up to 'em. Afterward he gave* orders to the
Officers in the Fleet diligently to look after the Soldiers and Mariners, and
take care they should be all ready to run in briskly upon the Enemy, at the
first sight of the Shield. By that time he had given his instructions, the sign
immediately appeared, and the Trumpet from the Admiral sounded to Battle, the
Ships set sail, and the Land men marched up along the shore to the promontory.
The distance between the two continents was fifteen Furlongs, but the Seamen
were so eager and industrious, that they soon reached the opposite shore; yet
Conon the chief Captain of the Athenians had descried 'em, and made what haste
he could, to get his Soldiers on board; some he commanded, some he persuaded,
and others he forced into the Ships; but all his endeavors were in vain, his
men, not in the least suspecting any surprise, were dispersed; one party was
walking in the Fields, another slept in their Tents, a third was gone to
Market. So Conon when the noise and Cries of the Lacedaemonians drew very near
him, made his escape with eight Ships to Evagoras King of Cyprus. The
Peloponnesians fell upon those that remained, and either took or disabled 'em
all. Those Soldiers that came to the relief of the navy were slain in the
attempt, those that thought to make their escape by flight, were pursued and
taken. Lysander took three thousand Prisoners with their Commanders, and seized
the whole Fleet, except those few Ships that conveyed Conon to Evagoras. Thus
after he had completed this famous Victory by his own Counsel and Conduct, and
in so little a time, with such unexpected success, put an end to that War which
had been so long depending, and in which more Grecians lost their Lives, than
in all the former ones, he returned in Triumph to Lampsacus.

This Action was so surprising that 'twas thought a particular Providence was
concerned in it. Some say Castor and Pollux placed themselves on each side
Lysander's Ship, and attended this affair with extraordinary influence. Others
fansi'd a stone, that seemed to fall from Heaven, to be an Omen of this
overthrow. 'Twas of a vast bigness, and fell by the River Egus. The
Peloponnesians esteem it very much, and show it among their Curiosities to this
day.

Theophrastus tells us that Lysander, when the three Thousand Athenians which
he took prisoners were condemned by the Council, called Philocles and asked him
What punishment he thought that man deserved, who advised the Citizens to
proceed so severely against the Grecians? Philocles not at all daunted in his
Adversity, replied, You are no judge in this Case, but do you use your
Prisoners as I would have used you, if you had been mine. After this bold
answer, with all gayety and cheerfulness he led on his Countrymen, as if he
had been going rather to a Triumph, than his Execution.

When this Tragedy was over, Lysander visited all the neighboring Cities, and
Commanded all the Athenians he found, upon pain of death, to repair to Athens.
His design was this, That the City being thus thronged might soon be reduced to
Famine, and glad to surrender upon discretion, as soon as he opened the Siege.
Wherever he came, he changed the present Government of the place, and put in
a Lacedaemonian as Chief with ten other Assistants. Thus he dealt not only with
his Enemies, but his Allies, and by this means had in a manner engrossed to
himself the whole Empire of Greece. He did not employ the Nobility or the
wealthy Citizens in any part of the Government, but put it into the hands
either of private Friends, or strangers, and entrusted 'em with full power of
Life and Death. Many were executed whilst he was present, and whoever expressed
any dislike of his Friends proceedings were sure to meet with very hard usage.
This management gave the Greeks an ill Opinion of the Lacedaemonian Government.
From hence Theopompus took occasion by way of drollery to compare the
Lacedaemonians with Vint'ners, who whilst they pretend to entertain us with
sweet Wine give it a dash of Vinegar; for though Lysander openly professed he
allowed 'em all their Freedom and privileges, yet he oppressed 'em so much by
his Ambitious and Tyrannical Officers that no Slavery could be more uneasy to
'em than what he called Liberty.

Having settled Affairs here according to his mind, and dispatched Messengers
to tell the Lacedaemonians, that he should return to them with two hundred Sail
in a very short time, he appeared before Attica, with such assurance, as if he
thought of nothing less than the immediate surrender of the City. But when he
found the Athenians made a vigorous defense beyond his expectation, he
retreated into Asia, and made the same alteration in other Cities as he had
done in those we mentioned before* putting some to death who did not submit to
his Tyranny, and forcing others to quit their Country. He utterly routed the
Samians, and gave Fugitives the possession of their Cities. He used the same
Barbarity to the Inhabitants of Sestos, which was then in the hands of the
Athenians, and divided it among his Seamen. The Lacedaemonians themselves were
displeased at these inhumane proceedings, though against their Enemies, and
reestablished the Sestians. The Greecians were well satisfied with Lysander's
Conduct, for by his means the Aeginites were restored to their own Cities, of
which the Athenians had injustly possessed themselves. By this time Lysander
had intelligence that there was a Famine in Athens, upon which he sailed to the
Piraeum, and had no sooner began his siege, but the City surrendered, submitting
to whatever Terms he demanded.

It Is reported among the Lacedaemonians, that Lysander wrote to the Magistrates
thus, Athens is taken: To which they returned this Answer in the same way; You
say it is taken, we are satisfied. But this was recorded rather as Laconick than
true, for they commanded him to observe these orders. They run thus: Know this
is the decree of the Lacedaemonians; Pull down the Piraeum, and the long Wall;
Divide their Lands among the neighboring Cities; Allow 'em what is necessary,
and set the Captives at liberty. When you have performed this, enjoy that peace
which you have so well deserved: As for the number of Ships, use your own
discretion in that matter. When these orders came to the Athenians, they took
Theramenes his advice thereupon, whom Cleomenes one of the young Counselors
asked, why he acted contrary to the intention of Themistocles, and gave those
Walls into the hands of the Lacedaemonians, which he built in defiance of 'em.
Youth, says he, I have my eye upon Themistocles his design. He raised these
Walls for the preservation of the City, and I for the very same reason would
have 'em destroyed; and if Walls only secure a City, Sparta which has none is
in a very ill condition.

Lysander as soon as the Ships and Fortifications of the Athenians were
delivered into his hands, attempted the same alteration among them, as he had
made in the other parts of Greece, but finding 'em more stubborn than he
expected, he complained to the Lacedaemonians, that their orders were not
observed by the Athenians, that the Walls were yet standing, after the time
fixed for their pulling down was expired, and now since they had broke their
first Articles, he declared he would not enter into new conditions with 'em.
Some say he moved in Council that they might be reduced to Slavery, when at the
same time Erianthus the Theban proposed wholly to destroy the City, and leave
the Country desolate; but a little afterward at an entertainment of the
Captains, one of 'em repeated some verses out of Eurypides's Electra: They
begun thus,

Electra, O unhappy Queen,
Whither would you fly! return;
Your absence the forsaken Groves
And desert Palace seem to mourn.
This struck 'em, and, gave 'em occasion to reflect, how barbarous 'twou'd
appear to lay that City in ruin, which had been renowned for the birth and
education of so many famous men. However Lysander, the Athenians entirely
submitting to him, called a great consort of Music, both out of the City and
Camp, and whilst he pulled down the Walls and burned the Ships, his associates
dancing and Crowned with Garlands, expressed as much joy, as if the end of
other men's happiness, had been the beginning of their own. After this,
according to his usual way of dealing with Conquered People, he altered their
Government, appointed thirty Rulers over the City, and ten over the Piraeum,
placed a strong Garrison in the Tower, and made Callibius a Spartan the
Governor, who upon some slight occasion offered to strike Autolycus (a famous
wrestler, the same whom Xenophon mentions in his (...)) but the young Gentleman
avoided the blow, and gave Callibius a fall. Lysander, though this reflected
upon one of his Officers, seemed not to be much disturbed at it, he only mildly
reprimanded Autolycus, and told him Callibius was unacquainted with the
Athenian Polity, and did not know the distinction of his quality: But soon
after the Governors to ingratiate themselves with Callibius, killed Autolycus.

Lysander when he had settled his Affairs, sailed to Thrace. All the money and
presents which he had received (and in all probability a man in his station
must have received many) he sent to Lacedaemon by Gulippus, whom he had made
Captain over the Troops in Sicily. This Gulippus ripp'd up every bag, and when
he had taken out of each as much as he thought fit, sowed 'em up again; but
this was not managed so cunningly as he imagined, for in every bag it seems
there was a bill that gave a particular account of its sum, so that when he
came to Sparta, having first secured, as he thought, under the tiles of his
House what he had taken for his own use, he delivered up his charge to the
Magistrates, and with a good assurance showed 'em the Seals as a mark of his
fidelity. But when they examined the money and found it fall short of the
Accounts expressed in the Bills, not suspecting any cheat in the Messenger they
were something surpised at the difference, till Gulippus his Servant betrayed
the Secret, and told 'em by way of Riddle, That he had observed a great many
Owls lodged under his Masters tiles: Now the Athenian money being generally
stamped with the image of an Owl, this Mystery was quicly understood, and
Gulippus having stained his former reputation with this mean action, was
ashamed to appear any more at Lacedaemon.

Some of the wisest among the Spartans, probably upon this occasion, being
sensible what an ill influence money had over most men's manners, and how easily
the best were corrupted by it, were very warm in their reflections upon
Lysander, and earnestly pressed the Magistrates to send away all their treasure
of Gold and Silver. This debate was referred to a Council, where as Theopompus
says Scirophidas, as Ephorus will have it, Phlogidas, openly declared against
receiving Gold or Silver into the City, and moved that no money might be used
amongst 'em, but their own, which was Iron dipped in Vinegar whilst it was
Red-hot, to make it hard and unpliable, that it might not easily be covered
with Counterfeit Brass, this Coin of theirs made in the fashion of a Pyramid,
was heavy, and that which was much in weight, was but little in value, so that
'twas very troublesome to carry any considerable Sum. This party that Voted
against keeping the money was overpowered by Lysander's Friends, and at last
'twas decreed that it should be employed upon Public Occasions, and that it
should be a Capital Crime to convert any of it to Private uses; But this did
not at all answer Lycurgus his design, who by a scarcity of money intended to
prevent Covetousness which is generally the ill Consequence of Riches; now this
was not so much prevented by forbidding the use of money in Private, as 'twas
encouraged by allowing it in Public, and it could not be imagined that People
who managed wealth to so General an Advantage of the Republic, should think it
of no concern to themselves; nay it is much more reasonable to conclude that the
common Custom of a Nation should influence particular men, than that the whole
Nation should be corrupted by the Actions of some few, who upon any misdemeanor
may be called to account, and reduced to a better sense of their duty, by sound
Laws and strict Discipline. So that the order of State which we just now
mentioned, was of no benefit to the Commonwealth, for though the fear of
punishment was a pretty secure Guard upon men, not to hazard their Lives in
Treasuring up money, yet the prohibition only heightened their desires, and if
their Actions did not break out, at last their affections were tainted. But I
shall say no more of this matter here, because I have reflected upon it in
another place.

Lysander, as we observed before, being much enriched with plunder and
presents, raised his own and several of the chief Commanders statues in Brass
at Delphos, and represented in Gold the Constellations of Castor, and Pollux,
which had shone so favorably upon him at the Battle of Leuctra. The great Ship
that Cyrus sent him when he congratualted him upon his Victory, he placed in
the Treasury of Brasidas, and the Acanthians, and Alexandrides in his History
names a very considerable Sum left there by Lysander. But this account is not
agreeable to the latter circumstances of his Life.

It must be owned that never any Lacedaemonian General had so absolute an
Authority as Lysander, yet his Pride and Haughtiness of Spirit still carried
him beyond it, insomuch that Douris says the Grecians raised Altars to his
Honor and sacrificed to him as a God. He was the first that was complimented
with Songs of Triumph; one of which begun thus,

To the brave Leader of our Bands,
Begin the Song, which Gods inspire;
With Tuneful Voice, and Artful Hands:
Io Paean! touch the Lyre!
And the Samians decreed that the Feasts which were Celebrated in the Honor of
Juno, should now be transferred to Lysander. Chaerilus a Poet was always one of
his retinue and ready upon all occasions to Celebrate his Actions. Antilochus
presenting him with a Panegyric which he was much pleased with, was very
splendidly rewarded. There was a great emulation between Antimachus of Colophon
and Niceratus of Heraclea, who should write the best Poem in Lysander's Praise.
The Laurel was given to Niceratus, which Antimachus taking ill, suppressed his
Verses. Plato who was then a young Man, and an admirer of Antimachus his
Poetry, desired him to bear this little misfortune with more Courage, telling
him that ignorance affects only those that are ignorant, as Blindness hurts
those alone that are Blind, and that this affront was not so much his own
unhappiness, as theirs who were not able to judge of his excellencies.
Aristonous the Musician who had six times won the prize of the Pythian games,
openly declared, that if ever he had the fortune to be conqueror once more,
he would employ all his art in Lysander's praises.

Lysander's Haughtiness and Ambition was alike uneasy to his Superiors and
his equals; he had so many Creatures followed him, that he looked upon every
Body with careless disdain, and was so regardless of other peoples Opinions,
that he made his own humor the measure of all his Actions; to his Friends and
those strangers that humbly attended him, and sided with his party, he was too
liberally grateful, and rewarded their services with unlimited Commissions to
govern Cities as absolutely as they pleased: But an Enemy seldom escaped his
revenge, and that was never satisfied but with the death of the Offender. To
compass this he stuck at nothing that was base or treacherous, as it is plain
from his dealing with the Milesians. They had appeared too forward in
maintaining the right of the people, and when they found their designs
discovered, he was afraid they might secure themselves by flight, to prevent
this he solemnly swore not a man of them should suffer; Upon this they were all
so credulous as to rely upon his word, nay many who upon apprehension of
punishment had before absconded, appeared abroad again, so when he had got 'em
all in his power, he ordered 800 of 'em to be slain at one execution. In every
City he exercised cruelties of this nature, and no man could be safe who was
suspected of any inclinations to popular Government. He did not only sacrifice
men to his own private caprices, but with the same barbarity gratified either
the malice or Covetousness of his Friends. From whence Eteocles his saying
became famous; that Greece could never bear two Lysanders. Theophrastus says
that Archistratus applied the same thing to Alcibiades.

Pharnabazus after he had been plundered and very ill used by him, sent
informers against him to Sparta. The Magistrates took this complaint into
Consideration, and put some of his Friends to death, amongst which was his
Fellow-Captain Thorax, who against the late Law was found with Silver in his
possession; neither did they stop here in punishing his accomplices, but
commanded him home by their Scytale. The nature and use of which was this. When
the Magistrates gave their Commission to any Admiral or General, they took two
round pieces of Wood both eactly equal in breadth and thickness, one they kept
themselves, the other was delivered to their Officer, so when they had any
thing of moment which they would secretly convey to him; they cut a long narrow
scrowl of Parchment, and rolling it about their own staff one fold close upon
another, they wrote their business on it, when they had wrote what they had to
say, they took off the Parchment and sent it to the General, he applied it to
his own staff, which being just like that of the Magistrates, the folds fell in
with one another, exactly as they did at the writing, and the Characters,
which, before 'twas wrapped up, were confusedly disjoined, and altogether
unintelligible, appeared now very plainly.

Lysander was startled at the Scytale, and being conscious how ill he had used
Pharnabazus, thought this message was chiefly upon his Account, so he took all
the care imaginable to have a speedy conference with him, and hoped by a little
discourse to compose all differences between 'em. When they met, he desired him
to give another information to the Senate, and to contradict what his
Messengers had told 'em before. Pharnabazus seemed to comply with these
proposals, but, as it is in the Proverb, Put the cheat upon the deceiver; for he
wrote a Letter in Lysander's Presence according to his directions, but had
contrived to have another by him, which was to a quite contrary effect; so when
they came to Seal the Letter, he put that upon him which he had writ
underhand; Lysander returned boldly to Lacedaemon, and attending the
Magistrates, as it is their Custom, at the Palace, he delivered Pharnabazus his
Letter to 'em, which he was pretty confidently assured, would take off his
greatest Accusation, for he knew Pharnabazus was much valued by the
Lacedaemonians, as being an expert Soldier and a favorite of Artaxerxes. The
Magistrates read the Letter, and showed it Lysander, he was much surpised to
meet with what he had not in the least suspected, and in great confusion left
the Palace.

Some days after when he was amongst the Governors, he told 'em he was obliged
to go to Ammon's Temple, and pay that Sacrifice which he had Vowed to him
before the Battle, and it is indeed reported that Ammon appeared to him in a
Dream, when he besieged the Aphygaeans, upon which as the God had directed he
raised the Siege, and bid the Aphygaeans Sacrifice to Ammon: But it is generally
believed that this was only a pretense, and that the true occasion of his
retiring was a suspicion that the Magistrates would call him to an Account, for
having Ruled so long without control; his haughty Spirit could not brook
Submission to any Body, like an Horse that after he had been free a great while
and ranged in open Pasture, is very unwilling to be confined again to the
Stable, and submit to the manage of his Rider. Ephorus gives another Account of
his retiring, which I shall mention by and by. Whatever the occasion was, he
found it very difficult to get the Magistrates leave, and when with much ado
they had given their consent to his Voyage, considering that most of their
Cities were in the possession of his Friends, that he consequently must needs
have a great sway among 'em, and be likely to be received by 'em with all the
respect due to their great Commander and Patron, they took particular care to
dispossess 'em and put the Government into other hands.

This Revolution raised every where new disturbances, and first of all the
Athenians attempted to seize upon their thirty Governors, but Lysander happened
to come very opportunely to their relief, and persuaded the Lacedaemonians to
join with the Rulers against the People, they did not only grant him this, but
presented the Governors too with an hundred Talents, and chose him their
Captain: Some of the Chief of the the Athenians were jealous of Lysander, and
fearing least he should take the City again, resolved one of 'em should be
deputed to discourse with him. Pausanias was the man. When he came to Lysander,
he pretended he had been a great Friend to the Tyrants against the People, but
his design was to break off the War, least Lysander should again make himself
Master of Athens. This design he compassed very easily, for he reconciled the
Athenians, and composed the Tumults, and so put a stop to Lysander's Ambition.
However the Athenians made another insurrection, but Pausanias made a plausible
excuse for it, and said that 'twas no strange thing to see People that were
just free from their usual discipline, and left more to their own liberty,
break out into insolent Affronts; withal he gave Lysander the commendation of a
generous man, who never employed his Arms either for the gratification of
Friends or his own fame, but purely for the Glory of Sparta. Thus he preserved
the City a second time from Lysander's Tyranny.

Lysander's Courage and Spirit appeared in his expressions, no less than it did
in his Actions. Once when the Argives contended about their bounds, and thought
they could make a better Plea than the Lacedaemonians, he held out his Sword,
and said, He that is Master of this will best make out his Title. A Megarean
using more freedom than ordinary with him, met with this reprimand, By your
discourse, Sir, a man may guess you are a stranger at Court. When the Boeotians
stood wavering whether they should engage on his side, or his Enemies, he told
'em they must fix their resolutions, he would be with 'em speedily, and bad 'em
consider whether they had rather be visited in a Friendly or hostile manner.
After the Corinthians had revolted, and the Lacedaemonians seemed backward in
their Assault, an Hare by chance leaping over the Ditch, Are ye not ashamed,
said he, to fear those Enemies, whose laziness is such that the Hares sleep
under their very Walls?

After Agis his death, Agesilaus his Brother, and Leotychides his supposed Son,
were the only pretenders to the Crown, Lysander who was Agesilaus his
particular Friend, persuaded him to claim his Right to the Kingdom, as being
legitimately descended from Hercules, for 'twas very much suspected that
Leotychides was Alcibiades his Son, who had been observed to be familiar with
Agis his Wife Timaia, all the time he was a fugitive in Sparta, and Agis
computing the time, concluded that he himself could not be the Father, so
openly disowned him and neglected him as a Bastard; yet afterward when he fell
sick and was carried to Herea, by the importunity of the Youth himself, and his
Friends, just before he died he declared before many witnesses that Leotychides
was his lawful Son, and desired them to testify these his last words to the
Lacedaemonians; which accordingly they did. Every body respected Agesilaus as a
very deserving man, and his acquaintance with Lysander was a farther
recommendation of him, but he was abused by Diopithes a great dealer in
Prophecies, who applied this Speech of the Oracle to Agesilaus his lameness.

Proud as thou art, Sparta, beware
How thou obeyest a limping Heir!
War and discord without end,
Shall on that luckless Hour attend;
Every Labor, every Fate,
That can waste, or sink a state.
Many believed the interpretation, and began to favor Leotychides his party.
But Lysander said that Diopithes had mistook the sense of the Oracle, that
'twas not meant the Lacedaemonians would be unhappy under a lame King, but that
they would be a lame people if they suffered the posterity of Hercules to be
governed by illegitimate princes. Having thus put a plausible construction upon
the words of the Oracle, and being otherwise one that had got a great interest
among the People he prevailed with 'em to make choice of Agesilaus; As soon as
he was settled in his Kingdom, Lysander pressed him very earnestly to make War
upon Asia, putting him in hopes of raising to himself a great reputation by the
Conquest of Persia; to further this design he writ to his Friends in Asia, and
desired 'em they would Petition Agesilaus to accept the Command of their Forces
against the Barbarians. They complied with his request, and sent Ambassadors
to Lacedaemon for that purpose.

Agesilaus thought himself no less obliged to Lysander for this favor, than he
had been before for his Kingdom. But ambitious Spirits however otherwise
qualified for Government, are hindered in their way to Glory by that Envy which
they generally bear to their equals, and so make them the chief opposers whom
they might make the greatest promoters of their Heroic Actions. Thus Agesilaus
at first chose Lysander for his particular Favorite, made him one of his
Cabinet Council, and consulted him upon all Affairs of moment, but when they
came into Asia, having little acquaintance there, the People seldom addressed
themselves to him but made their greatest Court to Lysander, some upon the
account of a former familiarity and Friendship, others out of a servile
Compliance. Thus as it often happens in Plays, a chief Actor represents one of
a mean Character, yet is much taken notice of, while he that personates the
King has but a small part, and is little regarded by the Spectators; so here
the Counselor had all that was really valuable in Government, and left the
King only the empty name of Power. Indeed both of 'em ought to have moderated
their Ambition, Lysander was too forward in accepting those honors which ought
first to have been paid Agesilaus: On the other side Agesilaus did ill, so
unhandsomely to discard a Friend that he had been so much obliged to. For first
of all he never gave him any opportunity of appearing with reputation, never
put him in any post of Command; besides whoever he engaged for, was sure to
miscarry, and to be thought Lysander's Friend was fault enough to deserve the
King's displeasure.

Lysander was so unsuccessful in every thing he undertook, and found so often
that what he designed as a kindness was prejudicial to his Friends, that he
desired 'em to forbear their addresses, and take no public notice of him, that
they should either speak to the King himself, or to those Favorites who had
more interest than he at present to prefer 'em. Upon this many gave him no
farther trouble with their concerns, but still continued their respects to him,
and waited upon him in all places of public entertainment. This grieved
Agesilaus yet more, when he saw all his endeavors to call off the Peoples
Affections from Lysander were in vain: So to show his resentment, when he made
new Officers in his Army, and Governors of Cities, he affronted Lysander so
far as to make him overseer of his House-provisions, and then by way of
derision bid the Ionians, go and pay their complements to his Caterer. Lysander
could brook this usage no longer, and resolved freely to tell the King his
mind. Their discourse was very short and Laconick. Agesilaus, says Lysander,
you know very well how to despise your Friends; Yes, says he, when they affect
to be greater than my self, and it is just they should have the greatest share
in my power who most endeavor to promote it. Lysander replied very modestly,
Sir, this is rather what you please to say, than what I ever did. I beg of you,
since our Enemies have an eye upon our carriage to one another in hopes to make
advantage of it, let me serve you in some Office where I may be least
suspected, and most useful to you. This favor was granted him, and he was sent
Ambassador to the Hellespont, and though he did bear some secret grudge to the
King, yet that did not hinder him from a very faithful discharge of his duty.
He persuaded Mithridates the Persian who had fallen out with Pharnabazus to
revolt with all the Army under his Command, and brought him over to Agesilaus:
However he was not employed upon any other service, but returned in disgrace to
Sparta, not only highly incensed against Agesilaus in particular, but
displeased more than ever with the whole frame of the Government.

Things had been a great while ripe for change, and People were ready to break
into Rebellion; he resolved therefore not to miss the opportunity but set it on
foot as soon as possible. His stratagem was this. Some of the Heraclidae who
came into Peloponnesus and mixed with the Dorians, were now grown very numerous
and powerful in Sparta. But two Families only could claim any right to
succession in the Kingdom; those were the Eurytiontidae and the Agiadae, others
had no privilege in the Commonwealth by the Nobleness of their Birth, but those
who could plead most merit had the best Titles to the common Rewards of Virtue.
Lysander was one of these, and when he had gained a great Reputation by his
Actions, many Friends, and much Power, he was uneasy to see that City which
owed its increase chiefly to him, ruled by others no better descended than
himself. So he contrived to alter the settlement which confined the Government
to two Families, and gave all the Heraclidae an equal right to it; nay some say
not the Heraclidae only, but all the Spartans, and make it a reward not so much
of Hercules his posterity, as of those who bravely imitated that valor which
gave him a place among the Gods. He had great hopes that when the Kingdom was
thus to be disposed of, no Spartan could appear with those advantages that he
could. Upon which prospect first he endeavored to insinuate the reasonableness
of this change into private People, and afterward to the same purpose spoke an
Oration which Cleon of Halicarnassus had made for him. But perceiving that this
new project was very extraordinary, and not to be brought about by common
means, as in Tragedies, when any thing of great importance is to be resolved,
the assistance of some God is made use of, so he to promote his designs with
more color of Authority counterfeited answers from Delphos, presuming he
should terrify those by Apollo's Oracles whom he could not persuade by Cleon's
Eloquence. Ephorus says that after he had in vain endeavored to pervert the
Pythian Oracle, and as unsuccessfully sent Pericles to corrupt Dodona, he went
himself to Ammon, and profer'd the Priests prodigious Sums of Gold, who with
great indignation rejected his Bribes and sent people to accuse him at Sparta.
Where he met with such favorable Judges that he was easily cleared from their
impeachments, upon which the Libyans took their leave of the Spartans in this
manner, When you come to live among us in Africa you will find us more impartial
Judges. Now there was an ancient Prophecy which foretold that the
Lacedaemonians should some time or other inhabit Africa. Lysander's designs in
this matter were very subtle and intricate, and managed by very great
Politicians, so in order to clear the whole intrigue we must trace it as we do
a Mathematical demonstration, up to its first principles; I shall therefore at
large explain it as it is related by a certain Historian and Philosopher.

There was a Woman in Pontus who was said to conceive by Apollo, many with a
great deal of reason suspected it, others were so credulous as to believe it.
After she was delivered of a Boy many People took peculiar care of its
education, and for some reason or other gave it the Name of Silenus. Lysander
taking hold of this, made it the Ground of his whole stratagem, and chose such
confidents to assist him in it, whose Character might bring the story into
reputation without the least suspicion of forgery. To make the best advantage
of this they spread abroad another story, that there were very ancient Oracles
closely concealed in the custody of the Priests, and 'twas upon record that
they were not to be profaned by vulgar hands, neither was it lawful for any man
to read 'em, till in some future Age one should arise who should manifestly
prove himself the Son of Apollo, and challenge to himself the Interpretation of
these Mysteries. When the credit of this report was well established among the
People, Silenus was to come and demand the prerogative of his Birth. The
Priests who were Confederates in this Plot, were strictly to examine into every
circumstance and particular of his Nativity, and afterward being fully
convinced that he was the true Son of Apollo, were to deliver up their charge
to him: who when he publicly opened the Oracles before the People, was to
declare several things concerning the Government, among which he was to tell
'em 'twou'd be more for their honor and interest to break the present
succession, and choose their Kings out of the most deserving men in the
Commonwealth. But when Silenus was grown up and every thing ready for Action,
the whole business miscarri'd by the Cowardice of one that was an agent in it,
whose heart failed him just at the time of Execution. However nothing of this
was discovered while Lysander lived, for he died, before Agesilaus returned
from Asia, in the Baeotian, or as some say the Grecian, War. For it is reported
both ways. Some say he himself was the occasion of his death, others blame the
Thebans for it, others accuse both. To the Thebans it is objected that they used
the Sacrifice so irreverently, as to scatter it in pieces on the Ground; that
suffering themselves to be corrupted by the King about Androclides and
Amphitheus, they engaged the Lacedaemonians in the Grecian War, that they set
upon the Phocians and laid waste their Country. They say too Lysander took it
ill, that they alone, when the rest of the Confederates were content, pretended
to the privilege of assuming to themselves the tenth part of the spoils; and
that they complained of his sending money to Sparta. But he was most of all
displeased, because they made way for the Athenians to free themselves from the
Tyranny of that Government which he had established among 'em. To terrify the
Athenians from this revolt, the Lacedaemonians decreed that those who fled out
of Athens should be apprehended wherever they should be found, and that those
who endeavored to rescue 'em should be treated as Enemies to the Government.
The Thebans gave out a counter order which was generous and becoming the
posterity of Hercules, and Bacchus, that every House and City in Baeotia should
be open and free for any Athenian that desired protection, and that whoever did
not assist a fugitive that was in danger of being seized, should be fined a
Talent, besides if any one should march Armed through Baeotia to the Relief of
the Athenians, he should find a safe passage without being taken notice of.
Neither did they stop here, for as their decree was hospitable and friendly, so
their Actions were agreeable to it. For Thrasibulus with several other
fugitives was so far aided by them secretly, with Money, and Arms, that he made
an assault upon the Phile, and possessed himself of it. Lysander could not but
resent these affronts, which the Thebans had so openly offered both to him and
the Lacedaemonians. His Anger grew very fierce, and was increased by a
Splenetick humor which he was troubled with in his old Age. This urged him to
importune the Magistrates to employ him once more in their Service, so he
marched out with the Army under his Command, and Pausanias followed him with
another. Pausanias went round by Cythaeron with a design to invade Baeotia;
Lysander passed through Phocis in order to meet him. As he marched along he
took by surrender the City of the Orchomenians, and laid waste Lebadia. From
whence he sent Letters to Pausanias that he should remove from Platea, and make
haste to join Forces with him at Haliartus, where he himself would certainly
meet him by break of day. These Letters fell into the hands of the Enemies
Spies, and were brought to the Thebans. Upon the opening of 'em they entrusted
their City with the Athenians, and they sallying out at the first Watch arrived
at Haliartus, and put part of their Forces into the City a little before
Lysander came. Lysander had at first resolved to pitch his Tents upon the side
of an Hill, and wait for Pausanias, but day drawing on he grew impatient, and
led his Soldiers out in a direct line along the Road to the Walls of the City.

There is a Fountain called Cisseusa in which they say Bacchus was washed
immediately after his birth, for the Water is like Wine, of a bright Color,
and a pleasant taste, not far off grows the Cretian Storax, by which the
Haliartians guess Radamanthus dwelt there, and the rather because his Sepulcher
too, which they call Alea, is seen in this place. The monument of Alcmena is
hard by, where they pretend she was buried, when after Amphitryo's death she
married Radamanthus. 'Twas here about on the left side of Haliartus, that those
Thebans who had not entered the City were placed, from whence with great
fierceness they fell upon the Enemies Rear. In the mean time those within the
City putting themselves into one body with the Haliartians kept their order in
quiet. But as soon as Lysander appeared with his Vanguard before the Gates,
they rushed out, killed him and one of his Priests, with some few more, for the
greater part made their escape to the main Army, but the Thebans pursued 'em so
closely that they all soon dispersed and fled to the Hills. A Thousand of them
were killed in this pursuit, and 300 of the Thebans fell by chasing 'em too
rashly into craggy and dangerous places. These 300 had been suspected of
correspondence with the Lacedaemonians, which made 'em so rash and desperate
that they were resolved to wipe off this disgrace though with the loss of their
Lives. The news of this defeat came to Pausanias as he was going from Platea to
Thespias. He presently put his Army in order and made toward Haliartus, where
about the same time Thrasybulus was arrived with a party of the Athenians under
his Command. Pausanias would have articled with 'em upon terms for the dead,
but the Spartan Magistrates would not consent to it, and were angry with him
for offering such mean proposals. They declared Lysander's body should not be
redeemed by conditions, but if they fought it out, and Conquered they might
carry it off honorably, if they happened to be overcome themselves 'twou'd
however be more glorious to die upon the spot with their Commander. The
Magistrates carrying it thus high with the usual haughtiness of Spartans,
Pausanias, who was more calm, saw 'twas too difficult a matter to think of
routing the Thebans, who were just now flushed with Victory; besides if this
could have been done, the body lay so near the Walls, that it could not easily
be bore off without a truce, so he immediately dispatched an Herald, obtained
a Treaty; drew back his Forces, carried away Lysander, and buried him in the
Country of his Friends, the Panopeans. His Monument is still to be seen in the
Road from Delphos to Chaeronea, where the Lacedaemonians for some time took up
their quarters, and while they staid there, one of Phocis giving an account of
the Battle to one of his Companions, said, The Enemy fell upon 'em, after
Lysander had passed Ophlites. A Spartan, Lysander's Friend that stood by,
having not heard of that name, asked what Ophlites he meant, and yet says the
Phocian that is the place where we lost our bravest men, it is the River that
runs by the City. The Spartan immediately wept and broke out into this
expression, O how unavoidable are the decrees of Fate! For it seems the Oracle
had pronounced this to Lysander.

Take care to shun Ophlites watery Field,
And him who bears a Dragon in his Shield.
Some indeed say Ophlites does not run to Haliartus, but is a River near
Coronea, which mixed with the River Phliarus passes along to that City. 'Twas
formerly called Oplias, but now it is known by the name of Isomantus. Neocorus
the Haliartian who killed Lysander, bore a Dragon in his Shield, and it is
probable that this was signified by the Oracle.

It Is reported there was an Oracle concerning the Thebans in the Peloponnesian
War, which foretold the Battle at Delium, and this at Haliartus, though this
happened thirty years after. The Oracle runs thus.

Don't follow in your chase the eager Hound
Upon the Confines, fly th 'Orchalian Ground
That den of Foxes.
This place about Delium he calls the Confines, where Baeotia borders upon
Attica; and the Hill Orchalides, which now they call Alopecon, lies in that
part of Haliartus, which is toward Helicon.

The Lacedaemonians looked upon Pausanias his proceedings as so dishonorable
to a Spartan General, that they would have tried him for his Life, but he durst
not venture to appear, so fled into Tegaea, where he devoted himself to a
private Life in the Temple of Minerva.

Lysander's poverty which was discovered at his death, made his virtue more
admired, when it appeared that from so much plenty and power, such rich
presents from so many Cities, which were under his Government, he had not at
all increased the wealth of his own private Family. This is observed by
Theopompus, whom we may sooner believe when he commends, than when he finds
fault, for men are more apt to discommend than praise. Ephorus says that upon
some dispute between the Confederates with Sparta, when Lysander's writings
were to be examined, Agesilaus was ordered to make the search, who finding a
discourse of Lysander's concerning the Government, where he endeavored to show
how advantageous 'twou'd be to the Commonwealth, if the right of succession,
which the Family of the Eureutiontidae and Agiadae pretended to, was broke, and
the Kingdom made elective. This discourse Agesilaus designed to publish, and
discover by that means what sort of a Friend Lysander was to 'em in private.
But Lacratidas a wise man, and at that time President of the Council, would not
suffer him so basely to abuse a great General's memory, and told him that these
papers which were so plausibly and ingeniously writ, deserved to rest
honorably with their Author, and that 'twas inhumane to dig Lysander out of
his Grave. The Spartans bestowed many honors on him after his death, amongst
which this was none of the least; There were some who had engaged themselves to
Lysander's Daughters while every thing about him appeared Rich and Splendid,
but when they saw how poor and honest he died, they broke off their contract.
These in respect to Lysander's memory the Spartans severely fined: For there
was it seems in Sparta a Law which punished as well those that broke off, or
deferred a promised marriage, as those who engaged in an ill one, and this Law
laid hold on those chiefly who endeavored to marry into rich, rather than good
Families. Thus we have faithfully related all the Remarkable passages which we
could gather of Lysander's Life.

THE LIFE OF L. C. SYLLA.
Englished from the Greek, By William Davies, Fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridge.
VOLUME III.
LVcius Cornelius Sylla was descended of a Patrician or Noble Family. Of his
Ancestors, Rufinus, they say, had been Consul, and that his Honor met with a
more signal disgrace: For being found possessed of Plate, to the value of above
ten pounds more than the Law allowed, he was thereupon put out of the Senate.
His Posterity have lain ever since in obscurity, nor had Sylla himself any such
splendid Education.

SYLLA.
^e Sylla lays his Arms and Empire down
quits his power, and takes a private gown
^imple strange! and which we scarce believe;
^^erce Tyrants sheath their swords, and yet they live!


In his younger days he dwelt in hired Lodgings, for which he paid but a very
small rate, insomuch as in aftertimes it was upbraided to him as one who had
been fortunate above his Quality. And as he was boasting and magnifying himself
for his Exploits in Libya, a Person of Worth and Ingenuity made answer; And how
can Thou be an honest man, who since the death of a Father, who left thee
nothing, have purchased so much? The then present Age was not absolutely an Age
of clean and upright manners, but was already declined and fallen in love with
Riches and Luxury: however then, in this Gentleman's Opinion, they who had
deserted the Ancient Hereditary meanness of their Family, were as much to blame
as those who had run out a fair Estate. And after, when he had seized the Power
into his hands and slew many, a Freeman of the City, being suspected to have
concealed one of the Proscribed, and for that reason sentenced to be cast
headlong down the Tarpeian Rock, in a reproachful way, recounted, how that they
had lived long together in familiar converse under the same Roof, himself for
the upper Rooms paying two thousand Sesterces, and Sylla for the lower three
thousand; so as the difference between their Fortunes then was no more but one
thousand Sesterces, which in Attick Coin give two hundred and fifty Drams.
And thus At seven pence half penny a Dram.
much of his Original.

His other shape of Body appears by his Statues, only his gray Eyes, of
themselves extreme fierce and glaring, the complexion of his face rendered yet
more formidable to look on, for it brake out into red fiery Pimples, intermixed
here and there with spots of white. Hence, by report, he was surnamed Sylla, in
allusion to which an Athenian Droll cast out this Scoff in Verse,

Sylla's a Mulberry drudg'd over with Meal. Nor is it improper to make use of
such remarks as these, in the decyphering of a Person, who by Nature was so
addicted to raillery, as in his youthful obscurer years he would converse
freely with Mimicks and Jesters, and accompany them in all their wild Fegaries.
And, when Lord of All, he was often wont to muster together the most impudent
Stage Players and merry Fellows of the Town, to drink with, and play Prizes of
Wit, without seasonable regard had to his Age, or Dignity of his Place, and to
the prejudice of other important Affairs. At hours of refreshment it was not in
Sylla's Nature to admit of any thing that was serious, and though at other
times he was a man of business, and somewhat austere of countenance, yet would
he alter so, all of a sudden, at his first entrance upon Wine and good
Fellowship, as to Minstrels and Danceing-women he became tractable, and to all
sorts of humors pliant and condescending. The cause of this loose distemper in
him, could be no other than Nature her self, ever prone to love and violently
breaking forth into all manner of voluptuousness, from which in his old Age he
could not refrain. He constantly from his youth affected Macrobius, the Player.
In his first Amors it happened, that he made court to a common but rich Lady,
Nicopolis by Name, and what by the air of his Youth, and what by an agreeable
behavior, won so far on her Affections in Quality of a Gallant, as dying she
bequeathed him her whole Substance; he likewise inherited the Estate of a
Motherin-law, who loved him as her own Son. By these means he had pretty well
advanced his Fortunes.

He was chosen Questor to Marius in his first Consulship, and set sail with him
for Africa, to War upon Jugurtha. Here as to other Points he approved himself
to all men, but more especially, by closing in dexterously with an accidental
occasion, made a Friend of Bocchus King of Numidia. For having honorably
entertained the King's Ambassadors, after their escape from Numidian Robbers,
he sent them on their Journey with Presents and a safe Convoy. As for Bocchus,
he had long since hated and dreaded his Son-in-law, Jugurtha, who at that time
had been worsted in the Field, and fled to him for shelter: Wherefore spying
his opportunity, he called Sylla in, as choosing by him, rather than by himself,
to make seizure and delivery of Jugurtha. Sylla, when he had communicated the
business to Marius, and received from him a small Detachment, put himself on
imminent danger; for confiding in a Barbarian, and one who had been unfaithful
to his own Relations, out of desire to apprehend another man's Person, he made
surrender of his own. Bocchus, having both of them now in his power, was
necessitated to betray one or other, and after long debate with himself, at
last resolved on his first Design, and gave up Jugurtha into the hands of Sylla.

For this Marius Triumphed, but the Glory of the Enterprise, which the
conscious Envy of Marius thought due to Sylla, grieved him inwardly. And the
truth on it is, Sylla himself was by Nature vainglorious, and this being the
first time, that from a low and private condition he had risen to Esteem
amongst the Citizens, and tasted of Honor, his Ambition bore him up higher to
such a pitch of Ostentation, as to cause the Figure of this Action to be
engraved on a Signet, which he made use of ever after. The Impress was, Bocchus
delivering and Sylla receiving of Jugurtha. This touched Marius to the quick,
however judging Sylla to be below a Rival, he made use of him as
Lieutenant General in his second Consulship, and in his third, as Tribune. And
by his means were many considerable Services done. In his
Lieutenant-Generalship he took Copillus, Chief of the Tectosages, Prisoner, and
compelled the Marsians, a great and populous Nation, to become Friends and
Confederates of the Romans.

From henceforward Sylla perceiving that Marius bore a jealous eye over him,
and would no longer afford him opportunities of Action, but rather opposed his
growth, he applied himself to Catulus, Marius his Colleague, a brave man, only
somewhat unactive as to War. Under this General, who entrusted him with the
chiefest and greatest Commands, it came to pass, that, together with Glory, he
arrived at Power. He subdued by Arms most part of the Alpine Barbarians. There
happ'ning a scarcity in the Armies, he took that care upon himself, and brought
in such store of Provisions, as not only to refresh the Soldiers of Catulus
with Plenty, but likewise to supply Marius. This, as he writes himself, struck
Marius to the very Heart. So slight and childish was the first beginning and
rise of that Enmity between them, which nourished with Civil Blood and endless
Divisions, grew up to Tyranny, and the Confusion of the whole State. This
argues Eurypides to be a wise Man, and well skilled in the Distempers of the
Body Politic, in that he forewarned all Men to beware of Ambition, as the most
destructive and pernicious Goddess to those who consult her.

Sylla by this time thinking that the Reputation of his Arms abroad was
sufficient to entitle him to part of the Civil Administration, betook himself
immediately from the Camp to the Assembly, and fell a canvassing for a
Pretorship, but lost it. The fault of this disappointment he wholly ascribes to
the People, who knowing his intimacy with King Bocchus, and for that reason
expecting, that if he was made Aedile before his Pretorship, that he would then
show them noble Game, and the Encounters of Lybian Beasts, chose other Pretors,
on purpose to force him on the Aedileship. The vanity of this Pretext was
sufficiently disproved by matter of fact. For the year following, partly by
stroaking the People with fair Words, and partly by Money, he got himself
elected Praetor. Wherefore carrying the Place, and withal hastily telling
Caesar, that against him he should make use of his Own Authority, Caesar
smilingly replied, You do well to call it your Own; for you have bought it. At
the end of his Pretorship he was sent over into Cappadocia, with a specious
pretense, to re-establish Ariobarzanes in his Kingdom, but in reality to give
check to the growing Power of Mithridates, a mighty stirring Prince, who had
already invested himself in as vast a new-acquired Power and Dominion, as was
that of his ancient Inheritance. He carried over with him no great Forces of
his own, but making use of the cheerful supply of the Confederates, flung out
Gordius, with huge Slaughter of the Cappadocians, more especially of the
Armenian Succors, and declared Ariobarzanes King.

During his stay on the Banks of Euphrates Romans and Perthians.
there came unto him Orabazus, a Parthian, in quality of Ambassador from King
Arsaces, whereas yet there had been no Correspondence between both Nations. And
this we may lay to the account of Sylla's Felicity, that he should be the first
Roman to whom the Parthians made address for Alliance and Friendship. At the
time of Reception, having ordered three Chairs of State to be set, one for
Ariobarzanes, one for Orobazus, and a third for himself, he placed himself in
the midst and gave Audience: For which the King of Parthia afterward put
Orobazus to death. Some People commended Sylla for his lofty carriage toward
the Barbarians: Others again accused him of Arrogance and unseasonable
Ambition. It is reported, that a certain Chalcidian, of Orobazus his Retinue,
looking Sylla wistfully in the Face, and observing judicially the Motions of
his Soul and Body, according to the Rules of Art, should say, That it was
impossible for him not to be the greatest Man, or rather a wonder how he could
eventhen abstain from being Head of all.

At his return Censorinus impeached him of Extortion, for drawing a vast sum of
Money from a well affected and associate Kingdom. However Censorinus appeared
not at the Trial, but let fall his Accusation. The quarrel between Sylla and
Marius began to break out afresh, receiving new life from the Ambition of
Bocchus, who to please the People of Rome, and gratify Sylla, set up in the
Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus consecrated Images of Victory, and withal a
Golden Jugurtha, in posture as he was delivered by him to Sylla: but as Marius
attempted to pull them down in a rage, and others were aiding to Sylla, the
City had like to have taken fire by that violent Commotion, had not the
Confederate-War, which lay long a smothering, blazed forth at last, and
respited the Sedition.

In the course of this War, which had many great Revolutions, and which shockt
the Romans most, and endangered the very being of the Commonwealth, Marius was
not able to signalize his Valor in any action, but left behind him a clear
proof, that a warlike Spirit stands in need of a strong and vigorous Body.
Sylla, on the other hand, by his extraordinary Deeds, got the name of a great
Commander amongst the Citizens, of the greatest amongst his Friends, and the
most fortunate amongst his Adversaries. Nor made this the like Impression on
him, as it made on the Spirits of Timotheus the Son of Conon, an Athenian, who,
when his Adversaries had pictured him asleep, and Fortune by his side, casting
her nets over Cities, raged and stormed at those who did it, as if by ascribing
his successes to Fortune, they had robbed him of his just honors, and to the
People at his return from the Wars, said, And in this, ye men of Athens,
Fortune had no part. For this high presumption of his, the Goddess grew so
perversely cross, that from that time he was never able to compass any thing
that was great, but proving altogether unfortunate in his attempts, and falling
into discredit with the People, was at last banished the City.

Sylla on the contrary would not only having frankly acknowledged such Divine
Felicities and Favors, but withal magnifying and extolling what was done to
the Skies, had placed it all to Fortune, whether out of haughty purpose, or a
real sense of the Deity. He remarks, in his Memoirs, that of all his
well-advised Actions, none proved so lucky in the Execution, as what on a
sudden he had boldly enterprized. And in that Character which he gives of
himself, That he was born for Fortune rather than War, he seems to attribute
more to his Fortune than Valor. In short, he makes himself entirely the
creature of Fortune, accounting even his unanimous agreement with Metellus, a
man of equal Authority with himself, and his Father-inlaw, as a blessing from
Heaven. For expecting to have met in him a turbulent, he found a quiet
Colleague. Moreover, in those Memoirs which he has dedicated to Lucullus, he
admonishes him to esteem nothing more solid, than what the Gods should advise
him in a Vision by Night. And when he was sent forth with an Army to the
Confederate-War, he relates, how that the Earth about Laverna opened wide, and
from thence issued much fire, shooting forth a bright flame up to the Heavens.
The Southsayers upon this foretold, that a valiant Person of rare and singular
aspect, should take the Government in hand, and quiet the present troubles of
the City. Sylla affirmed, he was the man, for he had that about him which was
extraordinary, a golden head of hair; nor was he ashamed openly to attest his
Valor, after so great and gallant performances. And thus much of his opinion
of the Gods.

As to the rest of his conditions, he was an irregular sort of man,
inconsistent with himself: much given to Rapine, to Prodigality much more: in
promoting or disgracing whom he pleased, alike unaccountable: cringing to those
he stood in need of, and domineering over others who stood in need of him; so
that it was hard to tell, whether his Nature had more in it of disdain or
flattery. As to his unequal distribution of punishments, when upon slight
grounds he would put to the torture, and again bear gently with the greatest
Crimes, and receive into grace the most heinous Transgressors upon easy terms,
but small and inconsiderable offenses chastise with Death, and Confiscation of
Goods; one might from hence judge, that in himself he was really of a bitter
revengeful Nature, which however he could qualify, upon reason of Interest. In
this very Confederate-War, when the Soldiers with Stones and Clubs, had killed
a chief Commander, his own Legate, Albinus by name, he passed by such horrid
indignity without taking Cognizance, giving it out moreover in a boast, that
hereafter he should have the Soldiers more intent upon the War, to repair their
breach of Discipline, by some notable piece of service; nor took he notice of
the clamours of those that cried for Justice, but casting in mind, how to crush
Marius, now that he saw the Confederate-War to be at an end, he made much of
the Army, in hopes to get himself declared General of the Forces against
Mithridates.

At his return to Rome he was chosen Consul with Quintus Pompeius, in the
fiftieth year of his Age* and then he took to Wife, the Illustrious Lady
Cecilia, Daughter to Metellus, the Chief Priest. The common People made Sonnets
on the Marriage, and many of the Nobility were disgusted at it, esteeming him,
as Livy writes, unworthy of the Lady, whom before they thought worthy of a
Consulship. This was not his only Wife, for first in his younger days he was
joined to Ilia, by whom he had a Daughter; after her to Aelia, and then to
Caelia, whom he dismissed as Barren, but with respect and a good report, adding
moreover Presents. The Match between him and Metella falling out a few days
after, gave suspicion that he had wrongfully accused Caelia: he was evermore
indulgent to Metella, insomuch as when he refused to recall the banished Marians,
the People made their humble application to Metella. And the Athenians, it is
thought, had harder measure, at the Sacking of the Town, because in a jeering
way, they had affronted Metella from off the Walls. But of this hereafter.

At present esteeming the Consulship but small in Comparison of things to come,
he was impatiently carried on in thought to the Mithridatick War. Here he was
withstood by Marius, who out of mad affectation of Glory, and thirst of Empire,
those never dying Passions, though he were broken in Body, and insufficient for
the last services, by reason of his Age, yet still coveted after Foreign and
Transmarine Wars; and whilst Sylla was departed for the Camp, to order the rest
of his Affairs there, sat brooding at home, and at last hatched that execrable
Sedition, which wrought Rome more mischief, than all her Enemies together could
have done, as was foretold by the Gods. For a flame broke forth of its own
accord, from under the staves of their Ensigns, and was hard to be extinguished.
Three Ravens brought forth their young and eat them, carrying the relics into
the Nest again. Mice having gnawed the Consecrated Gold of the Temple, the
Aediles took one Female in a trap, but she bringing forth five young ones in
the very trap, devoured three of them. But what was greatest of all, in a calm
and clear sky there was heard the sound of a Trumpet, but with such a strong
and dismal blast, as struck terror and amazement into the hearts of the People.
The Hetruscane Sages affirmed, that this Prodigy betok'ned the mutation of the
Age, and revolution of the whole Universe. For according to them there be in
all eight Ages, differing one from another in Lives and Conversation, and to
each of these God has allotted a certain measure of times, determined by the
Circuit of the great year; when one Age is run out, at the approach of another,
there appears some wonderful sign from Earth or Heaven, as is plain to those
who have made it their business to study such things, that there has succeeded
in the World a new race of Men, disagreeing in Customs and Institutes of Life,
and more or less regarded by the Gods, than the preceding. Amongst other
mighty changes that happen, as they say, at the turn of Ages, even the Art of
Divination grows into esteem sometimes, and predicts certainties from clear and
evident tokens, sent from God: and then again, in another Generation waxes as
low to a decline, as frivolous for the most part, taking in future events
through weak and darksome Organs. This was the Mythology of the Tuscan Sages,
who were thought to be more knowing than other People. Whilst the Senate sat
in Consultation with the South-sayers, concerning these Prodigies, in the
Temple of Bellona, Goddess of War, a Sparrow came flying in before them all,
with a Grasshopper in the mouth; and part she let fall, and part she bore away.
The Diviners doubted a Commotion and Dissension to arise between the Country
and City. For with them the clamorous Grasshopper signifies the Country, and
Sparrow, the City.

Now Marius joined to him Sulpitius, a Fellow second to none for the most
exquisite Villainies, so as we need not enquire wherein he excelled others, but
wherein he excelled himself in Wickedness. He was cruel, bold, rapacious,
openly dishonest, and throughout a Rogue, making sale by outcry of the Roman
Freedom to Libertines and Strangers, and telling out the price on the public
Money-tables. He maintained three thousand Swordmen, and had always about him
a company of young Gentlemen ready on all occasions, whom he styled his
Antisenatarian-band; having caused a Law to be enacted, that no Senator should
contract a debt of above three thousand Drams, he himself after Death, was
found indebted three Millions. This was the man whom Marius let in upon the
Commonwealth, and who ordering all things by Force and the Sword, made several
Ordinances of dangerous consequence, and amongst the rest, that same, which
gave to Marius the Conduct of the Mithridatick War. Upon this the Consuls
proclaim a Public Cessation of business, but as they were holding a Senate in
the Temple of Castor and Pollux, he let loose the Rabble upon them, and amongst
many others slew Pompey, the Consuls young Son, in the Forum, Pompey himself
hardly escaping in the Crowd. But Sylla being closely pursued into the House of
Marius, was forced to come forth and dissolve the Cessation; for this cause
Sulpitius having deposed Pompey, continued Sylla in his Consulship, only the
Mithridatick Expedition, that he conferred on Marius.

There were immediately dispatched to Nola, Tribunes, to receive the Army, and
bring it to Marius; but seeing that Sylla was got before to the Camp, and the
Soldiers upon hearing of the News had stoned the Tribunes, Marius in requital,
put the Friends of Sylla in the City to the Sword, and rifled their Goods. The
People were all up in a hurry, shifting and running to and fro, some from the
Camp to the City, others from the City to the Camp. The Senate, then no more
its own, but wholly Governed by the Dictates of Marius and Sulpitius, alarmed
at the report of Sylla's advancing his Troops toward the City, sent forth two
of the Pretors, Brutus and Servilius, to forbid his nearer approach: The
Soldiers would have slain these Pretors in a fury, for their rough Language to
Sylla; however, breaking their Rods asunder, and tearing off their Purple
Robes, after much contumelious usage, they sent them back, to the sad and
sudden dejection of those that beheld their Magistrates despoiled of Pretorian
Ensigns, and withal declaring, that things were now manifestly come to a
Rupture and past cure: Marius put himself in a readiness, and Sylla with his
Colleague moved from Nola, at the head of six complete Legions, all whom he
found willing to march up directly against the City; but he himself as yet was
doubtful in thought, and apprehensive of the danger. As he was sacrificing,
Posthumous the South-sayer having inspected the Entrails, stretching forth both
hands to Sylla, required to be bound and kept in Custody till the Battle was
over, as willing if they had not speedy Success, to suffer the utmost
Punishment. It Is said, that there appeared to Sylla in a Dream a certain
Goddess, whom the Romans learnt to worship from the Cappadoces, whether she was
the Moon, or Pallas, or Bellona: This same Goddess, to his thinking, stood by
him, and put into his Hand Thunder and Lightning, then naming his Enemies one
by one, bad him discharge on them, who all of them dropped at the discharge, and
disappeared. Encouraged by this Vision, and relating the same to this Colleague,
next day he led on toward Rome: About Picinae being met by an Embassy,
beseeching him not to fall on of a sudden, in the heat of a March, (for the
Senate had decreed to do him all the right imaginable) he consented to lodge on
the place, and sent his Officers to measure out the Ground, (as is usual) for a
Camp; so as the Ambassadors believing it, returned. They were no sooner gone,
but he sent a Party before, under the Command of Lucius Basillus and C.
Mommius, to secure the City-Gate and Wall on the side of the Aesculine-hill;
then at the Heels of these he himself followed with all speed. Basillus fell
with success into the City, but the unarmed Multitude pelting him with Stones
and Tiles from off the Houses, stopped his further Progress, and beat him back to
the Wall. Sylla by this time was come up* and seeing what was done, called
aloud on his Men to set fire to the Houses, and taking a flaming Torch, he
himself led the way, and commanded the Archers to make use of their Fire-darts,
letting fly at the tops of Houses: This he did without the least consideration*
all enraged, and yielding the Conduct of that days work to Passion, as if all
he saw were Enemies, without respect or pity either to Friends, Relations, or
Acquaintance, he went on by Fire, which knows no distinction betwixt Friend or
foe.

In this dispute Marius being driven into the Temple of Mother Earth, would
from thence have drawn in the Bondmen by Proclamation of Freedom, but the Enemy
coming on, he was overpowered and fled the City.

Sylla having called a Senate, had Sentence of Death passed on Marius, and some
few others, amongst whom was Sulpitius Tribune of the People. Sulpitius was
executed, being betrayed by his Servant whom Sylla first made free, and then
threw him headlong down the Tarpeian Rock. As for Marius, he set a Price on
his Life, by Proclamation; but neither gratefully nor politickly, if we
consider into whose House not long before he put himself at Mercy, and was
safely dismissed. Albeit had Marius not let go Sylla, but suffered him to be
slain by the Hands of Sulpitius, he might have been Lord of all; but he spared
his Life, and a few days after, upon like occasion, received not like measure.

By these Proceedings Sylla gave secret distaste to the Senate; but the
displeasure and free indignation of the Commonalty showed it self plainly by
their Actions. For they ignominiously rejected Nonius his Nephew, and Servius,
who put in for Offices of State by his Interest, and chose others for
Magistrates, by honoring whom, they thought to have grieved him most. He made
semblance of extreme satisfaction hereat, as if the People by his means had
again enjoyed the Liberty of doing what seemed best to them. And to pacify the
public Odium, he created Lucius Cinna Consul, one of the adverse Party, having
first bound him under Oaths and Imprecations, to be true to his Interest: For
Cinna ascending the Capitol with a Stone in his Hand, swore solemnly and with a
direful Curse, that he himself, if he kept not the Accord, might be cast out of
the City, as that Stone out of his Hand; he thereupon cast the Stone to the
Ground, in the presence of many People.

Cinna had no sooner entered on his charge, but fell to disturb the
Establishment, and having prepared an information against Sylla, suborned
Virginius, one of the Tribunes of the People, to be his accuser; but Sylla
leaving him and the Court of Judicature to themselves, set forth against
Mithridates.

About the time that Sylla was making ready, to put off with his Forces from
Italy, besides many other Divine Omens which befell Mithridates at Pergamos,
there goes a Story, that the Statue of Victory, with a Crown in her hand, which
the Pergamenians by Engines from above let down on him, when she had almost
reached his head, fell asunder, and the Crown tumbling down into the midst of
the Theater, broke to pieces against the ground, so as this startled the
Vulgar, and hugely disquieted the Mind of Mithridates, although his Affairs
hitherto had succeeded beyond expectation; for at present having wrested from
the Romans Asia, from the Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes.
Kings Bithynia and Cappadocia, he made Pergamus his Royal Seat, bestowing on
his Friends Riches, Principalities, and Kingdoms. Of his Sons, the one (
Arcathias) residing in Pontus and Bosphorus, held his Ancient Realm as far as
the Deserts, above the Lake Maeotis, without molestation: Ariarathes (the
other) was about reducing Thrace and Macedon, with a great Army, to Obedience.
His other Commanders with Forces under them, invaded other Quarters; especially
Archilaus, who by his Ships gave in a manner absolute Law at Sea, had subjected
the Isles Cyclades, together with other situated within Malea, and had taken
Aeubaea it self. From Athens, his Seat of War, he made his Excursions as far as
Thessaly, and drew after him most of the States of Greece, without the least
impeachment, save only at Chaeronea. For here Brutius Sura, Deputy of Sentius,
Governor of Macedon, a man excelling in Valor and Prudence, met with
Archelaus, and though, like a Torrent, he came pouring along Baeotia, made
stout resistance, and giving him thrice Battle, repulsed and forced him off
again to Sea; however being Commanded by Lucius Lucullus to give place to his
Successor Sylla, and resign the War to whom it was decreed, he presently left
Baeotia, and returned back to Sintius, although his Success had out-gone all
hopes, and Greece was well disposed to a Revolt, upon account of his gallant
behavior. These be the glorious Actions of Brutius.

Sylla at his arrival received by their Ambassadors the Complements of all the
Cities of Greece, except Athens, which being forced by the Tyrant Aristion
within to hold for the King, he came against it with all his might, and
investing the Haven Pyreus, laid formal Siege to it, erecting all manner of
Batteries, and trying all manner of Assaults; whereas had he forborne never so
little, he might without hazard have taken the Upper City by Famine, being
already reduced to extremity, through want of Necessaries; but hasting to
Rome, and fearing some Innovation there, by many Adventures, many Fights, and
vast Expense, he pusht on the War; for besides other Equipage, the very Work
about the Engines of Battery was supplied with no less than ten thousand Yoke
of Mules, employed daily in that Service; and when Timber grew scarce (for many
of the Works failed, some quashed to pieces by their own weight, others taking
fire by the continual play of the Enemy) he made bold with the sacred Groves,
and cut down the stately Walks of the Academy, which stands in the Suburbs, and
the Lyceum; and being there wanted a vast Sum of Money to carry on the War, he
broke up the unvoidable Treasures of Greece, that of Epidaurus, and that of
Olympia, sending for the fairest and richest Offertories; he wrote likewise to
the Amphyctiones at Delphos. That it were better to remit the Wealth of the God
to him, for that he would keep it more securely, or in case he made use of it,
restore as much. And of his Friends he sent Caphis the Phocean on this Message,
commanding him to receive each Particular by weight. Caphis came to Delphos,
but was loath to touch holy things, and with many Tears in the presence of the
Amphyctiones, bewailed the Necessity: But some of them making as if they heard
the sound of a Harp from the innermost Shrine, he, whether himself believed it,
or else was willing to strike a Religious awe into Sylla, sent back an Express.
To which Sylla replied in a scoffing way, That it was matter of wonder to him,
that Caphis understood Music to be a sign of Joy, not Anger; and therefore
wished him to go on boldly, and receive it from the hands of a Gracious and
bountiful God.

The rest of the things that were delivered out, escaped the memory of most
Grecians, save the Silver Tun, that only Relick of Regal Donation, which for
its weight and bulk the Carriages not being able to receive, when the
Amphyctiones were forced to cut in pieces, they presently called to mind, now
Titus Quinctius Flaminius, and Manius Acilius.
Acelius, now Paulus Aemilius. One of whom, when he had thrown Antiochus out of
Greece, the others when they had brought under Philip and Perses.
Macedonian Kings, not only abstained from the Grecian Temples, but added to
them Gifts and Honor, and much Veneration. Those indeed according to Law being
only elected Chief Leaders of Men well-disciplined, and taught to yield ready
obedience to Command, themselves Great in Soul and Mean in Expenses, lived
within the Bounds of the ordinary established Charges, accounting it a greater
disgrace to stoop basely to their own Soldiers, than to stand in awe of an
Enemy; whereas the Commanders of these times, attaining to Superiority by
force, not worth; and having need of Arms one against another, rather than an
Enemy, were constrained to temporize in Authority, and hiring the Soldiers
labor at the price of Luxury, have rendered their whole Country at unawares
Mercenary, and themselves Slaves to the vilest of Wretches, to the intent they
might Lord it over their Betters. These Practices cast out Marius, and again
brought him in against Sylla, The same caused Cinna to be the Assassin of
Octavius, and Fimbria of Flaccus. To which beginnings Sylla contributed not the
least* For he to corrupt and call over those who were under the Command of
others, would be munificent and profuse toward those who were under his own,
so as by drawing some of the adverse Party to a revolt, and his own men to a
dissolute course, he came to be in want of a large Treasury, especially for
that Siege.

Sylla had a vehement and an implacable desire to Conquer Athens, whether out
of emulation, fighting as it were, against the shadow of that once Famous City,
or out of anger, stomaching those Flouts and Scurrillous jests, wherewith the
Tyrant Aristion, fooling and skipping about daily, had provoked him and Metella
from off the Walls.

The Tyrant Aristion had his very Being compounded of Wantonness and Cruelty,
receiving into himself as common Sewer the worst of Mithridates his ill humors
and vicious qualities, who like some satal disease, after its deliverance from
innumerable Wars, many Tyrannies and Seditions, brought the City to the last
extremity. At the time when a About six bushel.
Medimnus of Wheat was to be sold in the City for one Thousand Drams, and
men were forced to live on Feverfew, growing round the Citadel, and eat shoes
and Oyl-bags sodden, he daily carrousing and feasting it in the open face of
Noon, then dancing in Armor, and sporting at the Enemy, suffered the holy Lamp
of the Goddess to expire for want of Oil, and to the Chief-Priestess, who
demanded of him an About a Pint.
Hemina of Wheat, he sent the like quantity of Pepper. The Senators and
Priests, who came in humble guise, to beg of him to take Compassion of the
City, and treat a Peace with Sylla, he drove at and dispersed with a flight of
Arrows. At last with much ado, he sent forth two or three of his revelling
Companions to parley, whom Sylla, perceiving that they made no overtures
toward an accommodation, but went on haranguing in praise of Theseus,
Eumolpus, and their Median Trophies, replied to them thus, Happy men! ye may
put up your Speeches and be gone, for I was sent by the Romans to Athens, not
to learn, but to reduce Rebels to obedience.

In the mean time News came to Sylla, that some old men discoursing in the
Ceramicum, were overheard to blame the Tyrant, for not securing the Passages
and Avenues on the side of the Gate Heptachalcos, where only the Enemy might
easily get over. Sylla neglected not the report, but going in the Night, and
discovering the place to be assaultable, set straight to work: Sylla himself
makes mention in his Memoirs, that Marcus Teius, the first man who scaled the
Wall, meeting with an Adversary, and striking him on the headpiece a home
stroke, broke his Sword, however shrunk not from his ground, but withstood and
held him fast. The City was taken on that part, as it is recorded by the most
ancient of the Athenians.

When they had thrown down the Wall, and made all level betwixt the Pyrean, and
Sacred-Gate, about the dead of night, Sylla entered the breach in dreadful
manner with many Trumpets and Cornets, with the rowsing shout and cry of an
Army, falling to the spoil and slaughter, and scouring through the streets with
Swords drawn, so as there was no numbering of the slain; only from the space of
ground overflowed with Blood, we may even now take a survey of their Multitude,
for to pass by the execution done on other Quarters of the City, the bloodshed
about the Market place, took up the whole Ceramicum, within the Double gate,
and according to most Writers, passing through both doors, overwhelmed the
Suburbs. Nor did the People which fell thus in such vast heaps, excel the
number of those, who out of pity and love of their Country, then at point of
destruction, slew themselves; the best of them despairing and dreading to
survive; as not expecting either Humanity or Moderation in Sylla. At length,
partly by the instance of Midias and Calliphon, two exiled men, beseeching and
casting themselves at his feet, partly by the intercession of those Senators
who followed the Camp, having had his fill of Revenge, and making some
honorable mention of the Ancient Athenians, I forgive (said he) the Many for
the sake of a Few, the Living for the Dead. He took Athens, according to his
own Memoirs, on the Calends of March, which fall out exactly on the first of
Authesterion, on which day the Athenians keep a Solemn Commemoration of the
many Ruins and Devastations, occasioned by excessive rains, particularly of the
Deluge which happened about that time.

At the taking of the Town, the Tyrant fled into the Citadel, and was there
besieged by Curio, who had that charge under Command. He held out a
considerable time, but for want of Water yielding up himself, clearly evidenced
the Divine Providence. For on the same day and minute that Curio conducted him
down, the Clouds gathering in a calm Heaven, there showred down a great
quantity of rain, and filled the Citadel with Water.

Not long after Sylla won the Haven Pyreus, and burnt most of it, amongst the
rest Philo's Arsenal, a stupendous Work.

In the mean time Taxilles, Mithridates his General, coming down from Thrace
and Macedon, with an Army of one hundred thousand Foot, ten thousand Horse, and
ninety Chariots, fang'd at Axles with Iron Sythes, would have joined Archelaus,
who lay hovering with a Navy on the Coast of Munichia, with intention, neither
to quit the Sea, or engage the Romans in Fight, but to draw out the War in
length, and cut off the Enemies Provision, which Sylla perceiving much better
than himself, passed with his Forces into Baeotia, from out a region barren and
unable to maintain a Camp in time of Peace. He was thought by some to have
taken false measures, when leaving Attica, a rugged Country, and uneasy for
the Cavalry to move in, he put himself into the plain and open Fields of
Baeotia, knowing the Barbarians strength to consist most in Horse and Chariots.
But as was said before, to avoid Famine and Scarcity, he was forced to run the
risque of a Battle: Moreover he was troubled for Hortensius, a man expert in
War, and of a rough Soldiery Constitution, whom on his way to Sylla with Forces
from Thessaly, the Barbarians awaited in the Thermopule.
Streights: For these reasons Sylla drew off into Baeotia* Caphis Plutarch's
Countryman a- Chaeronean.
our Countryman led Hortensius another way unknown to the Barbarians, by
Parnassus just under Tithora, being then no such great City as it is now, but a
Garrison built a round on a steep Precipice, which the Phocenses, to escape the
Invasion of Xerxes, put themselves and goods into, and were saved. Hortensius
encamping here, kept off the Enemy by day, and at night descending by difficult
passages into Patronis, joined the Forces of Sylla, who came to meet him. Thus
united, they posted themselves on a fertile Hill, on the Plains of Elateia, set
round with Trees, and watered at the foot: It Is called Philobeotus, the
Situation and Richness of which Soil, Sylla praises wonderfully.

As they lay thus encamped, they seemed to the Enemy a contemptible number, for
they were not above fifteen hundred Horse, and less than fifteen thousand Foot;
wherefore, the rest of the Commanders over-perswading Archelaus, and drawing up
the Army, covered the Field with Horses, Chariots, Bucklers, Targets: The
clamor and hideous roar of so many Nations, standing thick together in
Battalia, tore the Sky; nor was the Pomp and Gallantry of their costly array,
altogether idle and unserviceable for terror: For the brightness of their
Armor, embellished with Gold and Silver magnificently, and the luster of their
Median and Scythian Coats, intermixed with Brass and shining Steel, cast forth a
flaming and a dreadful sight, by the waving and moving to and fro of the Army,
insomuch that the Romans shrunk them into their Trenches; and Sylla being
unable by any means to remove the fear, and unwilling to force them to fight
against their wills, was fain to sit down in quiet, ill-brooking though, to
become the Subject of Barbarian Insolence and Laughter; this however above all
advantaged him, for the Enemy from contemning of him, fell into disorder
amongst themselves, and being less subject to Command, by reason of many
Commanders, some few of them remained within the Line, but others, the Major
part, lured out with hopes of prey and rapine, flew about the Countries many
days Journey from the Camp, and by report demolished the City of Panope, rifled
Lebadea, and robbed the Oracle, without any Discipline.

Sylla all* this while chasing and fretting to see the Cities all around
destroyed, suffered not the Soldiery to indulge, but going forth, compelled
them to divert Cephisus from its ancient Channel, by casting up ditches and
giving respite to none, showed himself rigorous in punishing the remiss, that
growing weary of labor, they might be drawn by hardship to embrace danger;
which fell out accordingly, for on the third day being hard at work, as Sylla
passed by, they begged and clamoured to be led against the Enemy. Sylla replied,
That this demand of War proceeded rather from a backwardness to labor, than
any forwardness to fight; but if they were in good earnest Martially given, he
bad them with their Arms get up thither, pointing at the ancient Tower of the
Parapotamians, whereof at present, the City being laid wast, there remained
only the Mountainous head, steep and craggy on all sides, and severed from
Mount Edulium, the breadth of the River Assus, which running betwixt, and at
the bottom of the same Hill, falling into Cephisus, with an impetuous
Confluence, made that a safe Height to lodge on; wherefore beholding the Brass
Targettiers to make up hastily, Sylla was willing to take prepossession, and
took it by the vigorous Address of the Soldiers. Archelaus put back from hence,
bent his Forces upon Chaeronea. The Chaeroneans, who bore Arms in the Roman
Camp, beseeching Sylla not to abandon the City, he dispatched Geminius the
Tribune with one Legion, and withal sent out the Chaeroneans, endeavoring, but
not able to get in before Geminius; so active* was he, and more swift to
relief, than they who prayed Relief. Juba writes, that Ericius was the man
sent, not Geminius. Thus narrowly escaped Plutarch' s.
our Native City.

From Lebadea and the Cave of Trophonius there were spread abroad favorable
Rumors and Prophecies of Victory to the Romans, which the Inhabitants report
at large: And as Sylla himself affirms in the tenth Book of his Memoirs,
Quintus Titus, an obscure Man of those who traffic into Greece, came to him
after the Battle won at Chaeronea, and declared that Trophinius had foretold
another Fight and Victory on the same place, within a short time. After him a
Soldier, by name Salvenius, brought an account from the God of the issue of
Affairs in Italy. As to the Vision, they both agreed in this, that for Stature,
and Majestic Grace they had seen somewhat in the likeness of Jupiter Olympius.

Sylla when he had passed over the Assus, marched up to Edylium, and encamped
close to Archelaus, who had entrenched himself strongly between the Mountains
Acontium and Edylium, toward those called Assia: The Place of his Intrenchment
is to this day named from him Archelaus. Sylla after one days respite having
left Muraena behind him, with one Legion and two Cohorts, to amuse the
distracted Enemy with continual Alarms, went and sacrificed on the Banks of
Cephisus. The holy Rights ended, he held on toward Chaeronea, to receive the
Forces there, and view Mount Thurion, where the Enemy had posted themselves.
This is a craggy Height, running up gradually to a Point, which we call
Orthopagon; at the foot of it, is the River Morius, and the Temple of Apollo
Thurius: The God had his Surname from Thuro, Mother of Cheron, whom ancient
Fame makes Founder of Chaeronea. Others assert, that the Cow, which Apollo gave
to Cadmus for a Guide, appeared there, and that the Place took its Name from
the Beast; for the Phaenicians call a Cow, Thor.

At Sylla's approach to Chaeronea, the Tribune, who had been commanded out to
guard the City, drew his Men into Arms, and meet him with a Garland of Laurel
in his hand; which Sylla accepting of, and withal caressing and animating the
Soldiers to the Encounter, two Men of Chaeronea, Homoloichus and Anaxidamus,
present themselves before him, and proffer with a small Party to dislodge those
who were posted on Thurium; for that there lay a Path, unknown to the
Barbarians, from Petrochus along by the Musaeum, leading over head upon
Thurium; by this way it was easy to fall on, and either stone them from above,
or force them down into the Plain. Sylla assured of their Faith and Courage by
Geminius, when he had exhorted them to go on with the Enterprise, Embattelled
the Army, and disposing of the Cavalry on both Wings, himself commanded the
Right, and the left he committed to the direction of Muraena; in the Rear of
all, Gallus and Hortensius, his Legates, had planted themselves on the upper
Grounds, with the Cohorts of Reserve, to watch the motion of the Enemy, who
with infinite numbers of Horse, and expedite light-armed Foot, having made the
Wing pliant, and ready to wind about at pleasure gave suspicion that he
intended to overreach and enclose the Romans. In the mean time the
Chaeroneans, who had Ericus for Commander by appointment of Sylla, covertly
surrounding Thurium, and discovering themselves, there arose a great Confusion
and Rout, and mutual Slaughter amongst the Barbarians; for they kept not their
stand, but making down in that hurry, cast themselves on their own Spears, and
violently bore each other headlong, the Enemy from above pressing on, and
wounding them on the open side, insomuch as there fell three thousand about
Thurium. Some of them who escaped being met by Muraena as he stood in Array,
were cut off and destroyed. Others breaking through to their Friends, and
falling disorderly into the Ranks, filled most part of the Army with fear and
Tumult, and put the Chief Officers to a stand, which was no small disadvantage.
For immediately upon the Discomposure, Sylla coming full speed to the Charge,
disappointed the Service of their Armed Chariots, which require a good space of
Ground to gather strength and impetuosity in the Career, whereas a short drift
proves weak and ineffectual, like that of Engines without a full swing. Thus it
fared with the Barbarians at present, whose first Chariots, that set forth
spurtingly, and made but a faint impression when the Romans had repulsed, with
a clattering din and slaughter they called for more, as is usual in the public
Cirque. By this time the Gross of both Armies met. The Barbarians, on one side,
charged their long Pikes, and with Shields locked close together like a Roof
over head, strove what in them lay to preserve their Battalion entire: The
Romans, on the other side, threw by their Piles, and with drawn Swords put by
their Pushes, the sooner to mingle with them, in the rage they were then in:
For in the Front of the Enemy they beheld fifteen thousand Slaves, whom the
Royal The Commanders of King Mithridates.
Commanders had set free by Proclamation, and ranged amongst the Men of Arms.
Whereupon a Roman Centurion is reported to say, That he never knew Servants
allowed to play the Masters, unless on the Holy Days of Saturn. These Men, by
reason of their deep and thick Array, as well as for their daring Courage,
yielded but slowly to the weighty Legions, till at last by slinging Engines and
Darts, for which the Roman spared not from behind, they were forced to give way
and scatter. And as Archelaus was extending the the Right Wing to encompass the
Enemy, Hortensius with his Cohorts came down amain, with intention to charge
him in the Flank; but Achelaus wheeling about suddenly, with two thousand
Horse, Hortensius, overlaid with numbers, withdrew himself to the upper
Grounds, not far from the main Body, and was surrounded by the Enemy: When
Sylla heard this, he came speeding from the right to his succor, before the
Engagement; but Archelaus guessing the matter by the dust of his Troops, turned
to the right Wing, from whence Sylla came, in hopes to have surprised it
without a Commander: At the same instant likewise Taxilles with his
Brass-Targetiers assailed Muraena, so as a Cry coming from both places, and the
Hills repeating it around, Sylla stood in suspense which way to move; it
seeming best to reassume his own Station, he sent in aid to Muraena four
Cohorts, and commanding the fifth to follow him, returned on the spur to the
right Wing, which then of it self held Archelaus to equal play; at his
appearance they gave one lusty push for all, and overcoming, followed them
disorderly flying to the River and Mount Acontium. Neither was Sylla unmindful
of the danger Muraena was in; for hasting thither, and finding them Victorious,
he helped to pursue. Many Barbarians were slain on the spot, many more cut in
pieces, as they were making to the Camp: Of such infinite Multitudes, ten
thousand only got safe into Chalcis. Sylla writes, that there were but fourteen
of his Soldiers wanting, and that two even of those returned toward evening;
wherefore he inscribed on Trophies, Mars, Victory, and Venus, as having won the
Day no less by Good-fortune, than by true management and force of Arms. That
Trophie of the Field-Battel stands on the Place where Archelaus first gave
back, as far as the Streums of Molus: The other is erected high, on the top of
Thurium, where the Barbarians were environed signifying in Greek Letters, That
Homoloichus and Anaxidamus were the Chief Leaders. The Hymns of Victory for
this Action were celebrated at Thebes, where Sylla built a Stage for Music,
near Oedipus's Well. As for the Judges of the Performance, they were Grecians
chosen out of other Cities, because he bore an implacable hatred to the
Thebans, and having cut off from them half their Territories, he consecrated
the same to Apollo and Jupiter, commanding them, out of the Revenue, to make
satisfaction to the Gods, for the Riches himself had taken from them.

After this, hearing that Flaccus a Man of the contrary Faction, being chosen
Consul, had crossed the Ionian Sea with an Army, to act in show against
Mithridates, but in reality against himself, he took the way of Thessalia,
designing to meet him; but in his March, about Meleteia, received Advises from
all Parts, That the Countries on his back were over spread and harrased by no
less a Camp-Royal than was the former: For Dorilaus arriving at Chalcis, with a
mighty Fleet (on board of which he brought over with him Eighty Thousand of the
best-appointed and best disciplined Soldiers of Mithridates his Army) had made
a sudden Incursion into Baeotia, and secured that Coast, in hopes to bring
Sylla to a Battle, making no account of the disswasions of Archelaus, but
giving it out, as to the last Fight, that without Treachery so many Thousand
Men could never have perished. However, Sylla facing about expeditiously, made
it appear to Dorilaus, that Archelaus was a wise Man, and had good skill in the
Roman Valor; insomuch as Dorilaus himself, after some small Skirmishes with
Sylla at Tilphossion, was the first of those who thought it not advisable to
put things to the decision of the Sword, but rather by expense of Time and
Treasure to wear out the War; nevertheless the Field of Orchomenos, where they
then lay encamped, gave no small encouragement to Archelaus, as being most
advantageous to those who excel in Cavalry to engage in. For of the Baeotian
Campagnes, that is the fairest and largest, which confining on the Principal
Seat of the Orchomenians, alone opens a clear Prospect, void of Cover as far as
the Fens, where the River Melas is swallowed up. Of all the Grecians Rivers,
this only, which arises from under the City Orchomenus, draws with it a deep
and navigable Water from the very Head, increasing about the Summer Solstice
like Nile, and bringing forth all things growing there; yet small, and without
Fruit. It runs not far, before the main Stream loses it self among the blind
and woody Marsh Grounds, a small Branch whereof mingleth with Cephisus, about
that place especially where the Lake is thought to produce the best Flute-reeds.

Now that both Armies were posted near each other, Archelaus lay still, but
Sylla fell to casting up Ditches athwart from either side, that, if possible,
by cutting the Enemies from the firm and open Champagne, he might force them
into the Fens. They on the other hand, not enduring this, but at the Word of
Command, issuing out furiously in full Bodies, not only the Men at work were
dispersed, but most part of those who stood in Arms to justify the Work, cast
themselves disorderly into flight. Upon this Sylla leaps from his Horse, and
snatching hold of an Ensign, rusht through the midst of the Rout upon the
Enemy, crying out aloud, To me, O Romans, it seems glorious to fall here: And
as for you, when demanded where was it, you betrayed your General, remember you
say, at Orchomenus. His men Rallying again at these words, and two Cohorts
coming to his succor from the Right-Wing, he gave a fierce Onset and turned
the Day. Then retiring some few Paces back, and refreshing his Men, he came on
again to block up the Enemies Camp but they again sallied out in better Order
than before. Here Diogenes, Son in-law to Archelaus, having fought on the
Right-Wing with much Gallantry, made an Honorable end. And the Archers, being
pressed on hard by the Romans, and wanting space for a retreat, took their
Arrows by handfuls, and striking with those as with Swords, beat them back. In
the end they were all shut up into the entrenchment, and had a sorrowful Night
of it, by reason of their slain and wounded. The next day again Sylla leading
forth his men up to their Quarters, went on finishing the Line, and as they
were drawing out to give him Battle, fell on, and putting a large Party of them
to the rout, in the fright they were in, none daring to abide, he took the Camp
by force, whence the Marshes were filled with Blood, and the Lake with dead
Bodies, insomuch as to this day there be found, of the Barbarian make, many
Bows, Helmets, pieces of Breast-plates, and Swords, buried deep in Mud, some
two hundred years since the Fight. Thus much of the Action, of Chaeronea and
Orchomenus.

Cinna and Narbo at Rome, using injustice and violence toward Persons of the
greatest Eminency, many of them to avoid that Tyranny, repaired to Sylla's
Camp, as to a safe Harbor, where in a short space he had about him the
Majestic face of a Senate. Metella likewise having with difficulty conveyed
her self and Children away by stealth, brought him word that his City and
Country houses were set on fire by the Adversary, and prayed his help at home.
Whilst he was in doubt what to do, being impatient to hear his Country abused,
and not knowing how to leave so great a work, as the Mithridatick-War
unfinished, comes unto him Archelaus, a Merchant of Delos, with some hopes of
an accommodation, and private instructions from Archelaus the King's General.
Sylla liked the business so well as to desire a speedy conference with
Archelaus in Person, and had a meeting at Sea on that side of Delos, where the
Temple of Apollo stands. When Archelaus began to propose and demand of Sylla,
that quitting his Pretensions to Asia and Pontus, he should set sail for the
War in Rome, receiving Money and Shipping, and such Forces as he should think
fitting, from the King: Sylla interposing, bad him take no further care for
Mithridates, but assume the Crown to himself, and become a Confederate of Rome,
delivering up the Navy. Here Archelaus professing his abhorrence of Treason,
Sylla proceeded: Thou, O Archelaus, Cappadocian as thou art, and Slave (on, if
it so please thee, Friend) to a Barbarian King, do thou upon such vast
Considerations scruple any thing of Baseness? and to me Roman General and Sylla
dare talk of Treason? as if thou were not the self same Archelaus who ran
away at Chaeronea, with a few in Company, the Relics of One hundred and
twenty thousand Men; who lay squat for two days in the Fens of Orchomenus, and
left Baeotia unpassable for heaps of dead Carcases. Archelaus, changed at this,
in humble manner fell at his Feet, beseeching him to lay aside the thoughts of
War, and make Peace with Mithridates. Sylla consenting to this Request,
Articles of Agreement were concluded on; That Mithridates should quit Asia and
Paphlagonia, restore Bithynia to Nicomedes, Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, and pay
the Romans two Thousand Talents, and give him seventy Ships of War, with all
their Furniture: On the other hand, That Sylla should confirm to him his other
Dominions, and declare him a Roman Confederate. On these terms he returned by
the way of Thessaly and Macedon for the Helespont, having Archelaus with him in
great esteem. For Archelaus being taken desperately ill at Larissa, he staid
the March of the Army, and took care of him, as one of his own Captains, or
Joint Comander in Chief. This gave suspicion of foul play in the Business of
Chaeronea, as well as because Sylla had discharged all the Friends of
Mithridates, taken Prisoners in War, save only Aristion the Tyrant, whom
disaffected to Archelaus, he made away by Poison; but more especially the ten
Thousand Acres of Baeotian Land, given to a Cappadocian, and him styled by
Sylla, Friend and Allie of the Romans. For all which, Sylla apologizeth in his
Memoirs.

The Ambassadors of Mithridates arriving, and withal declaring, That they
accepted of the Conditions, only Paphlagonia they could not part with, and as
for the Ships, they knew of no such Capitulation; Sylla in a rage answered,
What say you; does Mithridates then withold Paphlagonia? and as to the Ships,
denies he that Article? Whom I thought to have seen prostrate at my foot, had I
left him only that right hand of his, which cut off so many Romans. Sure he
will shortly, at our coming over into Asia, speak another Language; in the mean
time, let him at his ease in Pergamus, sit managing a War which he never saw.
The Ambassadors out of fear stood silent by, but Archelaus with humble
supplication asswag'd his wrath, laying gentle hold on his right hand and
weeping; in the conclusion he obtained to be sent Ambassador to Mithridates.
For that he would either Mediate a Peace, to the satisfaction of Sylla or, if
not, slay himself. Sylla having thus dispatched him away, made an Inroad into
Media, and after wide Depopulation returned back again into Macedon, where he
received Archelaus about Philippi, bringing word that all things were well, and
moreover that Mithridates earnestly requested an interview. The chief cause of
this meeting was Fimbria; for he having assassinated Flaccus the Consul, one
holding of the contrary Faction, and worsted the Mithridatick Commanders, was
advancing against Mithridates himself, who fearing this, chose rather to enter
into Alliance with Sylla.

There met at Dardanus of Troas, on one side Mithridates, attended with two
hundred Ships completely equipped, and of Land forces twenty thousand Men of
Arms, two thousand Horse, and a large train of Sythed-Chariots: on the other,
Sylla with only four Cohorts, and two hundred Horse. As Mithridates drew near
and put out his hand, Sylla demanded, Whether he was willing or no to end the
War on what Archelaus had agreed to? but seeing the King made no answer, Why
then (said he) it behooves the distressed to speak first, and as for the
Conquerors it is sufficient to give audience. And when Mithridates, entering
upon his Plea* began slily to shift off the War, partly on the Gods, and partly
to blame the Romans themselves, he took him up, saying, That he had heard
indeed long since from others, and now knew it himself for truth, that
Mithridates was a powerful speaker, who to set off such foul and unjust
practices, wanted not for handsome pretenses. Then charging him with, and
inveighing bitterly against outrages by him committed, he asked again, Whether
he was willing or no, to ratify the Treaty of Archelaus? Mithridates answering
in the affirmative, Sylla ran into and embracing kissed him. Not long after he
introduced Ariobarzanes and Nicomedes, the two Kings, and made them all
Friends. Wherefore Mithridates, when he had furnished Sylla with seventy Ships,
and 500 Archers, set sail for Pontus.

Sylla perceiving the Soldiers to be dissatisfied with the Peace, for the most
pernicious of Kings, and one who had caused one hundred and fifty thousand
Romans to be massacred in one day throughout Asia; they thought it a heinous
thing to behold him sailing out with the Riches and Spoils of Asia, which he
had pillaged, and put under contribution for the space of four years;)
alleged, that he was not able to have made head against Fimbria and
Mithridates, had they both withstood him in Conjunction. Thence he arose and
went in search of Fimbria, who lay with the Army about Thiatira, and pitching
hard by, began to fortify himself with a Trench. The Soldiers of Fimbria came
out in their single Coats, and saluting his men, lent ready assistance to the
work, which change Fimbria beholding, and withal apprehending Sylla as
irreconcilable, laid violent hands on himself in the Camp.

Sylla imposed on Asia in general a Tax of twenty thousand Talents, and
particularly wasted each Family by the licentious behavior, and long residence
of the Soldiery in private Quarters. For he ordained, that every Host should
allow himself four Tetradrachma's each day, and moreover entertain him, and as
many Friends as he should invite, with a Supper; that a Centurion should
receive fifty Drams a day, together with one Suit of Clothes to wear within
doors, and another when he went abroad.

Having put off from Ephesus with the whole Navy, he came the third day to
Anchor in the Pirean Haven. Here he was initiated in the Mysteries of the
Goddess Ceres, and seizing to his use the Library of Apellicon a Teian, in
which were most of Theophrastus and Aristotle's Works, then unknown to most, he
transported the same to Rome. It Is said, That Turannion the Grammarian made his
Collection chiefly from hence, and that Andronicus the Rhodian having through
his means the Command of diverse Copies, put out those Heads of Treatises which
be common now in every Man's hands, under the Title of Tables. The ancient
Peripateticks were of themselves indeed Men of Polite and Universal Learning;
but of all the Writings of Aristotle and Theophrastus, they had no exact
knowledge; because Theophrastus bequeathing his Study to the Heir of Neleus
Sceptius, these happened to fall into rude and illiterate Hands.

During Sylla's stays about Athens, there fell into his Feet a lumpish benuming
Pain, which Strabo calls, the first fetterring on of the Gout. Wherefore taking
a Voyage to Adipsus, he made use of the Hot Waters there, easing his thoughts
of Care likewise, and merrily passing away the time with Drolls. As he was
walking along the Seashore, certain Fishermen brought him a lovely Present of
Fish. Being taken therewith, and understanding that they were Men of Alaeae,
What, said he, be there any of Alaeae surviving? (For having won the Field at
Archomenus, in the heat of a Pursuit he had destroyed three Cities of Baeotia,
Anthedon, Larymna, and Alaeae.) The Men knowing not what to say for fear, Sylla
with a smiling Countenance bad them cheer up and return in peace, as who had
brought with them no small or contemptible Intercessors. The Alaei from hence
took Courage, and embodying, reentred the City.

Sylla having marched through Thessaly, and Mecedon, down to the Seacoast,
prepared with twelve hundred Vessels to cross over from Dyrrachium to
Brundisium. Not far from hence is Appollonia, and near it a spot of Ground
dedicated to the Nymphs, which from among flowery Dales and Meads discovers
here and there springs of Fire continually streaming out. Here, they say, was a
Satyr, such as Statuaries and Painters represent, found sleeping, and brought
before Sylla, where he was asked by several Interpreters who he was, when with
much ado he sent forth a harsh unintelligible Noise, like the Neighing of a
Horse, and crying of a Goat, in mixed Consort: Sylla dismayed at it, turned
aside in detestation.

At the point of Transportation, because Sylla was concerned, least at the
first setting foot upon Italy, the Army should dissolve of it self one by one
among the Cities, they of their own accord first took an Oath to stand firm by
him, and with good will not to injure Italy; then seeing him straightened for a
round sum of Money, they readily offered their assistance, and contributed
each Man according to his Ability. However Sylla would not accept of the
Benevolence, but praising their Goodwill, and withal rowzing up their Courage,
he put over (as himself writes) against fifteen Commanders, with four hundred
and fifty Cohorts under them.

The happy success of Affairs was plainly foretold him by the Divine Power; for
as he was sacrificing at his first landing about Tarentum, the Liver seemed to
have on it the figure of a Crown of Laurel, with two Labels pendant. And little
while before his arrival, in Campania, about the Mountain Hephaeus, two stately
Goats were seen, in a Rencounter by day, performing like Men in a Battle. This
Apparition rising up gradually from the ground, dispersed several through the
Heavens, like to fancied Representations in the Clouds, and so vanished out of
sight. Not long after, in the self-same place, when Martius the younger, and
Norbanus the Consul attacked him with two great Armies, without prescribing the
Order of Battle, or ranging his Men according to their Divisions, by the sway
only of one common Alacrity and Transport of Courage, he overturned the Enemy,
and shut up Norbanus into the City of Capua, with the loss of seven thousand of
his Men. This was the reason, says he, that the Soldiers disbanded not
throughout the Towns, but stuck close together, and despised the Enemy, though
infinitely more in number.

At Silvium (as he himself relates it) there met him a Servant of Pontius, an
Enthusiast, saying, That he brought him the power of the Sword and Victory from
Bellona, the Goddess of War; and if he hasted not, that the Capitol would be
burnt; which fell out on the same day the Man foretold it, namely on the sixth
day of the Month Quintilis, which we now call July.

Moreover, at Fidentia, Marcus Lucullus, one of Sylla's Commanders, reposed
such confidence in the sprightly forwardness of the Soldiers, as to dare to
face fifty Cohorts of the Enemy, with only sixteen of his own; but because many
of them were unarmed, delayed the Onset. As he stood thus in gaze, considering
with himself, a gentle gale of Wind bearing along with it from the neighboring
Meadows, an innumerable company of Flowers, threw them in scatteringly among
the Army; which falling about casually, and resting upon the Shields and
Helmets, showed them to the Enemy as crowned with Chaplets. Upon this being
further animated, they joined Battle, and victoriously slaying eight thousand
Men, took the Camp. This Lucullus was Brother to that Lucullus who in
aftertimes conquered Mithridates and Tygranes.

Sylla seeing himself surrounded with so many Armies, and such mighty Powers,
had recourse to Art, inviting Scipio the other Consul to a Treaty of Peace. The
Motion was willingly embraced, and thereupon followed several Meetings and
Consultations, in all which Sylla interposing still matter of delay and new
Pretenses, in the mean while debauched Scipio's Men by Under-instruments of his
own, who in subtle train and all the Methods of Inveigling, were as well
practiced as the General himself. For entering into the Enemies Quarters, and
intermixing, they wrought off some by present Money, some by Promises, others
by fair Words and Persuasions; so as in the end, when Sylla with twenty Cohorts
drew near, they came forth to salute him, leaving Scipio behind them in his
Tent, where he was found all alone and dismissed. Thus Sylla having used twenty
Cohorts as Stales, to draw in forty more Cohorts of the Enemy, led them all
back into the Camp. On this occasion Carbo was heard to say, That having a Fox
and a Lion in the Breast of Sylla to deal with, he was plagued most with the
Fox.

Some time after, at Signium, Marius the younger, with eighty five Cohorts,
offered Battle to Sylla, who was extremely desirous to have it decided on that
very day; for the night before he had seen a Vision, which to his thoughts
represented Marius the Elder, who had been long since dead, advising his Son
Marius to beware of the following day, as of fatal consequence to him. For this
reason Sylla, longing to come to a Battle, sent to the Camp afar off for
Dolabella. But because the Enemy had beset and locked up the Passes, his
Soldiers were exceedingly tired by Skirmishing and Marching at once. To these
difficulties was added moreover tempestuous rainy Weather, which distressed
them most of all; wherefore the Principal Leaders came to Sylla, and besought
him to defer the day, showing him withal how the Soldiers lay all along on the
Ground, cast down with Toil, and leaning upon the Target. When with much
difficulty he had yielded, and given order for the settling of the Camp, they
had no sooner begun to cast up a Rampart, and draw a Ditch across, but Marius
came riding up furiously at the Head of his Troops, in hopes to have scattered
them in that disorder and confusion. Here the Gods fulfilled Sylla's Dream: For
the Soldiers stirred up with anger, left off to work, and sticking their Piles
on the Bank, with drawn Swords and a courageous Shout, came to handy blows with
the Enemy, who made but small resistance, and were miserably slain in the
Flight. Marius fled to Praeneste, but finding the Gates shut, tied himself
round by a Rope, that was thrown down to him, and was taken up on the Walls.
Some there are (as Fenestella for one) who affirm that Marius knew nothing of
the Fight, but over-watch'd and spent with hard Duty, had reposed himself, when
the Signal was given, beneath some Shade, and was hardly to be awakned at the
Flight of his Men. Sylla (according to his own account) lost only three Men in
this Brush, having killed of the Enemy, twenty thousand, and taken alive eight
thousand.

The like Success had others of his Commanders, as Pompey, Crassus, Metellus,
Servilius, who with little or no loss cut off vast numbers of the Enemy,
insomuch as Carbo, the prime Supporter of the Cause, fled by night from his
Charge of the Army, and sailed over into Libya.

In the last Encounter, the Samnite Telesinus, like to some Champion whose lot
it is to enter last of all into the List, and take up the wearied Conqueror,
came nigh to have foiled and overthrown Sylla before the Gates of Rome. For
Telesinus with his second Lamponius the Lucan, having drawn together huge
Levies of Men, made all have toward Praeneste, to free Marius from the Siege;
but perceiving Sylla at the Head of him, and Pompey in the Tail, both making
violently at him, straightened thus before and behind, he, as a valiant and
expert Soldier, arose by night, and marching directly with his whole Army, had
like to have fallen unexpectedly into Rome it self. He lay that night before
the City, some ten Furlongs off from the Gate Collatina, all jocund and swollen
with further Hopes, as having already bafled so many eminent Commanders by
Stratagem: At break of day being charged by the Noble Youth of the City, among
many others, he overthrew Appius Claudius, a Person renowned for Nobleness of
Blood and Valor. The City, as it is easy to imagine, was all in an Uproar,
the Women shrieking and running about, as if he had been entered forcibly by
Assault, till at last Balbus advanced, with seven hundred Horse on full speed,
and after some small halt made for rubbing and bridling again, fell into
skirmish with the Enemy. In the mean time Sylla appeared, and commanding the
foremost to take refreshment, drew into order. Dolabella and Torquatus were
extreme earnest with him to desist a while, and not with spent Forces to hazard
the whole sum of Affairs, having before them in the Field not Carbo or Marius,
but two warlike Nations, bearing immortal hatred to Rome, the Samnites and
Lucans to grapple with; but he put them by, and commanded the Trumpets to sound
a Charge, about four a Clock in the afternoon. In this Conflict, which was the
sharpest as ever was, the Right-wing, where Crassus stood embattelled, had
clearly the advantage; the Left was overcharged, and in a declining condition,
when Sylla came to its succor, mounted on a white Courser, full of mettle, and
exceeding swift of foot, which two of the Enemy knowing him by, had their
Lances in a readiness to cast; but this Gentleman giving the Horse a touch, he
was, unknown to himself, so far advanced, as that the Points falling beside the
Horse-tail, stuck in the Ground. There goes a Story, That having a golden Image
of Apollo from Delphos, he was always wont in the day of Battle to carry it
about him in his Bosom, and that then he kissed it, with these words: O Apollo
Pythius, the Fortunate Cornelius Sylla, whom in so many Battles thou have
raised to Honor and Greatness, will thou now cast down, bringing him before
the Gate of his Country, to perish shamefully with his Fellow Citizens? After
he had thus addressed himself to the God, some of his Men he entreated, some he
threatened, and others he laid hold on, till at length the left Wing being
wholly shattered, he was forced in Company of the Rout to betake himself to the
Camp, having lost many of his Friends and Acquaintance; many likewise of the
City-spectators were trod to Death. So as Common Fame gave the City for taken,
and had like to have raised the Siege of Praeneste; many who escaped by Flight
posting thither, and advising Lucretius Offella (who was appointed to keep on
the Siege) to rise in all haste, for that Sylla was defeated, and Rome fallen
into the Hands of the Enemy.

About Midnight there came into Sylla's Camp Messengers from Crassus, to fetch
Provision for him and his Soldiers; for having vanquished the Enemy, they
pursued him to the Walls of Antemna, and had sat down there. Sylla hearing
this, and that most of the Enemy were destroyed, came to Antemna by break of
day, where three Thousand of the Besieged having sent forth a Herald, he
promised to receive them to Mercy, on condition they did the Enemy mischief in
their coming over. Trusting to his Word, they fell foul on the rest of their
Companions, and made a great Slaughter one of another; but however Sylla
gathered together in the Cirque, as well those as others of the remaining
party, to the number of seven Thousand, and as he was speaking to the Senate in
the Temple of Bellona, causes them all to be slain, by Men appointed for that
Service. The cry, as must needs be, of so vast a multitude put to the Sword, in
so narrow a space, flying abroad and startling the Senators; he, as he was
speaking, with a secure unconcerned Countenance, bad them listen to what he had
to say, and not busy themselves with what was a doing without doors; for
himself had ordered the Chastisement of a few naughty People. This gave the
most stupid of the Romans to understand, that they had made an exchange only of
Tyrannical Government, not a change. Marius, being in himself austere, altered
not, but confirmed Nature by Authority; whereas Sylla behaving himself
moderately and prudently at first, and giving good hopes of a true Patriot,
firm to the Interests both of the Nobility and Commonalty, being moreover of a
gay pleasant humor from his youth, and of such a melting compassionate
disposition, as to weep easily, has perhaps deservedly cast a Blemish upon the
higher Offices of State, as if these put us beside our former course of Life,
and were occasion of Folly, Pride, Inhumanity. This whether it be real change,
and new frame of Mind, arising from Fortune, or rather a malicious sly Nature,
discovering it self in Authority, to decide were matter of another sort of
Disquisition.

Now that Sylla was wholly bent upon, slaughter, and filled the Town
incessantly with infinite Executions, (many disinteressed Persons falling a
Sacrifice to private Enmity, through his permission and indulgence to a Party)
Cajus Metellus, one of the Noble Youths, made bold in the Senate to ask him,
what ends was there of those Evils, and where he intended to stop? We pray thee
not (said he) to pardon such as thou have resolved to destroy, but to free from
doubt such as it has pleased thee to save. Sylla answering, That he knew not
as yet whom to spare: Why then (said he) tell us whom thou will punish. This
Sylla said he would do. Those last Words, as some Authors would have it, were
spoken not by Metellus, but by Offidius, one of Sylla's fawning Companions.
Immediately upon this, without imparting the matter to the Magistracy, Sylla
proscribed eighty Persons, and notwithstanding the generality of Men stomach'd
it, after one days respite he posted two hundred and twenty more, and on the
third again as many. In an Harangue to the People on this occasion, he told
them he had put up as many Names as he could think of; and those who had
escaped his memory, he should hereafter proclaim. He published an Edict
likewise, making Death the Punishment of Humanity, to any one who should dare
to receive and cherish an Outlaw, without exception to Brother, Son, or
Parents. And to him who should slay any one proscribed Person, he ordained two
Talents, as a Reward of Parricide, whether it were a Slave, who had beat out
the Brains of his Master, or a Son his Fathers. But what was most unjust of
all, he cause'd the Attainder to pass upon their Sons, and Sons Sons, and made
open sale of the Goods of them all; nor reigned the Proscription only at Rome,
but throughout all the Cities of Italy, where the Effusion of Blood was such,
as neither the Temples of the Gods, nor Sanctuaries, nor private Houses,
escaped clear; Men were butchered in the Embraces of their Wives, Children in
the Arms of their Mothers. They who fell thus through public hatred, or
private spleen, were nothing in comparison of the numbers of those who suffered
for their Riches. The Assassin might safely say, A fair House killed this Man,
a Garden that, a third his Hot Baths. Quintus Aurelius, a quiet peaceable Man,
and one who thought it his Duty to bear a part in the common Calamity, so far
as to condole the Misfortunes of others, coming into the Forum, and finding
himself among those who were set up, cried out, Woe's me, my Alban, Manor has
informed against me. He had not gone far, before he was dispatched by a Ruffian
sent on that Errand.

In the mean time Marius on the point of being taken, killed himself. Sylla at
his first coming to Praeneste, proceeded judicially against each particular
Person, till at last, finding it a Work of too much time, he cooped them up
close together in one place, to the number of two and twenty thousand Men, and
gave order for the Execution of them all, his Host only excepted; but he brave
Man, scorning the Obligation of Life it self, from the Hands of one who had
been the Ruin of his Country, plunged into the Herd, and submitted willingly
to the Stroke. That of Lucius Catilina was a rare Contrivance: For before
Matters came to an issue, having made away his Brother, he beseeched Sylla to
clap him into the List of Outlawry, as living, and was so; wherefore Catiline,
to return the kind Office, assassinated Marius, one of the adverse Party, and
brought the Head to Sylla, as he was sitting in the Court of Judicature; then
going to the Holy Water of Apollo, which was nigh, washed his Hands.

There were other things beside matter of Tragedy, which gave offense: for
Sylla had declared himself Dictator, whereas that Form of Government had then
been laid aside for the space of one hundred and twenty years. There was
likewise an Act of Grace passed on his behalf, granting Impunity for what was
past, and for the future entrusting him with the Power of the Sword,
Confiscations, Trasplanting of Colonies, erecting and demolishing of Cities,
taking away of Kingdoms, and bestowing them at pleasure. He managed the Sale of
Conficsated Goods after such an arbitrary imperious way, seated on a Chair of
State, amidst beautiful Women, Mimicks, Fiddlers, and such like rascally People,
on whom he squandred away the Revenues of whole Countries and Cities, bestowing
on some of them Ladies in Marriage against their will; so as his Gratuities
were much more intolerable than his Usurpations. Having a mind to assure Pompey
the Great by a nearer Tie of Blood, he commanded him to make void the Nuptial
Bed, and forcing Aemilia (the Daughter of Scaurus and Metella, his own Wife)
from Marcus Glabrio, he bestowed her, great with Child, on him; but she died in
Labor at Pompey's House.

When Lucretius Offella, the same who reduced Marius by Siege, put in and
pushed his Fortune hard for the Consulship, he first forbad him; then seeing he
could not restrain him from coming down into the Forum, with a numerous Train
of followers, he commanded a Centurion of the Guards out and slew him, himself
sitting on the Bench in the Temple of Castor, and beholding the Murder from
above. The Citizens apprehending the Centurion, and dragging him to the
Tribunal, he bad them cease tumultuous clamouring, and let go the Centurion,
for he had commanded it.

His Triumph, though of it self exceeding stately, and set off with the unusual
Pomp, and Magnificence of Royal Spoils, was yet further illustrated, and drew
after it a goodly Spectacle, the Exiles. For in the Rear followed the most
eminent and most potent of the Citizens, Crowned with Garlands, and calling
Sylla, Savior and Father, by whose means they were restored to their own
Country, and again enjoyed their Wives and Children. When the Solemnity was
over, and the time come to render an Account of his Actions, in a Public
Assembly, he was as punctual in innumerating the lucky hits of War, as any of
his own Military Virtues. And from his Faelicity it was, that he made choice to
be Surnamed Felix. In his Addresses and Answers to the Graecians, he styled
himself, Epaphroditus, or Beloved of Venus. His Trophies which are still extant
with us, bear this Inscription, Lucius Cornelius Sylla Epaphroditus. Moreover
when his Wife had brought him forth twins, he named the Male Faustus, and the
Female Fausta; by which words the Romans understand Success and Good Omen. The
Confidence which he reposed in his good Genius, rather than in any Abilities of
his own, emboldned him, though deeply engaged in Blood, after such great
Changes and Revolutions of State, to lay down his Authority, and settle the
Right of Consular Elections once more on the People. So that he not only came
abroad, but on the Forum exposed his Person publicly to the People, walking up
and down as a private Man. And whereas, contrary to his will, a certain bold
Man, and his Enemy, Marcus Lepidus, was in Election to be Consul, not by his
own Interest, but by the Power and Solicitation of Pompey, who was extreme
gracious with the People; when the business was over, seeing Pompey going home
overjoyed with the Success, he called him to him, and said, Was it not
politickly done of you, Young man to pass by Catulus the best of Men, and choose
Lepidus the worst? Take heed, and look to thy self, or the Adversary thou have
raised will be too hard for thee. Sylla spoke this it may seem by Divine
Instinct, for not long after Lepidus grew insolent, and broke into open
defiance with Pompey.

Sylla consecrating the Tenth of his whole Substance unto Hercules, entertained
the People with sumptuous Feastings. The Provision was so much above what was
necessary, as that they were forced daily to throw great quantities of it into
the River, and drank Wine forty years old and upward. In the midst of the
Jollity, which lasted many days, Metella died of a Disease. Now because that
the Priest forbad him to visit the Sick, or suffer his House to be polluted
with Mourning, he sent her a Bill of Divorce, and caused her to be removed into
another House, whilst alive; in this he observed the Law to a Tittle, out of
Religious Superstition; but as for the Retrenching Act which himself made,
himself break it, sparing for no Funeral Cost. He trangressed likewise for his
own Sumptuary Laws, thinking to allay his Grief by excessive Drinking and
Revelling.

Some few Months after, at a Prize of Gladiators, when Men and Women sat
promiscuously in the Theater, no distinct Places being as yet appointed, there
sat by Sylla a beautiful Lady of high Birth, by name Valeria, Daughter of
Messala, and Sister to Hortensius the Orator. Now it happened that she had been
lately divorced from her Husband. The same came gently behind Sylla, and
putting out her Hand, plucked a lock of his Garment, and then passed on to her
Seat again. Sylla looking on and wondering what it should mean; No harm, Mighty
Sir, (said she) for that I also was desirous to partake a little of your
Felicity. It appeared straight that Sylla was well pleased, and even tickled
with the Fancy; for the sent to enquire her Name, her Quality, and Behavior of
Life. From this time there passed between them many an amorous Glance, both of
them at once oftentimes turning one on another, and interchanging Smiles. In
the end Overtures were made, and a Match concluded on. All which was innocent
perhaps on the Ladies sides; but though the Lady was never so modest and
Virtuous, it was no such modest and seemly beginning of Love in Sylla, to take
fire, as became Youth rather, at a Face, and buxom Humor, those common
Incentives to the most disorderly and shameless Passions.

Notwithstanding this Marriage, he kept company with Actors, Actresses, and
Minstrels, drinking with them night and day. His chief Favorites were, Roscius
the Comedian, Sorex the Arch-Mimick, and Metrobius the Woman Actor, for whom,
though past his Prime, he ever retained a professed Kindness. He fell by these
Courses into a Disease, which grew so leasurely upon him, as of a long time he
perceived not his Bowels to fester, till at length the corrupted Flesh broke
all out into Lice. Many being employed Day and Night in destroying them, the
Work so multiplied under their hands, as not only his Clothes, Baths, Basins,
but his very Meat was polluted with that Flux and Contagion, they came swarming
out in such numbers. Wherefore he went often by day into the Waters, to scowr
and cleanse his Body, but all in vain; the Course returned so quick, and with
such numerous Supplies, as overcame all manner of Riddance. There died of the
Lousy Disease, amongst those of ancient note, Acastus the Son of Pelias; of
later date, Alcman the Poet, Pherecides the Theologe, Callisthenes the Olyntian
in the time of his Imprisonment, as also Mutius the Lawyer; and if it be fit to
bring in Men of infamous Memory, Eunus the Fugitive, who stirred up the Slaves
of Sicily to rebel against their Masters; after that, he was brought Captive to
Rome, died of this creeping Sickness.

Sylla not only foresaw his End, but also writ somewhat concerning it; for in
the two and twentieth Book of his Memoirs, which he finished some two days
before his death, he writes, That the Chaldeans foretold him, That after he had
led a Life of Honor, he should conclude the last Act in fullness of Prosperity.
He declares moreover, That in a Vision he had seen his Son, who had departed
not long before Metella, to stand by in mournful Weeds, and beseech his Father
to cast off further care, and come along with him to his Mother Metella, there
to live at ease and quietness with her. However, he could not refrain
intermedling in Public Affairs; for ten days before his decease, he composed
the Differences of the Puteolaxians, and prescribed Laws for their better
Government; and the very day before his End, it being told him that Cranius a
Man in Authority, deferred the Payment of a Public Debt, in expectation of his
Death, he sent for the Man to his House, and calling his Servants about him,
caused him to be strangled; but through the straining of his Voice and Body,
the Imposthume breaking, he cast forth a great quantity of Blood. Upon this his
strength failing him, after a troublesome Night he died, leaving behind him two
young Children by Metella. Valeria was afterward delivered of a Daughter,
named Posthuma; for so the Romans call those who be born after the Fathers
Death.

Many ran tumultuously together, and joined with Lepidus, to deprive the Corpse
of the accustomed Solemnities; but Pompey, though offended at Sylla, (for he
alone of all his Friends was left out of his Will) having kept off some by his
Interest and Entreaty, others by Menaees, gave it a secure and honorable
Burial. It Is said, that the Roman Ladies threw on such vast heaps of Spices, as
beside what was brought in one hundred and ten Vessels, sufficed to raise a
large Statue for Sylla, and another for his Lictor, out of the precious
Frankincense and Cinnamon. The day being Cloudy over head, they deferred
carrying forth the Corpse till about three in the Afternoon, expecting it should
rain, but a strong Wind blowing full against the Funeral Pile, and setting it
all on a bright Flame, his Body was consumed in a moment. As the Pile shrunk
down and the Fire was upon expiring the Clouds showered down, and continued
raining till Night; so as his good Fortune was firm even to the last, and did
as it were officiate at his Funeral. His Monument stands on Campus Martius,
with an Epitaph of his own Writing. The Substance this, That neither Friend nor
Foe had outdone him, either in good or bad turns.

The Comparison of Lysander with Sylla.
HAving in like manner run through this Life, come we now to the Comparison.
That which was common to them both, was, that they were Founders of their own
Greatness, with this difference, that Lysander had the Consent of the Citizens,
in Times of right understanding, for the Honors he received; nor forced he any
thing against their good will, or sought to raise himself above the Laws;
whereas, In Civil Broils the Slave himself gets Honor; as then at Rome, when
the People were distempered, and the Government out of order, one or other was
still a getting uppermost; no wonder then if Sylla reigned, when the Glauciae
and Saturnini drove out the Metelli, when Sons of Consuls were slain in the
Assemblies, when others for Silver and Gold bought Men and Arms, and with Fire
and Sword set up new Laws, in spite of all Lawful opposition; nor do I blame
any one in such Circumstances, for working himself into Supreme Power; only I
would not have it thought a sign of Sovereign Goodness, to be Head of a State
so wretchedly discomposed. But Lysander being employed in the greatest Commands
and Affairs of State, by a sober and welldisciplin'd City, was ever esteemed
the best and most Virtuous Man, in the best and most virtuous Commonwealth.
Wherefore Lysander often returning the Government into the hands of the
Citizens, received it again as often; for the Excellencies of his Virtues ever
held the first place. Sylla on the other hand, when he had once made himself of
the Army, kept up his Command for ten years together, creating himself
sometimes Consul, sometimes Proconsul, and sometimes Dictator, but was always a
Tyrant. It Is true, Lysander (as was said) designed to introduce a new Form of
Government, after a milder fashion however, and more agreeable to Justice, than
Sylla; not by force of Arms, but Persuasion; nor by subverting the whole State
at once, but by more orderly directing the Succession of Kings. And by Nature
it seems just, that the most deserving should rule, especially in a City which
it self got the leading hand of Greece, upon the account of Virtue not
Nobility. For as the Hunter considers the Whelp it self, not the Bitch; and the
Horse-courser the Foal, not the Mare, (for what if the Foal should prove a
Mule?) so likewise were that Politician extremely out, who in the Choice of a
Chief Magistrate should enquire, not what the Man is, but how descended. The
very Spartans themselves have deposed several of their Kings, for want of
Kingly Virtues, as degenerated and good for nothing* A depraved Nature, though
of an ancient Stock, is dishonorable; whereas Virtue without Birth is
honorable. Moreover, the one was injurious to many, upon the score of his
Friends; the other to his very Friends. It Is confessed on all hands, that
Lysander offended most commonly for the sake of his Companions, committing
several Slaughters to uphold their Power and Dominion; but as for Sylla, he out
of Envy would have discarded Pompey from Commanding by Land, and Dolabella by
Sea, although himself had given them those Places; he ordered Lucretius
Offella, who sued for the Consulship, upon diverse meritorious accounts, to be
slain before his Eyes, raising thereby strange Apprehensions and Jealousies in
the Minds of all Men, for his Cruelty to his Dearest Friends.

The Business of Riches and Pleasure does further yet demonstrate in one a
Princely, in the other a Tyrannical Disposition. Lysander did nothing that was
intemperate or extravagant, in that full range of Power and License, but kept
aloof as much as ever Man did, from that trite Saying, Lion within, but Fox
without, he ever maintained such a sober, Laconick, well tempered Conversation;
whereas Sylla could never break his unruly Affections, either by Poverty, when
young, or by a long run of Years, when grown old; but would be still
prescribing of Laws to the Citizens, concerning Chastity and Sobriety, himself
living all that time (as Salust affirms) in open Lewdness and Debauchery. By
these ways he had so impoverished and drained the City of her Treasures, as to
be forced to sell her Liberties and Immunities to the associated and
well-affected Cities for Silver, although he had daily exposed the wealthiest
and greatest Families to public Sale and Outcry. There was no end of his
Favors vainly spent and thrown away on Flatterers; for what mean, what
likelihood of Parsimony in his more intimate Conversation, and Endearments over
Wine, when in the open face of the People, upon Auction of a large Estate,
which he would have passed over to one of his Friends at a small Price, because
another bidding higher, the Officer had made Proclamation of the Advance, he
broke out into a Passion, saying, What a strange unjust thing is this, O
Citizens, that I cannot dispose of my own Booty as I please? But Lysander, on
the contrary, with the rest of the Spoil, sent even the Presents which were
made him to the Citizens. Nor do I commend him for it, (for he perhaps by
excessive Liberality did Sparta more harm, than ever the other did Rome by
Rapine) only I make it an Argument of his Contempt of Riches. They had a
strange peculiar influence each Man on his own City. Sylla, a profuse
Debauchee, brought in Sobriety however amongst the Citizens: Lysander again,
temperate as he was, filled the Town with Luxury: So as they both were
blameworthy, the one for raising himself above his own Laws; the other for
causing his Citizens to fall beneath his own Example, in that he taught Sparta
to want those things, which himself had learnt not to want. And thus much of
their Civil Administration.

As for Feats of Arms, wise Conduct, innumerable Victories, perilous
Adventures, Sylla was beyond compare. Lysander indeed came off twice victorious
at two Seafights; I shall add to that the Siege of Athens, a Work of greater
Fame than Difficulty. For all this, the Business of Aliartus in Baeotia, although
perhaps it came about by ill Fortune, bears yet the semblance of ill Advice,
when out of Ambition and Eagerness to fight, without further attending the
Kings Forces, which were then almost at hand from Plataeae, he unseasonbly
approached the Walls, and was miserably defeated by a Sally of inconsiderable
Men; he received his Death-wound, not as Cleombrotas at Leuctra, resisting
manfully the impression of a just Enemy; not as Cyrus or Epaminondas, pressing
hard on the declining Battle, and making sure the Victory; who all of them died
the Death of Kings and Generals: But he, like some Common Soldier, or one of
the Forlorn Hope, cast away his Life ingloriously, giving testimony to the
ancient Spartans, that they did well to avoid storming of Walls, in which the
stoutest Man may chance to fall by the Hand not only of an abject Fellow, but
by that of a Boy or Woman, as they say, Achilles was slain by Paris in the
Gates. As for Sylla, it was somewhat hard to reckon up how many set Battles he
won, or how many thousands he slew: He took Rome it self twice, and forced the
Pyraean Haven, not by Famine, as Lysander did, but by several sharp Encounters,
driving out Archelaus from Land to Sea. And what most imports, there was a
vast difference between the Commanders they they had to deal with; for I look
upon it as an easy Task, or rather Sport, that same Overthrow of Antiochus,
Alcibiades his Pilot, as likewise the Circumventing of Philocles the Atheninian
Orator, Sharp only at inglorious point of Tongue: both whom Mithridates would
have scorned to compare with the Master of his Horse, or Marius with his
Lictor. But of all the Grandees, Consuls, Commanders, and Daemagogues, to pass
by others who opposed themselves to Sylla; who amongst the Romans so formidable
as Marius? What King more powerful than Mithridates? Who of the Italians
sturdier than Lamponius and Telesinus? Yet of these, one he drove into
Banishment, one he quelled, and the others he slew. Now the greatest of all,
which has been as yet related, in my judgment, was, That Lysander had the
Assistance of the State in all his Archievements; whereas Sylla, besides that
he was a Banished Person, and sorely overcharged by a Faction, at what time his
Wife was driven from home, his Houses demolished, and Adherents slain, himself*
then in Baeotia stood Embattelled against infinite Numbers of the Enemy, and
adventuring all for the sake of his Country, erected a Trophie: Nor, when
Mithridates came with Proposals of Alliance and Aid against his Enemies, would
he show any the least Compliance, or so much as Civil Respect, either by
greeting or vouchsafing him his Hand, till such time that he had it from the
Kings own Mouth, that he was willing to quit Asia, surrender the Navy, and
restore Bithynia and Cappadocia to the two Kings; than which Action, Sylla
never performed a braver, or with a Nobler Courage, when preferring the Public
Good to the Private, and, like a generous Dog, where he had once fixed, never
letting go his hold, till he had conquered the Enemy, he then set himself to
revenge his own private Quarrels. We may perhaps make a better estimate of
their Manners, by weighing both their Athenian Actions in the Balance. Sylla,
when he had made himself Master of that City, which had upheld the Dominion and
Power of Mithridates, in opposition to him restored her to Liberty. and the
free Exercise of her own Laws. Lysander, on the contrary, when she had fell
from such a vast height of Dignity and Rule, unmercifully took away the
Democracy, imposing on her the most Cruel and Lawless Tyrants. It Is now time to
consider, whether we should swerve from the Truth or no, by declaring, that
Sylla performed the more Glorious Deeds, but Lysander committed the fewer
Faults; as likewise by giving to one the Pre-eminence for Moderation and
Abstinence, to the other for Conduct and Valor.

THE LIFE OF CIMON.
Englished from the Greek, By Mat. Morgan, A. M. of St. John's College in
Oxford.
VOLUME III.
PEripoltas the Diviner having brought the King Opheltas and those under his
Command from Thessaly into Baeotia, left there a Family which flourished a long
time after; the greatest part of them inhabited Chaeronea, the first City out
of which they expelled the Barbarians. The Descendants of this Race, being men
of bold Attempts, exposed themselves to so many

CIMON.
This was the valiant and obliging Greek
Who Conqver'd when he acted or did speak*
His Courage and his Courtesy were great
The haughty Persian bravely did defeat;
Got in one day a double Victory
And so (...) Triumphed over earth (...)


Dangers in the Incursions the Medes made upon them, and in Exploits against
the Gauls, that at last they were almost wholly consumed.

There was left one Orphan of this House, called Damon, surnamed Peripoltas,
for Beauty and greatness of Spirit surpassing all of his Age; but of Temper
fierce and untractable. A Roman Captain of a Foot-Company that Wintered in
Chaeronea, fell in love with this Youth; but since he could not obtain his
infamous Desires, either by Gifts or Entreaties, 'twas much feared that he
would proceed to Violence. The Suspicion was made more probable by the
condition of Chaeronea, which was then so weak, that it had not power either to
prevent the Attempt, or punish the Commission of the Crime. Of which Damon
being sensible, and looking upon his Solicitations as Injuries, resolved to be
revenged of him: Accordingly he and sixteen of his Companions, conspired
against the Captain; but that the Design might be managed without any danger of
being discovered, they all daubed their Faces with Soot. Thus disguised, and
inflamed with Wine, they set upon him by break of day, as he was sacrificing;
and having killed him, and not a few of those that were with them, they fled
out of the City; which was extremely alarmed and troubled at the Murder: The
Council Assembled immediately, and pronounced Sentence of Death against Damon
and all his Accomplices. This they did to justify the City to the Romans. But,
that evening, as the Magistrates were at Supper together, according to Custom,
Damon and his Confederates breaking into the Room, killed them all, and then
again fled out of the Town. About this time, Lucius Lucullus passing that way
with his Forces upon some Expedition, and this disaster having but newly
happened, he staid to examine the matter. Upon enquiry he found the City was in
no wise faulty, but rather that they themselves had suffered; therefore he drew
out the Soldiers, and carried them away with him. Yet Damon continuing to
ravage the Country all about, the Citizens by Messages, and Decrees in
appearance favorable, enticed him into the City, and upon his return made him
Gymnasiarque; but afterward as he was suppling himself with Oil in the Baigno,
they set upon him and killed him. For a long while after Apparitions being
seen, and lamentable Groans heard in that place, (as our Fathers have told us,)
they ordered the Gates of the Baigno to be made up: and even to this day those
who dwell about that place affirm that they sometimes see Specter, and hear
terrible Voices. The posterity of Damon (of which some remain in the Country of
Phocide, near the City Stiris, living after the manner of the Aeolians) are
called Asbolomenoi, that is, Men dawbed with Soot. Because with that Damon was
besmeared when he committed this Murder.

But there being a Quarrel betwixt those of Chaeronea and the Orchomeniens, who
bordered upon them; they hired an Informer, a Roman, to excuse the Community of
Chaeronea, as if it had been a single Person, of the Murder of the Romans, of
which only Damon and his Ruffians were guilty; accordingly the process was
formed, and the cause pleaded before the Petor of Macedon, for as yet, the
Romans had not sent Governors into Greece.

The Advocates who defended the Inhabitants, appealed to the Testimony of
Lucullus, who in answer to a Letter the Praetor writ to him, returned a true
account of the matter of Fact. By this means the Town gained their Cause, which
otherwise they were in great danger of losing. The Citizens thus preserved,
erected a Statue to Lucullus in the Forum, next to that of the God Bacchus.

We also have the same Impressions of Gratitude; and tho removed from them by
the distance of so many Ages, yet we think our selves obliged by that Act. And
as to draw the Genius and Noble Inclinations of a great Personage, is harder,
and so more valuable, than to hit the Lines of his Face; we will put Lucullus
his Life amongst our Parallels of Illustrious Men. Wherein we will not use one
stroke of Flattery, but keep close to the Truth. It is sufficient we show how
we preserve a grateful Remembrance of his generous Kindness; and he himself
would not expect, that in recompense of that Service, which consisted in
speaking the Truth, we should abuse his Memory with a false and counterfeit
Narration. For as we would, that a Painter who is to draw a beautiful Face, in
which there is yet some Imperfection, should neither wholly leave out, nor
entirely express what is defective, because this would deform it, and that
spoil the Resemblance; so since it is very hard, nay almost impossible, to show
the Life of a Man wholly free from Blemish, let us in the same manner follow
Truth: But if any Lapses occur, which have been occasioned by the Emotions of a
sudden Passion, or the necessity of the Times, let us look upon them rather as
Defects of Virtue, than as Vices; let us carry the Pencil gently over them, out
of respect to Humane Nature, which never furnished any Man with so many good
Inclinations to Virtue, but that there was somewhat still wanting which rendered
him Imperfect. Considering with my self to whom I should compare Lucullus, I
find none so exactly his Parrallel as Cimon.

They were both valiant in War, and successful against the Barbarians, but
affable and courteous to their Fellow-Citizens: Both extinguished the Civil
Broils at home, and gained signal Victories abroad. In short, no Greek before
Cimon, nor Roman before Lucullus, ever carried the Scene of War so far from
their own Country, unless we except the Exploits of Bacchus and Hercules, those
of Perseus against the Aethiopians, Medes, and Armenians, and the Acts of
Jason, (if of these any Monuments that deserve Credit are derived down to our
days.) Moreover in this they were alike, that they finished not the Enterprises
they undertook: They brought their Enemies near their Ruin, but never entirely
defeated them. There was yet a greater Conformity in their Nature, for the
Civility and generous Reception they showed to all Strangers, and the splended
Provisions of their Tables. But we will omit those other good qualities, in
which they were alike, for 'twill be easy to observe them in the following
Relation.

Cimon was the Son of Miltiades and Hegesipyle, who was by Birth a Thracian,
and Daughter to the King Olorus; this appears from the Poems of Melanthius and
Archelaus, which they both write in praise of Cimon. By this means the
Historian Thucidides was his Kinsman by the Mother's side; for his Father's
name also was Olorus, and possessed Mines of Gold in Thrace, and was killed in
Scaptahyla, a District of Thrace, so called from its being full of Ditches. His
bones were afterward brought into Attica, and his Monument is shown amongst
those of the House of Cimon, near the Tomb of Elpinice Cimon's Sister. But
Thucidides was of the Tribe of Alimus, and Miltiades of that of Lacia.
Miltiades being condemned in a Fine of fifty Talents to the State, and unable
to pay it, was cast into Prison, and there died. Thus Cimon was left an Orphan
very young, with his Sister Elpinice, who was also young and unmarried. At
first he had no Reputation, being looked upon Riotous, and one who lived a
dissolute Life, as in reality he did, therefore they said, there was an
Agreement of Temper, as well as Appellation, betwixt him and his Grandfather,
whose name was Cimon too; but they Proverbially called him, for his Stupidity,
Coalemos (the Idiot) Stesimbrotus of Thassus, who lived near about the same
time with Cimon, reports of him; that he had little docility; that they could
never teach him Music, nor the Rudiments of any other Science, which were so
easily learned by the young Gentlemen of Athens: That he wanted a Vivacity of
Parts requisite for Conversation, was ungentile in his Carriage; neither had he
any Capacity to manage serious Affairs: However, that there appeared in him
something that was great; and that he had such a plain openness of Humor, that
you would have taken him, rather for a Native of Peloponnesus than Athens. He
being such an one, as Euripides describes Hercules.

Accomplishment of Carriage he did want,
But he was honest, tho not Elegant.
For this Character may well agree with that which Stesimbrotus had given of
him. They accused him in his younger years, that he incestuously caressed his
own Sister Elpinice, who otherwise had no very great Reputation for Chastity:
However, if her Brother was not her Gallant, 'twas reported that Polynotus was.
For when he painted the Trojan Dames in the Porch, then called Plesinaction,
now Paecile, he drew Laodice by her Face. He was not an ordinary Mechanic, to
be paid for his Work: But studying all ways to please tho Athenians, he
bestowed it freely on the Public. This all the Historians report of him; and
the Poet Malanthius particularly in these Verses.

This famous Painter at his own Expense,
Gave Athens Beauty and Magnificence:
New Life to all the Heroes did impart;
Embellished all the Temples with his Art:
The Splendor of the State restored again:
And so he did oblige both Gods and Men.
Some do affirm that Elpinice did not dissemble her Familiarities with her
Brother: But lived publicly with him, as if she had been his Wife: For though
she was no Fortune, yet he could meet with none, that was an equal Match for
her, by reason of the Quality of her Birth. But afterward, when Callias, one of
the richest Men of Athens fell in Love with her and proffered to pay the Mulct
the Father was condemned in, if he could obtain the Daughter in Marriage: Cimon
accepted the Condition, and betrothed her to Callias. There is no doubt to be
made, but that Cimon was of an amorous Complexion. For Melanthius gives him
hints of his Tendency that way, when in his Eulogies he facetiously rallies him
for his Mistresses: The one was called Mnestra, and the other was Aristeria of
Salamis; and these the Poet says, he was very fond of. However this is
certain, that he loved his Wife Isodice very passionately; she was the Daughter
of Euryptolemus the Son of Megacles. Her death he regretted even to impatience,
as appears by those Elegies of Condolance, addressed to him upon his loss of
Her. The Philosopher Panaetius is of Opinion, that Archelaus was the Author of
those Elegies; and indeed the time seems to favor that Conjecture. But take
Cimon in all his other Capacities, you shall find nothing in him that is justly
blameable, but rather all the Customs of his Life were very good. For as he was
as daring as Miltiades, and not at all inferior to Themistocles for Judgment,
so he was incomparably more just and honest then either of them. As he was
equal to them in understanding, and in discharging all the Functions of a
Commander; so for the Political part of Government, he excelled them and every
one else: And this too when he was very young, his years not yet confirmed by
any experience. For when Themistocles, upon the Medes threatening them with an
Invasion, advised the Athenians to forsake their Town and the Country about it,
and to carry all their Arms on Ship board, and in the Streights of Salamis
dispute the Dominion of the Sea with their Enemies, When all the World stood
amazed at the Confidence and Rashness of this advice; Cimon only was not at all
surprised, but cheerfully passed through the Street of Ceramicon, accompanied
with other young Men, toward the Castle, carrying a Bridle in his hand to offer
to the Goddess Minerva; by this intimating, that there was no more need of
Horsemen now, but Mariners. Thus after he had paid his Devotions to the
Goddess, and offered up the Bridle, he took down the Bucklers that hung upon
the Walls of the Temple, and so went down to the Port. By this Example he
encouraged the Citizens to follow him in order to their Embarking. Besides, he
was an handsome Person, of a just Stature, his Hair thick and curled. After he
had acquitted himself gallantly in this Battle of Salamis, he obtained a great
Reputation among the Athenians; and they not only admired his Actions, but
loved his Person. So that they were continually, enflaming him with Emulation,
to perform Deeds as Famous as that of Marathon; that entertaining great
Conceptions of things, he might act sutably thereunto. The People were very
glad, when they saw him applying himself to matters of State; for they were
disgusted with Themistocles: In opposition to whom, and because of the Candor
and Freeness of Cymon's Temper, which was agreeable to every one, they advanced
him to the highest Employments in the Government. The man that contributed most
to his Promotions was Aristides, who still cultivated that honest Genius he saw
in him: And purposely raised him, that he might be a Counterpoise to the Craft,
and repress the insolence of Themistocles. But when the Medes were driven out
of Greece, Cimon being Admiral, though the Athenians had not yet attained the
Chief Dominion, but still followed Pausanias and the Lacedaemonians; he kept
his Citizens in Heart, and by the Goodness of their Order and Equipage, but
chiefly by their Valor, they were distinguished from the rest. Besides he
perceiving, that Pausanias managed an intelligence with the King of Persia, to
betray Greece to the Barbarians, and puffed up with Arrogance and Success,
treated his Allies haughtily, and committed Insolences upon them; Cimon taking
this advantage, robbed him of the Esteem and Command of the Greeks, before he
was aware. This he did not by open Enmity, but by affable Discourse and the
Obligingness of his Conversation. So that the Allies no longer able to endure
the Sourness and Pride of Pausanias, revolted all from him to Cimon and
Aristides: Who, having gained such a Party from him, writ to the Ephori of
Sparta, and sent particular Messengers to complain of him, desiring them to
recall a Man who was a dishonor to Sparta, and a trouble to Greece. They
report of Pausanias, that when he was in Bysantium, he solicited a young Lady
of a noble Family in the City, whose name was Cleonice, to debauch her: Her
Parents dreading the cruel Humor of the Man, were forced to consent, and so
abandoned their Daughter to his Embraces. Cleonice commanded the Servants to
put out all the Lights; So that approaching silently, and in the dark toward
his Bed, she stumbled upon the Lamp, which she overturned and spilled:
Pausanias, who was fallen asleep, awaked, and startled with the noise, thought
an assassin had taken that dead time of the Night to murder him; so that
hastily snatching up his Poinard that lay by him, he wounded his supposed Enemy
to Death. After this he never enjoyed himself, but was disturbed in his
Thoughts. For his Dear Mistress haunted his Bed, and would not let him Sleep,
but interrupted his repose with these Angry Words.

Villain, be just at last, and so repent;
Or see the hand that brings thy Punishment.
This Tragical Accident gave the last stroke to his Ruin. For after this the
Allies joining their Resentments and Forces with Cimon's, besieged him in
Byzantium: but he escaped out of their Hands, and fled to Heraclea. Here coming
to a place which might be called the Oracle of the Dead, where they raise up
Spirits to know future Events, he solemnly invoked Cleonice, and entreated her
Ghost to be reconciled: Accordingly she appeared to him, and answered him in
these Words. As soon as thou come to Sparta thou shall be freed from all the
Misfortunes which now afflict thee. Hereby obscurely foretelling (in my
opinion) that imminent Death he was to suffer. This is the Story that is told
of him.

Cimon strengthened with this accession of the Allies, went General into Thrace:
For he was told that some great Men among the Persians, of the Kings Kindred,
having possessed themselves of Eione, a City situated upon the River Strymon,
infested the Greeks which confined upon them: First, he defeated these
Persians, and shut them up within the Walls of their Town. Then he fell upon
the Thracians themselves, who were Borderers, because they supplied those of
Eione with Victuals; he drove them entirely out of the Country, and took
possession of it as Conqueror: By this means he reduced the Besieged to such
straights, that Butes, who Commanded there for the King, in a desperate
resolution set fire to the Town, and burned himself, his Goods, and all his
Relations, in one common Flame. By this means Cimon got the Town, but no great
Booty; for these Barbarians not only consumed themselves in the Fire, but the
richest of their Movables. However, the Country about it he gave the
Athenians, which was a pleasant and fruitful Soil. For this Action the People
permitted him to erect Stone Mercuries; upon the First of which was this
Inscription.

Those were the valiant Heroes, who in Thrace
Did, Conquering the Persians, them disgrace;
By Sword and Famine made them all to die,
And unto Death, as to a refuge, fly.
Upon the Second was this.
This Monument did grateful Athens raise,
To give to her Commanders lasting Praise;
That this might make her Emulous Sons contend,
Encountering Death, their Country to defend.
This was the Inscription of the Third.
Since Mnestheus to Atrides Succors led,
From Athens, by whose Hands his Foes lay dead;
And as old Homer does report the same,
All Troy did tremble at this Warriour's Name.
Then no one justly ought for to admire
That Athens to this Honor does aspire:
None are so Wise and Valiant as They,
As Chiefs to Lead, as Soldiers to Obey.
Though the Name of Cimon is not mentioned in these Inscriptions, yet his
Contemporaries do assert them wholly as erected to his Honor; and being so, it
was a peculiar one to him. For Miltiades and Themistocles could never obtain
the like. And when Miltiades desired a Crown of Olive, one Sochares, who was of
the Tribe of Decelia, stood up in the midst of the Assembly, and spoke these
words, which being agreeable to the Populace, were applauded by them, tho
unjust, and very ungratefully spoken. When thou shall conquer alone,
(Miltiades) thou shall triumph so too. What then induced them so particularly
to honor Cimon? it was certainly this, that under other Commanders they stood
upon the defensive; but by his Conduct, they not only repulsed their Enemies;
but invaded them in their own Country.

Thus they became Masters of Eione and Amphipolis, where they planted Colonies:
and afterward took the Isle of Scyros, which Cimon gained after this manner.
The Dolopians were the Inhabitants of this Isle, a People of a slothful
disposition, and who neglected all Husbandry, their only course of life was
Piracy; this they practiced to that degree of mischief, that they rifled those
that brought Merchandise into their own Ports, and so violated all the Laws of
Commerce. Some Merchants of Thessaly, they not only spoiled of their goods, but
confined their Persons. Who afterward breaking out of Prison, went and
demanded justice of the Amphictyons, which is a general Assembly made up of the
People of Greece. These, maturely weighing the fact, condemned the Isle in a
great Pecuniary Mulct: but the People that were enriched with the Plunder,
began to apprehend that 'twas they particularly that must refund; therefore
they writ to Cimon to succor them with his Fleet, and they declared themselves
ready to deliver the Town into his hands. Cimon by these means got the Town,
expelled those Dolopian Pirates, and so opened the Traffic of the Aegean Sea.
After this, understanding that Theseus the Son of Aegeus, when he fled from
Athens, and took refuge in this Isle, was here slain by King Lycomedes upon
certain suspicions; Cimon endeavored to find out where he was Buried: For the
Oracle had commanded the Athenians to bring home his Ashes and to honor him as
an Hero. Cimon could not for a long time learn where he was interred; for those
of Scyros dissembled the knowledge of it, and were not willing he should
search. But at length after diligent enquiry he found out the Tomb; and then
carried the Relics into his Admiral Galley, and with great Pomp and Show
brought them into Athens, 400 years after Theseus first left that Country. This
Act got Cimon the Hearts of the People, who received the Discovery with great
Joy and abundance of Thanks. To signalize and perpetuate the Memory of this
Deed, and their sense of it, they appointed that memorable Decision of Victory
betwixt the two Tragedians, Aeschylus and Sophocles: For the latter having writ
his first Play, being yet very young, the Applause of the Theater was divided,
and the Spectators sided into Parties: To determine this, Aphepsion, who was at
that time Archon, would not cast Lots who should be Judges; but when Cimon and
the other Commanders with him came into the Theater, to see the issue of the
Contention, after they had performed the usual Rites to the God of the
Festival, the Archon, came to them, and made them swear (being ten in all) to
speak their Judgments in this Contention according to Equity and Honor. And so
being sworn Judges, he made them all sit down to give a decesive Sentence. The
Contention for Victory grew warm, and both Sides ambitiously strove who should
get the Suffrages of such honorable Judges; but the Victory was at last
adjudged to Sophocles; which Aeschylus took so ill, that he left Athens, and
went to Sicily, where he died of discontent, and was buried near the City of
Gela.

Ion reports, that when he was a young Man, and newly returned from Chios to
Athens, he chanced to sup with Cimon at Laomedon's House: After Supper, when
they had (according to Custom) poured out Wine to the Honor of the Gods, Cimon
was desired by the Company to give them a Song; which he did with so good
grace, that they were all charmed with his Voice, and extremely pleased with
his Humor, declaring that he was more complaisant than Themistocles, who being
entreated upon such an occasion to play upon the Lute, answered, That he could
not touch an Instrument, but give him a small Village, and he would raise it
into a strong and wealthy City. After talking of many indifferent things
incident to such Entertainments, they entered into the Particulars of those
several Actions for which Cimon had been Famous. And when they had run over the
most signal, he told them they had omitted one, upon which he valued himself
most for Address and good contrivance. He gave this Account of it. When the
Athenians and their Allies had taken a great number of the Barbarians Prisoners
in Sestos and Byzantium, giving him the preference to divide the Booty, he put
the naked Prisoners in one Lot, and the Spoils of their rich Attire and Jewels
in the other. This the Allies complained of, as an unequal Division; therefore
he gave them their choice to take which Lot they would, and the Athenians
should be content with that which they refused. One Herophytus of Samos advised
them to take the Ornaments for their Share, and leave the Slaves to the
Athenians: Upon this Cimon was laughed at for his ridiculous Division: For the
Allies carried away the Gold Chains and Purple Robes, and the Athenians had
only the naked Bodies of the Captives, which they could make no advantage of,
being unused to Labor. But a little while after, the Parents and Kinsmen of
the Prisoners coming from Lydia and Phrygia, every one redeemed his Relations
at a very high Ransom. By this means Cimon got so much Treasure, that he
maintained his whole Fleet of Galleys with the Money for four Months; and yet
there was some left to lay up in the Treasury at Athens. Now Cimon growing
rich, what he gained from the Barbarians with Honor, he spent hospitably upon
the Citizens. For he pulled down all the Enclousures of his Gardens and
Grounds, that all Travelers, but his Citizens especially, might gather of his
Fruits freely and without danger. At home he kept a Table that was not
furnished indeed with great Delicacies, but where was a Noble Competency of
Provisions, and all very good, hear the poor Townsmen had a constant and easy
Access, so that their Care was employed in discharging this Public duties,
from which otherwise they would have been distracted by seeking after a
Subsistence. But Aristotle reports, That he was partial in this Reception, and
that it did not extend to all the Athenians, but only to those of the Tribe of
Lacia. Besides, he always went attended with a Train of young Gentlemen, who
were his Domestics, and very well clad; and if he met with an elderly Citizen
in a poor Habit, he would strip one of his Retinue, and cloth the decayed
Citizen; and this was looked upon as very well done. He did enjoin them
likewise to carry great Sums of Money about them; and if they met in the
Streets any one that they either knew, or who looked as if he were in distress,
they had order to relieve him, and convey something privately into his Hand.
This Cratinus the Poet speaks of, in one of his Commedies called Archilocha,
after this manner.

I am Metrobius, who still believed,
Nay justly did expect, to be relieved
By such a Table Cimon once did hold
For men as poor as I, and men as Old.
Cimon of all the Grecians was the best,
Rich, Valiant, Honest, Noble to his Guest.
Gorgias the Leontine gives him this Character, That he got Riches that he
might use them, and so used them that he got himself Credit by them. And
Critias one of the thirty Tyrants of Athens,

Did wish to be, his Fortune to Complete,
As rich as Scopas Heirs, like Cimon Great;
And if the Gods his Life would farther bless,
He Would have in fight Agesilas's Success.
Lichas, we know, became Famous in Greece, only because on the days of the
Sports, when the young Lads run naked, he used to entertain the Strangers that
came to see these Diversions. But Cimon surpassed all the ancient Athenians for
Hospitality and good Nature: For tho those taught the rest of Greece to sow
Corn, and the use of Fire and Water: Yet Cimon by keeping open House, and
giving Travelers Liberty to eat all his Fruits, which the several Seasons
afforded, seemed to restore to the World that Community of Goods which the
Poets fabulously tell us was in the Reign of Saturn. Those who object to him,
that he did this to be popular, and gain the applause of the Vulgar, are
confuted by the constant Tenor of the rest of his Actions, which all tended to
uphold the Interests of the Nobility against the Populace; of which he gave
instances, when he together with Aristides opposed Themistocles, who was for
advancing the Authority of the People beyond its just Limits; and down right
quarrelled Ephialtes, who, to ingratiate himself with the Multitude, was for
abolishing the Jurisdiction of the Areopagites. And when all of his time,
except Aristides and Ephialtes, took Presents, he still kept his hands clean
and untainted, and never acted nor Counseled any thing but what was just and
innocent. They report that Raesaces a Persian, who had Traitorously revolted
from the King his Master, fled to Athens, and there being harassed by
Sycophants, who were still accusing him to the People, he applied himself to
Cimon, for redress; to gain his Favor he brought him two Cups, the one full of
Pieces of Money.
Dariusses of Gold, and the other of Silver: Cimon would not receive them, but
asked him smilingly whether he would have him to be his Mercenary, or his
Friend; he replied, his Friend: If so (said he) take away these pieces, for
being your Friend, I presume they are at my Service, when I shall have occasion
for them, and when I have I Will send to you.

The Allies of the Athenians began now to be very weary of the War, and were
willing to have some intervals of repose, that they might look after their
Husbandry and Traffic. For they saw their Enemies driven out of the Country,
and did not fear any new Incursions: Yet they still paid the Taxes they were
assess'd at, but would not send men and Galleys, as they had done before. This
the other Athenian Generals would constrain them to by rigor of process, till
at last by fining them so grievously they did render the Government uneasy to
them, and even odious. But Cimon practiced a contrary Method, he forced no man
to go that was not willing, but of those that desired to be excused from
Service, he took Money, and Vessels unmanned: And permitted the men to stay at
home and follow what gainful Vocations they liked best, whether of Husbandry or
Merchandise. By this means they grew Luxurious, and enervated all their Courage
by living at ease. But the Athenians he took into his Galleys, and by employing
them in all his Naval expeditions, inured them to suffer Hardship: So that
being severely Disciplined, and continually bearing Arms, the Allies began to
dread, and then flatter them who were grown thus dreadful at their cost; till
they fell to that degree of Subjection, as of Allies they almost became
Tributaries and Slaves. No man ever checked the growth of the Persians Ambition
so much as Cimon; for he not only beat them out of Greece, but closely pursuing
them, would not let them take Breath, nor put their Affairs in any posture; but
either took their Towns by open force, or made them revolt, by managing
Intelligence within their Walls. So that in all Asia, even from Ionia to
Pamphylia there was not one Soldier that appeared for the King of Persia.

When word was brought that some Persian Commanders were upon the Coasts of
Pamphylia with a Land Army, and a great Fleet of Galleys; Cimon, that he might
intercept them before they should come into the Sea that lies betwixt the
Chelidonian Isles, set forth from Triopium and Gnidos with two hundred Galleys,
very fleet, and that could easily tack about. They were first contrived and
built by Themistocles, but Cimon enlarged them, that when they came to grapple,
there might be a greater number of Combatants to oppose the Enemy. The first
place he shaped his Course to was Phaselis, which tho 'twas inhabited by
Greeks, yet they would not quit the Interests of Persia, but denied his Galleys
entrance into their Port: Whereupon he wasted the Country, and drew up his Army
to their very Walls; but some Soldiers of Chios, which were then listed under
Cimon, being ancient Friends to the Phaselites, endeavored to mitigate the
General in their behalf; and in the mean time shot Arrows into the Town, to
which were fastened Letters of Intelligence, which gave them account of the
state of Affairs: At length Peace was concluded upon these Conditions, That
they should pay down ten Talents, and join their Forces with Cimon against the
Barbarians. Ephorus says, the Admiral of the Persian Fleet was Tithraustes,
and the General of the Land Army Pherendates: But Calisthenes is positive, that
Argomandes the Son of Gobrias had the supreme Command of all the Forces. The
whole Fleet Anchored at the Mouth of the River Eurymedon, but with no Design to
fight, because they expected a re-inforcement of Phaenician Sail, which were to
come from Cyprus; but Cimon, being resolved to prevent their joining, ranged
his Galleys in such a posture, that if they declined fighting he might force
them to it. The Barbarians seeing this, retired within the mouth of the River,
to prevent their being attacked; but when they saw the Athenians come upon them
notwithstanding their retreat, they met them with six hundred Sail, as
Phaenodemus relates, but according to Ephorus only with three hundred and
fifty. Yet notwithstanding this odds of number, they did nothing worthy such
mighty Forces; for they presently turned the Prows of their Galleys toward the
shore, where those that came first threw themselves upon Land, and fled to
their Army drawn up thereabout, but the rest perished with their Vessels, or
were taken; by this you may guess at their number; for though a great many
escaped out of the Fight, and a great many others were sunk, yet two hundred
Galleys were taken by the Athenians. When their Land-Army drew toward the
Seaside, Cimon was in suspense whether he should make a descent: For thereby
he should expose his Greeks, wearied with Slaughter in the first Engagement, to
the Swords of the Barbarians, who were all fresh Men, and Superior to them in
number: But seeing his men resolute, and flushed with Victory, he made them
land, tho they had not yet wiped off the Sweat and Blood of the first Battle.
As soon as they touched Ground, they set up a shout, and ran furiously upon the
Enemy, who stood firm and sustained the first shock with great obstinacy; so
that the fight began to be very doubtful; the principal men of the Athenians
for Quality and Courage, were slain; at length, tho with much ado, they routed
the Barbarians, some they took Prisoners, and plundered all their Tents and
Pavillions, which were full of very rich Spoil. Cimon being thus a perfect
Conqueror, having in one day gained two Victories, wherein he surpassed that of
Salamis by Sea, and that of Platea by Land, was encouraged to pursue his
Success: So* that News being brought that the Phaenician Succors, in number
eighty Sail, were at the Gulf of Hidram, he bended his Course toward them, and
encompassed them about. They had not received any certain account of the former
defeat, and now were in great doubt what to think: so that thus surprised they
lost their Vessels, and all the men were either Slain or Drowned. This success
of Cimon so daunted the King of Persia, that he presently made that memorable
Peace, whereby he engaged that his Armies should come no nearer the Grecian Sea
than the length of a Horse-race: And that none of his Galleys or Vessels of War
should appear between the Cyanean and Chelidonian Isles. Calisthenes says, that
he agreed not to any Articles, but that upon the fear this Victory gave him, he
prudently kept off so far from Greece, that when Pericles with fifty, and
Ephialtes with thirty Galleys, cruised beyond the Chelidonian Isles, they could
not discover one Persian Sail. But in the Collection which Craterus made of the
public Acts of the People, there is an Original draught of this Treaty, as
following upon that defeat. And it is reported, that at Athens they erected the
Altar of Peace upon this occasion; and decreed particular Honors to Callias,
who was employed as Ambassador to manage the Treaty.

The People of Athens raised so much Money from the Spoils of this War, which
were sold by public Outcry, that besides other Expenses, and raising the
South Wall of the Citadel, they laid the Foundation of those Walls (afterward
finished) which they called Skele, i e, Long Shanks, that join the City to the
Port; but the place where they built them being a Moorish Ground, they were
forced to sink great Weights of Stone to secure the Foundation; and all this
they did out of the Money Cimon supplied them with. It was he likewise that
adorned Athens with those Public Places of Exercise, which they afterward so
much frequented and delighted in: He set the Forum with Plain-trees: The
Academy, which was before open, and exposed to the Weather, he fenced with
Trees, and beautified with Fountains; he made covered Alleys to walk in, and
set out Ground for Foot and Horse-races. Afterward being informed that some
Persians, who had made themselves Masters of the Chersonese, were so peremptory
in not quitting it, that they called in the People (...) the higher Thrace to
help them against Cimon, whom they despised for the smallness of his Forces; he
set upon them with only four Galleys, and took thirteen of theirs. Then having
drove out the Persians, and subdued the Thracians, he made the whole Chersonese
subject to the Commonwealth of Athens. From hence he went against the People of
Thasos, who had revolted from the Athenians; and having defeated them in a
Fight at Sea, where he took thirty three of their Vessels, he stormed their
Town, seized for the Athenians all the Mines of Gold on the other side of it,
and all the Country dependant of it. This opened him a fair Passage into
Macedon, so that he might have Conquered the greatest part of it. But because
he neglected that Opportunity, he was suspected of Corruption, and that he was
bribed off by King Alexander: So, by the Combination of his Adversaries, he was
accused of being false to his Country. Before the Judges he pleaded, That he
never made an Interest with the Rich Ionians nor Thessalians, as others have,
from whence they drew both Honor and Profit; but that he always embraced the
Friendship of the Macedonians; for as he admired, so he wished to imitate the
Sedateness of their Temper, their Temperance and Simplicity of ^iving, which he
preferred to any sort of Riches; tho he had always been, and still was
Ambitious to enrich his Country with the Spoils of her Enemies. Stesimbrotus
making mention of his Trial, reports, That Elpinice in behalf of her Brother,
addressed her self to Pericles, one of the most vehement of his Accusers; to
whom Pericles answered with a Smile, You are too Old (Madam) to manage Affairs
of this Nature. However, after that, he became the mildest of his Prosecutors,
and rose up but once all the while to plead against him, which he did but very
faintly: And Cimon was acquitted. As for his demeanor at home, he always
restrained the Common People, who would have encroached upon the Nobility, and
affected the Supreme Power over them. But when he afterward was called out to
War, the Multitude broke loose as it were, reversed all the ancient Laws and
Customs they had hitherto observed; this they did chiefly at the instigation of
Ephialtes; they withdrew likewise the Cognizance of almost all Causes from the
Areopagus; so that all Appeals being made to them, the Government was reduced
to a perfect Democracy; and this by the help of Pericles, who declared in
favor of the Common People. But Cimon, when he returned, seeing the Authority
of this Great Council so eclipsed, was exceedingly troubled, and endeavored to
remedy these Disorders, by bringing things to their former state, and restoring
the Nobility to those Degrees of Command they had in the time of Calisthenes:
This the others declaimed against, with all the vehemence possible, and began
to revive those Stories concerning him and his Sister, and cried out against
him as addicted to the Lacedaemonians. Consonant to these Calumnies are the
famous Verses of Eupolis the Poet upon Cimon.

Ill Nature to him we cannot reproach;
But he is Lazy, and he will Debauch.
He goes to Sparta, and is so unkind,
He leaves poor Elpinice in Bed behind.
But if when Slothful and a Drunkard he could storm so many Towns, and gain so
many Victories; certainly if he had been sober, and minded his Business with
the least application, there had been no Grecian Commander, either before or
after him, that could have surpassed him for Exploits of War. He was indeed a
Favourer of the Lacedaemonians even from his Youth; and Stesimbrotus reports,
That of two Sons (Twins) that he had by a Woman of Clitorium, he named one
Lacedemonius, and the other Eleus: Whence Pericles often upbraided them with
the Race of their Mother. But Diodorus the Geographer does assert, That both
these, and another Son of Cimon's, whose Name was Thessalus, were born of
Isodice the Daughter of Euryptolemus the Son of Megacles.

However this is certain, that Cimon was countenanced by the Lacedaemonians in
opposition to Themistocles, whom they hated; and while he was yet very young,
they endeavored to raise and increase his Credit in Athens: This the Athenians
perceived, but dissembled their knowledge of it; for the Favor of the
Lacedaemonians showed him was at that time advantageous to them and their
Affairs; who were then Practicing with the Allies to win them over to their
side: So they seemed not at all offended with the Honor and kindness showed to
Cimon, for he then bore the greatest sway in the Affairs of Greeee, was kind to
the Lacedaemonians, and Courteous to the Allies. But afterward the Athenians
grown more powerful, when they saw Cimon so entirely devoted to the
Lacedaemonians, they began to be angry, for he would always in his Speeches
prefer them to the Athenians; and upon every occasion, when he would reprimand
these for a Fault, or incite them to Emulation, he would Cry, The
Lacedaemonians would not do thus. This raised the discontent, and got him the
hatred of the Gitizens; But that which ministered chiefly to the accusation
against him fell out upon this Occasion.

In the fourth year of the Reign of Archidamus the Son of Zeuxidamus King of
Sparta, there happened in the City of Lacedaemon the most dreadful Earthquake
that ever was known in the Memory of Man; the Earth opened into most frightful
Abysses; and the top of the Mountain Taygetus was so shaken, that the hanging
Rocks and abrupt prominent Parts of it fell down; and except five Houses, all
the Town was shattered to pieces. They say, That a little before any Motion was
perceived, as some young Men were exercising themselves in the middle Portico,
an Hare of a sudden started out just by them, which some of them, tho all
naked, and daubed with Oil, run after shouting; no sooner were they gone from
the place, but the Gymnasium fell down upon them that were left, and killed
them all. In memory of this fatal Accident, the Monument where they were
afterward interred is to this day called Sismatias, (that is,) The Tomb of
those who were killed by the Earthquake.) Archidamus, by the present danger,
made apprehensive of what might follow; and seeing the Citizens intent upon
removing the richest of their Goods he commanded an Alarm to be sounded, as if
their Enemies were coming upon them, that they should presently with Arms
resort to him. 'Twas this alone that saved Sparta at that time: For the Helotes
were got together from the Country about, with design to surprise the Spartans,
and spoil those whom the Earthquake had spared: But finding them Armed, and
well prepared, they stole away into their Towns, and openly made War with them,
having drawn into Confederacy not a few of their Neighbors; and together with
them, the Messenians fell upon the Spartans, who therefore dispatched
Periclidas to Athens to solicit for Succors; of whom Aristophanes, mocking,
said,

Go to the Altars, and there prostrate lie,
And, clad in Purple Robes, demand Supply.
This Ephialtes opposed, protesting that they ought not to raise up or assist a
City that was Rival to Athens; but that being down, it were best to keep her
so, and break the Pride and Arrogance of Sparta. But Cimon (as Critias relates)
preferring the Safety of Lacedaemon to the Grandeur of his own Country, so
persuaded the People, that he soon marched out with a great Army to their
Relief. Ion reports the Speech he used to move the Athenians, That they should
not suffer Greece to be maimed by the loss of so considerable a Member, nor
their own City to be deprived of her Companion. In his return from aiding the
Lacedaemonians, he passed with his Army through the Territory of Corinth:
Whereupon Lachartus reproached him for bringing his Army into the Country,
without first asking leave of the People: For he that knocks at another Man's
Door, ought not to enter the House without the Master's leave. But you,
Lachartus, (said Cimon) did not knock at the Gates of the Cleonians and
Megarians, but broke them down, and entered by force, thinking that all should
be open to the Powerful. And having thus rallied the Corinthian, he passed on
with his Army. Some time after this the Lacedaemonians sent a second time to
desire Succors of the Athenians, against the Messenians and Helotes, who had
seized upon Ithone: But when they came, the Spartans fearing their Courage and
Resolution, of all that came to their Assistance they sent them only back,
alleging they were turbulent and seditious. The Athenians returned home,
enraged at this Usage, and vented their Anger upon all those who were Favorers
of the Lacedaemonians; therefore upon some slight occasion they banished Cimon
for ten years, which is the time prescribed to those that are banished by the
Ostracism. In the mean time the Lacedaemonians intending to free Delphos from
the Phoceans, brought an Army to Tanagra, whither the Athenians presently
marched with design to fight them.

Cimon also came thither armed, and ranged himself amongst those of his own
Tribe, which was that of Aeneide; but the Council of five hundred being
informed of this, and frighted at it, (his Adversaries crying out he would
disorder the Army, and bring the Lacedaemonians to Athens) Commanded the
Officers not to receive him; wherefore Cimon left the Army, conjuring Euthippus
the Anaphlystian, and the rest of his Companions, who were also suspected as
favoring the Lacedaemonians, to behave themselves bravely against their
Enemies, and by their Actions make their innocence evident to their
Countrymen. These being in all an hundred, took the Arms of Cimon, and
followed his advice: and making a Body by themselves, they charged so
desperately upon the Enemy, that they were all cut off, leaving to the
Athenians a deep regret, for the loss of such brave Men, and repentance for
having so unjustly suspected them. Whereupon they did not long retain their
severity toward Cimon, partly upon remembrance of his former services, and
partly constrained by the juncture of the times: For being defeated at Tanagra
in a great Battle, and fearing the Peloponnesians would come upon them, at the
opening of the Spring; they recalled Cimon by a decree, of which Pericles
himself was Author: so reasonable were Men's resentments in those times, and so
moderate their Anger, that it always gave way to the public good; even
Ambition, the most ungovernable of all humane Passions, could then yield to the
necessities of the State.

Cimon as soon as he returned, put an end to the War, and reconciled the two
Cities. Peace thus established, seeing the Athenians impatient of being Idle,
and eager after the Honor and Spoils of War; lest they should set upon the
Grecians themselves, or with so many Ships cruising about the Isles and
Peloponnesus, they should give Occasions to intestine Wars, or Complaints of
their Allies against them; He equipped two hundred Galleys, with design to make
an attempt upon Egypt and Cyprus; by this means to use the Athenians to fight
against the Barbarians, and enrich themselves by spoiling those who are by
nature Enemies to Greece. But when all things were prepared, and the Army ready
to imbark, Cimon had this Dream: It seemed to him an angry Bitch barked at him,
and a kind of humane voice mixed with barking uttered these Words.

Go on, for shortly thou shall be,
A Friend to my young Whelps and me.
This Dream was hard to interpret; yet Astyphylus of Posidonium, a man skilled
in Divinations, and intimate with Cimon, told him, that his Death was presaged
by this Vision, which he thus explained. A Dog is Enemy to him he barks at, and
one is always most a friend to ones Enemies, when one is dead; that mixture of
humane Voice with barking signifies the Modes, for the Army of the Medes is
mixed of Greeks and Barbarians. But after this Dream, as he was sacrificing to
Bacchus, and the Priest cutting up the Victim, a great number of Emmets, taking
up the little congealed particles of the blood, laid them about Cimon's great
Toe: This was not observed a good while; but as soon as Cimon spied it, the
Priest came and showed him the Liver of the Sacrifice imperfect, wanting that
part of it, which they called the head of the Entrail. But he could not then
recede from the Enterprise, so he set sail; sixty of his Ships he sent toward
Egypt; with the rest he went and fought the King of Persia's Fleet composed of
Phaenician and Cilician Sail: subdued all the Cities thereabout, and threatened
Egypt; designing no less than the entire Ruin of the Persian Empire; And the
rather for that he was informed Themistocles was in great repute among the
Barbarians, and had promised the King to lead his Army, whenever he should make
War upon Greece; but they say Themistocles losing all hopes of compassing his
designs, and despairing to equal the Virtue and good fortune of Cimon, dyed a
voluntary Death. Cimon still framing great designs, and keeping his Navy about
the Isle of Cyprus, sent Messengers to Consult the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon
upon some secret matter; for it is not known about what they were sent; the God
would give them no Answer, but commanded them to return again, for that Cimon
was already with him. Hearing this they returned to Sea, and as soon as they
came to the Grecian Army, which was then about Egypt, they understood that
Cimon was dead; and computing the time of the Oracle, they found that his Death
was meant by it, as being then with the Gods. Some say he died of Sickness at
Citium in Cyprus, and others of a wound he received in a Skirmish with the
Barbarians; when he perceived he should dye, he commanded those under his
charge to return to their Country, and by no means to spread the news of his
Death by the way; this they did with such secrecy, that they all came home
safe, and neither their Enemies nor Allies knew what had happened. Thus, as
Phaenodemus relates, the Grecian Army was, as it were, conducted by Cimon
thirty days after he was dead. But with him perished all the good fortune of
Greece; for after his Death there was not a Commander that did any thing
considerable, or which might deserve the name of a great action, and instead of
uniting against their common Enemies, they who bore sway in the Principal
Cities, animated them against one another to that degree, that none durst or
would interpose their good Offices to reconcile them. Thus by mutual discord
ruining themselves, the Persians had time to recover Breath, and repair all
their losses. It Is true indeed Agesilaus made some show of the Grecian Forces
in Asia, but 'twas a long time after; he seemed to revive some little
appearances of a War against the Kings Lieutenants in the Provinces, but they
all quickly vanished; for before he could perform any thing of moment, he was
recalled by civil Dissentions at home: So that he was forced to leave the
Persian Kings Officers to impose what Tribute they pleased on the Grecian
Cities in Asia, tho under the Dominion of the Lacedaemonians. Whereas in the
time of Cimon, no Officer of What Quality or Character soever could Command
there, nor durst any Soldier in Arms come within four hundred furlongs of the
Sea.

The Monuments called Cimonian, to this day in Athens, show that to be the
place of his Burial; yet the Inhabitants of the City Citium, pay particular
honor to a certain Tomb, which they call the Tomb of Cimon, according to
Nausicrates the Rhetorician; who also reports, that in a Famine, when there
necessities were very great, they sent to the Oracle, which commanded them to
honor Cimon as a God.

Thus have I drawn the Life of this Famous Captain, and by these Proportions
judge of him.

LUCULLUS.
See siere Lucullus sues, He humbly bends,
Of PRISCA bvys his Honors and his friends
The way is base: but thus hard state commands,
For ffortune still is in a Woman's hands:
THE LIFE OF LUCULLUS.
Translated by Giles Thornburgh, A. M.
VOLUME III.
LVCVLLVS his Grandfather had been Consul, his Uncle by the Mothers Sister was
Metelius surnamed Numidicus. As for his Parents, his Father was convict of
Extortion, and his Mother Caecilia's Reputation was blasted by her loose Life.
The first thing that Lucullus did, before ever he came to any Office, or meddled
with the Affairs of State, being then but a Youth, was, to accuse the Accuser
of his Father, Servilius the Augur having caught him in a Public Trespass.
This thing was much taken notice of among the Romans, who commended his Justice
therein, as an Act of singular Virtue. Even without the Provocation, the
Accusation was esteemed no unbecoming Action; for they delighted to see young
Men as eagerly pursuing injustice, as good Dogs do wild Beasts. But when great
Animosities arose thereupon, insomuch that some were wouned and killed in the
Fray, Servilius fled. Lucullus followed his Study, and became Master of the
Greek and Latin Tongues; (...)
which made Sylla dedicate to him the commentaries of his Life, which he wrote
himself, that the History thereof might be more methodically ordered and
digested. His Speech was not Elegant, and ready for Gain only, like one

That disturbs the Hall, as a mad Thynnus A Fish that grows mad after Midsummer.
does the Waters;
Out of it, altogether as dry, illiterate, and mute.
For in his younger days he chiefly addicted himself to the commendable Study
of the Liberal Arts; and growing old in the Camp, he refreshed his Mind with
the more comfortable Profession of Philosophy, chiefly favoring the Theoretick
Part, and thereby wisely preventing that dangerous Contest that was breeding
between Pompey and himself. Besides what has been said of his great Learning
already, one Instance more was, That in his Youth, upon a Proposal of writing
the Marsican War in Greek and Latin Verse and Prose, after some witty Rallery
upon the Occasion, he seriously protested to Hortensius the Lawyer, and Sisenna
the Historian, that hewould take his Lot for it; and very probable it is, that
the Lot directed him to the Greek Tongue, for the Greek History of that War is
still extant among us. Many are the Signs of the great Love which he bore to
his Brother Mark, the earliest whereof the Romans at this day commemorate: Tho
he was elder Brother, he would not step into Authority without him, but
deferred his own Advance, until his Brother was fitly qualified to bear a share
with him, who thereby so won upon the People, as when absent, Clark of the
Market.
to be chosen Aedyle with him.

Many and early were the Proofs of his Valor and Conduct in the Marsican War,
being admired by Sylla for his Constancy and Mildness, and always employed in
dispatching affairs where Industry and Fidelity were required; especially in
the Mint, most of the Money for carrying on the Mithridatick War, being Coined
by him. Which being soon exchanged for necessaries in the Camp, was for a long
time Current in the Army, and from thence called Luculleian Coin. After this,
when Sylla conquered Athens and necessaries for his Army were cut off by reason
the Enemy was Master at Sea: Lucullus was the man whom he sent into Libya and
Egypt, to procure him shipping. It was then the depth of Winter, when he
ventured but with three small Greek Vessels, and as many Rhodian Galleys, not
only into the main Sea, but also among multitudes of the Enemies shipping, even
there where they were absolute Masters. Arriving at Crete, he gained it: and
finding the Cyrenians harassed by long Tyranny and War, he took Care of their
public Affairs, and settled them: Putting their City in mind of that saying
which Plato had Divinely uttered of them: who being requested to prescribe Laws
to them, and mould them into some sound form of Government, made answer, That
it was a hard thing to give Laws to the Cyrenians, abounding with so much
Wealth and Plenty. For nothing renders a man more intractable than Felicity,
nor more gentle than the shock of Fortune. This made the Cyrenians so willingly
submit to the Laws which Lucullus imposed upon them. From thence sailing into
Egypt, and pressed by Pirates, he lost the best part of his Navy: but he
himself narrowly escaping was brought in State to Alexandria. The whole Fleet
(a Complement due only to his Majesty) met him, and young Ptolomy showed
wonderful kindness to him, allowing him Lodging and Diet in the Palace, in such
a manner as no Stranger before him had been received in. Besides, he gave him
Gratuities and Presents, not only such as were usually given to men of his
Condition, but four times as much; but he received nothing more than served his
necessity, and accepted of no Gift, tho one worth Eighty Talents was offered
him. It Is reported he neither went to see Memphis, nor any of the celebrated
Wonders of Egypt: It was Metropolis of Egypt.
for a man of no Business, and much Curiosity to see such things, not for him
who had left his Commander in the Trenches, storming the Walls of his Enemies.
Ptolomy fearing the Effect of that War, deserted the Confederacy; but
nevertheless sent a Convoy with him as far as Cyprus, and at parting, with much
Ceremony wishing him a good Voyage, gave him a very precious Emerauld set in
Gold: Lucullus at first refused it, but when the King showed him his own Image
graven thereon, 'twas too late for a Denial; for had he showed any discontent
at parting, it might have endangered his Passage. Drawing his Squadron
together, which he had summoned out of all the maritime Towns, except of those
suspected of Pyracy, he sailed for Cyprus; and there understanding that the
Enemy lay in wait under the Promontories for him, he laid up his Fleet; and
sent to the Cities to send in Provisions for his wintering among them: But when
Tide and Time served, he Rigged them out and went off, and Hoising up his Sails
in the Night which he let down in the Day, came safe to Rhodes. Being furnished
with Ships at Rhodes, he soon prevailed upon the Inhabitants of Chios, and
Knidia to leave the King's side, and join with him against the Samians. Out of
Chios he drove the King's Party, and set the Colophonians at Liberty having
seized Epigonus the Tyrant who oppressed them.

About this time Mithridates left Pergamus, and retired to Pitane, where being
closely besieged by Fimbria, and not daring to engage with so bold and
Victorious a man as Fimbria, he contrived his Escape by Sea, and sent for all
his Fleet to attend him. Which when Fimbria perceived, having no Ships of his
own, he sent to Lucullus, entreating him to assist him with his in subduing the
most Odious and Warlike of Kings, lest the opportunity of humbling Mithridates,
an enterprise which cost the Romans so much Blood and Trouble, should now at
last be lost, when he was within reach, and so easily to be taken; who being
caught, no one would be more highly commended than he, who stopped his passage
and seized him in his flight. He being drove from the Land by the one, and
stopped in the Sea by the other, would be matter of Renown and Glory to them
both. As for the great Actions of Sylla against the Orchomenians about
Choeronea, they were little valued by the Romans. The proposal was no unlikely
thing, it being obvious to all Men, that if Lucullus had hearkened to Fimbria,
and with his Navy, which was then near at hand, had blocked up the Haven the
War soon had been brought to an end, and infinite Numbers of mischiefs
prevented thereby. But he, whether from the Sacredness of Friendship between
himself and Sylla, reckoning all other Motives far inferior to it, or out of
Detestation to wicked Fimbria, whom he abhorred for advancing himself by the
late Death of his Friend, and the General of the Army; or, at least by divine
Providence sparing Mithridates then, that he might have him an Adversary for
the time to come, would by no means comply, but suffered Mithridates to escape,
and laugh at the attempts of Fimbria, he himself alone first, near Lectos of
Troas in a Seafight overcame the King's Forces; and afterward when Neoptolemus
came upon him with a greater Fleet, he went aboard a Rhodian Quinquereme
Galley, commanded by Demagoras, a Man very expert in Sea Affairs, and
altogether as Friendly to the Romans, and sailed before the rest. Neoptolemus
made up furiously at him, and Commanded the Master with all imaginable might to
bear up to him, but Demagoras fearing the Bulk and Massy stem of the Admiral,
thought it dangerous to meet him ahead, but Tacking about received him astern,
in which place though violently bore upon, he received no manner of harm, the
blow being defeated by falling on those parts of the Ship which lay under
Water. At which time the rest of the Fleet coming up to him, he Tacked about,
and vigorously falling upon the Enemy, put them to flight, and pursued
Neoptolemus. After this he came to Sylla in Chersonesus, as he was passing the
Strait, and brought timely assistance for the safe Transportation of the Army.

Peace being now made, Mithridates sailed off to the Euxine Sea, but Sylla
Taxed the Inhabitants of Asia two thousand Talents, and ordered Lucullus to
gather and Coin the Money: And it was no small Comfort to the Cities under
Sylla's severity that not only a Man of spotless Life and Justice, but also of
Moderation, should be employed in so heavy and disgustful an Office. The
Mytilenians who deserted him, he was willing should return to their Duty, and
to be moderately fined for the offense they had given in the Case of Marius.
But upon their obstinacy, he came up to them, overcame them at Sea, blocked
them up in their City and besieged them; then Sailing off from them openly in
the Day to Elea, he returned privately; and an Ambush being laid round the
City, lay quiet himself. Whereupon the Mytilenians disorderly and eagerly
plundering the deserted Camp, in the very fact he fell upon them, took many of
them, and slew five hundred, who stood upon their defense; he gained six
thousand Slaves and a very rich Booty.

He was no way engaged in the Great and General Troubles of Italy, which Sylla
and Marius had caused, Providence at that time detaining him in Asia about
business. He was as much in Sylla's favor as any of his other Friends, to whom
(as is said before) he dedicated his Memoirs as a Token of his kindness, and at
his Death passing by Pompey, made him Guardian to his Son, which seems to be
the rise of the Quarrel between them two, both young Men, equally contending
for Honor. A little after Sylla's Death he was made Consul with M. Cotta,
about the one hundred seventy sixth Olympiad. The Mithridatick War being then
under debate, Marcus reported that it was not finished, but only respited for a
time: Wherefore upon choice of Provinces, the Lot falling to Lucullus to have
that part of Gaul that was within the Alps, a Province where no great Action
was to be done, nor Glory to be obtained, he was exceedingly troubled: But
chiefly, the Success of Pompey in Spain fretted him most, being a man highly
Renowned, and after the Completion of the Spanish War, the only one likely to
be chosen General against Mithridates. So that when Pompey sent for Money, and
signified by Letter that unless it were sent him, he would leave the Country,
and Sertorius, and bring his Forces home to Italy; Lucullus most readily
espoused his Cause, that Money might be sent him, to prevent any pretense of
his returning home during his Consulship; for all things would have been at his
Disposal at the Head of so great An Army. Cethegus a very popular Man both for
Words and Actions, the Chief manager of Affairs in Rome, had conceived a mortal
hatred against him, for declaiming against his Debaucht, Insolent, and lewd
Life, Lucullus therefore openly set himself against him. But Lucius Quintus,
another Demagogue, inveighing against Sylla's Administration, and endeavoring
to put things out of Order, by private Exhortations and Public Admonitions, he
hindered his Design, and suppressed his Ambition, wisely and safely encountering
so great an Evil in the very Bud. At this time, News came that Octavius the
Provincial of Cilicia was Dead, and many appeared for the place, courting
Cethegus, as the man best able to serve them. Lucullus set little value upon
Cilicia it self, no otherwise than as he thought by his acceptance of it, no
other man besides himself might be employed in the War against Mithridates, by
reason of its nearness to Cappadocia. This made him use all his Interest that
that Province might be allotted to himself, and to none other; which put him
upon a Project, not so Honest and Commendable, as expedient for compassing his
Design, submitting to necessity against his own Inclination. There was one
Proecia, a most celebrated Wit and Beauty, but in other things nothing better
than an impudent Harlot: Who to the Charms of her Person, adding the Reputation
of one that loved and served her Friend, by making those who came to her, as
they discoursed of the Designs and Promotions of their Friends, had got a great
Interest. She had seduced Cethegus; the Chiefest Man in esteem and Authority of
all the City, and enticed him to her Love, and so made all Authority follow
her. For nothing of moment was done, wherein Cethegus was not concerned,
nothing by Cethegus without Praecia. This Woman Lucullus gained to his side by
Gifts and Flattery (and great cost it was to procure so stately and famous a
Dame, to be earnestly concerned for Lucullus) and presently found Cethegus his
Friend, using his utmost Interest to procure Silicia for him: Which when once
obtained, there was no more need of applying himself, either to Praecia, or
Cethegus; for all unanimously voted him to the Mithridatick War, by no hands
likely to be so successfully managed as his. Pompey was still contending with
Sertorius, and Metellus by Age unfit for Service; which two alone were the only
Competitors, who could stand equal with Lucullus for that Command. Cotta his
Colleague, after much ado in the Senate, was sent away with the Fleet to guard
the Propontis, and defend the Bithynians. Lucullus listed his Forces and
carried them over into Asia, where he collected some fresh ones, the old ones
being utterly disabled by dissoluteness and rapine. The Fimbrians, as they were
called, being utterly unmanageable by their long mis-use, and unfit for
service. For these were they that had slain Flaccus the Consul and General,
under Fimbria, and these were they who afterward betrayed Fimbria to Sylla; a
bold, and barbarous People, warlike, expert and hardy in the field. Lucullus in
a short time took down the Courage of these, and disciplined others, who then
first (in all probability) knew what a true Commander, and Governor was, who
in former times had been courted to service, and took up Arms at no bodies
Command, but their own Wills.

The Enemies provisions for War stood thus. Mithridates, like many of the
Sophisters, very proud, and haughty at first, set upon the Romans, with a very
unprovided Army, such indeed as made a good show but was nothing for service;
but being shamefully routed, and better instructed against a second Engagement,
he formed his Forces into a just, and well martiall'd Army. And removing the
Dangers, and Inconvenience which might happen among Men of different Nations,
and Tongues, and no less from gilt and rich Armor, a greater Temptation to the
Victors, than security to the Bearers, gave them broad Swords like the Romans,
and Massy Shields; chose Horses better for Service than Shape, drew up an
hundred and twenty Thousand Foot in the figure of the Roman Phalanx; had
sixteen Thousand Horse, besides Chariots Armed with Scyths no less than an
hundred. Besides which he set out a Fleet not at all cumbred with Golden
Cabins, lascivious Baths, and Women's furniture, but stored with Weapons and
Darts and other necessaries, and made a descent upon Bithynia. Not only these
parts willingly received him again, but almost all Asia, grievously oppressed
before by the Roman Extortioners and Publicans, seemed to be recovered of their
former Distemper. These afterward, who like Harpies stole away their very
Nourishment, Lucullus drove away, and by reproving them, did what he could to
make them more moderate, and thereby prevented a general Sedition, then
breaking out in all parts. While Lucullus was detained in rectifying this,
Cotta finding Affairs ripe for Action prepared himself for the War with
Mithridates, and News coming from all hands, that Lucullus was then Marching
into Phrygia, and he thinking Victory just almost in his hands, lest his
Colleague should share in the Glory of it, hasted to Battle without him. But
being routed both by Sea and Land, he lost sixty Ships with their Men, and four
Thousand Foot: he himself was forced into, and besieged in Chalcedon, there
waiting for relief from Lucullus. There were those about Lucullus, who would
have had him leave Cotta, and go forward, being then in a ready way to surprise
the defenseless Kingdom of Mithridates. And it was highly resented by the
Soldiers, that Cotta should not only lose his own Army, but hinder them also
from Conquest, which at that time without the hazard of a Battle, they might so
easily have obtained. But Lucullus in a Solemn Speech declared unto them, That
he would rather save one Citizen from the Enemy, than be Master of all that
they had.

Archelaus Governor of Baeotia under Mithridates, revolting from him and siding
with the Romans, demonstrated to Lucullus, that upon his bare coming, he might
easily surprise all the Country of Pontus; but he answered, that it did not
become him to be more fearful than Huntsmen, to leave the chase of the wild
Beasts abroad, and seek after sport in their deserted Lodges. Having so said he
made toward Mithridates, with thirty Thousand foot, and two Thousand five
hundred Horse. But being come in sight of his Enemies, he was astonished at
their Numbers, and resolved to forbear fighting, and wear out time. But Marius,
whom Sertorius had sent out of Spain to Mithridates with Forces under him,
stepping out and challenging him, he prepared for Battle. In the very instant
of joining no manifest alteration preceding, of a sudden the Sky opened, and a
great Body of light fell down in the midst between the Armies, in shape like a
Hogshead, but in Color like melted Silver, insomuch that both Armies being
surprised stood off. This wonderful Prodigy happened in Phrygia near Otryae.
Lucullus after this began to think with himself, that no Man could have Power
and Wealth enough, to sustain so great Numbers as Mithridates had, for any long
time in the face of an Enemy, Commanded one of the Captives to be brought
before him, and first of all asked him how many Companions were quartered with
him, and how much provision he had left behind him? and when he had answered
him, Commanded him to stand aside; then asked a second and a third the same
question, after which comparing the quantity of provision, with the Men, he
found that in three or four days time, his Enemies would be brought to want. As
for himself he was able to subsist longer, having stored his Camp with all
sorts of provision, and living in plenty, was better able to beset his hungry
Enemy. Which made Mithridates set forward against the Cyzicenians, miserably
shattered in the fight at Chalcedon, where they lost no less than three
thousand Citizens, and ten Ships. And that he might the safer steal away from
Lucullus, immediately after Supper by the help of a dark, and gloomy Night, he
went off, and by the Morning gained the City opposite to it* and sat down with
his Forces upon the Adrastian Mount. Lucullus saw his Motion, and pursued him,
but daring not to fall upon him with disorderly Forces, sat down also near the
Village called Thracia, a convenient pass, and plentiful place, from whence,
and through which all the provisions for Mithridates's Camp must of necessity
come. Whereupon judging of the event, he kept not his mind from his Soldiers,
but when the Camp was fortified, and the Works finished, called them together,
and with great assurance told them, that in few days, without the expense of
Blood, he would bring Victory to them.

Mithridates besieged the Cyzicenians with ten Camps by Land, and with his
Ships blockt up the Strait that was betwixt their City and the Continent, and
stormed them on all sides, who were fully prepared stoutly to receive him, and
resolved to endure the utmost extremity, rather than forsake the Romans. That
which troubled them most was, that they knew not where Lucullus was, and heard
nothing of him, though at that time his Army was visible before them. But they
were imposed upon, by the Mithridatians; who showing them the Romans Encamped
on the Hills, Do ye see those, said they? those are the Auxiliary (...).
Armenians and Medes which Tigranes sent to Mithridates. These were astonished
at the vast numbers round them, and could not believe any place of relief was
left them, no not if Lucullus had come up to their assistance. Demonax sent by
Archelaus was the first who told them of Lucullas's arrival; but they
disbeliev'd his report, and thought he came with forged News to comfort them:
At which time a Fugitive Boy was taken and brought before them; who being asked
where Lucullus was, smiled at their jesting, as he thought; but finding them in
earnest, with his finger showed them the Roman Camp; upon which they took
Courage. In the Lake Dascylitis they used Vessels of a midling size, the
biggest whereof Lucullus drew ashore, and carrying her in a Wagon to the Sea,
filled her with Soldiers, who Sailing along unseen in the dead of the Night,
came safe to the City. The Gods themselves wondering at the constancy of the
Cyzicenians, seem to have animated them with signs from above, but more
especially now in the Festival of Proserpina, where a black Heifer being
wanting for Sacrifice, they supplied it by a Meat Offering, which they set
before the Altar. The holy Heifer set apart for the Goddess, and at that time
grazing with the Herd of the Cyzicenians on the other side of the Strait, left
the Herd and came home to the City alone, and offered her self for Sacrifice.
By Night the Goddess appearing to Aristagoras the Town Clerk, I am come, said
she, and have (...)
brought the Lybian Piper against the Pontick Trumpeter; bid the Citizens
therefore be of good Courage. While the Cyzicenians (...)
were wondering at the Revelation, by a sudden North wind there arose a great
storm at Sea. The Kings battering Engines, the wonderful Contrivance of
Nicomedes of Thessaly, then under the Walls, by their cracking and shivering
soon demonstrated what would follow; after which a mighty tempestuous
South Wind succeeding, broke down the rest of the works in a Moments space, and
by a violent concussion, threw down a wooden Tower a hundred Cubits high. It Is
said that in ^ium Minerva appeared unto many in the Night with bloody and torn
Garments, telling them that she then came from relieving the Cyzicenians: and
the Inhabitants to this day have a Monument, with an Inscription by public
order of the same.

Mithridates, through the knavery of his Officers, not knowing the want of
Provision in his Camp, was troubled in mind, that the Cyzicenians should hold
out Siege against him: But his Ambition and anger fell, when he saw his
Soldiers in want, and feeding on Man's flesh; Lucullus being no airy
vainglorious Enemy, but one according to the Proverb, who made the seat of War
in their Bellies, by seizing on the food, which should sustain them.
Mithridates therefore took advantage of the time, while he was storming a Fort,
and sent away almost all his Horse to Bithynia, with the Sumpters, and as many
of the Foot as were unfit for service. Which Lucullus understanding, came to
his Camp; and in the Morning during the storm, took ten bands of Foot, and the
Horse with him, and pursued them through Tempest and Cold, though the severity
of the Weather forced some of his Soldiers back, who were ready to perish under
it; and with the rest coming upon the Enemy, near the River Ryndacus, overthrew
them with so great an Overthrow, that the very Women of Apollonia came out to
seize on the Booty, and rob the Slain. Great numbers, as we may suppose, were
slain, six Thousand Horses taken, with an infinite number of laboring Cattle,
and no less than fifteen Thousand Men; all which he led along by the Enemies
Camp. And here I cannot but wonder at Salust, who says, That this was the first
time Camels were seen by the Romans; as if he thought those who fought under
Scipio against Antiochus before, or those lately under the Command of Archelaus
against the Orchomenians about Chaeronea, had not known what a Camel was. But
however, it is well known, that Mithridates soon fled, and contrived Delays and
Diversions for Lucullus, while he sent his Admiral Aristonicus to the Greek
Sea; who was betrayed in the very instant of going off, and Lucullus became
Master of him, and ten Thousand pieces of Gold, which he was carrying with him,
to corrupt some of the Roman Army. After which, Mithridates himself made for
the Sea, leaving the Foot-Officers to conduct the Army; upon whom Lucullus fell
about the River Granicus, where he took a vast number alive, and slew 15000.
It Is reported that the number of fighting Men, and others who followed the
Camp, destroyed, amounted to thirty Myriads.

Lucullus first went into Cyzicum, and then fitting his Navy, sailed away into
the Hellespont, and arriving at Troas, he lodged in the Temple of Venus, where
in the night he thought he saw the Goddess coming to him, and saying, Why
sleep thou, great Lion, when the Fawns are nigh? Rising up hereupon, he
called his Friends to him, and told them his Vision; at which instant some
Ilians being present, acquainted him, that thirteen of the King's Quinqueremes
were seen off of the Achean Haven, sailing for Lemnos. He took these, and slew
their Admiral Isidorus; and then made after another Squadron, who were in
Harbor, with their Vessels ashore, but fought from above-deck, and sorely
galled Lucullus's Men; there being neither room to sail round them, nor to bear
upon them for any damage, while they stood secure, and fixed on the Sand. After
much ado, at the only Landing-place of all the Island, he Landed the Choicest
of his Men, who falling upon the Enemy behind, killed some, and forced others
to cut their Cables, who making from the Shore, fell foul upon one another, or
came within reach of Lucullus his Fleet. Many were killed in the Action. Among
the Captives was Marius the Commander, sent by Sertorius, a Man who had but one
Eye: And it was Lucullus's strict Command to his Men before the Engagement,
that they should kill no Man who had but one Eye, that he might rather die
under disgrace and reproach. This being over, he hastened his Pursuit after
Mithridates, whom he hoped to find at Bithynia, blocked up by Voconius, whom he
sent out before to Nicomedia with part of the Fleet, to stop his Flight: But
Voconius, by his mirth and jollity in Samothracia, slipped out his opportunity,
Mithridates being passed by with all his Fleet; who hastening into Pontus before
Lucullus came up to him, was nevertheless caught in a Storm, which dispersed
his Fleet, and sunk several Ships. The Wreck floated on all the neighboring
Shore for many days after. The Ship wherein he himself was, incapable of being
brought ashore by the Masters for its bigness, rolling up and down in the
Flood, being heavy with Water and ready to sink, he left, and went aboard a
Pyratical Vessel, delivering himself into the hands of Pirates, and unexpectedly
and wonderfully came safe to Heraclea in Pontus.

There happened a generous Emulation between Lucullus and the Senate: For they
having decreed him 3000 Talents to furnish out a Navy, he himself was against
it, and sent them word, that without so great Supplies, by the Confederate
Shipping alone, he did not in the least doubt but to rout Mithridates from the
Sea. And so he did, by Assistance from above; for it is reported, that Diana
Priapina sent the great Tempest upon the People of Pontus, because they had
robbed her Temple, and removed her Image. When many were persuading Lucullus to
go directly on, he rejected their Counsel, and marched through Bithynia and
Galatia, to the King's Country; in so great scarcity of Provision at first,
that thirty Thousand Galatians followed, every Man carrying a Bushel of Wheat
at his Back. But he subduing all in his Progress before him, at last arrived at
so great Plenty, that an Ox was sold in the Camp for a single Groat, and a
Slave for four. The other Booty they made no account of, but took and destroyed
as they pleased; there being no Contest among them, where all were satisfied.
But inasmuch as they had made frequent Incursions and Advances, as far as
Themiscyra and the inner Thermodon, and had laid waste the Country before them,
they began to discourse with Lucullus in good earnest, Why he took so many
Towns by Surrender, and never an one by Storm, which might enrich them with the
Plunder. And now, forsooth leaving Amisus behind, a rich and wealthy City, of
easy Conquest (if closely besieged) to carry us into the Tibarenian and
Chaldean Wilderness, to fight with Mithridates. Lucullus little thinking this
would be of so dangerous consequence as it afterward proved, took no notice of
it, but slighted it, and choose rather to excuse himself to those who blamed
his Tardiness, in losing time about small pitiful Places, not worth the while,
and allowing Mithridates time to recruit. That is what I design, said he, and
am contriving by my delay, that he may grow great again, and gather a
considerable Army, which may induce him to stand, and not fly away before us,
for do ye not see the vast and boundless Wilderness behind? Caucasus is not far
off, and the steep and craggy Mountains, enough to conceal numbers of Kings in
their flight from Battle. Besides, it is a Journey but of few days from Cabira
to Armenia, where Tigranes Reigns, King of Kings, who by his Power dissolved
the Parthian Empire in Asia, brought several Greek Towns under the Median Yoke,
Conquered Syria and Palaestine; extinguished the Royal Line of Seleucus, and
carried away their Wives and Daughters by violence. This same is Relation and
Son-in-Law to Mithridates, and cannot but receive him upon entreaty, and enter
into War with us to defend him; so that while we endeavor to depose
Mithridates, we shall endanger the bringing in of Tigranes against us, who
already has sought occasion to fall out with us, but can never find one so
justifiable as the Succor of a Friend and necessitous Prince. Why therefore
should we put Mithridates upon this strait, who as yet knows not how he may
best fight with us, and utterly disdains to stoop to Tigranes; and not rather
allow him time to gather a new Army and grow insolent, that we our selves might
fight with the Colchians and Tibarenians, whom we have often defeated already,
and not with Medes and Armenians. Upon these Motives Lucullus sat down before
Amisus, and slowly carried on the Siege; but the Winter being well spent, he
left Murena in charge with it, and went himself against Mithridates, then
Rendezvouzing at Cabira, and resolving to wait for the Romans with forty
Thousand Foot about him, and thirteen Thousand Horse, wherein he chiefly
confided. But passing the River Lycus, he challenged the Romans into the
Plains, where the Cavalry engaged, and the Romans were beaten. Pomponius, a Man
of good note, was taken, wounded, and sore, and in pain as he was, was carried
before Mithridates, and asked by the King, If by saving his Life, he would
become his Friend, who answered, Yes, if thou, O King, wilt be reconciled to
the Romans; if not, thy Enemy. Mithridates wondered at him, and did him no hurt.
The Enemy being Master of the Plains, Lucullus was something afraid and delayed
getting to the Mountains, being very large, woody, and almost inaccessible;
when by good luck some Greeks, who had fled into a Cave, were taken, the eldest
of whom, Artemidorus by name, promised to bring Lucullus, and seat him in a
place of safety for his Army, and a Fort that overlooked Cabira. Lucullus
believing him, lighted his Fires, and marched in the Night, and safely passing
the Strait, gained the Port, and in the Morning was seen above the Enemy,
pitching his Camp in a place advantageous to descend upon them, if he desired
to fight; and secure from being forced, if to lie still. Neither side was
willing to engage at present; but it is reported that some of the King's Party
being hunting a Stag, some Romans quartered upon them and met them. Whereupon
they Skirmished, more still drawing together to each side. In short, the King's
Party prevailed, where, upon the Romans from their Camp seeing their Companions
fly, were enraged, ran to Lucullus with Entreaties to lead them out, pressing
that Sign might be given for Battle. But he, that they might know of what
consequence the Presence and Appearance of a wise Governor is in time of
Conflict and Danger, commanded them to stand still; but himself went down into
the Plains, and meeting with the foremost that fled, commanded them to stand,
and turn back with him. These obeying, the rest followed, and making up a Body,
with no great difficulty drove back the Enemies, and pursued them to their
Camp. After his return, Lucullus inflicted a just punishment upon the
Fugitives, and made them dig a Trench naked, of twelve Foot, while the rest
stood by and looked on.

There was in Mithridates's Camp one Olthacus, Governor of the Dardarians, a
Barbarous People, living near the Lake Maeotis, a Man remarkable for Strength
and Courage in Fight, Wise in Council, and Pleasant and Free in Conversation.
He, out of Emulation and Glory, outvying the rest of the Lords, promised a
great piece of Service to Mithridates, no less than the Death of Lucullus. The
King commended his Resolution, and according to agreement counterfeited Anger,
and slighted him; whereupon he took Horse and fled to Lucullus, who kindly
received him, being a Man of great Credit in the Army. After some short trial
of his Sagacity and Wisdom, he found way to Lucullus's Board and Council. The
Dardarian thinking he had a fair opportunity, commanded his Servants to lead
his Horse out of the Camp, while he himself, as the Soldiers were refreshing
and easing themselves in the Shade, it being then High-noon, went to the
General's Tent, not at all suspecting that entrance would be denied him, who
was so familiar with the General, and came under pretense of extraordinary
Business with him. He had certainly been admitted, had not Sleep, which has
destroyed many Captains, saved Lucullus. For so it was, that Menedemus, one of
the Bed chamber, was standing at the Door, who told Olthacus, that it was
altogether unseasonable to see him, since after long Watching and hard Labor,
he was but just before laid down to compose him. Olthacus would not go away
upon this Denial, but still persisted, saying, that he must go in to discourse
of some necessary Affairs whereupon Menedemus grew angry, and replied, That
nothing was more necessary than the safety of Lucullus, and forced him away
with both hands. Whereupon, out of sear, he straightway left the Camp, took
Horse, and without Effect returned to Mithridates. Thus in Time, as in Physic,
there are Moments of Life and Death.

After this, Somatius being sent out with ten Companies for Forage, and pursued
by Menander, one of Mithridates's Captains, stood his Ground, and after a sharp
Engagement slew and destroyed the Enemy. Adrianus being sent afterward with
other Forces, to procure Food enough and to spare for the Camp, Mithridates
would by no means suffer him, but dispatched Meremachus and Myro with a great
Force, both Horse and Foot, against him; all which, except two, (as is
reported) were cut off by the Romans. Mithridates concealed the Loss, giving it
out, that it was a small Defeat, nothing near so great as reported, and
occasioned chiefly by the unskilfulness of the Leaders. But Adrianus in great
Pomp passed by his Camp, having many Wagons full of Corn, and other Booty;
which brought Despair upon himself, and Confusion and a horrible Consternation
upon his Army. 'Twas resolved therefore no longer to stay. But when the King's
Servants sent away their own Goods in quiet, and hindered others from doing so
too, in great fury they thronged and crowded to the Gates, seized on the Guards
and killed them; where Dorylaus the Captain, having nothing else besides his
Purple Garment, lost his Life for the same; and Hermoeus the Priest was trod
under foot in the Gate.

Mithridates having none of his Guards or Attendance with him, got out of the
Camp in the Throng, but had none of his Horses with him; but Ptolomy the Eunuch
looking back, and seeing him flying among the others, dismounted, and gave his
Horse to the King. The Romans, as they pressed on, were just ready to take him,
the close Pursuit which they made, reaching up just to him: But Greediness and
Avarice hindered the Romans from acquiring that Booty, which in so many Fights
and Hazards they had sought after, and hindered Lucullus from the Glory of
Conquest: For the Horse which carried the King was just ready to be seized; but
one of the Mules that carried the Sumpter, either by accident steping in, or by
order of the King so appointed to go between him and the Pursuers, they seized
and pilfered the Gold, and falling out among themselves about, the prey let
slip the great Prize. Neither was their Greediness prejudicial to Lucullus in
this only, but also they slew Callistratus the King's Secretary, under
suspicion of having five hundred pieces of Gold quilred up in his Clothes, whom
he had ordered to be conveyed safe into the Camp; notwithstanding all which, he
gave them leave to plunder the Camp. After this, in Cabira, and other strong
Holds which he took, he found great Treasures, and private Prisons, wherein
many Greeks, and many of the Kings Relations had of old been confined: who
counting themselves no other than dead Men, by the Favor of Lucullus met not
only with Relief, but a new Life and Resurrection: Nyssa Sister of Mithridates
was made Captive by a blessed Captivity: but those who seemed to be most out of
danger, Wives and Sisters at Pharnacia, placed in safety as they thought, all
miserably perished by the coming back of Bacchides the Eunuch from Mithridates
to them. Among others, there were two Sisters of the King, Roxana and Statira,
Virgins of forty years old, and two Ionian Wives, Bernice of Chios, and Monime
of Milesium. This latter was the most celebrated among the Greeks, because she
so long withstood the King in his Courtship to her, when he presented her with
fifteen thousand Pieces of Gold, until such time as the Marriage was
consummate, the Crown was sent her, and she was saluted Queen. She had been a
sorrowful Woman before, and often bewailed her Beauty, that had procured her a
Keeper in stead of a Husband, and Watch of Barbarians in stead of a Nuptial
House and Attendance. Being removed from Greece, she enjoyed the Pleasure,
which she proposed to her self, only in a Dream, being in the mean time robbed
of that which is real. Bacchides came and bid them prepare for Death, as every
one thought most agreeable and easy. She took the Diadem from her Head, and
fastening the String to her Neck, suspended her self therewith: Which being soon
broke, O cursed Head-band, said she, not at all able to help me in this small
thing! And throwing it away, she spat on it, and gave her Neck to Bacchides.
Bernice had prepared a Potion for her self, but at her Mother's entreaty, who
stood by, she gave her part of it: Both drank of the Potion, which prevailed
over the weaker Body; but Bernice having drank too little, was nothing changed,
but being something indisposed, was strangled by Bacchides for haste. It Is said
that one of the unmarried Sisters, with bitter Execrations and Curses, drank
the Poison; but Statira uttered nothing ungentile or reproachful, but, on the
contrary, commended her Brother, who in his own Danger neglected not theirs,
but carefully provided, that without shame or disgrace they might go out of the
World.

Lucullus, being a tender and good-natured Man, was concerned at these things;
but however going on, he came to Talauri, from whence, four days before his
arrival, Mithridates fled, and was got to Tigranes in Armenia. Whereupon he
took in the Chaldeans and Tibarenians, with the lesser Asia, and having placed
Garrisons in their Cities, he sent Appius to Tigranes to demand Mithridates. He
himself went to Amisus, which still held out Siege under the Command of
Callimachus, who by his great Skill and no less Experiencein Tacticks, as much
as could be shown in a Siege, incommoded the Romans; for which after he paid
dear enough: For Lucullus unexpectedly coming upon him at the same time of the
Day when the Soldiers used to lie quiet and still, gained part of the Wall, and
forced him to leave the City, which he fired, either envying the Romans the
Booty, or at least contriving his own Escape the better thereby. No Man looked
after those who went off, but as soon as the Fire had seized on most part of
the Wall, the Soldiers prepared themselves for Plunder; where Lucullus pitying
the Ruins of the City, brought Assistance from without, and encouraged his Men
to extinguish the Flames. But all Men being intent upon the Prey, and giving no
heed to him, with great shoutings brandished their Weapons in the Air;
whereupon he was compelled to let them plunder, that by that means at least he
might save the City from Fire. But they did quite contrary; for in searching
the Houses with Lights and Torches, every where with them they increased the
flames; insomuch that Lucullus the next day went in, and weeping, said to his
Friends, that he had often before blessed the Fortune of Sylla, but never so
much admired it as then, because when he was willing, he was also able to save
Athens; but my infelicity is such, that while I endeavor to imitate him, I
become like Mommius. Nevertheless he endeavored to save as much of the City as
he could; and at the same time also, by a lucky Providence, the Rain concurred
to extinguish the Fire. He himself, while present, repaired the Ruins as much
as he could, receiving the Inhabitants who fled, and settling as many Greeks as
were willing to live there adding a hundred and twenty Furlongs of Ground to
the Place.

This City was a Colony of Athens, built at that time when she flourished, and
was powerful at Sea; upon which account those who fled from Aristo's Tyranny,
settled here and, were made free; but had the ill luck to fly from Evils at
home, intogreater abroad. As many of these as survived, Lucullus furnished
every one with Clothes, and two hundred Groats, and sent them away into their
own Country; at which time Tyrannio the Grammarian was taken. Murena begged him
of Lucullus, and took him, and set him free; but he abused Lucullus's Favor
therein; for he by no means liked that a Man of Learning should be first made a
Slave, then Free; for Freedom thus speciously granted again, was a real
deprivation of what he had before. But not in this Case alone Murena showed
himself far inferior in Generosity to the General: Lucullus was now busy in
looking after the Affairs of Asia, and having no War to divert his time, spent
it in the distribution of Justice, which by the continuance of dismal Troubles
and Revolutions, had been for a long time a stranger in the Province; which was
then also miserably oppressed and enslaved by Publicans and Usurpers, insomuch
that they were forced privately to sell their Sons in the flower of their
Youth, and their Daughters in their Virginity, and their Consecrated Gifts,
Pictures, and holy Images in the open Market, and in the end to yield up
themselves Slaves to their Creditors; before which worser troubles lay upon
them, which were Tortures, Imprisonments, Racks, standing abroad to be scorched
when the Sun was near, and confined to stand in ice and clay in the cold;
insomuch that flavery was no less than redemption, and joy to them. Lucullus in
a short time freed the Cities from all these evils and oppressions; for first
of all, he ordered there should be no more taken than One per Cent. Secondly,
where the use was greater than the Principal, it should wholly be abolished:
the Third, and most considerable Order was, that the Creditor should receive
the fourth part of the Debtors income; but if men's persons were engaged, it was
utterly disallowed; insomuch that in the space of four years all debts were
paid, and lands returned to their right Owners. The public debt was contracted
when Asia was fined twenty thousand Talents by Sylla, but twice as much was
paid to the Collectors, who by Use and Interest had at last advanced it to a
hundred and twenty thousand Talents. Whereupon they inveighed against Lucullus
at Rome, as injured by him, and by their Wealth, and Credit, which they had
over many of the Principal Officers, they stirred up several leading Men
against him. But Lucullus was not only beloved by those People whom he obliged,
but was also wished for by other Provinces, who blessed the good luck of those,
who had such a Governor over them.

Appius Clodius, who was sent to Tigranes (the same Clodius, was Brother to
Lucullus's Wife) being led by the Kings guides in an unnecessary, and tedious
way, over the Mountains, through many Windings, and Turnings, being better
informed by his Freeman, a Syrian by Nation, of the direct rode, left that
long and fallacious one; and kindly bidding the Barbarians his Guides adieu, in
a few days passed over Euphrates, and came to Antiochia upon Daphne. There
being commanded to wait for Tigranes, (who at that time was reducing of
Phoenicia) he brought over many great Men to his side, who unwillingly had
submitted to the King of Armenia (among whom was Zarbienus King of the
Gordyenians) where also many of the Conquered Cities Corresponded privately
with him, whom he assured of relief from Lucullus, but ordered them to lie
still at present. The Armenian Government was very heavy and intolerable to the
Greeks, especially that of the present King, who growing insolent and proud
with his Success, imagined all things valuable and esteemed among men, that had
been already in his power and purposely created for him alone. From a small,
and inconsiderable rise, he had Conquered many Nations, broke the Parthian
Power (more than any before him) and filled Mesopotamia with Greeks, whom he
carried out of Cilicia and Cappadocia. He transplanted the Wild Arabs from
their Country, and manner of living, and settled them near him for improvement
of Trade.

Many Kings served at his Table, but four he always carried with him as
Servants and Guards, who ran by his Horse side in poor habit, and with folded
hands attended him, when sitting on his Throne, and publishing his Decrees to
the People: Which posture of all others was that which most expressed slavery,
it being of Men, who had bid adieu to Liberty, and had prepared their Bodies
more for the Chastisement, than service of their Masters. Appius being nothing
dismayed, or surprised at so Tragical a sight, so soon as audience was granted
him, said, he came to demand Mithridates, due to Lucullus's triumph, otherwise
to denounce War against Tigranes: Insomuch that tho Tigranes endeavored to
receive him with a pleasing Countenance and a composed Smile, he could not
dissemble his concern to them who stood about him, at the frank humor of the
young Man; for it was the first time in twenty five years any free Speech had
been uttered to him, so many years had he then Reigned. But however he made
answer to Appius, That he would not desert Mithridates, but would make the
Romans pay dear enough for beginning the War. That he was angry with Lucullus
for calling him only King in his Letter, and not King of kings, and therefore
in his Answer he would not call him Imperator. Great Gifts were sent to Appius,
which he refused; but they being augmented, that he might not seem to go away
in Anger, he took one Goblet, and sent the rest back, and went off to the
General. Tigranes before this neither vouchsafed to see nor speak with
Mithridates, tho a near Kinsman, and forced out of so considerable a Kingdom;
but proudly and scornfully at a distance contemned him, and in a manner secured
him in Moorish and unhealthy Places; but then with respect and kindness sent
for him, and at a private conference between them in the Palace, they healed up
all private jealousies between them, punishing their Favorites, who bore all
the blame: Among whom Metrodorus Scepsius was one, a witty and learned Man, and
a bosom Friend, vulgarly called the King's Father. This Man as it happened, being
employed in an Embassy by Mithridates to solicit help against the Romans,
Tigranes asked him, What would you, Metrodorus, advise me to in this Affair? In
return to which, either out of good Will to Tigranes, or of desire to have
Mithridates taken off, made Answer, That as Ambassador he counseled him to it,
but as a Friend dissuaded him from it. This Tigranes reported, and affirmed to
Mithridates, thinking that no harm would come of it to Metrodorus. But upon
this he was presently taken off, for which Tigranes was sorry, being not indeed
the principal cause of Metrodorus's death, but no small addition to the anger
of Mithridates against him; for he privately hated him before, as appeared from
his Cabinet-Papers when taken, wherein it was ordered that Metrodorus should
die; Tigranes buried him splendidly, sparing no cost to his dead Body, whom he
betrayed when alive. In Tigranes's Court died also Amphicrates the Orator, (if
at least for Athens sake, we may remember him,) for it is reported that he fled
to Seleucia, upon the River Tygris, and being desired to teach Philosophy among
them, arrogantly replied, that the Dish was too little to hold a Dolphin.
Wherefore he came to Cleopatra, Daughter of Mithridates, and Queen to Tigranes,
but being accused of high Misdemeanors, and prohibited all Commerce with his
Countrymen, soon ended his Days.

Lucullus, when he had established wholesome Laws, and a lasting Peace in Asia,
did not altogether banish Pleasure, and Mirth; but during his residence at
Ephesus, gratified the Country with Sports, Festival Triumphs, Wrestling Games,
and Prizes. And they in requital, instituted others, called Lucullian Games, in
honor to him, thereby manifesting their real love to him, which was of more
value to him, than all the Honor in the World. But when Appius came to him,
and told him he must prepare for War, he went again into Pontus, and gathering
together his Army, besieged Synope, or rather those of the Kings side who held
it; who thereupon killed most of the Synopeans, and set the City on fire, and
by night endeavored to escape: Which when Lucullus perceived, he came upon the
City, and killed Eight thousand of those who were left behind; but to the
others he restored what was their own, and took special care for the Welfare of
the City. To which he was chiefly prompted by this Vision. One seemed to come
to him in his sleep, and say, Go on a little further Lucullus: for Autolicus is
coming to see Thee. When he arose, he could not imagine what the Vision meant.
The same day he took the City, and as he was pursuing the Cilicians, who were
fled, he saw a Statue lying on the Shore, which the Cilicians carried so far,
but had not time to carry it aboard. It was one of the Masterpieces of
Sthenis: And one told him, that it was the Statue of Autolicus, the Founder of
the City. Which same Autolicus is reported to be Son to Dimachus, and one of
those who under Hercules went in the Expedition out of Thessaly against the
Amazons; from whence, in his return with Demoleon, and Phlogius, he lost his
Vessel on a point of the Chersonesus, called Pedalion. He himself, with his
Companions, and their Weapons, being saved, came to Synope, and dispossessed the
Syrians there. The Syrians held it, descended from Syrus, (as is reported) the
Son of Apollo, and Synope, the Daughter of Asopis. Which as soon as Lucullus
heard, he remembered the saying of Sylla, who positively affirms in his Memoirs,
That nothing is so credible, and beyond dispute, as what is revealed in Dreams.

But as soon as it was told him that Mithridates and Tigranes were just ready
to transport their Forces into Lycaonia and Cilicia, he much wondered why the
Armenian, if he had any real intention to fight with the Romans, did not assist
Mithridates in his flourishing condition, and join Forces when he was fit for
service; but suffering him to be vanquished, and broken in pieces, should now,
at last, upon slender hopes, begin the War, and throw himself down headlong
with them, who were irrecoverably fallen already. But when Macares the Son of
Mithridates, and Governor of the Bosphorus, sent him a Crown valued at a
thousand pieces of Gold, and desired to be listed a Friend, and Confederate of
the Romans, he justly reputed that War at an end, and left Sornatius his
Deputy, with Six thousand Soldiers to take care of the Province. He himself,
with Twelve thousand Foot, and little less than Three thousand Horse, advanced
to the second War. But it was very plain, that with two great, and ill-advised
speed, he Marched against Warlike Nations, many Thousands of Horse, into a vast
Champaign, every way enclosed with deep Rivers, and Snowy Mountains. Which made
the Soldiers, besides the disorder of their ranks, with great unwillingness,
and reluctance, follow him. When as at the same time also the Tribunes at home
publicly inveighed, and declared against him, as one that raised up War after
War, not so much for the Interest of the Republic, as that he himself, being
still in Commission, might not lay down Arms, but go on enriching himself by
the Public loss. These Men, at last, were even with him. But Lucullus, by long
journeys, came to Euphrates, where finding the Waters out, and rough, by reason
of the late Winter, was much troubled for fear of a delay, where danger might
come on him, while he procured Boats, and made a Bridge of them. But in the
evening the flood giving, and decreasing more in the night, the next day they
saw the River within his Banks: Insomuch that the Inhabitants discovering the
little Islands in the River, and the Water stagnating round them, a thing which
had rarely happened before, worshipped Lucullus, before whom the very River was
humble and submissive, and yielded an easy and swift passage. Making use of
the opportunity, he carried over his Army, and met with a lucky sign at
landing. Holy Heifers are preserved on purpose for Diana Persica, whom of all
the Gods, the Barbarians beyond Euphrates chiefly adore. They use only Heifers
for her Sacrifices. Which, at other times, wander up and down undisturbed, with
the Mark of the Goddess upon them, shining (...)
brightness; and it is no small, nor easy thing, when occasion requires to
seize one of them. But one of these, when the Army had passed Euphrates, coming
to a Rock Consecrated to the Goddess, stood upon it, and then laying down her
Neck, like others that are forced down with a Rope, offered her self to
Lucullus for Sacrifice: Besides which, he offered also a Congratulatory Bull to
Euphrates, for his safe passage. All that day he tarried there, but on the
next, and those that followed, he traveled through Sophene, using no manner of
Violence to those who came to him, and willingly received his Army. But when
the Soldiers were desirous to plunder a Castle, that seemed to be well stored
within. That is the Castle, said he, that we must storm, showing them Taurus at
a distance; there are the rewards of Triumph: Wherefore hastening his March, and
passing the Tigris, he came over into Armenia; The first Messenger that gave
notice of Lucullus his coming, was so far from pleasing Tigranes, that he had
his Head cut off for his pains; and no Man daring to bring farther Information;
without any Intelligence at all, Tigranes sat fuming with Hostility and Wrath,
giving ear only to those who flattered him, by saying, That Lucullus would show
himself a greater Commander, by standing before Tigranes at Ephesus, than by
his running away out of Asia, frighted with the many Thousands that come
against him. He is a Man of a strong Body that can carry off a load of Wine,
and of a singular Constitution that can digest Felicity. Mithrobarzanes, one of
his chief Favorites, first dared to tell him the truth: But had no more thanks
for his pains, than to be immediately sent out against Lucullus with Three
thousand Horse, and a great number of Foot, with peremptory Commands to bring
him alive, and trample down his Army. Some of Lucullus's Men were then pitching
their Camp, and the rest were coming up to them, when the Scouts gave notice
that the Enemy was approaching, whereupon he was in fear lest they should fall
upon him, while his Men were at a distance, and not come up into a Body: Which
made him stay for settling the Camp himself; and send out Sextilius the Legate
with Sixteen hundred Horse, and almost as many heavy and light Arms, with
Orders to advance upon the Enemy, and keep their ground, until Intelligence
came to him that the Camp was finished. Sextilius designed to have kept this
Order: But Mithrobarzanes himself coming furiously upon him, he was forced to
fight. In the Engagement Mithrobarzanes himself fighting, was slain, and all
his Men, except a few who run away, were destroyed. After which Tigranes left
Tigranocerta, a great City built by himself, and retired to Taurus, and called
all his Forces about him.

But Lucullus giving him no time to Rendezvous, sent out Murena to hinder, and
cut off those who Marched to Tigranes, and Sextilius also to disperse a great
Company of Arabians then going to the King; both Sextilius fell upon the
Arabians in their Camp, and destroyed most of them; and also Murena, in his
pursuit after Tigranes through a Craggy and Narrow way, opportunely fell upon
him: Upon which Tigranes throwing away all cumbrances, fled; many of the
Armenians were killed, and more taken. After this Success Lucullus went to
Tigranocerta, and sitting down before the City, besieged it. In it were many
Greeks carried away out of Cilicia, and many Barbarians in like circumstances
with the Greeks, Arraberrians, Assyrians, Gordyenians, and Cappadocians, whose
Countries he had destroyed, and forced away the Inhabitants to settle here. It
was a rich and beautiful City; every Nobleman, and Commoner, in imitation of
the King, studied to enlarge and adorn it. Which made Lucullus more vigorously
assault it, being persuaded that Tigranes would by no means suffer him, but
even against his own Judgment come down in anger to force him away; Wherein he
rightly Judged. Mithridates earnestly dissuaded him from it, sending Messengers
to him not to engage, but rather with his Horse to hinder him from forraging.
Taxiles also the Messenger, then in his Army, very much entreated the King to
forbear and avoid the Roman Forces, as a Business not to be meddled with at that
time. To this he hearkened at first, but when the Armenians, and Gordyenians in
a full Body, and the joint-Forces of Medes and Adiabenians under their
respective Kings, came up to him: When many Arabians came up the River from
Babylon, others from the Caspian Sea, Albanians, Iberians, and their
Neighbors, and not a few of the ungovernable People near Araxe by entreaty and
hire, came together up to him; all the Kings Tables and Councils rung of
nothing but Expectations, Boastings, and Barbarick Threatenings. Taxiles went in
danger of his Life for giving Counsel against fighting, and it was imputed to
Envy in Mithridates, to divert him from so Glorious an Enterprise: Whereupon
Tigranes would by no means tarry for him, for fear he should share in the
Glory; but marched on with all his Army, lamenting to his Friend, (as is said)
that he should fight with Lucullus alone, and not with all the Roman Generals
together. Neither was his Boldness to be accounted frantic or rash, when he
had so many Nations and Kings attending him, with so many Thousand of
well-armed Foot and Horse about him. He had Twenty thousand Archers, and
Slingers, Fifty five thousand Horse (whereof Fifteen thousand were all in
Armor, as Lucullus wrote to the Senate) a Hundred and fifty thousand heavy
Arms drawn up partly into Companies, partly into Phalanges; besides others
appointed to open the ways, and lay Bridges to drein the Waters, and prepare
Fuel, with other necessary attendance, to the number of Thirty five thousand:
Who being quartered behind the Army, made it the more formidable to behold. As
soon as he had passed Taurus, and appeared with his Forces, and saw the Romans
beleaguering Tigranocerta, the barbarous People within with shoutings and
acclamations received the sight, and threatening the Romans from the Wall,
pointed to the Armenians. In a Council of War, some advised Lucullus to leave
the Siege, and march up to Tigranes, others, that it would not be safe to leave
the Siege, and so many Enemies behind. He himself answered, that neither side
rightly, but both together gave sound advice; whereupon he divided his Army,
and left Murena with Six thousand Foot, the Charge of the siege, he himself
went out with Twenty four Bands, in which were no less than Ten thousand men at
Arms, all the Horse, and about a Thousand Slingers and Archers, and sitting
down by a River in a large Plain, appeared very inconsiderable to Tigranes, and
a fit Subject for the flattering Wits about him. Some whereof jeared, others
cast Lots for the spoil, every one of the Kings and Commanders came, and
desired the Engagement alone, and that he would be pleased to sit still and
behold. Tigranes himself something Witty and Pleasant upon the occasion, made
use of the old saying, That they were too many for Ambassadors, and too few for
Soldiers. Thus they continued laughing and scoffing. As soon as day came,
Lucullus brought out his Forces in their Arms. The Barbarian Army stood at the
Eastern part of the River, but Lucullus at the West, and at a turn of the River
where it was best passable, while he led his Army in haste, seemed to Tigranes
to fly. Who thereupon called Taxiles, and in derision said, Do you not see this
invincible Army of the Romans flying? But Taxiles replied, I would to God, O
King, some such Fortune may attend your Soul! But surely Travelers never put
on their best Cloths, nor use bright Shields and naked Head-pieces, and
unsheathed Weapons, as now you see; but this is a preparation for War, and of
Men just ready to engage with their Enemies. While Taxiles was thus speaking,
as Lucullus wheeled about, the first Eagle appeared, and the Bands, according
to their Divisions and Companies, were just ready to pass over, when, with much
ado, and like a Man in a Debauch, Tigranes cried out twice or thrice, What are
you coming upon us, Sirs? In great have therefore he put his Army in Array,
keeping the main Body to himself, the Left Wing was given in Charge to the
Adiabenian, and the Right to the Mede, in the Front whereof were most of the
Armed Men placed. Some Officers advised Lucullus to lie still that day, being
one of those unfortunate ones, whom they call Black-days, for therein the Army
under Scipio, engaging with the Cimbrians, was destroyed: But he, by a very
memorable Saying, replied, I will make this a happy day to the Romans. It was
the day before the Nones of October. Having so said, he bad them Courage,
passed over the River, and himself first of all led them against the Enemy. A
Coat of Mail with shining Scales he had on, and a fringed Mantle; and drew out
his naked Sword, as if they had been to engage with Men that used to fight at a
distance, and by a sudden falling in, he straightened the open places, which were
necessary for the Archers. But when he saw the armed Horse, the Flower of the
Army, drawn up under a Hill, on the top whereof was a broad and open Plain,
about four Furlongs high, and of no difficult or troublesome access, he
commanded his Thracian and Gallogrecian Horse to fall upon their Flanck, and
beat down their Lances with their Swords. (The only Defense of the Men in Arms
are their Lances, they have nothing else to defend themselves, or annoy their
Enemy, by reason of the weight and hardness of their Armor, in which they are
enclosed.) He himself, with two Bands, made to the Mountain, the Soldiers
briskly following on, when they saw him in Arms, afoot, first toiling and
climbing up. Being on the top, and standing in an open place, with a loud Voice
he cried out, We have overcome, we have overcome, O my Fellow Soldiers! And
having so said, he marched against the armed Horsemen, commanding his Men not
to throw their Piles, but coming up hand to hand with the Enemy, to hack their
Shins and Thighs, which Parts alone are unguarded in armed men. But there was
no need of this way of fighting, for they stood not to receive the Romans, but
with great clamor, and worse Fiight, they and their heavy Horses broke the
Ranks of the Foot before ever the Fight began; insomuch that without a Wound,
or Bloodshed, so many thousands were overthrown. The greatest Slaughter was
made in the Flight, or rather in endeavoring to fly away, which they could not
well do by reason of the depth and closeness of the Ranks, which hindered them.
Tigranes at first fled with a few, but seeing his Son in the same misfortune,
he took the Crown from his Head, and with Tears gave it him, bidding him save
himself in some other way if he could. But the Prince daring not to put it on,
gave it to one of his trustiest Servants to keep for him. This Man, as it
happened, being taken, was brought to Lucullus; so among the Captives the Crown
also of Tigranes was taken. It Is reported, that above a hundred thousand Foot
were lost, and few of the Horse escaped. Of the Romans a hundred were wounded,
and five killed. Antiochus the Philosopher making mention of this Fight, in his
Book about the Gods, says, That the Sun never saw the like. Strabo, another
Philosopher, in his Historical Collection, says, That the Romans could not but
blush and deride themselves, for putting on Armor against such pitiful Slaves.
Livy also says, That the Romans never fell upon an Enemy with so unequal Force;
for by more than a twentieth part the Conquerors were less than the Conquered.

The most understanding Roman Captains, and expert in War, have chiefly
commended Lucullus for conquering two great and potent Kings, by two different
ways, Haste and Delay. For he broke the flourishing Power of Mithridates by
Delay and Time, and that of Tigranes by Haste; being one of those rare Generals
who made use of Delay for advantage, and Speed for security. Whereupon it was,
that Mithridates made no haste to come up to fight, imagining Lucullus would,
as he had done before, use Caution and Delay, which made him march the slower
to Tigranes: And as he met some straggling Armenians in the way, running in
great fear and consternation, he suspected the worst, and when greater numbers
of naked and wounded Men assured him of the Defeat, he sought for Tigranes; and
finding him naked and destitute, he by no means requited him with Insolence,
but lighting off his Horse, and condoling the Public Loss, gave him a Princely
Guard to attend him, and animated him for the future; and they together
gathered fresh Forces about them. In the City Tigranocerta the Greeks divided
from the Barbarians, and delivered it up to Lucullus, which he came and took.
He seized on the Treasury himself, but gave the City to be plundered by the
Soldiers, wherein were found eight thousand Tallents of coined Money: Besides
which also he distributed eight hundred Groats per Man, out of the Spoils. When
he understood that many Players were taken in the City, which Tigranes invited
from all Parts, for opening the Theater which he had built he made use of them
for celebrating his Triumphal Games and Spectacles. The Greeks he sent home,
allowing them Money for their Journey; the Barbarians also, as many as had been
forced away from their own dwelling; insomuch that this one City being
dissolved, many were repaired by the restitution of their former Inhabitants.
By all which Lucullus was beloved, as a Benefactor and Founder. Other things
also prospered under him, as deserved, being more desirous of praise for
Justice and Clemency, than for Feats in War; for these are due partly to the
Soldiers, most of all to Fortune; but those are a demonstration of a gentle and
liberal Soul, whereby Lucullus at that time, even without the help of Arms,
conquered the Barbarians. For the Kings of Arabia came to him tendering what
they had; and with them the Sophenians also submitted. But he dealt so with the
Gordyenians, that they were willing to leave their own Habitations, and were
ready to follow him with their Wives and Children; which was for this Cause:
Zarbienus King of the Gordyenians (as is said) being grieved under the Tyranny
of Tigranes, by Appius had secretly made Overtures of Confederating with
Lucullus; but being discovered, was executed and his Wife and Children perished
with him, before ever the Romans had invaded Armenia. Lucullus forgot not this,
but coming to the Gordyenians, made a solemn Enterment for Zarbienus, and
adorning the Funeral Pile with a Royal Canopy, and Gold and Spoils of Tigranes,
he himself being present, kindled the Fire, and poured in perfumes, with the
Friends and Domestics of the Deceased, calling him his Companion, and Friend
of the Romans, and ordered a stately Monument for him. There was a large
Treasury of Gold and Silver found in Zarbienus his Palace, and 300000. (...),
more than a Bushel.
no less than three hundred Myriads of Measures of Corn; insomuch that the
Soldiers were provided for, and Lucullus was highly commended for maintaining
the War at his own Charge without receiving one Groat from the Public Treasury.

After this came an Embassage from the King of Parthia to him desiring Amity
and Confederacy; which being readily embraced by Lucullus, he dispatched
another to the Parthian, which discovered him to be a double minded Man, and
dealing privately with Tigranes to take part with him, upon Condition
Mesopotamia were delivered up to him. Which as soon as Lucullus understood, he
resolved to pass by Tigranes and Mithridates, as Enemies well nigh subdued, and
try the Power of Parthia, by leading his Army against them. He esteemed it a
renowned act, like a Wrestler, to throw down three Kings one after another, and
like an invincible Conqueror, successively to deal with three of the greatest
Commanders under the Cope of Heaven. He sent therefore into Pontus, to the
Officers with Sornatius writing to them to bring the Army thence, and join with
him in this Expedition out of Gordyene. They found the Soldiers resty and
stubborn before, but now plainly discovered their unruliness, by no manner of
Entreaty or Force to be reclaimed; for they protested and cried out, That they
would stay no longer there, but go away and desert Pontus. Which being reported
to Lucullus, did no small harm to the Soldiers about him, who were corrupted
with Wealth and Plenty, and desirous of Ease; and hearing the boldness of the
others, called them Men, and such as they ought to imitate; for the Actions
which they had done, did now well deserve rest and quiet. Upon these and worse
Words, Lucullus left off the thoughts of invading Parthia, and in the midst of
Summer went against Tigranes; where passing over Taurus, he was astonished at
the green Fields before him, so much the Season by reason of the cold Air is
deferred. But however he went down, and putting to flight the Armenians, who
dared to come out against him, he plundered and burnt their Villages, and
seizing on the Provision designed for Tigranes, who was afraid of the same,
reduced his Enemies to great necessity. But when he provoked the Enemy to
fight, by marching round their Camp, and burning the Country before them, he
could by no means bring them out after their frequent Defeats before, he rose
up and marched to Artaxata, the Royal City of Tigranes, where his Wives and
Children were kept: judging that Tigranes would never suffer that to go without
the hazard of a Battle. It is reported, that Annibal the famous Carthaginian,
after the Defeat of Antiochus under the Romans, coming to Artaxas King of
Armenia, instructed him in several necessary and useful things; who being taken
with the pleasant and delightful Situation of that Place, then uncultivated and
neglected, drew a Model of a City for the same; and bringing Artaxas thither,
showed him the same, and encouraged him to build: At which the King being
pleased, and desiring him to oversee the Work, erected a large and stately
City, called after his own Name, and made it Metropolis of Armenia.

Tigranes would by no means suffer Lucullus to come upon this City, but came
with his Army, and on the fourth day sat down by the Romans, the River Arsania
lying between them, which of necessity Lucullus must pass in his March to
Artaxata. Lucullus, after Sacrifice to the Gods, as if Victory were already
obtained, carried over his Army, having Twelve Bands in Front, the rest being
disposed to prevent the Enemies enclosing them: For there were many choice
Horse drawn up against him: In the Front stood the Mardians Horse-Archers, and
Iberians with long Spears, who being the most Warlike, Tigranes more confided
in than any other Strangers; but nothing of moment was done by them; for though
they skirmished with the Roman Horse at a distance, they were not able to stand
when the Foot came up to them; but being broken and divided on both sides, drew
the Horse in pursuit after them. Though these were routed, yet Lucullus was
afraid when he saw the Horse about Tigranes in good Order, and great Numbers
coming upon him: Whereupon he recalled his Horse from pursuing, he himself
first of all withstood the Nobles, and engaged with the best of them, as they
came upon him, and before ever they came to close Fight, with the very Terror
overthrew them. Of three Kings in Battle against him, Mithridates of Pontus
fled away the most shamefully, being not so much as able to endure the Noise of
the Romans. The Pursuit reached a long way, wherein the Romans not only slew
them all night, but took many alive, seized and carried away great Riches, with
other Booty, till they were weary and left off. Livy says, There were more
taken and destroyed in the first Battle; but in the second, those of better
note. Lucullus being flushed and animated hereby, determined to march into the
Vplands, and there complete his Conquests over the Barbarians; but the
Winter-season coming on, contrary to his expectation, brought severe Weather,
and frequent Snows, and even in the most clear Days, hard Frost and Ice; which
made the Waters scarce drinkable for the Horses, by exceeding Cold; and scarce
passable, for the breaking of the Ice, and cutting the Horses Sinews. The
Country, for the most part, being Forest, Enclosed and Woody, made them
continually wet, being covered with Snow as they Marched in the day, and
sitting down in Moorish places at Night. After the Battle they followed not
Lucullus many days, before they began to be unruly; first of all entreating,
and sending the Tribunes to him; but afterward tumultuously gathered together,
and made a noise all night long, which was a plain sign of a mutinous Army. But
Lucullus as earnestly entreated them, desiring them to have patience but till
they took the Armenian Carthage, and overturned the Work of that cursed Man
Annibal. But when he could not prevail, he led them back, and by another Road
over Taurus, came into the fruitful and pleasant Country of Mygdonia, where was
a great and populous City, by the Barbarians called Nisibis; by the Greeks,
Antioch of Mygdonia. Gaurus, Brother of Tigranes, was the Governor,
Callimachus Overseer of the Works and Fortifications, the same who so much
annoyed the Romans at Amisus. He brought his Army to it, and laying close
Siege, in a short time took it by Storm: He kindly used Gaurus, as he
surrendered himself; but by no means hearkened to Callimachus, though he offered
to make discovery of hidden Treasures; commanding him to be kept in Chains, to
be punished for firing the City of Amisus, which hindered him from showing
Favor and Kindness unto the Greeks, as he intended.

Hitherto one would imagine Fortune attended and fought for Lucullus; but
afterward, as if the Wind had failed of a sudden, he did all things by force,
and as it were against the Grain; wherein he showed the Conduct and Patience of
a wise Captain; but his Actions met with no Honor or Reputation: For by bad
Success and Divisions in his Army, he came within a Hairs-breadth of losing
what what he had before. Himself was not the least cause of all this, being no
ways indulgent to his Soldiers, but one who thought all Favor shown to them,
to be a beginning of Disobedience, and Dissolution of Authority. But what was
worst of all, he was naturally unsociable to his Great Officers in Commission
with him, despising others, and thinking them worthy of nothing in comparison
with himself. These were the Evils attending Lucullus his other Virtues; for he
is said to have been a lusty, goodly, and eloquent Man, Wise both in Court and
Camp. Salust says, The Soldiers were illaffected to him from the beginning of
the War, for being forced to keep the Field two Winters at Cyzicum, and
afterward at Amisus. There were other Winter Quarters that vexed, besides
these; for they either were in an Enemies Country, or else confined to their
Tents in the open Fields, among their Confederates; for Lucullus not so much as
once went into a Greek Confederate Town with his Army. To this ill affection
abroad, the Tribunes contributed at home, invidiously accusing Lucullus, as one
who for Empire and Riches delayed the War, and under his sole Power had then
got Cilicia, Asia, Bythinia, Paphlagonia, Pontus, Armenia, as far as the River
Phasis. And of late had laid waste the Kingdom of Tigranes, as if he had been
Commissioned not so much to subdue, as destroy Kings. For this is reported to
have been spoken by L. Quintus, one of the Praetors, at whose instance the
People determined to send one who should succeed Lucullus in his Province, and
disband most of his Army. Besides these Misdemeanors, that which most of all
prejudiced Lucullus, was P. Clodius, an insolent Man, very vicious and bold,
Brother to Lucullus his Wife, and by reason of her Incontinency shrewdly
suspected of Adultery with her. Being then in the Army under Lucullus, but not
(...)
in so great Authority as he expected; for he would fain have been of the Chief
Officers, though of an inferior Rank to several of them. He got in with the
Fimbrian Army, and stirred them up against Lucullus, using fair Speeches to
them, who, of old, had been used to be flattered in such a manner. These were
those whom Fimbrius before had persuaded to destroy the Consul Flaccus, and
chose him their Leader; which made them willingly deal with Clodius, and call
him the Soldiers Delight, for his Care and Concern for them. If there (...)
must be no end of Wars and Toils, but by fighting with all Nations, and
wandering throughout all the World they must spend their lives; receiving no
other Reward for their Service, than to guard the Carriages and Camels of
Lucullus, laden with Gold and precious Goblets. As for Pompey's Soldiers, they
were Citizens again, safe at home with their Wives and Children, not hunting
after Mithridates, or Tigranes, in wild Deserts, nor overturning the Kingdoms
of Asia, but reducing Exuls in Spain, or Fugitives at home. What, must we never
have an end of Fighting? Should we not rather reserve the Remainder of our
Bodies and Souls for such a General, who will reckon his chiefest Glory to be
the Wealth of his Army?

By such Practices the Army of Lucullus being corrupted, neither followed him
against Tigranes, nor against Mithridates, when he returned into Pontus out of
Armenia, and resumed his Kingdom; but under pretense of Winter coming on, sat
idle in Gordyene, every minute expecting some other General to succeed
Lucullus. But when News came that Mithridates had defeated Fabius, and was
Marching against Sernatius and Triarius, out of shame they followed Lucullus.
Triarius ambitiously aiming at Victory, before ever Lucullus came to him,
though he was then very near, was overthrown after a bloody Fight, wherein it
is reported, that above Seven thousand Romans fell, among whom were a Hundred
and fifty Centurions, and Four and twenty Tribunes, and even the Camp it self
taken. Lucullus coming up a few days after, concealed Triarius from the angry
Soldiers: But when Mithridates declined Battle, and waited for the coming of
Tigranes, who was then on his March with great Forces, he resolved before both
joined, once more to meet and engage with Tigranes. But in the way the mutinous
Fimbrians deserted their Colors, as Men disbanded by Decree of Senate, and
would no longer obey Lucullus, the Provinces being then allotted to others.
There was nothing beneath the Dignity of Lucullus, which he was not forced to
bear, entreating them, one by one, from Tent to Tent, going up and down
dejected and sorrowful, and submitting to shake some by the Hands. But they
turned away from his Salutes, and threw down their empty Knapsacks, bidding him
alone engage with the Enemy, who alone made advantage thereby. At length, by
the entreaty of the other Soldiers, the Fimbrians being prevailed upon,
consented to tarry that Summer under him; but even during that time, if no
Enemy came to fight them, to be free. Lucullus of necessity was forced to
comply with this, or else to leave the deserted Province to the Barbarians. He
kept them indeed with him, but without any Power over them: Nor did he lead
them out to Battle, being contented that they would stay with him, though he
then saw Cappadocia wasted by Tigranes, and Mithridates again doing mischief,
whom not long before he reported to the Senate to be wholly subdued: whereupon
Legates were arrived to settle the Affairs of Pontus, as if all had been quiet
there. But when they came they found him not so much as Master of himself but
contemned and derided by the Common Soldiers; who arrived at that height of
Insolence against their General, that at the end of Summer they put on their
Armor, and drew their Swords, and defied their Enemies then absent, and gone
off a long while before, with great Outcries and Aerie Skirmishes, going round
the Camp, and proclaiming that the time was expired which they promised to stay
with Lucullus. Pompey had drawn many to his side by Letters; by the Favor of
the People, and his Interest with the Tribunes, being then chosen General of
the Army against Mithridates and Tigranes. But it then appeared to the Senate,
and all unbiassed Men, that Lucullus was injured, having those put over his
Head, who succeeded rather to his Triumph, than the War; being not only
deprived of Command, but the Glory which he justly deserved, and forced to
yield it to another.

It was just matter of Pity to those who (...)
were present; for Lucullus remained no longer Master of Rewards or
Punishments, for Actions of War; nether would Pompey suffer any man to go to
him, or give heed to what he did himself, or with advice of his ten Legates: but
expressly gave Command to the contrary, and could not but be obeyed, by reason
of his greater Power. But Friends on both sides thought it necessary to bring
them together, who met in a certain Village of Galatia, and friendly saluted
each other. Lucullus was the Elder, but Pompey the more Honorable, for his
oftener Command, and two Triumphs. Both had Rods of Laurel carried before them
for their Victories; and when Pompey's Laurels were withered, by passing
through hot and droughty places, Lucullus his Viergers friendly gave them some
of the fresh and green ones which they had; which Pompey's Friends counted a
good Omen, for the others Actions were they which truly adorned his Empire. At
the interview they came to no amicable Agreement, but went off more
disatisfied. Pompey repealed all the Acts of Lucullus, drew off his Soldiers,
and left him no more then sixteen hundred for Triumph, and even those unwilling
to go with him. So unqualified was Lucullus, either by Nature or Misfortune,
for the chiefest thing in a General, which had he added to his other singular
Virtues (his Fortiude, Vigilance, Wisdom, Justice) the Roman Empire had not had
Euphrates for its Boundary in Asia, but the uttermost parts of the Earth, and
the Hyrcanian Sea. Other Nations being then disabled by the late Conquests of
Tigranes, the Power of Parthia could not be so considerable against Lucullus,
as it afterward appeared against Crassus, being then also divided at home by
Domestic and intestine War, and utterly unable to keep off the Encroachments
of Armenia, But Lucullus seems more to have injured his Country by others, than
he profited it by himself. For the Trophies in Armenia stand near the
Parthians, and Tigranocerta, and Nisibis, and the great Wealth brought from
thence to Rome, with the Captive Crown of Tigranes carried in Triumph, did all
puff up Crassus, as if the Barbarians had been nothing else but Spoils and
Booty: Who falling among the Parthian Archers soon demonstrated that Lucullus
his Triumphs were not beholden to the Inadvertency and Effeminacy of his
Enemies, but to his own Courage and Conduct. But of this afterward. Lucullus,
upon his return to Rome, found his Brother Mark accused by C. Memmius, for what
he did when Treasurer, by the Command of Sylla; who being fled, Memmius changed
the Scene, and animated the People against him, and persuaded them to deny him
a Triumph, for suppressing the Spoils, and prolonging the War. Lucullus his
Case being much disputed, the Nobility and Chief Men mixed themselves among the
Tribes, and with much Entreaty and Labor scarce at length prevailed upon them
to consent to his Triumph. The Pomp of his Triumph was not amazing and tedious*
as others had been, with along Train, and number of things carried therein; but
consisted chiefly in vast quantities of Armor, and Machins of the King's,
placed in the Flaminian Cirque. A Spectacle nothing despicable. In his Progress
passed by a few Horsemen in Armor, ten Chariots armed with Scythes, sixty
Friends and officers of the King's, and a hundred and ten long-beak'd Ships
were carried along with them. The Golden Image of Mithridates, six Foot high,
and rich Head pieces, twenty Loads of Silver Vessels, and thirty two of Golden
Cups. Armor, and Money all carried by Men. Beside which, eight Mules were
laden with Golden Beds, fifty six with Bullion, and a hundred and seven with
Coined Money and Silver, little Less 2700000*
than two hundred and seventy Myriads. In Public Tables were written what
Moneys he gave Pompey for prosecuting the Pyratick War, what he delivered into
the Treasury, and what beside he gave to every Soldier, which was nine hundred
and fifty Drams per Man: After all which, he nobly feasted the City and
Suburbs. Being divorced from Clodia, a dissolute and and wicked Woman, he
married Servilia Sister to Cato: It proved an unfortunate Match, for she was
guilty of all Clodia's vices but one, and that was Incest with her Brothers.
Out of reverence to Cato, he for a while connived at her Impurity and
Immodesty, but at length dismissed her. When the Senate expected great things
from him as one that would be a Check to the Usurpation of Pompey, and by the
Greatness of his Station and Credit would defend the Nobility, he retired from
Business and left the Republic; either because he saw her in a languishing
condition, and irrecoverable, or, as others say, because he was as great as he
could well be, and inclined to a quiet and easy Life, after those Labors and
Toils, which had not succeeded under him. There are those who highly commend
his change of Life, avoiding thereby that Rock whereon Marius split: For he,
after his Cimbrian Conquest, wherein he did Noble and Great things, would by no
means be contented with the Honor thereof, but out of an infatiable desire of
Glory and Power, even in his old Age, managed a Faction in the Government
against the Youth, and became Guilty of horrid crimes, and worse Murders.
Better had it been for Cicero, after Catiline's Conspiracy, to have retired in
his Age; and for Scipio, after his Numantine and Carthaginian Conquests, to
have sat down contented. For the Administration of public Affairs will
determine, and Statesmen, as well as Wrestlers, are laid aside, when strength
and youth fail.

Crassus, and Pompey, laughed to see Lucullus become luxurious, and effeminate,
feasting being altogether as inconvenient for his Age, as Government of Affairs
at home, or an Army abroad. In Lucullus his Life, as in the old Comedy, we meet
with Policy, and action in the beginning; and good eating, and drinking in the
end: And indeed scarce any thing but Feastings, and Revellings, and Sports.
Among which (...)
I count his stately Buildings, Portico's, and Baths; but above all his
Pictures and Carving, (...)
and great industry about these Curiosities, which with vast expense he
collected, lavishly bestowing all the Wealth, and Treasure which he got in the
War upon them: insomuch that now adays, when Luxury reins, the Lucullian
Gardens are counted the noblest that the Emperor has. Tubero the Stoic, when
he saw his Buildings at Neapolis, where he suspended the Hills upon Arches,
brought in the Sea for Moats, and Fish Ponds round his House, and built
Pleasure-Houses in the Waters, called him Xerxes in a Gown. He had also fine
Seats in Tusculum, pleasant Prospects, and large Apartments, and Portico's for
Men; where Pompey coming to see him, blamed him for making his Habitation so
pleasant in Summer, but inconvenient in Winter: To whom he smilingly replied.
Do you think I am less provident than Cranes and Storks, not to change my
habitation with the season? When a Praetor with great charge and pains, was
setting out a Spectacule to the People, and asked him to lend him some Purple
hangings for the Stage, he told him he would go home, and see, and if he had
any, he would lend him; and on the next day asking how many he wanted, and
being told that a hundred would suffice, ordered him to take twice as many,
which made Horace say, That he esteemed that a poor house where the lumber and
unnecessary Utensils, are not more than the Furniture in sight.

Lucullus his Entertainments were every new, and extravagent, not only with
Purple Carpets, and Plate adorned with Precious Stones, and Dancings, and
Interludes, but for all manner of Dainties, and Sweetmeats pil'd up, which made
the People admire him. It was a happy thought of Pompey in his Sickness, when
his Physician prescribed a Thrush for his dinner, and his Servants told him,
That in Summer time Thrushes where no where but in Lucullus his Penns, would
not suffer them to fetch one thence, but told his Physician, Had not Lucullus
fed on Thrushes, Pompey had not lived, and thereupon ordered some other thing
at hand to be made ready for him. Cato was his Friend and Companion, but
nevertheless so hated his Life, and Diet, that when a young Man in the Senate,
made a long and tedious speech in praise of Frugality and Temperance, Cato
standing up replied, Will you never have done? You who are as Rich as Cressus,
live like Lucullus, and speak like Cato. It is plain from his own Mouth, that
Lucullus was not only pleased with, but gloried in his way of living, for he is
said to have feasted several Greeks upon their coming to Rome day after day;
who out of a true Grecian Principal being ashamed, and refusing the invitation,
where so great an expense was every day caused for them, he with a pleasing
Countenance told them, Some of this indeed, my Grecian Friends, is for your
sakes, but more for Lucullus his own. Once, when he supped alone, there being
only one table, and that but moderately furnished, he called his Steward and
reproved him; who imagining that there would be no need of any great
Entertainment, when no Body was invited, was answered; What do you not know,
that to day Lucullus is to eat with Lucullus? Which being noised about the
City, Cicero and Pompey one day met him loitering in the Marketplace; one a
principal Friend and Acquaintance; but there had been some falling out between
Pompey and him, about the Command of the Army, but however they used civilly to
discourse, and talk together. Cicero saluted him, and asked him, How he stood
affected to disputing? Who answering, Very well; and inviting them to it, We,
said he, will eat with you, to day, if there shall be no more than what is
already provided. Lucullus being surprised, and requested a days time, they
refused to grant it, neither suffered him to talk with his Servants, for fear
he should give order for more than what was appointed before. But thus much
they consented to, that before their Faces he might tell his Servant, That to
day he would sup in the Apollo (for so one of his best dining Rooms was called)
and, by this evasion, imposed upon his Guests. To every Room (as it seems) was
allotted a proportion of Diet, having its proper Costs and Furniture belonging
to it; so that the Servants knowing where he would dine, knew also how much was
to be expended, and how the Supper was to be prepared. The expense for the
Apollo was fifty thousand pence, which being that day consumed, the greatness
thereof did not so much amaze Pompey, as the haste in dressing. He insulted
over Money, as Captive and Barbarian; as indeed it was. But however his
furnishing a Library, deserved praise and thanks, for he collected very many,
and choice Manuscripts; but the use they were put to, was more commendable than
the purchase. The Library being always open, and the Walks and Schools about it
free to all Greeks, who, from business, came thither as to the habitation of
the Muses, walking about, and diverting one another. He himself often studied
there, disputing with the learned in the Walks, and giving his advice to
Statesmen who required it, insomuch that his House was altogether a
Receptacle, and a Greek Prytaneum to all that came to Rome. He understood all
sorts of Philosophy, and was well read, and expert in them all. But he always
favored, and valued the Academy from the beginning. Not the new one (which at
that time under Philo flourished with the Precept of Carneades) but the old
one, then under the Government of Ascalonites Antiochus, a learned and eloquent
Man: Lucullus, with great labor, made him his Friend and Companion, and set
him up on purpose against Philo's Auditors, among whom Cicero was one, who
Wrote an excellent Book in defense of his Sect, wherein he has made a
discourse for Lucullus, about apprehension contrary to his own opinion. The
Book is called Lucullus. For, as it is said, they were good Friends, and acted
jointly in the public Concern. For Lucullus did not wholly retire from the
Republic, but from Ambition, and desire of Superiority, and Greatness equally
dangerous and troublesome, which he left to Crassus, and Cato. To whom the
Senate, who suspected Pompey's greatness, joined themselves, when Lucullus
refused to head them. For his Friends he came into the Forum, and into the
Senate to curb the Ambition and Pride of Pompey; whose orders, after his
Conquests over the King's, he annulled, and by the assistance of Cato hindered a
division of Lands to the Soldiers, which he proposed. Which made Pompey go over
to Crassus, and Caesar's Friendship, or rather Conspiracy, and then by filling
the City with Armed Men, to establish his Decrees by force, and drive Cato and
Lucullus away. Which being resented by the Nobility, Pompey's party produced
one Vectius, pretending they apprehended him in a design against Pompey's Life.
Who, in the Senate House, accused others, but among the People named Lucullus,
as if he had been suborned by him to kill Pompey. No Body gave heed to what he
said, and it soon appeared that they had produced a Man with a false charge,
and accusation. After a few days the whole Intrigue was discovered, the Carcass
of the accuser being thrown out of Prison, reported indeed to have died a
natural Death, but carrying marks of a Halter, and blows about him; and seeming
rather to have been taken off by those who suborned him. These things kept
Lucullus at a greater distance from the Republic.

But when Cicero left the City, and Cato was banished to Cyprus, he became
altogether sottish; it is reported, that before his Death, his parts failed him
by degrees. But Cornelius Nepos denies that either Age or Sickness impaired his
Mind, which was rather doz'd by a Potion given him by Callisthenes his Freeman.
The Potion given him by Callisthenes, was to endear him to him, being so
prepared; but it acted quite otherwise, and so disabled and intoxicated his
Mind, that even while he was alive, his Brother ordered his Affairs. At his
Death, which was the Death of one taken off in the very flower of Martial and
Civil Discipline, the People were much concerned, and flockt together, and even
by force would have taken his Corpse, as it was carried into the Marketplace,
by young Men of the best Quality, and have Buried it in the Martian field,
where they buried Sylla. Which being altogether unexpected, and Necessaries not
easily to be procured on a sudden, his Brother, after much entreaty and
solicitation, prevailed upon them to suffer him to be buried in the Tusculan
field, as was appointed. He himself survived him but a small time, coming not
far behind in Death, as he did in Age and Renown, being a most loving Brother.

The Comparison of Lucullus with Cimon.
ONe might bless the End of Lucullus, who died before the great Alteration of
Affairs, which Fate by intestine Wars was bringing, on, and left this Life in a
free, though troubled State, wherein, above all other things, Cimon and he
agreed. For he died also when the state of Greece was free, and flourished;
though in the Field, at the Head of his Army, not recalled, nor disgraced, nor
sullying the Glory of his Wars, Engagements, and Conquests, with Feastings and
Debauches: As Plato reprehended Orpheus for saying, That an eternal Debauch
hereafter, was the Reward of those who lived well here. Indeed ease and Quiet,
and the Study of pleasant and speculative Learning, to an old Man, unfit for
War or State, is a most ornamental and comfortable thing; but to misguide
virtuous Actions to Pleasure, as their utmost End, and to leave the Wars for
the Sports and Delights of Venus, did not become the gravity of the Academy,
and a Follower of Xenocrates, but one that rather inclined to Epicurus. But the
greatest wonder of all is, their Youthful days were flat opposite; the ones
being infamous and vicious, the others well disciplined and sober; yet better
is the Change for Good, for it argues a more ingenuous Mind, where Vice
decays, and Virtue increases. Though both had great Wealth, they differently
employed it; and there is no Comparison between the South-wall of the Tower
built by Cimon, and the stately Mansions and watery Prospects at Neapolis, built
by Lucullus, out of the Spoils of the Barbarians. Neither can we compare
Cimon's popular and numerous Table, to the Noble and Royal one of Lucullus,
that receiving a great many Guests every day at small Expense, this being
richly spread for a few Good-Fellows: (...).
unless you will say that different times made the alteration. For who can
tell, but that Cimon, if he had retired in his old age from Business and War,
to Quiet and Solitude, might have lived a more luxurious and debauched Life,
who was a Goodfellow, a pleasant Companion, and (as is said) a Lover of Women?
But brave and generous Actions, transported with other Delights than arise from
the lower Appetite, make active and heroic Men neglect and forget these. Had
but Lucullus ended his days in the Field, Envy itself and Detraction could
never have accused him. So much for their manner of Life.

In War it is plain they were both Men of excellent Conduct, both at Land and
Sea. And as they honored those Champions, who on the same day, in the same
Games, were Crowned for their Mastery in all, by calling their Actions,
Wonderful Victories; so likewise Cimon, honoring Greece with a Sea and
Land-Victory on the same day, is worthy to be placed in the first Rank of
Commanders. Lucullus received Command from his Country, but Cimon brought it to
his. He united the Lands of his Enemies to her, who ruled over Confederates
before; but this Man taking the Power out of other Hands, made his Country both
rule over Confederates, and Conquer Enemies too; forcing the Persians to
relinquish the Sea, and the Lacedaemonians to submit. But if it be the chiefest
thing in a General to win his Soldiers to Obedience by Gentleness; Lucullus was
despised by his own Army, but Cimon was obeyed by others. Those deserted the
one, these fled for Protection to the other. He came home without those Forces
he led out; this Man sent out at first under the Command of others, returned
home with Authority even over them also, having served his City in three
difficult Negotiations, establishing Peace with the Enemy, Dominion over
Confederates, and Unity with Lacedaemon. Both aiming to destroy great Kingdoms,
and subdue all Asia, failed in their Enterprise. Cimon very unfortunately; for
he died when General, in the height of Felicity: But Lucullus, no Man can
excuse from a Fault to his Soldiers, whether he knew not, or would not comply
with the Distaste and Complaints of his Army, which brought him into so great
hatred among them. But did not Cimon also suffer like him in this? For the
Citizens arraigned him, and never left till they had banished him; that, as
Plato says, They might not hear him for the space of ten Years. For Heroic
Minds seldom please the Vulgar, or are acceptable to them; for by punishing
their Extravagancies, they oftentimes pinch to the quick, like Surgeons
bands, reducing dislocated Bones to their natural position. But both of them
perhaps may be cleared of this.

Lucullus very much out-went him in War, being the first Roman who carried an
Army over Taurus, passed the Tigris, took and burnt the Royal Palaces of Asia,
in the sight of the Kings, Tigranocerta, Cabira, Sinope, and Nisibis, subduing
the North Parts as far as Phacis, the East as far as Media, and the South and
Red Sea, through the Kingdoms of Arabia; broke the Power of Kings, and narrowly
missed their Persons, who fled away like Wild Beasts into the Deserts, the
thick and unpassable Woods. A Demonstration of which was, That the Persians, as
if no great harm had befell them under Cimon, soon after appeared in Arms
against the Grecians, and overcame and destroyed a great Army of theirs in
Egypt. But after Lucullus, Tigranes and Mithridates were able to do nothing:
The latter being disabled and broken in the former Wars, never dared to show
his Army to Pompey without the Camp, but fled away to Bosphorus, and there
died. Tigranes threw himself naked and unarmed down before Pompey, and taking
his Crown from his Head, laid it at his Feet, complementing Pompey with what
was not his own, but that which Lucullus had triumphed over before; and when he
received the Ensigns of Majesty again, he was well pleased, because deprived
before. Greater is that Commander, who, like a Wrestler, leaves an Adversary
almost Conquered for his Successor; and therefore Cimon, at his Arrival,
finding the Forces of the King dispersed, and the Minds of the Persians down,
by their continual Overthrows and Flights under Themistocles, Pausanias, and
Leotychides, easily overcame their Bodies, whose Souls were dis-spirited and
faint before. But Tigranes, never yet baffled in Fight, but flushed with
Success, engaged against Lucullus. There is no comparison between those Numbers
which came against Lucullus, and those subdued by Cimon. All which things being
rightly considered, it is a hard matter to give judgment: For the Gods were
favorable to both Parties, directing the one what to act, and the other what
to avoid; and they have thereby declared them both brave Men, and of Heavenly
Extract.

NICIAS.
THE LIFE OF NICIAS.
Englished from the Greek, by Thomas Rymer, Esquire
VOLUME III.
CRassus, in my Opinion, may most properly be set against Nicias, and the
Parthian Disaster compared with that in Sicily. But then, in the first place, I
must beseech the Reader, in all Courtesy, not to think that I contend with
Thucydides, in matters so Pathetically, so Nobly, so beyond all Imitation, and
even beyond himself expressed by him; nor to believe me guilty of the like folly
with Timaeus, who Of Timaeus the Historian.
hoping, in his History, for Majesty of Style, to surpass Thucydides, and make
Philistius appear a trifler and very dolt, pushes on his descriptions through
the thickest of their main Battles, Achievements at Sea, and Debates of
Council, the most labored, and the most accurately delineated by them, bearing
up with them.

No more, by Jove,
Than a limping Footman, to the Lydian Chariot.
As Pindar has it. He shows himself all along half-lettered, a dealer in small
Wares. And, according to that of Diphilus,

All Fat, and rolling in Sicilian Grease. He oftentimes falls so very low, as
even with Xenarchus to quibble; telling us, That he thought it Ominous to the
Athenians, that their General who had Nicias.
Victory in his Name, refused to Command in the Expedition: And that from the
defacing of the Images of Mercury.
Hermae, some God foretold they should very much suffer in War, by* Hermocrates
the Son of Hermon. And moreover, how ' it was likely, that Hercules would aid the
Syracusians, for the Proserpina.
Maiden's sake, by whose means he took Cerberus, but would be angry with the
Athenians for protecting the Egesteans, descended from Trojan Ancestors, when
as he for an injury of their King Laomedon, had Sacked their City. But this
Author peradventure, chose to write these things out of the same abundant
consideration, and Wisdom, as he finds fault with the Language of Philistus;
and carps at every where what he meets with in Plato and Aristotle.

This sort of contention, and vying with others in matter of Style, in my mind,
at the best, looks very little, and shows the certain Spirit of a Pedant; but
in things unimitable is intolerable.

Such actions therefore as Thucydides and Philistius have related, seeing they
are not to be past by, especially those that discover the Genius of the Man,
and his disposition, which under his many and great troubles lay concealed,
those I say, that I may not seem altogether negligent, I shall briefly run
over; and such things as are not vulgarly known, and lie scattered here and
there, in other Men's Writings, or are found amongst the old Monuments and
Archieves, I shall endeavor to bring together; not huddling up an impertinent
Story, but delivering what may make his disposition and temper understood.

First of all, I would premise what Aristotle has written concerning Nicias,
That there had been three good Citizens eminent Three eminent Citizens.
above the rest for their Fatherly Affection and love to the People, Nicias the
Son of Niceratus, Thucidides the Son of Milesius, and Theramenes the Son of
Agnon; but the last less than the others; for his mean extraction, was cast in
his Teeth, as a Forreigner from Ceos, and his unconstancy, siding sometimes
with one Party, sometimes with another, in the Commonwealth, made him be
Nicknamed the Theramenes Cothurnus.
Buskin.

Thucydides was the foremost in time, he on the behalf of the Nobility, stiffly
opposed Pericles, who cajoled the Commons.

Nicias came after, yet was in some reputation even whilst Pericles lived;
insomuch as to be in joint-Commission with him, and many times to be General
alone; but Pericles dying, he presently rose to the highest preferments,
chiefly by the favor of the Nobility, who set him for their Bulwark against
the Presumption and Insolence of Cleon; yet withal, he held the good Will of
the Commons, who likewise contributed to his advancement. For tho Cleons
interest ran very high by his caressing the Old Men, and by his frequent Dole
to the Poor; yet even they, whom he practiced upon for their Favor, beholding
the Avarice, the Arrogance, and the Presumption of the Man, stood many of 'um
for Nicias.

For his was not that sort of Gravity, which is over harsh or odious, but
tempered with a certain awful Respect and Deference, winning upon the People,
by seeming afraid of them. And being naturally Diffident and Timorous, in
feats of War, his good Fortune supplied his want of Courage, and kept it from
being detected, his Enterprises proving always successful. But his
Timerousness, in point of Government, and his huge dread of Informers, tended
very much to conciliate the good will of the People; and gave him no small
Power over them: They being fearful of one that despises them, but promoting
him that pays them Reverence; for their greatest Honor, from their Betters, is
not to be Contemned.

Pericles, who by solid Virtue, and the pure dint of Eloquence ruled the
Commonwealth, stood in need of no disguise, nor wheadling with the People;
which Talents Nicias wanting, but abounding in Riches, with these he was faint
to truck for Popularity.

Neither was he made with the Nimble Wit of Cleon, so as by breaking Jests, and
playing the Droll to tickle the Athenians; therefore being unprovided of such
like Qualities, he treated the People with Dances and Games, and other public
Shows, more Sumptuous and more Splendid, than had been ever known in his, or in
former Ages.

Amongst his Works of Devotion there was Extant, even in our days, a Shrine of
Minerva in the Citadel, having lost the Gold that covered it: And a Temple in
that of Bacchus under the Tripods, that were presented by those at the public
Games, who won the Prize: For at these Games he had often carried off the
Prize, and never once failed.

It Is reported, that at one of these publicks Shows, a Slave of his past along
in Masquerade, personating Bacchus, Fair and Goodly to behold, nor yet any
Beard upon his Chin; The Athenians pleased with the sight, and hopping a long
time, Nicias Nicias's Acts of devotion.
stood up, and said, He held it impious to keep any Body for a Slave, who had
publicly been likened to a God. And forthwith he set the young Man free.

His performances at Delos are remembered, as Noble and Magnificent Works of
Devotion. For whereas the Choras which the Cities had sent to sing Anthems to
the God, were wont to arrive all in Confusion; the Rabble coming presently to
meet the Ship, and crying to 'um to sing: And they out of haste, debarking in
disorder, and making a Clutter, some for their Garlands, some for their
Surplices. Now he being to Convoy the Chorus, shipped them over to Rhenia,
together with the Sacrifice, and other Holy Appurtenances. And moreover, took
along with him from Athens, a Bridge ready fitted for the purpose, and
Curiously adorned with Manufactures of Gold, and with Pictures and Garlands,
and Tapestries; this he joined together in the Night over the Channel, betwixt
Rhenia and Delos, being no great distance: And presently by break of day he
marched forth with all the Provision to the God, and led the Chorus with all
their Ornaments in exquisite Order, singing all along over the Bridge.

The Sacrifices, the Games, and the Feast being over, he set up a Palm Tree of
Brass for a present to the God, and bought a parcel of Land with ten thousand
Drams, which he Consecrated; with the Revenue the Inhabitants of Delos were
to Sacrifice, and to Feast, and to pray the Gods for many good Things to
Nicias. This he ingraved on a Pillar, which he left in Delos to be a Record of
his Request. This same Palm Tree, afterward broken down by the Wind, fell on
the huge Statue which the Men of Naxus had presented, and beat it to the Ground.

It Is very plain, that much of this looks like Vainglory, and shows a strong
affectation of Popularity and Applause: Yet from other Qualities and Carriage
of the Man, one might believe all this Cost and Magnificence to be purely the
Effect of his Devotion: For he was one of those who dreaded the Divine Powers
extremely, and (as Thucydides informs us) was moap'd with Godliness. In one of
Pasiphon's Dialogues it is written, That he daily sacrificed to the Gods, and
keeping a Divine at his House, he pretended to be consulting always about the
Commonwealth; whereas for the most part he enquired only of his private
Affairs, more especially concerning his Silver Mines: For he possessed many,
and of great avail, in the Lauriotick Ground; but wrought them not without
hazard. He maintained there a multitude of Slaves, and his Wealth consisted
chiefly in Silver; whereby he had many Retainers, and many Hangers-on about
him, craving and having; for he gave to them who could do him mischief, no less
than to those who deserved well of him. In short, his Fear made a Rentcharge
for the Rogues, and His Timorousness.
his Humanity for Honest Men. Of these things we have Testimony, even in our
Comedies; for Teleclides brings in an Informer, saying thus:

Troth, Charicles refused to give five Mark,
Lest it be said that he (an Elder Brother)
Came first of all from out his Mother's Fob:
But Nicias, Niceratus's Son,
Gave twenty Mark: Wherefore! Tho well
I know, I say not;
He is a Friend, and Wise, if I mistake not.
And he who is brought in by Eupolis (in his Maricas) representing a good
simple Poor Man:

How long (Friend) since thou last saw Informer.
Nicias?
I saw him not, save lately standing in the Poor man.
Streets.
The Man confesses that he saw Nicias. Informer.

And what the wiser he for seeing him, unless he had a Spell from him?
You have heard (Companions) Nicias taken in the very Fact.
Think you (ye Sots) to take a good Man in Author.
any Crime?
Cleon, in Aristophanes, threatening, says,
I Will throttle their fine Speakers, and make Nicias all aghast.
Phrynichus represents him wanting Courage, and ready to be scared out of his
Senses, in these Verses:

Good Man was he (that very well I know)
And never did, like Nicias, trembling go.
So afraid he was of Informers, and so reserved, Reservedness.
that he neither would venture to eat with any Citizen, nor to have ordinary
Discourse with them, nor any Conversation nor Pastime whatsoever. Nor indeed
had he any leisure for those Diversions. When he was Archon, he staid in Court
till night, was the first upon the Bench, and the last that left it. And if no
Public Business took up his time, yet was it very hard to have Access, or to
speak with him, he being retired at home, and locked up. And when any came to
the Door, some Friend of his gave them good words, and begged their Pardon, for
that Nicias was then very busy, certain Affairs of State and the Public lay
heavy upon him.

Who principally acted this Part for him, and contributed mostwhat to his Pride
and Vanity in this matter, was Hieron, a Man educated in Nicias's Family, and
instructed by him in Letters and Music: He pretended to be the Son of
Dionysius surnamed Chalcus, whose Poems are yet extant, and who was Governor
of a Colony that planted in Italy, and built Thurii.

This Hieron also transacted all the Secrets for Nicias with the Divines; and
gave out in Speeches to the People, What a toilsom and miserable Life he led,
for the sake of the Commonwealth. He (said Hieron) can never be at quiet,
neither at the Bath, nor at his Meat, but some Public Care seizes him:
Careless and negligent of his own, zealous for the Public Good; scarce ever
going to Bed, till after that others have had their first sleep: So that his
Health is impaired, and his Body wasted: Neither cheerful nor affable with his
Friends, but abandons them, together with his own Concerns, for the Public.
Other Men make Friends by being in Office, enrich themselves, fare deliciously,
and play with the Government.

And this truly was Nicias his manner of Life; so that well might he apply to
himself that of Agamemnon,

With Pageantries and Pomp, the World I brave;
Yet, in effect, am but the Peoples Slave.
He observed, That the People, in a Man of Eloquence, or of eminent Parts and
Ability, made use of his Talent to serve their Occasions; but were always
jealous, and held a watchful Eye upon his Power, curbing and breaking it, and
taking down his Authority and Reputation. This was manifest in their
Condemnation of Pericles, their Banishment of Damon, their Distrust of Antiphon
the Rhamnusian, but especially in the Case of Laches, that took Lesbos, who
giving an Account of his Conduct, in the very Court of Justice unsheathed his
Sword, and slew himself.

On these Considerations Nicias declined His caution.
all difficult, and all little Enterprises: Or if he took a Command, he was for
doing what was safe. Thus, it is likely, he had for the most part Success; which
he did not attribute to any Wisdom, Conduct, or Courage of his own, but (to
avoid Envy) he thanked Fortune for all, and gave God the Glory. This the
Actions themselves testify; for at that time there happened many and terrible
Shocks to the City of Athens, yet had not he a hand in any of them. The
Athenians were routed in Thrace by the Chalcedonians, Calliades, and Xenophon
Commanding in Chief: Demosthenes was the General when they received the Blow in
Aetolia: At Delos they lost a Thousand Citizens, under the Conduct of
Hippocrates: The Plague was principally laid to the charge of Pericles, he
having shut up close together in the Town, a Crowd of Country-Fellows for the
War, who, by the change of Place, and their unusual Course of Living, bred the
Pestilence.

Nicias stood clear of all this; and by his His Success.
Conduct was taken Cythera, an Island most commodious against Laconia, and held
by the Lacedaemonians: Many Places likewise in Thrace, which had revolted, he
took and subdued: He, shutting up the Megareans within their Town, seized upon
the Isle Minoas; and soon after, marching swiftly from thence to Nisaea, made
himself Master there; then, making a Descent upon the Corinthian Territory, he
overcame in Battle, and slew a great number of the Corinthians, with their
Captain Lycopheon.

There it happened that two of his Men were left, by an oversight, when they
carried off the Dead; which when he understood, he made an Halt, and sent an
Herald to the Enemy for leave to carry off the Dead; though by a certain Law
and Custom, he that by a Truce craved leave to carry off the Dead, seemed to
quit the Victory: Nor was it lawful for him that did this, to erect a Trophy;
for his is the Victory, who is Master of the Field, and he is not Master who
asks leave, as wanting Power to take. But he chose rather to renounce his
Victory and his Glory, than to let two Citizens lie unburied.

He scowred the Coast of Laconia all along, and beat the Lacedaemonians that
made Head against him. He took Thyraea, Garrisoned by the Arginetans, and
carried the Prisoners to Athens.

When Demosthenes had fortified Pylos, and the Peloponnesians brought together
all, both their Sea and Land Forces, before it, after the Fight, about the
number of Four hundred Native Spartans were left ashore in the Isle Sphacteria:
Now the Athenians thought it a brave Exploit (as indeed it was) to take these
Men Prisoners. But the Siege, in places that wanted Water, being very difficult
and untoward; and to convoy the vast necessaries about by Sea, in Summer,
tedious and vastly chargeable, in Winter doubtful, or plainly impossible; this
grieved them, and they repented their having rejected the Ambassy of the
Lacedaemonians, that had been sent to treat a Peace and League with them: Which
was done at the Importunity of Cleon, who opposed Cleon.
it, chiefly out of a Pique to Nicias: For, being his Enemy, and observing him
to labor a Compliance with the Lacedaemonians, he persuaded the People to
break off the Treaty.

Now therefore that the Siege held long, and they heard of the dismal
Extremities that pressed their Army, they grew enraged against Cleon; but he
turns all the blame upon Nicias, charging it on his Softness and Cowardice,
that the besieged Escaped: Were I the General (quoth he) they should not hold
out so long. The Athenians presently replied, Why then do not you go with a
Squadron against them? And Nicias standing up resigned his Command at Pylos to
him, and bids him take what Forces he pleased along with him, and not swagger
with Words, out of harms way, but go forth and perform some memorable Service
for the Commonwealth.

Cleon, at the first shrunk back, startled with the surprise, but the Athenians
Commanding, and Nicias lowdly upbraiding him, he, so provoked, and fired with
Ambition, took upon him the Charge; and said farther, That once within Twenty
days after he embarked, he would either kill the Enemy upon the place, or
bring them alive to Athens. This the Athenians were readier to laugh at, than
to believe, for on other occasions, his Flashes and Extravagances used to make
them sport, and were pleasant enough.

As for Instance, it is reported that once when the People were assembled, and
had waited his coming a long time, at last he enters with a Garland on his
Head, and prays them to Adjourn to the next day, For (quoth he) I am not at
leisure to day, I have Sacrificed to the Gods, and am to Feast my Strangers.
Whereat the Athenians laughing, rose up, and dissolved the Assembly: However,
at this time he had the lucky hit, and Commanded so Gallantly, in Conjunction
with Demosthenes, that within the time he had limited, he carried Captive to
Athens all the Spartans that had not fallen in Battle.

This brought an horrible Disgrace on Nicias; for this was not to throw away
his Shield, but something more foul and Ignominious, to quit his Charge
voluntarily out of Cowardice, and by yielding up his Command, of his own
accord, to put into his Enemies hand the opportunity of Atchieving so brave an
Action.

Aristophanes has a fling at him on this occasion, in his Birds, saying thus,

No time, by Jove, is left for us to snort in,
Nor to be restif like Nicias. --
In his Husbandmen, he says thus,
A. I Would be telling. B. Well, And who hinders thee?
A. You, yet would I give an Hundred Marks
That you would rid my hands of the Charge.
B. Content, with those of Nicias they will make Two hundred.
Besides all this, he did a vast prejudice to the City, by suffering the
Accession of so great Reputation and Power to Cleon; whereby he assumed that
Turbulent Spirit, and unbridled Impudence, and opened the Door for greater
Mischief to the Commonwealth; whereof a sufficient part fell to his own share:
For now Cleon banished away all Decorum from the Pulpit, and first of all broke
out into Exclamations, flung open his Cloak, smote his Thigh, and ran up and
down whilst he was speaking, which soon after introduced amongst those who
managed the Affairs of State, such License and Contempt of decency, as brought
all into Confusion.

Now also grew up at Athens, Alcibiades, Alcibiades.
such another Common-wealth-Man, tho not altogether so unruly. But as the Land
of Egypt, which through the Richness of the Soil, is said,

Great Plenty to produce,
Both wholesome Herbs, and Drugs of deadly Juice.
So the Nature of Alcibiades, was strong and luxuriant in both kinds; and made
way for a great many Innovations. Whereby it fell out, that after Nicias had
got his hands clear of Cleon, yet had he not opportunity to settle the City
perfectly in quietness. For having brought Matters to a pretty fair pass, all
was dashed and plunged again into Confusion by Alcibiades, through the Wildness
and Extravagance of his Ambition; and he embroyled again in War worse than
ever. Which sell out thus.

They who principally hindered the Peace, were Cleon and Crasidas; War setting
off the Virtue of the one, and hiding the Villainy of the other; it gave to the
one occasions of Atchieving brave Actions, to the other of Committing enormous
Crimes. Now when these two were in one Battle both slain near Amphipolis;
Nicias having perceived that the Spartans had long been desirous of a Peace,
and that the Athenians had no great Stomach to the War; both being alike tired,
and (as it were by consent) laying down their Arms: He therefore in this nick
of time, employs all his Might to make a Friendship betwixt these two Cities,
and to deliver the other States of Greece from the Evils and Calamities they
labored under, and so establish their Happiness to after Ages. He found the
Men of Substance, the Aged Men, and the Husbandmen generally all inclined to
Peace; besides many others, by discoursing in private, and by Informing them,
he brought over, to be not so very Keen for a War. Whereupon he now encouraged
the Hopes of the Lacedaemonians, counseled them, and put them upon it to seek
Peace. They confided in him, as being on other Occasions, a moderate Man; and
because of his Kindness and tender Care over the Prisoners, taken at Pylos, and
in Chains, making their Misfortune the more easy upon them.

The Athenians and the Spartans had before this, concluded amongst themselves,
a Cessation for a Year, whereby conversing with one another, they tasted again
the sweetness of Peace and Security; and mingling together Familiars and
Strangers, they wished an end of that fighting and Bloodshed. And with delight
heard the Chorus sing such as this,

Rest my Lance, and no man mind thee,
Till around the Cobwebs bind thee.
And with joy remembered that saying, They who sleep in peace, are awaked by the
Cocks-Crow, not by the Trumpet. And on the same score they cursed and kicked them
out of Company, who said that the Fates decreed this to be a War of thrice nine
Years.

It followed afterward, that all points having been debated, they made a
Peace. And most People thought, now, indeed they had got an end of all their
Evils: And Nicias was in every Man's mouth, as one especially beloved of the
Gods, who for his Piety and Devotion, had given him to bear the same Name with
the fairest and greatest of all Blessings; For in Truth, they called the Peace
Nicias's work, as the War the Work of Pericles: Because on very light occasions
he seemed to have plunged the Grecians into very great Calamities: Whereas
Nicias persuaded them to forget the highest injuries, that they might be
Friends: Wherefore they call that to this day the Nician Peace.

The Articles being, that the Garrisons and Towns, taken on either side, and
the Prisoners should be restored, and they to restore the first to whom it
should fall by Lot; now (as Theophrastus tells us) Nicias secretly purchased
with Money the Lot for the Lacedaemonians to deliver the first.

Afterward when the Corinthians and the Boeotians showed their dislike of what
was done, and by their Complaints and Accusations well nigh brought back again
the War upon them, Nicias persuaded the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians,
besides the Peace, to make a League offensive and defensive, which would be
such a tie and strength to them, as should make them more Terrible to those
that held out, and be the firmer to each other.

Whilst these matters were on Foot, Alcibiades, who was not of an Humor to be
quiet, and who hated the Lacedaemonians, because of their Applications to
Nicias, and that they attended him, but overlookt and despised Alcibiades. Yet
from first to last, he heartily opposed the Peace, though all in vain. Till some
time afterward, finding that the Lacedaemonians did not altogether come up to
please the Athenians, but seemed to do them Injustice in having made a League
offensive and defensive with the Boeotians, and had not observed the Agreement
so fully in the delivery of Penactus, nor yet of Anthipolis, he laid hold on
these Occasions for his purpose, and from every trifle instigated the People.
At the length taking aside the Ambassadors of the Argives, he endeavored to
bring them over into a Confederacy with the Athenians.

But afterward when the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors were come with full Powers,
and at their first Audience by the Council, they seemed to come in all Points,
with just Proposals: He, fearing that the People would be drawn to be of their
Mind, Circumvented the Ambassadors, topping upon them, and swearing that he
was ready to assist them in all things, provided that they would not confess
that they came with full Powers, that being the only way for them to attain
their Desires.

They being over-perswaded, and decoyed from Nicias, to follow him, he
Presented them to the Assembly, and asked them presently whether or no they
came in all Points with full Powers, which when they denied, he, contrary to
their Expectation, changing his Countenance, called the Council to witness
their Words and now bids the People, Beware how they trust, or transact any
thing with such manifest Liars: Who now affirm this, now the quite contrary of
the very same thing. These Plenipotentiaries (as well-they might) being
astonished at this, and Nicias at a loss what to say being struck with Amazement
and Wonder, the Assembly resolved to send away immediately for the Argives, to
strike up a League with them. But an Earthquake, which interrupted and brake
the Assembly, made for Nicias's advantage: For the next day the People being
again assembled, after, many Speeches, and great Canvassing and Soliciting,
with much ado he brought it about that the Treaty with the Argives, should be
deferred, and he be sent to the Lacedaemonians, he promising that so all would
go well.

When he arrived at Sparta, they received Ambassy to Sparta.
him there as a good Man, and one well-inclined toward them; yet he effected
nothing, but overcome by them that favored the Boeotians, he returned home,
not only Dishonored, and hardly spoken of, but likewise in fear of the
Athenians: who were vexed and enraged, that through his Persuasions they had let
go so many, and so considerable Persons; for they who had been brought from
Pylos, were of the chiefest Families of Sparta, and had the highest there in
Place and Power, for their Friends and Kindred.

Yet did they not in their heat proceed against him, otherwise than that they
chose Alcibiades their General, and took the Mantineans and Eleans (who had
revolted from the Lacedaemonians) into the League, together with the Argives:
And sent to Pylos Free-Booters to infest Laconia, whereby the War began to
break out afresh.

But the Enmity betwixt Nicias and Alcibiades, running higher and higher, and
the time at hand for decreeing the Ostracism (or Ostracism.
Banishment for ten Years, which the People putting the Name in a Shell, were
wont to inflict at certain times, on some Person suspected, or otherwise envied
for his Popularity or Wealth) on which occasion very much Trouble and Danger
attended them both, one of them (in all likelihood) being to undergo this
Ostracism, for the People did abominate the Life of Alcibiades, but stood in
fear of his Boldness and Resolution; as is shown particularly in the History of
him.

Then for Nicias, his Riches made him envied, and besides more especially, his
course of Life seemed neither Popular nor Civil, but reserved, unsociable, and
austere. And now because he strongly (against the Grain) opposed their
Inclinations, forcing them against their Interest, they hated him.

To speak plainly, it was a Contest of the young Men and Soldiers of Fortune,
against the men of Years, and Lovers of Peace, they turning the Ostracism upon
the one, these upon the other.

Into Divisions when the People fall,
The choice often lights on the worst Man of all.
As now it happened, that the City distracted into two Factions, preferred the
most impudent and profligate Persons: Amongst whom was Hyperbolus of Perithus.
A fellow Hyperbolus.
not presuming from any Power, but from his Presumption rising into Power; and
by the Honor he found in the City, becoming the Scandal of it.

He at this time thought himself far enough from the Ostracism, as more
properly deserving the Gallows, and made account that one of these men being
dispatched out of the way, he might be able to Bandy against the other that
should be left; he openly showed himself to rejoice at the Dissension, and
stirred the People against both of them. Nicias and Alcibiades, perceiving his
Malice, did secretly combine together, and setting both Interests jointly at
work, did prevail that neither of them both, but even Hyperbolus should undergo
the Ostracism.

This indeed at the first made sport, and raised Laughter amongst the People,
but afterward they took it in great Indignation, as having injured the thing
by so unworthy a Fellow, there being a kind of Honor in this Punishment;
looking upon the Ostracism as a Punishment rather for Themistocles, Aristides,
and such like Persons. But for Hyperbolus 'twas a Glory, and a fair Pretense
for him to boast, when for his Villainy he suffered the same with the best Men:
As Plato the Comic Poet said of him,

He suffers what was for ill manners fit,
Unfit for him, unfit for branded Villains,
Ostracism was not meant for such as he.
And in Fact, none ever afterward suffered this sort of Banishment, but
Hyperbolus was the last. Hipparchus the Cholargian (who was of kin to the
Tyrant) was the first.

There is no judgment to be made of Fortune; it is not to be comprehended by
reason: For if Nicias had run the risk with Alcibiades whether of the two
should undergo the Ostracism, he had either prevailed, and (his Rival expelled
the City) he had remained secure; or being overcome, he had avoided the utmost
Disasters, and preserved the Reputation of a most excellent Commander.

I am not ignorant that Theophrastus says, Hyperbolus was banished; Phaeax, not
Nicias, contesting it with Alcibiades; but most Authors differ from him.

When the Egestan and Leontin Ambassadors arrived, and persuaded the Athenians
to make War upon Sicily, Nicias opposed them, but was run down by the
Persuasions and Ambition of Alcibiades; who even before the People could be
assembled, entertained and corrupted them with Hopes and with Speeches;
insomuch that the young Men at their Sports, and the old Men in their Porches,
and sitting together on the Benches, would be drawing Maps of Sicily, and
making Charts, describing the Seas, the Harbors, and Places that this Isle
shows opposite to the African Shore: For they made not Sicily the end of the
War, but the Magazine from whence they might carry it to the Carthaginians, and
be Masters of Africa, and of all the Seas, even to Hercules's Pillars.

Now therefore the Bulk of the People pressing this way, Nicias's Party, who
opposed them, was neither many, nor of much Interest; for the Men of Substance
(fearing lest they should seem to decline the Public Charges, and Ship money)
were quiet, against their Inclination, yet was not he tired, nor gave off; but
when the Athenians decreed a War, and chose him in the first place General,
together with Alcibiades and Lamachus, when they were again assembled, he stood
up, dissuaded Nicias against the War.
them, and protested against the War; and impeached Alcibiades, charging him
with going about to involve the City in Foreign Dangers and Difficulties,
merely out of respect to his private Lucre and Ambition. Yet it came to
nothing: For Nicias, because of his Experience, was looked upon as the fitter
for the Employment; his Wariness, with the Bravery of Alcibiades, and the
mildness of Lamachus, all mixed together, promised great Security, and very
much promoted the Suffrages: So that Demostratus (who, of the leading Men,
chiefly pressed the Athenians to the Expedition) stood up and said, He would
stop the Mouth of Nicias from urging any more Excuses; and thereupon moved that
the Generals might have absolute Power, both at home and abroad, to Order and
to Act what they list. And this he got passed into a Law.

However, the Priests are said to have very earnestly opposed this Enterprise.
But Alcibiades had his Divines of another Cut, who from some old Prophecies
foretold the Athenians to get great renown from Sicily. And certain Pilgrims
came back to him from Jupiter Ammon, with Oracles importing that the Athenians
should take all the Syracusians.

They who knew any thing that boded Prodigies.
ill, concealed it, lest they might seem to forespeak ill Luck; for even
Prodigies that were obvious and plain, would not deterr them; nor the defacing
of the Hermae, all in one Night maimed, save only that one, called the Herma of
Andocides, erected by the Aegean Tribe, placed then directly before the House
of Andocides, nor what was perpetrated on the Altar of the twelve Gods, where a
certain man leapt suddenly upon the Altar, and then turning round, with a stone
cut off his Privities. Likewise at Delphos there stood a Golden Image of
Minerva in a Palm Tree of Brass, erected by the City of Athens, for the Spoils
they won from the Medes; this was peckt at several days together by Crows
flying upon it, and they plucked off the Fruit of the Palm Tree, which was Gold,
and threw it down. But the Athenians said, these were all but Tricks of the
Delphians, corrupted by the Men of Syracuse.

And a certain Oracle requiring them to bring from Clazomene a She-priest of
Minerva(whom they now sent for) named Hesychia, that is to say, Quietness,
hereby, it is likely, the Divine Powers advised the City at this time to be
quiet.

Whether therefore the Astrologer Meton Meton.
feared these Presages, or that from Humane reason he doubted the Success (for
he was appointed a Commander) he feigning himself mad, set his house on fire.
Others say, he did not counterfeit himself mad, but set his house on fire in
the Night, and the next Morning went into the Court in woeful plight, and
beseeched the People in Consideration of the sad Disaster, to release his Son
from the Service, who was about to go Captain of a Gally for Sicily.

Moreover the Genius of the Wise Socrates, Socrates his genius.
by the usual Tokens, revealed all this to him, and that this Expedition would
prove the Ruin of the Commonwealth; the which he imparted again to his Friends
and Familiars, and afterward it spread about amongst the People.

And not a few were troubled, because of the days on which the Fleet set Sail,
it happening to be at that time when the Women celebrated the Funeral of Adonis;
there being every where then exposed to view Images of dead Men, carried about
with Mourning and Lamentation, and Women beating their Breasts: So that such as
lay any stress on these Matters, were extremely troubled; and feared lest that
all these Warlike Preparations, so Splendid and so Glorious, should suddenly,
in a little time be blasted, and come to nothing.

Now for Nicias, in that he opposed the Voting of this Expedition, and neither
was puffed up with Hopes, nor transported with the Honor of his high Command, he
showed himself Wise, and a man of Constancy: But when his endeavors could not
divert the People from the War, nor get leave himself to be discharged of the
Command, but the People, as it were, violently forced him against his Will, to
be their General, this was no longer now a time for his mighty Caution, and his
Delays, or for him (even like a Child) to look back from the Ship, often
repeating, and reflecting over and over again, how that he had not been
overruled by Reasons, thereby blunting the Courage of his Fellow-Commanders,
and losing the nick of time for Action. Whereas he ought presently to have
rusht upon the Enemy, brought the matter to an issue, and thrown all upon
Fortune immediately.

But when Lamachus had counseled to Sail directly to Syracuse, and give the
Enemy Battle under their City-Walls: And Alcibiades advised to cut off their
Communication with the other Towns, and then to march against them; Nicias
dissented from them both, and stiffly insisted that they should Cruise around
the Island, and alarm the Coasts, and having Landed a small supply of men for
the Egesteans, return to Athens. Thus he distracted their Counsels, and cast
down the Spirits of the men.

And a little while after, (the Athenians having called home Alcibiades in
Order to his Trial) he being, though joined with another in Commission, in
effect the only General, made now no end of Loytering, of Cruising, and
Considering, till their hopes were grown stale, and all the Disorder and
Consternation which the first approach and view of their Forces had cast
amongst the Enemy was worn off, and had left them.

Whilst yet Alcibiades was with the Fleet, they went before Syracuse with a
squadron of sixty Galleys, fifty of them were kept in Battalia without the
Haven, the other ten forced their way in to make discovery. And by an Herald
they demanded the Leontins to be sent home.

These scouts took a Gally of the Enemies, wherein they found certain Tablets,
on which was set down a List of all the Syracusians, according to their Tribes.
These were wont to be laid up remote from the City, in the Temple of Jupiter
Olympius, but were now brought forth to furnish a Muster-Roll of young Men for
the War. These being so taken by the Athenians, and carried to the Officers,
and the multitude of Names appearing, the Divines put an ill Construction
upon it, as if hereby were fulfilled the Old Prophecy, That the Athenians shall
take all the Syracusians. Yet indeed this was said to be accomplished by the
Athenians at another bout, that time when Callipus the Athenian having slain
Dion, held Syrucuse.

But when Alcibiades and a few with him were shipped off from Sicily, the Command
fell wholly to Nicias; for Lamachus Lamachus*
handled his Weapon in fight with great Dexterity, was stout, and very honest,
yet so extremely Poor and Low, that as often as the Athenians bestowed on him a
Command, he would always to their Account, bring some little reckoning or other
of Money for his very Clothes, and Shoes to his Feet. On the Contrary, Nicias,
as in other matters, in Riches and Ostentation carried it high.

It Is said, that once upon a time, the chief Magistrates being in Consultation
together, he bid Sophocles the Poet speak his Opinion first, as the Ancientest
Magistrate. I (quoth he) am indeed before you in Years, but you are the first
in Authority and Honor.

So here having Lamachus, that better understood Military Affairs, at under;
and evermore delaying and dodging, and faintly employing his Forces: First, his
Sailing about Sicily, at the greatest distance, aloof from the Enemy; then
afterward besieging Hyble, a small pitiful Town, and drawing off before he
could take it, rendered him extremely despicable; at the length he retreats to
Catana, without having achieved any thing, save that he demolish't Hyccara, a
little poor quarter of the Barbarians, where it is reported that Lais the
Harlot, whilst yet a Maiden, was sold amongst the other Slaves, and carried
thence away to Peloponnesus.

But when the Summer was spent, after that it was noised about that the
Syracusians were grown so Cock-a-hoop, that they would come, and first attack
him: And the Troopers skirmishing to the very Camp, twitted them, asking,
Whether they came to Pension with the Cataneans? Or they came to put again the
Leontins in Possession of their Houses? Now it was, that with much ado Nicias
resolved to sit down before Syracuse.

And to the end he might safely and without Molestation form his Camp, he sent
a Man, as a Renegade from Catana, with Intelligence to the Syracusians, That
they might seize the Athenian Camp void of Men, and all their Arms, if they on
such a day march with all their Forces to Catana: And, That the Athenians
living mostwhat in the Town, the Friends of the Syracusians had contrived, so
soon as they should perceive them coming, to possess themselves of one of the
Gates, and to fire the Navy; that many now were in the Conspiracy, and waited
their Arrival.

Nicias showed good Conduct in this only Instance of all the Sicilian
Expedition; for having drawn away all the strength of the Enemy, and made the
City quite destitute of Men, he set out from Catana, he entered the Haven, and
he chose a fit place for his Camp, where the Enemy could nor incommode him,
with that wherein lay their Excellency; but in those things wherein he had the
Advantage, he might expect to maul them without impediment.

When the Syracusians returned from Catana, and stood in Battle-Array before
the City-Gates, he on the sudden drawing forth the Athenians, fell on them and
defeated them; yet he slew not many, the Horse hindering their pursuit. But his
cutting and breaking down the Bridges that lay over the River, gave Hermocrates
(heartning the Syracusians) occasion to say, That, Nicias was ridiculous, whose
great Conduct is to avoid fighting, as if fighting were not the thing he came
for.

However he cast the Syracusians into a grievous Fright and Consternation, so
that in the stead of Fifteen Generals then in Service, they chose Three others
to whom the People engaged by Oath to let them Command absolute.

There was nigh them a Temple of Jupiter Olympius, which the Athenians (there
being in it many Consecrated things of Gold and Silver) had a great mind to
take, which Nicias industriously delaying, lost the Opportunity, and let a
Garrison of the Syracusians enter it, he judging that if the Soldiers should
make Booty of that wealth, 'twou'd be no manner of advantage to the Public,
and he should bear the Infamy of the impiety.

But Nicias, not improving in the least his Victory, that had made so much
noise every where, after a few days stay, whip away goes he to Naxus, there
Winters with such an Army upon excessive Charges, and performs little of moment
with some Sicilians revolted to him.

Insomuch that the Syracusians took Heart again, made Excursions to Catana,
wasted the Country, and fired the Camp of the Athenians. Now every Body blamed
Nicias as who with his Argumentations, his Considerations, and his mighty
Cautions had let slip the time for Action. None ever found fault with the Man
when once set a going, for in the brunt he was brisk and active, but was slow,
and wanted assurance to engage. When therefore he brought again the Army to
Syracuse, such was his Conduct, and with such both celerity and safety, he came
upon them, that no Body knew of his Arrival with the Galleys at Thapsus, of his
Descent, nor his Surprisal of Epipolae: Then beat he the choicest Regiments,
took three hundred Prisoners, and routed the Cavalry of the Enemy, which were
thought invincible.

But that which chiefly astonished the Syracusians, and seemed incredible to
the Grecians, was, in so little time the walling about of Syracuse, a Town not
less than Athens, but far more difficult, by the unevenness of the Ground, the
nearness of the Sea, and the Marshes adjacent, to have such a Wall drawn in a
Circle round it. Yet this, all within a very little, finished by a Man that had
not his Health competent for so weighty Cares, but lay all ill of the Stone;
Which may justly be blamed for what was left undone. I admire the Toil of the
General, and the Bravery of the Soldiers, for what they performed. Eurypides
after their Rout and Disaster, writing their Funeral Elegy, thus Sang,

These did eight times the Syracusians Foyl,
But then the Gods stood Neuter all the while.
And in truth one shall not find eight, but many more Victories won by these
Men against the Syracusians; till the Gods or Fortune plainly gave a Check to
the Athenians, when lifted to the top of their Power and Greatness.

Nicias therefore doing violence to his Body, was present in most Actions.

But when his Disease was the sharpest upon him, he lay in the Camp, with some
few Servants to attend him. And Lamachus having the Command, fought the
Syracusians (who were bringing a Cross-Wall from the City, along to that of the
Athenians, to hinder them from carrying it round) and in the Victory, the
Athenians hurrying in some Disorder to the pursuit, Lamachus, left alone,
withstood the Syracusian Horse that came upon him; before the rest advanced
Callicrates, a man of good Courage and Mettle, Lamachus upon the Challenge
engaged with him in single Combat, who received the first wound, yet returned
it so home to Callicrates, that they both fell down and died together.

And now the Syracusians took away the Body and Arms of Lamachus, and in great
have marched to the Wall of the Athenians, where Nicias lay without any Guards;
yet rouzed by this necessity, and beholding the Danger, he bid those about him
go and set on Fire all the Wood, and Materials that lay provided before the
Wall for the Engines, and the Engines themselves; this put a stop to the
Syracusians, saved Nicias, saved the Walls, and all the Money of the Athenians.
For when the Syracusians saw so much Fire flaming in the middle of them, they
wheeled off.

Now whilst these things were Achieved, Nicias only was left of all the
Generals, and he began to conceive great Hopes, for the Cities revolted to him,
and Ships laden with Corn from Coast every came to the Camp, every one
favoring when Matters went well. And now some Discourses past amongst the
Syracusians (desparing to defend the City) about a Treaty with him.

And when Gylippus who came with a Squadron to their aid from Lacedaemon, heard
on board of the Wall surrounding them, and of their Streights, he so steered
for the rest, as that giving Sicily for lost, he might now if possible secure
the Italians their Cities. For a strong report was every where spread about,
that the Athenians carried all before them; and had now a General for Conduct,
and for Fortune invincible.

And Nicias himself now against his Nature, grown Presumptuous in his present
Strength and Success (especially from the Intelligence he received underhand
of the Syracusians, believing they would surrender the Town upon Terms) had no
manner of regard to Gylippus coming to their Assistance, Gylippus.
nor set out any Scouts to purpose; so that neglected altogether, and despised,
Gylippus went in a long Boat ashore, without the knowledge of Nicias; and
having Landed in the remotest parts from Syracuse, he mustered up a great Army,
the Syracusians neither knowing of his Arrival, nor expecting him: So that an
Assembly was summoned in Order to a Parley with Nicias, and some were hasty to
have all dispatched, before the Town should be quite walled round, for now
remained very little to be done, and the Materials lay all ready on the place.

In this very nick of Time and Danger, arrived Gongylus in one Gally from
Corinth, and every one (as you may imagine) flocking about him, he told them
that Gylippus would be with them speedily, and other Ships to relieve them.
Now, e're they could perfectly believe Gongylus, an express was brought from
Gylippus, to bid them go forth to meet him: So now, plucking up a good Heart,
they took Arms; and Glyippus was presently upon the March, and by the way
ranged them in Battel-array against the Athenians, as Nicias also embattelled
these. And Gylippus in view of the Athenians laying down his Arms, sent an
Herald to tell them, He would give them leave with Bag and Baggage to depart
quietly from Sicily. To this Nicias would not vouchsafe any Answer, but some of
his Soldiers laughing, asked if with the sight of one Cloak and Laconian Staff,
the Syracusian Matters were so well hoped up, in the turn of an hand to despise
the Athenians, who had released to the Lacedaemonians three hundred, whom they
held in Chains, Goodlier men than Gylippus, and with longer Locks? Timaeus also
writes, That even the Syracusians made no Account of Gylippus, at the first
sight, drolling upon his Staff and long Hair, as afterward they hated his
Avarice and narrow Spirit.

The same Author says, that Gylippus appearing, many came fluttering about him,
as it were some Owl, and were listed under him. And this is more like the Truth
than what was said before; for in the Staff and the Cloak beholding the Badge
and Authority of Sparta, they crowded to him. And Thucydides affirms, that all
the Work was done by him alone; so does Philistus, who was a Syracusian, and a
Spectator of all that past.

However, the Athenians had the better of the first Encounter, and slew some
few of the Syracusians, amongst whom was Gongylus of Corinth. Yet the next day
Gylippus showed what it is to be a Man of Experience, for with the same Arms,
the same Horses, and on the same spot of Ground, changing only the Figure of
the Battle, he overcame the Athenians: and they fleeing to their Camp, he set
the Syracusians to work, and with the Stone and Materials that had been brought
together for finishing the Wall of the Athenians, he built a Cross*Wall to
intercept theirs and break it down, so as naught remained to them of all their
toil.

Hereupon the Syracusians taking Courage, manned out their Galleys, and with
their Horse and followers ranging about, they gathered up a great many
Prisoners, and Gylippus going himself to the Cities, stirred and instigated
them, who all heard him readily, and took Arms. So that Nicias fell again to
his old Considerations, and, seeing the Face of Affairs change, he desponded
and writ to Athens, bidding them send either another Army, or rather recall
this out of Sicily; that he might however be wholly discharged of the Command,
because of his Disease.

Before this, the Athenians had been very hot of sending another Army to
Sicily, but Envy of Nicias's former great Achievements and Success, cast in
many Delays, till now that they were all for hastening away Recruits. Eurymedon
went before, in Mid-winter, with Money, and to declare Euthydemus and Menander
(chosen out of those that served there under Nicias) to be Joint-Commanders
with him. Demosthenes was to go after in the Spring with a great Navy.

In the mean time Nicias was briskly attackt both by Sea and Land; in the
beginning he had the disadvantage in his shipping, yet did he destroy and sink
many Galleys of the Enemy. But by Land, he could not provide succor in time,
so Gylippus fell upon, and surprised Plemmyrion at the first Assault in which
the Stores for the Navy, and a great sum of Money (being there kept) was all
lost, many there he slew, and took others Prisoners. What was of greatest
importance, he cut off the Provisions from Nicias, which were safely and
readily convoyed to him whilst the Athenians held Plemmyrion; they being beaten
out, he could not be supplied but with great Difficulty, and with fighting the
Enemy, who rid at Anchor under that Fort.

And now it seemed manifest to the Syracusians that their Navy had not been
beaten by Strength, but by their Disorder in the Pursuit: Now therefore all
Hands, went to work to fit out a gallanter Fleet than the former, however
Nicias had no Stomach to a Sea Fight, but said, ' it was madness for them ( when
Demosthenes was coming in all haste with so great a Fleet and fresh Forces to
their Recruit) to engage the Enemy with a less number of Ships and ill
provided. On the contrary Menander and Euthydemus, puffed up with their new
Command, let loose their Ambition, and envy against both the Old Generals: They
were for preventing Demosthenes by some brave Action before his coming; and
were for doing something beyond Nicias, they pretended the Honor of the City,
which (said they) would be blemished and utterly lost, if they should be afraid
of the Syracusians, who dared them to Battle.

Thus they forced Nicias to a Sea Fight; and by a Stratagem of Ariston, who
commanded the Corinthian Galleys, they in the left Wing (as Thucydides tells
us) were worsted, and lost many of their Men.

Hereupon Nicias was overwhelmed with Despair, beaten when he had the sole
Command, and again miscarrying with his Companions.

But now by this time was discovered before the Haven Demosthenes, most
splendidly equipped, and terrible to behold. He brought along, in seventy three
Galleys, five thousand Men of Arms; of Darters, Archers, and Slingers, not less
than 3000, with the glitterring of their Armor, the Flags and Streamers,
waving in the Air from the Galleys, the multitude of Trumpeters, and Minstrels,
and Hoboys, and set off with all the Warlike Pomp and Ostentation, to dismay
the Enemy.

Now (one may believe) the Syracusians were again in a deadly fright, seeing no
end nor expectation, but toiling in vain, and perishing to no purpose.

But Nicias was not long overjoyed for this Reinforcement; for the first time
he came to speech with Demosthenes (who advised forthwith to attaque the
Syracusians, and speedily to put all to the hazard; to win Syracuse, and return
home) afraid, and wondering at his briskness and temerity, he beseeched him to
do nothing rashly and desperately, seeing that delay would be the Ruin of the
Enemy, whose Money would not hold out, nor their Confederates be long kept
together; that when once they came to be pinched with Want, they would again
presently seek to him for Terms, as formerly; that many in Syracuse, who held
secret Correspondence with him, wished him to stay, in regard they were tired
with the War, nor could endure Gylippus longer: And if their Necessities should
the least sharpen upon them, they would give up all.

Nicias, glancing darkly at these matters, and partly unwilling to speak out
plainly, put the Captains to imagine, that it was pure Cowardice which made him
talk in this manner: And they (saying that he was now again upon the relapse to
his old Cautions, and Shifts, and Trifling, whereby he let slip the
Opportunity, in not immediately falling on the Enemy, but suffering his Men to
cool, and to grow contemptible) stuck to Demosthenes, and with much ado forced
Nicias to comply.

Hereupon Demosthenes, with a Party of Foot, by night made an Assault upon
Epipolae; part of the Enemy he slew ere they took the Alarm; the rest,
defending themselves, he put to flight. Nor was he content with this Victory
there, but pushed on further, till he fell among the Baeotians; for these were
the first that made head against the Athenians, and, after a great Shout,
warmly charged them with Push of Pike, and killed many on the Place. And now
was there nothing but Horror and Confusion throughout the whole Army; the Body
that stood involved with those that fled, they that defended, and those who
came round, falling foul together, knocked one another down, taking them in the
pursuit for those that fled, and handling their Friends as if they were the
Enemy. For jumbled thus in disorder, distracted with blind Fear and
Uncertainties, and discerning false, the Night not being absolutely dark, nor
yielding any steady Light, the Moon then toward setting, shadowed with many
Weapons and Bodies that moved to and fro, and glimmering so as not to show an
Object plain, but to make, through fear, a Familiar, suspected for a Foe; which
cast the Athenians into horrid difficulties and despair.

Besides all this, they had the Moon on their Backs, whereby they shaded one
another, and both hid their Numbers and the Glittering of their Arms; but the
reflection of the Moon from the Shields of the Enemy, made them show more
numerous, and better appointed than indeed they were.

Lastly, Being pressed on every side where they had retreated, they took the
rout; and, in their flight, some were destroyed by the Enemy, some fell by the
hands of their Friends, and some tumbled down the Rocks. Those that were
dispersed and stragled in the Fields, were picked up in the morning by the
Horsemen, and put to the Sword; the slain were Two thousand; of the rest few
came off safe with their Arms.

Upon this Disaster, Nicias, struck, as might be expected, accused the rashness
of Demosthenes; but he colored it over, and advised to be gone in all haste;
for neither were other Forces to come, nor the Enemy to be beaten with the
present; or supposing they were yet too hard for the Enemy, however they ought
to remove, and avoid that place, being always accounted a sickly place, and
dangerous for an Army; especially now, because of the season, being (as they
see by experience) Pernicious. It was the beginning of Autumn, and many now lay
sick, and all were out of heart.

It grieved Nicias to hear of flight, and departing home, not that he did not
fear the Syracusians, but he was worse afraid of the Athenians, their
Impeachments, and Sentence, therefore he made as if he apprehended nothing
farther there; or, should ought happen, better dye by the hand of an Enemy,
than by his Fellow-Citizens.

He was not of the opinion which afterward Leo of Byzantium declared to his
Fellow-Citizens, I had rather (said he) perish by you, than with you.

Nicias therefore, for the matter of place and quarter, whither to remove their
Camp, said, That might be debated at leisure: And Demosthenes, his former
Counsel having succeeded so ill, ceased to press him farther; others thought
Nicias expected, and had assurance from some Body within the City, which made
him so stoutly oppose their retreat, so they did acquiesce. But another Army
coming to the Syracusians, and the Sickness raging in his Camp, he also now
approved of their retreat; and commanded the Soldiers to make ready to go
aboard.

And when all were in readiness, and none of the Enemy had observed them, not
expecting such a thing, the Moon fell Eclyps'd An Eclipse.
in the Night, to the great fright of Nicias, and of others, who, for want of
experience, or out of Superstition, are scared with these Appearances. That the
Sun would be dark'ned about the Thirtieth day of the Month by the Moon going
between, this even the ordinary People now well enough understood; but the Moon
it self to be dark'ned, how that could come about, and how on the sudden a
broad full Moon should lose all her light, and show such various colors, that
was not easy to be comprehended: But they concluded it to be Ominous, and a
sign from God of heavy Calamities to ensue.

For he, who the first, and the most plainly of any, and with the greatest
assurance, committed to Writing how the Moon is enlightened and overshadowed,
was Anaxagoras; yet neither was he ancient, nor his Notion much taken notice
of, but was looked upon as Heterodox, and kept secret, passing only amongst a
few, under some kind of Caution and Confidence. For they would not suffer
Naturalists and (...) as they then called them, that is, such who dispute of
things above; as lessening the Divine Power, by deducing things from Natural
senseless Causes, and a long Chain of Necessity, without any thing of
Providence, or a free Agent.

Hence it was, that Protagoras was Banished, and Anaxagoras cast in Prison,
Pericles had very much ado to procure his Liberty; and Socrates, though he
meddled not at all in this sort of Learning, yet was put to death for Philosophy.

At the length the Reputation of Plato shining forth by his Life, and because
he subjected Natural Necessity to a divine and more excellent Principle, he
wiped off the obloquy and scandal from these contemplations, and made way for
the Mathematics to all People. So his Friend Dion, when the Moon (at the time
he was to Embark from Zacynthus to go against Dionysius) was Eclyps'd, was not
in the least disturbed, but went on, and arriving at Syracuse, drove away the
Tyrant.

But it so fell out with Nicias, that he had not at this time a skilful Divine
with him; for his Domestic (and who took off much of his Superstition)
Stilbides dyed a little before.

However, this Prodigy ( as Philochorus says) could not be unlucky to them
that flee, but surely very favorable; for things done in fear require to be
hidden, for the Light is their Foe.

Nor was it usual to observe the Sun or Moon more that three days, as
Autoclides has related in his Commentaries: But Nicias persuaded them to wait
another course of the Moon; as if he had not presently seen it clear again,
after it passed the shady place, that the Light was no longer obstructed by the
Earth.

Yet he in a manner abandoning all other cares, betook himself wholly to his
Sacrifices; till the Enemy came upon them with their Infantry, besieging the
Forts and Camp, and drew their Ships in a circle about the Harbor. Nor did
they from the Galleys only, but the little Boys every where got into
Cock-boats, and rowed about, provoking the Athenians, and insulting over them.
Amongst these a Youth of Noble Parentage, Heraclides by name, having launched
out before the rest, in Athenian Ship pursued and well nigh took him, his Uncle
Pollichus, in fear for him, made out with Ten Galleys, whereof he had the
Command; and the rest, to relieve Pollichus, in like manner drew forth, which
brought on a very sharp Engagement; wherein the Syracusians had the Victory,
and slew Eurymedon, with many others.

Hereupon the Athenian Soldiers had no patience to stay longer, but mutiny'd
against their Officers, requiring them to depart by Land; for the Syracusians
upon their Victory, immediately shut, and locked up the Entrance of the Harbor;
but Nicias would not consent to this, for it was a shameful thing to leave
behind so many Ships of Burden, and Galleys, little less than Two hundred;
putting therefore on board the best of the Foot, and the lustiest Darters, they
filled one Hundred and ten Galleys; the rest wanted Oars: the remainder of his
Army, Nicias posted along by the Seaside, deserting the great Camp, and Walls
that reached to Hercules's Temple.

So the Syracusians, not having of a long time performed their usual Sacrifice
to Hercules, went up now, both Priests and Captains to Sacrifice; And now their
Galleys being Manned, the Divines predicted from their Sacrifice, Victory and
Glory to the Syracusians, provided they would not be the Aggressors, but fight
upon the Defensive; for so Hercules overcame all, by only defending himself
when set upon.

In this confidence they set out: And this proved the hottest and fiercest of
all their Sea Fights; raising no less concern and passion in the beholders,
than in the actors; because they might oversee the whole action, with all the
various turns, so sudden and unexpected; wherein the Athenians suffered no less
from their own preparations, than from the Enemy; for they fought against light
nimble Ships, with theirs laden, heavy, and at every turn falling foul on one
another. And they were thrown at with Stones that fly indifferently any way,
for which were returned Darts and Arrows, which glancing on the waves, no
longer fly point blank, or regard the mark at which they were levelled.

Ariston, a Corinthian Captain, taught this the Syracusians, who fighting
stoutly, fell himself in this very Engagement, even whilst the Syracusians had
the Victory.

The Athenians, their loss and slaughter being very great, their flight by Sea
cut off, their safety by Land so difficult, did neither hinder the Enemy towing
away their Ships, from under their noses, nor demanded their Dead, judging
their want of Burial a less Calamity than the leaving behind the sick and the
wounded; all this they had before their eyes, yet far more miserable than those
did they reckon themselves, who were to work yet through more such evils, after
all, to make certainly the same end.

Now the Athenians prepared to dislodge that night.

Gylippus seeing the Syracusians fast at their Sacrifice and their Cups for
their Victories, and it being also a Holiday, expected not either by
Persuasion, or by Force to rouse them up, and carry them against the Athenians
as they decamped. But Hermocrates, of his own Head, put a trick upon Nicias;
sending some of his Companions to him, that pretended they came from those that
were wont to hold secret intelligence with him, to advise him not to stir that
night, the Syracusians having laid ambushes, and all beset the ways.

Nicias, caught with this stratagem, did simply stay; as if he feared lest that
he should not feel the Enemy effectually. For they the next Morning Marching
before, seized the Passes, fortified where the Rivers were fordable, cut down
the Bridges, and ordered their Horsemen to range the Plains and Ground that lay
open, so as to leave no manner of way for the Athenians to move without
fighting.

They stayed both that day, and another night, then went along, as if they were
leaving their own, not an Enemies Country, lamenting and howling for want of
Necessaries, and for their parting from Friends and Familiars that were not
able to help themselves; and likewise judging the present evils lighter than
those they expected to come.

But among the many miserable Spectacles that appeared up and down in the Camp,
the saddest sight of all, was Nicias himself, laboring under his Malady, and
unworthily reduced to extreme want of all accommodations, necessary for his
condition, which required more than ordinary, because of his Sickness; yet he
bore up under all this Illness, and underwent more than many in perfect health
could be able to endure: And it was plainly evident, that all this toil was not
for himself, or from any regard to his own Life, but purely for their sake
under his Command, he would not abandon hope.

And indeed the rest were given over to weeping and lamentation through fear or
sorrow, but he, whenever forced thereunto, 'twas manifest, he reflected on the
shame and dishonor of this Adventure, set against the Greatness and Glory he
had expected to win.

Not only beholding his person, but calling to mind his words, and the
disswasions he used to prevent this Expedition, they reckoned that so much the
less did he deserve to be thus wretched.

And they had no heart to put their trust in the Gods, considering that a Man
so Religious, who had performed to the Powers Divine so many and so great Acts
of Devotion, should have no more favorable Success than the wickedest and
meanest Fellow of the whole Army.

Nicias however endeavored all the while by his Voice, his Countenance, and
his Carriage, to be above these Misfortunes; and all along the way pelted at,
and receiving Wounds eight days continually from the Enemy: Yet preserved he
the Forces with him in a Body entire, till that Demosthenes was taken Prisoner.

The Party that he led, whilst they fought and made a stout resistance, were at
the Village Polyzelia hemmed in; Demosthenes thereupon drew his Sword, and
smote, but killed not himself, the Enemy presently running in and seizing upon
him.

So soon as the Syracusians had gone and informed Nicias of this, and he sent
some Horsemen, and by them knew the certainty of that Armies Defeat, he then
vouchsafed to sue to Gylippus for a Truce, for the Athenians to depart out of
Sicily, leaving Hostages for the Money that the Syracusians had expended in the
War.

But now they would not hear of these Proposals, but threatening them in great
fury and storm, and upbraiding them, let fly at them, destitute of all things
necessary. Yet Nicias made good his Retreat all that Night, and the next day,
through all their Darts, held on his way to the River Assinarus; there the
Enemy encountering them, drove some into the Stream; others, ready to die for
thirst, plunged in headlong, there drinking and drowning with the same labor.
And here was the cruellest and most immoderate Slaughter; till Nicias, falling
down to Gylippus, Let Pity, O Gylippus, (said he) move you in your Victory; not
for me, who have some Glory and Name from such like Misfortunes, but for the
other Athenians: You well know, that the Chance of War is common to all; and
the Athenians used it moderately and mildly toward you in their Prosperity.

At these Words, and at the sight of Nicias, Gylippus was somewhat troubled;
for he was sensible that the Lacedaemonians had received good Offices from
Nicias in the late Treaty; and he thought it a great and glorious Action, to
carry off the Chief Commanders of the Athenians alive: Wherefore he received
Nicias with respect, and bid him be of good Cheer; and commanded his Men to
spare the Lives of the rest; but the Word of Command being communicated slowly,
the Slain were far the greater number than the Prisoners. Yet many were privily
conveyed away by particular Soldiers; those taken openly were hurried together
on heaps, their Arms and Spoils hung up on the goodliest and the fairest Trees
all along the River; the Conquerors Crowned, their Horses splendidly adorned,
with those of their Enemy cropp'd and cut bare, entered the City, having, in the
noblest Contest, waged by Greeks against Greeks, and with the greatest
Strength, and the utmost Effort of Valor and Manhood, won a most entire
Victory.

And a General Assembly of the People of Syracuse, and their Confederates,
sitting, Euricles, a leading Man, moved first, That the Day on which they took
Nicias, should from thence-forward be kept Holy Day, by Sacrificing, and
forbearing all manner of Work; and from the River, be called, the Assinarian
Feast. This was the Twenty sixth day of the Month of July. And that the
Servants of the Athenians, and the other Confederates, be sold for Slaves;
themselves, and the Sicilian Auxiliaries, to be kept and employed in the
Quarries; except the Captains, and they to be put to death.

As the Syracusians debated these matters* Hermocrates saying, That to use well
a Victory, was better than to gain a Victory; They, in a great Hubbub, rebuked
him warmly. And Gylippus demanding the Athenian Generals to be delivered to
him, that he might carry them to the Lacedaemonians, the Syracusians, now
insolent with their good Fortune, gave him ill Words. Yet before this, even in
the War, they hardly endured his austere Carriage, and Lacedaemonian
Haughtiness: And (as Timaeus tells us) they condemned in him his Sordidness and
Avarice, an Hereditary Vice; for which also his Father Cleandrides, convicted
of Bribery, was banished: And this very Man, of the One thousand Talents which
Lysander sent to Sparta, embezell'd Thirty, and hid them under the Tyles of his
House; which being detected, he most shamefully ran his Country. But these
Matters are more at large handled in the Life of Lysander. Timaeus does not
say, that Demosthenes and Nicias were stoned to death, as Thucydides and
Philistus have left written, but that upon a Message from Hermocrates (whilst
yet the Assembly were sitting) admitted to them by some of the Guards, they
slew themselves; and their Bodies, thrown out before the Gates, lay open for a
Public Spectacle.

I have heard that now to this day, in a Temple at Syracuse, is shown a shield,
said to have been Nicias's, with Gold and Purple curiously wrought and
embroidered. Most of the Athenians perished in the Quarries by Diseases and ill
Diet, allowed only two pints of Barley every day, and one of Water. Many of
them were carried off by stealth and sold, or concealed amongst the Slaves, and
sold as Slaves, having marked an Horse on their foreheads, which they suffered
over and above their slavery.

But their modesty and handsome carriage was an advantage to them; for they
were either soon set free, or winning respect, continued with those who possessed
them.

Several amongst them were saved for the sake of Euripides; for, of all the
Inland Grecians, his Muse (it seems) was of highest esteem with the Men of
Sicily. And when any Travelers arrived, that could tell them some Copy, or
give them any taste of his Verses, they lovingly communicated them to one
another. Many of those that were preserved, are said, after they got home, to
have gone and made their acknowledgments to Euripides, relating how that some
of them had been released from their slavery, by teaching what they could
remember of his Poems; and others, when straggling after the fight, been
relieved with Meat and Drink for repeating some of his Lines. Nor need this be
any wonder, for it is reported, That a Ship of Caunus fleeing into their Harbor
for Protection, pursued by Pirates, was not received, but forced back, till one
asked if they had any of Euripides's Verses, who saying they had, they were
admitted, and their Ship brought into Harbor.

It Is said, that the Athenians, chiefly, because of the Reporter, could not
believe their loss; for a certain Stranger (it seems) coming to Peiraeum, and
there sitting in a Barbers Shop, and talking of what had happened, let fall some
words, as if the Athenians already knew all that had past; which the Barber
hearing, before he acquainted any body else, he ran, in all have, up into the
City, applied himself to the Archons, and presently spread it all about.
Whereupon there being every where (as may be imagined) great Fear and
Consternation, the Archons summoned a general Assembly, and there brought in
the Man, and questioned him how he came to know those things; and he, giving no
satisfactory account, was taken for a spreader of False News, and one that
trouble the City; and was therefore fastened to the Wheel, and racked a long
time, till other Messengers arrived, that related the whole Disaster
particularly. Thus, at the length, was Nicias believed, suffering what he so
often had foretold.

THE LIFE OF MARCUS CRASSUS.
Translated from the Greek, by Mr. Amhurst, Esquire Volume III.
MArcus Crassus, whose Father had born the Office of a Censor, and received the
Honor of a Triumph, was Educated in a little House together with his two
Brothers, who both Married in their Parents Lifetime, and they kept but one
Table amongst them all, which (perhaps) was not the least reason of this Man's
Temperance and Moderation in Diet; but one of his Brothers

MARCUS CRASSUS.
This is ye. certain Hate of Avarice,
Like Dropsy Patients, Crassus drinks, and dys.


dying, he Married his Widow, by whom he had his Children; neither was he, as
to this, less continent than any of the Romans, though when he was grown up, he
was suspected to have been familiar with one of the Vestal Virgins, named
Licinia, who was nevertheless acquitted, one Plotinus managing the Evidence
against her. Now this Licinia stood possessed of a fair Country Seat, which
Crassus desiring to purchase at under-rate, he was always lying (...).
at her, and attending of her, and this gave occasion to the Scandal; but he
likewise was acquitted, his Avarice, in some measure, clearing him of Incest;
but however he never left the Lady till he had got her Estate. People were wont
to say, That all the many Virtues of Crassus were darkened by this one Vice of
Avarice, and indeed he seemed to have no other but that; for it being the most
predominant, obscured the other Vices to which he was inclined, and the
Arguments they alleged, were the vastness of his Estate, and the manner of
raising it; for whereas at first he was not worth above 300 Talents, yet 35000.
l.
being entered upon Administration of Affairs, though he had Sacrificed the
Tenths of all he had to Hercules, and feasted the People, and gave to every
Citizen Corn enough to serve him Three Months; yet upon casting up his
Accounts, before he went upon his Parthian Expedition, he found them amount to
Seventy thousand Talents, most of which, if we may scandal him with a Truth, he
got by Fire and Rapine, making his advantages of the Public Calamities: for
when Sylla seized the City, and exposed to sale the Goods of those that he had
caused to be slain, accounting them Booty and Spoils, and calling them so too,
and being willing to make as many of the most substantial Citizens as he could,
partakers in the Crime, Crassus never (...), for the Streets were exceeding
narrow, and crooked, and built most with Timber, after it had been burnt by the
Gauls.
was the man that refused to accept, or give money for them. Moreover,
observing how extremely subject the City was to fire, and falling down of
Houses, by reason of their height, and standing so near together; he bought
Slaves that were Builders and Architects, and when he had got to the number of
500, he bought the Houses that were on fire, and those in the Neighborhood,
which, by reason of the present danger and uncertainty, the old Proprietors
were willing to part with for little or nothing: so that the greatest part of
Rome, at one time or other, came into his hands. Yet for all he had so many
Workmen, he never built any thing but his own House; because, said he, those
that are addicted to Building will undo themselves soon enough without the help
of other Enemies; but hired his Servants out to Citizens that had a mind to
build, and sold 'em as much Ground as they had need of: But although he had so
much ready Cash, and rich Land, and Laborers to work in it, yet all this was
nothing in Comparison of his Servants. So many, and so excellent Lecturers,
Amanuenses, Silver-Smiths, Stewards, and Table-waiters, and he always stood
over them to inspect and teach them himself, accounting it the Duty of a Master
to look over the Servants, that are indeed the living tools of Housekeeping;
and herein he was in the right (if he spoke as he meant) that the Servants
ought to look after all other things, and the Master after them: For Economy,
which in things Inanimate is but good Huswifery, in men becomes Policy: but
surely he was mistaken when he said, No man was to be accounted Rich, that
could not maintain an Army at his own Cost and Charges; for War, as Archidamas
well observed, has no certain Allowance, the charge of which is indefinite; and
he was clear of another opinion than C. Marcus; for he when he had distributed
fourteen Acres of Land a Man, and understanding that some desired more; God
forbid (says he) that any Roman should think that too little which is enough to
keep him alive and lusty; but however Crassus was very hospitable to Strangers,
for he kept open House; and to his Friends he would lend Money Interest-free;
but he called it in precisely at the time; so that his Kindness was worse than
the paying the Interest would have been. As for his Entertainments, they were
very frank and courteous, his Company generally of the middle sort, the
neatness and contrivance of them looking better than if they had been more
Magnificent. As for Learning, he chiefly minded Rhetoric, and such Studies as
might accomplish most for Public Employments; for although he was naturally as
good a Spokesman as almost any of them, yet in his Pains and Industry he
surpassed them all; for there was no Trial, how mean and contemptible soever,
that he came to unprepared; nay, several times he has gone through with a
Cause, when Pompey, and Caesar, and Tully himself have refused to stand up,
upon which account particularly he got the Love of the People, who looked upon
him as a necessary Man, and one ready to do a good turn: Besides, the People
were pleased with his courteous and frank Salutations and Greetings; for he
never met any Citizen, how mean and low soever, but he returned him his Salute
by Name. He was looked upon as a man well read in History, and pretty well seen
in Aristotle's Philosophy, which one Alexander read to him, whose Commerce with
Crassus was a sufficient Argument of his good nature and meek disposition: For
it is hard to say whether he was poorer when he entered into his Service, or
while he continued in it; for being his only Friend that used to accompany him
in his Progresses he would lend him a Cloak for a Journey, and when he came
home demand it again. O the patience of the Wretch, when even the Philosophy he
professed did not look upon Poverty as a thing indifferent! but of this
hereafter, when Cinna and Marius got the Power in their hands, 'twas soon
perceived that they came not for any good they intended to their Country but
designing the ruin and utter destruction of the Nobility, and as many as they
could lay their hands on they slew, amongst which was Crassus his Father and
Brother; but himself being very young, for the present escaped the danger; but
understanding that he was every way beset, and hunted after by the Tyrants,
taking with him three Friends and ten Servants, with all possible speed he fled
into Spain, having formerly been there, and contracted a great acquaintance
while his Father was Prator of that Country; but finding all People in a
Consternation, and dreading the Cruelty of Marius, as if he was already at
their Doors, he durst not discover himself to any Body, but hid himself in a
large Cave, which was by the Seashore, and belonged to Vibius Pacianus, to
whom he sent one of his Servants to sound him, his Provisions also beginning to
fail. Vibius was well pleased at his Escape, and enquiring the place of his
abode, and the number of his Companions, he went not to him himself, but
Commanded his Bailiff to provide every day a good Meals-meat, and carry it and
leave it upon such a Stone, and so return without taking any further notice, or
being inquisitive, promising him his Liberty if he did as he commanded, and
that he would kill him if he did otherwise. The Cave is not far from the Sea,
made by the closing together of some Cliffs, through the Chinks of which enters
a refreshing and delicate Gale: When you are entered, you find a wonderful high
Roof, and a great many very large Rooms one within another; neither is it void
of Water or Light; for a very pleasant and wholesome Spring runs through the
Cliffs, and the natural Chinks let in the Light all day long; and by reason of
the thickness of the Rock, the Air within is pure and clear, that which is
foggy and unhealthful being carried away with the Stream. While Crassus
remained here, the Steward brought them what was necessary, but never saw them,
nor knew any thing of the matter, though they within saw, and expected him at
the customary times; neither was their entertainment such as just to keep them
alive, but very plentiful and delicious; for Pacianus resolved to treat him
with all imaginable Civility; and considering he was a young Gentleman, he
resolved to gratify a little his youthful Inclinations; for to give just what
is needful, seems rather to come from necessity, than from a hearty Friend.
Taking with him therefore two handsome Damsels, he showed them the place, and
bid them go in boldly; whom when Crassus and his Friends saw, they were afraid
of being betrayed; demanding therefore what they were, and what they would
have, they, according as they were instructed, answered, They came to wait upon
their Master, who was hid in that Cave. Then Crassus perceiving 'twas a kind
Trick of Vibius, took the Damsels to him, and kept them there with him as long
as he staid, who gave an account to Vibius of what they wanted, and how their
Case stood. One of which Ladies, though she was very old, Femestellus says, he
had seen, and often heard her tell the Story.

When Crassus had lain concealed there eight Months, as soon as he understood
Cinna was dead, he appeared abroad, a great number of People flocking to him,
out of which he selected 2500. He visited many Cities (and as some write)
sacked Halaca; though he ever obstinately denied it; hence getting together
some Ships, he passes into Africa, and joins with Metellus Pius an eminent
Person, that had raised a very considerable Army; but upon some difference
between him and Metellus, he stayed not long there, but went over to Sylla, by
whom he was very much esteemed; when Sylla passed over into Italy, he kept all
the young Noblemen, that were with him in Employment, some he dispatched one
way, and some another, it fell to Crassus his share to raise men among the
Marsians, he demanded a Guard, being to pass through the Enemie's Country, to
whom Sylla replied sharply; I give you for Guard, your Father, your Brother,
your Friends and Kindred, whose unjust and cruel murder I am now going to
revenge; whereat Crassus being netled, he went his way, broke boldly through
the Enemy, and behaved himself briskly in all Sylla's Encounters, from whence,
they say, began the Emulation for Glory between him and Pompey; for though
Pompey was the younger man, and had the disadvantage to be descended of a
Father that was disesteemed by the Citizens, and hated as much as ever Man was;
yet in these Affairs he appeared so glorious and great, that Sylla always used
when he came in, to stand up, and pull off his Hat, an Honor which he seldom
showed to Older men, and of as good Quality, evermore he saluted him Imperator;
this fired and stung Crassus, though indeed 'twas but Pompey's due to be
preferred, for he both wanted experience, and his two innate Vices, Sordidness
and Avarice, Tarnish'd all the Luster of his Actions; for when he had taken
Turdesia, a Town of the Vmbrians, he converted all the Spoil to his own use,
for which he was complained of to Sylla: Nay, in the last and greatest Battle
before Rome it self, where Sylla was worsted, some of his Batalions giving
ground, and others quite broken; though Crassus got the Victory in the right
Wing which he Commanded, and pursued the Enemy till night, he then sent to
Sylla to acquaint him with his Success, and demand Provision for his Soldiers.
By Prescriptions and Sequestrations he lost his repute, by making great
purchases for little or nothing, and expecting Presents too besides: Nay, they
say he sequestered some one of the Brescians without Sylla's Order, only for his
own profit, wherefore Sylla never after trusted him in any Public Affairs. As
no man was more cunning than Crassus to ensnare others by flattery; so no man
lay more open to it, or swallowed the Bait more greedily than himself; and this
particularly was observed of him, that though he was the most covetous and
scraping man in the World, yet he ever hated and railed at such People. It
troubled him to see Pompey so successful in all his Undertakings, that he had
rode in Triumph before he was capable to sit in the Senate, and that the People
had surnamed him the Great, and when some body was saying, Pompey the Great was
coming, he smiled and asked him, Why, how big is he? despairing therefore to
equal him by Feats of Arms, he betook himself to the long Robe, when by doing
kindnesses, pleading, lending money, by standing by and voting for those that
stood for Offices, he arrived at as great Honor and Power, as Pompey had from
his many famous Expeditions, and this was peculiar to them, Pompey's name and
interest in the City was greatest when he was absent, for his Renown in War,
but when present he was often less esteemed than Crassus, by reason of his
superciliousness and haughty way of living, shunning mean Company, and
appearing rarely at the Forum, assisting only some few, and that not readily,
that his Interest might be the stronger when he came to use it for himself;
whereas Crassus being a Friend always at hand, ready and easy of access, and
very well experienced in these Affairs, with his Freedom and Courtesy got the
better of Pompey's Formality. As for the Gracefulness of Body, Eloquence of
their Discourse, and Dignity of their Persons, they were equally excellent: But
however this Emulation never transported him so far as to quarrel him, or bear
him any ill will; for though he was grieved to see Pompey and Caesar preferred
to him, yet he never added Baseness to his Jealousy, though Caesar, when he
was taken Captive by the Corsairs in Asia, cried out, O Crassus, how will thou
rejoice at the News of my Captivity? Though afterward they lived friendly
together: For when Caesar was going Praetor into Spain, and wanting Money, his
Creditors fell upon him, and seized upon his Equipage, Crassus then stood by
him and relieved him, and was his Bail for 830 Talents; now the City of Rome
being divided into three Factions, of Pompey, Caesar and Crassus, (for as for
Cato his Fame was greater than his Power, being rather admired than followed)
the sober and substantial part were for Pompey, the brisk and hot headed
followed Caesar's Ambition, but Crassus trimmed between them, making advantages
of both, and caused a great alteration in the Government of the City, being
neither a trusty Friend nor implacable Enemy, and was easily angered or appeased
according as he found it for his advantage, so that in a small time he would
assert and decry the same Laws and the same men, but though he was so much
favored, he was more feared, so that Sicinius who was the greatest Teizer of
the Magistrates, and Ministers of his time, being asked how chanced he let
Crassus alone? Oh, says he, he carries Hay on his horns, alluded to the custom
of tying Hay to the Horns of a Bull that used to Butt, that People might avoid
him. Now the Insurrection of the Gladiators, and the Desolation of Italy, which
many call the Sparteceian War, began upon this occasion: One Lentulus Batiatus
trained up a great many Gladiators in Capua (many of which were Gauls and
Thracians) who not for any fault by them committed, but by the injustice of
their Master, were compelled often to fight one with another. Two hundred of
these consulted how to escape, but their Plot being discovered, they who first
perceived it for preventions sake, being seventy eight, got out of a Cooks shop
chopping-knives, Spits, etc. and made their way through the City; and lighting
by the way on several Wagons, that were carrying Gladiators Arms to another
City, they seized upon them and Armed themselves; and seizing upon a defensible
place, they chose three Captains, of which Spartacus was chief, a Thracian
Shepherd, a Man not only of an high Spirit and valiant, but more understanding
and courteous than could be expected from one of his condition, and more
Civilized than the People of that Country usually are. When he first came to be
sold at Rome, they say a Snake twined about his Face as he lay asleep and his
Wife who also accompanied him, his Country-Women, a kind of Prophetess, and
inspired by Bacchus, declared that it was a great and terrible sign, portending
great Power to him with an happy event. First then routing those that came out
of Capua against them, and seizing upon their Arms, they gladly threw away
their own as barbarous and dishonorable; afterward Clodius the Praetor, was
Commanded against them with a Party of three thousand, who besieged them within
a Mountain, which had but one narrow and Difficult passage, which Clodius kept
guarded, encompassed with broken and slippery precipices, but upon the top grew
a great many wild Vines; they cut down as many of their boughs, as they had
need of and twisted them into Ladders, that would reach from thence to the
Bottom, by which without any danger they got down all but one, who stayed there
only to throw them down their Arms, and after all he saved himself. Now the
Romans were ignorant of all this, wherefore coming upon their backs, they
assaulted them at unwares, took their Camp, and several of the Shepherds and
Herdsmen that were there, stout nimble fellows, revolted over to them; these
they Armed and made use of them for Scouts and light Armed Soldiers. Again
Publius Varinus is sent General against them, whose Lieutenant General
Phrurius, with two thousand Men, they fought and routed. Then Cossinius
Colleague to Varinus, was sent with considerable Forces, him Spartacus missed
but very little of taking, as he was Bathing at Salenae, for he with great
difficulty made his escape, but Spartacus possessed himself of his Baggage, and
following the chase with a great slaughter, stormed his Camp and took it, where
Cossinius himself was slain; nay after many Skirmishes with the Praetor
himself, and in one taking Prisoners his Lictors and his own Horse, he began to
be great and terrible, wisely therefore considering, that he was not to expect
to match the Force of the Empire, he marched his Army toward the Alps,
intending when he had passed them that every Man should go to his own home,
some to Thrace, some to Gaul, etc. but they being grown confident in their
numbers, and puffed up with their Success, would give no Obedience to him, but
with Excursions ravaged Italy, so that now the Senate was not only moved at the
Indignity, and Baseness, both of the Enemy, and of the Insurrection, but
looking upon it as of dangerous Consequence, both the Consuls are sent to it as
to a great and difficult Enterprise, and Consul Gellius falling suddenly upon a
Party of Germans, who through Contempt and Confidence, were stragled from
Spartacus, fell upon them on a sudden, and cut them all to pieces. But Lentulus
with a mighty Army besieging Spartacus, he sallied upon him, and joining Battle
took his chief Officers Prisoners, and made himself Master of all his Baggage.
As he made toward the Alps, Cassius that was Praetor of that part of Gaul that
lies about the Po, met him with ten thousand Men, but being overcome in Battle
he had much ado to escape himself, with the loss of a great many of his Men;
when the Senate understood this, they were displeased at the Consuls, and
ordering them to meddle no farther, they appointed Crassus General of the War,
and a great many of the Nobility went Volunteers with him, partly out of
Friendship, and partly to get Honor. He staid in Picena, expecting Spartacus
would take a compass and come that way, and sent his Lieutenant with two
Legions, to wheel about and observe the Enemies motion, but upon no account to
engage or Skirmish; but he upon the first opportunity joined Battle, and was
routed, having a great many of his Men slain, and a great many saving their
lives with the loss of their Arms. Crassus rebuked Mummius severely, and Arming
the Soldiers again, he made them find Sureties for their Arms, that they would
part with them no more; but for Five hundred that were the Beginners of the
flight, he divided them into Fifty tenths, and one of each was to Die by Lot,
thus he revived the ancient punishment of Decimation, where Ignominy is added
to the Circumstances of Death, like the representation of a dismal and terrible
Tragedy, where the rest sit as Spectators. When he had thus reclaimed his Men,
he led them against the Enemy, but Spartacus retreated into Lucania, toward the
Sea, and in the straights meeting with some Cilician Pirates, he had thought of
attempting Sicily, whereupon Landing Two thousand Men, he hoped to new-kindle
the War of the Slaves, which was but lately extinguished, and seemed to need
but little fuel; but after the Pirates had struck a bargain with him, and
received his Earnest, they deceived him, and sailed away. He thereupon retired
again from the Sea, and pitched his Camp in the Peninsula of Rhegium; there
Crassus came upon him, and considering the nature of the place, and that it
supplied him for all that was necessary for his undertaking, he designed to
build a Wall cross the Isthmus; thus keeping his Soldiers at once from
idleness, and his foes from forage; which great and difficult undertaking he
perfected in a small time, beyond all expectation, making a Ditch from one Sea
to the other, over a neck of land of Three hundred furlongs long, fifteen foot
broad, and as much in depth, and upon it built a wonderful high and strong
Wall, which Spartacus at first slighted and despised, but when Provisions began
to fail, and intending to pass further, he found he was walled in, and no more
was to be had in the Peninsula, taking the opportunity of a snowy stormy night,
he filled up part of the Ditch with earth, and boughs of Trees, and so passed
over the third part of his Army, wherefore Crassus was afraid lest he should
March directly to Rome; but was soon eased of that fear, when he saw many of
his men upon a mutiny revolt from him, and encamp by themselves upon the
Lucanian Lake. This Lake they say is very changeable, sometimes sweet, and
sometimes so salt, that it cannot be drunk. Crassus falling upon these beat
them from the Lake, though he could not pursue the slaughter, by reason of
Spartacus his coming in, who stayed the flight. Now he began to repent that he
had formerly writ to the Senate, to call Lucullus out of Thrace, and Pompey out
of Spain, so that he did all he could to finish the War, before they came,
knowing that the honor of the Action, would redound to him that came to his
assistance; resolving therefore first to set upon those that were revolted, and
encamped apart, whom C. Cunicius and Castus Commanded, he sent six thousand men
before to secure a little Eminence, and to do it, as privately as possible,
which that they might do, they covered their Helmets, but being discovered by
two Women that were sacrificing for the Enemy, they had been in great hazard,
had not Crassus immediately appeared, and joined Battle with them, which proved
very Bloody, for twelve thousand three hundred were slain, and two only wounded
in their backs, the rest all died standing in their ranks, and fighting
bravely: Spartacus after this Discomfiture, retired to the Mountains of
Petilia, but Quintus one of Crassus his Commanders and Scropha the Questor,
pursued, and overtook him, but when Spartacus rallied and faced them, they
basely betook themselves to flight, and had much ado to carry off their Questor
who was wounded; this Success ruined Spartacus, because it encouraged the
Fugitives, who now disdained any longer to make a flying Fight, not to obey
their Officers, but as they were upon their March, they came to them with their
Swords in their Hands, and compelled them to lead them back again through
Lucania, against the Romans, and to make what haste they could to find out
Crassus; here News is brought that Pompey was at hand, and people used to talk
openly, that the honor of this War was reserved for him, who would come and
oblige the Enemy to fight, and certainly rout him. Whereupon Crassus desiring
to fight, he encamped very near the Enemy and made Lines of Circumvallation,
but the Slaves made a Sally, and attacqu'd the Pioneers; now as fresh Supplies
came in, on either side, and Spartacus seeing there was no avoiding it, he set
all his Army in Array, and when his Horse was brought him, he drew out his
Sword, and killed him, saying, if he got the day, he should have a great many
better Horses of the Enemies, and if he lost it, he should have no need of
this; so making directly toward Crassus himself, through Wounds and Darts he
missed of him, but two Centurions that fell upon him together, he slew; at last
being deserted by those that were about him, he himself stood his ground, and
being surrounded by the Enemy, he bravely defending himself was cut in pieces.
But though Crassus made use of his Fortune, and not only did the part of a
General, but gallantly exposed his Person; yet Pompey shared in the honor of
the Action, for he met with many that fled and slew them, so that he Wrote to
the Senate, that Crassus indeed had Vanquished the Fugitives in a pitched
Battle, but that he had put an end to the War. Pompey was honored with a
magnificent Triumph for his Conquest over Sertorius and Spain; but Crassus
himself, could not so much as desire a Triumph, and it looked meanly in him to
accept of an Ovation for a Servile War, and pass through the City on Foot: (as
to the Difference between Ovation and Triumph it is writ in the life of
Marcellus:) And Pompey being immediately called to the Consulship, tho Crassus
hoped to be joined with him, he did not scruple to request his Assistance, who
very readily laid hold on that Opportunity, (for he desired by all means to lay
some Obligation upon Crassus) and briskly furthered his Interest; and at last
he declared in his Speech, that he was not less beholden to them for his
Colleague, than for the Honor of the Office. But being entered upon the
Employment, this Amity continued not long; but differing almost in every thing,
clashing and maligning one another, the time of their Consulship passed without
any matter of Consequence, except that Crassus made a great Sacrifice to
Hercules, and feasted the People at ten thousand Tables, and measured them out
Corn for three Months. Now as their Command was ready to expire, and they were
making their farewell Speeches, a Roman Knight, one Ovatius Aurelius, a private
Country-Gentlemen, mounted the Rostrum, and declared a Vision he had in his
Sleep. Jupiter, says he, appeared to me, and commanded me to tell you, That you
should not suffer your Consuls to lay down their Charge before they were made
Friends. When he had spoke, the People cried out, that they should be
reconciled. Pompey stood still and said nothing; but Crassus first offering him
his hand, I cannot think, says he, my Countrymen, that I do a mean thing, and
unworthy my self, if I make the first Offers of Accommodation and Friendship
with Pompey, whom you your selves styled the Great, before he was of Man's
Estate, and decreed him a Triumph before he was capable of sitting in the
Senate. This is what was memorable in Crassus's Consulship; but as for his
Censorship, that was altogether idle and unactive; for he neither made a
Scrutiny of the Senate, nor took a Review of the Gentry, nor an Account of the
People, though he had as mild a Man as could be desired for his Colleague,
Lutatius Catulus, though 'twas reported, that when Crassus intended a violent
and unjust action, which was the reducing Egypt to be tributary to Rome,
Catulus strongly opposed it, and falling out about it, they laid down their
Office by consent. As for that great Conspiracy of Catiline, which was very
near subverting the Government, Crassus was not without some suspicion of being
concerned, and one man swore him in the Plot; but no body credited him, yet
Cicero in one of his Orations, openly charges both Crassus and Caesar with it,
though that Speech was not published till they were both dead, and in that
Speech which he made upon his being elected Consul, he declares that Crassus
came to him by Night and brought a Letter concerning Catiline and confirming
the Conspiracy, for which Crassus hated him ever after, but was hindered by his
Son from doing him any Injury; for Publius was mightily addicted to Learning
and Eloquence, and a constant follower of Cicero, insomuch that he put himself
into Mourning for his Banishment, and obliged all the young Gentlemen to do the
same; at last he reconciled him to his Father. Now Caesar returning from his
Command, and designing to get the Consulship, and seeing that Crassus and
Pompey were again at Variance, was unwilling to disoblige one, by making
application to the other, and despaired of success without the help of one of
them; he therefore made it his business to reconcile them, making it appear,
that by destroying one the other, they advanced the Cicero's, the Catuli, and
the Cato's, who would really be of no Account, if they would join their Forces
and Factions together, and so they might manage the Affairs of the Empire as
they pleased; so they being reconciled by his Persuasion, they three set up an
irresistible Power, which utterly subverted the Government, both as to Senate
and People; not that he made them greater than they were before; but by their
means made himself greatest of all; for by the Adherents of both he was
gloriously declared Consul, which Office when he administered with Credit, they
decreed him the Command of the Army, and allotted him Gaul for his Province,
and so placed him as in the Citadel, not doubting but they should divide the
rest at pleasure, when they had confirmed him in the Command he desired. Pompey
was moved hereto by an immoderate desire of Ruling; but Crassus, adding to his
old Disease of Covetousness, an affectation of Trophies and Triumphs, emulating
Caesar's Exploits, not content to be beneath those two, tho above all others,
could never rest contented till it ended in an ingnominious Overthrow, and a
Public Calamity. When Caesar came out of Gaul to Luca, a great many People
went thither to meet him* Pompey and Crassus had various Conferences with him,
how to get the whole management of Affairs into their hands, and subject every
thing to their Power; Caesar to keep up his Army, and Pompey and Crassus to get
new ones, and new Provinces, in which there was but one way, the getting the
Consulate a second time, which they were to stand for, and Caesar to assist
them by writing to his Friends, and sending many of his Soldiers to vote; but
when they returned to Rome their Design was presently suspected, and a report
was spread, that this interview was for no good. When Marcellinus and Domitius
asked Pompey in the Senate, If he intended to stand for the Consulship* he
answered, Perhaps he would, perhaps not; and being urged again, replied, He
would ask it of the Honest Citizens, but not of the Dishonest. Which Answer
appearing too haughty and arrogant, Crassus answered more civilly, He would
desire it, if it might be for the advantage of the Public, otherwise he would
desist; wherefore some others were daring enough to desire it, amongst which
was Domitius; but when such eminent Men appeared for it, the rest were frighted
to give it over; but Cato encouraged Domitius to proceed, who was his Friend
and Relation, exciting him to persist, as though he was now defending the
Public Liberty, for they did not so much aim at the Consulate, as at Arbitrary
Government, and this last was not a Petition for an Office, but a seizure of
the Provinces and the Army. Thus spoke Cato, and he spoke his thoughts only,
and almost compelled Domitius to appear at the Forum, where many sided with
them; for People admired what should make 'um desire the Consulship again, and
why they two together, and not with some third Person; we have a great many Men
not unworthy to be Fellow-Consuls with Pompey or Crassus; Pompey's Party being
apprehensive of this, committed all Undecencies and Violencies, and, amongst
other things, lay in wait for Domitius, as he was coming thither before
daybreak with other Company; his Torchbearers they killed, and wounded several
others, of which Cato was one: these being beat back and shut into a House,
mean while the Consuls are declared; not long after they besieged Domitius his
House, thrust Cato out of Doors, killed some that made resistance, and Decreed
Caesar his Command for Five years longer, and Provinces for themselves, Syria,
and both the Spains, which being decided by Lots, Syria fell to Crassus, and
the Spains to Pompey; they were both well-pleased with their Chance, for the
People were desirous that Pompey should not go far from the City, and he being
extremely fond of his Wife, was very glad to continue there; but Crassus was so
transported with his Fortune, that 'twas manifest he never thought he had so
good luck befell him as now; so that he had much ado to contain himself before
Company and Strangers, but amongst his Confidents he blurted out many vain and
childish things, which were unworthy of his Age, and contrary to his Nature,
for he was not much given to boasting in all his life besides; but then being
strangely puffed up, and his head heated, he would not limit his fortune with
Parthia and Syria, but looking on the Actions of Lucullus against Tygranes, and
the Exploits of Pompey against Mithridates but Childs-play, he proposed to
himself in his hopes to pass beyond Bactria and India, and the utmost Ocean;
not that he was obliged by his Office to undertake a Foreign Expedition, but
'twas well known that Crassus affected it, and Caesar* wrote to him out of
Gaul, commending his resolution, and inciting him to the War; and when Atteius
the Tribune of the People designed to stop his Journey, for most men murmured,
that one man should undertake a War against a People that had done them no
injury, and were at Amity with them, he desired Pompey to stand by him and
accompany him, for he had a great Authority amongst the Mobile, and when
several were ready to rise and exclaim against it, Pompey appeared with a
pleasing Countenance, and so mollified the People, that they let Crassus pass
quietly; but Atteius met him, and first by word of mouth conjured him* not to
proceed, and then commanded his Sergeant to seize him and detain him; but the
other Tribunes not permitting it, they released Crassus; Atteius therefore
running to the gate, whither, when Crassus was come, he kindled a fire in a
Caldron, he offered Fumigations and Sacrifices, calling upon and naming several
strange and horrible Deities, and cursed him with most dreadful imprecations:
now the Romans conceit there is so much Virtue in these sacred and ancient
Rites, that no Man can escape the effects of them, and that the Conjurer
himself seldom prospers; so that they are not often made use of, and that but
upon a great occasion; so that Atteius was to be blamed to devote that City to
such Calamities, upon whose account only he was so highly offended with
Crassus. Crassus arrives at Brundusium, and though the Sea was very rough, he
had not patience to wait, but went on Board, and lost many of his Ships, and
with the remnant of his Army marched a foot through Galatia, where, meeting
with King Deiotarus, who, though he was very old, was about building a New
City; whereupon Crassus scoffingly, told him, Your Majesty begins to build at
the 12th Hour. Neither do you, says he, O General, undertake your Parthian
Expedition very early; for Crassus was then Threescore years old, and he seemed
older than he was. At his first coming things went as he would have them, for
he made a Bridge over Euphrates without much difficulty, and passed over his
Army in safety, and took in many Cities of Mesopotamia, which yielded
themselves up voluntarily; but he lost a hundred of his Men before one, where
Apollonius had usurped; wherefore drawing all his forces down he took it by
Storm, plundered the Goods, and sold the Inhabitants; the Greeks call this City
Zenodotia, upon the taking of which he permitted the Army to salute him
Imperator, but it looked mean and poor, as if he despaired a Nobler
Achievement that was so exalted with this little Success; putting Garrisons of
seven thousand Foot and one thousand Horse in the new Conquests, he returned to
take up his Winter Quarters in Syria, where his Son, a most accomplished
Gentleman, met him coming from Caesar out of Gaul, and brought with him 1000
select Horse; here Crassus seemed to commit his first Error, unless you will
allow the whole Expedition to be one; for whereas he ought to have gone forward
and seized Babylon and Seleucia, Cities that were ever at enmity with the
Parthians, he gave the Enemy time to provide against him; besides he spent his
time there more like an Usurer than a General, for he took no account of the
Arms, nor Discipline of his Soldiers, but in computing the Revenue of the
Cities, and weighing the Treasure that was in the Temple of Hierapolis, giving
Commissions for levying of Soldiers, and dismissing them for Money, whereupon
he lost his credit and became despicable; here he met with the first ill Omen
from this Goddess, which some call Venus, others Juno, others Nature, or the
Cause that produces all things out of Moisture, and instructs us in all good;
for as they were going out of the Temple, young Crassus stumbled, and his
Father fell upon him; when he drew his Army out of Winter quarters, Ambassadors
came to him from Arsaces with this short Speech; If the Army was sent by the
People of Rome, he denounced a mortal War, and would give no quarter; but if
(as he understood it was) that against the Consent of his Country, Crassus for
his own ends had invaded his Country, then their King would be more merciful,
and taking pity upon Crassus his dotage, would send back those Soldiers whom he
looked upon rather besieged, than in a Garrison. Crassus vainly told them, he
would return his Answer at Seleucia, whereat Vagises the Chief of them smiling,
showed the Palm of his Hand, saying Hair will grow here before you will see
Seleucia; so they returned to their King Hyrodes, telling him 'twas War Several
of the Romans that were in Garrison in Mesopotamia, with great hazard made
their escape, and told them the danger was worth their Concern; for that they
by experience knew the number of the Enemy, and the manner of their fighting,
when they assaulted their Towns, (and as the manner is) they made it seem
greater than really it was, that by flight it was impossible to escape them,
and as impossible to overtake them when they fled, that they had new strange
sort of Weapons as swift as sight, that they pierced whatever they met with,
before you could see who threw; their Kataphracti, or Armed Men at all points,
were so provided as that they would beat down any thing, and give way to
nothing; which when the Soldiers heard, their hearts failed them; for before
they thought there was no difference between the Parthians and Armenians, or
Cappadocians, who tired Lucullus in following and pursuing of them, and were
persuaded that the difficulty of the War consisted only in the tediousness of
the March, and the trouble of chasing those that durst not come to handy blows,
so that the danger of a Battle was beyond their expectation; wherefore the
Officers advised Crassus to proceed no further at present, but take new
Measures upon the whole; especially Cassius the Questor, and the Southsayers
told him privately the Omens were unlucky, and that the Sacrifices portended
dismal Consequences; but he gave no heed to them or any body else, but those
that exhorted him to proceed; nor did Artabaces King of Armenia confirm him a
little, who came to his aid with 6000 Horse; these were said to be only the
King's Lifeguard, for he promised 10000 Curiassiers more, and 30000 Foot at
his own Charges; he persuaded Crassus to invade Parthia by the way of Armenia,
for he would not only supply his Army with Forage, but his Passage would be
more secure, by reason of the roughness of the Country, and a continued Chain
of Mountains, which were almost impassable to Horse, in which the main strength
of the Parthians consisted; Crassus returned him but cold thanks for his
readiness to serve him, and the Splendor of his Assistance, and told him he
was resolved to pass through Mesopotamia, where he had left a great many brave
Roman Soldiers, whereupon the Armenian went his way. As Crassus was passing his
Army by Zeugma, many strange and supernatural Thunders were heard, and the
Lightning flashed upon the Army, and during the Storm a Hurricane broke down
the Bridge, and carried part of it away, and two Thunderbolts fell upon the
very place where the Army was going to Encamp, and one of the General's Horses
famously caparison'd, broke from the Groom, leaped into the River, and was seen
no more; and when they went to take up the great Standard, the Eagle turned its
head backward, and after he had passed over his Army, as they were distributing
Provisions, they first gave Lentils and Salt, which the Romans account ominous,
being what is set before the dead. And as Crassus was haranging his Soldiers,
he let fall a Word which struck a great terror in the Army; for, said he, I
will break down the Bridge, that none of you may return; and whereas he ought
when he had perceived his blunder to have corrected himself, and explained his
meaning to those that were so concerned at it, he would not do it out of mere
stubbornness; and when at the last general Sacrifice the Priest gave him the
Entrails, they slipped out of his hand, and when he saw the standers by concerned
at it, he laughed and said, See what it is to be an old Man, but I Will hold my
Sword fast enough; so marching his Army along the River with seven Legions,
little less than 4000 Horse, and as many light armed Soldiers, the Scouts
returning, declaring that not one Man appeared, but that they saw the footing
of a great many Horses which seemed to retire and fly; whereupon Crassus
conceived great hopes, and the Romans began to despise the Parthians, as men
that would not come to handy-strokes; but Cassius and the rest advised him to
refresh his Army in some of the Garrison Towns, and remain there till they
could get some certain Intelligence of the Enemy, at least to make toward
Seleucia, and keep by the River, that so they might have the convenience of
Ships to bring him Provisions, which might always accompany the Army, and the
River would secure them from being environed, and if they should fight it might
be upon equal terms. As Crassus was considering hereupon, there came to the
Camp an Arabian Tribune named Ariamnes, a cunning subtle Fellow, and one which
was the chief cause of all the misfortune that befell them; some of Pompey's
old Soldiers knew him, for he had served with them under him, and had received
some Kindnesses of him, and was looked upon as a Friend to the Romans, but was
now suborned by the King's Officers, and sent to Crassus to entice him if
possible from the River and Hills into the Plain, where he might be surrounded,
for the Parthians desired any thing rather than to be obliged to meet the
Romans face to face; he therefore coming to Crassus and he had his Tongue well
hung) highly commended Pompey as his Benefactor, and admired the Forces that
Crassus had with him, but seemed to wonder why he delayed and made
Preparations, as if he should not use his Feet more than his Arms, against
those Men that taking with them their best Goods and Chattels, had designed
long ago to fly for refuge to the Scythians or Hyrcanians; but supposing they
were to fight, at least he ought to make what have he could, before the King
could recover Courage, and get his Forces together; for you see Surena and
Syllaces are opposed to you, to hinder your further progress, but the King
himself does not appear; but this was all a Lie for Hyrodes had divided his
Army into two parts, with one he in Person wasted Armenia, revenging himself
upon Artuasdes, and sent Surena against the Romans, not out of Contempt as some
pretend, for there is no likelihood that he should despise Crassus, one of the
Chiefest men of Rome, to go and fight with Artuasdes, and invade Armenia; but
for my part I believe he apprehended the danger, and therefore he expected the
Event, and that Surena should first run the hazard of a Battle and circumvent
the Enemy: Nor was this Surena an ordinary Person, but for Wealth, Family, and
Authority, the second man in the Kingdom, but for Courage and Prowess he was
the first, neither was any one so large sized, or so well shaped; whenever he
traveled alone he had 1000 Camels to carry his Baggage, 200 Chariots full of
Concubines, 1000 completely Armed men for his Life-Guards, and a great many
more light Armed, and at least 10000 of his Servants and Retinue, and the
Honor had long belonged to his Family, that at the King's Coronation he put
the Crown upon his Head, and when this very King Hyrodes had been exiled, he
brought him in; 'twas he that took the great City of Seleucia, was the first
Man that scaled the Walls, and with his own hand beat off the Defendants, and
though at that time he was not above 30 years old, he was counted as wise and
discreet; wherein he had much the advantage of Crassus, who was easy to be
imposed upon, first through his overweening confidence, and afterward because
he was dastarded and cowed by his Calamities. When Ariamnes had thus worked
upon him, he drew him from the Rivers into vast Plains, by a way that at first
was pleasant and easy, but afterward very troublesome by reason of the depth
of the Sand, not a Tree, not any Water, and no end of this to be seen; so that
they were not only spent with thirst, and the difficulty of the passage; but
the uncomfortable Prospect of not a bough, not a stream, not a hillock, not a
green herb, dismayed them quite, but an odd kind of a Sea of Sand, which
encompassed the Army with its Waves. Here they began to suspect some Treachery,
and at the same time came Messengers from Artuasdes, that he was engaged in a
bloody War with Hyrodes, that had invaded his Country, so that now 'twas
impossible for him to send him any succors. Wherefore he advised Crassus to
turn back, and with joint Forces to give Hyrodes Battle, or at least that he
should so March and Encamp where Horses could not easily come, and keep to the
Mountains. Crassus out of Anger and Vanity, writ him no Answer, but told them,
At present he was not at leisure to mind the Armenians, but he would call upon
them another time, and revenge himself upon Artuasdes his Treachery. Here
Cassius his Party began again to complain, but when they perceived how much
Crassus was displeased, they gave him over, but privately railed at the
Barbarian. What evil Genius, O thou worst of Men, brought thee to our Camp, and
with what charms and potions have thou bewitched Crassus, that he should march
his Army through a vast and deep Desert, through ways which are rather fit for
a Captain of Arabian Robbers, than the General of a Roman Army? But the
Barbarian being a very subtle fellow, very submissively exhorted them, and
encouraged them to sustain it a little farther, but ran about the Camp, and
under pretense of cheering up the Soldiers, asked them in scoff, What do you
think you march through Campania, expecting every where to find Springs, and
Shades, and Baths, and Inns of Entertainment, consider you now travel the
Confines of Arabia and Assyria. Thus he managed them like Children, and before
the cheat was discovered, he rode away, not but that Crassus was privy to his
going, but he had persuaded him, that he would go and contrive how to disorder
the Affairs of the Enemy; and it was observed that Crassus came not abroad that
day in his Scarlet Robe, which Roman Generals use to wear, but in a black one,
which, as soon as he perceived, he changed. And the Standard-Bearers had much
ado to take up their Eagles, which seemed to be fixed to the place; Crassus
laughed at it, and hastened their March, and compelled his Infantry to keep pace
with his Cavalry, till some few of the Scouts returned, and told them that
their Fellows were slain, and they hardly escaped, that the Enemy was at hand,
resolved to give them Battle; here all was in an uproar, Crassus was struck
into an amaze, and, for have, could not put his Army in good order. First
therefore, as Cassius advised, they opened their Ranks and Files, that they
might take up as much space as could be, to prevent their being surrounded, and
distributed the Horse into the Wings, but afterward changing his Mind, he drew
up his Army in a square, and made a Front every way, each of which consisted of
Twelve Companies, to everyone of which he allotted a Troop of Horse, that no
part might be destitute of the Assistance that the Horse might give, and that
they might be ready to assist every where, as need should require; Crassus
Commanded one of the Wings, young Crassus the other, and himself was in the
middle; thus they marched on till they came to a little River named Bolissus, a
very inconsiderable one in it self, but very grateful to the Soldiers, who had
suffered so much by Drought and Heat all along their march. Most of the
Commanders were of the opinion, that they ought to remain there that night, and
to inform themselves as much as possible of the number of the Enemies and their
Order, and so march against them at break of Day, but Crassus was so exalted at
the eagerness of his Son, and the Horsemen that were with him, who desired and
urged him to lead them on, and engage, that he Commanded those that had a mind
to it, to eat and drink as they stood in their Ranks; and before they had all
well done, he led them on, not leisurely and by stops, as if he was going to
Battle, but kept on his pace as if he had been in haste, till they saw the
Enemy, contrary to their expectation, neither so many nor so magnificently
Armed as the Romans expected, for Surena had hid his main Force behind the
first ranks and ordered them to hide the glittering of their Armor, with Coats
and Skins; but when they approached and the General gave the Signal,
immediately all the field rung with a hidious noise, and terrible clamor; for
the Parthians do not encourage themselves to War, with Cornets and Trumpets,
but with a kind of Kettle Drum which makes a dead, and solemn noise, like the
Bellowing of Beasts, mixed with something like thunder; for they well considered
that the sense of hearing, which receives the first impressions, most easily
disturbs the Mind, and subverts the understanding. When they had sufficiently
terrified the Romans with their noise, they threw of the covering of their
Armor, they shone like lightening in their Brest-plates, and Helmets polished
and furbished, and made of Margianian Steel, and their Horses were covered with
Brass and Steel Trappings. Surena was the tallest and comelyest Man himself.
And the Sweetness of his Looks, and Effeminacy of his Habit, could not promise
so much Manhood, as he really was Master of; for his Face was Painted, and his
Hair parted, after the fashion of the Medes, whereas the other Parthians looked
more terrible, with their hair shaggy, after the Scythian Mode. Their first
design was with their Lances to beat down, and force back the first Ranks of
the Romans, but when they perceived the depth of their Battle, and that the
Soldiers kept their ground, they made a retreat, and pretending to separate and
break their Orders, they encompassed the Romans round, ere they were aware of
it; then Crassus Commanded his Light Armed Soldiers to charge in, but they had
not gone far, before they were received with such a shower of Arrows, that they
were glad to retire amongst the heavy-Armed, which was the first occasion of
their disorder and terror, when they perceived the strength and force of their
Darts, which pierced and broke their Arms, Body and all. Now the Parthians
divided themselves and began to shoot from all sides, not aiming at any
particular, for indeed the order of the Romans was so close, that they could
not miss if they would, and Arrows being forced out of strong bent Bows, the
strokes were very violent. Now was the state of the Romans desperate, for if
they kept their ranks, they were wounded, and if they charged, though they hurt
the Enemy never the more, they suffered never the less. For the Parthians threw
their Darts when they fled, an Art, which none but the Scythians are better
practiced in, and it is cunningly contrived; for while they thus fight to make
their escape, they avoid the dishonor of a Flight; however the Romans had some
comfort to think, that when they had spent all their Arrows, they would either
give over, or come to Handy-strokes; but when they understood there were
several Camels loaded with Arrows, and when the first Ranks had discharged
those they had, they wheeled off, and took more; Crassus seeing no end of it,
was out of all heart, but sent to his Son that he should endeavor to fall in
upon them, before he was quite surrounded; for the Enemy charged mostly upon
that Quarter, and rode about that they might come behind him; wherefore the
young Man taking with him 1300 Horse (1000 of which he had from Caesar) 500
Archers, and Eight Companies of his best Armed Soldiers that stood next him, he
led them up with design to charge the Parthians. Whether it was that they
feared to stand an Army in so good Array, (as some think) or else designing to
entice young Crassus, as far as they could, from his Father, pretended to fly;
whereupon he crying out, That they durst not stand, pursued them, and with him
Censorinus and Vegabacchus, both famous, one for his Courage and Prowess, the
other for being of a Noble Family, and an excellent Orator, both Intimates of
Crassus, and his Contemporaries. The Horse thus pushing on, the Infantry staid
little behind, being exalted with hopes and joy, for they supposed they had
already Conquered, and now were only pursuing, till, when they were gone too
far, they perceived the Deceit; for they that seemed to fly, now turned again,
and a great many fresh ones came on; hereupon they made an Halt, for they
doubted not but now the Enemy would Attack them, because they were so few, but
they placed their Curiassiers against the Romans, and with the rest of their
Horse, rode about scowring the field, and stirring up the sand, they raised
such a Dust, that the Romans could neither see nor speak to one another, and,
for want of room, tumbling upon one another, they were slain, not by a quick
and easy Death, but with intolerable pain and convulsions; for, rolling among
the Darts, they lingered away of their Wounds, and when they would, by force,
pluck out the barbed Arrows, they caught hold of the Nerves and Veins, so that
they tore and tortured themselves; many of them Died thus, and those that
survived were Disabled for any service, and when Publius exhorted them to
charge the Curiassiers, they showed him their Hands nailed to their Shields,
and their Feet stuck to the ground, so that they could neither fly nor fight;
wherefore he charged in briskly with his Horse, and made a gallant Onset; but
the Fight was very unequal, either as to the offensive or defensive part; for
the Romans with their weak and little Javelins, struck against Targets that
were of tough raw Hides, or Steel; whereas the naked Bodies of the Gauls were
exposed to the strong Spears of the Enemy; for upon these he mostly depended,
and with them he wrought Wonders; for they would catch hold of their Spears,
and seize upon the Enemy, and so pull them off from their Horses, where they
could scarce stir by reason of the heaviness of their Armor, and many of them
quitting their own Horses, would creep under those of the Enemy, and stick them
into the Belly; which growing unruly, by reason of the pain, trampled upon
their Riders, and Enemies promiscuously. The Gauls were chiefly tormented by
reason of the Heat and Drought, being not accustomed to them; and most of their
Horses were slain, by being spurred on against the Spears, so that they were
forced to retire among the Foot, bearing off Publius grievously wounded:
Observing a sandy Hillock, not far off, they made to it; tying therefore their
Horses to one another, and placing them in the midst, and joining all their
Shields together, before them, they thought they might make some Defense
against the Barbarians, but it fell out quite contrary, for when they were
drawn up in a Plain, the Front, in some measure, secured those that were
behind, but when they were upon the Hill, one being higher than another, there
was no avoiding of it, but all were equally exposed, bewailing their Inglorious
and useless Fate. There were with Publius two Greeks, that lived near there at
Carras, Hieronymus, and Nichomachus, they persuaded him to retire with them to
Icenas, a Town not far from thence, and Allie of the Romans. No, said he, there
is no death so terrible, for the fear of which Publius would leave his Friends
that die upon his Account; but wishing them to take care of themselves, he
embraced them and sent them away, and because he could not use his Arm, for he
was run through with a Spear, he opened his Side to his Armor-bearer, and
Commanded him to run him through; and 'twas said, that Censorinus fell after
the same manner, Vegabacchus slew himself, as also the rest of best note, and
the Parthians coming upon the rest with their Lances, killed them fighting, nor
were there above 500 taken Prisoners; cutting off the head of Publius, they
directly march toward Crassus; and this was the posture of Affairs, when he
had commanded his Son to fall upon the Enemy, and word was brought him that
they were fled, and perceiving that the Enemy did not press upon him so hard as
formerly, for they were gone to fall upon Publius, he began to take heart a
little; and drawing his Army into a convenient place, expected when his Son
would return from the pursuit of those whom he thought defeated (as soon as he
saw his danger) the first Messengers were intercepted by the Enemy, and slain,
the last hardly escaping came and declared, That Publius was lost, unless he
had speedy Succors; Crassus was mightily distracted, not knowing what Counsel
to take, being fearful for the main Chance, and desirous to help his Son, at
last he resolved to move with his Forces: Just upon this, up came the Enemy
with their shouts and noises, now more terrible, with their Drums astonishing
the Romans, who now feared a fresh engagement; and they that brought Publius
his Head upon the point of a Spear, when they were come so near that it could
be known, scoffingly enquired where were his Parents, and what Family he was
of, for 'twas impossible that so brave and gallant a Gentleman, should be the
Son of so pitiful a Coward as Crassus: This sight, above all the rest, dismayed
the Romans, for it did not incite them to courage as it ought to have done, but
to horror and trembling, though they say, Crassus out-did himself in this
Calamity, for he passed through the ranks, and cried out to them: This, dear
Countrymen, is my own peculiar Loss, but the Fortune and the Glory of Rome is
safe and untainted so long as you are safe, but if any one be concerned for my
loss of the best of Sons, let him show it in revenging him upon the Enemy: Take
away their joy, revenge their Cruelty, nor be dismayed at what is past; for
whoever attempts great matters must suffer something: Neither did Lucullus
overthrow Tigranes without Bloodshed, nor Scipio Antiochus: Our Ancestors have
lost 1000 Ships about Sicily, and how many Generals and Captains in Italy? None
of which notwithstanding failed to overthrow the Conquerors, for the State of
Rome did not arrive to this height by Fortune, but by perseverance and virtue.
While Crassus thus spoke, exhorting them, he saw but few that gave much heed to
him, and when he ordered them to shout for the Battle, he found the deadness of
heart of his Army, which made but a faint and weak noise, but the shout of the
Enemy was clear and bold, and when they came to the business, the Horsemen
riding about shot their Arrows, and the foremost ranks with their Spears drove
the Romans close together, except those who rushed upon them for fear of being
killed by their Arrows. Neither did these do much Execution, being quickly
dispatched, for the strong thick Spear made great Wounds, and often run through
two Men at once; as they were thus fighting, the Night coming on parted them,
the Parthians boasting that they would indulge Crassus one Night to mourn his
Son, unless upon better consideration he would rather go to Arsaces, than be
carried to him; and therefore took up their Quarters near them, being flushed
with their Victory: But the Romans had a sad Night of it, for neither taking
care for the Burial of their dead, nor the Cure of the Wounds, nor the Groans
of the expiring, every one bewailed his own Fate: For there was no means of
escaping. Whether they should stay for the Light, or venture to retreat into
the vast Desert in the Dark, and now the Wounded Men gave them new trouble, for
to take them with them would retard their flight, and if they should leave
them, they might serve as Guides to the Enemy by their Cries, but however they
were desirous to see and hear Crassus, though they were sensible he was the
cause of all their Mischief; but he retired and hid himself, where he lay as an
Example of Fortune to the Vulgar, but to the Wise an Example of
Inconsiderateness and Ambition: Who, not content to be Supperior to so many
Millions of Men, but being inferior to two, esteemed himself as the lowest of
all. Then came Octavius his Lieutenant General, and Cassius to comfort him, but
he being altogether struck senseless, they called together the Centurions, and
Officers, and agreeing that the best way was to fly, they ordered the Army to
march without sound of Trumpet, and at first with silence; but when the
disabled Men found they were left behind, a strange Confusion and Tumult, with
an Outcry and Lamentation seized the Camp, and a trembling and dread fell upon
them, as if the Enemy were at their heels; by which means now and then turning
back, now and then standing to their order, sometimes taking up the Wounded
that followed, sometimes laying of them down, they wasted the time, (except 300
Horse) whom Ignatius brought safe to Carrae about midnight; where calling to
the Watch, as soon as they heard him, he bid them tell Coponius the Governor,
that Crassus had fought a very great Battle with the Parthians; having said but
this, and not so much as telling his Name, he rid away at speed to Zeugma: It Is
true, by this means he saved himself and his Men, but he lost his Reputation by
deserting his General; but however his Message to Coponius was for the
advantage of Crassus, for suspecting by this hasty and confused delivery of
himself, that all was not well, he immediately ordered the Garrison to be in
Arms, and as soon as he understood* that Crassus was upon the way toward him,
he went out to meet him, and received him with his Army into the Town; but the
Parthians, although they perceived their dislodgment in the Night, yet did not
pursue them, but as soon as it was day, they came upon those that were left in
the Camp, and put no less than 4000 of them to the Sword, and with their light
Horse picked up a great many straglers; Vargontinus the Legate broke off from
the main Body with about three Cohorts, which strayed out of the way, the
Parthians encompassing these in an eminence, slew every Man of them excepting
twenty, who with their drawn Swords forced their way through the thickest, and
they admiring their Courage, opened their Ranks to the right and left, and let
them pass without any further molestation, to Carrae.

Soon after a false report was brought to Syrena, that Crassus with his
principal Officers had escaped, and that those who were got into Carrae, were
but a confused Rout of insignificant People not worth further pursuit.
Supposing therefore that he had lost the very Crown and Glory of his Victory,
and yet being uncertain whether it were so or not, and therefore not able to
resolve, whether he should besiege Carrae or follow Crassus, he sent one of his
Interpreters to the Walls, commanding him in Latin to call Crassus or Cassius;
for that the General Syrena had a mind to threat with him; as soon as Crassus
heard this he embraced the Proposal, and soon after came up a Band of Arabians,
who very well knew the faces of Crassus and Cassius, as having been frequently
in the Roman Camp before the Battle. They having espied Cassius from the Wall,
told him that Syrena desired a Peace, and would give them safe Convoy, if they
would make a League with the King his Master, and withdraw all their Garrisons
out of Mesopotamia, and this he thought most advisable for them both, before
things came to extremity. Cassius greedily embracing the Proposal, desired that
a time and place might be appointed, where Crassus and Syrena might have an
interview. The Arabians having charged themselves with the Message, went back
to Syrena, who was not a little rejoiced, that Crassus would stand a Siege;
next day therefore he came up with his Army, insulting over the Romans, and
haughtily demanding of them Crassus and Cassius bound, if they expected any
mercy; the Romans, seeing themselves deluded and mocked, were much troubled at
it, and advising Crassus to lay aside his long and empty Hopes of aid from the
Armenians, resolved to fly for it; and this Design ought to have been kept
private, till they were upon their way, but Crassus could not conceal it from
the Villain Andromachus, nay he was so infatuated, as to choose him for his
Guide. The Parthians then to be sure had punctual intelligence of all that
passed; but it being forbid to them by the Laws of their Country, and no less
difficult to fight by Night, Crassus chose that time to set out in, and the
trusty Andromachus, lest he should get the start too far of his Pursuers, led
him into Morasses, and places full of Ditches and Enclosures, so that it was
exceeding painful and vexatious to his Company, and some there were who
supposing by these Windings and Turnings of Andromachus, that no good was
intended, resolved to follow him no further; and at last Cassius himself
returned to Carrae, and his Guides the Arabians advising him to tarry there
till the Moon was got out of Scorpio, he told them, that he was most afraid of
Sagittarius; and they with 500 Horse left, him and went into Assyria. Others
there were, who having got honest Guides, took their way by the Mountains, and
got into places of security by daybreak; these were 5000, under the Command of
Octavius, a very gallant Man; but Crassus fared worse, for Andromachus had so
entangled him in the Fens and rough Ways, that before he could get clear of
them, the Parthians were at his Heels. There were with him four Cohorts of
Legionary Soldiers, a very few Horsemen, with whom having with great difficulty
got into the way, and not being above a Mile and half from Octavius, instead of
going to join him, he retreated unto another Hill, neither so defensible nor
unpassable for the Horse, but yet lying under the Hills of Sinnaca, and
continued in a long Ridge through the Plains, Octavius could see in what danger
the General was; and himself, at first but slenderly followed, came in to the
rescue. Soon after the rest upbraiding one another with Baseness, in forsaking
their Officers, marched down, and falling upon the Parthians, drove them from
the Hill, and compassing Crassus about, and fencing him with their Shields,
they declared that their General should never lie exposed to a Parthian Arrow,
so long as there was a Man of them left alive; Syrena therefore perceiving his
Soldiers grew faint in their Attaque, and knowing that if the Romans should
spin out the Battle till Night, they might then gain the Mountains, and be out
of his reach, he betook himself to his usual Craft; for some of the Prisoners
were set free, who had heard a contrived discourse in the Camp, that the King
did not design a War to be pursued with the utmost extremity against the
Romans, but rather by his gentle Treatment of Crassus, to make a step toward
Reconciliation of the two Empires; and the Barbarians desisted from fighting,
Syrena himself going gently to the Hill, unbent his Bow, and held out his Hand,
inviting Crassus to an Agreement, and withal assured him, that it was besides
the Kings intentions, that they had thus far shown their Valor and Force; that
now he desired no other contention but that of Kindness and Friendship, by
making a firm Alliance, and permitting them to go away in fafety: These Words
of Syrena some received joyfully and accepted the Offer; but Crassus, who had
had sufficient experience of their Perfidiousness, and not being able to assign
any Reason of the sudden Change, would give no ear to them, and only took time
to consider; but the Soldiers cried out and advised him to treat, afterward
upbraided and affronted him, saying, That it was very unreasonable that he
should bring them to fight with such Men Armed, whom himself without their Arms
durst not look in the Face. He tried first to prevail with them by Entreaties,
and told them, That if they would have patience till Evening, they might get
into the Mountains and Passes, unaccessible for Horse, and so be out of danger
of the Parthian Darts; and withal he pointed out the Way with his Hand,
entreating them not to neglect their Preservation, which presented it self to
them. But when they mutinied, and clash'd their Targets in a threatening manner,
he was overpowered and forced to go, and turning about at parting, said, You,
Octavius and Petronius, and the rest of the Commanders which are present, you
see the necessity of going, which I lie under, and ye cannot but be sensible of
the Indignities and Violence which is offered to my Person; however out of
tenderness to the Honor of the Romans, declare to all the World, that Crassus
perished rather by the subtilty of his Enemies, than by the Treason and
Perfidiousness of his Friends and Countrymen. But Octavius would not stay
there, but with Petronius, went down from the Hill; as for the Lictors, Crassus
bid them be gone. The first that met him were two half-blood Gr^cians, who
leaping from their Horses, made a profound Reverence to Crassus, and desired
him (in Greek) to send some before him, who might see that Syrena himself was
coming toward them, his retinue disarmed, and not having so much as their
wearing Swords along with them; but Crassus answered, That if he had but the
least Concern for his Life, he would never have entrusted himself in their
Hands; but sent two Brothers the Roscii by name, to take an account how
accoutred, and in what numbers they came, and them Syrena ordered immediately
to be seized, and himself with his principal Officers came up to him upon the
Spur, and greeting him, says he, This is a most undecent Spectacle, a Roman
Emperor on Foot, whilst I and my Train are on Horseback: But Crassus, replied,
That there was no error committed on either side, for they both met according
to the custom of their own Country, Syrena told him that from that time there
was a League betwixt the King his Master and the Romans, but that Crassus must
go with him to the River to sign it, for you Romans (says he) are something
forgetful of your Articles and Agreements, and therefore need some remarkable
sign to keep it in your Memory, and withal reached out his Hand to him. Crassus
therefore gave order that one of his Padds should be brought, Syrena told him
there was no need he should put himself to that trouble, for the King his
Master presents him with one; and immediately, a Horse with a Golden Bit, and
very rich Trappings, was brought up to him, and himself was forcibly put into
the Saddle, and his Gentlemen switched the Horse to make the more have; but
Octavius running up got hold of the Bridle, and soon after one of the Colonels
with Petronius and the rest of the Company came in striving to stop the Horse,
and pulling back those who on both sides of him forced Crassus forward. Thus
from pulling and thrusting one another, they came to a Tumult, and soon after
to blows. Octavius drawing his Sword killed a Groom of one of the Barbarians,
and one of them getting behind Octavius killed him, Petronius was not Armed,
but being struck on the Breast, he fell down from his Horse, though without
hurt; one Pomaxaithres killed Crassus, others say it was another, and that this
man only cut off his Head and right Hand; for as for those that were by, they
had not leisure to observe Particulars, being either killed fighting about
Crassus, or using their heels to get to their Comrades on the Hill. But the
Parthians coming upon them, and saying that Crassus had the punishment he
justly deserved, Syrena bid the rest to come down from the Hill without fear;
some of them came down and surrendered themselves, others were scattered up and
down in the Night, (a very few of which got safe home) and others the Arabians,
beating the field, hunted and put to Death. It is generally said, that in all
20000 Men were slain, and 10000 taken Prisoners, but Syrena sent the Head and
Hand of Crassus to Hyrodes the King, into Armenia; but himself by his
Messengers scatering a Report, That he was bringing Crassus alive to Seleucia,
made a ridiculous Procession, which by way of scorn he called a Triumph. For
one Caius Pacianus, who of all the Prisoners was most like to Crassus, being
put into the Habit of the Barbarians, and instructed to take the Title of
Crassus and Emperor from those who spoke to him, was brought sitting upon his
Horse, but before him went a parcel of Trumpeters and Lictors upon their
Camels; the Girdles and Purses of the Romans were hung as the end of the
Bundles of Rods, and the Heads of the slain, fresh bleeding, at the end of
their Axes; after them followed the Seleucian Minstrelsie making abundance of
scurrilous and abusive Reflections, upon the Effeminacy and Cowardliness of
Crassus, with a musical Cadence; and this Show was seen by every Body: but
Syrena calling together the Senate of Seleucia, showed to them a wanton Book of
Aristides, called his Milesia; neither was this a Forgery, for it was found
amongst the Spoils of Roscius, and was a good subject for Syrena to droll upon
the Romans, who were not able even in the time of War to forbear such wanton
Writings and Practices; but the people of Seleucia, had reason to commend the
Wisdom of Aesop's Fable of the He alludes to Aesop's Fable of the Sack, that we
put our own faults in the bottom, and other Men's in the top of it.
Sack, seeing their General Syrena carrying a bag full of loose Milesian
Sonnets before him, but drawing after him a whole Parthian Syberis, or Brothel
house, if I may so call it, with so many Coaches full of his Wenches, which
might well be compared to Vipers and Aspes; for he resembled that Fable, where
the Front looks great and terrible with Spears and Arrows, and Darts, and
Horsemen, but the Rear consisted of loose Women, and Ministrels, and Players on
Castianetta's, and all Instruments of Luxury. Roscius indeed is not to be
excused, but sure the Parthians had forgot (when they mocked at the Milesiaca)
that many of the Royal Line of their Arsacidoe, had been born of Milesian and
Ionian Strumpets. Whilst these things were doing, Hyrodes had struck up a Peace
with the King of Armenia, and made a match betwixt his Son and the King of
Armenia's Daughter, their Feastings and Entertainments were very Sumptuous, and
sometimes some Grecian Compositions, suitable to the Occasion, were recited
amongst them, for Hyrodes was not altogether ignorant of the Greek Language,
but Artuasades was so expert in it, as that he wrote Tragedies and Orations,
and Histories, some of which are still extant. When the head of Crassus was
brought to the Door, the Table was just taken away, and one Jason an Actor of
Tragedies sung the Scene in the Bacchoe of Eurypides concerning Agave, he
having gotten a great deal of Applause. Sillaces coming into the Room, and
having adored the King, threw down the head of Crassus into the midst of the
Company, the Parthians taking it up with Joy, and Acclamations, Sillaces by the
King's order was made to sit down, but Jason laid aside the Person of Pentheus,
and taking up the head of Crassus, and acting one inspired by Bacchus, he, in a
rapturous and Enthusiastical manner, pronounced these words.

A. G. We'he hunted down a mighty stag to day. And from the Mountains bring a
Noble prey. Cho. What happy hand the fatal Monster slew? A. G. I claim that
honor to my Courage due.

And this humor took wonderfully, but in the recital of those Verses, who slew
him, and c. Pomaxaithres who happened to be at Supper, started up and would
have got the head into his own hands, for it is my due, says he, and no Man's
else. The King was hugely pleased at this scuffle, and according to the Custom
of the Parthians, gave large rewards to them, and to Jason the Actor he gave a
Talent. Thus truly Tragical was the end of Crassus's Expedition, but yet the
divine Justice, failed not to punish both Hyrodes for his Cruelty, and Syrena's
Perjury; for Syrena not long after was put to death by Hyrodes, out of mere
envy to his Glory; and Hyrodes himself having lost his Son Paccoras (who was
slain in a fight with the Romans) falling into a Disease which turned to a
Dropsy, had Aconite given him by his second Son Phraates: the Poison working
only upon the Disease, and carrying away the Dropsical matter with it, the King
began to recover on the sudden, so that Phraates at length was forced to take
the shortest course and stifled him with his Pillow.

The Comparison of Crassus with Nicias.
IN the Comparison of these two, first if we compare the Estate of Nicias with
that of Crassus, we must acknowledge Nicias's to be more honestly got; for
otherwise indeed one cannot much approve of enriching ones self by laboring of
Mines, the greatest part of which is done by Malefactors and Barbarians, some
of them too bound, and others perishing in those close and unwholesome places;
but yet, if we compare this with the Sequestrations of Sylla, and Crassus's
undertaking to build Houses ruined by Fire, we shall then think Nicias came
very honestly by his Money; but Crassus publicly and professedly made use of
those Arts, as other Men do of Husbandry, and putting out their Money to
Interest; but to deny that his Voice was venal in the Senate, though it was
proved upon him; to do Injustice to his Allies, and to court Widows to be made
their Heir, and for advantage to conceal Criminals; these are things of which
Nicias never fell under the least suspicion; nay he was rather laughed at for
giving Money to Sycophants, merely out of timorousness; a Course indeed that
would by no means become Pericles and Aristides; but necessary for him, who by
nature was destitute of good Assurance: And this Lycurgus the Orator frankly
acknowledged to the People; for when he was accused for buying off an Evidence,
he said that he was very much pleased, that having administered their Affairs
for so long a time, he was at last accused rather for giving than receiving.
Again, Nicias in his Expenses was of a more Public Spirit than Crassus,
priding himself much in the Dedication of Temples, endowing of Schools, and
adorning Processions; but the Expenses of Crassus, only in Feasting so many
Myriads of People, was much greater than the whole Estate of Nicias, together
with what he spend upon good accounts; so that here we may see confirmed that
old Observation, That Vice is an unequal thing, and unsupportable to it self:
For what these two great Persons infamously got, they expended very honorably.
And let so much be said of their Estates. As for their Management of Public
Affairs, I see not that any Craft, or Injustice, or Arbitrary Action can be
objected to Nicias; but Crassus is generally blamed for his changeableness in
his Friendships and Enmities, for his Unfaithfulness, and his Ungentleman-like
Proceedings; for he himself could not deny, that to compass the Consulship, he
hired men to lay violent Hands upon Domitius and Cato. Then at the Meeting for
the disposing of the Proconsulships, many were wounded, and four outright
killed. And this puts me in mind of a Passage, which I had forget in the
Relation of his Life, That he struck with his Fist one Lucius Analius a
Senator, for contradicting of him, and drove him out of the Court bleeding. As
Crassus was to be blamed for his Tyrannical and Arbitrary Courses so is Nicias
no less to be blamed for his timorousness and meanness of Spirit which made him
submit himself to the meanest and most profligate sort of Villains; but in this
respect, Crassus showed himself more Noble-spirited and Magnanimous. who having
to do, not with such as Cleon or Hyperbolus, but with the Magnificence of
Caesar, and the three Triumphs of Pompey, would not stoop, but bravely bore up
against their Joint-interests; and in the Office of Censor he surpassed the
Dignity even of Pompey himself: For a Minister that truly loves his Country,
ought not to regard how invidious the thing is, but how noble and useful, and
by the greatness of his Interest to overpower Envy; but if he will be always
aiming at security and quiet, and yield to Alcibiades upon the Bench and to the
Lacedaemonians at Pylus, there are opportunities enough of retirement, and he
may sit out of the noise of Business, and weave to himself Garlands of dull and
quiet Inactivity. His desire of Peace indeed, and to finish that tedious War,
was a Divine and truly Grecian Design; nor does Crassus deserve to be compared
to him on this account, although he had enlarged the Roman Empire from the
Caspian Sea to the Indian Ocean. However in a State where there is some sense
of Virtue left, a powerful Man ought not to give way to the ill-affected, or
expose the Government to those that are incapable of it, nor suffer high Trusts
to be committed to those who want common Honesty. This did Nicias, who by his
Connivence raised Cleon, a Fellow remarkable for nothing but his loud Voice and
brazen Face, to the command of an Army. Indeed I do not commend Crassus, who in
the War with Spartacus was more forward to fight than became a discreet
General, though he was put upon it by a point of Honor, lest that Pompey by
his coming should rob him of the Glory of the Action, as Mammius did Metellus
at the taking of Corinth; but Nicias's Proceedings are inexcusable; for he did
not yield up an Opportunity of getting Honor and Advantage to his Competitor,
but thinking that the Expedition would be very hazardous, resolved to take care
of one; and left the Common wealth to shift for it self; and when as
Themistocles, lest that a mean and pitiful Fellow should ruin the State by his
Conduct in the Persian War, bought him off from his Command, and Cato in a most
perplexed and critical Conjuncture, stood for the Tribuneship, for the sake of
his Country, Nicias that reserved himself for trifling Expeditions, such as for
Minoas, Cythera, and the miserable Meleans, if there be occasion to come to
blows with the Lacedaemonians, sneaks out of his Generalship, and betrays to
the Unskillfulness and Rashness of Cleon, the Fleet, the Seamen, and his whole
Country together, with an Army that needed and deserved a most skilful
Commander. I say, such a man is not to be thought so much careless of his own
Fame, as of the Interest and Preservation of his Country. By this means it came
to pass he was in a sort pressed for the Sicilian War, men generally believing
that he was backward in it, not so much for the Difficulty of the Enterprise,
as out of his immoderate Love of his Privacy and Ease: But yet this is a great
sign of his Integrity, that though he was always averse from War, and unwilling
to command, yet they always pitched upon him as the best experienced and ablest
General they had: On the other side, Crassus could never have attained to it,
unless by mere Necessity in the Servile War, Pompey and Metellus and the two
Lucullus's being absent, although at that time he was at his highest pitch of
Interest and Reputation.

THE LIFE OF EUMENES.
Translated from the Greek. VOLUME III.
DVris reports that Eumenes the Cardian was the Son of a poor Wagoner, in the
Thracian Chersonesus, yet liberally educated, both as a Scholar and a Soldier;
and that while he was but young, Philip passing through Cardia diverted himself
with a sight of the Training, and other Exercises of the Youth of that place,
among whom Eumenes performing with the greatest address and activity; Philip
was so pleasured

EUMENES.


with him, as to take him into his Service. But they seem to speak more
probably, who tell us, That Philip advanced Eumenes for the Friendship he bore
to his Father, whose Guest he had sometime been. After the Death of Philip, he
continued in the Service of Alexander, with the Title of his Principal
Secretary, but in as great favor as the most intimate of his Familiars, being
esteemed as wise, and faithful as any Person about Court: So that he went
General in the Expedition against India, and succeeded in the command of
Perdiccas, when Perdiccas advanced to that of Hephaestion then newly deceased.
Wherefore after the Death of Alexander, when Neoptolemus who had been Captain
of his Lifeguard, said, That himself had followed Alexander with Shield and
Spear, but Eumenes only with Pen and Paper, the Macedonians laughed at him, as
knowing very well that besides other particular marks of Favor, the King had
done him the Honor to make him a kind of Kinsman to himself by Marriage. For
Alexander's first Mistress in Asia, by whom he had his Son Hercules, was
Barsine the Daughter of Artabazus: Now, in the famous distribution of the
Persian Ladies amongst his Captains, Alexander gave her Sister Apame to
Ptolomy, but Barsine to Eumenes. Notwithstanding he frequently incurred
Alexander's displeasure, particularly once upon the Score of Hephaestion: For
the Quarrels that had been taken up for Eumenes, Hephaestion assigned to Euijus
a Musician. Whereat Eumenes in a rage, and Mentor came to Alexander, and aloud
upbraided him, and told him, That the way to be regarded was to throw away
their Arms, and turn Fiddlers, or Tragedians, insomuch that Alexander took their
part and* chid Hephaestion. But soon after changed his mind, and was angry with
Eumenes, and accounted the freedom he had taken, to be rather intended as an
Affront to the King, than a Reflection upon Hephaestion. Afterward when
Nearchus with a Fleet was to be sent into the Gulf of Persia, Alexander
borrowed money of his Friends (his own Treasury being exhausted) and would have
had 300 Talents of Eumenes; but he sent a hundred only, pretending that 'twas
not without great difficulty he had raised so much. Alexander neither
complained, nor took the money; but gave private order to set Eumenes his Tent
on fire, designing to take him in a manifest Lie, when his money was carried
out; but before that could be done, the Tent was consumed, and Alexander
repented of his Orders, all his Papers being burnt. Now the Gold and Silver
which was melted down in the fire, being afterward dug up, was found to be
more than a Thousand Talents, yet Alexander took none of it, and only writ to
the several Princes to send new Copies of the Papers that were burnt, and
ordered them to be delivered to Eumenes.

Another difference happened between him and Hephaestion concerning a Gift, and
a great deal of ill Language passed between them, yet Eumenes still continued
in favor. But Hephaestion dying soon after, the King took it very much to
heart, and presuming, all those that differed with Hephaestion in his
lifetime, did now rejoice at his death, used great strangeness, and severity
toward them, especially toward Eumenes, whom he often twitted with his
Quarrels, and ill-Language to Hephaestion. But he being a wise and dextrous
Courtier, made advantage of what had done him prejudice, and struck in with the
King's humor of honoring his Friends memory, suggesting diverse inventions to
do him honor, and contributing very largely and readily toward erecting him a
stately Monument. After Alexander's Death, a dispute hap'ning between his own
Phalanx, and his more intimate Friends; Eumenes, though in his Judgment he
inclined to the latter, yet in his Words and Action stood neuter, as if he
thought it unbecoming him who was a stranger, to interpose in the private
Quarrels of the Macedonians. And when the rest of Alexander's Friends left
Babylon, he stayed behind, and, in great measure pacified the Foot, and
disposed them toward an accommodation. When the Officers had agreed among
themselves, and quelled the Mutiny of the Soldiers, they shared the several
Commands and Signiories, and made Eumenes Governor of Cappadocia and
Paphlagonia, and all the Coast upon the Pontic Sea, as far as Trapezond, which
at that time was not subject to the Macedonians (for Ariarathes kept it as
King) but Leonnatus and Antigonas, with a great Army, were to put him in
possession of it. Antigonus (being now grown haughty, and despising all Men)
took no notice of Perdiccas's Letters; Leonnatus with his Army came down into
Phrygia to the Service of Eumenes; but being visited by Hecataeus, the Tyrant
of the Cardians, and requested rather to relieve Antipater and the Macedonians
that were besieged in Lamia; he resolved upon that Expedition, inviting Eumenes
to a share in it, and endeavoring to reconcile him to Hecataeus. For there was
an hereditary feud between them upon some Politic Account, and Eumenes had
often declared openly, that Hecataeus was a Tyrant, and had exhorted Alexander
to restore the Cardians their Liberty. Wherefore at this time also he declined
the Expedition proposed, pretending that he feared least Antipater, who already
hated him, should, for that reason, and to gratify Hecataeus, kill him.
Leonnatus so far believed, as to impart to Eumenes his whole Design, which, as
he pretended, and gave out, was to aid Antipater, but, in truth, was to seize
the Kingdom of Macedon; and he showed him Letters from Cleopatra, wherein she
seemed to invite him to Pella, with a design to Marry him. But Eumenes, whether
fearing Antipater, or looking upon Leonnatus as a fond, rash, unconstant, and
therefore lost Man, stole away from him by Night, taking with him all his Men
(which were Three hundred Horse, and Two hundred of his own Servants armed,)
and all his Gold, which was to the value of Five thousand Talents of Silver,
and fled to Perdiccas, discovered to him Leonnatus's Design, and thereby gained
great interest in him, and was made of his Council. Soon after Perdiccas, with
a great Army, which he led himself, conducted Eumenes into Cappadocia, and
having taken Ariarathes Prisoner, and subdued the whole Country, declared him
Governor of it. Who disposed of the Chief Cities to his own Friends, and made
Captains of Garrisons, Judges, Receivers, and other Officers of such as he
thought fit himself, Perdiccas not at all interposing. Notwithstanding Eumenes
still waited on Perdiccas, both out of respect to him, and a desire not to be
absent from Court. But Perdiccas (believing he was able enough alone to secure
his March forwards, but the Country he left behind him might stand in need of
an active and faithful Governor) when he came into Cilicia dismissed Eumenes,
under color of sending him to his Command, but, in truth, to secure Armenia,
which was Frontier to it, and unsettled through the Practices of Neoptolemus.
Him, though a proud and vain Man, Eumenes endeavored to gain by Civility; but
to balance the Macedonian Foot, whom he found both insolent, and very stout, he
contrived to raise an Army of Horse, excusing from Tax and Contribution all
those of the Country that were able to serve on Horseback, and buying up great
store of Horses, which he gave among such of his own Men, as he most confided
in. Inflaming the Courage of his Soldiers, by many Gifts and Honors, and
inuring their Bodies to service, by often Marching and Exercising; so that the
Macedonians, some of them, were astonished, others overjoyed to see, that in so
short a time he had got together no less than 6300 able Horse.

Now when Craterus and Antipater, having subdued Greece, were advanced into
Asia, with intention to quell the power of Perdiccas, and were reported to
design an impression upon Cappadocia; Perdiccas being himself to march against
Ptolomy, made Eumenes Commander in chief of all the Forces of Armenia and
Cappadocia, and to that purpose wrote Letters, requiring Alcetas and
Neoptolemus to be obedient to Eumenes, and giving full Commission to Eumenes,
to dispose and order all things as he thought fit. Alcetas flatly refused to
serve, because his Macedonians (he said) were ashamed to fight against
Antipater, and loved Craterus so well, they were ready to receive him for their
Commander. Neoptolemus designed Treachery against Eumenes, but was discovered;
but being summoned, refused to obey, and put himself in a posture of defense.
Here Eumenes first found the benefit of his own foresight and contrivance; for
his Foot being beaten, he routed Neoptolemus with his Horse, and took all his
Carriage; and pursuing close upon the Phalanx which he had broken, and
disordered, obliged the Men to lay down their Arms, and take an Oath to serve
under him. Neoptolemus with some few straglers which he rallied, fled to
Craterus and Antipater. From them came an Embassy to Eumenes, inviting him over
to their side, whereby he should have the advantage of being secured in the
Government he was possessed of, and being put into further Command by them of
obliging his Enemy Antipater to become his Friend, and keeping Craterus his
Friend from turning to be his Enemy. To which Eumenes replied, That he could
not so suddenly be reconciled to his old Enemy Antipater, especially since he
saw him use his Friends like Enemies; but was ready to reconcile Craterus to
Perdiccas, upon any just and equitable terms; but if his desires should prove
unreasonable, he was resolved to assist the injured to his last breath, and
would rather lose his Life than betray his word. Antipater receiving this
Answer, took time to consider upon the whole matter; when Neoptolemus after his
defeat arrived, and acquainted them with the ill success of his management, and
requested both of them to assist him; but especially Craterus, because the
Macedonians loved him so excessively, that if they saw but his hat, or heard
his voice, they would all Arm and follow him. And in truth Craterus had a
mighty name among them, and the Soldiers after Alexander's death were extremely
fond of him, remembering how he had often for their sakes incurred Alexander's
displeasure, restrained him from following the Persian Fashions, to which he
very much inclined, and keeping up the Customs of his Country, when through
Pride and Delicacy they began to be disregarded. Craterus therefore sent
Antipater into Cilicia, and himself and Neoptolemus Marched with a great Army
against Eumenes; expecting to come upon him unawares, and to find his Army
disordered with revelling after the late Victory. Now that Eumenes should
suspect his coming, and be prepared to receive him, is an Argument of his
Vigilance, but no great one of his Sagacity: But that he should contrive both
to conceal from his Enemies, the ill Posture he was in, and from his own Men,
whom they were to fight with, so, as to serve against Craterus himself, not
knowing he commanded the Enemy, this indeed seems to show the peculiar Address
and Talent of a great General. He gave out therefore that Neoptolemus, and
Pigris, with some Cappadocian and Paphlagonian Horse, and designing to March by
night, he fell into a deep sleep, and had an extraordinary Dream. For he
thought he saw two Alexanders ready to engage, each Commanding his several
Phalanx, the one assisted by Minerva, the other by Ceres; and that after a hot
dispute, he on whose side Minerva was, was beaten, and Ceres gathering the
Corn, wove it into a Crown for the Victor. This Vision Eumenes interpreted as
boading Success to himself, who was to fight for a fruitful Corn-Country, the
whole being sowed with Corn, and the fields so thick with it, that they made a
beautiful show of a long peace; And he was farther confirmed in his opinion,
when he understood that the Enemy bore Minerva and Alexander in their Colors;
wherefore he also bore Ceres and Alexander, and gave his Men orders to make
Garlands for themselves, and to dress their Arms with wreaths of Corn; he found
himself under many temptations to discover to his Captains and Officers whom
they were to engage with, and not to conceal a secret of such moment in his own
breast alone, yet he kept to his first resolutions, and ventured to run the
hazard of his own Judgment. (When he came to give Battle,) he would not trust
any Macedonian to engage Craterus, but appointed two Troops of Foreign Horse,
commanded by Pharnabazus, Son to Artabazus, and Phaenix of Tenedos, with Order
to charge as soon as ever they saw the Enemy, without giving them leisure to
speak or retire, or receiving any Herauldor Trumpet from them; for he
exceedingly feared the Macedonians, lest, knowing Craterus, they should go over
to his side. He himself with 300 of his best Horseled the right Wing against
Neoptolemus. When the Enemy having past a little Hill came in view, and Eumenes
his Men charged with more than ordinary briskness, Craterus was amazed, and
bitterly reproached Neoptolemus for deceiving him, with hopes of the
Macedonians revolt, but he encouraged his Men to do bravely, and forthwith
charged. The first Engagement was very fierce, and the Spears being soon broke
to pieces, they came to close fighting with their Swords; and here Craterus did
by no means dishonor Alexander, but slew several of his Enemies, and repulst
diverse that assaulted him; but at last received a Wound in his side, from a
Thracian, and fell off his Horse. Being down, many not knowing him went over
him, but Gorgias one of Eumenes his Captains knew him, and alighting from his
Horse guarded his Body, which was now in an ill condition, and even in the very
Agony of Death. In the mean time Neoptolemus, and Eumenes were engaged, who
being inveterate and mortal Enemies, sought for one another, but missed for the
two first Courses, but in the third, discovering one another, they drew their
Swords, and with loud Shouts they immediately charged, their Horses striking
against one another like two Galleys, they quitted their reins, and taking
mutual hold they drew off one another Helmets, and their Armor from their
Shoulders; while they were thus stripping one another, each of their Horses
went from under them, and they fell together to the ground, each of them
keeping their hold and wrestling. Neoptolemus getting up first, Eumenes wounded
him in the hamm, and withal got upon his feet before him, Neoptolemus staying
himself upon one knee, the other Leg being grievously wounded, and himself
undermost, fought courageously, though his strokes were not mortal, but
receiving a blow in the neck he fell down and fainted. Eumenes transported with
Rage, and inveterate Hatred to him, sell to reviling and stripping of him, and
perceived not that his Sword was still in his hand, wherewith he wounded
Eumenes in the Groin near the privy parts, but in truth rather frighted than
hurt him; his blow being faint for want of strength. Having stripped the dead
Body, ill as he was of the Wounds he had received in his Legs and Arms, he took
Horse again, and made toward the left Wing of his Army, which he supposed to
be still engaged. Hearing of the Death of Craterus, he rode up to him, and
finding there was yet some Life in him, alighted from his Horse and wept, and
laying his right hand upon him, inveighed bitterly against Neoptolemus, and
lamented both Craterus his Misfortune, and his own hard fate, that he should be
necessitated to engage against an old Friend and Acquaintance, and either do or
suffer so much mischief.

This Victory Eumenes obtained about ten days after the former, and got a great
reputation for atchieving it, partly by his Conduct, and partly by his Valor.

But on the contrary it created him great Envy both among his own, and his
Enemies, that he a Stranger, and a Foreigner, should employ the Forces, and
Arms of Macedon, to cut off one of the bravest and most considerable Men among
them. Had the news of this defeat come timely enough to Perdiccas, he had
doubtless been the greatest of all the Macedonians; but now he being slain in a
Mutiny in Egypt, two days before the News arrived, the Macedonians in a rage
decreed Eumenes his Death, giving joint-Commission to Antigonus and Antipater
to prosecute the War against him. Passing by Mount Ida, where the King had a
breed of Horses, Eumenes took as many as he had occasion for, and sent an
account of his doing so to the Masters of his Horse. Whereat Antipater is said
to have laughed, and professed to admire the wariness of the Man, who seemed to
think that an account of the King's Affairs would either be expected from him,
or given to him. Eumenes had designed to engage in the Plains of Lydia near
Sardis, both because his chief strength lay in Horse, and to let Cleopatra see
how powerful he was: But at her particular request (for she was afraid to give
any umbrage to Antipater) he marched into the upper Phrygia, and Wintered in
Celaene, when Alcetas, Polemon, and Docimus disputing with him, who should
command in Chief: You know (said he) the old saying, That destruction regards
no Punctilio's. Having promised his Soldiers pay within three days, he sold
them all the Farms and Castles in the Country, together with the Men and Beasts
wherewith they abounded; every Captain or Officer that bought, did with
Eumenes's consent, employ his Machins to storm the place, and divided the Spoil
among his Company, proportionably to every man's Arrears. Hereby Eumenes came
again to be beloved, so that when Letters were found thrown about the Camp by
the Enemy, promising one hundred Talents, besides great Honors to any one that
should kill Eumenes, the Macedonians were extremely offended, and made an Order
that from that time forward one thousand of their best men should continually
guard his Person, and keep strict Watch about him by Night in their several
turns. This Order was cheerfully obeyed, and they gladly received of Eumenes
such Honors as Princes use to confer upon their Favorites: for he had power
to bestow purple Hats and Cloaks, which among the Macedonians is one of the
greatest Honors the King can give. Now good Fortune puffs up narrow Souls, to
imagine themselves high and mighty, and looking down upon the World; but a
truly noble and resolved Spirit, in distress and misadventure raises it self,
and becomes more conspicuous, and such was Eumenes. For having by the Treason
of one of his own men, lost the Field to Antigonus at Orcyni in Cappadocia, in
his flight he gave the Traitor no opportunity to escape to the Enemy, but
immediately seized and hanged him. Then in his flight taking a contrary course
to his Pursuers, he stole by them unawares, returned to the place where the
Battle had been fought, and there encamped. There he gathered up the dead
bodies, and burnt them with the Doors and Windows of the neighboring Villages,
and raised heaps of Earth upon their Graves, insomuch that Antigonus, who came
thither soon after him, was astonished at his great Courage, and firm
Resolution. Lighting afterward upon Antigonus his Carriage, he might easily
have taken many Captives, both bond and freemen, and much Wealth collected from
the Spoils of so many Wars; but he feared lest his men overladen with so great
Booty, might become unfit for so many Marches, and through softness unwilling
to hold out so long time as he designed; For upon those two things he laid the
main stress of his Action, expecting to tire Antigonus into some other course.
But then considering it would be extremely difficult to restrain the
Macedonians from plunder, when it seemed to offer it self, he gave them order
to provide themselves, and bait their Horses, and then attack the Enemy. In the
mean time he sent privately to Menander, who had care of all his Baggage,
pretending a Concern for him upon the score of old Friendship and Acquaintance;
and therefore advising him to quit the Plain, and insconce himself upon the
side of a neighboring Hill, where the Horse might not be able to hem him in.
When Menander, sensible of his danger, had trussed up his Carriage, and
decamped, Eumenes openly sent his Scouts to discover the Enemies posture, and
commanded his men to arm, and bridle their Horses, as designing immediately to
give Battle; but the Scouts returning with News that Menander had secured so
difficult a Post, it was impossible to take him, Eumenes pretending to be
aggrieved with the disappointment, drew off his men another way. It Is said,
that when Menander reported this afterward to Antigonus, and the Macedonians
commended Eumenes, imputing it to his singular good nature, that having it in
his power to make Slaves of their Children, and ravish their Wives, he forbore,
and spared them all, Antigonus should thus reply, Alas, good man, he had no
regard to us, but to himself, being loath to wear so many Shackles when he
designed to fly. From that time Eumenes daily flying, and wandering about,
persuaded diverse of his men to disband, whether out of kindness to them, or
unwillingness to lead about such a Body of Men, as were too few to engage, and
too many to fly undiscovered. Being come to the Citadel of Nora in the
Confines of Lycaonia and Cappadocia, with fifteen hundred horse, and two
hundred Foot well appointed, he again dismissed as many of his friends as desired
it, through fear either of the straitness of the place, or want of Provisions,
and embracing them with all demonstrations of kindness, gave them license to
depart. Antigonus when he came before this Fort, desired to have an interview
with Eumenes before the siege; but he returned Answer, That Antigonus had many
Friends who might Command in his room; but they whom Eumenes defended, had no
body to substitute if he should miscarry; wherefore if Antigonus thought it
worth while to treat with him, he should first send him Hostages, and when
Antigonus required that* Eumenes should first come to him, as being the greater
man; he replied, while I am able to wield a Sword, I shall think no man greater
than my self. At last, when according to Eumenes his demand, Antigonus sent his
own Nephew Ptolomy to the Fort, Eumenes went out to him, and they mutually
embraced with great civility and friendship, as having formerly been very
intimate. After long Conversation, Eumenes making no mention of his own Pardon
and Security; but insisting that he would be confirmed in his several
Governments, and withal be honorably rewarded for his Service, all that were
present were astonished at his Courage and Gallantry, and many others of the
Macedonians flocked to see what manner of person Eumenes was; for since the
death of Craterus, no man had been so much talked on in the Army. But Antigonus
being afraid for him, lest he might suffer some violence, first commanded the
Soldiers to keep off, calling out, and throwing stones at them that pressed
forwards. At last embracing Eumenes in his arms, and keeping off the crowd with
his Guards, not without great difficulty* he returned him safe into the Fort.
Then Antigonus having built a Wall round Nora, left a Force sufficient to carry
on the siege, and drew off the rest of his Army; Eumenes was beleaguered, and
kept Garrison, having plenty of Corn, and Water, and Salt, but no other thing,
either for Food or Delicacy; yet with such as he had, he kept a cheerful Table
for his Friends, inviting them severally in their turns, and seasoning his
Entertainment with a gentle, and affable behavior; for he had a sweet
countenance, and looked not like a rough battered Soldier, but was smooth and
florid, and his shape as delicate, as if his limbs had been carved by Art in
the most accurate proportions. In conversation he was not quick, but courteous
and obliging. The greatest distress of the besieged, was the straitness of the
place they were in, their Quarters being very narrow, and the whole place but
two Furlongs in compass; so that both they, and their horses fed without
exercise; wherefore not only to prevent the restiness that both might contract
by that large living, but to have them in condition to fly, if occasion
required, he assigned a Room fourteen Cubits long (the largest in all the Fort)
for the men to walk in, directing them to begin their walk gently, and so
gradually mend their pace. And for the Horses, he tied them to the Roof with
great Halters, which being fastened about their Necks with a Pully, he gently
raised them, till standing upon the ground with their hinder feet, they just
touched it with the very ends of their fore-feet. In this posture the Grooms
plied them with Whips and Noise, provoking them to curvet and caper,
endeavoring to stand upon their fore-feet; and thus their whole Body was
exercised, till they were all in a foam, and groaned again; an excellent sort
of exercise this, whether for strength or speed; and then he gave them their
Corn boiled, that they might sooner dispatch, and better digest it.

The Siege continuing long, Antigonus received advice that Antipater was dead
in Macedon, and that Affairs were embroiled by the differences of Cassander and
Polyperchon, whereupon he conceived no mean hopes, purposing to make himself
Master of all, and in order to his design, to bring over Eumenes, that he might
have his advice and assistance. Wherefore he sent Hieronymus to treat with him,
proposing a certain Oath, which Eumenes first corrected, and then referred
himself to the Macedonians themselves that besieged him, to be judged by them,
which of the two Forms were the most equitable. Antigonus in the beginning of
his had slightly mentioned the Kings, but all the sequel referred to himself
alone: But Eumenes would have the Form of it to Olympias and the Kings, and
would swear not to be true to Antigonus only, but to them, and to have the same
Friends and Enemies not with Antigonus, but with Olympias and the Kings. This
Form the Macedonians thinking the more reasonable, swore Eumenes according to
it, and raised the Siege, sending also to Antigonus, that he should swear in
the same Form to Eumenes. Now all the Hostages of the Cappadocians which
Eumenes had in Nora he returned, and from those they were returned to, took
War-horses, Beasts of Carriage, and Tents in exchange, and rallying those men
which from the time of his flight were scattered, and wandering about the
Country, got together a Body of near a thousand Horse, and with them fled from
Antigonus, whom he justly feared; for he had not only ordered him to be first
blocked up, but had sent a very sharp Answer to the Macedonians, for admitting
Eumenes his Amendments of the Oath. While Eumenes was flying he received
Letters from them in Macedonia, who were jealous of Antigonus his greatness, to
wit, from Olympias, inviting him thither, to take the Charge and Government of
Alexander's little Son, against whom there was diverse Plots. Other Letters he
had from Polyperchon and Philip, the King, requiring him to make War upon
Antigonus, making him General of all the Forces in Cappadocia, and impowring
him out of the Revenue of Cyndos, to take fifty Talents to reimburse himself,
and levy as much more as he thought necessary to carry on the War: they write
also to the same effect to Antigenes, and Teutamus, the Chief Officers of the
Argyraspides, who, receiving these Letters, treat Eumenes with a show of
respect, and kindness, but it was apparent enough they were full of Envy and
Emulation, disdaining to give place to him. Now their Envy, Eumenes very fairly
declined, by refusing to accept the Money, as if he had not needed it; and
their Ambition, and Emulation, who were neither able to govern, nor willing to
obey, he conquered by turning it into Superstition. For he pretended that
Alexander had appeared to him in a Dream, and showed him a Regal Pavilion
richly furnished, with a Throne in it; and told him if they would sit in
Council there, he himself, would be present, and prosper all the Consultations,
and Achievements, upon which they should enter in his name. Antigenes and
Teutamus were easily prevailed upon to believe this, being unwilling to come
and consult Eumenes, as much as he disdained to wait at another Man's
Threshold. Wherefore they erected a Tent-Royal, and a Throne, and called it
Alexander's, and there they met to consult upon all Affairs of moment.
Afterward they advanced into the upper Country, and in their March met with
Peucestus friend to Eumenes, and with other of the Lords, who joined Forces
with them, and greatly encouraged the Macedonians with the number and
appearance of their Men. But they themselves having since Alexander's Decease,
been from under Government, and lived with great delicacy, and so becoming soft
and effeminate, and imagining themselves great Princes, which fond conceit of
theirs, was daily pampered by the flattery of the Barbarians; all these things
concurring, made them rude to one another, and unconversable, and all of them
unmeasurably flatter the Macedonians, inviting them to Revels, and Sacrifices,
till in a short time they brought the Camp to be a dissolute Place of
Entertainment, by every Captains endeavoring to make a Party among the
Commons, as in all Democracies is usual. Eumenes perceiving they despised one
another, and all of them feared him, and sought an opportunity to kill him,
pretended to be in want of Money, and took up many Talents, of those
especially, who most hated him, to make them both confide in him, and forbear
all Violence to him for fear of losing their own Money. Thus his Enemies
Estates, were the guard of his Person, and by receiving Money, he purchased
safety, for which other Men use to give it. Now the Macedonians while there was
no show of Danger, made all their Court, and came to the Leve of those that
treated, and presented them; and they had their Guards, and affected to appear
Generals. But when Antigonus came upon them with a great Army, and their
Affairs themselves seemed to call out for a true General, then not only the
common Soldiers cast their Eyes upon Eumenes, but these Men who had appeared so
great in a peaceful time of ease, submitted all of them to him, and quietly
posted themselves severally as he appointed them. And when Antigonus attempted
to pass the River Pasitygris, all the rest that were appointed to guard the
Passes, were not so much as aware of his March; only Eumenes met and
encountered him, slew as many of his Men as filled up the River with their
Carcases, and took 4000 of them Prisoners. Chiefly when Eumenes was sick the
Macedonians discovered that in their Judgment, others would treat handsomely,
and make fireballs, but he alone knew how to fight and lead an Army. For
Peucestas having made a splendid Entertainment in Persia, and given each of the
Soldiers a Sheep wherewith to Sacrifice, promised himself to Command in chief,
some few days after the Army was to march, and Eumenes being dangerously sick,
was carried in a Litter without the Body of the Army, that his rest might not
be disturbed. But when they were a little advanced, unexpectedly they had a
view of the Enemy, who had passed the Hills that lay between them, and was
marching down into the Plain* seeing therefore the glittering of the Enemies
Golden Armor, which glar'd in the Sun, the good Order of their March, the
Elephants with their Castles on their backs, and the Men in their Purple, (as
their manner was when they were going to give Battle) the Front stopped their
March, and called out for Eumenes, for they would not advance a step but under
his Conduct; and fixing their Arms in the ground, gave the Word among
themselves to stand, requiring their Officers also not to stir or engage, or
hazard themselves without Eumenes. News of this being brought to Eumenes, he
hastened them that carried his Litter, and put forth his right hand. As Soon as
the Soldiers saw him; they saluted him in the Macedonian Language, and took up
their Shields, and striking them with their Pikes, gave a great shout, inviting
the Enemy to come on, for now they had a Leader. But Antigonus understanding by
some Prisoners he had taken, that Eumenes was sick and to that degree as to be
carried in a Litter, presumed it would be no hard matter to tread in pieces the
rest of them, since he was ill. Wherefore he made the greater haste to come up
with them and engage. But being come so near, as to discover how the Enemy was
drawn up, and appointed, he was astonished, and paused for some time, at last
he saw the Litter carrying from one Wing of the Army to the other, (and as his
manner was) laughing aloud, he said to his Friends, That Litter there, it
seems, is the thing that offers us Battle; but withal he immediately wheeled
about with all his Army, and decamped. The other side finding a little respite,
returned to their former custom of revelling, and assuring every Man the port
of a General, taking up for their Winter Quarters near the whole Country of the
Gabeni, so that the Front was quartered near 100 furlongs from the Rear, which
Antigonus understanding, marched immediately toward them, taking the worst way,
through a Country that wanted Water (but the way was short though uneven)
hoping if he should surprise them thus scattered in their Winter Quarters, the
Soldiers would not easily be able to come up time enough, and join with their
Officers. But being to pass through a Country uninhabited, where the Winds were
bleak and boisterous, and the Frosts great, he was very much checked in his
March, and his men exceedingly tired. The only relief in this case was making
continual fires, whereby his Enemies got notice of his coming. For the
Barbarians who dwelt on the Mountains, bordering upon the Desert, amazed at the
multitude of fires they saw, sent Messengers upon Dromedaries, to acquaint
Peucestus: He being astonished and almost struck dead with the News, and finding
the rest in no less disorder, resolved to flee, and get up what Men he could by
the way. But Eumenes delivered him from his great fear and trouble, undertaking
to stop the Enemies Career, that he should arrive three days later than he was
expected. Having persuaded them, he immediately dispatched Expresses to all
Officers, to draw the Men out of their Winter Quarters, and Muster them with
speed. He himself with some of the chief Officers rode out, and chose an
eminent place within view of such as traveled the Desert; this he fortified
and quartered out, and commanded many fires to be made in it, as the Custom is
in a Camp This done, and the Enemies seeing the fire upon the Mountains,
Anguish and Despair seized Antigonus, supposing that his Enemies had been long
advertised of his March, and were prepared to receive him. Wherefore lest his
Army now tired and wearied out with their March should be forced immediately to
encounter with fresh Men, who had Wintered well, and were ready for him,
quitting the near way, he marched slowly through the Towns and Villages, to
refresh his Men. But meeting with no such Skirmishes as are usual, when two
Armies lie near one another, and being assured by the People of the Country,
that no Army had been seen, but only continual Fires in that place, he
concluded he had been outwitted by a Stratagem of Eumenes, and being very much
troubled, advanced toward him, resolving immediately to give Battle. By this
time the greatest part of the Forces were come together to Eumenes, and
admiring his Conduct, declared him sole Commander in chief of the whole Army.
Whereat Antigenes and Teutamus, Captains of the Argyraspides, being very much
offended, and envying Eumenes, formed a Conspiracy against him; and assembling
the greater part of the Lords and Officers, consulted when and how to cut him
off. When they had unanimously agreed, first to abuse his service, and make him
miscarry in the next Battle, and thence take an occasion to destroy him;
Eudamus the Master of the Elephants, and Phadimus, gave Eumenes private advice
of this design; not out of kindness, or good will to him, but lest they should
lose the Money he had lent them. Eumenes having commended them retired to his
Tent, and telling his Friends he lived among a Herd of wild Beasts, made his
Will, mangled and tore all his Letters, lest his Correspondents after his
Death, should be questioned or punished for the Intelligence they had given
him. Having thus disposed of his Affairs, he thought of letting the Enemy win
the Field, or of flying through Media, and Armenia, and seizing Cappadocia, but
came to no Resolution while his Friends stayed with him. After forecasting
diverse things in his mind, which his changeable Fortune made unsteady and
sickle, he at last put his Men in Array, and encouraged the Greeks, and
Barbarians, as for the Argyraspides, they encouraged him, and bid him be of
good heart, for the Enemy would never be able to stand them. For indeed they
were the oldest of Philip and Alexander's Soldiers, tried Men, that had long
made a Trade of War, that had never been beaten or so much as foiled, most of
them 70, none less than 60 years old* Wherefore when they charged Antigonus his
Men, they cried out, You fight against your Fathers, you Rascals; and furiously
falling on, routed the whole Troop at once, no Body being able to stand them,
and the greatest part dying by their hands, so that Antigonus his Foot were
routed, but his Horse got the better, and he became Master of the Baggage,
through the Cowardice of Peucestus, who behaved himself negligently and basely.
While Antigonus, not daunted with the loss of his Infantry, was vigilant and
active, and had the advantage of the ground. For the place where they fought
was a large Field, neither deep, nor hard under foot, but like the Seashore,
covered with a fine soft sand, which the treading of so many Men and Horses, in
the time of the Battle, reduced to a small white dust, that like a Cloud of
Lime darkened the Air, so that one could not see clearly at any distance, and
so made it easy for Antigonus to take the Carriage unperceived. After the
Battle Teutamus sent a Message to Antigonus to demand the Baggage. He made
Answer, He would not only restore it to the Argyraspides, but serve them
farther in other things, if they would but deliver up Eumenes. Whereupon the
Argyraspides made a villainous Resolution, to deliver up this great Man alive
into the hands of his Enemies. So they came to wait upon him, being unsuspected
by him, but watching their opportunity against him, some lamenting the loss of
the Baggage, some encouraging as if he had been Victor, some accusing the rest
of the Captains, till at last they all fell upon him, and seizing his Sword,
bound his hands behind him with his own Girdle. When Antigonus had sent Nicanor
to receive him, he begged he might be led through the Body of the Macedonians,
and have liberty to speak to them, neither to request, nor deprecate any thing,
but only to advise them what would be for their Interest. A silence being made,
as he stood upon a rising Ground, he stretched out his hands bound, and said,
What Trophy, O ye basest of all the Macedonians, could Antigonus have wished
for, so great, as you your selves have erected him, in delivering up your
General Captive into his hands? How vile is it when you were Conquerors, to own
your selves Conquered, for the sake only of your Baggage, as if it were Wealth,
not Arms wherein Victory consisted? Nay, you deliver up your General to redeem
your Lumber. As for me I am unvanquished, though a Captive, Conqueror of my
Enemies, and betrayed by my Fellow Soldiers. For you, I adjure you by Jupiter,
the Protector of Arms, and by all the Gods that are the avengers of Perjury, to
kill me here with your own hands, for it is all one; and when I am murdered
yonder, it will be esteemed your Act; nor will Antigonus complain; for he
desires not Eumenes alive, but dead. If ye would withold your own hands,
release but one of mine, it shall suffice to do the Work; but if you dare not
trust me with a Sword, throw me bound as I am, to wild Beasts. This if you do,
I shall freely acquit you from the guilt of my death, as the most just and kind
of Men to their General. While Eumenes was thus speaking, the rest of the
Soldiers wept for grief; but the Argyraspides bawled out to lead him on, and
gave not attention to his trifling. For it was nothing so grievous the
Lamentation of this Chersonesean Plague, which in thousands of Battles, had
annoyed and wasted the Macedonians, as it would be for the choicest of Philip
and Alexander's Soldiers to be defrauded of the Fruits of so long Service, and
in their old Age to come to beg their Bread; besides that their Wives had lain
now three Nights with their Enemies. So they pushed him on with all speed and
violence. But Antigonus fearing the Multitude, (for no body was left in the
Camp) sent ten of his strongest Elephants with diverse of his Mede and
Parthyaean Lances to keep off the Press. Then he could not endure to have
Eumenes brought into his presence, by reason of their former Intimacy and
Friendship; but when they that had taken him, had enquired of Antigonus how he
would have him kept? As I would (said he) an Elephant or a Lion. A little
after, being moved with Compassion, he commanded the heaviest of his Irons to
be knocked off, one of his Menial Servants to be admitted to anoint him, and
that any of his Friends that were willing, should have liberty to visit him,
and bring him what he wanted. Long time he deliberated what to do with him,
sometimes inclining to the advice and Promises of Nearchu^ of Crete, and
Demetrius his Son, who were very earnest to preserve Eumenes, whilst all the
rest were unanimously instant and importunate to have him taken off. It Is
reported that Eumenes should enquire of Onomarchus his Keeper, why Antigonus,
now he had his Enemy in his hands, would not either forthwith dispatch or
generously release him? And that Onomarchus contumeliously answered him, That
the Field was a more proper place than this to show his Contempt of Death. To
whom Eumenes replied, And by Jupiter I showed it there; ask the men else that
engaged me; but I could never meet a Man that was too hard for me. Therefore
(rejoyned Onomarchus,) now you have found such a Man, why don't you submit
quietly to his pleasure? When Antigonus resolved to kill Eumenes, he commanded
to keep his Meat from him, and so with two or three days fasting, he began to
draw near his end: But the Camp being on a sudden to remove, an Executioner was
sent to dispatch him. Antigonus granted his Body to his Friends, permitted them
to burn it, and having gathered his Ashes into a Silver Urn, to send them to
his Wife and Children.

Eumenes being thus taken off, the Divinity appointed no other of the Captains
or Commanders to revenge the Disloyalty of them that had betrayed him; but
Antigonus himself abominating the Argyraspides, as wicked and inhumane
Villains, delivered them up to Ibyrtius Procurator of Arachosia, commanding him
by all ways and means to confound and destroy them, so that not a man of them
might ever come to Macedon, or so much as within sight of the Greek Sea.

SERTORIUS.
THE LIFE OF QUINTUS SERTORIUS:
Translated from the Greek. By Edward Brown, M. D.
VOLUME III.
IT is no great wonder, if in long process of time, the Wheel of Fortune
running variously hither and thither through the Universe, shall happen to fall
diverse times into the same Trace, and the like Occurrences be often produced;
and if the number of Subjects to be wrought upon, be infinite, Fortune being
supplied with matter sufficiently copious, may more easily produce this
remarkable likeness in humane Affairs: Or if otherwise all things be composed
and framed out of a finite and limited number of Events; when these have all
appeared, the same of necessity must again come to pass; the Series, and whole
course of Accidents having already been performed. Now some, being delighted
with such casualties as exactly resemble one another, make Historical
Collections of those fortuitous Occurrences they have heard, or read of; and
observing some Fatality therein, represent them as the works of a rational
predeterminating Power and Providence. Thus they observe that of two eminent
Persons, both whose Names were Attis, both Nobly Born, and of most Illustrious
Families, the one of Syria, the other of Arcadia, both of them were slain by a
wild Boar; that of two Noblemen, Both whose Names were Actaeon, the one was
torn in pieces by his Dogs, the other by his Lovers; that of two famous
Scipio's, the one overthrew the Carthaginians in war, the other totally ruined
and destroyed them; the City of Troy was the first time taken by Hercules for
the horses promised to be given him by Laomedon; the second time by Agamemnon,
by means of the celebrated great wooden Horse; and the third time by
Charidemus, by occasion of a Horse falling down at the Gate, which hindered the
Trojans, so as they could not shut them soon enough; and of two Cities which
take their Names from most delightful odoriferous Plants, Jos and Smyrna, the
one from a Violet, the other from Myrrh, the Poet Homer is reported to have
been born in the one, and to have died in the other. To these Remarks, if it
may be permitted, we may further observe, that the most warlike Commanders,
Great Commanders who had but one Eye, Philip, Antigonus, Hannibal, Sertorius,
and others.
who have performed the greatest exploits, and carried on the most notable
Stratagems by their Courage and Skill in Martial Affairs, have had but one Eye;
as, Philip, Antigonus, and Hannibal, and Sertorius also, whose Life and Actions
we describe at present, and who far surpassed the other in all noble Virtues;
for we may give this true report of him, That he was more Temperate, Sober, and
Continent than Philip, more Faithful to his Friend than Antigonus, and more
Merciful and Courteous to his Enemies than Hannibal; for Prudence, Wisdom, and
Judgment, he gave place to none of them; but in Fortune was inferior to them
all, who though she was every where more severe and cruel to him, than to all
his Illustrious Enemies, yet for Skill and Experience in War he made himself
equal to Metellus; for bold Attempts, Valor, and Bravery, he might compare
with Pompey; and in Success, he no ways yielded to Sylla; and for Power and
Force he made himself a March for the whole Roman Empire, and fought gloriously
against the united Arms of Rome, when he was a Banished Man, and a Stranger
amongst Barbarous People.

Of all the Grecian Commanders, Eumenes Sertorius compared with Eumenes.
of Cardia may be best compared with him; for they were both of them great
Generals, both Valiant and Politic Commanders, making use of Deceit, intricate
designs, and cunning Stratagems in War; they were both Aliens and Strangers,
Banished from their Countries, and had the Command of Foreign Forces; both had
Fortune for their Adversary, and so extravagantly injurious to them in the end,
that they were both betrayed, and villainously murdered by those who served
them, and by whom they had formerly overcome their Enemies.

Quintus Sertorius was of a noble Family, Sertorius was of a Noble Family.
he was born in the City of Nursia, in the Country of the Sabines, his Father
died when he was young, he was carefully and decently educated by his Mother,
whose Name was Rhea, and whom he extremely loved and honored; he exercised
Sertorius was a good Orator.
himself in Oratory, and pleading in his Youth, which he performed so
judiciously, that he acquired no small Reputation and Power in Rome by the
force of his Eloquence; but the splendour of his glorious Actions in Arms, and
his successful Atchievments in the Wars, induced him to alter his Ambition, and
to seek for Honor wholly in martial Affairs. At his first entering the Field,
he served under Scipio, when the Cimbri and Teutones invaded Gaul; where, the
Romans fighting unfortunately, and being put to flight, he was wounded in many
parts of his Body, and thrown from his Horse, yet nevertheless he swam cross
the River Rhosne in his He swims cross the Rhosne in his Armor.
Armor, with his Breast Plate and Shield, bearing himself up against one of
the swiftest Rivers in the World, and breaking through its furious Waves by
clear strength, so strong a Body he had, inured to hardship, and by long
exercise brought to endure all Labor.

The second time that the Cimbri and He is sent as a Spy into the Camp of the
Cimbri and Teutones, to discover their Designs.
Teutones came down with some hundreds of thousands, threatening death and
destruction to all, when it was no small piece of Service for a Roman Soldier
to keep his Rank, and obey his Commander, Sertorius undertook to view the
enemies camp, and to discover their utmost Forces, and Designs, and to this
intent having learned the manner of their Salutations, and the ordinary
expressions of their Language, he threw himself in amongst the Barbarians,
dressed in the Habit of a Celtick Gaul, where having carefully seen with his
own Eyes, or having been fully informed by Persons upon the place, of all their
most important Concerns, and Affairs of greatest Moment, he returned to Marius,
General of the Roman Army, from whose hands he received the honorable Rewards
of his Valor: And afterward giving frequent Demonstrations both of his
Conduct and Courage in all the following War, he was advanced to Places of
Honor and Trust under his General, who highly esteemed and consided in him.

After the Wars with the Cimbri and He is sent into Spain under Didius the
Praetor.
Teutones, he was sent into Spain, having the Command of a thousand Men, under
Didius the Roman General, and wintered in the Country of the Celtiberians, in
the City of Castulo, where the Soldiers enjoying great plenty of all things,
grew insolent, and continually drinking, the Inhabitants despised them, and
sent for aid by Night to the Gyrisenaeans their near Neighbors, who sell upon
the Romans in their Lodgings, and slew a great Number of them; but Sertorius
being alarmed, withdrew out of the City, with a few of his Soldiers, and
rallying together the rest who had slipped out, he marched round about the
Walls, and finding the Gate open, by which the Gyrisaenians privately entering,
had set upon the Romans, he gave not them the same opportunity, He recovers the
City of Castulo.
but placing a Guard at the Gate, and seizing upon all Quarters of the City, he
slew those who were of age to bear arms; and then ordering his Soldiers to lay
aside their weapons, and put off their own Clothes, and put on the
accoutrements of the Barbarians, he commanded them to follow him to the City,
from whence those were sent, who fell upon the Romans by Night, and deceiving
the Gyrisaenians with the sight of their own Armor and He deceives the
Gyrisaenians, and takes their City.
Equipage, he found the gates of their City open, and took great Numbers of
them Prisoners, who came out, thinking to meet their Friends and
Fellow-Citizens, coming from performing a worthy piece of Service. Many also
were slain by the Romans at their own Gates, and the rest within yielded up
themselves, and were sold for Slaves.

This action made Sertorius to be highly renowned throughout all Spain, and as
soon as he returned to Rome, he was constituted He is made Questor of Gallia
Cisalpina, now called Lombordy.
Treasurer General of Gallia Cisalpina on both sides of the River Po, very
advantageously for the Roman Affairs at that time; for the War with the Marsi
being unanimously resolved upon, Sertorius was ordered to raise Soldiers, and
provide Arms, which he performed with such Diligence, Speed, and Alacrity,
contrary to the languishing feebleness and slothfulness of his Companions, that
he got the repute of a man of Life and Spirit in Business; nor did he any ways
desist from his Milirary Boldness and Bravery, when he arrived at the Dignity
of a great Commander, but performed Wonders with his own hands, and never
sparing himself, but exposing his Body freely in all Conflicts, he lost one of
his Eyes, which was cut out of his head, and yet continued to have a cheerful
Look, and always esteemed it an honor to him: For others do not continually
carry about with them the marks and testimonies of their Valor, but often lay
aside their Chains of Gold, their Spears and Crowns; whereas his Ensigns of
Honor, and the Manifestations of his noble Courage always remained with him,
and those who beheld his Scars and Misfortunes, admired at the same time his
undaunted Prowess and Magnanimity; the People also paid him due Respect, and
honored him suitably to his Merit; and when he came into the Theater, they
applauded him, and received him with clapping their hands, Sertorius highly
applauded by the People.
beating their feet against the Seats, and with joyful Acclamations, which sort
of Applause was not easily obtained, even by Persons who were more venerable in
respect of their Age, and of greater Dignity in the Commonwealth.

Notwithstanding this Popularity, when he stood to be Tribune of the People, he
was disappointed, and lost the place, being opposed by a Party stirred up by
Sylla, which seems to be the principal cause of their inveterate
irreconcilable hatred.

After that Marius was overcome by Sylla, and fled into Africa, and that Sylla,
had left Italy to go to the Wars against Mithridates, that of the two Consuls,
Octavius and Cinna, Octavius remained steadfast to the Designs of Sylla, but
Cinna (affecting Innovations) attempted to recall the lost Interest of Marius,
and to set up a Party again that was declined and trodden under foot; Sertorius
adhered to Cinna, perceiving that Octavius was somewhat heavy, could not
distinguish of the worth of a Man, and was also suspicious of any one that was
a Friend to Marius.

When the Battle was fought between the A Battle fought in the Forum at Rome.
two Consuls in the Marketplace, Octavius overcame, and Cinna and Sertorius
having lost not less than ten thousand Men, left the City, and persuading the
Soldiers who were dispersed about, and gaining those who remained still in many
parts of Italy, they united their Forces, and in a short time mustered up a
Party against Octavius, sufficient to give him Battle again, and Marius coming
by Sea out of Africa, proffered himself to serve under Cinna, as a private
Soldier under his Consul and Commander.

Most were for the speedy Reception of Marius, but Sertorius openly declared
against it, and whether he thought that Cinna did not herein consult his own
Interest, and that his Greatness would be diminished by the presence of a
Person of greater Splendor and Authority, or whether he feared that the
violence of Marius would bring all things to Consusion, and that by his
boundless Wrath and Vengeance after Victory, he would go beyond all the Rules
and Limits of Justice, he insisted upon it with Cinna, alleging that they were
already Victorious, that there remained little to be done, and that if they
admitted Marius, he would not only deprive them of the Glory and Advantage of
the War, but would also prove a very uneasy and unfaithful sharer in the
Government. To which Cinna answered, That he had rightly computed these
affairs, but that he himself was at a loss, and ashamed, and knew not how to
reject him, whom he sent for to be Partner in all his Concerns: To which
Sertorius replied, That he thought Marius came into Italy of his own accord,
and therefore he deliberated what might be most expedient, but that it was not
fair for Cinna to consult whether he should accept of him whom he had already
vouchsafed to invite, but should honorably receive and employ him, for his
word once past, left no room for debate, and his promise being sacred, ought
never to be disputed.

Marius being sent for by Cinna, and The Army commanded by Cinna, Marius, and
Sertorius.
their Forces being divided into three parts, under Cinna, Marius, and
Sertorius, the War was carried on successfully; but those about Cinna and
Marius committing all manner of Insolence, Severity, and Rapine, made it
evident to the Romans, that the Original and chief inducement to these Wars,
was Booty and Plunder; but on the contrary it is reported of Sertorius, that he
never slew Man in his Anger, to satisfy his own private Revenge, nor never
insulted over any one whom he had overcome, but was much offended with the
inhumane Rigor of Marius, and would often converse privately with Cinna, and
entreat him to mitigate his Fury, and to use his Power more moderately; in the
end, when the Slaves whom Marius had freed at his landing, to increase his
Army, being made not only his Fellow Soldiers in the War, but also his Guard,
and the Executioners of his Tyrannical Cruelty, became strong and numerous; and
either by the Command, or Permission of Marius, had, contrary to all Law,
forcibly oppressed their Masters, slain their Lords, ravished their Ladies, and
forced, and abused their Children; their Crimes appeared so intolerable to
Sertorius, that he slew no less Sertorius punishes the insolency of the Slaves
than four thousand of them upon the place; commanding his Soldiers to strike
their Darts through the Bodies of them all as they lay encamped together.

Afterward when Marius was dead, and Cinna was slain, when the younger Marius
had usurped the supreme Authority, and made himself Consul against the mind of
Sertorius, and the known Laws of Rome: When Carbo, Norbanus, and Scipio had
fought unsuccessfully, and made but small resistance against the fortunate Arms
of Sylla, returning victoriously from the Wars with Mithridates and Fimbria;
when much was lost by the softness and effeminate remissness of the Commanders,
but more destroyed by the treachery of their own Party; when their Affairs were
so miserably shattered, and born down that they were not able to be supported
even by the presence of Sertorius, and that he was able to do little by reason
that those who had the greatest Command, and Authority, were persons of no
great Prudence or Conduct; in the end, when Sylla had placed his Camp near to
Scipio, and by pretending friendship, and putting him in hopes of a good Peace,
had corrupted his Army; and Scipio could not be made sensible thereof, although
often foretold, and forewarned of it by Sertorius; He leaves Italy and hastens
into Spain.
he utterly despaired of the prosperity of Rome, and made haste into Spain;
that by taking possession thereof beforehand, he might establish his Power in a
Country, which would be a resuge to his Friends, and a support to his declining
party. But having bad weather in his journey, and traveling through
Mountainous Countries, and the Inhabitants stopping the way, and demanding a
Toll, and Money for passage, those who were with him were out of all patience;
and highly aggravating in their discourses the indignity and shame it would be
for a Proconsul of Rome to pay Tribute to a Crew of wretched Barbarians; he
little regarded their censure; but slighting that which had only the appearance
of an undecency, told them he must buy time, the most precious of all things,
to those who go upon great Enterprises; and pacifying the barbarous People with
Money, he hastened his journey, and took possession of Spain, a Country
flourishing, and populous, abounding with lusty young Men fit to bear Arms; but
by reason of the Insolency and covetousness of the Commanders, sent thither
yearly from Rome, they had generally an aversion to the Roman discipline; and
were very ill prepared to receive any sort of Government. But he soon gained
the affection of the Nobility, by his Civilities and free Conversation amongst
them and got the good Opinion of the People by remitting their Taxes. But that
which made him generally beloved, and wan the hearts of all, was his exempting
them from finding Lodgings for the Soldiers, when he Commanded his Army to take
up their Winter Quarters without the Cities, and to pitch their Tents in the
fields; and when he himself first of all, caused his own Pavilion to be raised
without the Walls; yet not being willing to rely totally upon the good
inclination of the Inhabitants, he armed all the Romans who lived in those
Countries that were of Age, and undertook the building of Ships, and the making
of all sorts of Warlike Engines, by which means he kept the Cities in due
Obedience, being affable and courteous in time of Peace, and appearing
formidable to his Enemies, by reason of his great Preparations for War.

As soon as he was informed that Sylla had made himself Master of Rome, and
that the Party which sided with Marius and Carbo was utterly destroyed, he
expected that some Great Commander with He sends Julius Salinator to Guard the
narrow passages of the Pyrenaean Mountains.
a considerable Army would speedily come against him, and therefore sent away
Julius Salinator immediately with six thousand Men well Armed, to Guard the
Mountains, and to fortify and defend the narrow passages of the Pyrenaeans;
snd Caius Annius not long after being sent out by Sylla, finding that Julius
Salinator could not be approached unto, and that his Camp was impregnable by
reason of its Situation, nor to be forced by any assault, he sat down short at
the foot of the Mountains in great perplexity; but Calpurnius Lanarius having
treacherously slain Julius Salinator, and his Forces astonished at this
accident, forsaking the tops of the Pyrenaeans, Caius Annius came forward with
a great Army, and passed over the Mountains, and forced those from their
Stations who endeavored to hinder his March; Sertorius also not being strong
enough to give him Battle, retreated with three thousand men into new Carthage,
where he took Shipping, Cartagana.
and crossed the Seasinto Africa, and coming near to the coast of Mauritania,
his men went on shore to water; and straggling about negligently, the Africans
fell upon them, and slew a great number. This new misfortune forced him to sail
back again into Spain, from whence he was also repulsed; but the Cilician
Pirates joining with him, they made for the Pityusa, Ebusus, now. Y^ica
Island of Pityusa, where they landed and overpowred the Garrison placed
therein by Caius Annius, who also came thither not long after with a great
Fleet of Ships, and five thousand Soldiers, and Sertorius made ready to fight
him by Sea, although his Ships were not built for strength, but for lightness
and swift Sailing; but a violent West-wind raised such a storm at Sea, that
many of Sertorius's Ships were run on ground, and shipwrack'd all along the
rocky Shoars, and he himself with a few Vessels, being kept from putting
further out to Sea, by the storms and fury of the Weather, and hindered from
Landing by the power of his enemies, was tossed about for ten days together,
and the Seas running high, and the waves being boisterous and violent, he
escaped with great difficulty, and after the Wind ceased, ran into certain
desolate Islands scattered about in those Seas, affording no Water, from whence
making out to Sea again, he passed the Streights of Gadiz; between the Pillars
of Hercules, and sailing outward, keeping the Spanish Shore on his right hand,
he landed a little above the mouth of the River Baetis or Guadil quiver.
Baetis, where it falls into the Atlantic Sea, and gives the Name to all that
part of Spain. Here he met with Seamen, newly arrived from two Islands in the
Atlantic, which are Called from them Hispania Baetica.
divided from one another, only by a narrow Channel, and are distant from the
Coast of Africa ten thousand Furlongs; These are called the Fortunate Islands,
The fortunate Islands.
where the Rain falls seldom, and then in moderate showers, but for the most
part they have gentle Breezes, bringing along with them soft dews, which
renders the Soil not only fat* and fit to be ploughed, and planted; but so
abundantly fruitful, that it produces of its own accord Plants and fruits for
plenty and delicacy, sufficient to feed and delight the Inhabitants, who may
here enjoy all things without Trouble or Labor. The Seasons of the year are
temperate, and the alteration from Quarter to Quarter so moderate, that the Air
for the most part is serene and refreshing, and the Weather generally fair and
pleasant. The rough Northerly and Eastern Winds, which blow toward these
Islands from the Coasts of Europe and Africa, are divided and dissipated by
reason of the vast distance, and utterly lose their force long before they
reach these Parts. The soft Western and Southerly Winds which breath upon them,
do sometimes produce gentle sprinkling Showers, but for the most part they
calmly impregnate the Earth only with the fruitful Dews, and the nourishing
Moisture of the Air, which they bring along with them from the Sea; so that it
is firmly believed, even by the barbarous People themselves, that this is the
seat of the Blessed, and that these are the Elysian Fields highly celebrated by
Homer.

As soon as Sertorius heard this Account, Sertorius desirous to live in the
Fortunate Islands.
he was seized with a wonderful affection for these Islands, and had an extreme
desire to live there in peace and quietness, far from the noise of Wars, and
free from the Troubles of Government; but his inclinations being perceived by
the Cilician Pirates, who desire neither Peace nor Quiet, but rove after Riches
and Spoils, they immediately forsook him, and sailed away into Africa, to
assist Ascalis the Son of Iptha, and to help to re-establish him in the Throne
of his Father, and to restore him to his Kingdom of Mauritania.

The sudden departure of the Cilicians, did no ways discourage Sertorius, or
cause him to desist from further Attempts; for he presently resolved to assist
the Enemies of Ascalis, and by this new Adventure kept his Soldiers together,
who from hence conceived new Hopes of their future Prosperity, and began to
have better prospect of their Affairs. His arrival in Mauritania being very
acceptable to the Moors, he lost no time, but immediately giving Battle to
Ascalis, beat him out of the Field, and besieged him; and Pacciacus being sent
by Sylla with a Powerful supply to raise the Siege, Sertorius slew him in the
field, and overthrew all his Forces, with this great advantage, that he not He
takes the City of Tingis, now Tangier.
only took the whole Roman Army Prisoners, but also forced the City of Tingis,
where Ascalis and his Brothers were fled for refuge. The Africans report that
Antaeus was buried in this City, a Giant of a wonderful stature, but Sertorius
being unwilling to trust common Fame, which He causes the Tomb of Antaeus to
be opened.
gave out that his Body was of a most Prodigious length, he caused his
Sepulcher to be opened, and finding that his Corpse was effectually full
threescore Cubits long, he was infinitely astonished, and immediately offered
up Sacrifice to the Gods, and closed up the Tomb again, whereby he confirmed
the report of the Inhabitants, increased the Fame of the Sepulcher, and added
new honors to the Memory of Antaeus. The Africans further allege that after
the Death of Antaeus his Wife Tinga lived with Hercules, and had a Son by him
called Sophax, who was King of these Countries, and gave his Mothers name to
this City, whose Son also was Diodorus a great Conqueror, who subdued many
other Regions, and brought the greatest part of Africa under his Subjection,
with an Army of Greeks, which he raised out of the Colonies of the Olbianians
and Myceneans placed here by Hercules. I mention these passages for the sake of
King Juba, the most excellent Historian of any Prince that ever yet has
honored History with his own Pen, and who numbers for his Progenitors a long
Race of Mauritanian Kings. Who derive their Genealogies from Diodorus and
Sephax, and are lineally descended from Hercules.

When Sertorius had made himself absolute Master of the whole Country, he was
very just to those who had confided in him, and showed not the least unkindness
to others, who yielded to his Mercy, but restored to them their Estates, their
Cities, their Laws and Privileges, accepting only of such acknowledgments as
they themselves freely offered. And whilst he considered which way next to turn
his Arms, the Lusitanians sent Ambassadors The Lusitanians send Ambassadors to
him.
to desire him to be their General, for being terrified with the Roman Power,
and finding the necessity of having a Commander of great Authority and
experience in war, being also sufficiently informed of his Worth and Valor, by
those who had formerly served him, they were extremely desirous to commit
themselves and their Fortunes wholly to his care, and humbly beseeched him to
accept of the Command. And to give a true Character of Sertorius, he was of a
temper not to be surprised with fear, nor easy to be Captivated with pleasure,
in Adversity and Dangers undaunted, and no ways puffed up with Prosperity, but
of an even Mind, Courteous and Obliging. Upon a sudden Assault or dangerous
Attempt, no Commander in his time was more bold and daring, for whatever was to
be performed in War by Deceit, Circumvention, or Surprise; or if any strong
place was to be taken in any pass to be gained speedily, any sudden Invasion or
Inroad to be made, he was a most notable Contriver, and politic Advancer of
all such intricate and difficult Designs, in bestowing Rewards, and conferring
Honors upon those who had performed good service in the Wars. He was
Bountiful and Magnificent even to Prodigality, but very sparing and backward
in punishing Crimes, and Mild and Merciful to Offenders; yet that piece of
Harshness and Cruelty, which he executed in the latter part of his Days, upon
the Spanish Hostages, seems to argue, that his Clemency was not Natural, but
only acted and handsomely dissembled, as his Occasions or Necessity required;
and as to my own Opinion, I am persuaded that sincere Virtue established by
Reason and Mature Judgment, can never be totally Perverted or Extirpated by any
Misfortune whatever. Not that I think it impossible but that great Indignities
offered without cause, and frequent Abuses put upon those of the best Nature,
and most virtuous Inclinations, may make some impression and alteration in
their Temper; and thus I suppose it happened to Sertorius, who being
exasperated by the repeated Injuries of ungrateful Persons, he was at last
severe to those who had unworthily injured him.

The Lusitanians having sent for Sertorius, he left Africa, and being made
General with absolute Power and Authority, he ordered all things for the best
Advantage, and brought the Neighboring Parts of Spain under his Subjection;
many Countries also voluntarily submitted themselves won by the Fame of his
Clemency, and of his Martial Performances. Upon some Occasions also he would
not fail to invent strange Artifices to please the People, and to make use of
alluring Devices, and even of deluding Impostures, amongst which certainly that
of the Hind Sertorius's Hind.
was none of the least. Spanus a Countryman, who lived in those Parts, meeting
by chance a Hind that had newly Calved, flying from the Hunters, he let the Dam
go, and pursuing the Hind-calf, took it, being wonderfully pleased with the
Rarity of it, and the strangeness of the Color, which was all milk-white, and
at the same time Sertorius keeping his Court in those Parts and receiving
courteously such Presents of Fruit, Fowl or Venison as the Country afforded,
and rewarding liberally those who presented them, the Countryman brought him
his young Hind, which he kindly accepted, and was much taken with it at the
first sight, but when in time he had made it so tame and gentle, that it would
come when he called, and follow him wheresoever he went, and could endure the
Noise and Tumult of the Camp; knowing well that Barbarous People are naturally
prone to Superstition, by Degrees he gave out that it was inspired with a
Deity, that it was given him by the Goddess Diana, that it discovered to him
hidden Mysteries, and revealed to him what was to come to pass hereafter: To
which also he added these further Contrivances; if he had received at any time
private Intelligence, that the Enemies had made an Incursion into those
Provinces which were under his Command, or had solicited any City to revolt,
he pretended that the Hind had informed him of it in his sleep, and charged him
to keep his Forces in readiness; or if otherwise he had notice that any of the
Commanders under him had got a Victory, he would hide the Messengers, and bring
forth the Hind crowned with flowers, for joy of the good News that was to come,
and would encourage them to Rejoice and Sacrifice to the Gods for the good
account they should soon receive of their Prosperous Success, and by those
Inventions filling their Heads with strange Imaginations, and the thoughts of
Miracles, he brought them to be more Tractable and Obedient in all things; for
now they thought themselves no longer to be led by a Stranger, but rather
conducted by a Hero, or one nearly related to a God. Considering also that his
Power daily increased contrary to all Humane Reason or Probability. For with
two thousand five hundred, which for Honor's sake he called Romans, joined
with seven hundred Africans, who landed with him when he first entered
Lusitania, together with four thousand foot, and seven hundred Horse, he made
War with four Roman Generals, who commanded a hundred and twenty thousand Foot,
six thousand Horse, two thousand Archers, and Slingers, and Cities innumerable,
whereas at the first he had not above twenty Cities in all, and from this weak
and slender beginning, he became afterward so considerable Mellaria now
Tariffa, between Trafalgar and Gibralter, in the Streights mouth. Cape Spartel,
and Trafalgar, Abyla, and Gribalter, are places well known to Seamen that Sail
into the Mediterranean Sea.
that he took many good Cities and overcame Great and Powerful Countries. Of
the Roman Commanders which were sent against him, he overthrew Cotta in a
Sea Fight, in the Channel near the City of Mellaria, he routed Phidius chief
Commander of Hispania Baetica, and slew two thousand Romans near the Banks of
the River Baetis. Domitius and Lucius Manlius Proconsul of another Province of
Spain, were overthrown in a set Battle by one of his Lieutenants, he slew
Toranius a Commander sent against him by Metellus with a great Force, and
destroyed his whole Army; and Metellus the greatest General in those Times, and
a Person of the most approved Experience of any Roman then living, was often
supplanted and circumvented by him, and reduced to such extremities that he was
forced to call Lucius Lollius to his assistance out of Gallia Narbonensis, and
Rome it self being alarmed and terrified, parted with her beloved Pompey the
Great, and sent him into Pompey sent against Sertorius.
Spain in all haste with the most considerable Forces of the Roman Empire. Nor
did Metellus know which way to turn himself, having to do with a man of
undaunted Boldness and Sagacity, who was continually molesting him, and yet
could not be brought to a set battle, but by the swiftness and dexterity of his
Spanish Soldiery he was able to change his Station, and to cast his Army into
all Forms and Figures, to lead them on, and bring them off again, and wind
himself out of all Streights and Difficulties; and although Metellus had great
Experience in conducting entire well appointed Legions, and was an excellent
Commander of Soldiers armed with heavy Armor, and drawn up in due order into a
standing Phalanx able to encounter the Enemy hand to hand, and overpower them
by clear Force, yet he was no way able to climb up steep Hills, and be
continually upon the pursuit of a swift Enemy, or attend the speedy Marches of
Men that were accustomed to range about the Mountains, to endure Hunger and
Thirst, and to live exposed to the Wind and Weather without Fire or Covering;
Besides that, Metellus being now in years, and having been formerly engaged in
many Fights and dangerous Conflicts, he was now inclinable to lead a more
remiss, easy, and voluptuous Life, and was the less able to contend with
Sertorius who was in the Flower and Strength of his Youth, full of Spirit and
Life, and had a Body wonderfully fitted for War, being strong, active, and
temperate, continually accustomed to endure hard Labor, to take long, tedious
Journeys, to pass many Nights together without Sleep, to eat little, and to be
satisfied with very coarse Fare, and was never stained with the least Excess in
Wine, even when he was most at leisure, but what time he had to spare, he spent
in hunting, and riding into all Parts; whereby he understood the Course of the
Country, the Situation of all places, and where there were passages, and where
not; with this advantage to himself, that when he could not maintain the Fight,
he knew which way to fly and escape, and where certainly to ensnare and
encompass his Enemy, when Victory accompanied his Arms; insomuch that those
with Metellus suffered all inconveniences like Men that were conquered,
although he earnestly desired to fight, and Sertorius (though he refused the
Field) reaped all the advantages of a Conqueror; for he hindered them from
Foraging, and cut off all Provision; if they proceeded forward he stopped their
March, if they stayed in any place and encamped, he continually molested and
alarmed them; if they besieged any Town he presently appeared and besieged them
again, and reduced them to great Extremities for want of necessaries, whereby
he wearied out the Roman Army, and reduced them to so low Sertorius challenges
Metellus.
and despairing a condition, that when Sertorius challenged Metellus to fight
singly with him, they commended him, and cried out it was a Fair Offer for a
Roman to fight against a Roman, and a General against a General, and when
Metellus refused the Challenge, they reproached him, but Metellus derided and
contemned them, in doing which he did well; for as Theophrastus observes, a
General should die like a General, and not like a Gladiator.

Metellus perceiving that the City of the Lagobrites, which gave great
assistance to Sertorius, might easily be taken for want of water, (there being
but one Well within the Walls) and that whosoever besieged the Place, would
make himself Master of the Springs and Fountains in the Suburbs, he hoped to
force the Town in two days time, there being no more water, and gave command to
his Soldiers to take five days Provisions only; but Sertorius resolving to send
speedy relief, ordered two thousand Vessels to be filled with water, and a good
Reward for the carriage of every Vessel, and many Spaniards and Moors
undertaking Sertorius relieves the City of the Lagobrites.
the work, he chose out those who were the strongest and swiftest of Foot, and
sent them through the Mountains, with order, that when they had delivered the
water, they should remove and convey away privately all those who would be
least serviceable in the Siege, that there might be water sufficient for the
Defendants. As soon as Metellus understood this, he was highly disturbed, and
when he had spent most part of the necessary Provisions for his Army, he sent
out Aquinus with six thousand Soldiers to fetch in fresh Supplies: but
Sertorius having notice of it, laid an Ambush for him, and having sent out
beforehand three thousand men, which he placed within a shady Valley, in a
Channel which had been made hollow by the rapid fall of Water from the Hills;
they set upon the Rear of Aquinus in his Return, while Sertorius charging him
in the Front, destroyed part of his Army, and took the rest Prisoners, Aquinus
only escaping, after he had been thrown from his Horse, and lost his Armor,
and Metellus being forced shamefully to raise the Siege, became the Laughter
and Contempt of the Spaniards, and Sertorius the Object of their Esteem, Love
and Admiration. He was also highly honored for his instituting a right
Discipline, and good Order amongst them; for he altered their furious savage
manner of Fighting, and brought them to make use of the Roman Armor, taught
them to keep their Ranks, and follow their Ensigns, and out of a confused
Number of Thieves and Robbers, he constituted a regular well disciplined Army:
he afterward bestowed Silver and Gold upon them liberally to gild and adorn
their Helmets, he caused their Shields to be wrought, and engraved with various
Figures and Designs, he brought them into the Mode of wearing flowered and
richly embroidered Clothes, and by courting them, by paying their Expenses, by
conversing familiarly with them, he won the Hearts of all, and led them whither
he pleased, but that which delighted them most, was the Care that he took of
their Children, when he sent for all the Noblemen's Sons in those Parts, and
placed them in the great City of Osca, where he appointed Masters to instruct
Osca Huesca.
them in the Grecian and Roman Learning, that when they came to be men they
might be fitted to share with him in Authority, and in the Government of the
Commonwealth, although under this pretense of their better Education, he really
made them Hostages and Sureties for their Country; however their Fathers were
wonderfully pleased to see their Children going daily to the Schools in good
order, handsomely dressed in fine long Garments edged with Purple, and that
Sertorius paid a Sallary for their Learning; examined them often, distributed
Rewards to the most deserving, and gave them Jewels to hang about their Necks,
and Golden Bosses which the Romans called Bullae.

There being a Custom in Spain, that Sertorius infinitely beloved by the
Spaniard.
when a great Commander was slain in Battle, those who attended his Person
fought it out till they all died with him, which the Inhabitants of those
Countries called an Offering, or a pouring out of Blood in Sacrifice. There
were few Commanders that had any considerable Guard or Number of Attendants;
but Sertorius had many thousands who offered up themselves, and vowed to
sacrifice their Lives, and spend their Bloods with his, and it is reported that
when his Army was defeated near to a City in Spain, and the Enemy pressed hard
upon them, the Spaniards took no care for themselves, but being totally
sollicitous to save Sertorius, they took him up on their Shoulders and passed
him from one to another, till they carried him into the City, and when they had
thus placed their General in safety, every one provided afterward for his own
security.

Nor were the Spaniards alone ambitious The Roman Soldiers with Perpenna desire
to be under his Command.
to serve him, but the Roman Soldiers also that came out of Italy were
impatient to be under his Command, and when Perpenna, who was of the same
Faction with Sertorius, came into Spain with great Riches, and a good Army, and
designed to make War against Metellus in a distinct Body by himself, his own
Soldiers opposed it, and discoursed continually of the great Fame and Merit of
Sertorius; which was no small Mortification to Perpenna, who was puffed up with
the Grandeur of his Family and his Riches. When they afterward understood also
that Pompey the Great had passed the Pyrenaens, they took up their Arms, laid
hold on their Ensigns, called upon Perpenna to lead them to Sertorius, and
threatened him that if he refused it, they would go and place themselves under a
Commander who was sufficiently able to defend himself and those that served
him, which forced Perpenna to yield to Perpenna joins his forces with Sertorius.
their desires, who immediately joining with Sertorius, added to his Army three
and fifty Cohorts; and when all the Cities on this side of the River Iberus
also united their Forces together under his Command, his Army grew great, for
they flocked together, and flowed in upon him from all Quarters; but when they
continually cried out to charge the Enemy, and were impatient of Delay, their
unexperienced Rashness was troublesome to Sertorius, who at first strove to
restrain them with Reason and good Counsel, but when he perceived them
refractory and unseasonably violent, he gave way to their impetuous Desires,
and permitted them to engage with the Enemy, in such sort, that being repulsed
yet not totally routed, he hoped they would become more obedient to his
Commands for the futue; which happ'ning as he conjectured, he soon rescued
them, and brought them safe into his Camp; and after a few days being willing
to encourage them again, when he had called all his Army together, he caused
two Horses to be brought into the Field, one an old, feeble, lean Jade, the
other a lusty strong Horse, with a very fair, thick, long Tail; near to to the
lean Jade he placed a tall strong man, and near to the strong young Horse a
weak, little, despicable Fellow to look upon, and at a Sign given, the strong
Man took hold of the weak Horses Tail with both his hands, and drew it to him
with his whole force, as if he would presently pull it off; the other little
weak Fellow in the mean time fell to plucking off hair by hair from the great
Horses Tail; and when the strong man had given trouble enough to himself in
vain, and sufficient divertisement to the Company, and had given over his
intent, whilst the weak pitiful Wretch in a short time and with little pains
had left never a hair on the great Horses Tail. Sertorius rose up, and spoke to
his Army after this manner. You see Fellow. Soldiers, that Ingenuity is greater
than Force, and Perseverance more prevailing than Violence. Many things which
cannot be overcome when they are together, do yield themselves up by degrees
when they are separated, Assiduity and continued Diligence is resistless, and
in time overthrows and destroys the greatest Powers whatever; Time being the
favorable Friend and Assistant of those, who through mature Judgment
understand aright how to take their best Advantages; and the destructive Enemy
of those who are unseasonably urging and pressing forward; with such like
Inventions and Discourses, wherewith he frequently entertained them, he
brideled the rash fierceness of the Barbarous People, and taught them to attend
and to watch for their best Opportunities of Fighting.

But of all his Remarkable Exploits, and His Stratagem against the
Characitanians.
wonderful Stratagems in War, none raised greater Admiration in all, than that
which he put in practice against the Characitanians; these are a People beyond
the River Tagus, who inhabited neither Cites nor Towns, but lived in a vast
high Hill, within the deep Dens and Caves of the Rocks, the Mouths of which
open all toward the North, the Country below it is a clayish, chalky Soil, and
being also light, full of Pores, and spungy, it is apt to be crummed and broken
into Powder, and is not firm enough to bear any one that treads upon it, and if
you touch it in the least it flies about like Ashes, or unslaked Lime. In any
danger of War, these People descend into their Caves, and carrying in their
Booty and Prey along with them, are free from all fear, and think themselves
invincible. And when Sertorius being at some distance from Metellus, had placed
his Camp near this Hill, they slighted and despised him, imagining that he
retired into these Parts being overthrown by the Romans; and whether out of
Anger, and just Resentment, or out of his unwillingness to be thought to fly
from his Enemies, he caused himself to be carried thither early in the Morning
to view the situation of the Place; but finding there was no way to come at it,
as he rode about threatening them in vain, and troubled in his Mind, he took
notice that the Wind raised the dust and carried it up, toward the Caves of
the Characitanians, the Mouths of which, as we said before, opened toward the
North; and the Northerly Winds, which some call Coecias, prevailing Caecias is
the North-EastWind or the NorthEast ^and by East.
most in those Parts, engendered out of the moist Morish Plains, or the
Mountains covered with Snow, and in the Heat of Summer being supplied and
increased by the Relaxation and Melting of the Ice on the Peaks of the Northern
Hills, it blows a delightful fresh Gale, which recreates the Characitanians,
and refreshes their Cattle all the Day long. Sertorius confidering well all
Circumstances, wherein either the Information of the Inhabitants, or his own
Experience had instructed him, commanded his Soldiers to shovel up a great
Quantity of this light dusty Earth, to heap it up together, and make a Mount of
it, over against the the Hill wherein these Barbarous People resided, who
imagining that all this Preparation was for the Raising of a Fort, or for the
making of a Bulwark against them, they looked upon it as a Design most worthy
to be laughed at; however he continued the Work till the Evening, and brought
his Soldiers back into their Camp. The next Morning when a gentle Breeze arose,
and moved the lightest Parts of the Earth, and dispersed it about as the Chaff
before the Wind, and when the Sun coming to be higher, the blustering Northerly
Wind had covered the Hills with the dust, the Soldiers turned this new Mount of
Earth over and over, and brake the Clots of Clay in Pieces, whilst others on
Horseback rode through it backward and forward, and raised a Cloud of dust,
which being committed to the Wind, was blown into the Dwellings of the
Characitanians, the entrances into which were all toward the North, and there
being no other Vent or Passage, than that through which blustering Caecias
rushed in upon them, together with all the powdered Earth and Dust, tossed and
blown about, it quickly blinded their Eyes, and filled their Lungs, and causing
a Difficulty of Breathing, choked them up, whilst they strove to draw in the
rough harsh Air mingled with streams of Dust, nor were they able with great
hardship to hold out above two Days, but yielded up themselves on the third.
This Success added not so much to the Strength and Power of Sertorius, as it
increased his Glory and Renown, in letting the World see that he was able to
conquer those Places by Art, and by the Strength of his Brain, which were
impregnable and never to be taken by the Force of Arms. He was continualy
Successful during the whole War against Metellus, who by Reason of his Age and
his slow Temper was not able to resist the active Boldness and Bravery of
Sertorius, who commanded a light army more like a Band of Robbers than a due
established Militia. When Pompey also had passed over the Pyreneans, and placed
his Camp near him, where both of them gave their utmost Proofs of their
Gallantry and Skill in War, both in Receiving and Attacking one another,
Sertorius far surpassing him, either in defending himself, or countermining the
Designs of his Enemies, his fame was then highly celebrated even in Rome it
self, for the most terrible Warrior, and the most expert Commander of his
Time. For considering that the Renown of Pompey was not small, who had already
won much Honor by his Prowess and Magnanimity in the Wars of Sylla, from whom
he received the Title of Magnus, and was called Pompey the Great; and who had
ascended to the Honor of a Triumph before the Hairs were grown on his Face,
and many Cities which were under Sertorius had an earest Desire to Revolt, when
they were deterred from it by that great Action amongst others which he
performed near the City of Lauron, contrary to the Expection of all.

As soon as Sertorius had laid siege to The Siege of Lauron.
Lauron, Pompey came with his whole Army to relieve it, and there being a Hill
near this City very advantagiously seated, they both made haste to take it. But
Sertorius prevented him, and took possession of it first, and Pompey having
drawn down his Forces, was not sorry that it had thus succeeded, for he
imagined that he had hereby enclosed his Enemy between his own Army and the
City, and sent in a Messenger to the Citizens of Lauron, to bid them be of good
Courage and to come upon their Walls, where they might see their Besieger
Besieged. Sertorius perceiving their Intentions, smiled, and told them, he
would now teach Sylla's Scholar (for so he called Pompey in derision) that it
was the Part of a General to look as well behind him as before him, and at the
same time showed them six thousand Soldiers which he had left in his former
Camp, from whence he marched out to take the Hill, where if Pompey should
assault him, they might fall upon his Rear, Pompey discovered this too late,
and not daring to give Battle, for fear of being encompassed in on every side,
and yet being ashamed to leave his Friends and Confederates in extreme Danger,
was forced to sit still and see them ruined before his Face; for the Besieged
despaired of Relief, and delivered up themselves to Sertorius, Sertorius burns
the City of Lauron in the sight of Pompey the Great who is not able to relieve
it.
who spared their Lives and granted them their Liberties, but burnt their City,
not out of Anger or Cruelty, for of all Commanders that ever were, Sertorius
seems least of all to have indulged these Passions, but only for the greater
Shame and Consusion of the Admirers of Pompey, and that it might be reported
amongst the Spaniards, that the Fire which burnt down his Confederates, though
(...) was so near as to be well warmed at it, was not able to raise heat enough
in him to dare to relieve them.

Sertorius sustained some Losses in these Wars, but he always defended those
with him, and maintained himself Invincible, and it was by other Commanders
under him that he suffered, and he was more admired for being able to repair
his Losses, for showing himself brave in danger, for recovering the Victory,
when the Field seemed already to be lost, than the Roman Generals against him
for gaining these Advantages: As at the Battle of Sucro against Pompey, and at
the Battle near Turia, against him and Metellus together. It is reported that
the Battle near the City of Sucro was fought through the Impatience of Pompey,
lest that Metellus should share with him in the Victory, and through the
willingness of Sertorius to fight with him before the Arrival of Metellus:
However Sertorius delayed the time till the Evening, considering that the
darkness of the Night would be a great disadvantage to his Enemies, either
Flying, or Pursuing, who were mere Strangers, and had no knowledge of the
Country. When the fight began it happened that Sertorius was not placed
directly against Pompey, but against Afranius, who had Command of the Left Wing
of the Roman Army, as he commanded the Right Wing of his own; but when he
understood that his Left Wing began to give way, and yield to the furious
Assaults of Pompey, he committed the care of his Right Wing to other
Commanders, and made haste to relieve those in distress, and rallying some that
were flying, and encouraging others that still kept their Ranks, he renewed the
Fight, and set upon them with that Force that he routed the Enemy, and brought
Pompey Pompey in great danger, wounded, and thrown from his Horse.
who was pursuing into great danger of his Life; for after being wounded and
thrown from his Horse; he escaped unexpectedly, for the Africans with Sertorius
who took Pompey's Horse, set out with Gold, and covered with rich Trappings,
fell out with one another, and upon the dividing of the Spoil, gave over the
Pursuit. Afranius in the mean time, as soon as Sertorius had left his Right
Wing to assist the other part of his Army, overthrew all that opposed him, and
pursued them to their Camp, fell in with them, and plundered them till it was
dark Night; knowing nothing of Pompey's Overthrow, nor being able to restrain
his Soldiers from Pillaging. When Sertorius returning with Victory fell upon
the Forces of Afranius, Sertorius overthrows Afranius.
which were in Disorder, and slew great Numbers of them; and the next Morning
came into the Field again, well armed, and offered Battle, but perceiving that
Metellus was near, he drew off, and returned to his Camp, saying, If this old
Woman had not been here, I would have whipped that Boy soundly, and sent him to
Rome.

Sertorius being much concerned that his white Hind could no where be found;
whereby he was destitute of an admirable Contrivance, both to amuse, and
encourage the Barbarous People, at a time when he most stood in need of it;
some of his Men wandering in the Night chanced to meet her, and knowing her by
her color, took her; to whom Sertorius promised a good Reward, if they would
tell no one of it; and presently shut her up; a few days after, he appeared in
Public with a very cheerful Look, and declared to the Chief Nobility of the
Country that the Gods had foretold him in a Dream that some great good Fortune
should suddenly attend him; and being set on the Tribunal to Answer the
Petitions of those who applied themselves to him: The Keepers of the Hind let
her loose, and she no sooner espied Sertorius, but she ran leaping with great
joy to his Feet, laid her Head upon his Lap, and licked his Hands as she
formerly used to do, and Sertorius stroaking her, and making much of her again,
with that tenderness that the Tears stood in his Eyes, all that were present
were immediately filled with Wonder and Astonishment, and afterward
accompanying him to his House with respectfull Congratulations, and loud Shouts
for Joy, they looked upon him as a Person above the Rank of Mortal Men, as one
that was influenced from above; and that was highly beloved by the Gods, and
being hereby mightily encouraged they conceived far better hopes for the future.

When he had reduced his Enemies to He fights with the Romans in the
Territories of the Saguntines.
the last extremity for want of Provision, he was forced to give them Battle
(in the Plains near Saguntum) to hinder them from foraging, and plundring the
Country, where both Parties fought gloriously, and Memmius the greatest
Commander in Memmius slain.
Pompey's Army was slain in the heat of the Battle; but Sertorius overthrew all
before him, and with great slaughter of his Enemies pressed forward toward
Metellus. This old Commander making a stout resistance beyond what could be
expected from one of his years, was wounded with a Metellus wounded.
Lance, which struck amazement into all that saw it, or heard of it, and filled
the Roman Soldiers hearts with Sorrow and with Shame, to be thought to have
left their General in distress; but at the same time it provoking them to
Revenge and Fury against their Enemies, they soon covered Metellus with their
Shields, and brought him off in safety, and then valiantly repulsed the
Spaniards, whereby Victory changed sides, and Sertorius that he might afford a
more secure Retreat to his Army, and that more Forces might more easily be
raised, retired into a strong City in the Mountains; and thought it was the
least of his Intention to sustain a long Seige yet he began to repair the
Walls, and to fortify the Gates, whereby he deluded his Enemies, who came and
set down before the Town, hoping to take it without much resistance; and gave
over the pursuit of the Spaniards, affording them opportunity to gather
together again, and to raise new Forces for Sertorius, to which purpose he had
sent Commanders to all their Cities, with Orders, when they had sufficiently
increased their Numbers, to send him word of it, which News he no sooner
received, but he sallied out and forced his way through his Enemies, and easily
joined with the rest of his Army, and having received this considerable
reinforcement, he set upon the Romans again, and by fiercely assaulting them,
by alarming them on all sides; by ensnaring, circumventing, and laying Ambushes
for them; he cut off all Provisions by Land, while He cuts off all Provision
from the Roman Army both by Sea and Land.
with his Ships of War, and Pyratical Vessels, he kept all the Coast in awe,
and hindered their Recrutes by Sea; whereby he forced the Roman Generals to
dislodge, and to separate from one another: Metellus departed into Gallia, and
Pompey wintered among the Baccaeans, in a wretched condition, where being in
extreme want of Money, he wrote a lamentable Letter to the Senate, to let them
know that if they did not speedily supply him, he must draw off his Army; for
he had already spent his own Estate in the Defense of Italy. To these
Extremities the Chiefest and the most Powerful Commanders of the Age, were
reduced by the Skill and Valor of Sertorius; and it was the common Opinion in
Rome, that he would be sooner in Italy than Pompey, and how far Metellus was
terrified with his Greatness; and at what rate he esteemed him, he plainly
declared, when he offered by Proclamation an hundred Talents, and twenty
thousand Acres of Land to any Roman that should kill him; and leave if he were
banished, to return; attempting villanously to betray and sell him, when he
despaired of ever being able to overcome him in open War, with all the
powerful Forces of the Roman Empire. And when afterward he gained some
advantage in a Fight, against Sertorius, he was so wonderfully pleased and
transported with his good Fortune, that he caused himself to be publicly
proclaimed Imperator, or Sovereign Commander; and ordered that all the Cities
which he visited should receive him with Altars dedicated, and Sacrifices
offered to him: where indulging himself in splendid Entertainments, and costly
Suppers, he would sit drinking in his Triumphal Robes, with Garlands and Crowns
upon his Head, while the Images and Figures of Victory, were introduced by the
motion of Machins, bringing in with them Crowns and Trophies of Gold, to
present to him, and Companies of young Men and Women danced before him, courted
him, and sang to him Songs of Joy, and Triumph; whereby he rendered himself
deservedly ridiculous, for being excessively delighted and puffed up with the
thoughts of following one that retired of his own accord, and for having once
the better of him, whom he used to call Sylla's Fugitive, and his Forces the
Remainder of the scattered Troops of Carbo.

The Generosity of Sertorius signally appeared He constitutes a Senate out of
the Roman Senators which fled to him from Rome.
when he appointed a Senate, and called together all the Roman Senators which
fled from Rome, and came and resided with him; and out of these he chose
Praetors, and Quaestors, and adorned his Government with all the Roman Laws and
Constitutions; and though he made use of the Arms, Riches, and Cities of the
Spaniards, yet he would never permit them so much as to mention any thing of
Government, but set Roman Officers and Commanders over them, whereby he
restored Liberty to the Romans, without increasing the Spaniards Power against
them; for he was a sincere Lover of his Country, and had a great desire to
return home, but in adverse Fortune he showed his undaunted Courage, and
behaved himself toward his Enemies free from all dejection and mean
spiritedness; but when he was in his Prosperity and in the height of his
Victories he sent word to Metellus, and Pompey, that he was ready to lay down
his Arms, and live a private Lite, if he were called home, declaring that he
had rather be the meanest Citizen in Rome, than Supreme Commander of all other
Cities together; and it is thought that his great Love for his Country was in
no small measure promoted by the respect which he had for his Mother, under
whom he was brought up in his tender Years, after the Death of his Father, and
upon whom he had placed his entire Affection, and after that his Friends had
sent for him into Spain to be their General, as soon as he heard of his
Mother's Death, he had almost cast away himself, and died for Grief; for he lay
seven days together continually upon the Ground, without giving the Word, or
being seen by the nearest of his Friends; and when the Chief Commanders of the
Army, and Persons of the greatest Note came about his Tent, with great
difficulty they prevailed with him at last to come abroad and speak to his
Soldiers, and to take upon him the Management of Affairs, which were in a
prosperous Condition; by all which he seems to have been of a mild and
compassionate Temper, and naturally given to Ease and Quietness, and that he
accepted of the Command of Military Forces contrary to his own Inclination; but
not being able to live in safety, he was forced by his Enemies to have recourse
to Arms, and to espouse the Wars as a necessary Guard for the defense of his
Person.

His Administration of Affairs with King His Treaty with Mithridates.
Mithridates, does further argue the greatness of his Mind; for after that
Mithridates was overthrown by Sylla, and had recovered himself; and, as a
strong Wrastler that is desirous to try another fall, was again endeavoring to
re-establish his Power in Asia, at which time the great Fame of Sertorius was
frequently celebrated in all Places; and the Merchants which came out of Spain
and the Western Parts of Europe, to furnish the Asiaticks with Foreign
Commodities, had filled all the Kingdom of Pontus with their Discourses of his
Exploits in War. Mithridates was earnestly desirous to send an Embassy to him,
being also highly encouraged to it by the Boastings of his Parasites, and
flattering Courtiers, who comparing Mithridates to Pyrrhus, and Sertorius to
Hannibal, gave out that the Romans would never be able to make any considerable
resistance against such great Forces, and Commanders of that Temper and sublime
Judgment; when they should be set upon on both sides at once, on one side by
the most Warlike General that ever was, and on the other side by the most
Powerful Prince on Earth.

Mithridates having sent Ambassadors Mithridates sends Ambassadors to
Sertorius.
into Spain to Sertorius with Letters, and Instructions, and with full Power
and Commission to promise Ships, and good Sums of Money, toward the Charge of
the War, if Sertorius would vouchsafe to confirm his Pretensions upon Asia, and
Authorize him to possess all that he had surrendered to the Romans, in his
Treaty with Sylla. Sertorius called a full Council, which he named the Senate;
where, when all joyfully approved of the Conditions, and were desirous
immediately to accept of his Offer, seeing that he desired nothing of them but
a Name, and an empty Title to Places, not in their Power to dispose of, in
recompense of which they should be supplied with what they then stood most in
need of, Sertorius would by no means agree to it; declaring, that as he was
willing that King Mithridates should exercise all Royal Power and Authority
over Bithinia and Cappadocia, Countries accustomed to a Monarchical Government,
and not belonging to Rome, so he could never consent that he should seize or
detain a Province, which by due Right and Title, was possessed by the Romans,
which Mithridates had formerly lost in open War to Fimbria, and had afterward
quitted upon a Treaty of Peace with Sylla, for he looked upon it as his Duty to
enlarge the Roman Possessions by his Conquering Arms, and not to increase his
own Power, by the Diminution of the Roman Territories, telling them that a
generous-minded man, though he willingly accepts of Victory, when it comes
accompanied with Honor, yet he will never so much as endeavor to defend
himself or save his own Life, upon any dishonorable terms.

When this was related to Mithridates he was struck with admiration, and said
to his intimate Friends, What will Sertorius enjoin us to do, when he comes to
be seated in the Senate House in Rome, who at present, when he is driven out to
the furthest parts of the Earth, bordering upon the far remote Western Ocean,
sets bounds to our Kingdoms in the East, and threatens us with War, if we
Attempt the recovery of Asia? However they solemnly upon Oath concluded a
League between them, upon He makes a League with King Mithridates.
these Terms, That Mithridates should enjoy the free possession of Cappadocia
and Bythinia, and that Sertorius should send him Soldiers, and a General for
his Army, in recompense of which the King was to supply him with three thousand
Talents, and forty Ships. Marcus Marius a Roman Senator, who had quitted Rome
to follow Sertorius, was sent General into Asia, by whose Conduct when
Mithridates had reduced diverse of the Asian Cities, Marius made his entrance
with Rods and Axes carried before him, as before a Proconsul of Rome, and
Mithridates followed in the second place, voluntarily waiting upon him; some of
these Cities he set at liberty, and others he freed from Taxes, signifying to
them by Letters, that these Privileges were granted to them by the Grace and
Favor of Sertorius, and hereby Asia which had been miserably tormented by the
unsatiableness of the Publicans, and oppressed by the insolent Pride and
Covetousness of the soldiers began to rise again, and with new Wings added to
their former hopes, to soar alost in earnest Desires toward their long wished
for change of Government.

But in Spain the Senators about Sertorius and others of the Nobility, finding
themselves strong enough for their Enemies, and having no less hopes of
returning to Rome; they no sooner laid aside all fear; but Envy, immediately,
and unreasonable Jealousies inflamed their minds, and chiefly Perpenna, who
being of a Noble Family, and extremely envious of Sertorius's Greatness, was at
this time so arrogantly transported with a fond Ambition of Commanding the
Army, that he threw out villainous Discourses in private amongst his intimate
Acquaintance, and among those whose seditious Ingratitude, had made more
willing to hearken to him. What Perpenna conspires against Sertorius.
evil Genius (would he often say) hurries us perpetually from worse to worse,
and we who disdained to obey the Dictates of Sylla, the great Ruler of Sea, and
Land, and might have lived at home in Peace and Quiet, are come hither to our
destruction, hoping to enjoy Liberty, where most wretchedly we have made our
selves Slaves of our own accord, and are become the contemptible Guards and
Attendants of the banished Sertorias, who that he may expose us the further,
gives us a name that renders us ridiculous to all that hear it, and calls us
the Senate, when at the same time he makes us undergo more hard Labor, and
forces us to be more subject to his haughty Commands and Insolences, than the
poor Spaniards and Lusitanians. With these mutinous Discourses, he continually
seduced them; and many who could not be brought to fall into Rebellion openly
against Sertorius, fearing his great Power and Authority, were prevailed with,
to endeavor to destroy his Interest secretly; and by many ways to ruin his
Affairs. For by abusing the Lusitanians and Spaniards, by inflicting severe
Punishments upon them, by raising exorbitant Taxes, and by pretending that all
this was done by the strict Command of Sertorius, they caused great Troubles
and made many Cities to revolt: and those who were sent to mitigate and heal
these Differences, did rather exasperate them, and increase the Number of his
Enemies, and left them at their return more obstinate and rebellious than they
found them. Which so highly incensed Sertorius, and caused so great an
alteration in his former Clemency and Goodness toward the Spaniards Sons,
educated in the great City of Osca; that coontrary to all Civil Justicie, he
cruelly put some of them to Death, and sold others.

In the mean time Perpenna having increased the Number of his Conspirators,
drew in Manlius, a Commander in the Army, who at that time loved a Youth, and
to endear him the more discovered the Confederacy to him, persuading him to
neglect his other Lovers, and to be constant to him, alone; who in a few days
was to be a person of great Power and Authority; but the Youth having a greater
Inclination for Aufidius, disclosed all to him, which much surprised and amazed
him; for he was also one of the Confederacy; but knew not that Manlius was any
ways engaged therein; but when the Youth began to name Perpenna, Gracinus, and
others, which he knew very well were sworn Conspirators, he was very much
terrified, and astonished; but made slight of it to the youth, and bid him not
regard what Manlius said, a vain boasting fellow; but however went presently to
Perpenna, and giving him notice of the danger they were in, and of the
shortness of their time, desired him immediately to put their designs in
Execution; and when all the Confederates had consented to it, they provided a
Messenger who brought feigned Letters to Sertorius, in which he had notice of a
Victory obtained by one of his Lieutenants, and of the great slaughter of his
Enemies; and as Sertorius, being extremely well pleased, was Sacrificing and
giving thanks to the Gods for his prosperous Success, Perpenna invited him and
those with him (who were also of the Conspiracy) to an Entertainment, and being
very importunate, prevailed with him to come. At all Suppers and Entertainments
where Sertorius was present, great Order and Decency was wont to be observed,
for he would not endure to hear or see any thing that was rude or unhandsome,
and their Freedom and Mirth, was Modest and Inoffensive; but in the middle of
this Entertainment, those who sought occasion to quarrel, fell into dissolute
Discourses openly, and making as if they were very Drunk, committed many
Insolences on purpose to provoke him; and Sertorius being Offended with their
ill behavior, or perceiving the unquietness of their Minds by their muttering
and sudden disrespect, changed the posture of his lying, and leaned backward,
as one that neither heard nor regarded them. When Perpenna took a Cup full of
Wine, and as he The manner of Sertorius's Death.
was drinking, let it fall out of his hand, and made a noise, which was the
sign agreed on between them; and Antonius who was next to Sertorius,
immediately wounded him with his Sword, and whilst Sertorius upon receiving the
Wound turned himself and strove to get up, Antonius threw himself upon his
Breast, and held both his hands, whereby not being able to free himself, he was
exposed to the fury of the rest of the Confederates, who killed him upon the
place with many Wounds.

Upon the first News of his Death, most of the Spaniards left the Conspirators,
and The Spaniards forsake the Conspirators, and yield themselves up to Pompey
and Metellus.
sent Ambassadors to Pompey and Metellus, and yielded themselves up to them.
Perpenna attempted to do something with those that remained, but he made so ill
use of Sertorius's Arms and Preparations for War, that he soon made it evident
to all, that he understood no more how to Command, than he knew how to Obey,
and when he came against Pompey he was soon overthrown, and taken Prisoner;
neither did he bear this last affliction with any bravery of Mind, but having
torius's Papers and Writings in his hands, he offered to show Pompey Letters
from Persons of Consular Dignity, and of the highest Quality in Rome, written
with their own hands, expressly to call Sertorius into Italy, and to let him
know, what great Numbers there were that did earnestly desire to alter the
present State of Affairs; and to introduce another manner of Government. Upon
this occasion Pompey behaved himself not like a young Man, or one of a light
inconsiderate Mind, but as a Generous Commander of a confirmed, mature, solid
Judgment: whereby he freed Rome from great Fears and Innovations, for he put
all Sertorius's Writings together and read not one of them, nor suffered any
one else to read them, but burnt them all, and caused Perpenna immediately to
be put to Perpenna put to Death.
Death, lest by discovering their Names, further Troubles and Revolutions might
ensue.

Of the rest of the Conspirators with Perpenna, some of them were taken and
slain by the Command of Pompey, others fled into Africa, and were set upon by
the Moors, and run through with their Darts; and in a short time not one of
them was left alive; except only Aufidius, the Rival of Manlius, who hiding
himself, or not being much enquired after, dyed an Old Man, in an obscure
Village in Spain, in extreme Poverty, and hated by all.

The Comparison of Sertorius with Eumenes.
THese are the most Remarkable Passages, that are come to our knowledge,
concerning Eumenes and Sertorius. In comparing their Lives, we may observe,
that this was common to them both; that being Aliens, Strangers, and banished
Men, they came to be Commanders of Powerful Forces, and had the leading of
Numerous, and Warlike Armies, made up of diverse Nations. This was peculiar to
Sertorius, that the Chief Command was by his whole Party, freely yielded to
him, as to the Person, undoubtedly of the greatest merit, and of the highest
Worth and Renown; whereas many contended with Eumenes, till by his great
Performances, he at length obtained the Superiority.

The Soldiery followed the one, being earnestly desirous to be Commanded by
him, and submitted themselves to the other for their own security. The one
being a Roman, was the General of the Spaniards and Lusitanians, who for many
years before, had been under the Subjection of the Roman Empire; and the other
a Cherronesian, was chief Commander of the Macedonians, who were the great
Conquerors of Mankind, and had at times subdued the World. Sertorius being
already in high esteem for his Courage and Conduct, and admired for his former
services in the Wars, and his great Abilities in the SenateHouse, was advanced
to the Dignity of a General over a great and numerous Army. Whereas Eumenes
obtained this honor from the Office of a Writer or Secretary, and from having
been a long while despised by the great Ones, for his Scribbling Employment. Nor
did he only at first take his rise from these slender Opportunities, but
afterward also met with great Impediments in the further Increase, and
Progress of his Honor and Authority, and that, not only from those who
publicly resisted him, but from many others that privately Conspired against
him; but it was much otherwise with Sertorius, for not one of his Party did
ever publicly oppose him, or promote any Insurrection against him; nor
secretly; till at last a few of his Acquaintance entered into a private
Conspiracy. Sertorius put an end to his Dangers, as often as he was Victorious
in the Field, whereas the Victories of Eumenes were the beginning of his
Calamities, through the Malice of those that envied his Glory.

Their martial performances were equal and parallel, but their manners and
inclinations were different. Eumenes naturally loved War and Contention, but
Sertorius esteemed Peace and Tranquillity: When Eumenes might have lived in
safety, with honor, if he would have quietly retired, he persisted in his
contentions, and made War with the greatest of the Macedonian Princes, with the
danger and loss of his Life: But Sertorius, who was unwilling to trouble
himself with any public disturbances, was forced, for the safety of his
Person, to make War against those who would not suffer him to live in peace: If
Eumenes had not violently contended for the Superiority, or could have
contented himself with the second place, Antigonus would have used him
handsomely, and shown him all favor and respect, whereas Pompey's Friends would
never permit Sertorius to live in quiet. The one made War of his own accord,
out of his ambition to Rule and Govern; and the other was constrained to accept
of the Sovereign Power and Authority, to defend himself from his Enemies that
made War against him. Eumenes was certainly a true Lover of War, for he
preferred his covetous Ambition before his own ease and security; but Sertorius
was truly warlike, who procured his own safety by the successful force of his
Arms.

As to the manner of their Deaths, it happened to one without the least thought
or surmise of it; but to the other when he suspected it daily; which in the
first argued a clear equal temper, and a noble mind not to distrust his
Friends: But in the other it showed some infirmity of Spirit, for Eumenes
intended to fly and was taken. The death of Sertorius dishonored not his life,
he suffered that from his companions, that none of his mortal enemies were ever
able to perform. The other not being able to deliver himself before his
imprisonment, being willing also to live in captivity, did neither prevent nor
expect his fate with any honor or bravery; for by meanly supplicating and
petitioning, he made his enemy, that pretended only to have power over his
Body, to be Lord and Master of his Body and Mind.


