AN ACCOUNT Of the Taking of CARTHAGENA BY THE FRENCH, In the Year 1697.
Containing all the Particulars of that Expedition, from their first setting
out, to their return into BREAST.

By Monsieur De Pointis, Commander in Chief.

Illustrated with a large Copper Plate, Describing the Situation of Carthagena
and Parts adjacent.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Buckley, at the Dolphin over against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street. School.

THE PREFACE.
THE City of Carthagena, in the West Indies (which now gives Title to a
considerable Government of the same Name, and is reckoned a Province of New
Granada; or, according to some Writers, of New Andaluzia; but by others is
annexed to the Golden Castille) was begun to be built in the Year 1532. by
Peter de Heredia, and was finished by Georgio Robledo, about Eight Years after
the Foundation was laid.

The Situation of its Port was found so convenient for the Spanish Fleets, and
such Quantities of rich Merchandise were brought down near to it, by the
Confluence of the great Rivers of Santa Martha and the Magdalena, that the Town
increased in Wealth, Number of People, Stately Edifices, and in a Jurisdiction
over Five or Six petty Cities, till in the Year 1585, It was sacked by the
Valor of a few English, under the Command of Sir Francis Drake: in a Reign,
when the Public Good and Honor of England was the chief Business at Court,
and our Land enriched with the Spoils of our Proud Enemies; who were humbled by
the Conduct of our Fleets abroad, and our Naval Applications at Home.

But this City of Carthagena received a greater Blow (before it was perfectly
repaired) from Five Privateers, led on by a disgusted Spaniard, who burnt the
Place to Ashes, after they had surpised the Governor asleep, and seized a
mighty Treasure: Yet, for all this, it raised its Head again, numbered above
Twenty Thousand Inhabitants (whereof Four Thousand were Spaniards, the rest
Mesticoes and Slaves) and improved daily in Riches and Magnificence, till taken
by the French from Breast, and the Bucaniers from Petit Guaves, who severally
plundered it; as is particularly related by Monsieur de Pointis.

Into such a fatal Stupidity are a certain People (by Nature Brave, formerly
Conquerors and Heroes) of late degenerated, either from the ill Influences of
their State, or Church, or both; that now they fall a Prey to every Invader,
and even to Privateers, and Vagabonds: The Causes whereof are too manifest, and
owned by a judicious and honest Writer of their own Country, whose Sense I
shall here deliver.

Unreasonable Taxes are multiplied and entailed upon the Spaniards, under
Pretense of making good Deficiencies and Funds of Interest: The Treasury grown
Monstrous, either by obstructing or diverting the Public Aliment, and by
contracting new Debts: The Grandees themselves conspire to cheat in their
several Stations; in order to advance or support their own Extravagancies: The
Court Officers, Gabellers, and such Swarms of mercenary Vermin are
innumerable, draining the very Blood of the People: The Standing Forces upon
Free Quarter, the Shipping neglected, the Garrisons and Magazines very ill
supplied, most of the Governors and Men in Trust (like so many Vultures)
griping whatever comes within the Catch of their Talons. Trade is discouraged
by seemingly advantageous Loans, by high Customs, Indulto's, and other Imposts.
The Church is overgrown with Revenues, Inquisitions and Dominion; all which
have contributed to impoverish and despirit the Mass of the Body Politic, and
to reduce it into the Figure, we now behold it in; all over Rickets, with large
Heads and withered Limbs, for want of a proportionable Circulation, and a due
Administration.

These Chronical Distempers in the Spanish Governments in Europe, have infected
the rest in America, where their Weakness is discovered upon all Occasions.
Indeed Monsieur de Pointis carried Twenty times the Force that Sir Francis
Drake, or the Privateers after him, did; yet considering the Spaniards had
frequent and very early Intelligence of the French Preparations, and of their
Arrival in the West Indies, methinks their Defense was very Languid, and scarce
credible to one unacquainted with their present Constitution, which will
produce the like Symptoms and bad Effects in any other Nation, that has the
Misfortune to suck in the same Contagions.

But to return to Carthagena, whose Territory is related to be very fruitful,
only a little too moist by the violent and frequent Rains.

The Journals of Sir Francis Drake's Voyages commend the Plenty and Variety of
Fruits found there; Oranges, Citrons, Limes, Guavo's, some Spices and Balsams,
especially a sort of long Pepper, and the Tolu, mentioned by Carolus Clusius,
Franciscus Ximenes, John de Laet, Margrave, Hernandes, and others, are brought
from the adjacent Parts in great Quantities. Gold is washed down by the
Torrents from the Mountains, where some precious Stones are found. In a Word,
the Country is much the same with the neighboring Isthmus of Darien, which has
been so well described by Mr. Ringrose, Monsieur Raveneau de Lussan, and more
lately by Captain Dampier, and Mr. Wafer, that nothing more need be said here
of this Part of the Terra Firma.

EXPLANATION

A. Cartagena

B. Hihimani

C. Fort St Lazare

D. Fort St Croix

E. Fort of Boccachica

F. Redout at the entrance of the Basin

G. the Trenches

H. a Battery of 6 Guns

I. a Battery of 3 Guns and two Mortars

K. a Battery of 6 Guns and one Mortar

L. a Battery of one Mortar in the highway

M. a Battery of one Mortar in a little Island

N. Notre Dame de la Poupe

O. Lake of N. D. de La Poupe

P. the Place where the French landed their Troops

Q. their Artillery landed

R. ye Scepter

S. the Vermandois

T. ye St Lewis

V. a Galliot Bombarding ye City

Y. a Galliot Bombarding Boccachica.

1. 2 Mortars battering Boccachica

2. the Ships Anchoring before Boccachica

3. the Descent upon Boccachica

4. the Descent of ye Buccaniers frustrated by the roughness of the Sea

5. two Spanish Vessels burnt

6. the French Camp




A Scale of one Mile.

Sold by Sam: Buckley at the Dolphin in Fleet street London

A DRAUGHT OF THE CITY OF CARTAGENA ITS HARBOR AND FORTS



Monsr DE POINTI'S ACCOUNT OF HIS EXPEDITION TO Carthagena, In the YEAR 1697.
THE Design I had long since formed, of a Naval Expedition, that might be both
honorable and advantageous, was put off from time to time by intervening
Accidents, although Mons. Pontchartrain had received His Majesty's Approbation
of the Project I had the Honor to present him; and had, likewise, obtained the
Ships, Men, and Ammunitions, which I proposed to take with me.

But at length, the laying up of the Fleet, brought by Count Chateau Renault
from Toulon, leaving all the Marine, in a manner, idle; and the Measures I had
taken with Treasurer-General Vanolles, seeming to promise a sufficient Fond for
the Expense, there appeared no farther Obstacles to the Execution of this
Enterprise.

Hereupon we proposed our Design to the Public; which was so generally liked,
and People were so forward to bring in their Money, that Vanolles was not able
to receive it fast enough; insomuch, that he fancied he should be forced to
refuse several Persons, by reason we had agreed upon the Sum, and resolved not
to exceed it.

But the Face of Affairs became soon altered; for the Peace being concluded
with Savoy, made it hoped, that it would suddenly be attended with a General
One: And 'twas believed, that if the War should be at an end, before I was
under Sail, I should be ordered to the contrary; and so the Money employed upon
our Armament, would be infallibly lost. And now People were so far from
offering new Sums, that those who had already engaged in the Design, would have
been very willing to have withdrawn their Contributions.

I could not inform every Body, That Count Maurepas, who was acquainted with
the Particulars of our Project, had engaged Mons. Pontchartrain, to ask his
Majesty, What should be done with our Armament, in case the Peace should be
agreed upon? And that His Majesty was pleased to answer, That I might go on
with it; for, if the Peace should be concluded, he would take Care to
re-imburse the Adventurers. And we were assured of this Favor, by an express
Article inserted in the Margin of the Minutes of the Marine Council, that was
held upon this Matter: Nevertheless, many Persons considering, that the best
which could happen, would be to receive their Money again, chose rather to keep
it in their Purses.

And besides this Prejudice, the ill Success of some Attempts that preceded
mine, and from which great Matters were expected, discouraged the Public more
than the appearance of an approaching Peace.

By this means we were obliged to proceed upon the Fond that was already
advanced, which was much inferior to what I had proposed; and this compelled
me to lessen our Preparations, and consequently weaken the Armament. However,
being determined to go thorough with my Undertaking, I resolved to make use of
the Advantages which the Court was pleased to confer on me, in allowing me such
considerable Succors. So I returned to Breast in the beginning of October,
1696; and to work we went, with all imaginable Diligence, to fit out our Fleet:
But the bad Weather hindered our Careening; so that we could not get out of
Breast, but lay in that Road 'till the 6th of January; from whence my Project
was to have sailed the beginning of the preceding November.

To add to our Misfortune, I was at that time not able to take the Opportunity
of a fair Wind, that then offered; because I staid for a great Convoy of Arms,
and Provisions, that were laden for me at Rochel, without which I could not
proceed; I had continually expected it for three Months. In the midst of these
Perplexities, I understood they were, at last, arrived at Port Lewis; where
they were forced to put in, to avoid a Squadron of the Enemy, that had for some
time cruis'd upon that Coast, and had them in sight. By this, I found our Naval
Preparation upon the very point of miscarrying; our Provisions were already
much diminished, and the Appearance very great, that the Enemy's Squadron would
remain there, and we utterly consume our Provisions in the Road of Breast: Upon
which I fixed my Resolution; which, although it seemed very hazardous, was yet
the only Method that the Posture of my Affairs would permit me to take: It was,
to find out my Convoy, and even to disengage them at the hazard of a Battle:
Now, although I should have the best of it, yet it could not be without a mighty
Inconveniency to me: But I flattered my self, that possibly I might not be
discovered by the Enemy; or, in case of meeting with them, get indifferently
well off, and refit at Port Lewis; and then try to get out; and happen what
would, by whatsoever way it should be my Fate to be lost, I had rather have
been ruined with our Arms in our Hands, than miscarry for want of Resolution,
and in a shameful Abode there.

Accordingly I had given my Orders to sail the next Day; at which time I
understood by Signals from Vshant, that they descried a very large Fleet. We
knew very well, by several Accounts, that there were about Forty English Men of
War abroad, with Orders to cruize before Breast, and by all manner of means to
prevent my passage; by which my Departure seemed impossible, my Enterprise
defeated, and my Misfortune unavoidable. However, I proposed other Matters to
my self, and stuck to my first Resolution, not thinking my Condition much worse
for this News; the little way between Breast and Port Lewis, or the entrance
into the River of Morbian, of which I had taken particular Care to inform my
self, that I might secure my Retreat into it, gave me some Hopes to believe,
that I might probably get in thither, before I should be too deeply engaged in
a Battle; and then having once got on Board what the Convoy had brought me, I
might, by the Favor of the long Nights, get away, without being seen by the
Enemy; or, at the worst, escape with small damage, in a running Fight. So this
great Fleet did no more alter my Circumstances, than if it had been a small
Squadron; against which, in the Juncture I was in, the hazard of fighting was
as dangerous as with a Capital Fleet, my Care being to get away, and prosecute
the Business of my Project. Besides, if I could get a little before the
Enemies, there was no great appearance for them either to come easily up with
me, or that they could be in Condition to pursue me for Two thousand Leagues
that I might lead them: I had, moreover, the opportunity of separating my Ships
in the Night, by ordering them different Courses to the appointed Rendezvous.

The Governor of Vshant sent an Express to assure me, That he could discern
Forty Men of War, amongst which were Five English, or Dutch Flags: I received
this News at Midnight, and making use of it in a manner quite different to the
Opinions of them that sent it me, I made the sailing Signal, and was under Sail
by that time it was Day, it being upon the Seventh of January, 1697. I had,
some Days before, sent my Orders to the Vessels at Port Lewis, to come away
immediately, running all Hazards, to join me; but to keep so near the Shore,
that the Enemies Ships might not dare to approach them, or to avoid their
Cannon by running into the Ports that are upon that Coast; which are good
enough to cover such small Vessels, as I expected, from the Danger of Cruisers.
I had sent the Mutine-Frigat, and the Providence-Brigantine, to Convoy them,
who expected them at Pennemarc-Point.

We were hardly got out of the Goulet when we saw the Fleet appear at Point
Raz, with the small Convoy I had sent to them; whereupon I came immediately to
an Anchor at Bertheaume, where I made all the haste I could to get our
Provisions on Board our Ships and Fly-boats, and by extraordinary Diligence, I
was in a Condition of Sailing the next Day.

We had hardly got into our Course, when the Scepter struck upon a place,
where, according to the Rules of Navigation, there could be no manner of
danger, after having struck three times very violently, we thought she was just
upon sinking, especially when we saw a great many Planks floating upon the
Water; at the same time we perceived her to float, and running immediately to
the Pumps, we found she did not make one drop of Water: We could not tell what
to think of this Accident; however, it was concluded, that it could not be a
Rock she had struck upon, but upon some sunk Vessel that floated under Water,
which being less strong than the Scepter, had occasioned us that Alarm by the
breaking of her Planks, without any ways prejudicing the Scepter. We continued
our Course, endeavoring to avoid the Enemies: I had so regulated my self to
the Tides, as to be, by the beginning of the Night, at Pennemarc-Point;
besides, there was no great probability I should be discovered in sailing so
little a way, especially by reason of our holding so near to the Coast. I
resolved at the same time to steer directly from Pennemarc, to the Coast of
Spain, which I designed to leave to the Southward. This Course, so contrary to
what is customarily taken, to get clear of the Land, which the Enemies must
know I designed; and upon which, most probably, they formed their Method of
Cruising, was the most likeliest Expedient to deceive them. This had the
desired Effect, and the Wind continuing favorable, I first made Cape Ortegal,
and afterward continued my Course toward the Island of St. Domingo, where I
arrived in Fifty five Days; during which there happened nothing remarkable,
unless it was, that after having passed the Tropic, we met with West
South-West Winds, and consequently contrary, which is not usual.

The pleasure of arriving at Cape Francis, which was that part of S. Domingo
that I came to, was mitigated by several Accidents. I understood there, that
Capt. Desaugets, who commanded Three Ships in those Seas, for whom I had Orders
to join himself with my Squadron, was Eight Days before my Arrival sailed upon
his Return to France. I was there likewise informed by Mons. Daunou,
Lieutenant-Governour of the Island, that the Succors which Mons. Du Casse,
Governor of the Coast had prepared for me, consisted in about Four hundred
Men, although he had Orders to join me with the Strength of the whole Colony.

It is true, that by good Fortune all the Pirates of those parts, which are
usually called Buccaniers, were met together at that time: It was thought that
I might find a Party of them; but it was no ways to be imagined, that I should
find them all; for they go out and come in as they please; consequently, this
Assistance could not be computed at 14 or 1500 Men, as I was made to believe I
should find at St. Domingo; neither did they exceed 600: So I was near upon a
Thousand Men behind of my Account.

The Departure of Capt. Desaugets, deprived me of a like Number of Men, and two
great Ships. Moreover, I was fallen short of two great Ships, and several
Frigates, specified in my first Project, by which means I found my self reduced
to half the Force I proposed at the beginning.

I did not think fit to come to an Anchor at the Cape, but left there Three
Frigates, the Mutine, the Avenant, and the Marin, to take in such Forces as
might be drawn from thence, and the fresh Provisions which Commissary Du
Tilleul was to supply my Squadron with.

S. Vandrille, Commander of the Marin, that was sent two Months before I left
France, with Orders for Mons. Du Casse to have the Forces ready that were
appointed for my assistance, after he had carried his Dispatches to Petit
Guaves, sailed for the Cape, and attended me there.

In his passage from France to St. Domingo, he was attacked by an English Ship
of 54 Guns, who notwithstanding her Superiority, was forced to retire with
Shame, after a Fight of several Hours.

Desaugets going for the Hondura's, before he returned to France, had ordered
the Chevalier De la Motte d'Heran, on Board the Christ, taken from the
Spaniards, to sail directly for France, with the Favorite-Frigat, whom I found
at the Cape upon his departure. These two Ships were both manned with the
Favorite's Crew only, consequently very weak Men of War; wherefore I resolved
to make use of but one of them, to put all the Men into her, and leave the
other Ship at Petit Guaves. By Virtue of the King's Letter, which I had to
Desaugets, and his Squadron, I ordered La Motte d'Heran, to join me; which he
did, and chose the Christ that he commanded.

About Eight a Clock, upon the Sixth of March, I came to an Anchor over against
Exter, the usual Residence of Mons. Du Casse; who came immediately on Board, to
advise with me about the shipping of the Men he was to bring me; and seeing
that I did not dissemble neither my surprise, nor my trouble, at the small
Number of Men he had provided for me, he protested, that he had done all he
could; and continually endeavored to make me have a great Opinion of the good
Success of this Attempt; for, that the Buccaniers were at that Juncture all
together, and would every Man of 'em perform Wonders. We agreed that he should
go to Petit Guaves, and that I would be ready by that time it was Day, to get
into the Port: Du Casse came thither to join me, having a Design on foot which
I did not imagine; I brought him the Duplicate of the Order which he had
received from St. Vandrille, which he did not read when I delivered it to him,
by reason it was wrote in Ciphers. There was added in that Letter, without my
knowledge, that he was to contrive the Means of succeeding in an Attempt that
was approved by His Majesty, without damaging the Colony: This Restriction did
in some measure deprive me of the Power of commanding his Forces, seeing he had
an opportunity of pretending to keep them for the preservation of his Colony.
He said, That he would not insist upon Terms with me, as being persuaded that I
would have a regard to his Character. I replied, That the greatest Character he
could pretend to, was that of being Captain of a Ship, which he had the Honor
to command by his Commission; all that I could do, was, that he should serve in
that Capacity, according to his Seniority, which did submit him to several
others, who, nevertheless, would not pretend to concern themselves with the
Forces of his Government; in relation to whom, I should address my self to him,
that he was to accept this Proposition, or not to embark with me, for I had no
Orders to compel him.

After refusing these Offers he left me; and thinking no more of him, I was
surpised to hear, that he took all imaginable Care for what was personally
necessary to him in this Expedition; and that he reported, He would rather come
on Board as a private Soldier, than not engage in so glorious an Affair. He
showed much Courage and Desire of Glory in his Discourse, and it is pity, that
he afterward discovered his Resolution to proceed from Motives, and Interests,
something less generous.

In the mean time we employed our selves in getting of Water, Wood, and other
things necessary for the Squadron; and to fit up the Vessels of the Buccaniers,
which were all unrigg'd; without the help of the Rigging and Cordage, that I
ordered to be delivered them by my Squadron, it would have been impossible for
them to put to Sea; we likewise distributed the Provisions there, which I had
brought for the Forces that were to embark with me; in short, we prepared all
things for our Departure. It was then necessary to regulate the Pretensions of
the Buccaniers, who desired to be assured of their Shares of the expected
Prizes.

These Free-booters, are, for the most part, composed of those that desert from
Ships that come upon the Coast: The Advantage they bring to the Governors,
protects them against the Prosecutions of the Law; besides, all those that are
apprehended in France, as Vagabonds, or such as can give no Account of
themselves, are sent to these Islands, where they are obliged to serve for
Three Years. The first that gets them, obliges them to work in the Plantations;
at the end of the Term of Servitude, some Body lends them a Gun, and to Sea
they go a Buccaniering. This Profession has maintained it self a long while by
this sort of Recruits, and subsist by their Pyracies; they were formerly
altogether independent, but of late Years, they have been reduced under the
Government of the Coast of S. Domingo; they have Commissions given them for
which they pay the Tenth of all their Prizes, and are now called the King's
Subjects: For the Governors of St. Domingo being enriched by them, do mightily
extol them for the Damages they do to the Spaniards, and endeavor to have it
believed, that the Buccaniers are the strength and support of the Colony;
whereas, they are, in effect the Ruin of it: For if such as are conveyed
thither, were kept from the Liberty of embracing this infamous Profession,
which an Impunity for all sorts of Crimes renders so much beloved, we should
not have lost, in a few Years, above Six thousand Men, that might have improved
and peopled the Colony. And thus, indeed, they would have been truly the
strength and support of the place.

As to other Matters, although they are pleased to be counted the King's
Subjects, yet it is with so much Arrogance, as obliges all those that are
desirous to make use of them, to court them in the most flattering Terms. This
not being agreeable to my Disposition, and being they were in the Dominions of
His Majesty, and esteeming them as His Subjects, which the Governor was obliged
to deliver to me; I plainly told them, That they should find me a Commander to
lead them on, but not as a Companion of their Fortune; that if they made any
Difficulties, either to embark or obey, I would certainly burn all their
Vessels, even to the poorest Boats, and inevitably deprive them of the Means
for some Years, if not for ever, of continuing their Depredations.

It was feared, that upon these Threats they would betake themselves to the
Woods, as being their usual Retreat upon any Dissatisfactions: But I knew they
apprehended very much the Execution of my Menaces; and moreover, that the
Governor, who is so highly concerned in their Pyracies, would omit no sort of
Care to retain them in their Duty.

The Demand they made, of having their Share, in the Division of the Prizes,
secured to them, was very reasonable; therefore I explained my self in Writing,
and caused it to be fixed up in several places, implying, That they should, Man
for Man, have the same Shares of Booty, that was allowed to the Men on Board
the King's Ships.

I was informed of their Customs, and that of diverse ways of dividing the
Shares, (which is commonly a very troublesome Business); the most usual Method
was this, of reckoning by the Number of the Men; for Example: A Vessel of a
Hundred Men, has double the Allowance that is made to another of but Fifty, so
the rest in proportion. I made no manner of delay in the Choice I was to make;
as likewise, to acquaint them, that I could not meddle with any thing that
belonged to the King, the Admiral, and the Undertakers of the Armament. That
His Majesty had been pleased to allow to the several Ships Companies, the Tenth
of the First Million, and a Thirtieth part of all the others: And I engaged my
self in Writing, to give the Buccaniers the same Terms. Du Casse told me, that
I had taken the easiest Method, desiring me only to leave with him the Original
of that Writing, including the Frigate Pontchartrain, commanded by Lieutenant
Mornay, who desired to serve in the Squadron upon the same Conditions that I
had granted to the Buccaniers: There was likewise comprehended, at the Desires
of Du Casse, a Frigate of S. Malo, fitted both for War and Traffic. We shall
have occasion to mention this Writing again, in the Sequel of our Story.

Upon the Eighteenth, all the Ships that I had left at Cape Francis, having
joined my Squadron with La Motte d'Heran, whom I had likewise ordered to join
me; I made ready on the Nineteenth to go and Anchor at Cape Tiburon, being the
furthest Western Point of S. Domingo; the Water there is better, and easier to
be got, than in any other place, so it was absolutely necessary for me to touch
there; besides, I was very desirous to get out of Port, to oblige the
Buccaniers to come on Board, which they ever defer to the last moment; however
they at last got on Board, seeing me at some distance, and followed the
Squadron, as also the Pontchartrain, which Du Casse had chosen for himself;
when, on a sudden, a violent North Wind, which is very extraordinary, and
rarely known in this Season, scattered not only the Buccaniers, but likewise
all the Ships of my Squadron, insomuch that I continued alone for above Thirty
Hours, two Chaloups sent from the Scepter, to the assistance of two Buccaniers
in danger of stranding, not being able to get up with me; but good Weather
coming on, we all met upon the 28th, in the Road of Irois, three Leagues
distant from Cape Tiburon.

Until then, I had kept my Design secret, not being wholly determined on the
Matter: Du Casse, who understood by his Letters from Court, that the principal
design of the Expedition was upon Carthagena, did judge the execution
impossible, by reason of the several Accidents already mentioned, and the small
number of Forces with me. He represented unto me, with much appearance of
Reason, That, according to the last Advices from the Indian Coasts, the
Galleons must be at Porto Bello, or upon their way to Carthagena, in order to
their return for Spain; that we might reasonably hope to meet with them, by
steering that course; and that, by our strength, we might reckon our selves
secure of them, although we found them in Porto Bello; for notwithstanding the
Port is defended by three Castles, yet it is open enough for us to get in, and
possess our selves of those Castles, by means of our Bombs. But I had my
Reasons not to follow this Opinion: The Galleons might as well be at
Carthagena, as at Sea, and I was sensible, by my own Experience, how uncertain
it is to meet Ships at Sea, a thing not to be depended upon; moreover, it seemed
plain to me, that the less the Spaniards were in a Condition to defend
themselves at Porto Bello, the less Reason I had to hope for an Advantage by
their Defeat, otherwise than in the Honor I might gain; for they would
certainly have burnt, or sunk, their Ships, upon the approach of such a
Squadron as I had the Honor to Command, and that Treasure not lost to them,
must have been absolutely so to me, since I could not possibly have continued
long enough there, to get it out of the Water.

These Considerations absolutely dissuaded me from going first of all to Porto
Bello, which Voyage would have spent my Provisions, and rendered me incapable
of any other considerable Attempt. Vera Cruz was a more likely place; for we
were well assured, that one of the Flotas had been there ever since the
beginning of September, and that they could not go away before the beginning of
May, therefore I could not miss meeting with them; moreover, my Forces were
sufficient to make me Master of the City, which may be entered without our being
exposed to the Fire of the Castle, which is impregnable by its advantageous
situation: It is built on a Rock, in the middle of the Sea, and surrounded on
all sides with extraordinary Fortifications. However, with my great store of
Artillery, I could, in a very little time, have reduced that Castle to Ashes;
besides the Bombs that I could have used from my Ships, I might have raised
what Batteries of Cannon and Mortars I pleased on Shore, which is not above 200
Yards from it.

I should not have run the Risque here, as I must have done at Porto Bello, of
seeing the Spaniards burn their Ships, to deprive me of the Silver: For it
being well known, that they do embark the Plate there, but a very few Days
before the departure of the Flota, consequently, at the worst, I could only
have lost the Merchandises, of which I made little account. In short, it is
probable, I should have engaged in this Expedition, had I not received some
Advices at St. Domingo, that occasioned me new Perplexities, viz. that though the
Plate was not used to be embarked until the Day before the Fleet sailed, and
was brought from Mexico to Vera Cruz, long before 'twas put on Board; yet, of
late Years, upon some Jealousies, they bring it no farther than Pueblo de los
Angelos, forty Leagues up the Country, from whence it is conveyed directly on
Board the Galleons.

According to the Rules of Navigation, which it is not necessary to insert here,
the Galleons could not sail until the Month of May, yet they might come away
later, even until the Month of August; so if they had not by chance taken the
resolution of coming away with the first of the Season, it being then but
March, and we not above three Weeks sail from them, I did foresee that our
Design would be ruined by my arrival before the Plate was brought down, and I
was no ways in a condition of marching forty Leagues, with such a small Body of
Forces, in an Enemy's, and well-inhabited Country. Moreover, I was not willing
to begin with a place, that would have frustrated my farther Intentions, in
case I had been unsuccessful: For such is the Nature of the Gulf of Mexico, at
the bottom whereof Vera Cruz is situated, that at our coming out again, it
would not be possible for us to entertain any other Thoughts, but those of
returning to Europe, as well because of the length of the Voyage, as because
the Winds and the setting of the Currents, would have prevented all other
Attempts to the Eastward.

The only place I could fix my Resolutions upon, was Carthagena, which lay to
Windward; and although I should have missed of my Aim there, yet it would not
have been any Obstacle to my other Designs, not even against Vera Cruz, unless
I consumed my time by adventurously falling upon the first place, without a
well-grounded assurance of carrying it: The small number of my Forces, was the
only thing that could dissuade me from this Attempt: But this want of Strength,
might be remedied by good Management.

Capt. Venner, an Englishman, having been several Years in the Service of the
Spaniards, in the West Indies and Commanded several of their Ships, was lately
come into the Service of France, and was placed on Board Desaugets, until some
other Employ should be given him. This Officer was very well acquainted with
the Coasts and Places of the West Indies; he had likewise some knowledge of
Geometry, and by the assistance of Canette, my principal Ingenier, I got him to
draw several Plans, especially that of Carthagena, which we found to be as
exact as any thing could be expected that was made by Memory.

My first Design was to have immediately landed with Five thousand Men, near
Carthagena, not including the Seamen: I expected to have drawn these Forces
from the places beforementioned, with which I reckoned I should be able to
force the place, though besides its ordinary defense, the whole strength of the
Galleons should have been in it. But I was all manner of ways very much
mistaken in my Account, scarce having one half of the Forces I proposed, with
which there was no probability of taking a place so famous in India, and so
well known in Europe, for its Fortifications which I found to be even better
than they were reputed to be. The Ships were to Anchor in the open Sea, and by
that means must have been exposed to all the Inconveniences of the bad Season,
which was not quite over; besides, I might have been surpised by the English
Squadron, which I knew had Orders to follow me. In this case there was no
likelihood for me to expect any Service from the Seamen, it being altogether
necessary to leave them on Board to work the Ships in bad Weather; but then
again, having only the Landforces to re-embark, I might, upon any occasion,
soon put my self into a posture of defense.

Then I imagined, that if instead of attacking Carthagena, I only attempted
Boccachica, which defends the entrance into that vast Harbor, called the
Lagune of Carthagena, and should carry that Fort, the rest would be easily
acquired, by reason I might bring my Ships under the Protection of this Fort,
and thereby make use of the Seamen that might be then spared from the Ships,
which would in some measure make up the want of Landforces.

However, this Design had its Difficulties likewise: For the passage which this
Fort defends, is so narrow, and winding, that there is no sailing through it,
but you must warp your Ships along by their Anchors and Cables; now two Ships
riding within, can prevent this work, and alone defend the entrance against the
strongest Fleet: I could not imagine, but that the Spaniards would use that
Precaution, in case the Galleons had been at Carthagena.

On the other hand, if I could make a Descent on any other part of the Island,
at one end of which stands Carthagena, at the other Boccachica, I might
probably surmount all Difficulties, by expeditiously landing of my Cannon; with
which crossing the Island, and raising of Batteries on the Banks of the Tagon,
I knew very well, I could either sink, or force away any Ships that should be
posted to defend the entrance: As to the Fort, I did no ways doubt the taking
of it with the help of my Bombs, in spite of any Succors the Enemy might
bring to it by Land.

Being once in possession of Boccachica, I had several Reasons for good hopes,
in case the Galleons were not there, that I should, by the help of the Seamen
(which I might take when the Ships were secured) be enabled to attempt
Carthagena; and if the Galleons were there, then I purposed to attack them; and
in case they should resolve to sink themselves, then I should be able so to
terrify the place with my Bombs, that they would yield to a Contribution, that
might re-imburse my Undertakers; and from thence I could afterward steer to
some other Leeward place.

After I had duly weighed these Matters, I absolutely resolved upon sailing to
Carthagena, and I published my Resolution; which was applauded and received
with all the signs of Satisfaction from the Soldiers. Du Casse proposed the
sending away two Frigates of Buccaniers, to precede me, which should land in the
Night near Carthagena, to take what Prisoners they could make, and carry them
to Sambee, twelve Leagues to Windward of Carthagena, and there expect our
coming. Capt. Pierre, and Capt. Blou, were instantly commanded to sail upon
this Design; but instead of executing these Orders, the desire of pillaging,
according to their usual Custom, engaged them to chase some small Vessels they
met, which they had not the Courage to board, after they had driven them
aground; and this occasioned them to lose so much time, that without having
been at Carthagena, they arrived after me at Sambee, where a sudden Gust from
the North-East, called here a Breeze, had forced me to come to an Anchor, and
wait for better Weather to appear before Carthagena in.

On the Thirteenth, the Wind being abated, we got under Sail, and directed our
Course for Carthagena. The whole Fleet was composed of these Ships: Seven
Frigates from Eight to Twenty four Guns, on board them about Six hundred and
fifty Buccaniers. One hundred and ten Inhabitants of S. Domingo, One hundred
and seventy Garrison Soldiers of the Coast, and One hundred and eighty Negroes;
were dispersed on board the Men of War, and Flyboats belonging to the Squadron.
This was all the assistance which I received from the Government of St. Domingo.

The Pontchartrain, and the French Frigate were joined to us as before
mentioned, the one having Forty Guns, and One hundred Men; the other Twenty
four Guns, and Sixty Men.

The Squadron was composed of Seven great Ships.

The Scepter carrying Eighty four Guns, and Six hundred and fifty Men,
commanded by Guillotin: I was on board this Ship.

The St. Lewis of Sixty four Guns, and Four hundred and twenty Men, commanded
by Levy, who acted as Vice Admiral.

The Fort of Seventy Guns, and Four hundred and fifty Men, commanded by the
Viscount Coetlogon, who served as Rear-Admiral.

The Vermandois, Apollo, Furieux, and St. Michael, all four of Sixty Guns each,
and Three hundred and fifty Men, were commanded by Dubuisson, Gombaud, La Motte
Michel, and the Chevalier de Marolles.

The Christ, a Spanish-Prize, commanded by the Chevalier de la Motte d'Heran,
of Two hundred and twenty Men, and Forty four Guns.

The Avenant, by the Chevalier Francine, Two hundred Men, and Thirty Guns.

The Marin, commanded by St. Vandrille, had One hundred and eighty Men, and
Twenty eight Guns.

The Eclatant, Bomb-Vessel, commanded by De Mons, had Sixty Men.

The Providence-Brigantine, of Thirty Men, and Four Guns, commanded by the
Chevalier De L'Escouet.

Two Flyboats.

Four Boats, called by the French Traversier, who had each of them one Gun, and
a Mortar.

On board these Ships, and Vessels, were One hundred and ten Officers, Fifty
five Guards Marine, Two thousand one hundren Seamen, One thousand seven
hundred and fifty Soldiers, effective Men.

Before I left the Road of Irois, or Cape Tiburon, which is the same place, I
had regulated the Descent, and the Manner of employing our Forces.

The Captains of the Men of War, viz. those that effectually were so, (but not
all those who commanded for such, as did several Galliot-Captains, and some Men
of War Lieutenants) were to serve as General-Officers, dividing themselves
according to their Seniority, to be alternately ashore and on board; for it was
absolutely necessary to have some of them always in Command on board the Ships.
Du Casse had the Command of all the Buccaniers, and Inhabitants of the Coast,
whom I left to him, under their ancient Captains.

By Order of the Court, there was a State Major, composed of Sorel,
Inspector-General of the Marine Troops of Brittany. The desire of serving in
this Expedition, induced him likewise to take upon him the Function of
Major General, but taking place only as Captain: of Thesut, Major: of two
Aid-Majors-General, who were the Chevaliers Jaucour, and De Pointis: a
Sub-Major-General Beraudin; and some Guards Marine, as Sub-Majors:

Of Du Tilleul, Commissary.

One principal Ingenier, and another, viz. Canette and Tangey, for whom were
composed two Brigades of Officers, or Guards-Marine, as also some
Voluntier-Soldiers, that were in some measure thought capable of serving as
Ingeniers. The Chevalier de Ferriere, du Crest, and Coursy, were the chief of
these Brigades; the Chevaliers de Nesmond, and Pouillermont, Enseignes; La
Land, du Ches, and Rochebonne, Guards-Marine, chose to serve as Aids de Camps
under me.

Six Battalions were composed of the Soldiers on board the King's Ships; the
first was a Body of Two hundred and fifty Grenadiers, drawn out of all the
rest, commanded by La Roche de Vigier, Captain of a Frigate, but then serving as
second Captain on board the Scepter, commanded, I say, by him, as Colonel, le
Chevalier de Vezins, Lieutenant of a Man of War, as Lieutenant-Collonel;
Vaujoux served as Major, St. Lazare d' Aid, Framine, Montrosier, and
Vignancourt, had the Command of the Five Companies that made this Battalion.

The Five Senior Lieutenants of Infantry Marine, commanded as Colonels in the
Five other Battalions of Three hundred Men each; who were the Chevalier
Marolles, le Chenau, de Bresme, Simonet; the Guards-Marine were divided among
them to augment the number of Officers. Besides these, I made Detachments of
Four hundred Seamen, under their own Officers, all armed with Scythes and
Pistols; upon occasion, these were to be commanded by Lieutenants of Ships,
that had no Companies, who were de Vaulx, Longuejoue, Carcavy, Siglas, and
Sabran, these were to be relieved by Five Captains of Fireships that were on
board our Squadron.

The One hundred and seventy Soldiers drawn out of the Garrisons on the Coast
of St. Domingo, were in a separate Body, and commanded by Beaumont. The One
hundred and ten Inhabitants, and the One hundred and eighty Negroes, made each
of them another. The Buccaniers were all in one Troop.

The Plans, and Memoirs, which I had of several places, of whose Errors I have
much reason to complain, were nevertheless true in one point: For they gave me
a plain assurance, that if we did not seize at our arrival at Carthagena, upon
a considerable Eminence, and a Church called Nostre Dame de la Pouppe, that
commands the Avenues, all the Treasure would be carried off, the greatest part
being in Gold and Emeraulds, easily to be transported up into the Country;
which the Spaniards would not fail to do, upon the approach of such a
formidable Fleet.

To get possession of this Post, I resolved to land the Buccaniers, the Night
after my coming to an Anchor, they being very proper for such an Attempt, as
being accustomed to marching and subsisting in the Woods, where each of them
carries his own Provisions, and lives upon what he kills; so I was informed at
least: Thus, not being encumbered with any Baggage, their March might be kept
secret, their Irruption unexpected, and, in case of necessity, their Retreat
secure, by ways unpassable to others. I had concerted with Du Casse all things
relating to this Design, which he undertook to see executed: We agreed upon the
Signals he should make me by Fires from the Hills, to acquaint me whether he
wanted any assistance, or Vessels to re-imbark his Men; or upon taking of the
Post, whether he was in a Condition of maintaining it, or not. On my part, I
was to inform him by Signals from the Ships, of my Condition, and the
Resolutions which various Accidents might oblige me to take.

Having concluded upon this Method of executing our Design, we arrived between
Carthagena, and Point Hicacos, four Leagues to the Eastward, where finding good
Anchorage in a great Bay, which the Land makes by running out to the Southward,
we came to an Anchor about Four a Clock, two Leagues from the City, on the same
Day, being the Thirteenth. The Squadron was got ready in the Morning at Sambee,
and I delivered all my Orders by Signals: By this diligence I was sure to make
a secure Descent, it not being possible that an Enemy could be able to guard
all the Shore, or march down time enough to hinder our landing.

So soon as the Ships were come to an Anchor, I made the Signal for the
Chaloups, (that were to land the Buccaniers) to go on board their Frigates, so
soon as it was dark; and to them to be in a readiness for the Boats, although it
was resolved they should not embark until Midnight, to the end they might be
ashore some Hours only before Daylight.

In the mean time, the Fort, the Mutine, and the Bomb-Vessel, according to
their Orders, were advanced toward the City; the last near enough to bombard,
and the other two to guard her. I expected, by thus employing of the Enemy with
my Bombs, to divert them from taking other necessary Precautions.

When the Buccaniers were to be embarked, in order to their landing, they did
not behave themselves so heroically as Du Casse had boasted of them: For this
separation from the King's Forces, afforded them a prospect of the dreadfullest
Dangers; they began to apprehend the want of Provisions in the Woods, where
they were used to subsist many Days, when they were only to rob and cut Peoples
Throats sleeping, whereas now they were to march against a People that stood on
their Defense; yet to take away one of their pretenses that covered their fear,
we delivered them Provision, and the Major General, after much stirring, got
them at last into the Boats.

All was in a readiness for the Descent, when I fortunately resolved to visit
the Shore; for the most proper place of landing: One would not have thought,
that in a great Bay, sheltered from the Winds that usually Reign upon this
Coast, where Ships find a good Anchorage, and the Sea calm, it should be
impossible to get ashore; but scarce were we come to it, when the Waves
breaking upon the Rocks even with the Water, did but little miss of filling my
Canoa quite full of Water at once: Levy, Du Casse, and Tilleul, were with me.
We rowed down the Strand toward Carthagena, in hopes of finding some proper
place; but there the Sea ran higher than it did from whence we came; and when
we were fallen so low, that it was not possible to proceed farther without
engaging our selves among several little Lakes that from this part water all
the Territory of Carthagena, our Canoe came a-thwart a Sea, that filled her
half full of Water; and now, in all probability, our Enterprise, as yet not
begun, was like to end in a Goal: But Levy leaping into the Water, and by his
Example encouraging the Seamen, that followed him, to use their utmost
Efforts, we at length got our Canoa a-float, that had struck on the Rock, and
delivered our selves from that imminent Danger. Our first Care was, by the
other Canoas of the Majors, to dispatch Orders to the Chaloups, not to come
near the Shore; where, embarrass'd by the great number of People on board them,
and being every way larger, drawing more Water, and not so well provided with
Rowers, as my Canoa was, their Ruin must have been inevitable.

We were then, notwithstanding all our Draughts and Memoirs, obliged to agree,
that Carthagena was inaccessible on this side: For if in so calm a Day, the Sea
was so boisterous as we found it, what were we to expect in other Weather? In
short, the stay we made in this Country, has shown us by Experience, as well
as informed us by the Relations of the Inhabitants, that the Sea upon all this
Coast, and in all Seasons, is a natural and invincible Rampart; and that
Carthagena is approachable only by the Lake, which makes the Harbor.

I reflected with Concern on this disastrous Adventure; I foresaw, that in not
being able to possess my self of that considerable Post of Nostre Dame de la
Pouppe, I should afford the Spaniards an opportunity of several Days to carry
off whatsoever they were desirous to save, by reason I could not be able to
come at them, until I had taken the Fort of Boccachica.

Being wholly bent upon Boccachica, the Fleet got into a readiness of sailing
in the Morning on the Fourteenth. We designed to pass so nigh the Walls of
Carthagena, as to do them all the mischief my Guns could afford them; but
notwithstanding my utmost care to provide all things necessary for every Vessel
of the Buccaniers, who have the Reputation of knowing this Coast, we found them
so very ignorant, and so much at a loss, that we durst not attempt any thing
upon the small Informations that we could get from them; so we resolved to take
the surest Precautions possible, by ordering the Chaloups to sound before us.
The Scepter not finding Water enough, could not come within Shot of the Town;
the Lewis, and the Fort, that drew less, even touched in several places.
However, that did not hinder them from firing, until I made them a Signal to
join the Fleet. The Enemy made no great Fire; yet we perceived they had great
Pieces, and good store of them: To our admiration, we observed, that Carthagena
was enclosed only on this side with Pallisades, and old Walls that were in many
places fallen down; whereupon we founded our Projects and Hopes of a lucky
Event; not knowing that Nature had sufficiently provided for the Security of
this part, by the great Violence of the Sea that washes it: I touched twice,
and came not this Night to an Anchor before Boccachica, being desirous first to
inform my self of all the Soundings; but came to an Anchor so soon as we found
a proper depth. We understood afterward, that the place we had been in all
Day, was about eight Years since a Plain, where the People of Carthagena used
to walk.

I sent away all the Chaloups, to sound the Coast, even up to the Fort. I
ordered St. Vandrille, on board the Marine, to an Anchor over against the
entrance, that so he might prevent any Boats from carrying of Advice, or
Silver, to Porto Bello. All the Officers and Pilots, that had been out to
sound, assured me, that there was every where Water enough, even to Twenty
Fathom, and near the Shore; and the Coast jetting out to the Southward, had
formed near the Fort, a sort of a Haven secure from the Violences of the Sea,
which ran too high everywhere else for a Descent, and a small neck of Land, or
Promontory, did likewise protect us from the Fire of the Fort; whereupon it was
resolved to come to an Anchor there, by Break of Day, next Morning, being the
Fifteenth, and to take our Anchoring Births, according to the Disposition of
the place.

All the Fleet were at Anchor on the Fifteenth at Noon: I immediately
dispatched away Major Thesut, to observe what part of the Shore was most proper
for a Descent. Upon his return I made the Signal for landing, and ordered Du
Casse to take eighty Negroes, that were on board the Furieux, to embark with
them on board the Pereagoes, which are a very light Vessel, and therefore are
in no danger of stranding; with these I ordered him to make up toward
Carthagena, and to come very near the Shore, in two or three places, without
endeavoring to land, but only to draw out the Enemies, if there were any, and
by that means oblige them to discover what they were; and if there was no
appearance of any, he was to inform me of it by a Signal: The Woods lie close
to the Sea-shoar, where the Spaniards might have kept themselves concealed, and
discharged upon us without appearing, which obliged me to this precaution; but
Du Casse finding no such matter, landed with his Negroes, and hoisted the white
Flag upon a Rock. This acquainted me that he was landed: The Chaloups
immediately made to shore, and the Descent was made without any opposition. The
Negroes were forthwith employed with their Bills and Hatchets, to make a way
through the Wood to the Lake, on the other side of the Island, where we
designed to encamp, and make our Approaches to the Fort, the Ground on this
side, toward the open Sea, not being so proper; besides, it was necessary to
cut off their Communication with Carthagena by Land. The Island, which is but
narrow at the Point where the Fort is situated, is but a good quarter of a
League from the Sea to the Lake, at the place our Negroes were cutting, within
half Cannon-shot of the Fort, from which we were covered by the Woods: The Way
was made in a very little time, so that all our Troops were ranged quite cross
the Island, making places of Arms in the several Paths of the Wood that lead to
Carthagena; by this means we were soon posted, and the Places of Arms, or Corpse
de Guard, were near enough to speak to each other.

While we were thus settling our selves a-shoar, the Lewis made a little more
out, and began to Cannonade the Fort; sometime afterward, the Fort Man of War
doing the same, as likewise the Scepter, that followed at a little distance,
the Battery began to be very warm, the Bomb-Galliot, and the Traversier with
one Mortar, having taken their Stations, played their parts very well, which
continued until Night. The Enemy only made a very slow Fire, which did not
occasion us much damage, only our Yards and Rigging suffered a little, and
three Men were killed or wounded.

In our approach to the Lake, we had a little crook'd the Way leading toward
the Fort, to the end we might fall directly in with a little Plain, which (the
People of St. Domingo brought hither for our Guides, told us) lay between the
Lake, the Wood, and the Fort; so we came out at the foot of a rising Ground,
that was high and large enough to cover us, and from whence we had the liberty
of examining the Fort, which is not above Musket Shot from it: We lodged our
selves here, expecting the approach of Night, to examine the Ditch, and where
it was proper, to open the Trenches, by cutting down a part of the Wood, which
we perceived to be much nearer to the Fort, than the Way we had cut: So soon as
it was dark, the Major General, and Canette, slipped away to make the Tour of the
place, upon the Bank of the Ditch; which they did without being discovered:
Levy, Jaucourt, and I, being without design insensibly advanced into the Wood,
until we perceived our selves near to the Ditch, we were desirous to examine
it. The obscurity, and great stil^^ess of the Night, favored our Attempt; we
met the Major General and Canette who had been round; our Meeting happened to
occasion some little Noise, upon which the Sentinels fired, and we returned,
sounding the Ground; which being proper for the Work, confirmed us in the
Opinion of opening the Trench in that part of the Wood which I said was nearest
to the Fort; besides, a little Fen being between the Eminency and the Fort, did
deprive us of the convenience of carrying on our Work on that side.

Upon the Sixteenth in the Morning, we began to make our Fascines, Gabions, and
to get our Artillery on Shore, which we wanted, one of the Mortars being
brought a-shoar in the Night, was ready to fire, and another was getting ready,
when one of those great Pereagoes, that are much used in the West Indies, and
big enough to carry Sixty Men, came gently sailing on to Boccachica, under the
Shore, which she did not imagine to be in our possession; but being perceived
by our Grenadiers there, they resolutely took their opportunity, without
waiting for Orders, and fired so thick into her, that at the first Discharge,
they killed and wounded fifteen or sixteen Men, seven or eight more being
perfectly scared, leaped into the Water, and were drowned, the rest throwing
themselves into the bottom of the Pereagoe; she lay floating on the Water,
until some of our Negroes launching off a little Boat, that was by chance
there, made to her, and brought her ashore. Besides the killed and wounded,
there were Eight and twenty Men in her, among whom were two Franciscan Friars,
one of which had received a small hurt in his Arm: By these Prisoners I was
informed, that the Galleons were at Porto Bello, of which I had no certain
Account since my coming out. They had been there ever since the end of October,
and were expected every moment at Carthagena; their stay at Porto Bello having
been contrary to all the Rules of Commerce, much longer than usual.

I made use of one of these Friars, to represent unto the Governor, (whom I
designed to summon) the insignificancy of his Defense, against such unequal
Forces, I multiplied them in the Eyes of the Friar, by drawing forth all the
Troops in the Wood, and whilst they amused him, I made some of them file off
through the By-ways, and advance themselves beyond those he had seen; the
Ammunition, and Train of Artillery, were showed him; insomuch, that if the
Matter had depended on him only, the Fort would have been surrendered at that
very instant: However, he made use of all his Eloquence to the Governor; to
whom he carried from me very honorable Proposals. He answered, by my Drummer,
That he was not reduced to the Condition of Capitulating; but when he was, he
would be willing to accept of the Offers I had made him: Moreover, he charged
the Franciscan, in particular, with many Civilities to me.

The Fort Man of War returned to her Station to batter the Fort; but the
Bullets that flew over it, falling into a Quarter of the Camp, that we designed
not to quit, I sent her Orders to retire, and to the Scepter, and S. Lewis,
going to the same work, to return to their first Births. The Mortars on Board,
and those on Shore, began to Fire at the same time.

About two in the Afternoon, two greater Pereagoes than that in the Morning,
came before the Wind, to land Succors at the Fort, which the Governor of
Carthagena had been solicited to send thither, upon finding their mistake, in
believing that my Expedition was upon the Galleons, and to land at Porto Bello;
and that I durst not engage upon an Enterprise of that moment, as was the
attacking of Carthagena; but came thither only to see if the Galleons were
there.

The Adventure and Example of the Morning, inspired some of the Buccaniers with
a Resolution of doing what the Grenadiers had done: These last Pereagoes having
passed something wide from the Post of the last, drew to the Shore only when
they were pretty near the Fort; these Buccaniers, at the head of whom may be
about twenty Men, that deserve to be distinguished for their Courage, my
intention being very far from comprehending them in the Descriptions which I
make of the others; these Buccaniers, I say, having possessed themselves of
some little Houses on the Lake-side, made a very great Fire upon the Pereagoes;
the Noise brought the Major General, Canette, Gougon, and some other Officers
to them, who encouraging this small number of Buccaniers accidentally joined by
some Soldiers, led them toward the Fort, to prevent the Pereagoes that kept on
their way, from landing the Forces on Board them. The other Buccaniers, by the
Example of the first, having taken Arms, ran to the Shore, where they made an
extraordinary Fire; but the place being within Musket Shot of the Fort, the
Enemy began to fire upon them; and the Buccaniers, who are not used to engage
where there is any danger, made the most of their Heels, to bring themselves
under shelter: I met them in their way, and finding that words were of no
weight with them, I lighted on a Cudgel, and with that forced them to return to
the Post they had abandoned. Du Casse was surpised at this way of carrying Men
on, yet concealed, in silence, the vexation he conceived at the Action. In this
space of time, the Pereagoes, terrified with the Discharge they had sustained,
were tacked about, and on their return toward Carthagena: The Major General
taking the advantage of this opportunity, posted himself with the small Troop
that followed him, at the foot of the Counterscarp, which the blindness of the
Spaniards had left so, as it covered us from the Fire of the Ramparts. Canette,
Le Cher, Marin, and Gougon, were wounded in this Action; fifteen Soldiers and
Buccaniers were killed and wounded. La Mothe, Ensign of the Buccaniers, pitched
his Colors, yet neither his Signal, nor my Blows, were sufficiently powerful
to make his Companions advance. I then imagined, that by sustaining those that
were at the foot of the Counterscarp, I might make an advantageous Business of
this accidental Attempt: So I abandoned the Buccaniers to their Cowardice, and
ordered two Companies of Grenadiers, with the Battalion of de la Chenau that
was at hand, to march: Levy put himself at their head, and to shorten the way,
marched up to his Belly through the Water, and so possessed himself likewise of
the foot of the Counterscarp; at this instant Du Casse received a Contusion on
the Thigh, by a Cannon-Ball falling among a heap of Stones. The Major General
did not forget to send me word, that the Post he had taken might be kept, by
causing the Troops to march, although at the hazard of some Men, by reason of the
Fire which they were to sustain in going to it; but those Men were got to him,
before his Messenger had spoke to me, so there was no time for deliberation, it
being necessary to maintain this Lodgement; because the Counterscarp almost
environing the place, through the fault of not being cut sloping at the foot,
afforded shelter from the Fire of the Ramparts, and was capable of receiving a
greater number of Men than mine. I sent Major Thesut to bring up the
Battalions, as likewise the Ladders, with all imaginable expedition, to be at
Hand, in case there should be occasion for them; and as the Battalions came up,
so they defiled off to the foot of the Counterscarp. The Besieged fired very
briskly, but being obliged to expose their whole Bodies, that their Shot might
not be made too high, and being easily reached in that posture, they soon
bethought themselves of firing from behind their Defenses, and thereby
occasioned us but very little damage.

Du Buisson Varenne, was at the place of our descent with two Battalions, who
hearing the Noise of our Fire, imagined we were attacking the place, although he
knew not in what manner; he made through the Wood, into the place where the two
Mortars were raised, and by the way of the little Plain, which is but a quarter
so long as that in the Wood which makes a Circle, he brought us that Supply at
the Minute the Besieged called out, They were willing to capitulate, if they
might have good Quarter. I answered them, That there was good Quarter for them;
but that was all: And, that, if they did not immediately throw their Arms into
the Ditch, for an instance of their Sincerity to surrender, I would continue
the setting up of my Ladders; after which, they were not to hope for Quarter.
Several of them obeyed, and we saw the Harquebuzes in the Air, falling into the
Ditch. By this being assured of their intention, I confirmed the first
assurance of fair Quarter, with my farther Promises of good usage: I required
to have the Gate opened at that instant, my Impatience not being satisfied with
their calling from the place that they were actually at work upon clearing of
it: For I was apprehensive, that some alteration might happen by the delay. But
to appease me, they let down a Man by a Cord, who came to assure me from the
Governor, That they used the utmost diligence to deliver themselves into my
Hands. In a moment of time the Gate was opened, and old Sanchez Ximenez, who
had been Governor for above Twenty five Years, came and delivered the Keys
into my possession. I gave him all the Comfort I could, in the good usage I
showed him, by giving him, and his Officers, their Liberties, and among the
rest to, the President of the Isle of St. Martha, who happened to be at that
time in the Fort, and to be wounded: Moreover, I permitted the Governor to
carry away whatsoever belonged to him; and the next Day he retired, with his
Domestics and Slaves, to his Country-Houses, on the other side of the Lake.

This piece of Success did not stand me in above Fifty Men, therein
comprehending all the several Bodies, as Grenadiers, Soldiers, Inhabitants of
the Coasts, Negroes, and Buccaniers. The Garrison being Prisoners of War, were
confined. La Roche du Vigier, that commanded the Grenadiers, I made Governor;
to whom, besides Cannoniers, and other necessary Workmen, I left the Soldiers
of the Coast for his Garrison. By this I put him into a Condition of defending
me, if occasion were. The Enemies Garrison did consist of about Three hundred
Men, whereof Two hundred and Ten remained fit for Service, the rest were either
killed or wounded in the Bombardment, Cannonading, and Attack.

On the Seventeenth we re-embark'd all that we had on Shore, toward the main
Sea, and began to work our selves into the Lake, but the careful transporting
of our Ammunition and Provision being of the highest consequence, and could
only be counted safe in the Lake, I resolved not to stir, until they were got
in: For which Reason I was obliged to defer our March until the next Day, to
the second Fort, that was about two Leagues and a half from us, called St.
Croix; the taking of which was not less necessary to enable our Ships to come
within Cannon-shot of Carthagena, than that of Boccachica, to facilitate the
entrance into the Lake.

My intention all along was to cut off the Avenues of Carthagena, so soon as it
was possible, by securing the Post of Nostre Dame de la Pouppe; to which
purpose, I had in the Morning sent away the Brigantin, Traversiers, and
Chaloups, necessary for the carrying of the Buccaniers, which I ordered upon
this Expedition, for the Reasons beforementioned. Du Casse fearing that a long
troublesome March might bring his Contusion into a Wound, refused to charge
himself with the Command: His Major, that had formerly served with those
Pirates, and was at present in a considerable Employ, ought to have had this
Command; but he likewise distrusted his Health: Thus there was only Daunou
left, who was no ways agreeable to them, as well by reason of his Misfortune,
in not having acquired on the Coast of St. Domingo, either the Esteem or Love
of any Body; as likewise, upon the account of his being Lieutenant-Governour in
a place where they never make any stay; so they could not be persuaded, that he
had any Right to command them: However, it was necessary I should make use of
him, for want of another. I disposed all things for it, delivered him his
Instructions, and even made most of them embark in my Presence; yet no sooner
was my Back turned, but he came running with Tears in his Eyes, to demand
Justice upon their Insolence, for pressing them to go into the Boats, that
attended on them, it was murmured about, That they did not know him, neither
would they obey him: In short, they refused to embark; whereupon he took one of
them by the Arm, to push him into the Canoa, which the Fellow had the Impudence
to return, very insolently. I forthwith ordered the Delinquent to be showed to
me, and upon the spot, I had him tied to a Tree, a Confessor was called, a
Cloth bound over his Eyes, and the Musketeers were marching to do Justice on
him; when Daunou, whom 'twas very necessary for me to reconcile to the
Buccaniers, having beforehand instructed him what he was to do, threw himself
at my Feet, protesting, he would not rise, until I had bestowed Mercy on the
unfortunate Offender. I seemed to be very difficult, upon the Account of good
Order; but at length, at the pressing Desires of the Company, I gave him his
Life. And much trouble there was, to revive the Condemned; who could not
believe, that it was possible for him to be alive again, after the Ceremony of
binding his Eyes.

Being desirous to put an end to this Affair, I went to the nearest Vessel,
where Captain Pierre was embarked; who was, as I had been informed, the first
Beginner of the Mutiny; but, in the time of bringing the Fellow to Execution,
he had considered the Matter, and was marched on Board with his Buccaniers; I
commanded him to be immediately dragged out, and put into my Canoa, and ordered
him to prepare to die: But there appearing from the rest of the Company, many
signs of Submission, and Acclamations of, God save the King, I at last resolved
to forgive the Offense; yet, withal, threatening to decimate them, upon the
least Complaint that Daunou should make of their misbehaviour.

This Usage, so different from the Cajolements they had been accustomed to
receive, from those that made use of them; did me very good Service, during the
whole time they were under me, so as to make 'em tolerably obedient to Daunou;
yet not to the exposing themselves to the Dangers of Fire and Sword: For having
without trouble possessed themselves of Nostre Dame de la Pouppe, that was
utterly abandoned by the Enemy; and believing, that upon their approach to the
little Fort of S. Lazare, between La Pouppe, and Carthagena, they might happen
to frighten the Garrison to retire from thence also, he proposed this Attempt
to them; but it was to no purpose: And in a Council where he did not preside,
they resolved to attend my coming, encamped in the Wood, at the foot of the
Fort; where they got about Thirty Hours before me.

On the Seventeenth, all the Ships being drawn into Order, at the entrance into
the Lake, they passed it in the Morning of the Eighteenth. The Diep Flyboat
touched; the great many Banks of Sand in the Lake, which our Pilots did not
know, was the occasion we did not advance very much that Day: The Apollo ran
a-ground this Day; but these Banks being only Sand and Ouse, mingled with a
very fine Turf, there was no fear of danger.

In the mean time, being sure of having the Ships suddenly follow me, we began
our March by Break of Day; and for Security against all Hazards, took two Days
Provision with us for the Forces, which was dignified with the Title of the
Land-Army: This, after the departure of the Six hundred and fifty Buccaniers,
that were gone to the other side, and the Garrison of One hundred and seventy
Men remaining behind us in the Fort of Boccachica, might consist of about One
thousand seven hundred Men, not including some Seamen, One hundred and ten
Inhabitants of St. Domingo formed into Companies, Fifteen or Twenty Volunteers,
that followed Du Casse, and One hundred and eighty Negroes.

I was obliged to defer making use of my Seamen, until the Ships were arrived,
and had taken their Stations: The smallness of our Forces was no discouragement
to us. The Marines especially, being highly pleased with the execution of a
Business, in which they had never before been employed, did apply themselves
with all imaginable Diligence and Good Will, every one of them cheerfully
undertaking whatsoever was appointed to him.

After we had crossed the Mountains covered with Woods, which the Negroes
examined before us, we met with the Plain, that is here and there covered with
Shrub-wood, and at Noon came to an old ruined Castle, within half a Mile of St.
Croix: Here we rested the Troops; and besides the Pits, that are there easily
made in the Sand, and afford indifferent good Water, we had the good Fortune to
find a great Cistern that was a mighty Convenience to us. After this
Refreshment, the Vicount de Coetlogon, whose Day it was, marched on with a part
of the Grenadiers, to observe how we might encamp as near as possible to the
Fort, and to seize upon the Passages that are in those Marshes, that encompass
the Fort; in the mean time we continued our March, not being able to leave the
Shore, because the Lake approaching, in diverse places, within a few paces of
the Sea, permits you the choice of that way only, until we came down from the
Mountains, below which the Island is pretty spacious. This way having brought
us within Cannon-shot of the Bastion of Carthagena, called S. Domingo, we
struck short off to the right, by a way that the Marsh leaves cross the low
Woods, called Maugliers, that grow in the Water.

In this place I was informed by the Officers that Coetlogon sent me, that he
was at the foot of Fort S. Croix, which the Enemy had abandoned, having carried
off their Cannon, and set fire to the Lodgements that were there; likewise,
that some part of the Forces might encamp upon a Spot of Ground about the Fort,
but that the rest must be left in the way worn near the Fort by a Rill of Water
running from the neighboring Marshes; that the bottom was good, and the Water
not above Knee-deep, which would no ways prevent a communication.

Levy, the Major General, and my self, with some Grenadiers, were in the mean
time so near advanced to Carthagena, as easily to observe, that the place could
not be attacked on one side, the Marshes and Sea not leaving there a Sandy
space of about twenty Fathom over, which was exposed to the fire of three
Bastions; besides, there was no sinking two Foot deep, without being in Water.
The great Number of People that we saw on the Ramparts, who quietly looked on
us, made me desirous to summon them; the Governor was there, and answered my
Drum, That he was ready to defend himself better than we could attack him.

We could not exactly discern the foot of the Rampart; and being desirous to
know, if there was a Ditch, I ordered De Bresme, whose Battalion was encamped
at the least distance from it, to examine at Night how it was; which he
performed very well, and assured me, That the Water of the Marsh went up even
to the foot of the Walls, and that there was only a small dry space of Sand,
that environed part of the great Bastion called S. Domingo, and that on the
other side, the Sea came up to the foot of this Bastion. This Report made us
conclude, not to attack Carthagena in this place.

The next Day, being the Nineteenth, so soon as it was Day, we crossed the
Lake, with much diligence: Pally, that commanded the Negroes, whom I had
ordered to seek out a convenient place of descent, having assured me, that he
had found out two, which came almost up to the great way; I immediately passed
over with Levy, Sorel, and the Grenadiers of the Battalion of de la Chenau,
being conducted by some Prisoners, that Pally had taken on Board of a Pereagoe,
which had endeavored to get from Carthagena: These Prisoners, in hopes of
being the better treated, had offered themselves for our Guides; and, indeed,
led us very nigh to the foot of the Eminency, upon which Fort St. Lazare is
situated. At this place we found the Buccaniers, (Daunou had left a Detachment
of 'em to guard Nostre Dame de la Pouppe) Coetlogon, La Motte Michel, and La
Motte d'Heran, whom I had left at S. Croix, to bring away the rest of the
Troops, as the Chaloups came to them; insomuch, that we were all got together
by Break of Day next Morning, leaving only a Sergeant, and Twenty Men, in Fort
S. Croix, with Orders to keep the Gate always shut, that and the Situation
being sufficient to prevent the Enemy from repossessing themselves of it.

We had in the Evening of the Nineteenth Day, viewed all the places adjacent to
St. Lazare, and perceived, that without getting it into our possession, it
would not be possible to advance a step toward Carthagena, by reason it
commands all the Avenues: We beheld, with much trouble, the time it must cost
us, if we attacked it in Form, and brought our Artillery to batter it. This
whole little Mountain is defended with a natural Glacis, very steep, covered
with Shrubwood, which runs up to the foot of the Wall, where we supposed was a
Ditch; the Wood being extremely thick, and very difficult to pass, prevented us
from going to it; upon which I ordered the Chevalier de Pointis, to seek out
two Negroes to examine the Matter; but understanding to what purpose I sent for
them, he betook himself to the Wood, at the same time he sent them to me; which
he crossed in the best manner he could, until he took hold of the very Wall;
the Negroes went almost as fast as he, and then came to assure me, that the
Ground was level to the foot of the Fort: The Chevalier de Pointis quietly
heard their Report, which being exactly true, he said not a word of what he had
done. In all this occasion, there was only a Grenadier killed upon our return.

Upon the next Day, being the Twentieth, Levy, Coetlogon, and Sorel, having got
up to an Eminency, that was above all the others, sent to me, to come to them;
from whence they showed me, that the Fort did not take up (as we had imagined)
all the Eminency, which extended a good distance farther to the right; and,
that if we could make a Way, through the Wood, to that height, we might
afterward go upon a level from thence to the foot of the Fort, all the way,
being covered with Woods; and that we could fix a Miner to it, if the Garrison
should resolve not to quit it. Upon this, I ordered the Major General to call
to Arms, and having called the Negroes to me at the moment I came down, I put
them to work upon cutting of a Way, to facilitate the March of the Troops; this
was carried on half way up the Hill, where dividing the Way, to encompass the
Fort, Levy marched to the right, Coetlogon to the left, and the Major General
visited every place as his Presence was requisite. This Work being found
shorter than what we had expected, we arrived at the foot of the Fort in a very
little time, where we made the greatest Fire that was possible for us to make,
at the same time calling out for the Ladders; not that we expected to use them,
but to terrify the Garrison; however, I sent for the Miner in good earnest.

During which time, the Enemy made no great Fire, by reason we made our Shot
upon them, so soon as they exposed their Bodies to view. They had for a good
while perceived, that we were piercing through the Wood; and we understood, by
the sounding of a Bell, how much every step we made increased their trouble.
This Bell was a Signal to the City, to acquaint them with their Condition; at
first it struck only now and then, keeping sounding more and more by degrees,
until at length it rung full out, when their fear gave them occasion to think
they would be attacked on all sides; which had effectually happened, if they
had not chose rather to retire, for the Quarter toward the Gate was then free
to them.

In this manner we possessed our selves of the Fort: In the place there was
only nine killed and wounded. On our side, the Chevalier de Vezins, that
commanded the Grenadiers, since La Roche du Vigier was made Governor of
Boccachica, was killed, with five Grenadiers; Simmonet, Colonel of a Battalion,
dangerously hurt in the Head, and St. Lazare, Captain of Grenadiers, wounded in
the Thigh.

The taking of St. Lazare, giving us the liberty to open our selves, we crossed
the way, and advanced our Camp to the Chapel of St. Lazare Hospital, which is
a great breadth; being covered on one side, with several little Canals, that
have a communication with the Lake; and on the other, by a high thick Wall,
which besides the Trees that covered us, did prevent the Bastions of the City
from discerning the place we possessed; the killed and wounded that we had,
were only by chance Balls: In the mean time, this little Chapel gave us the
opportunity of going covered within a small Musket Shot of the place, which is
not above that distance from it.

Whilst we were thus employed, the Ships, by the care of Du Buisson, were come
nearer to the Town; insomuch, that in the Morning, a Bomb-Galliot with a
Mortar, and a Traversier, were moored, and began to fire. In the Evening the
Traversier was obliged to retire, being shot through with several Balls, and
ready to sink; Bois Pinault, Lieutenant of the Artillery, commanded her; De
Mons was in the Galliot, which likewise suffered so much, that she was also
obliged to retire a little; besides, she had a great many killed on Board her;
but the strength of these Vessels enabling them to endure a great deal of Fire,
she began again in the Morning of the Twenty first of the same Month.

My chief Ingenier was wounded, and ill; whereby I was obliged to execute that
Function. The Officers of the Marine, which I had formed into Brigades, had
only their own Readiness to enable them to execute every thing, which could not
supply the want of Practice and Judgment. I had, by good Luck, at the first,
agreed with the Major General, where to begin the Opening and Advancement of
the Trenches. I had, moreover, designed the Batteries of Cannons and Mortars,
and given Orders for the things necessary to the Works; by which means, the
Accident that happened to me a few Hours afterward, did not much interrupt our
Proceedings: In the mean time, all Hands were at work, the Soldiers upon
Fascines and Gabions, the Seamen upon landing the Artillery; in the drawing of
which, the Hundred and eighty Negroes were a mighty assistance to us: For as to
the Buccaniers, we were never able to make the least use of them; and the share
which they ought to have performed of the Work, falling upon others, who were
by this means over-wrought, did not a little contribute to the causing of those
Distempers, which so lamentably reigned among us afterward.

Our small number, and the great many things to be done, forced us to keep the
Troops with their Arms in one hand, and their Working-Tools in the other, the
Soldiers were at one and the same time, both on the Guard, and working; the
nearness of the Woods, on whose sides we were encamped, were a great
convenience to us: For when we drew out our Troops, they left their Arms upon
that spot, and went to the Wood with their Tools; and upon the first Beat of
Drum, they quitted their Tools, and running to their Arms, were immediately in
a Condition of marching; the Battalion of Grenadiers, was ever at the Head of
the Camp, to sustain whatsoever might be presented; and that was sufficient, by
reason the disposition of the Ground was such, that the Camp was on all parts
inaccessible, but on that only toward the City.

Nor were they less diligent on Board the Fleet: Du Buisson caused the Scepter
to advance, commanded by Guilotin, the Saint Lewis by Sabran, and the
Vermandois, aboard which he commanded; with these Ships he made up toward the
City, notwithstanding the Spaniards had purposely sunk a Galleon to render the
passage difficult: We were obliged to leave on Board these Ships that were to
fight, a great many Seamen to work the Guns; which diminished the number of
those employed upon the Disimbarkment, and transporting of the Artillery that
was necessary to us on Shore: It is hardly to be imagined, how so small a
parcel of our Men was able, in six Days to disimbark, draw half a League upon
Land, and bring into a State of Battery, Twenty seven of the greatest Cannon we
used, five Mortars, and all the Equipage necessary to the execution of both the
one and the other, besides the Provisions that we were obliged to bring to the
Camp; but it is true, that Du Tilleul being charged with this Care, attended it
with such application, that making use of the Seamen only at certain
Intervals, he constantly kept our Magazines filled with Provision and
Ammunition, without ever interrupting any other Business.

Our Affairs being in this State, and having, moreover, raised a Mortar to
prevent the Enemy from going on with a Work, that we perceived they had begun
upon a Platform over the Gate: We having twice neglected to throw up a
Breast-work that I had marked out; and fearing, least at the third time there
might not be something farther necessary to be done, that might occasion a
delay, I resolved to continue my Presence there until it was perfected; my stay
inconsiderately brought a great many Officers, this number of People being
moreover remarkable for their Clothes, drew upon us the Enemies Fire, and
particularly that of their Cannon, with Hail-shot, by which I was wounded; my
hurt was more painful than dangerous, yet I was very fearful that this Accident
might discourage our Men, which indeed was too apparent at first: Moreover, I
was apprehensive, least the Officers, whom I had by good Fortune maintained in
a perfect Union hitherto, should not continue the same, which would have been
detrimental to our Design: I resolved therefore, to struggle with the Pain
which I felt; insomuch, that after the Third Day I was carried into every part
that I could have visited in another Condition: But during that interval, I
committed all things that I could not inspect, to the Care of Levy; who
certainly acquitted himself to a degree above all manner of Praise;
indefatigable, full of Expedients and Contrivances for the Work; neglectful of
his Rest, and his Meals; he was everywhere, and forwarded every thing, with an
incredible vigor.

The Vicount de Coetlogon, was to have commanded the Artillery; but I was
over-joyed to understand, that his Inclinations were rather to enter, with the
rest, into the general Service; this gave me an opportunity of choosing several
Persons, to manage the Artillery, who did their Duty with more expedition than
would have been possible for any single Man to have done: So he had the Guard
only of the Battery of five Cannons of Twelve and Eighteen Pounders, which he
raised at the foot of Fort St. Lazare; in which Fort we had got mounted Seven
Pieces of Twelve, Eight, and Six, that terribly shattered the Bastions of the
place. Mornay, Commander of the Pontchartrain, was in the Fort with his Ship's
Company; the Chevalier De la Motte d'Heran, took upon him the Care of a great
Battery of nine Guns, that was likewise upon the same Eminency with the Fort,
but more to the right than the first: La Motte Michel, had the Charge of that
we called, The Royal Battery, consisting of six Pieces of Thirty six, and
Twenty four, planted Sixty Fathoms distant from the Gate, and designed to make
the Breach: Gombaud played the Mortars, which he had been exercised in from his
Youth, and doubtless never any did better execution than these; for one would
have thought the Bombs had been placed by Hand, in the places where they were
designed to fall. These Mortars were placed between the Batteries of the
Cannon, in such manner, that as soon as they began to play, the place was on
fire in several parts at once; the Galliot was at work on her side, but the
Bombs she spent the first Days, were of little or no effect.

The Twenty first, Twenty second, Twenty third, and Twenty fourth, were
employed in transporting the Cannon, and getting together the things necessary;
the Vermandois only was advanced to Cannonade the Town; but I being informed,
that she being alone, did solely bear the whole Fire of a Bastion, that could
conveniently reach her; I ordered her to retire, and to wait for the other
Ships that were to go on with her; we were likewise constrained to bring away
two small Cannons that we had raised in the Chapel of St. Lazare, without any
other Parapet than the Wall, upon which the Enemy making an extraordinary Fire,
rendered this Post untenable, we brought off the Cannon with the loss of eight
or ten Men.

Canette, although wounded, returned to the Camp on this Day, being the Twenty
fourth; and I continued to regulate, upon my Bed, with him, what was necessary
to be done. In the Evening of the same Day, he opened the Trench a little below
the Door of the Chapel of St. Lazare, where we were under cover, being the
same place I had agreed upon with the Major General. Levy, whose Day it was,
did not Command, by reason he was entrusted with the General Management of the
Siege in my stead: Coetlogon mounted the Guard in the Trench, which was
advanced the same Night Seventy two Fathoms, being as far as was necessary to
attack the City-Gate, when the Breach should be perfectly made. The following
Days the Captains took their turns, according to their places, and mounted
every Twenty four Hours; the Batteries were likewise brought into a condition
for Service, and on the Twenty eighth begun to play, our Fire, until then,
being only from some little Pieces that were mounted in haste. The Enemies
Fire, which had always been very moderate, grew now something slower; for the
Bombs, and the Cannon of the Fort, and the Hill, had dismounted several of
their Pieces; yet they troubled us less with their Sallies, for they did not so
much as attempt to make one in the whole Siege.

At this time, a Bark sent from Porto Bello, by the General of the Galleons, to
the Governor of Carthagena, not knowing what passed in this place, came
quietly into Boccachica, and fell into the hands of the Avenant, and Marin,
that I had left there, who took her with their Canoes: The Letters on Board
her, were in Answer to those which the Governor of Carthagena had sent to the
General, informing him, that the French Fleet was upon the Coast; they
contained a particular of the Precautions that were used to secure the
Galleons, viz. By bringing them to the very lower end of the Port, and
defending the approach to them by an Estoccade of Piles, and Platforms of
Cannon: They added farther, That part of the Silver which they had, was already
brought into the Castles; for that they had suspended their Resolutions of
sending it back to Panama, until they had received some farther Information of
our Designs; which the General pressed the Governor to send him immediately,
either by the same Bark, or a second, that was to come away in Four and twenty
Hours after the first: But what most acquainted us with the miserable Condition
they were in, was the earnest Desires of the General, in the most pressing
Terms, to send him fifty Pullets, and some Quintals of white Biskit.

Although the Batteries, as I said, were not in a Condition to fire, until the
Twenty eighth, yet that designed to make the Breach, was played so
successfully, by La Motte Michel, Siglas, Longjoue, and some other Officers
under him, assisted by the Gunner of the Scepter, that on the Twenty ninth in
the Morning, the Wall seemed to totter; our Fire had not been discontinued,
because of the Night, but it increased so much in the Day, that in the Evening
the Front of the Rampart being quite fallen down, Levy, and Sorel, who would
lose no time, imagined the Breach was passable, and came to propose the Assault
to me. I was resolved neither to lose, nor neglect a Minute; but likewise
determined not to hazard any thing upon ill Grounds: I ordered to Arms, and
disposed all things for an Assault; yet resolving not to engage before I judged
it feasible: In short, Night being come, whilst we prepared our selves, the
Chevalier de Pointis passing up to the Armpits in Water, over the little Marsh
upon which the Causey, and the Bridge, that communicates with the City, are
built, went to view the Breach. He assured me, That the Wall was indeed very
much ruined; but that it was not possible, as yet, to mount it without Ladders.

The Chevalier de Ferriere, Captain of a Fire-ship, who was at the Head of the
Brigade of Ingeniers, that I had sent to observe the Condition of the wooden
Bridge, (which the Enemy had endeavored to blow up, by running under it a
Pereagoe filled with Powder) brought me word, That the Bridge had suffered; yet
might not be altogether unserviceable to us: And, that the Gate beyond it,
which we imagined was beat down by the Cannon, was strongly terrass'd on the
inside; of this he was positively certain, by reason he had put his Hand into
the Holes which the Cannon had made, and therefore there was no hopes of
carrying the place by that; but that the Breach must be passed, to the foot of
which he could not get from the place where he was; and that it was, by all
that he could perceive in the Night, but little advanced.

These two Officers were too well known, to doubt of their having been where
they said they were: Moreover, Canette told me, he was not quite ready; that
all the Gabions, and Fascines, which he had got together, were spent; and, that
if by chance we should find so much resistance as to be obliged to lodge upon
the Breach, we should not be able to do it, our Earth-sacks being at the
Lake-side, for want of Hands to bring them; that there were two little Flanks
unruin'd, that would destroy a great many Men in the Attack; all these Reasons
engaged me to dismiss the Troops from their Duty, and we agreed not to make the
Assault until the first of the next Month; in the mean time, to employ both
Night and Day in the finishing of the Breach, and to get together all such
things as would be necessary upon that occasion.

Upon the Twenty ninth, Du Buisson being advanced with the three Ships,
Scepter, St. Lewis, and Vermandois, within a small Cannon-shot of the City,
they fired upon it with all their Artillery; but seeing it only reached the
tops of the Houses, and my Business being to have two Bastions silenced that
annoyed my Camp, I sent to let them know, That when they were retired in the
Evening, they should wait new Orders before they begun again.

In the mean time, we prepared our selves for the Business of the next Day; the
Order of Attack I had regulated with the Major General, in this manner:

A Sergeant, with ten Grenadiers, should begin, sustained by the Company of
Grenadiers on Guard, there being always one at the Head of the Trench; the
whole Body of Grenadiers were likewise to advance to the Head of it, to sustain
the first, and to precede a Battalion, in whose Rear should be Canette, the
Chevalier de Ferriere, du Crest, Coursy, and One hundred and fifty Workmen,
with the Sub-Ingeniers, and all necessary Implements; after whom should follow
the same number of Buccaniers and Negroes. The Head of the Trench was twenty
Fathom distant from the little Ravelin, that in some sort covers the Bridge,
whose Wall was so low, that it might have been passed, if it had not been
easier to pass through a single Barrier that was there, and these Troops filled
all the Trench, unto the Gate of the Chapel: All the rest of the Battalions
were posted according to their Ranks, within the Close of the Hospital, to
march into the Trench as fast as the first Troops advanced out of it, to the
Attack, and to follow 'em up, and sustain 'em. I recommended to Major Thesut,
in particular, the good Order which these Battalions were to observe, to the
end, that too much Precipitation might not cause Confusion in their March, nor
too much Slowness occasion as much Inconveniency by any Interval being left
open.

All things were thus regulated for the next Day, when Du Casse, whose Day it
was, came to tell me, about Three a Clock, That he saw the Breach from the Head
of the Trench, plainly enough to assure me, that it was passable; that he
believed the Enemies were at work behind, in throwing up a Retrenchment. A
delay, in this case, would have been so very inconvenient to me, by reason of
the time I should have given the Enemies, to finish their Work, that I
forthwith resolved to attack the Enemies at that instant, provided I found the
Breach to be as it was described to me. I was the more inclined to believe it,
by being informed on all Hands, in the Morning, with the good Effects of the
Royal Battery, which at every Discharge brought prodigious Ruins from the
Wall; and, at the worst, I could not be more ashamed in retiring, if things
should not appear in the Condition reported, than I had been the Night before.

I immediately sent for Levy, the Major General, Canette, and some other
Officers, that were gone to Nostre Dame de la Pouppe, to discover from that
place the Condition of the Town; but hearing a general Alarm beaten, they
presently returned; and being informed what was to be done, every one of them
ran to give the necessary Orders to what belonged to him. The Troops at work in
the Woods, being called by the Drums, instantly came to their Arms, and put
themselves into order; there was only a small Body in the Trench, that were not
exactly placed where they were to be; but the Major General disposed of them
with all possible Expedition: At which time Nesmond, Poullermont, La Linde, Du
Che, and Rochebonne, who (as I said before) chose rather to serve as my Aids de
Camps, than to be employed in any other Service, not knowing but that the
Troops were in perfect order, came to acquaint me, That every thing was ready,
and that they waited for my Orders to march: I gave it, imagining like the
rest, that all the Wall was fallen.

The Order was immediately carried by my Aids de Camp; who having all
undertaken to deliver it, took that occasion to run to the head of the Trench,
Du Tilleul only, that could not be any where else, was with me; Du Casse was on
his Day in the Trench; but Levy being the eldest of all, and this Action being
regarded as a General Affair, by reason all were employed in it, put himself at
the Head, and gave the Motion to the Troops to begin, at the moment he received
the Order; which was as suddenly executed, as it was speedily carried.

What ought to have been a great Advantage, had like to have caused a great
Inconveniency; the Officers, notwithstanding the Remonstrances that had been
made them, upon the necessity of each of them being at his Post, to see the
Troops perform their Duty; carried on by their Courage, the greatest part of
them advanced before the Troops, and assaulted the Breach with Sword in Hand,
without observing how they were followed; and the Troops, unprovided of
Leaders, did indeed march on, but slower than the Safety of their Officers
required, who remained for a considerable time exposed upon the Breach which
they had gained. We were all deceived in our Reckoning, for it was the steepest
way imaginable: The Grenadiers, who were ordered not to fire, could not abstain
from it, when they came to be exposed out of the Trench, and to suffer the Fire
of the Ramparts; but the time they employed to Re-charge, detaining them in the
way between the Trench and the Breach, was the reason of their Officers being
alone at the top: Levy repaired the inconveniency of this Accident so soon as
it was possible, by hastening on the Troops, as likewise by his Words and his
Actions. In the mean time, the Chevalier de Pointis, who had first mounted, was
in an instant joined by Gougon, Jaucourt, and Marolles, whose Battalion was on
the Trench-Guard; Day, Vignancourt, Montrosier, Du Rollon, Vaujoux, young
Marolles, Marigny, Fouilleuse, and my Aids de Camp: They endeavored to
maintain themselves, notwithstanding all the Efforts of the Enemy, who were
attacked at the time they least expected it; yet not being dismayed, they
attempted to drive us off with Sword and Pike. Marolles, and Du Rollon, were
already mortally wounded, and upon the Ground; Fouilleuse had his Leg broke,
Gougon, Montrosier, young Marolles, Marigny, Day, and Moussac, were all
wounded; some shot, others hurt with Pikes; some of them had several Wounds, as
Montrosier, and Vaujoux; when at length Levy, and the Grenadiers, came to their
assistance, and repulsed the Enemy; who rallying nevertheless at the end of the
Streets, were several times charged before they could be driven off. Du Casse,
not so nimble as the rest, although one of the first at the foot of the Breach,
maugre all his Good Will, had so much trouble to climb it, that he was out of
Breath by that time he got to the top, where he thought he should never recover
his Wind. He was followed by fifteen or twenty Volunteers, Inhabitants of the
Coast, who did very good Service; for firing upon such of the Enemies as were
yet upon the Ramparts, behind two little Flankers that fired upon the Bridge,
and very much annoyed our Troops; they at length obliged them to follow those
that were driven from the Platform, where the Breach ended; the Major General,
who at the bottom of the Breach was wounded by a Musket-Ball in the Neck,
followed by Baraudin, one of his Aids, and Francin, Captain of Grenadiers with
his Arm broken, notwithstanding mounted the Breach together; but the Captain's
strength failing, so soon as he was up, he was forced to be brought off, for
the same reason the Major General was not able to make a much longer stay.

All the Troops defiling in the mean time one after another, I found my self at
last rid of all Uneasiness for the Success of an Action, that may, with
Modesty, be termed very bold, and very extraordinary, for Seafaring Men.

A Party of the Negroes of Pally, who conducted them, in defiling off to the
Ramparts on the left, pushed the Enemy from Bastion to Bastion, unto the Causey
that divides this part of the City, particularly called Hihimani, from the
other called by the general Name of Carthagena; but the Buccaniers to exempt
themselves from the Attack of the Breach, had consulted the Matter upon the
Bridge, and the little Causey of Hihimani, and resolved to line the Hedge
over against the Ramparts, where they made an extraordinary Fire, not
perceiving the part they chose out of fear, was much more dangerous than that
they endeavored to avoid: But by good Fortune for them, the Enemy was driven
from off those Ramparts, and those Indian Heroes adventured to enter, when they
thought the Business was pretty well at an end; yet were they a little mistaken
in this Account: For the Enemy, after having stood firm at all the Corners of
the Streets, were at length driven to the Causey of Hihimani, toward
Carthagena, into which they designed to retreat; but the Governor, who perhaps
feared, that upon opening the Gates we might enter Pell-mell with his People,
plainly told them, That he would not let them in, until they had attacked us in
Hihimani: So after the loss of about 800 Men, urged by necessity, and possibly
the Wine they had drunk, infusing fresh Courage into them; they got together in
a Crowd, and with a great Cry came and charged us at the Head of the great
Street, which ends at the Causey: We had just begun to cast up a Retrenchment
there, and the Troops not having time to bring themselves into Order, surpised
with this Attack, moved a little backwards, to cover themselves with the Houses
of the Streets which crossed that: But while Levy, and the Officers, brought
them into order, which was instantly done, Vignancourt, the Chevalier de
Pointis, Gougon, and Jaucourt, with a small number of Grenadiers, sustained
this impetuous Attack; but the Troops being brought back to the Charge, made a
very great slaughter of the Enemies; above 150 were found the next Day upon the
Causey, pierced with Bayonets, besides those that went off wounded: In this
Charge the Vicount de Coetlogon was wounded with a Musket-Ball in the Shoulder,
who was come hither from the Battery, accompanied by De la Motte Michel, and De
la Motte d'Heran; his Wound did not at first appear to be considerable, but by
weakening of him, it contributed to his Death, caused by a malignant Fever; and
here the Chevalier de Pointis, after having passed through so many Dangers, to
which he exposed himself, received the Wound he died of; the Marquis Du Boury
was at this time likewise hurt in his Face, St. Amant on the Side, and many
other Officers received Contusions.

The Enemy being drove back again were received by a little Port into
Carthagena; we applied our selves in Hihimani, to making of Retrenchments at
all the Avenues, to secure us from Surprises, and to permit our Troops to pass
the Night quietly, in the convenient Lodgings of a handsome City; the Fire of
the Enemies Cannon killed some Men in this Work, that were commanded by the
Chevalier de la Ferriere, du Crest, and Coursy, under the direction of Canette,
about Ten at Night all was in good order.

In this Action I lost about sixty Men, and had some more than that number
wounded, without comprehending the Officers beforementioned.

It was resolved to rest the Troops, the next Day being the first of May, and
to work only upon the opening of the Gate, and repairing of the Bridge for the
passage of the great Cannon, with which we designed to beat down the Rampart we
had to pass, before we could enter into the other part of the City. Canette
went in the Morning early, to view the places of Battery that were to be
raised, and having showed them to me in the Evening, I found them so near the
Wall, that I did not doubt making a very considerable Breach in a very little
time; this whole Causey, and that part of the Marsh which divides Carthagena,
are not a Musket Shot over.

This Day I sent on Board the Scepter, St. Lewis, and the Vermandois, a part of
the Detachment of Seamen, called Scythe-men, by reason of the small Scythes
fixed upon Staffs, which they had for their Arms; I ordered these Ships to
endeavor again the next Day, to ruin the Defenses of a Bastion that could
hurt us more than the others. About Three a Clock, on the Second, they began to
Cannonade; in the mean time we put all things into a readiness, toward the
bringing of the great Cannon into Hihimani; this Cannonading continued until
Six; when at the sight of four white Flags flying, two on Hihimani side, and
the others toward the Sea, I ordered the Ships to forbear firing, until I knew
the Intentions of the Besieged. They told Du Casse, who by the means of a
little Spanish, run himself into all things, That they were willing to
capitulate upon honorable Terms. I sent them word, That before I entered upon
it, I expected Hostages that very moment, without giving any other Assurance
than my Parole, to return them the next Day, in case we did not agree upon
Terms. This hard Condition was accepted; which plainly showed me, that the
Enemies were straightened. In short, the Precedent of Hihimani terrified them,
and the Bombs permitted them no manner of rest; so they brought me two of the
most considerable Men amongst them. At this instant I received Advice from two
places of 1000, or 1200 Men, being upon their March to throw themselves into
Carthagena: An Indian was the first that brought me this Account; which was
afterward confirmed to me, by a Letter from a Lieutenant at Boccachica; who
seeking for fresh Provisions in the Country, had been besieged in one of the
Houses of Don Sanchez Ximenez, defended by his People against a small
Detachment of that Body on their March. The Indian said, That he had been among
the Troops; who knowing that we possessed the common Highway, did design to go
round the great Lake, and passing afterward through By-ways into the little
Lakes that lie about Carthagena, to go on a long the Seaside, and get into the
City by the Bastions of St. Catherine. I immediately ordered a-shoar all the
Scythe-men, and Seamen, that could possibly be spared, who were also provided
with Arms; these were set to guard the Batteries, for all the Artillery was as
yet there. I detached Du Casse with 500 Buccaniers, and a Battalion of 300
Soldiers, to stop the passage of these Succors; he posted himself amongst the
little Lakes, where the Enemies would be obliged to come; and the advantage of
the place wherein he was posted, enabled him to have given a very good Account
of them. The next Day I sent Daunou with a less number, being informed it would
be sufficient to repel the Succors, in case it should be attempted; but they
did not appear, neither did I ever know the Reasons of it.

In the mean time we were employed upon the Capitulation. Du Casse, ever an
importunate Advocate for the Spaniards, continually tormented me, to mitigate
the Conditions I imposed upon them; but being not only charged with the support
of the Honor due to His Majesty's Arms, but having likewise my Undertakers
Interests to manage, I stood firm to my Demands, although an infinite number of
Reasons might have occasioned me to be more impatient than any Body else, to
have this Affair determined. At length I proposed to the Governor, the
honorable Articles of passing out through the Breach, with all those carrying
Arms, Drums beating, to take four Pieces of Cannon; and as to the rest, it was
agreed, That all the Silver, without Exception, or Reserve, in favor of
whomsoever it might be, should belong to me; that the Effects of all such as
went out, or were absent, of whatsoever Nature the said Effects were, should
devolve to me; that such of the Inhabitants as would continue in the place,
excepting their Plate, should enjoy all their Possessions and Privileges, and
for the future be regarded as the King's Subjects, being they were so by
Conquest: And farther, that all the Churches and Convents should be preserved.

This Matter agreed on, I demanded until such time as the Governor marched
out, which could not be in some Days, that they should deliver me up one of the
Gates; which they did, and I ordered the Grenadiers to it. I had regulated what
every Man, according to his Condition, was to carry out with him in Silver for
their Subsistence; to which, that I might not be imposed upon, I had added this
Condition, That I reserved to my self the liberty of searching the Men and
Baggage at the Gate. The Governor sent to desire I would permit, out of
Courtesy, (which was the Expression) the principal Officers, and some other
considerable Persons that I permitted to follow him, the double of what was
stipulated. This amounted unto 2000 Crowns a Head; but they being a small
number, I readily acquiesc'd to it, and was convinced by the Fervency of their
Acknowledgments, that it was really necessary to them.

It was of great consequence to me, that those who were allowed to retire where
they pleased, after the Garrison was marched out, should remain until they were
obliged to reveal what Sums they had in their Houses; therefore I was very
exact in my Measures, that no Body might escape: In the mean time, several
Officers went freely up and down the City; and Du Casse, whom I had declared
Governor, that they might believe I designed to keep the City, took upon him
to deliver to some People Certificates, that were not Pasports, yet had some
resemblance to them, by which those People passed the Gates, the Officers on
the Guard believing it was my Order. I do believe he had no ill Intention in
it, and I did attribute that manner of acting to the kindness he ever affected
to show to the Spaniards; yet common Report did not forbear saying, that he got
very considerable Sums; which I did not believe. However, I would not have it
thought, that I tolerated his Conduct; therefore I forbid him the continuance
of it: And this Order so much displeased him, that he never came afterward to
me.

The Governor delayed his departure all that he could; but at length I
acquainted him, That he must positively march out upon the Sixth, and that on
the same Day I would enter at the Head of the Troops; which was accordingly
executed. The Count Vgnez de los Rios, followed with his Garrison, being listed
Men, to the number of about 2800, marched out through a Lane of our Soldiers
and Seamen, (whom I had ordered on Shore to enlarge the number) Buccaniers,
Inhabitants of the Coast, and Negroes. We two were upon our Horses, and having
saluted me with his Sword, after some Expressions of Civility, he continued his
way with the City-Colours, and two of the four Cannon allowed him, not having
Equipage convenient for the exporting of the others; even these were the
smallest, and drawn by Men.

These People were narrowly searched as they came out; but when I was informed
of their Number, which was almost equal to ours; and perceiving that this
Search would bring the Night upon us, before we could dispatch them, I was
afraid, least the danger of losing a little Money, should occasion some
disorder when it was dark; so I sent my Orders to the Gates, to hasten their
March, without delaying of it by a Search, which produced little; and the
Garrison all marched out before Sunset. It was not without a great deal of
trouble, that I continued upon my Horse, to receive the Salute of the
Governor; but that being passed, I was obliged through the great pain of my
Wound, to get into my Chair, wherein I was used to be carried; in this
Condition, and in the midst of the Guards Marine, who were clothed alike, I
went (preceded by a Battalion of Grenadiers) to take possession of the City.

I was well assured there was Silver in Carthagena; but the difficulty was how
to get it: The worst that could happen to those in possession of it, was the
loss of it, when we had discovered it; it was therefore necessary to search all
the Houses: But by whom could it be done? With what Surety, that the best part
should not remain undiscovered? The number of Officers was not great enough, to
disperse them into all the necessary places; and if I would not have left any
thing, it must have required me above six Months time. In this perplexity I
bethought my self of this Expedient: I publicly declared, and ordered it to be
set up in the principal places, That I would give the Tenth to the Proprietors,
of whatsoever they honestly brought me; and a Tenth to them that should inform
me, of any Persons that did not declare their Effects. To these Promises I
joined my Threats, of punishing them for formal Disobedience.

The hopes of preserving a part of what was otherwise all in danger to be lost;
the fear of Neighbors, and ill Friends, who at the same time had the
opportunity of profiting and being troublesome, induced them all to be
ingenuous in the matter; which was done with so much forwardness, that Tilleul,
who was charged with the Treasure, was not able to receive and weigh the Silver
fast enough.

The Convents only were of the Opinion, that they were exempted from this
Search, under the Article of the Capitulation, that they should be preserved;
by this means they quietly kept both their own Money, and what was confided to
them. I ordered that Article to be explained to them, to the end they might
know, that the preservation of the Convents, consisted, in not permitting them
to be destroyed; but as to the Money, I had in formal Terms, reserved that to
my self: Otherwise they might have got together all the Riches of the City into
their Houses, to have deprived me of it. Notwithstanding these Reasons, several
of them continued so obstinate, and among the rest, Father Grenelli a Jesuit,
the Guardian, and Procurator of the Cordeliers, that I was forced to have them
secured, and to threaten them with worse usage. The Rector of the Jesuits
obeyed, and brought about Twenty thousand Crowns in Gold, that he found in the
Chamber of Father Grenelli, and about as much from the whole House besides; and
then desired, that I would order the House to be everywhere visited, by which
Conduct he engaged me to release his Religious. So soon as the Cordeliers
perceived that the Buccaniers were brought, who have a particular Talent at
discovering hidden Treasures, they protested, they were ready to reveal all
they had, so the Buccaniers retired; but when they were gone, the Reverend
Fathers fell into their first Silence; in short, I resolved to charge the
Captains with the Care of searching the Religious Houses, to the end the
Presence of these principal Officers might preserve all necessary Order and
Reservedness. This Search produced enough to make amends for the trouble it
gave us; and in regard to the Churches, prevented even the appearance of
Profanation. After I had severely commanded 'em not to touch any of the sacred
Vessels, or any thing appertaining to the Sacrifice, I ordered our Chaplains to
gather up what was only for the Decoration of the Churches. Father Paul, a
Dominican, who has (by I know not what Authority) given himself a sort of a
Mission among the Buccaniers; and usually living upon the Coast, had followed
the Army, and put himself among our Chaplains; aided them with a mighty Zeal to
execute my Orders, which seemed to him sufficiently just, in relation to the
other Convents; but when he was to go to the Dominicans, supported with the
Credit of Du Casse, he thought to have prevented this Visit; but seeing there
was no great Notice taken first of his Threats, nor afterward of his Prayers,
was then transported with horror at the profanation, and came running to
denounce upon me, from God Almighty, the Anger of Heaven; yet they did not
forbear going on with the Business.

Although the Silver was brought in great abundance to the Contadore; that is,
the Townhouse, where I had my Quarters; yet we did not receive, by much, what
we might have expected. We had scarce got to the Coast of St. Martha, which I
had been told was a Desert, but they were acquainted with it at Carthagena; and
being likewise informed by three several Expresses from the King of Spain, of
all Particulars, they were amply acquainted with my Project, my Forces, and, in
a manner, the time I should get thither; so they begun to bestir themselves
upon that very Alarm: All the Women, of any Quality, with their Jewels, the
Nuns, and what was worst of all, 120 Mules laden with Gold, went out in four
Days time; they retired to Monpos, a Town forty Leagues from thence; and although
we had not miscarried in our first Descent, to attempt Nostre Dame de la
Pouppe, yet we could not have got thither until the greatest part of those
Treasures was gone. However, the Honor which his Majesty's Arms acquired in
this occasion, besides near upon Eight or Nine Millions that could not escape
us, comforted us for the loss of the rest.

There is, in the Year, one intemperate Season, that never misses this part of
the Indian Coast, and it seemed, as if the great Rains, and Thunder, which are
the Forerunners of it, had, for a time desisted, to afford us the Opportunity
of taking Carthagena; for no sooner were we in possession of it, but the Air
became infected: Eight hundred Men, in six Days time, were seized with a
contagious Distemper, of whom the greatest part died; and, in a little time, we
were scarce able to receive into the Hospital, which was with much Expedition
established, the great Number that was brought from all parts, every Day were
we informed of some melancholy Example; all Ideas of Triumphs and Treasures,
were effaced, by those of Sickness and Mortality. In short, if the Distemper
had continued with this Rigor, I must have beheld my inevitable Ruin in the
fairest Port of the World, and no Enemy near me; not only have lost the Fruits
of all our Labors, but likewise the Squadron entrusted to me.

There was a Report spread about, the Author of it I did not find out until
some Days afterward, That I could not carry back the King's Ships, without
making use of the Buccaniers; who being accustomed to these Climates, were no
more infected with the Unhealthiness of the Air, than the Natives that are very
rarely touched with it. In this Condition, Du Casse, that concealed his Spite
at Hihimani, where he was retired, sent to me, by his Major, a Writing,
insinuating, That his Colony was in danger of being destroyed, in case the
Enemies should attempt a Descent there, which was no ways to be doubted; that
he demanded of me the Forces I had drawn from thence; and in case of refusal,
he thereby made me responsible for all Accidents. I answered by the same way,
That his Colony was as much recommended to me, as it had been to him; that
concurring to his Sentiments, as to that Matter, I did consent, whatsoever
Inconveniency might attend the weakening of my self by his departure, that he
might return with three parts of his Buccaniers, all the Inhabitants, and part
of the Negroes; and, that what I kept with me, would therefore be too
inconsiderable for the Coast to suffer by it. This Answer, which I designed
with sincerity, happened to be contrary to what he expected, he did not imagine
I could have taken that Resolution, thinking, by the Report spread about, to
have made me so well comprehend the occasion I should have for the Buccaniers,
as to have determined my self against their return; but seeing my firmness, he
begun to be more compliant, and better disposed, without speaking of going
away; and thereby plainly showed us, what sort of Interest detained him at
Carthagena. As the Silver was brought in, so it was immediately carried on
Board the King's Ships; upon which he employed Daunou to acquaint me, That the
Buccaniers were disgusted, that I did not call some of them to be Witnesses of
what passed at the Contadore; and proposed to have me admit some Body from
them. I found so much Insolence in this Proposition, that I suspected from
whence it proceeded: I told Daunou, That if he happened to charge himself with
any more such Commissions, I would make him repent it. I was at that instant
informed, That some of the Buccaniers, contrary to my Prohibition of pillaging
Houses, had broke through the Roof of a House, and stole some Merchandises: I
took my Guards, and went through all the Quarters of the City, resolved to make
an Example of those who fell into my Hands; but they were all retired to the
Posts assigned them, where they received all the Threats I made them with a
most profound Submission: Moreover, I was not so ill served by my Spies, as not
to be informed, that the seditious Discourses they sometimes held, upon the
Silver being carried on Board the King's Ships, was inspired into them, by
People wholly abandoned to their own Interest, who took all Opportunities to
express their own Thoughts with the Tongues of the Buccaniers.

I was not so much a Stranger to the Buccaniers Courage, as to apprehend any
manner of Attempt from that part; but a Rumor being underhand whispered, that
they had a mind to pillage the Contadore, to secure the share they pretended to
of the Booty; I was apprehensive, least they might force me to punish them so,
that I should not be able to expect any farther Service from them, and I might
possibly have occasion for their assistance on Board the King's Ships, in my
return to France. Upon this I proceeded upon a Method which seemed most likely
to satisfy them, without engaging me to an unbecoming Condescension: I
liberally recompensed such of the Buccaniers as were wounded, and gave more to
the lamed; there being so few of the one, or the other, that I could not
thereby much prejudice the Interests of the Armament; I ordered very
considerable Gratifications to their Captains, and some others that had
distinguished themselves; I thought by the kindness I showed to Du Casse, and
his Adherents, which were so excessive, that I am ashamed to own it; I thought,
I say, to have engaged them to have made no farther Pretensions; but I was
surpised to find, that by his Calculation, of the eight Millions, he reckoned
two of them belonged to the Buccaniers; and of these two Millions, he esteemed
himself sure of one; for he shares with them as Captain General, as first
Captain of each Frigate, as Proprietor of the Frigates of which he lends some to
them, and lets them have others belonging to the King, which with diverse
Pretexts he detains upon the Coasts, at exorbitant Interest. When I was made
acquainted with the Particulars, I resolved with my Authority and Diligence to
extricate my self out of this Affair: But this Diligence was the difficult
Matter, a great part of the Equipage necessary in a Siege, which we had brought
from the Fleet, was yet ashore, the Distempers deprived me of half my Men, and
I had scarce got on Board half of the Silver. The Brass Cannons of Carthagena
were yet on the Ramparts; I entreated the Buccaniers to undertake this Work,
which they refused; and I was informed, they had not only resolved not to work,
but likewise to make neither Watch or Ward, until they were put into possession
of their share of the Booty. I showed no Concern at this time, but prevailing
by Dint of Money, upon the small Number I had in a Condition of working, to use
their utmost Efforts, I got on Board my Squadron all the Cannon of Carthagena,
all that remained of what was brought on Shore; and part of the Bastions being
already thrown down, on the 25th of May the Powder was put to the other Mines;
I re-embark'd all my Troops, and my self, leaving Du Casse, his Officers, and
Buccaniers, in the City; I acquainted both the one and the other, That if they
pillaged the least of the Houses I had marked, I would instantly fire their
Frigates: They were too well laden, to suffer them to be exposed to the Effects
of my Threats, for having resolved not to bring any Merchandises on Board the
King's Ships, that I might be in a better Condition of Defense, I did permit
the Buccaniers to take what belonged not to the Inhabitants that remained in
the Town. Du Casse wrote me word, That he would answer for the Obedience of the
Buccaniers; adding withal, That if their Conduct was any ways to be blamed, it
proceeded from that Severity which was used to them, in not letting them know
what they were to expect of the Booty. He might have said with more Truth, that
it was his own Inquietude; and in reality, for some Days past, he had
continually complained against the embarking of all the Silver; which, he said,
they could not tell how to get from the King's Ships: But yet, that he could
not believe I would deprive him of any thing that so justly belonged to him;
having engaged my self by Writing, to let the Buccaniers divide Man for Man,
with the Seamen of the King's Ships. He had a great deal of Reason to insist
upon this Writing; which was what I ever designed to have observed; but when I
understood, that by his Calculation, Two of the Eight Millions belonged to him,
I was surpised at his meaning, believing him informed, as every Body else was,
that what appertained to the Seamen of the King's Ships, and consequently to
the Buccaniers, whom I had received upon these expressed Terms, was the Tenth
of the First Million, and the Thirtieth of all the others; which his Majesty
had been pleased to grant to the said Men on Board his Ships, to excite them to
do well, and as a Recompense for their Services, as it was explained in the
Conditions upon which his Majesty had consented to this Armament. At length,
although Du Tilleul was Night and Day employed in the Receipt, and Embarking of
the Silver, and the infinite Particulars appertaining to a great Squadron, had
not the time to examine his Books, and consequently we could not exactly know
what Silver there was; yet I so pressed him to make an Estimate of the whole
Affair, to satisfy Du Casse, and his Cabal, what did belong to them, that he
made out the Account, and signed it.

Upon the 29th I sent this Account to Du Casse; who, upon my reiterated Orders
that I had sent him, was at last embarked with his Buccaniers, and come down
pretty near to the Fort of Boccachica; below which was the whole Squadron,
except the Scepter, who through the Ignorance of the Pilots, was got between
two Banks, upon which she had struck, and had not then got clear of them.

Du Casse was extremely surpised upon the reading of the Account, wherein he
saw that his, and the Buccaniers Shares, amounted only to about 40000 Crowns.
He reckoned, that the whole would have been divided into Four equal Parts, and
he being very near a Fourth of the Army, one of these Parts would consequently
fall to his Share: But when he opened his Eyes, and saw that dividing Man for
Man with the King's Ships, signified sharing of what appertained to the said
Ships Companies, but not what appertained to the King, and the Armatures; and
when it appeared, that the part of the Ships Companies consisted in the Tenth
of the First Million, and the Thirtieth of the others; of which the Fourth,
that might belong to him, amounted only to 40000 Crowns, he fell into such a
Rage, that not considering, that the leaving of his Government, without a
Permission from Court, and upon a particular Interest, was by all manner of
Laws, a Criminal Action; yet he resolved to steer for France; probably to
demand Justice of himself, for being mistaken; for as to any thing else, there
cannot appear any pretense of Complaint. I must acknowledge, I was a long time
before I could comprehend, that his Misapprehension should carry him so far, as
to imagine, that the Credit of so many People was used, much Address employed,
great Sums of Money collected and expended, and so long a Voyage undertaken, to
give the Fourth of what it produced, to the Governor of S. Domingo, and a
Troop of Banditti; who without being at any Charge, and only for about six
Weeks, at least the greatest part of them, idle Spectators of a great Action;
methinks Justice seems so repugnant to such a Thought, that Du Casse cannot be
excused entertaining it. By allowing a Subsistence, and Share, as I did to this
Rabble, they received too much Honor, especially being joined in the Division
with the Companies of the King's Ships, whose continual Service, which they
render to the King, and the State, so gloriously distinguish them from that
base kind of Life that the others lead. Moreover, I do not see what Reply can
be made to this Argument: If they are the King's Subjects, they were ordered to
serve in this Enterprise, upon which his Majesty did not declare there should
be any Distinction in favor of them; according to the Orders, the whole
Strength of the Colony was to join the Forces I brought from France; and if
they did not, I was to treat them as Rebels: And I was much in the wrong, to
associate them to the Consideration that was promised to the King's faithful
Subjects.

When I was getting under Sail, to come out of Carthagena, I was forced to set
on fire the Bomb-Galliot, her Masts and Hulk were so shattered, that she was
not in a Condition of going to Sea. I left also the Providence-Brigantine, (of
whose Company there was not one Man capable of Service) with a
Buccanier-Captain, until farther Order. The necessity I was in, of dismounting
some Ship, to afford some assistance to the others, by dividing of her Company
amongst them, had engaged me to have fired the Christ-Ship, if Du Casse, to
whom it was necessary I should give a Ship, to transport his People to the
French Cape, had not been contented with that; which he armed as well as he
could, to carry back the Buccaniers, Inhabitants, and Negroes, to St. Domingo.

On the 30th I was taken so very ill with the Distemper, that all that I could
do, before I fell into a Condition that deprived me of my Intellect, was to
acquaint Levy, that I committed the Care of the Squadron to him; and that he
should steer his Course for Cape Tiburon, according to the Resolution he knew I
had taken, to return from thence to France, without touching at Petit Guaves,
where, as I was informed, the Air was not infected less than at Carthagena, by
which the rest of our Men would have infallibly perished: From that time, I
ordered nothing that passed; but the Account that follows, Levy, and the
Major General, gave me in Writing, as likewise by Word of Mouth.

Upon the last of the Month of May, completing the Ruin of the Fort of
Boccachica, where we had some Days been at work, Daunou, after many fruitless
Attempts to speak with me, went to them, and acquainted them, That the
Buccaniers being enraged at the small part I gave them of the Booty, had
proposed to board and plunder the Scepter; but that afterward they were come
to the Resolution, to return and plunder Carthagena: And in reality, they
perceived at that Instant, the greatest part of their Frigates making into the
Port, to sail to it: He said further, that they had passed under the Stern of
the Pontchartrain, where Du Casse was on Board, to whom they had declared their
Design; and, that he had exhorted them, not to commit such an Infraction of the
Treaty upon which the City surrendered; that he had likewise sent his Major to
endeavor to dissuade them from it; that for his own part, it gave him so much
trouble, that he desired only a hundred Seamen, with which he should think
himself strong enough to prevent their Designs on the City.

All the Squadron was out at Sea, excepting the Scepter, who was something
nearer to them; but in such a Condition by reason of the Distemper among the
Seamen, that we were very far from being able to make this Detachment; And
although they might have been, yet how could it be possible, for a hundred Men,
several Hours behind the Buccaniers, to prevent them from landing? The
ridiculous and true Motive of this Proposition was palpably apparent; and
accordingly Levy, and the Major General, expressed their Opinion very freely to
Daunou, whose Passion increased upon the Contempt they showed him. Yet Levy,
desirous to apply all the Remedy that was to be used, made all the haste he
could on Board the Frigate of Macary, being nearest the Fort, and longer in
getting ready than the other, and by that able to be reached, and by his
Authority he made her come to an Anchor again, believing, that afterward she
would not dare but to come out with the Scepter; yet this Ship being got
through the passage, the Frigate was no longer afraid of being stopped by her
Cannon; Macary having for some time followed us, suddenly tacked about, and
stood after the rest of his Companions, after having conferred with Du Casse,
with whom he stayed most part of the Night.

It looks as if Du Casse was entirely bereft of his Sense, in not more
carefully covering his Connivance with the Buccaniers, in their violating of an
Authentic Capitulation. The Pontchartrain, aboard which he was, and the
Malouin-Frigate, that he could have commanded, were both of them among the
Buccaniers Frigates, when they resolved upon this Course; Why did he not go
after them, on all sides firing on them? Yet shooting so high, or so low, as
not to do them any damage? He might have made it to have been believed, that he
was no Accomplice in this Perfidiousness, and at the same time have justified
to the World, that it was not by my Orders committed, being it would then have
appeared, that it was done by Mutiniers; whereas this scandalous Herd being, in
appearance, under my Command, as formerly, I am become responsible for their
Conduct to the K. of Spain; who might, if I should ever happen to fall into his
Power, with some Justice, use me as a Breaker of Treaties: For what appears in
sum of this Action, is a Capitulation manifestly broken by the King's Army. It
was plain to us, Du Casse only thought of making the best of his way to get
first of all into France, quitting the Squadron without leave, and even without
the knowledge of any one, he brought to all the Sails of the Pontchartrain, and
we heard no more of him until the Fourth of June. The Squadron left Boccachica
on the First, after having disengaged themselves of the Misfortune which the
Scepter and Fort had, in striking the first Night after their coming out, upon
two Banks three Leagues from the Coast, whereby they were like to have been
lost. The Squadron after this, stood for Cape Tiburon, when a Vessel from Petit
Guaves brought us a Packet; he met Du Casse, to whom he had likewise delivered
one, which was a Duplicate of that he had for me: They came from Robert,
Intendant of the Isles, who had dispatched away a Bark to inform me, That upon
the Twenty seventh of April, Thirteen English Men of War, of which Eight were
Capital Ships, were arrived at Barbados, where there were several others; that
it was not to be doubted but this was the Squadron, (as he had been informed
from France) that the Enemies was to send after me, to prevent the Execution of
my Designs; that this Squadron was not to make any stay at Barbados, upon
which I was to take my Measures. The Day before I left France, I was advised,
that to whatsoever place I went, Admiral Nevil, with Fifteen English Ships, was
to follow me, so soon as they knew the Course I steered. These Informations
concurring with each other, we did not doubt of the arrival of that Squadron in
the Indian Seas, as likewise that we must meet them: For their Course, of
consequence, if they were informed at Jamaica of our Success at Carthagena, as
it was very probable, would be to expect us at Cape Tiburon, there not being
any likelihood that we should return to France, without passing upon that Coast
to take in fresh Provisions, and leave the Men I had taken from thence. I was
then a little recovered from the Extremity of my Illness, and upon this News I
held the first Council of this Expedition; there was no diversity of Opinions,
all the Captains agreeing, that we ought to steer for the Gulf of the Streights
of Bahama; that we ought to supply our want of Water, by the most extraordinary
good Management of what we had; that there would be an opportunity of taking in
more upon the Coast of Accadia, which was the most probable way of missing the
Enemy, who could not be gone to expect us there, knowing we had a more
convenient passage upon many Accounts. Upon this Resolution we altered our
Course that we were steering to Tiburon, for that of Bahama, which we continued
until the Sixth. It may here be observed, how little one ought to depend upon
the severest Reasons, when Fortune is in the Scale: The Course of Cape Tiburon,
our Ruin, in appearance, was free of all Danger, the Enemy passed very wide of
it; and the way of Bahama, so sure in our Reckoning, carried us into that
between Jamaica, and Carthagena, which they then steered, and occasioned us to
fall into the midst of them in the Night, between the Sixth and the Seventh.
Some Hours before Day, I was informed, that from time to time, they perceived
Fires made in a Ship behind us; this Signal not being to be made by any of
ours, we began to believe, it was some advanced Frigate of the Enemies, who
informed them by her Fires, that she followed us, and that by keeping after
her, they could not lose us. There was then no other Resolution to be taken,
than to wait for the Day; we did not know our situation, in relation to that of
the Enemies, so by any other manner of working, we should have run the same
Risque, to have fallen in with them, as to have steered clear of them. The
first appearance of Day presented us with the Image of an inevitable and dismal
Misfortune; we at first reckoned Twenty Sail, then Twenty five, a little
afterward Twenty nine, and among them a Ketch. Eight of these Ships seemed to
be of an equal force to the Scepter, Ten or Twelve others, with the St. Lewis,
the Furieux, and our other Ships of that Rate, the rest with our Frigates from
Thirty six to Forty four Guns; half of this Fleet was to Windward of our
Squadron, and wanted but little of Cannon-shot of us; some others were exactly
on our Lee; and the rest, which were the great Ships beforementioned, were in
our Sterns, a little below us.

Our great Misfortune was not only to have Eight and twenty Ships against our
Seven Ships, and Three Frigates; but as an addition, our unfortunate Squadron
was so strangely weakened by the Mortality, that she was rather a general
Hospital for the rest of the Officers, and Seamen; insomuch, that when we went
to put our selves into a Condition of making some sort of a resistance, by the
paleness of our Faces, and the weakness of our Motion and Stirring, it looked
as if the Hospital of Paris was brought under Arms. To give an Idea of the
Condition we were in, I need only say, that the other Ships were possibly in a
much worse Condition than the Scepter, who out of her Complement of 700 Men,
had not above 350 that were able to take Arms, or work our Artillery. What an
alteration for me in particular! My Expedition had acquired some Honor to the
King's Arms, and would have produced considerable Advantages to my Armatures.
The taking of Carthagena seemed to have acquired me a pleasing Distinction; and
being enriched, I had, at my Return, a prospect of Glory and Pleasures, all
which now passed like a shadow; and I had contitinually before my Eyes, the
destruction of a flourishing Squadron, which I had the Honor to be entrusted
with; the Displeasure of the King and his Ministers, in the Circumstances of
this Loss, which not only deprived His Majesty of so many Ships, but so much
advantaged his Enemies, and carried them those Riches, that were in a manner
ready to have entered France; the Grief of my Armatures, for whom all was lost
by this unhappy Rencounter; and my continual Despair in the Remainder of a
Life, which after a long Imprisonment, I must have passed in Obscurity, if the
Report of my bad Fortune had not rendered me remarkable.

These were my Reflections, when having acquainted all my People, that we ought
to die like Men of Honor, I had two occasions of being comforted; the first
was, the Officers protesting to me, with an Air of Assurance, that the Ships
should be defended, whilst any of them were living; and the Ships Company
entered into the same Sentiment; insomuch, that the Sick, at least those not at
extremity, showed themselves as forward as the others; so I beheld Resolution
on all sides of me. The other was, so soon as the Signal for the Order of
Battle was made, the St. Lewis, Furieux, Vermandois, St. Michael, and the
Mutine, came up so fast, and fell so well into their Stations, that they
allowed us no occasion of doubting of their having the same Resolution with
ours; the Fort, the Apollo, L'Avenant, and Marin, did not obey the Signal, but
kept to Windward, where they chanced to be; the Captains of the two last were
sick, and I had taken from them the greatest part of their Men, to strengthen
the great Ships, and had designed them for Fireships; but not having time to
fit them up for it, nor to fetch away their Sick, they were become altogether
incapable of any Service, so I could no ways wonder they did not fall into
their ordered Station; as to the Fort, and the Apollo, I was apprehensive that
the first had lost so many of her Men, that she was not able to make any sort
of a Fight; the other being her Second, did believe, as it is the Custom, that
she was not to abandon her Flag, Du Buisson, by the Death of the Vicount
Coetlogon, then carrying the Flag of Rear-Admiral. At this instant, one of the
Enemies Ships having fired a Gun upon the Fly-boat, called, The City of
Amsterdam, who was a good way a-stern of us; she struck Sail, and surrendered:
They found a great many sick Men on Board her, and a very considerable quantity
of Ammunition and Provision. The only Traversier left me had the same Destiny
with the Fly-boat, with whom she was. But while these things passed, we found
that half of their Fleet, who in a little time were got within reach of us,
were unwilling to engage, until the others to Leeward could come to the Action:
Yet being unwilling to hand in their Sails, to stay for the others behind, they
kept themselves in a Line, and permitted us to get before them. We perceived by
their working, that we were yet to have some Hours of quiet, and none of us
being strong enough to support a long Action, we reposed our selves in
expectation of the Event. About two a Clock in the Afternoon, the Major General
came to me, and told me, There was no farther hopes of delays, that the
advanced part of the Enemies Fleet was got within less than Cannon-shot, and to
Windward of our Squadron, and their great Ships exact a-broadside of our Lee.
This being so, the Signal general for the Order of Battle was given, without
loss of time; I added to it the particular Signal of the Fort, to bring her to
her Station; but she only did so much as was necessary, to let us know that she
knew her Signal, and then standing to Windward, she confirmed me in the
Thoughts I had in the Morning.

The Affair was sufficiently serious to keep us attentive: We observed first of
all, that the Ships which might have attacked us, chose rather to slacken their
way, and fell from us; with much regarding of them, I was partly of the
Opinion, that it was by going larger away than we who kept close to the Wind,
that their great Ships had gained so much upon us. The fear of deceiving my
self in this matter, made me consult all those that I reckoned able to inform
me; and they all being of the same Opinion, I easily penetrated into the
Thoughts of the English Admiral, who reckoned there was no Safety for me, but
to go before the Wind, for the Streights of Bahama; so he proposed to get so
much a Head of me, as to hinder my passage; but I perceived at the same time,
that he might be mistaken in his working; because, instead of sailing parallel
to the Course we steered, his coming up opened an Angle; which in truth,
brought him into my Traverse, but in reality at a greater distance than when he
was a little a-stern of us; therefore by tacking about, I should be at a
greater distance than I was before; besides, I was sure to get something by it.

I was certain, that the Ships which might have attacked me, durst not do it,
and therefore it would not much trouble me, if I did find them in my passage.
Upon this, I sent the Marine-Frigate, to order all the Ships of the Squadron to
tack about, precisely, at the shutting in of Night; that I would light no
Fires, nor make any Signal, and that they should go as close haul'd to the Wind
as it was possible. At the time appointed we went about, but we were too near
the Enemy to conceal our working from them; one of their small Frigates being
likewise got in amongst us, I was obliged to give him some Cannon-shot from the
Scepter, and the Furieux, who was something nearer to him; with which he stood
so corrected, that we saw him no more afterward. But the different Signals
which the Enemies Ships made by Fires to each other, assured us, that they who
were most advanced, communicated to them behind what passed, so we doubted not
of our being followed. However, the next Day, so soon as it was light, we found
the success of our working; for we could only reckon 14 Ships, who followed us
in a Line one after the other, and not so nigh by far as the Day before; but at
the same time we missed the Fort, Apollo, L'Avenant, Marin, and the Diep
Flyboat: We having not heard any Cannon-shot, we could not think they were
taken: However, it was not until the next Day that I was eased of this
Apprehension, by report of the Mutine, that rejoined me, acquainting me, That
when she carried the Orders for the Ships to go about, those we missed being
considerably to Windward of us, who had by much the Wind of the Enemies when we
tacked, it was much easier for them to get clear, by keeping on their way, than
in following me: Simonet added, that the Fort had lost her Foretop-mast: But
having seen all the Enemies Ships standing as we did, at a great distance from
each other, there was no reason to fear that ours were pursued.

This separation being not to be remedied, my Thoughts were wholly employed to
the preservation of the rest of the Squadron, and to make use of the advantage
I had got; I continued the same Board, until within twenty Leagues of
Carthagena, where we were on the 9th of the same Month of June. In the Evening
I made the Signal of holding the contrary Course; and when it was quite dark, I
acquainted the other Ships, with three Guns, that they were to steer West,
directly before the Wind: There was then but three of the Enemies Ships that
kept within sight of us, and they were a great way from us; they could not
imagine what this Signal mean'd, and so kept on the same Board. In the mean
while, we ran this Night 22 Leagues, and the next Day found our selves
perfectly out of all Business on that side. But to one Trouble ended, commonly
comes another: It was not possible for us to reach Bahama, by holding through
the usual passage, that lies between Cuba and Jamaica, and which is not at all
dangerous; but we were obliged to take that to the Southward, terrible for the
Shelves, among which we were forced to pass, although we were altogether ignorant
of them; however, supplying the want of Experience, with our utmost Care and
Diligence, we escaped all the Rocks, and having doubled the Cape of St.
Anthony, found our selves on the 26th in the entrance of the Straight of
Bahama; where we understood by a small English Vessel, who fell into our
Squadron, coming from Jamaica, laden with Indigo and Cotton, to the value of
about 25000 Crowns, that the English Fleet we had met was commanded by Nevil,
and was composed, at Barbados, of 13 Ships that came from England, of three
that were in the Island, and eight Hollanders, of which four were very large
Ships, and came out of the Streights, who made in all 24 Men of War, to whom
were belonging four Fireships, and a Ketch: Which was exactly the Number we
had seen; their Intention was to have stayed 24 Hours only at Jamaica, but the
contrary Winds had detained them eight Days; that their Ships were in good
Health, but very ill manned, the greatest of them not having above 350 Men, and
those of between 50 and 60 Guns, 150 Men: This last Circumstance diminished the
admiration I was in, that none of them who could have attacked me, had not
begun the Fight by engaging of me, until such time as the rest could get up to
them; it may be, they were ignorant of the ill state we were reduced to by
Sickness, or possibly they did not give Credit to what they might have known by
the Amsterdam Flyboat; for the Countenance that we showed them, was no ways
answerable to what she could have told them.

Having detached away the Mutine-Frigat for St. Domingo, with the Forces,
Inhabitants, and Negroes, that were on Board that part of the Squadron then
with me, we steered on our Course; nothing material happened to us, excepting
an Error in our Reckoning: For we were got to the Eastward of Newfoundland,
when we thought we had been to the Westward; which obliged us to go into
Conception-Bay for Water, that we designed to have taken at Plaicentia: We came
to an Anchor on the Fourth of the Month of August, having only six Days Water
on Board. The Captain of a small Vessel coming from Barbados, which we took on
the Second Instant, did us very good Service in our Anchorage, which we did not
know; but this Vessel which the Vermandois manned, happend to lose the Squadron
in a Mist; as did also another small Vessel, that we found abandoned at Sea,
upon which we sent likewise some Men, and since we never heard more of them.
The great want of some fresh Provisions, obliged me to send the Captain of the
Prize, taken at Bahama, to propose to some Fishermen, retired to the bottom of
the Bay, called La Carbonniere, to supply me with what Cattle they could, and
to lend me their Boats to take in Water; upon which I promised, to do them no
harm. They answered me by the same Messenger, That they had scarce any fresh
Provisions; but they would give me what they had, and accommodate me with their
Boats; provided, I gave them Hostages. The assistance was not considerable
enough, to accept it upon this Condition; so I resolved to burn a dozen, or
fourteen, pitiful Houses that were there, after I had taken in my Water.

In the mean time, I was informed by a Prisoner, That there were eight English
Men of War at St. John's, eight Leagues from us; sent thither for the
Re-establishment of that Colony, ruined by the Governor of Plaicentia; that
these Ships, whereof two carried 70 Guns each, and the rest from 50 to 60, had
brought 13 Foot-Companies, commanded by Gibson, Lieutenant-Governour of
Portsmouth, who were to stay there; that Norris commanded the Fleet; and, that
in a Council of War, held at our arrival, it was resolved, to stand out to
fight us. This News made us double our Diligence to get in the Water we wanted,
and to prepare our selves, not only to fight the English, but to seek them out.
To this purpose we got under Sail; on the Seventh of August we stood to La
Carbonniere, to burn the little Houses; but the Weather being so bad, that we
could not get to them without danger, besides the inconsiderableness of the
place, rendering this Action not sufficiently important, to consume away time
upon it, I took the Party to go before St. John's, to attack the Enemies, if
they had been out; but apparently, some reflection of the force and largeness
of our Ships, had prevented them from coming out, and the Port was so straight,
as to render any Attempt upon them impracticable; I was contented to show my
self, and offer them Battle, which seeing they did not Answer we steered for
the Coast of France upon the Eighth of the same Month of August: and on the
Twenty fourth of the said Month, in the Fourth Degree of Latitude, and..
Longitude, we perceived six Ships cruising exactly in the Course we steered.
Notwithstanding the weakness to which we were reduced, our Ships not having
then by much, one half of our Complement of Men; the Number of the Enemies,
supposing they were so, did no ways occasion us to fear meeting them; besides,
this place not being a usual cruising station with them; and on the contrary,
very common for the French Ships; there was a great deal of appearance that
they were such, and many Conveniences would attend this joining; so I continued
on my way: But when I came up with them, three of them appeared to be three
Deck Ships, the fourth equal to ours of 64 Guns, a Frigate of 40 Guns, and
another small Vessel, that did not bring her self into the Line; whilst we were
considering of what Country they were, and had brought our selves into Order of
Battle, with the Wind upon the Beam, being the same Method which they had taken
in expecting us, they put forth English Colors, and contrary to the Custom of
that Nation, they did not fire first, although we were in less than Cannon-shot.
We put forth our Colors, at the same time they showed theirs; and to do them
Justice, it was impossible to make a bolder working than what they showed;
little did they guess the badness of our Condition, nor that the Scepter, St.
Lewis, Furieux, Vermandois, and St. Michael, were reduced to the weakness of 40
Gun Frigates, not knowing these Circumstances, it must be allowed that they
showed a great deal of Resolution.

We were so far advanced, that the Honor of His Majesty's Arms would not
permit us to turn back, but rather to make our selves a passage; and moreover,
that Attempt which would infallibly have discovered our weakness, would as
certainly have encouraged the Enemy, upon whom we came within the reach of a
Fusil Boucanniere, where we then perceived their Beds and Hamocks to be passed
from the Forecastle to the Quarter Deck, to cover them from our small Shot;
this hindered us from discerning the space between the Forecastle and
Quarter Deck, and occasioned us to believe them Three-deck-ships; it was easy
to mistake them, three being of those great Frigates of 72 Guns, which have
that length, width, and depth, so they wanted only some Beams and Planks to
unite them; the fourth was something less, and about the strength of the
Furieux; the fifth a Frigate of 40 Guns: The Commander was in the midst of his
Squadron, and my self also in the Center of His Majesty's Ships, both sides
being exactly in a Line, I was only to spring my Loofe to come a-broadside of
him, and upon my Signal the Fire began, which continued from half an Hour after
Three, until Seven; and with much more briskness on our side, than I could have
expected from our weakness; the Enemy, although better provided, in my Opinion,
showed not altogether so much; however, they kept as close to the Wind as it
was possible for them.

At the same time the Fight began, they set their Sails as we did, that is, so
as to continue on the Course upon which we found them, which was North
North-West, a very contrary Course to what I was to steer, and from which I
could not depart; so I went about in our Line of Battle, to leave the Cape to
the East.

In the execution of this, the Fire was pretty violent on both sides; but the
Enemies, instead of going about, continued their Broadsides, which passed in a
moment, and we got far enough to apprehend any farther damage. In a very little
while afterward, the Enemies went about likewise all at once; yet I was fully
persuaded, they would not endeavor to begin the Fight again, by reason they
continued their lower Sails furled as well as we, who wrought with much trouble
through the want of Hands to repair the great damage we suffered in our Sails
and Rigging: For as to the Men, there was not abroad the Scepter above eleven
killed and wounded, and in the other Ships yet less in proportion; but the
Vermandois having lost her Foretop-mast, I was extremely troubled, because I
did not think her able to get up another; yet she did not only attempt it in
the Night, but perfectly accomplished it early the next Day.

We continued our Course all Night, with an easy Sail, and our usual Lights.
The next Day we were in a Condition to have begun again, if the Enemy had
followed us; which we doubted of in the Night, as not discerning any of their
Lights; but it is probable, that they had not less work to repair than we had,
so I presume they spent the Night at work, and the next Day we were almost out
of fight.

We had done our Business, which was to pass without shame: We had no Advantage
to expect from a second Engagement; but on the contrary, many Inconveniences,
and one almost inevitable; which was, that the Squadron would perish at Sea for
want of Provisions, if any endamag'd Ship should considerably detain us.
Therefore we kept on our way, and the Enemies followed us until the 26th at
Noon, at which time they went about to the other Board.

I cannot refuse making the Officers and Seamen the Acknowledgments I owe them;
for they did, in this occasion, by much go beyond their Strength; and with the
Good Will they express, if our Force had been something less unequal, the
Enemies would have had more trouble to have disengaged themselves. We came at
last into Breast, upon the 29th of August, 1697.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Sam. Buckley, at the Dolphin in Fleet Street.
VOyages and Discoveries in South-America: The first up the River of Amazons to
Quito in Peru, and back again to Brazil performed at the Command of the King of
Spain, by Christopher D'Acugna. The Second up the River of Plate, and thence by
Land to the Mines of Potosi, by Monsieur Acarete. The Third from Cayenne into
Guiana, in search of the Lake of Parima, reputed the richest Place in the
World. By M. Grillet and Bechamel. Done into English from the Originals, being
the only Accounts of those Parts hitherto extant. The whole illustrated with
Notes and Maps. In Octavo.

An Account of Monsieur de la Salle's last Expedition and Discoveries in
North America. Presented to the French King, and published by the Chevalier
Tonti, Governor of Fort St. Louis, in the Province of the Islinois. Made
English from the Paris Original. Also the Adventures of the Sieur de Montauban,
Captain of the French Buccaniers, on the Coast of Guinea, in the Year 1695. In
Octavo.

The French Perfumer; teaching the several ways of extracting the Odours of
Drugs and Flowers, and making all the Compositions of Perfumes for Powder,
Wash-balls, Essences, Oils, Wax, Pomatum, Paste, Queen of Hungary's Water, Rosa
Solis, and other Sweet Waters. The Manner of preparing Sweet Toilets, Boxes,
etc. with the Preparations and Use of Perfumes of all Kinds whatsoever. Also
how to color and scent Gloves and Fans. Together with the Secret of cleansing
Tobacco, and perfuming it for all sorts of Snuff, Spanish, Roman, etc. The
Second Edition, Corrected. In Twelves.

In the Press, and will be finished in a Month.
Mr. John le Clerc's Additional Notes to Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase and
Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament, faithfully translated to
supply the English Edition of Dr. Hammond. In Quarto.


