OF TRADE

1. In General. 2. In Particular. 3. Domestic. 4. Foreign. 5. The East India.
6. The African. 7. The Turkey. 8. The Spanish. 9. The Hamburgh. 10. The
Portugal. 11. The Italian. 12. The Dutch. 13. The Russia. 14. The Greenland.
15. The Swedeland. 16. The Denmark. 17. The Irish. 18. The Scotland. 19. The
Plantation. 20. The French, etc.
ALSO, Of Coin. Bullion. Of Improving our Woollen Manufacture. To prevent
Exporting Wool. Of Ways and Means to Increase our Riches, etc.

By J. P. Esquire;

To which is annexed, The Argument of the Late Lord Chief Justice Pollexphen,
upon an Action of the Case, brought by the East India Company against Mr. Sands
an Interloper.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, near the Kings-Armes in Little Britain. 1700.

The Contents.
THE Introduction Page 1, 2 Balance of Trade no Mystery. Page 3, 4 Those
Trades good that Export our Products. Page 5 Those suspicious that Export
Bullion. Page 6 Against Raising our Coin. Page 12 That will occasion great Loss
to the Public, and Advantageous only to Debtors. Page 24 What Governs the
Price of Bullion. Page 30 The necessity of Severe Laws to prevent
Counterfeiting our Coin. Page 38 The necessity of looking into Trade. Page 40
Of Trade Domestic. Page 41 That only Trade can Advance the Price of Lands.
Page 42 Of the Original of Riches. Page 43 From the Labor of People. Page 44
How Idleness has Increased, and how should be prevented. Page 45 Of an Act for
a General Naturalization. Page 51 How necessary to prevent the Export of Wool,
and Making false Goods. Page 53 What Inquiries should be made to Discover how
the Balance of Trade stands. Page 55 What Trades may be esteemed Good. Page 58
What Bad. Page 59 What Effect the reducing of Interest would have. Page 60 Of
Paper Credit. Page 63 Of Free Ports. Page 78 Of the good Effects of Labor and
good Husbandry. Page 80 Of Sumptuary Laws. Page 82 What Trades have Carried
out our Coin. Page 83 That the Money Coined the last Reigns has been most
Exported by the French, Northern and India-Trade. Page 84 Of our several Trades
to Spain Page 85 Portugal Page 85 Italy Page 85 Turkey Page 85 Plantations Page
85 Holland Page 85 Ireland Page 85 Scotland Page 85 Hamburgh Page 85 Greenland
Page 85 Ruffia Page 85 Swedeland Page 85 Denmark Page 85
Of the French Trade. Page 92 Of the East India Trade. Page 96 Of the African
Trade. Page 128 Against Settling the East India, or Guiny Trade in having
Joynt-Stocks. Page 130 Proposals for Regulated Companys. Page 139 Of Protection
at Sea. Page 144 Of the Book of Rates. Page 146 Of the Act of Navigation, and
how our Navigation may regain Repute. Page 147 Of the Necessity of Laws to
Regulate Trade. Page 147 Of the declining State of our Woollen Goods. Of Ways
and Means to Increase our Riches, Page 150 with Proposals and Arguments to put
them in Practice. Page 151
The Argument of a Learned Council, upon an Action of the Case brought by the
East-India-Company against Mr. Sands an Interloper.

The END.
ERRATA.
IN Page 5. l. 15. dele is. IN Page 36 l. 13. read lend. IN Page 52. l. 31.
read Oppertune. IN Page 57. l. 26. dele our. IN Page 78. l. 1. read 500. IN
Page 140. l. 16. read or out of the Gains.
A DISCOURSE OF TRADE and COIN.
OUR Naval Strength, Value of Lands, Increase of Riches, Employment of the
Poor, and Preservation of the Coin and Bullion we have, depending on Trade; it
is convenient that all Persons should be sensible how much the Public, as well
as their Private Interest is concerned, in the promoting of it, that a due
inspection may be made into it; and such Trades as are Good and Profitable for
the Nation be encouraged, such as are Disadvantageous and Pernicious,
discouraged, that the balance may stand in our favor, otherwise whether we
complete the work begun, of restoring our Coin, to its former Weight and
Purity, or leave it to the mercy of the Clippers, we shall be in danger of
being drained of what we have in a few Years, which affords a dreadful prospect
of Poverty and Insecurity.

Trade and Coin have such a dependence one upon the other, that they could not
well be considered distinctly; therefore though the Manner may appear confused,
yet the Matter may be the more intelligible, the repeating or interfering with
other Men's Notions, that have writ upon the same Subjects, could not be avoided.

This Kingdom is so well situated for the carrying on of Trade, so well
provided with Staple Commodities fit for Foreign Markets, and with Ships and
Seamen to make good use of those benefits, that nothing but a long supine
Carelessness in matters of Trade, Luxurious prodigal way of Living, and Ill
Management of the Advantages we have; could have brought us into this Danger.

Hopes of Gain may be said to be the Mother of Trade. No Gentleman would put
his Son to be an Apprentice to any Trading Man, but in Expectation he may get
an Estate, or at least a Livelihood by it. No Man would adventure his Money in
Trade, if he had not hopes thereby to increase it. This draws as the Loadstone
the Needle; and it is well it is so, otherwise there would be no good Reason to
expect we should have much Trade: Therefore in Considerations of Trade and
Coin, Arguments from Interest ought to be taken for as good Proof as
Demonstration.

Though there may be some Circumstances in the Management of Trades that may be
Secrets, and kept by every Tradesman to himself, and Mysterious to others, yet
as it relates to the great ends before mentioned, Trade is only a Mystery to
such, who have not time, or will not employ their Thoughts about it.

Nations compared with other Nations, Balance of Trade.
may in most cases be considered as great Families, or Merchants, or Traders,
as to their Dealings one with another. That which is called the balance of
Trade, is no more a Mystery, as to the meaning of it, then what is meant by the
balance of an Account between a Gentleman and his Steward, or between
Merchants and Shopkeepers; And though the Accounts of the Trades, between
Nation and Nation, are not so kept as that can be made up exactly, yet such
Methods may be taken as may produce a satisfactory Judgment, for the end
designed, of discovering what Trades carry out our Coin or Bullion, or may
deserve Encouragement or Discouragement.

When we take from any Nation more Goods, or by any Contract or Dealings,
become more indebted to any Nation then such Nation to us, by the Goods taken
from us, the overplus (which may properly be called the Balance) must be paid
in Bullion, Coin, Jewels, or some such Treasure, which is usually carried off
privately, or else by Bills of Exchange, the Product of Goods remitted to some
other Country; which in most Cases will, upon Examination, appear to be the
same in effect, as if it were Treasure carried out hence.

If we did take from France formerly, as many Wines, Brandies and Silks, and
other Goods, as amounted to a Million per Annum, we did then by taking those
Goods from them, become Debtors to that Nation for a Million: And if the Goods
we sold to them, or they took from us, amounted to but half a Million, then the
other half Million, upon the Balance, must be owing to that Nation; which we
may be sure they did not give us, or left unrecovered, but took it from us,
either in Money, Jewels, or some such Treasure; for pay themselves, in all such
Cases, the Merchants will some way or other, at such times and seasons as they
find it most convenient for them.

The like with all other Nations, whether our Debts be contracted by
Commodities taken from them, by way of Trade, or by borrowing Money upon Loans,
or by engagements for the Payments of Armies or Fleets, or any other way: What
is not paid in Goods will some way or other be paid, and carried off from us in
Bullion, Coin, etc. as may turn best to account to such Creditors, when our
Goods do not in any Country turn to account so well as Bullion, either by our
own People to buy Goods or pay Debts there, or the Strangers that bring such
Goods here, or are become our Creditors by any Dealings, will leave our Goods
and carry out our Money; and what is thus carried out is usually said to be, to
balance such a Trade, and is that which may properly be called, The balance
of Trade.

No Trades can be more secure, Those Trades Good that Export our Products.
to be for the Interest of this Nation, then what are carried on by the
Exportation of our Products and Manufactories, or by such Goods as come here
from our Plantations, because of the Advantages we have by the Exportation, in
the Consumption of our Product, and Employment of the Poor; but no Trade is
more likely to increase Seamen, than our Fishing-Trade is; because great
numbers (as well as some Landmen which thereby become Seamen) are employed in
the taking, and making, as well as in carrying it to Foreign Markets; and no
Trade can produce more clear Profit to the Nation, because the whole Value
arises from the Labors of our People, excepting the Salt. Trades that have so
good a foundation should be promoted; because not so difficult to judge what
Trades are good by the Exportation, as what are bad by Importation.

As Trades carried on by the Exportation of our Products or Fish cannot be
pernicious, so Trades carried on by the Exportation of Bullion, are dangerous;
no such Advantage in the Exportation, rather the contrary; and ought only to be
approved of for the purchasing of Goods in Foreign parts to be carried to
Foreign Markets, from whence there may be a probability that the Returns will
bring in more Bullion than was carried out; or for purchasing Goods for
perfecting ours, or for another Manufactory here, as Raw Silk and Spanish
Wool, etc.; or of such Commodities as are absolutely necessary for our Defense
and Safety, as Naval Stores, and cannot be had elsewhere on better terms.

For though Silver and Gold be a Commodity, Against the Ex^^tation of Bullion
and allowed in some places to be with as much impunity Exported as any others,
as in Holland, Florence, Genoua and Venice, yet it does not follow that it may
be as convenient here to encourage it; for though those Countries may grow
Rich, yet we may grow Poor by it.

Where a Place or Country is situated convenient for Trade, with good
Harbors, but not provided with plenty of staple Commodities of their own
growth or fabric, as those places aforementioned, there Free ports or Freedom
of Trade, without Limitations, may be convenient, as the only way to bring
Trade, and increase it; and the Gains which arise to the Prince, State or
People of those Countries by such Trade, are by the Duties paid, and by the
Charges and Expenses the Ships and Merchandises leave behind them; and what may
be got by the People of those Countries, is by Buying, Selling and Trading with
Foreign Commodities more than by their own; and the Money carried out, not much
of the Country Coin; for it would probably be found, if a true account could be
given, that none of those places had any great store of Coin or Bullion, when
they gave that liberty at first; and that the plenty of it now there, as it
came first, so can only be preserved by continuing the same Trade; it being
likely, that if a stop should be put to it, they would soon find a decrease of
Trade, and consequently of Coin, because they are not well stored with
Commodities of their own, what they have being most brought from Foreign parts;
or the Materials they are fabrickt with, not possible to be procured by them
but by Money; such Nations are as Store-keepers of the Goods of Foreign
Nations, which being by their own Ships, or of Strangers, Transported to
Foreign parts, afford them great Profit; as the Dutch by their Spices from
India, Linnens from Germany, and other Commodities in abundance.

Though it be granted that our Gold or Silver cannot afford us any increase
while kept within the Kingdom, yet it being that in which the Riches of the
Nation does so much consist, and so necessary for the Payment of Fleets and
Armies, and carrying on of Commerce, that we cannot be Safe, nor Rich, without
it; this Nation being so well stored with Staple Commodities of our own growth,
as well as others, from our Plantations, and other places for Exportation, it
may be said, we rather want Trade than Stock. But if it should be thought we
want Stock, it is more our Interest to apply our selves to increase our
Products and Manufactories, and Consumption of them, and to retrieve our
Fishing Trade, to add to our Stock, then to encourage the Exportation of
Bullion, which is the same in effect as the Exportation of our Coin; there
being little difference between the allowing Exportation of Bullion only, or
Bullion and Coin both

For when there is not Bullion to supply the Merchants occasions for
Exportation, the Price will advance; which if but Three Pence per Ounce above
our Coined Silver, reckoning Ounce to Ounce, it did formerly, when our Milled
and Weighty Money was plenty, afford a sufficient temptation of Profit for
those that had culled and laid by the Weightiest, to melt it down, that it
might be called Bullion, Sold and Exported, as it is well known has been
practiced for vast Sums, since the Act for allowing the Exportation of Bullion:
For after General or Particular Pardons, few of those that practiced it,
thought it worth denying.

Before Countenance should be given to Trades carried on by the Exportation of
Gold and Silver, an Exact Inquiry should be made, what Returns we shall have
for it, or wherein it will be Advantageous to the Nation; and if it appear,
that except for the Uses aforesaid, for Stores or Goods for a further
Manufactory, no Trade carried on by the Exportation of Bullion can bring us in
any Returns, but what must be consumed in Luxury, or Prodigality, or hinder the
expense of our own Manufactures, we should make but a bad Exchange. If we
should approve of its going out for any such Goods, and being such Trades
cannot promote the advancing of Lands, employing of the Poor, nor the increase
of our Navigation by the Exportation, which are the chief ends designed by
Trade, if they should be encouraged, we may find, when too late, that as Trade
brought Gold and Silver into the Nation, so it may carry it out again.

Prohibitions against the Exportation of Coin or Bullion, have never had any
good effect in any Country. It is by Law a Capital Crime in Spain and Portugal,
yet it is Shipped off from thence as frequently, as if there were no such Law;
and we have reason to suspect that our Laws here against the Exportation of our
Coin, have had but little better success. The removing of the Cause, or the
making of such a Trade Unprofitable, can only assord a Remedy in any such case;
for where Temptations are great and Transgressions private, though some out of
Fear, or Conscience, may not adventure to break such Laws, yet others will.

Neither can the Raising or Clipping of our Coin much hinder the Exportation,
because Coin or Bullion that is carried out to a Foreign Nation can only be for
payment of Debts made, or intended to be contracted, (unless the Owners resolve
to remove their Persons also, or give it away) the word Debt being taken at
large, whether for Goods bought, or intended to be bought, by way of
Merchandising, or for discharging the Expenses of Armies, or of Ambassadors, or
Gentlemen that travel making Presents, requite Obligations, or Money Lent us on
Public Funds: All these, or the like engagements with any Foreign Nation,
bring us in Debt to that Nation as much as such engagements may import; and
what is not paid by our Goods or Products, or the proceed of them, either the
Natives of that Country must quit and forgive us, or it must be paid in
Bullion, or some such Treasure. The Raising or general Clipping of our Coin may
put such Foreign Creditors under difficulties how to be paid such Debts as were
contracted before such Advance of the Coin, as much to their Advantage as
usual, but will not probably make them so good Natured as to forgive us such
Debts; they upon such Advance will consult their Interest, and if they cannot
find out some way more Advantageous, rather than lose all, will carry out
Bullion, or Coin so Advanced, which may be some Loss to them; and what they
lose we may save; but whether agreeable to Honor, and Justice, may be
considered; and to what Account it may turn, being it will respect only such
Debts as were contracted before the Advance of the Coin; for upon all Occasions
afterward they will Advance the Price of their Commodities, and all Contracts
proportionable, and secure themselves against the like Losses, if possible: For
though our Laws may change the Name of a Shilling, and give it the Name of
Fifteen Pence, yet that will not have any effect with Foreigners in their
Dealings; they will always proportion the Price of their Commodities according
to its Weight and Fineness.

When the East India Company have bought in India, or have ordered their
Factors to buy as many Goods there for their Supply for a Years Trade, as may
cost 700000 l. Sterling, and find it their Interest to send out but 100000 l.
in Goods, the remaining 600000 l. must go in Bullion, and not a Penny-weight
the less, because we have Advanced our Coin: But if any Nation have Debts owing
from us, at the time of making such a Law, to be paid here, then they may be
obliged to receive it in Money so Advanced.

In such a Case, as Persons in their Private Concerns so Nations will act, if a
particular Trader that owes great Sums of Money to several Persons will shut
himself up in his House, and be peremptory he will pay but Sixteen Shillings of
the Pound, and it appears to his Creditors that they must take that, or run a
hazard of losing all, it is probable that in such a Case, some will take his
Goods, others his Debts, others his Money, and be careful how they deal with
him again, unless upon secure Terms.

All Arguments that such Debts to Foreign Nations; may be paid by Bills of
Exchange, and so lessen the going out of our Coin, will upon Examination appear
fallacious.

Unless other Causes can be assigned for the Exportation of our Bullion, then
for payment of Debts, the Raising of our Coin can have no effect as to the
preventing of it; unless it be presumed that will make us good Husbands for the
future, and oblige us to contract sewer Debts with such Nations, being that
which we may call 125 l. must be paid then, instead of 100 l. that we paid
before, if our Coin should be risen One Fifth: But such uncertain hopes as
these, will not answer the Inconveniences that may attend the Raising of the
Coin.

For all Nations have a watchful Eye, Against Raising of the Coin.
one upon another, in matters of Trade and Coin; and a fixed Opinion, grounded
on Experience and Reason, that Exchanges, and Goods, will always govern in all
Nations, proportionable to the Weight and Fineness of their Coin. The effects
of the Raising of the Coin will first be perceived by those who have occasion
of Money by Exchange, or of Wrought Plate, or of any sort of Bullion.

The Exchange of Money for Bills, or Bills for Money, between Nation and
Nation, is a great Trade of it self; many Persons in Trading Cities, make it
their chief, if not only Employment, to take Money when offered, and draw Bills
for it on their Correspondents, which they have in most parts and places where
there is any Trade carried on, and their Correspondents to reimburse
themselves, Redraw on them, or on their Agents in other places as may receive
Directions, and as the Rates of Exchange may induce them; which at last must be
repaid by the first Drawer, either by Goods or Money sent out hence, or by the
payment of Bills that may be drawn on him. By which Trade thus carried on
without Buying, Selling, or Trading much in Goods, they usually get much more
than Interest by their Money, and in a course of Years considerable Estates;
others that do not make Exchange their sole Trade, draw Bills upon many
occasions to be paid out of the product of Goods, or Money sent and lodged in
their Correspondents hands for that purpose. These ways of Trading by Exchange
has proved of so great use in the carrying on of Trade, for the speedy supply
of Money upon Occasions, lessening of Adventures, and getting quick Returns;
that it may be said, Exchange is to some Trades as the first Foundation, or as
a Pendulum to a Watch to keep it in Motion; and being so, has a great
influence on the Price of Commodities, which will always much depend upon the
Rate of Exchange, and the Rate of Exchange upon the Weight and Fineness of the
Coin; like so many Links of a Chain, if one be drawn the others will follow.

All those that make it their Business to give Bills for Money, or Money for
Bills, know the Intrinsic Value of the Coyns in the Countries to which they
deal; and the Natural Rate for all Countries, amounts to giving One Hundred
Pound weight of Silver in one Country, for a Hundred Pound weight of Silver, of
the same Fineness, in another Country, with as much difference as may be a
Temptation to the Bankers, or Exchangers, to continue their Trade, more or less
according to the distance of Place, Time for Payment, or Plenty or Scarcity of
Money, or Bills, which oftentimes makes it considerable: But taking it without
such Accidents and Considerations, the Rates are a Hundred Pound weight, for a
Hundred Pound weight in another Country, or very near. The Old Crown in France
did formerly answer in Weight and Fineness to 4 s. 6 d. of our Money, the
Exchange then usually went at 54 d. here for a Crown to be paid in France. The
Old Shilling in Holland answered to 7 d. or better, the Exchange for Holland
usually at 36 s. there, for 20 s. here. To imagine that if our Coin be Raised
One Fifth Part here, the Exchange for Foreign Countries will not Advance
proportionable, is to suppose that Men will act contrary to Reason and their
true Interest, and give One Hundred Pound weight of Silver in a Foreign
Country, for Eighty Pound weight received here; when it may turn much better to
account to them to bring it here, and have it Coined in the Mint.

As for Instance: After such an Advance, a Merchant comes to a Banker, and
demands a Bill for Paris for 100 l., and offers for every French Crown to be
paid in Paris 4 s. 6 d. as the Price usually went before Advanced, and it then
answered in Weight and Fineness to our Money here: If the Banker agree to it,
then he must give a Bill for 444 Crowns, for so many times 4 s. 6 d. will be
found to be in 100 l. and must receive 320 Crowns here of our Coin, because
will then be called 100 l.; which he will soon find is not his Interest to do:
For the 444 French Crowns brought here, and Coined, will make 400 of our
Crowns; and after such an Advance of our Coin, will produce him at 6 s. 3 d.
per Crown, 125 l. And therefore we may conclude, Bills will be refused for
Paris, Spain, or any where, unless the Exchange advance proportionable to the
Coin: But though this be offered as Demonstration, that the Rates of Exchanges
will Advance, yet not that it will occasion the bringing in of Money to be
Coined; for if Goods, and all Contracts in the way of Trade, should alter (as
is supposed) proportionable to the Coin, then his 125 l. so made, will do no
more service than 100 l. before; and therefore the advancing of Coin, no
Temptation for the bringing in of Bullion, unless for payment of Debts
contracted before such Advance.

And as it cannot be expected that the Exchange of Money for Bills should go on
at the rate as before, so that any sort of Wrought Plate or Bullion should be
sold at the same Price: For how can it be imagined that any Man will Exchange
One Hundred Pound weight for Eighty Pound weight of the same Metal; which
carried into the Mint, and Coined, would yield One Fifth more? And though the
same Reasons cannot be given for the Advance of all other Commodities, yet
Dealings by Exchange have such an influence upon Trade, and the giving high
Denominations to Coin, so unlikely to make it pass for more than its Intrinsic
Value, according to its Weight, that it is contrary to reason to expect, that
Foreign Nations will barter their Commodities for it, rather in proportion to
the Name, than Value; and if it have that effect with Foreign Nations, as may
be presumed, and our own Goods should not Rise also proportionable, then will
prove but a contrivance to make us sell our Goods to Strangers at one Rate, and
buy of them at another.

The true Intrinsic Value of Silver in Exchange of Silver ever was, and will
be, an Ounce for an Ounce; an Ounce Coined for an Ounce Uncoyned. Five
Shillings of our English Coin weighs about an Ounce, and therefore we usually
compute an Ounce of Silver worth 5 s. because 5 s. Coined weighs an Ounce
Uncoyned; some little differences occasioned by the Alloy, or Charge of Coynage
in some places, if should be cavilled at, will not be found upon examination to
be very material; and whatever Denomination has been given to Coined Money in
any Country, to raise it higher than answers in Weight and Fineness to an Ounce
Uncoyned, has always been found ineffectual in all Dealings. Either
Commodities will Advance so much in Price, or so much will be abated in
Goodness, or in Weight, Length, or Breadth, or some way or other, as the nature
of the Commodity may best bear: For as Governments may take upon them to alter
the Standard of their Coin, so the People, if cannot raise their Goods
proportionable in Price, especially those of Foreign Nations, will make no
scruple to alter the Standard of their Goods; it being the Weight and Fineness
of Coin, that is the true Standard and Measure of Commerce and Dealings, and
not the Denominations: Therefore great care should be taken how any Alteration
is made, or stop put to the Currency of Coined Money, because it will occasion
a great Alteration and Confusion in the carrying on of Trade. Coin is not only
the easiest and safest Security that can be given, between Man and Man, but the
quickest for Dispatch, and of most Satisfaction in Buying and Selling, because
by the Stamp the Value is known: Bartering of Commodities for Commodities,
which would follow of consequence if there were not Money, would soon be found
Chargable and Inconvenient, and a hindrance to Trade.

Arguments for Raising of the Coin, grounded on affirmations, that Guineas are
now worth 26 s. a piece in Holland, and Ireland, or any of our Neighboring
Countries, will be found, upon examination, to have no Weight.

Common Consent has fixed a proportion to the Value, between Gold and Silver,
which will probably continue till altered by the like Common Consent, and
General Opinion. What may happen by Accident, or to serve a sudden or
extraordinary Occasion, ought not to be put in the Balance against what is the
usual course and practice in Dealings.

That proportion between Gold and Silver which governs here, is well known to
be also observed amongst our Neighbors, and therefore not likely should act so
contrary to their Interest, as to give such an overvalue for Guineas, as 4 or
5 s. on a Guinea, paid in our Milled Money, or any other Coin that is
equivalent in Weight and Fineness, and would answer in Value to our Milled
Money in our Mint; and therefore the Truth of the Fact may be doubted: But if
it be true, we should be very Impolitick, if we should not encourage them to
continue of that humor; for it would be our advantage to carry them all the
Guineas we have, or as many as they please to take, and bring away their
Silver; which for all Payments would be as useful to us as the Gold, and the 4
or 5 s. per Guinea, which they would, if that were true, give us, more than
their Real Value, would be so much clear Gains.

But this Argument being too grols to hold any Contest, Notions about Exchange,
or that Guineas will pass in those parts at that Rate, in purchasing of
Commodities, are mustered up to make it good.

It has been already asserted, That no Reason can be given why Bullion or
Money, should be Exported out of any Nation to a Foreign Country, to remain and
continue there, but in order to pay, or contract some Debt; unless the Person
that Exports it, intend to remove himself also, or to give it away: All Persons
so indebted, or that intend to become indebted, to any Foreign Nation by any
Purchase, or Contract, consider which way to raise such Money, as shall want in
that Country, whether by remitting Goods, Bills of Exchange, Bullion or Coin;
if find that the Price of Goods, and Rate of Exchange is against them, and that
Bullion or Coin will turn them better to account, it is probable that they may
resolve to send out Bullion, or Coin; and the like our Neighbors, that are
indebted, or have occasion to run in Debt to us, will practice; but the Raising
or Falling of the Coin to prevent or further it either here, or there, will
have little more influence than the sinking of a Ship in the mouth of the
Thames, would have upon the Flux or Reflux of the Sea, because the Rate of
Exchange and Prices of Goods would Advance proportionable, and make it the same
thing in effect, though may occasion some Change in Names and Figures: For
unless it can be made out, that the Raising or Falling of the Coin will
discharge what Debts we may owe to Foreign Nations, we shall be as liable to
pay them, after such Advance, as before, and they probably as willing to be
paid; which will occasion that our Coin must go, be it high or low; and
nothing, but not running into Debt, can prevent it.

To imagine that Foreign Nations will in any Case take from us Guineas at 4 to
5 s. per piece more than are worth, compared with Silver, or in Exchange of
Silver, is to imagine they will act contrary to Common Sense.

Therefore it is probable that this Assertion is taken up, not upon
Observations made upon the usual course of Trade, but from Accidents which may
give some cause for it. As Gluts of Markets, or Want of Goods, may advance or
run down their Prizes, so Plenty of Bills of Exchange, or Scarcity of them, or
of Money for Bills, for any place, may occasion a considerable alteration in
their Rates on a sudden, which may sometimes offer Opportunities to remit Gold
to Holland, or to any of our Neighboring Countries, to purchase Bills of
Exchange, which when received here may produce 26 s. per Guinea: And thus it
may be said that 26 s. was obtained for a Guinea. But the alteration of the
Coin cannot have any effect to prevent any such Accidents, which as do
sometimes occasion the carrying out of Coin or Bullion, so at other times the
bringing of it in: For Merchants from Holland, when the Exchange gives them any
such temptation, send Money here to make the same Advantage to themselves also.
Such ways as these ever were, and will be, practiced by Trading-Men to get
Money, and what thus happens by Accident not very material to a Nation: For
when any such great difference happens between the Product of Bullion and
Exchange, cannot according to Nature hold long; either the Trade of Exchange
will destroy the Trade in Bullion, or Bullion that by Exchange. Both Trades
will not long continue, unless the Rates run near an Equality or Par.

If Guineas be made current by Law at 26 s. and the Silver not raised
proportionable, then our Neighbors will take the same advantage on us, as is
before proposed to be taken on them; bring us in Gold, and carry away our
Silver, which will be so much Loss to the Nation as the 4 s. or 5 s. per
Guinea, on the quantity so brought in, will amount to: Therefore if Guineas be
Advanced, our Silver Coin must be Raised also.

A perpetual Silence would be put to all Arguments for Raising all or any of
the Coin to prevent Exportation, if the impossibility of preventing the Raising
of the Rates of Exchange, and Prizes of Goods proportionable, or how to avoid
the payments of Debts to Foreigners if any such be contracted, or to hinder
other Princes or States from Raising their Coin proportionable, were well
considered.

Exchange for Ireland was 10 to 15 per Cent. in Favor of that Kingdom last
Year, now about 10 per Cent. in our Favor. And the like Instances may be given
of alterations since the stop to a Currency of the Clipped Money. In the Exchange
to other places, the Price of most Goods did advance to the Price of Guineas,
when were current at 30 s. and are since Fallen; which are such great Proofs
from Experience (and fresh in our Memory) that the Weight and Fineners of the
Coin, does govern not only the Price of Exchange, but of Goods also, that it
must afford cause for admiration that any doubt should be made to it.

The Bulk of Trade is usually carried on between Nation and Nation, by
Bartering or Exchange of Commodities; but when disuse, high Customs, gluts of
Markets, or any other cause, make such alterations in the Prizes of the
Commodities of any Country, that may not turn to account so well as Bullion,
then Bullion will be Ship off in the room of such Commodities. If for any cause
our Goods should so decline in Price Abroad as to hinder their being sent out,
and the Goods of such Foreign Countries to which we did use to send them,
should continue in esteem, and be consumed here, then we shall either send out
our Bullion to purchase them, or those that bring them, will carry away our
Bullion in return of them: But this cannot be prevented, but by taking less
Goods from such Nations, or by finding some way to get such a Repute to our
own, as that we may spend more there; for buying and taking much of such
Nations, and felling and delivering little to them, must inevitably bring us in
Debt, and occasion the going out of our Money to discharge what we did not pay
in Goods. To prevent this, it is more advisable to confider how to take away
the Cause, that we may not run in Debt to Foreign Nations, then to contrive how
to pay 20 s. with 16 s.; for when we have put the best face we can upon the
Raising of the Coin, it will appear to Foreigners, like making a Composition,
to pay but a part of what we owe them instead of all; and be an impairing of
the Credit and Public Faith of the Nation, and occasion such Jealousies in all
the Trading People we deal with, that it may Reasonably be expected, that
afterward Bills of Exchange, and Contracts, will be so made, as that those
which are concerned in them may fence or secure themselves against the like, to
prevent their receiving any Losses by it. We may by Raising of the Coin put
some Difficulties upon such Strangers to whom we are now indebted, but not
comparable to what we shall bring upon our selves.

The chief use of Coin, is to be a Pledge, Rule and Measure in Dealings,
therefore ought to be Certain, Fixed and Immovable. If one Alteration be made
will create not only a Jealousy, but a Necessity that more will follow, as
always in the like Case has been practiced in all Countries. To prevent
Losses by it, such Care and Circumspection will be required, and such
Endeavors will be used by others to make Advantages by it, in their Dealings,
that the Coin will no longer be a standing Rule and Measure for Commerce, but
be as uncertain in Value as other Commodities, and be rather a Commodity to
Trade in, then a convenience for the carrying on of Trade: And when the
continual Loss and Confusion, which will be the consequence of Raising the
Coin, shall be universally perceived, or felt, if produce resolutions for
falling it again, as may reasonably be expected in some short time, the
Difficulties how to do it will be so great, and the Loss (if sunk to the Old
Rate) so immense, that it will be hard to be born. Those which have had any
Advantage by the Raising of it, will keep what they have got, and leave the
Loss that must happen by the sinking of it, either on the Public, or on such
Particular Persons as may then have it in their possession. Poor and Rich will
in such case be forced to lose One Fifth of what Money they may then have,
though did not get any thing by the Advance of it.

The Raising of the Coin can only be an advantage to those persons that have it
at that time in their custody, The Advantage to whom by Raising the Coin.
and are indebted to others; but the Public, and most other Persons will
receive great Losses by it. Whoever has 10000 l., if a Crown piece be advanced
to 6 s. 3 d., will get 2500 l. upon it, for will be enabled to pay 12500 l.
Debt with his 10000 l. and those that receive it must bare the Loss; for there
cannot be in such a case, so much Gains put into one Man's Pocket, but it must
come out of another, or out of the Public; as certain as it has been found
by Experience, that the Gains some Ill Men have made by Clipping, must now be
paid by the Public, or lost by Particular Persons, so Clipping it by Authority
would be found at last to have the same effect. Those that have any Money owing
upon Mortgages, Bonds, Specialties, or otherwise, must then receive 320 Crowns
instead of 400, which must be called and taken as 100 l. which no doubt may be
Lent out again, or Paid away in all Cases as 100 l. because the Law obliges
all Persons so to take it; but it is not likely the Law will oblige all Persons
to sell as much Land or Goods for such 320 Crowns when must be esteemed 100 l.,
as was sold for 400 before, but leave all Persons in that to their liberty; If
so, then it is probable the genious Humor and Fancy of People, as well as
Reason, will lead them to stand upon their Terms in all Sales, that may not
take 320 instead of 400, notwithstanding Arguments that it will pass for so
much from one to another; neither will Persons be forward to borrow at that
Rate, without assurance that shall at the same Rate pay it again.

The fallacy of the Argument that it will pass so, and therefore no prejudice,
will soon appear, and have little influence after a while; for People will in
time consider, what they may have in Barter for their Money, the Weight,
Goodness, and Value of it, compared with what they bought formerly, what they
can purchase for it, as well as how it will pass; and if find, as soon will,
that their 320 Crowns, though now called 100 l., will buy no more Goods than
400 Crowns before such Advance, will conclude that have misreckoned, or are
abused, 80 Crowns in 400: For though all People have not the sense of seeing,
yet all have the sense of feeling: In Bills of Exchange, buying of Plate, or
any thing of Gold and Silver, will find it immediately; and in a short time
probably upon all Goods of our own Growth, as well as from Abroad; for the
alteration that must happen in passing Bills of Exchange, must occasion the
Raising the Prizes of Foreign Goods; for few Persons but agree, that Foreigners
in their Dealings will not have respect to the Raising of our Coin; and if
their Goods should Rise and ours not, we should make but a bad Bargain; for
then it would inevitably follow, that we should buy from Strangers their Goods
20 per Cent. dearer than we shall sell them: For if our Goods do not Rise
proportionable to the Coin, then what we sold formerly for 400 Crowns, must be
sold for 320, and so at one blow cut off One Fifth of the Value of all Goods
now made or to be made, sold to Strangers; and thereby enable them to buy here
so cheap, as to undersell Abroad our own Merchants, and then get no more by
Advancing our Coin, then we got lately by the Strangers Importing Guineas upon
us at 30 s. before our Goods rose proportionable. Either this must be owned, or
that all Goods will Rise in proportion; and then it may appear the greatest
Mystery referring to Coin, where the Advantage will be; for cannot prove a
multiplication of the Coin in Substance, though may in Number, which will be
found of little use, and cannot hinder the Exportation of Bullion, and if Goods
Rise, not be the occasion of bringing it in; and if our Goods do not Rise in
proportion, then have a worse effect: For Silver and Gold may be bought too
dear; and if brought in upon such losing Terms, it will be impossible to keep
it long here; for the very taking it upon those Terms will open a door for the
carrying it out again.

If a Law should be made that every half Acre of Land should for the future be
reckoned and called an Acre, it may double the Lands in number of Acres; for
those Fields which were esteemed at 100 Acres before, will then be accounted as
200 Acres, and as 200 Acres, may descend to the next Heir, Sold to a Purchaser,
or Let to a Tenant; but not likely that therefore the Purchaser or Tenant will
double his Price or Rent, but will conclude that it will not bear more Grass or
Corn for the Acres being so doubled in Name: Not likely that the Raising of
Money, either 25 or 50 per Cent. should have any other effect. A Crown piece in
such case would pafs from one to another at 6 s. 3 d. where the Receiver is no
more concerned than to take it by that Name. A Man that is to borrow 100 l.,
will and must take 320 Crowns as 100 l. and not regret it; because by the same
Law will expect to pay it back at the same rate: But a Man that is to pass away
Lands, or Goods, for it, will consider, that if any sort of Goods which he may
want be Risen that he must be a Loser, unless Raise his Lands and Goods, that
intends to sell, in proportion.

Borrowing and Lending, and in some Cases Buying and Selling, may be properly
said to be the way and means to get Riches, but not the end designed by Men's
Labors. No Man would take any pains and care of that Nature, nor improve Lands
or Rents, but in hopes of Gains to support his Expenses, according to the port
may live in; or provide for his Family higher or lower, as may thereby be
enabled. However Money so Advanced may pass for the way and means, when comes
to that which is the design, and end, of the Labors of Men, will soon find the
mistake, and that 320 Crowns in his Expenses, will go no further than 400
Crowns did before, and the like in Childrens Portions, or making provision for
them; and it is the end, and not the way, that should be chiefly minded in this
case. And the like disadvantage will be found in all Expenses for the Public;
and Gentlemen that have their dependence on Rents will find One Fifth lost,
either for along time, or for ever, and lose One Fifth part of all Debts owing
to them; must receive for 100 l., 320 Crowns instead of 400 Crowns, which
unless for payment of Debts contracted before, will soon find, will lose 80
Crowns in 400. And although it may be argued, that the Rents of Lands may also
Advance in time, yet not having so immediate a dependence on Trade, as
Commodities that are bought and sold daily, it may be feared, that the Rents of
Land will be the last thing that will Advance, and Old Rents, Rent Charges or
Annuities, never, unless a Law be made for that purpose.

It is difficult to apprehend, why it should be thought so easy to make Money
(which is of so great Concern, and upon which most fix their chiefest
Considerations) pass and serve as the Standard of all Dealings and Commerce,
according to its Name, without any respect to Weight or intrinsic Value, and
at the same time probably not allow, that it is possible to make Land, or any
sort of Goods, to pass by Name, without respect to Goodness, Value or Weight:
It being not likely, that if by Law Three Fourths of an Acre of Land should be
called an Acre, or Three Fourths of a Pound of Lead, called a Pound, that then
it would Exchange for as much Silver as before; so as unlikely, that when Three
Fourths of a Crown piece is called a Crown, should Exchange for as much Land,
or Lead, as before. That some Credulous Persons should be imposed upon to think
well of Raising the Coin not strange; but if a whole Nation, it would in time
be concluded they were either under an infatuation, or that they designed to
live only for Six Months or a Year.

That Exchanges and Goods did not immediately Rise upon the Clipping of the
Money, was because there was more Unclipt than Clipped, and the Major overruled
the Minor; but as soon as the Clipped exceeded the Unclipt, then that illegal
debasing of the Coin, soon had that effect: What then can be expected if should
be advanced or debased (for may be termed either) by Authority.

If the giving of Coin high Denominations could make it pass accordingly, and
have the effect of preventing Exportation, and occasion the Importation of
Bullion, how easy for Poor Princes to make themselves Rich: But as it appears
impossible that any such Advantages should be made by others, so that should
long continue to us, if any could be expected, unless we could Enact at the
same time, that no other Prince or State should Raise their Coin in proportion,
which it is probable they soon would, if found themselves prejudiced by our
drawing away their Coin by any such Law here: Then the Advantages designed
would be deseated, but the Mischiefs would remain.

Arguments for the Advancing of the Coin deduced from the Price of Bullion,
Price of Bullion.
that it is worth much more than when Coined, either here or in Foreign
Countries, if duly examined, can have no foundation. Bullion or Coin when
Exchanged or Bartered for Commodities, or the Commodities may be esteemed
higher or lower according to the Plenty or Scarcity of Bullion or Coin, or the
Commodities, but that Bullion or Silver in Barter of Coin or Silver, of the
same Fineness, can be, or ever was, worth any thing considerable more than Coin
or Silver of the same Fineness, that is, an Ounce for an Ounce, cannot be from
any Natural Cause, only by Accident, and therefore no Argument for the
Advancing of Coin: For the same Accidents may probably remain, though the Coin
be never so much Advanced.

Where there are Laws that allow of the Exportation of Bullion, but prohibit
the Exportation of Coin, as now with us, when great Quantities of Bullion do
not come from Foreign Parts to exceed the occasion of those that send it out,
to the East Indies, or any other Country, where the carrying on of Trade, or
payment of Debts, requires it, Bullion will not be carried to the Mint to be
Coined, but be sold without, for the supplying of those Traders that have
occasion, who will give for it much above the Rate of Coin, because may Ship it
off with impunity: And needing great Quantities to be Shipped sometimes in one
bottom, are loath to adventure the Shipping of Coin, because if a Seizure, may
prove a Loss irreparable: But this may be observed, that when we had plenty of
Milled Money and Weighty Coin, then Bullion seldom exceeded the Value of Coin 3
d. per Ounce; since that is grown scarce, the Price much Advanced.

In Spain, when pieces of Eights are grown scarce at the end of a Year before
the Galloons or Fleets arrive, or upon any delay or loss of their Fleets, then
oftentimes are worth 8 to 10 per Cent. Exchange more than at other times; but
here, and there, and in all places, occasioned by such Laws or Accidents, which
the Raising of Coin cannot possibly prevent: It being as contrary to all Reason
that an Ounce of Silver Coined, should not be worth an Ounce Uncoyned, a little
more or less, if it were not for such Accidents, as that a Shilling should not
be worth another Shilling of the same Weight and Fineness.

Few or no presidents can be given, that where any or all the Coin of a Nation
was Raised, that the Gains by the Advance might redound to the particular
persons that had it in their custody. In Spain the Coin has been often
Advanced, but always with an expectation to ease the Government in Payments.
In Portugal was Raised 25 per Cent. about Anno 1664, because the Government
could not possibly otherwise get Money to oppose the Spaniard, who were then
entering that Kingdom with a numerous Army; for which 20 per Cent. of the
Advance Money was taken, and 5 per Cent. allowed to the People to tempt them to
bring it in. In France the Gold has been lately Risen several times, but for
the Profit of the Government. And in all these places, though did serve for a
turn, yet has occasioned so much Confusion, Complaints and Disadvantages, that
no Arguments can be drawn from those Presidents to encourage others to do the
same. In all Ages has been looked upon as a great discovery of Poverty, and
like adventuring the last Stake. But Arguments from Necessity, and
Self-preservation, if the Advance-Money be applied for that end, may make some
Excuse, when no other way can be found to save a Nation.

Silver Coin is the Standard in all Nations. Gold, though also esteemed
Treasure, and of greater Value than Silver, because of its Scarcity,
Durableness, Beauty and Use, before other Metals, takes its Computation from
Silver the only Standard, and is usually reckoned by the general Consent of
Mankind, to be worth about Fifteen to One; One Ounce of Gold being usually
esteemed worth Fifteen Ounces of Silver, is also necessary to increase the
Treasure, as well as Stock of the Nation, should be Coined exactly in
proportion to Silver, to answer the Value put on it by Common Esteem,
otherwise will give an opportunity to Foreigners, either to carry away the
Gold, and bring Silver, or carry away the Silver, and bring Gold, as may turn
them best to account. But because a great Value of Gold may be preserved in
little room, and therefore with more security than Silver, impossible to keep
it from being attended with some little variations, as such Conveniences may
occasion, which those that have it will take the advantage to make. But Gold is
not so serviceable to a Nation as Silver, because those that have it are not
willing to make Payments with it, but apt to hoard it, unless can have more for
it than it is worth; which makes it rather a Commodity to Trade in, than a
convenience for the carrying on of Trade; and a part of the dead Stock of the
Nation.

If the Gains expected by some that have the Coin now in their custody, should
produce a combination to hoard it up, in hopes to put a force upon the
Government to get it Raised, though may prove a great hindrance to Public
Affairs, and Commerce for some time; yet no remedy can be so bad to cure any
such evil, as the Raising of the Coin, not only in respect of the great Loss
and Charge that would attend it, as because would be a great encouragement to
others, in a short time, to hoard it up again, in hopes to force the Government
to another Advance: If not, the doing it once, if extended to Debts then owing,
will make such a violation upon all Contracts, between Man and Man, and
occasion such a confusion in our Coin, Exchanges, Prices of Commodities, and
all Dealings, that what has been done already, to regulate the Coin, would
prove so much Labor lost, and put us back ward instead of forward; for the
Species of both Gold and Silver must be Raised, not one without the other,
which would add to the Loss, Charge, and Mischiefs, the Clippers have brought
on us already, as much more as the Coin may be Risen; therefore it may probably
be much easier and safer, seeing the lightest of the Clipped Money is taken in,
and most new Coined, to go on reforming the rest of the hammered Money, by
allowing a Reasonable Price, to encourage Persons to bring it into the Mint, in
other places as well as London, that the Countries may also be furnished with
New Money, by the New Coining of it; and when the Rate is fixed. for the taking
it in to be Coined, if be also taken in upon Funds, and by the Receivers of the
Public Revenue, may probably then pass from hand to hand, at the same Rate by
Weight, for the carrying on of Commerce, till can be taken in, and New Coined,
which should be with all speed, that our several Species of Coin may be reduced
to one Standard which is absolutely necessary. The Raising of the Coin, instead
of conquering this overgrown Monster, which has so much endangered the Peace
and Tranquillity of the Nation, will create a new brood of Mischiefs more
ravenous than the Dam, and be rather augmented, than abated, by limiting such
an Advance to continue but for a short time, or to be allowed only during this
present War. A Law so limited will occasion that some part of the Coin may
change hands, with great Gains to all Tenants and Debtors, but what they get
the Landlords and Creditors must lose; but so far from affording the least
prospect of a general Currency to our Coin, or any Advantage to the Public,
that the quite contrary effect may be feared; for all Persons (excepting those
indebted) will then find it difficult, if not impossible to make any use of the
Coin so Raised: If offer to lend it out upon Bonds or Mortgages, those that
receive it at 6 s. 3 d., if have a prospect, fear or jealousy, that the Crown
will in time be reduced again to 5 s. must be out of their Wits, if do not
agree that he that lends it, shall receive the Crown at the same rate again of
6 s. 3 d. when they pay it back; and if endeavor to lay it out in Lands,
Goods, or Bills of Exchange, will find the like caution will be taken; if lent
it into the Exchequer, and the like care be not taken there to agree to pay
back at the same rate they receive it, then the Lender may be safe, by the
Kings bearing the Loss, and upon such Terms no doubt will prove a temptation
for the bringing in of great Sums upon Loans: But if the Exchequer should take
care to prevent any such Loss, and pay what they may then owe, with Money so
Advanced, the Loss the People may receive thereby will prove a great hinderance
to the bringing in of more Money; And those that have received 40000 Crowns for
50000, instead of paying it into the Exchequer, may be under as great
temptations to hoard it up, in expectation to force another Change in their
favor (having justice to plead in their behalf, that they may not be losers)
as those that contrived the Raising of it before it was paid to them; the hopes
thereof, and the interruptions that will follow, in the Paying of Bills of
Exchange, and in Commerce and Dealings, till some Method can be agreed how
Payment shall be made for the future, by expressing not only at what rate a
Crown shall be paid, but of what Weight also, most likely to put a stop to the
Currency of all our Coin at once, and occasion more Complaints, Losses and
Confusion, ^hen we have suffered by the Clipping. The Raising of the Coin,
whether for a limited or unlimited time, will prove as dangerous as meddling
with Foundations, or removing the most necessary Bound marks, may lead us into
a Labyrinth or out of our depth, more likely than do any good to the Public,
or to many Particular Persons.

What effect the Raising of the Coin may have upon Edibles, and with
Shopkeepers in selling our home Commodities amongst our selves, may allow of
some dispute; for the most Natural Cause for the Advance of such Commodities
should be from the Advance of Rents, which may not soon happen: But as all
Shopkeepers, and the People that furnish the Markets, have occasion of some
Foreign Commodities, the alteration that they will find in the Price of them,
and in making provision for their Families, may probably make them soon Advance
their Commodities also proportionable, that they may not take 1 s. for 15 d.
when can turn them no better to account, in what they may purchase for it, than
a Shilling did before such Advance; though must so pass to their Landlord.

Whatever differences may happen in Opinion about the effects of altering the
Standard of our Coin, Laws to prevent Counterfeiting the Coin.
or ways to reduce it to its former Purity, yet all will agree, that the
Honor, Justice and Peace of the Nation, as well as the carrying on of
Commerce, depends much upon preventing the debasing of it; and that it is of so
great importance, that all care should be taken to hinder it, at the first
appearance of any such attempt, otherwise hard to be cured without great
Confusion and Loss, as we now find by Experience. The numbers of People which
have practiced the Clipping Trade, and the encouragement it has had (as may be
presumed) from persons of considerable Estates, by taking off Clippings under
the name of Bullion, and Clipped Money, in Exchange of Weighty, it may be feared,
has so degenerated their Principles, that may not easily be reduced to live by
more laborious, honest, and less profitable Employments: And seeing the
ingenuity of the Age in Wickedness is such, that the New Milled Money is
already Counterfeited, and that the Laws we have with the penalty of Death and
terror of Burning, have not had any great effect toward the preventing of it,
as desperate Diseases require desperate Remedies, this Evil being most
dangerous to the Public Good, severer Laws then ever yet were made in any
case, will be found necessary to prevent it, till this Villainous Crew be
extirpated, and their Art forgotten; which if not speedily made and put in
execution, we may soon have such a mixture of Milled Money, as may in a short
time render it incapable to be the Standard of Commerce, without great trouble
and uncertainty, and force a New Coining of all over again; as if we were to
walk in a Circle, during the pleasure of these Artists. What ways the Poorer
sort have found out to avoid being punished by the Laws already made, and how
the Rich (without whose assistance the Clipping Trade could not have been
carried on to so great a degree) have escaped, without punishment, is
notorious. As the Legislative Power of Parliaments is undoubted, so their
Judiciary has been often practiced upon extraordinary occasions; if a stricter
prosecution in order to Condemnation, or of severer Chastisements upon such as
may be found with any Instruments, for the Coining of False Money, or with any
quantities of such Money, unless can prove where they received it, and for the
cutting in pieces of such Money by Magistrates and Justices when offered in
payment, and for frequent Proclamations upon the discovery of any False Coin,
with descriptions and directions how may be known, by Weighing or other ways,
which may be had by the help of the Officers of the Mint, that the Magistrates
and Justices may do their Duty in cutting and defacing such Coin, which will
keep the people upon a constant guard to discover it. If such Powers as may be
thought necessary for these ends, to put a stop to this growing Evil, should
not be thought convenient to be entrusted with inferior Courts, as may without
danger be reserved and executed by the High Court of Parliament, so if should
in some extraordinary Cases be so reserved, most likely to strike the greatest
terror into such Offenders, that they may no longer be encouraged to go on, by
depending upon the favor of Juries, niceties of Law, or hopes of Pardons.

Upon these foregoing Considerations it may appear, The Necessity of looking
into Trade.
that the true Reason for the Exportation of our Coin is running in Debt to
Foreign Nations, and that the Raising of our Coin, or Laws against the
Exportation of it, or Bullion, can have little or no effect toward the
increasing or retaining of it, and that it can only be done by looking into
Trade, and all other Transactions, upon which the contracting of Debts with
Foreign Nations depends, and by making such Regulations and Reformations, as
may reduce the Balance of Accounts with Foreign Nations to be in our favor.

Trade may properly be distinguished into Domestic and Foreign. Of Trade
Domestic.
Buying, Selling and Trading amongst our selves, may occasion that one Man may
grow Richer than another, but has no immediate influence upon the enriching or
impoverishing of the Nation; but those Nations which consume most of the
Products of Foreign Countries, and also are extravagant in the expense of their
own, will be under a great disadvantage; for like good or bad Husbandry in
other Cases, that will have a great influence upon the increase or decrease of
Riches. Those that are prodigal in the consumption of Foreign Commodities, do
by that prodigality bring the Nation in Debt more than necessary, as much as
they might have saved to themselves in their own Expenses; and those that are
prodigal in the expense of their own Products, do decrease the Exportation of
so much as they might have saved: Therefore though it may be true, that bad
Husbands and Prodigal Persons do, by such Prodigality, promote Trade, it can
only be understood for the advantage of our Home Trades, but not for the
enriching of the Nation.

However much does depend upon the encouragement of our Home Trades; vast
numbers of People have their Livelyhoods from it, and the Grandeur, Strength
and Wealth of great Cities and Corporations are chiefly supported by it. Shop
Trades are convenient that all People may know where to go to be supplied, with
what Goods or Commodities they want; and Handicrafts and Artificers for the
providing of them. The more are maintained by Laborious Profitable Trades, the
Richer the Nation will be both in People and Stock, and thereby all have the
convenience of Commodities the cheaper: Therefore all Laws, Bylaws, and
Customs of Corporations, that tend to Restrain, Limit, and Narrow our
beneficial Home Trades, may upon examination be found prejudicial to the
Public.

Building Ships, and the great Dealings which are necessary for the
Manufacturing of all Goods to be made fit for Exportation, and for the
Consumption of what brought from Abroad, may be esteemed as part of our
Domestic Trade: So that although the Riches of the Nation cannot be said to be
immediately from our Domestic Trades, yet it is that upon which our Foreign
Trade, and consequently our Riches, have so great dependence, that there cannot
be one without the other, in any great measure; and the Landed Men, and such
others as have Wealth, but not engaged in Trade, give their help also, either
by affording Materials, or as Consumers, of what made here, or brought from
Abroad, the Merchants by Exporting and Importing, the Seamen by carrying; and
thus the whole Body of the Nation may be said to help, and be useful, in the
carrying on of Trade, which if well considered would prevent all Animosities
and Enmity between the several Callings: Their dependence is so intermixed, that
neither could thrive without the help one of the other.

The way to make our Domestic Trade more subservient to us, To advance Lands
and Rent.
would be to give all encouragement to the increase of all sorts of
Manufacturies, and Handicrafts Trades; for that may occasion a multiplication
of People, and of Profitable Employments, and the increase of our Exportation,
and decrease of our Importation: For the more variety we have of Goods of our
own make, the less we shall need from Abroad, and have the more to Export. And
this would also conduce to the Improvement of Lands, and their Advancement,
both in Rent and Value, not only because Wool, Flax, and some other of our own
Products may be spent in the Manufacturing of such Commodities, and if People
increase we should have a greater Consumption, but because it is the surest way
to lay a foundation for the increasing of Riches, and the Coin of the Nation,
which above all other Causes that can be assigned will be the most effectual to
advance Lands and Rents. Plenty of Money will always produce variety and
plenty of Chapmen to purchase, or take Lands at Annual Rents, and cause the
Products to advance in Price; but scarcity of Coin will always have the
contrary effect: And it is not likely that any other way can be found out to
advance the Value of Lands that will be general, or hold for any long time.

Our moveable Riches had their Original, The Original of Riches
and must have their Increase from the Labor and Industry of our People, by
digging out of the Bowels of the Earth, Manufacturing and making fit for use
the Product thereof; and Fish got out of the Sea, and Transporting it to, and
Trading with Foreign Nations; or by Trades carried on by Foreign Commodities
sold to Foreign Nations; or by Employments given to our Shipping Abroad. All
which depends upon having many people: Therefore the obtaining more, and well
employing those we have, may deserve consideration in the first place.

Though in all Nations there ever were several Conditions, From the Labor of
the People.
Qualities and Degrees of Men, yet it cannot be too often considered, that
though a Gentleman have Lands valued in 10 or 20000 l. per Annum, and Mines of
Gold at his own dispose; Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, etc. never so great
Merits, Parts, or pretenses to Gains or Incomes, yet would be so far from
enriching the Nation, or having Riches or Plenty themselves, that they would
not have Necessaries, nor Money to buy them, without the help of the laboring
and working Men; that all persons may in their several stations endeavor to
promote Industry, as the foundation of Riches, Plenty, and their own Welfare.

When those that depend to have their Riches and Necessaries from the Sweat and
Labor of others, are more in proportion than those that labor to provide
those things that are necessary to supply them, there must be a danger that the
Riches of the Nation must be consumed, and that Scarcity and Poverty will ensue.

It is not doubted, To prevent Idleness.
but there is a labor of the Brain as well as of the Body, that is absolutely
necessary for the preservation of Societies, which cannot subsist without
distinction, as well for Dominion, as for the preservation of Property and
Liberty, without which there would be no encouragement to Industry; and that
many ought to be exempted from the labor of the Body, not only because have
great Estates and Dignities, but because may apply themselves wholly to the
labor of the Brain, for the carrying on the Governing part, that Religion may
be promoted, Peace preserved, Justice administered, the Public secured, and
Expenses defrayed; but when more are bred up, or admitted, for the carrying on
of such Employments than are necessary, especially of the meaner sort, will be
attended with ill consequences by defrauding the Public of so many hands which
would be more useful in the Mines, or at Husbandry, or in the Fishing Trade or
Manufacturies.

It is obvious that of late, no Employment offers in Church or State, nor in
any Gentleman's Family, that can be performed without Bodily Labor, but
pretenders too it are numerous, though the Employment be mean; but for Plowing,
or any sort of Husbandry, digging in our Mines, or working on Manufacturies, or
any servile work in Families, or any thing that requires Labor, Servants are
difficult to be got, as is experienced in most parts of the Kingdom; which is a
demonstration that the generality do bring up their Children either idly, or
give them such Education as inclines them to Employments not accompanied with
Labor; or that the People are too much run off from those Laborious
Employments that are most necessary for the Nation.

Too many being engaged in such Employments, more than are necessary, and more
that spend their days idly in hopes to get them, is a great load upon the
Nation; as well because their hands are wanted to carry on Husbandry and Trade,
as because are of ill Example to others: And when such Employments fail, being
disused and enemies to Labor, fall to Robbing, Stealing, Pilfering, Clipping,
or the like, to get a Livelihood; and think it a sufficient Excuse to say, when
come to suffer for it, That they could not other ways live.

Besides those that spend their Time in Employments unprofitable to the
Public, or in Addresses, and expectation to get them, many that are able to
work rather choose to live by Begging, both in City and Country, and a great
number Idle upon several other pretenses, industrious in nothing but how to
avoid Work: Such should not be comprehended within the obligations and
injunctions for Charity, least the Stock of the Nation, which depends on
Labor, and upon which all must live, should by encouraging such Idle Drones
and Vagrants, be decreased or destroyed.

If the Labor of every Working Man may be esteemed at 5 l. per Annum Gains to
the Nation, it amounts to a vast Sum that is lost Annually by the Idleness of
so many people, and such Idle Employments. The want of such hands, as it has
made Servants scarce for Labor, so it has advanced their Wages, which does
fall heavy upon Land and Trade, and the advance of Wages has proved an
inducement to Idleness; for many are for being Idle the oftener, because they
can get much in a little time; and therefore little the better for it.

It may possibly appear upon examination that this Mischief has risen from the
Education of Children; Parishes and Parents having been very negligent of late
Years to put the Poor out to Labor, or any Employment, in their Minority, and
being bred up Idly in their Youth, cannot afterward bring themselves, nor be
brought to work; especially if they have learnt to get any thing for their
Subsistence, by any pilfering or Finical Employment.

How much the breeding up the Children of poor people to Learning or
Scholarship has conduced to their avoiding of Laboring Imployes may be
considered; for few that have once learnt to Write and Read, but either their
Parents, or themselves, are apt to think that they are fit for some preferment,
and in order to it, despise all Laboring Employments, and live Idle rather
than disparage themselves by Work, and not endeavor to reap some particular
Advantage by such Learning.

As Communities consist of several degrees, so it is convenient that every
degree should be preserved. Though Learning is to be admired and prefered, yet
there being many indications of undoubted Authority, that Man should live by
Labor; and in the Swear of his Face eat his Bread: If Learning, and Labor of
the Body be now found inconsistent, or not to be expected in one person, and
the Nation like thereby to want what is necessary, for security against the
common dangers of Famine and Poverty, whether should be let alone that people
may take their own way, in the Education of Children, or some Remedy should be
applied, being a tender point, is left to better Judgment. But as we have
Free-Schools to teach Children to Write and Read, if we had also as many
Publick-Workhouses, to teach them to Spin and Card, and manufacture Goods,
would probably prove advantageous to such Children, and Nation also.

How the Education of the Rich is changed of late Years, may be fitter for
private Considerations than to be particularly exposed; but if those of great
Qualities, and Estates, would breed up Sons and Daughters to some necessary
Business and Employment, after they have obtained a stock of Learning, as might
prove a great addition to their Fortunes, and happy Living, so of advantage to
the Public. Time spent in Business would be more Honorable to the Greatest,
and more accountable to God and Man, than spending it in Revellings and Vanity,
as it is feared is too much practiced. Those that can give a good account to
the Public how they spend their time, are likely to give the best account
hereafter, at the Great Day.

The Seventh day was appointed for Gods Service, and for Man to rest from his
Labors; whether the many Holidays kept now be not a great load upon the
Nation, may be Considered; for if but 2 Millions of Working People at 6 d. per
day, comes to 50000 l. which upon a due inquiry from whence our Riches must
arise, will appear to be so much Lost to the Nation, by every Holyday that is
kept, whether some may not be abolisht, especially being what was designed by
those Holidays is remembered only by some few, the Major part, spending such
days in Idleness, if not Debauchery: But at the same time that care is taken
to force, or entice the People to Work; so care should be taken there should be
Employment enough for them, for which the encouraging by Example, as well as
Laws, the Expense of our Homemade Commodities, and the encouraging of the Silk
and Linen, Paper and other Manufactures among us, such as upon examination may
be found most Convenient, would be of great Use.

Proposals for Setting the Poor at Work have been so often made Public, and
some of them so well contrived, and designed, that little can be added, and
therefore it may be lamented have not had the Sanction of Law to make them
effectual; and that those Laws we have against Idleness, Debaucheries, and for
the Employing of the Poor have not been better Executed; there having been a
General Remisness in Magistrates and others: therefore not strange we should
feel the ill Consequence of it, and wish for a better Execution hereafter.

Some have observed that the Taxes to the Poor on Lands, and Parishes, are
increased to be double what they were 20 Years since; which if true is a great
proof that many more have now a Recourse to that Idle way of being Maintained
then formerly; and half the Money Employed to put them to Work, would enable
them to Live more Comfortable, and be more useful to the Public.

These Propositions cannot appear trivial if it be Considered that the Monarchy
of Spain, which many Years held the Balance of Europe, notwithstanding her
great extents, excellent Situation, and rich Mines in the West Indies, by
permitting so great numbers of her People of both Sexes, to enter into
Religious Orders, the rest to Live in grave Idleness, keeping many Holidays,
and doing little Work, has declined to so great a degree, that of the
strongest and richest Monarchy in Europe, is become one of the Weakest, and to
be Supported by the Labor of their Blacks and Indians, that dig their Silver
for them out of their Mines: And it may be presumed that it will be impossible
for that Monarchy to Recover it Self, without using better Politics to
increase her People, and make them useful. Those that went to the West Indies,
could not be the true Cause of her Declining, because as the People are
managed, would have been of little use, if had staid in the Country, it being
not the way to grow Rich to have many Eaters, and few Workers.

If something be not done for the more effectual breeding up of young Children,
to such Employments as may Enure them to Labor, and Industry, in their younger
days, and for the Lopping off, or preventing the dependence of such a number
upon Maintenance from the Parish, and Idle Employments, unprofitable to the
Nation, it may be feared we shall grow top-heavy, and be in as much danger of
falling, as a Tree that has many branches but little Root, though there may be
some hopes of a remedy from the Course and Nature of things; because as Riches,
and Plenty, produce Luxury, and Idleness, so necessity, and Poverty may produce
Industry, and Frugality: Yet wise Nations do not usually let things run to the
last extremity, if can possibly prevent it; and the danger may appear too great
to be adventured, if well Considered.

Acts for a General Naturalization, General Naturalization.
though not absolutely necessary, yet would be an encouragement in order to
increase people, have been often attempted, and as often laid aside, without
coming to perfection, yet at the same time seldom refused to particular
Persons; which is to grant it, when the Persons are of qualities to pay for it,
(for it is attended with a considerable Charge) but to deny it Gratis; and
thereby the Working People, who we most want, are shut out from the benefit of
it; though any that come and bring their Estates with them ought to be welcome.
The admitting of the Poor might probably tend more to the increase of Riches
then what can be expected by admitting the Rich; for these may so far exceed
the Rich in number, that if kept to Employments, might in time get more, then
may probably be brought by the few Rich that may come in: Our Commonalty,
especially the Trading Part, are violently against such an Act, on a mistaken
Principle that the Strangers will then take the bread out of their Mouths: The
Shoemaker supposes if there come a Shoemaker, and make Shoes, that he shall
Sell the less, not Considering that as there may come one Shoemaker, so there
may come many others, who must all need Shoes, but not Make them, and increase
the expense of Shoes, more then he can well fear the new Shoemaker can Make.
The like with all other Trades. And therefore if understood their Interest,
would not find Reason to be against it, unless could Imagine that all came in
would take to one particular Trade, then might bring down the Price, or
over-load that particular Trade.

But the timing of such an Act as well in reference to abroad, as at home, is
Considerable; when the French Protestants were first Banished, or made Fly from
France, was oppertuned and the next thing, to make such an Act advantageous,
would be to take care to Employ the People that may come, in some Laborious
Trades, then we might have the advantage of gaining by it. Many People in a
short time, which otherways will be long growing up, but if should come and
live Idle, would do us more hurt then good.

Those that may be inclined to Husbandry, to Enclosing, Dreyning, Dressing, or
otherways Improving Lands, when can be spared from the plow or other
Employments, absolutely necessary; others to Spinning, Weaving, or any
Employment relating to any Sort of our Manufactures that we have or may think
good to Promote: and so we may make Provision for the Employments of Multitudes
of both Sexes, and all Ages, from Seven years Old upwards, for all Seasons and
times of the Year; where several Sorts of Manufactures are made, not likely all
will fail, and such as are inclined to the Sea, may be Employed in the Fishing
Trades

The not permitting our Wool to be Exported, if it can thus be Manufactured
here, Working up our Wool and making Goods True.
will be advantageous, and the expense of all sorts of Goods both at home and
abroad depending upon the well Working of them, that the Materials be all well
Wrought, and well Weaved into pieces, and to their due Length, Breadth, and
Goodness, and that Fish be well Cured and Packt, is very Material; all Persons
being apt to leave buying such Commodities in which they find themselves
Cheated.

And as the goodness of Commodities is absolutely necessary to introduce,
encourage, or preserve the Consumption of them, so is the price. Few persons
either abroad, or at home, are so bad Husbands, as not to endeavor to have the
most for their Money. If other Nations can afford the same, or other Goods, that
may Serve for the same uses Cheaper, then we can, such will be spent, and ours
will lie by the Walls; therefore all Charges, Customs, and Duties, on our own
products and Manufactures, and on our own Shipping, may appear to be Impolitick
and Mischievous, and be convenient to be taken off, if some other Duties less
prejudicial, could be contrived in the room of them for a recompense. The like
prejudice may arise from the advance of Wages, and Materials; therefore the
safest way for a Nation to enrich its Self is to have many People, and many
Materials; for gains made by a large Trade, may continue In spite of all
opposition, but gains made by a high price on a small Trade, not like to
endure; and to the Nation much better to have the gains arising by Trade,
divided amongst many, then few.

Next to Manufacturing and making Goods, follows carrying to Markets, for which
Cheap and easy Carriage, and Protection from Robbers by Land, and Pirates or
Enemies by Sea, is Material; without it Foreign Trade cannot be advantageous.
By the Goods consumed or Spent at home, our necessities for them are supplied;
what are not so Spent, are carried to Foreign Markets, which only can increase
Riches, but not likely without good Protection and safe Conduct.

A narrow inspection made, Balance of Trade.
in order to discover how the Balance Stands in reference to Trade in General
or particular, may be of great use to discover and give Light, what Trades and
Commodities ought to be encouraged, and what discouraged.

For though great difficulties may arise in adjusting the Balance of Trade,
and impossible to be done, exactly, yet such endeavors should not be slighted.
Where plain demonstration cannot be had, such proof as the matter is capable
off, should suffice.

In the Custom house Books there are entered, what Goods are Exported to or
Imported from Foreign Countries, of which an account should be taken for such
Years as may be thought convenient, and the value computed, such as are brought
in our own Ships according to their Cost put aboard, such as are brought in
Foreign bottoms, as are worth before Custom paid, for what it appears we have
Imported we must stand Debtors, and for what we have Exported Creditors.

But sometimes Ships and Goods are entered for one Country, that are designed
for another, when the Merchant can give any good proof or Reason, for any such
Practice; for any Country if the value can be known abatements may be made for
it out of an Account Stated as before mentioned.

It may also be objected that where we stand Debtors upon any such account, it
does not follow that the Balance is Carried out of this Nation in Coin, for it
may be, was remitted by Bills of Exchange drawn from the effects remitted to
Spain, or some other Country, or by Fish from the Newfound-land, or Goods
Carried from one Foreign Country, to another, which could not be entered in our
Custom-house Books, and therefore not come within the Computation, as ought.

This may in some Cases be true; and what Fish is Carried from Newfound-land,
or Goods from any place belonging to England, ought to be abated out of the
Account so Stated; but Bills of Exchange or Money from Spain, if it appear that
would otherways have come Home to us in Bullion, is tant a mount, as if Carried
from us in Money, and therefore ought not to be allowed. Goods Carried from one
Foreign Country to another, may be allowed, as a good Reason for an abatement,
if are the product of our own.

It is probable that many, and the Richest Goods, are sometimes Exported or
Imported by Stealth; if no inquiry can reach the value of such, may happily
produce another good effect, to use the uttermost diligence to prevent it; but
it may appear upon due Consideration, that it may not be reasonable to allow of
any such Goods, for a Charge or discharge in making up such an Account; for as
are smuggled, so raise a suspicion that are not Goods approved off by the
Government; and probably not Convenient should be Exported or Imported: But no
General rule can be prescribed in this or many other Cases.

All pretenses that our Bullion is not Carried out of the Kingdom to make up
the Balance to any Country from whence we Import more than we Export, that it
is drawn or remitted by Bills of Exchange, from some other Foreign Country,
should be looked upon as a great suspicion, that our Trade to any such Country,
is not profitable; for upon an Examination, such pretenses may appear to be to
the Nation no otherways, then with a Merchant that drives two Trades, upon
making up his Accounts finds that by one of the Trades had got 2000 l. but that
by the other had lost 1000 l. though upon the whole is a Gainer, yet being the
loss by the one must be supplied by the Gains from the other, may probably be
fonder of that Trade where he got then of that by which he lost; and that
unless can be well assured by new Measures to make it more Beneficial, not be
forward to continue any such Trade. The like Rule should be observed by Nations.

It is probable some other helps may be had to discover the Balance of Trade,
from the Rates of Exchange; by informations to what our Countries, our Coin or
Bullion, is usually Carried, and by a Judgment made upon the Scituations,
Policy, Customs, and Habits of such Countries to which we Trade; all which
though may not amount to a certain Proof, may be sufficient to produce
Resolutions for encouraging of those Trades, by which it may appear we
certainly get, and for endeavors to better those where a Suspicion arises
that we may lose, and to discourage those where there appears a certainty that
are pernicious.

Where the Balance of Trade is against us, if we cannot alter it by increasing
the expense of our Goods there, or by Spending in the Room of theirs the like
Goods taken from another Country, from whence we may have them on better Terms,
then the safest way (if we can be without such Goods) is to discourage the use
and expense of them by example: If that be not likely to have any effect, then
high Customs or Prohibitions may be used; but Prohibitions should always be
the last Remedy, when no other way can be found out, because may occasion
prejudicial Relations, especially if Contrary to Treatise of Commerce; and if
too much Practiced may prove such a Stinting of Trade, by being of ill Example
to others, that we that are a Trading Nation, should be careful how use them
often; but no Trading Nation but do take that Course someimes, and ought to be
practiced, rather then permit a losing Trade to be carried on, if no other
remedy.

Those Trades may be esteemed good which consume our products, What Trades good.
and Manufactures, upon which the value of our Land and Employment of the Poor
depends, that increase our Seamen and Navigation upon which our Strength
depends, that Supply us with such Commodities as we absolutely want for
carrying on our Trade, or for our safety, or Carry out more then bring in, upon
which the increase of Riches depends.

On the contrary, What Trades bad.
those that Import more than they Export, or bring us in Goods perfectly
Manufactured, or any sort of Goods that hinder the expense of our own, or that
carry out Wool, or other Materials, to enable Foreign Nations to make
Manufactures to be spent in the room of our own, or bring in Commodities that
are not of necessary use, but tend to increase Idleness, and Luxurious
Expenses, or are carried on by Foreign Bottoms, or Factors or Merchants that
are Foreigners, (not so advantageous as when carried on by our own Ships and
People) or Trades carried on by the Exportation of Coin or Bullion. Such Heads
as these may serve as a Touchstone for the Examination of Trades.

Most Trades are carried on between Nations by a permutation of Commodities,
Most Trades carried on by Exchange of Goods.
as a mutual convenience, for the supplying each the other with what they want;
Providence having so ordained that different Nations may abound with different
Commodities, and to want others, which makes the Exchange commodious. Those
that want least, and have most to Export (to which Industry added to Natural
Advantages does much contribute) generally have the advantage; but if they
should take none though could live without them, the like measures would
probably be taken by other Countries.

As Millions of People in this Kingdom have no Livelihood but what depends upon
Trade, so great care should be taken how any stop is put to any branch of it,
or any thing allowed that may decrease it: But it being possible that some Men
may enrich themselves by, and so consequently be encouraged to carry on some
Trade that may have a quite contrary effect, as to the Nation in general; where
that appears plain, a stop may be put, having respect in all proceedings of
this kind, to this General Rule, That Liberty of Trade is absolutely necessary
to make it Great, and Greatness to make it Beneficial, and to observe it
accordingly where the foundation for Trade is good.

Many Traders upon occasions take up Money at Interest; Of reducing Interest.
and some are of Opinion, that the reducing of Interest by Law to 4 per Cent.
is the only thing necessary to increase Trade, and enrich the Nation.

It Is true, Laws have been made formerly for the bringing down of Interest, and
sometimes for setting Prices on some Commodities; and the Price of Interest
has fallen since, and Trade increased: But it may be a question if it was
occasioned by those Laws; it being next to impossible to hinder those that have
Money or Goods not to make the most some way or other, here or elsewhere.
Therefore others are of Opinion, that the increase of Trade is rather the cause
of the falling of Interest, than that Low Interest should occasion the increase
of Trade, and that it was not occasioned by those Laws, but by our increase of
People, Industry and Trade.

Nations differ so extremely in Circumstances and Methods of Living and
Dealing, that we ought to be careful how we take our Measures from any Foreign
Nation, without due Consideration of their state, as well as our own. The
Dutch, Genoueses, Florentines and Venetians, being well seated for Trade, but
having not Lands of any great Value, the Lands sell high, because the Buyers
are abundantly more than the Sellers; and being there are not Lands for those
that have got great Estates by Trade to purchase, they are under a necessity to
continue their Estates in Trade, and their Children to continue the same after
them: And therefore it may be concluded that it is the Greatness of their Trade
that is probably the cause of Low Interest, and not that of their great Trade:
But if they did not outdo us in Frugality and Parsimony, they would have little
advantage over us by the difference of 1 per Cent. in the price of Interest
Money. But not Living at One Fifth of the Expense we do gives them a great
advantage as to the enriching those Nations. A Man of 10000 l. Estate not
spending there 200 l. per Annum; but here it is expected that of the like Estate
they should spend 1000 l. The Spaniards have large Territories, but the People
such Enemies to Industry, that if they had Money at 2 per Cent. they would
never increase Trade, as long as they continue of that humor.

As Gains is the Mother of Trade in general, so it has an influence on its
branches, or ingredients, that are necessary to carry it on, of which Money is
the chiefest; therefore it is probable that all persons that Lend Money at
Interest, who are usually Widows, Trustees for Orphans, or such as are Aged or
not Industrious, if they should be restrained by Law to 4 per Cent. Interest,
if they cannot by some indirect way make more of it, will either hoard it up,
lend it at the said rate of 4 per Cent., adventure it in Trade themselves, lay
it out in Land, or send it out of the Nation to be Lent out at Interest Abroad.
How any of these ways will be more for the Advantage of the Nation then as the
case stands at present, may be considered. If they hoard it up, then it will be
as so much lost; if Lent out at 4 per Cent. on Mortgages, then those that have
occasion to borrow will have the Advantage, and what they save by it, must be
lost by those that Lend, but no Advantage to the Nation, only a taking it out
of one Man's Pocket to put it into another. If they Lend it to Trading Men, or
adventure it in Trade themselves, still there will be but the same Stock as
before. If they lay it out in Land, and the Price, as to sale, should advance
upon it, then those that Sell would have some Advantage by it, and those that
Buy pay the dearer, but the Lands will be still the same as before to the
Nation; and unless the Rent advance as well as the Value, not encourage
Improvement, which cannot well be supposed will be practiced by those that take
up Money at Interest. And if they send it out of the Nation, though it return
in time with Interest, yet we may suffer more by the want of the use of it at
Home, then we may gain by such Interest made Abroad.

Interest being abated to 5 per Cent. without a Law, is a proof that Laws are
not absolutely necessary for any such purpose, but that it may be presumed
Trade governs Interest, and not Interest, Trade; and it cannot well be
comprehended how a Change of 1 per Cent. more, should have any great influence
upon the Improving or Advancing of Land, Increasing of Trade, or enable us to
outdo the Dutch, or other Nations, therefore no great help can be expected from
any such Law for abatement of Interest, but may rather be pernicious by
discouraging the use of Coin.

Paper Credit may be of some use, as well for the Supply of the Public, Paper
Credit.
as for the carrying on of Commerce, which has occasioned that many Projects
have been published and some put in practice, for making Paper to pass for
Money, taking it to be very easy, and that it could not fail of a good effect,
because the like has been, and is still practiced in Venice and Amsterdam; and
some have gone so far as to assert, that Coin is unnecessary, that Paper would
do as well.

In this, as in all other Cases relating to Trade and Coin, we should be
careful how we take our Measures from Foreign Nations. The Banks of Amsterdam
and Venice have, by their long Experienced Usefulness, put such an Obligation
upon those Governments to support them, that those Banks are become as an
Essential part of the Government; and the People thereby possessed with so good
an esteem of them (though it is doubted if they have any considerable Funds)
that as long as those Governments stand, the Credit of the Banks are like to
stand also; the Interest of the Banks being so interwoven with the Government,
that the Public Faith must be their support. But this may be a Privilege due
particularly to Commonwealth Governments; and it may not be found so easy to
set up any such Banks under a Monarchy: And the Antiquity of those Banks is
also a further Security to them; and the allowing of Paper Credit there, not so
dangerous as here.

The striking of Tallies for the supply of the Public has been long practiced
here, and by Authority, but Paper Credit for the carrying on of Commerce is
new, and has been left (till of late) to take its own way, though a matter of
great importance, and well worth the care of the Government; no footsteps of
Goldsmiths Notes passing for Money till since Anno 1650.

Gold and Silver is valuable in all parts, but our Paper Credit only amongst
our selves, and that no longer than the Funds, or Opinions, on which it is
grounded stand good; though it is not probable, that those which have once got
Gold and Silver, will give it away to a Foreign Nation, yet they may be under
great temptations, rather than undergo the danger and trouble of keeping it
when they cannot make any Profit by it, to accept of any Overtures for Lending,
or other ways employing it, in a Foreign Country; which may occasion that a
Nation that relyes much on Paper Credit, may be thought Rich one day, and be
found Poor another. When a great War happens, which only can discover (like
Death to some great Traders) whether a Nation be Rich or Poor, then the Paper
Credits may fail us, and our Money too, if due encouragement be not given to
increase and preserve our Coin. Such Credits, as far as may be necessary to
supply the want of Coin, may be very useful, but if it should be practiced to
jostle out the use of Coin, as some have proposed, is most dangerous, and may
have the same effect with a Nation, as with a Gentleman that has an Estate in
Land and Money: If he should squander away his Money, on a supposition that
Bills of Credit issued out, chargable on his Land, may do as well, he would not
long be the true Owner, either of Land or Money.

Some Paper Credits may be allowed with a prospect that they may stand good
against all attempts, or accidents, that may endanger its Reputation; but if
general and too much, the more likely to fail, and sink under its own weight.
If at the same time that such great endeavors are used to set up so many sorts
of Credits, there be not care taken to procure and preserve Gold and Silver,
which must support it and make it useful, we may soon experience a great want
of valuable Riches, and have only in its room what is imaginary.

A Law for assigning or transferring of Bonds or Bills of Debt, of all sorts of
Paper Credit, may be least liable to Objections, and in some measure at all
times supply the want of Coin; for the carrying on of Trade and Dealings, such
Bonds or Bills being made for Goods received, or some Valuable Consideration,
will have a good foundation; and though transferred from one to another, as
persons occasions may require, the foundation will not thereby be weakened; it
being probable that Merchants and Tradesmens Bonds or Notes, may, amongst
themselves, have as good Credit as Goldsmiths Notes had formerly, and pass to
one from another in Payment, upon such Terms as they may agree, as freely as
the Goldsmiths Notes did; and such Credit not likely to be extended beyond what
particular persons Occasions may require, to carry on their Trade, nor pass
without examination of the persons. Ability and Circumstances; whereas the
Goldsmiths Notes were taken upon an Implicit Faith; or else not probable that
one Goldsmith would have been indebted to the People, when the Fire of London
happened, above 1200000 l.

As the assigning of Bonds and Bills may in a great measure supply the want of
Coin for the carrying on of Commerce, so the Exchequer Bills with running
Interest when past on good Funds, settled by Act of Parliament, may in time be
brought to such perfection, as to supply the Public with much less Charge of
Interest than formerly. What other Paper Credit may be found necessary, should
be carefully settled by Authority, on good Funds, with Restrictions to prevent
the extending of such Credits beyond the Funds: For as it is impossible for
particular persons to run in Debt beyond their Estates, but will run the hazard
of losing their Credit, and consequently bring their Creditors demands upon
them, so with Nations or Banks. If Paper Credit do exceed the Funds, and the
prospect of having Coin upon occasion to answer such Credit, may be found a
loose way of Dealing, and subject to great dangers and inconveniences, for
most likely such Credit may fail when there may be most occasion for the use of
it, and if once lost not easily recovered, no Nation can be too cautious, with
whom they trust their Riches, nor what they make or allow to pass for Treasure,
though but artificial. Those that are entrusted with the real Treasure, may
probably meet with great Temptations to misapply it, and the diminishing or
adulterating of the Coin, and engrossing of Trade, much in their power, and
those more that are entrusted with the artificial Treasure, or passing of Notes
or Bills of Credit, if care be not taken to keep them under Restrictions and
Limitations, may not only become Debtors to the People, for what they please,
but employ the Money, when got into their hands, as they please: Which makes
such Trusts worthy the Care of the Government; that they may be under such a
Constitution as may not be liable to the dangers here mentioned.

When any Tax or Imposition is granted by Parliament, Tallies, Exchequer Notes
or Bills, issued out upon the same, for the supplying of the Government with
Ready Money till the Duties be paid, may have as good Credit as the Bank Bills
at Venice or Amsterdam, because grounded on the greatest Authority, and Public
Faith; but no other Paper Credit, for the Supply of the Crown, can be presumed
will be long approved, if our Constitution be considered.

The passing of Paper in Payments was not much practiced till after Anno 1660,
had its Original from the Profuseness of the Court, taking up great Sums of
Money at any rate from the Goldsmiths, and they from the People, and served
instead of Coin for the supplying the wants of those that, for Goods or
otherwise, had taken Tallies from the Exchequer; which at extraordinary Rates
were often sold to the Goldsmiths for their Notes, which when given out for
that, or for other occasions, did circulate for some time, and excused the use
of so much Coin, which happily did increase Trade, but it ended in shutting up
the Exchequer; and until it be decided whether the great Debt yet owing to the
Bankers, shall be paid by the Government, or lost by the People that trusted
them, no Judgment can be made who had the Profits gotten by that Paper Credit;
and other Losses that have happened by Bankers should not be forgotten.

But though it may be a question whether the Nation, particular persons, or
who, has got by the Paper Credit as it has been hitherto carried on, yet no
doubt but if some such Credit could be so settled, as to avoid the dangers
beforementioned, would be of great use: For if a Banker upon receipt of a 1000
l. give his Note, and that Note circulate as Money, and he employ the 1000 l.
received, which it is probable he will, though the Banker have only the
particular Gains that may be made by employing the 1000 l. in Money, yet the
Nation may reap some Advantage by having the 1000 l. thus doubled, as to Use:
The Note may pass and do service as 1000 l., and the Money as another. And thus
the Coin of the Nation may (as to Use) be increased Two Millions. Banks may be
necessary also for the discounting of Bills or Tallies, if can be Limited to
Reasonable Rates, that such Money may circulate in Trade, and of great ease to
Merchants, and others, for the lodging, receiving or paying of Money.

But it is good in the day of prosperity to think of adversity, and to consider
the Dangers as well as Conveniences. Though Notes to a greater Value than Two
Millions may circulate, yet if it be found impossible to prevent the Causes and
Accidents, that may occasion a stop to the circulation of such Notes, by a
general demand for Money, then Care should be taken to avoid the ill
consequences of it; for in such a Case, Two Millions in Notes (over and above
what Notes or Tallies may be issued out, on Taxes or Impositions granted by Act
of Parliament) may be sufficient to run down the Credit of the greatest Bank or
Bankers. And being Paper has not usually past in Payment elsewhere but in
London, and only for some certain uses, and that always a great stock of Coin
did lie dead to answer such Bills for fear of a general run, the number of
Goldsmiths considered that used to pass such Notes, and to what Value each
might issue out, it may Reasonably be concluded, that our Bankers Notes did
never, since the shutting up of the Exchequer, serve to multiply the Coin much
above Two Millions: But if Notes have circulated for more, and from thence it
should be argued, that we are under a necessity to have the Trade of Paper
Credit encouraged, good Resolutions should be taken how such Credit shall be
supported, in case of a general run; when nothing may satisfy, but every Man
getting his own Money. It cannot be pretended that any Fund or Security can be
more infallible than Land; but Paper Credit, though Land be its foundation, if
intended as running Cash, will never pass as Money, longer than Money may be
had for such Bills, as soon as demanded; when that fails, such Bills will fall
under a Disrepute, occasion Clamours, Confusion, and a stop to Trade, and
Payments, though the Security be unquestionable.

A Law to make Bills or Tallies to be a good tender in payment, or to pass as
Money, would have little better success than the allowing of Coin of different
Values; the Force will rather be a Disrepute, and make them ineffectual (as to
a general use) then be a Credit; and create Opposition, rather than facilitate
the taking of them. Bills of Exchange from Foreign parts, and all Contracts
made afterward, would be with a proviso how they shall be paid, in what Coin.
Whoever may take such Notes or Tallies, and at the same time indebted to
another, may compel such Debtor to take them: But Coin is so absolutely
necessary for some uses, and so desirable and esteemed, that unless Ready Money
can be had for such Bills, on Demand, not likely should pass as Money, further
than as the Law may be compulsary, which may be impossible to reach future
Contracts, and therefore will be of so little use in Dealings, as may not
probably make amends for the hardships they will put upon such persons as may
be Creditors at the time of passing such an Act. Money may raise Credit, or
Credit may raise Money, and our putting our selves in a thriving condition may
raise both; but of such ways no proof can be expected, but as in all cases
where Nature is forced too much. Nothing more likely to occasion the hoarding
up of Money than the Peoples being possessed with a fear, that if they part with
it they shall have such Notes or Tallies forced upon them in exchange of it;
for being they cannot be converted into Money till they become payable on the
Funds on which they are issued, which (though never so good) may not suit all
Men's occasions, it cannot be expected they should be willingly taken. A
Currency to all the Coin we have, and the Coining of more, if the Temptations
for bringing in of Plate take effect, and our putting our selves in a posture
of good Husbandry, may recover our Credit; without which, such dependancies on
Paper Credit is not likely to settle Trade on a good foundation.

All Men that have Estates in Money do consider how they had best distribute
the employing of it to their most advantage and convenience. What they lend out
on Mortgages, is usually such part as they intend for some Purchase, or for
Childrens Portions, which they are most willing should continue till such
Occasions call for it. What they lend on Tallies or Loans to the Government,
they foresee they shall not want till the time allotted for payment expire. What
they do not so dispose of, they keep for their Expenses, or such Occasions as
require Money. Though they should for it take Notes issued out upon Land
Security, payable on Demand, yet any jealousy or suspicion that they shall not
have Money for such Bills on Demand, will occasion a general run, because such
Bills or Notes will not serve them, for such Occasions as they have allotted it,
longer than Money may be had for them on Demand. The Peoples Occasions will
always make a great difference between what they have lent out on Mortgages,
and what they laid out on such Notes, being what they designed for their
running Cash. Paper Credit was at its height before the Fire of London. The
Fire and the Dutch Exploit at Chatham, which happened the Year after, though
neither occasioned a stop to the payment of the Goldsmiths Notes for any long
time, and they did then pay Interest for much of the Money they had in their
hands, yet the People perceiving by those short interruptions, that such Notes
and Bonds could not be depended on, to afford them Ready Money at all times,
great Sums were drawn out of the Goldsmiths hands upon it; which disabling them
from serving the Court as before, occasioned a stop to the payment of what was
owing them, amounting to 1280754 l. 16 s. 10 d; it being well known that what
they took of the People was most Lent to the Exchequer, and being no more, is a
further proof that such Paper Credit, at that time, did not add to the Coin of
the Nation Two Millions, as has been asserted.

By what has been said upon this Subject it may be presumed, that if there be
a Million of Families in this Nation, that Three or Four Millions of our Coin
will lie dead, or circulate amongst the People for Marketing, or petty
Expenses, never to be drawn from them in exchange of any Bank Notes or Bills
whatsoever, because such Notes or Bills cannot serve for those purposes; each
Family, reckoning Rich and Poor alike, may need 3 to 4 l. a Family for such
uses. What other Coin the People may have over and above what is necessary for
such Expenses (excepting what may be in the hands of some few that may delight
in hoarding it) unless there be a general disconfidence as to Dealings one with
another, will not lie dead. What one may receive by giving a Mortgage or Bond,
or upon any account, will soon be paid to another, as the public, or Men's
particular Occasions for the carrying on of Commerce, or other Dealings, may
require, there being no other way to make Profit by it. If it be found that
such part of our Coin is not sufficient to supply our present Occasions, Bills
or Notes issued out upon Funds, or Land Security of a sufficient Value, payable
at certain times, with a running Interest, may supply the defect thereof, it
not appearing impossible to make such Bills or Notes as secure, and so
consequently as Valuable as any Mortgage of Lands, Bonds or Specialties
whatsoever, and as desirable as Money, and to continue in that esteem till
there be a failure of Payment at the time mentioned, and agreed: But nothing
but having a prospect that Coin will be ready to pay such Bills at their
respective times, can make them be preferred to Money, nor preserve the
Reputation of such Bills, or of any Bills, Notes or Paper Credit whatsoever,
but the having Money ready to make a punctual payment at the time prefixed and
agreed. No such Bills can ever be brought into practice for Marketing and petty
Expenses. None past for Money lodged, as a running Cash, will hold their Repute
longer than paid when demanded. None though issued out on Land Security payable
at certain times, not longer than while such Bills or Notes are punctually paid
at the time agreed. When any failure happens, a stop will inevitably be put to
the Currency of such Notes, or Bills, and give a preference to Coin, because
People will imagine that Coin cannot be subject to such disappointments; and
therefore it is thought convenient to sum up what has been said upon this
Subject with this Conclusion,

That Gold and Silver has always been esteemed the Sinews of War. Paper
Credit may come in, as an aid, in case of want, but not to be depended on,
either for that or carrying on of Commerce, as principal; its original and
existence being from Credit, and Opinion, that must be obtained, with a
prospect that it will continue, before any use can be made of it, but
impossible to prevent its being subject to Chance. Wherefore seeing it must be
our Coin that in all cases of extremity must be our refuge, it ought to be
preferred, that care may be taken how it may be increased and preserved.

As many Families have been ruined for want of keeping Accounts, and observing
how their Incomes have answered to their Expenses, so many Nations for want of
the like Estimates, and Calculations, and a true Judgment how far their Coin as
well as their Credit may be depended on to serve their Occasions. If it appear
hazardous to confide too much in Paper Credit, or that it may be difficult to
be made useful (when our Condition may most need it) by any lasting
uninterrupted Currency, unless by Mortgaging Lands or some good Funds, and
there be a prospect how Coin will come in for the discharge of it at the time
agreed, though Arguments for the Exportation of Coin for the carrying on a War
in Foreign parts, for the Honor of a Nation, Safety of Trade, or the Security
of such of our Neighboring Countries as may be absolutely necessary to
preserve our selves, may be allowed, because may only be for a time, yet no
Arguments ought to be admitted for the carrying on of Trade, so as to occasion
a constant Exportation of our Coin or Bullion, because will certainly terminate
in a want of those Species, and Credit also, and bring Poverty and Destruction
upon us.

Asia and Europe afford but inconsiderable parcels of Gold and Silver, most
comes from the West Indies, and Coast of Afriea, of which all Nations endeavor
to get shares: If upon an inquiry it should appear that all the Silver and Gold
that has come into Europe for these Forty Years last past, never amounted to
the value of Two Millions and half per Annum of Pounds Sterling, and that there
is no prospect any greater quantity will be brought in hereafter, and that the
most we have had hitherto, or can well expect for our share, has not, or may
not hereafter, exceed 600000 l. per Annum brought here in Specie, over and
above what is brought in by Strangers, and carried out again, and that a lavish
Expense at Home of Gold and Silver Lace, Wire, Fringe, or for Gilding, and such
like uses, has consumed 200000 l. per Annum, and that the Northern Trades have
ever since the Fire of London, carried from us above 200000 l. per Annum, the
India Trade, since the Year 1670, 600000 l., the French Trade (till in some
measure stopped by the War) 700000 l. per Annum, besides what is constantly
carried out by some other Trades, and outgoings, we shall find reason to
conclude that the Stock we had of Gold and Silver has of late Years decreased,
and that we are in as much danger to have what now remains diminished, as a
Gentleman that has but 750 l. per Annum and yet spends 1000 l. per Annum, is
of consuming his Estate; and that unless we can by altering our course of
Living put a stop to such Consumptions, and take effectual Methods, to prevent
the causes that occasion the Exportation of it, we shall in a few Years want
Money to carry on our Trade.

Though Bank Notes past on a good Foundation, may pass from hand to hand as
Money, and may so be very useful, as a means to carry on Commerce, so long as
there is a good prospect and assurance, that such Notes will be discharged by
Money at the time prefixed for the payment of them, yet will never deserve the
Name of a New Specie, nor to be esteemed as Coin, because it will thus only
serve as a Pledge to gain Time for the payment of Money, but not answer the
Ends designed by Money, which is finally to pay and discharge Debts; which can
no more be done by such Bank Notes, than a Mortgage that is transferred from
one to another can be said to be discharged, till the Money be paid off by the
Owner of the Estate Mortgaged, and Deed cancelled, or Estate assigned back.

The great Advantages which the Duke of Tuscany has reapt by giving the
privilege of a Free Port to the City of Leghorn, Free Ports.
has made many Advocates for having Free Ports, not well considering that this
Kingdom abounds with both Natural and Artificial Commodities, People addicted
to Trade, Ships, and Seamen, to Transport them to Foreign Markets, and the said
Duke very few, nor any good Foundation for Trade, but the Situation and
Convenience of that Port, which without the help of Foreigners could not have
been Advantageous to him, because was under these Circumstances; therefore
thought good to give encouragement, not only to Foreign Ships freely to come
and go, load or unload any Commodities, paying small Duties, but also to all
Nations to inhabit there, with all the Freedom and Privileges, that could be
thought necessary, to tempt and invite them; which as it was a great piece of
Policy, so had a very good effect; for thereby, he made that Port a Magazeen
for the greatest Trades in the Levant, and all Ships and Goods leaving
something of clear Gains behind them, and the Trade thither increasing to a
great degree, as many littles make a mickle, so it has, in a course of Years,
not only enriched that Port, but the adjacent Country, and filled the Great
Dukes Coffers with abundance of Treasure.

However Free Ports may have a quite contrary effect here; for as we do not
want Goods to Export, so not Ships nor Seamen to carry them abroad, and bring
back what we want. If we should make a Free Port, or Ports, though such Ships
as come in, and such Goods as they may bring, and load off, may leave something
behind them of Profit, yet it would probably prove such a hinderance to our
Seamen and Navigation, to our own Merchants and Factors, and to the Consumption
of our own Manufactures, by such Importations as may be made, unless settled
with such Restrictions and Limitations, as may make a Free Port only in Name
but not in Substance, that it might prove as disadvantageous to us, as it has
proved advantageous to that Duke; and the Repayment we now make by Debenters on
some Commodities of what paid for Custom Imported, when the same Goods are
Exported, may be so settled as to give us all the Advantage we can expect by
Free Ports.

After a full examination of these, Libour and good Husbandry most likely to
increase Riches.
and other such like Proposals for promoting of Trade, and for the preserving
and multiplying of our Coin, though some may be found useful, yet none will
probably conduce so much, or so certain, to it as the having of many People
Laboriously employed, and the preventing of Luxurious, Prodigal Expenses and
Consumptions at Home, and costly Engagements Abroad.

It is with Nations as with Families: Those Masters that are careful and good
Husbands themselves, and keep their Servants to their Labor, and frugal in
their Expenses, generally thrive most; so with Nations, those that have the
most Industrious People, and are most Parsimonious, will be the Richest: And
this is so absolutely necessary, that all other ways, without it, may prove
insufficient.

A Gentleman that has but 500 l. per Annum, that is Industrious with his
Servants in Husbandry, and content with his own, for his Food and Apparel, and
careful to avoid unnecessary Outgoings and Expenses, may bring Money into his
House and keep it too; but a Gentleman that has 1000 l. per Annum, that keeps
Idle Servants, despises his own Food and Clothing, and instead thereof takes
in Silks, Wines, and dear bought Commodities from Abroad in the room of them,
at the end of the Year either cannot bring Money into his House, or not keep it
long because of his Debts: The same with Nations that neglect the keeping of
their People to Profitable Employments, despise their own Commodities, and are
fond of those that are far fetched, and dear bought. That undeniable Maxim, That
the way to be Rich is to be careful in Saving, as well as industrious in
Getting, has the same reference to Nations as to particular Persons, or
Families. And although as with persons that have great Estates, the effect of
such a kind of management may not be so soon perceived as with those that have
less, yet in a course of time, if no remedy be applied, the balance of their
Accounts will stand on the wrong side: So with Nations, especially such as have
a great Trade, may not presently perceive it; but now that we feel the Effects
of it, high time to apply proper Remedies. Thinking and Talking are usually the
first steps to Reformation; but it is good Resolutions, and a due execution of
them, that must perfect and make it effectual.

It is true, nothing of this kind can be done but may prove a hinderance to, or
diminishing some Trades; but that may be an occasion of increasing others in
their room, more Advantageous. Trades that are pernicious ought to be
destroyed, where it appears plain they are such.

Sumptuary Laws have seldom had any good effect. Swnp'uary Laws
If general, then the Offenders may be too many to admit of strict execution,
and are always looked upon as vexatious by the Tradesmen and Consumers both.
If relate to Foreign Commodities, then the Nations concerned in those
Commodities may take offense at them. A good Example in great Persons, may in
many Cases have as good an effect, if not then no remedy but Laws, to prevent
the Importation of such Goods as may be found prejudicial; it being sater to
keep Thieves out of an House than to depend upon mastering of them when in. No
doubt the People of this Nation are of late Years much changed for the worse,
in course of Living: What Tradesmen and Artificers spend extravagantly upon
themselves, or Families, must be advanced in the Price of their Commodities
they make or sell, which is a great means to hinder the expense of some of our
own Make: For if any other Nation can afford them cheaper, either Abroad or at
Home, those that work cheapest, most likely to have the greatest Trades; and
the having Workmen cheap most likely to occasion the doing of much, both in
Husbandry and Trade. Excessive Wages is a load upon a Nation, and excess in
Apparel or other Expenses much the occasion of it, or of its continuance; but
no way better to prevent it than by Example, Education, and gaining more People
for the Laboring Employments.

In order to discover what Trades did exhaust our Treasure, To look into Trade.
brought in Commodities of no use but to encourage Luxury and Prodigality,
before this War, or may probably hereafter, it will be necessary to look into
all Trades, particularly, that the Exports and Importsmay be stated, which will
be a Work that will require Time, and need the help of Authority. Till that be
done no particular Remedies can be proposed, or applied, upon good grounds.
Those Trades that have carried out much of the Coin we had, may probably in
time carry away what is left, or shall be gotten hereafter, if care be not
taken to prevent it.

In the Two Last Reigns about Five Millions of Milled Money was Coined, What
Coined the Two last Reigns.
and about Five Millions of Guineas; the most of which, and much of our
weightiest Hammered Money is supposed to be Exported, for little appears of it,
besides much Bullion that was Imported in those Years of Peace and Plenty of
Trade; for though much of that happily went to supply the want of Plate in
Families, which was consumed by the Civil War, yet a great quantity was then
also Exported; which is a plain discovery that the Balance of Trade stood
against us in those days, though then not so much taken notice of, or felt, as
now occasioned by this long and expensive War with France, and great Losses we
have had by Sea.

It may not be difficult, Carried out by the French Trade.
without making any new inspection, to give an account of some Trades that did
exhaust our Treasure before the War. Upon an Examination taken out of the
Custom-House Books in the Year 1669, it did appear that we stood Debtors to
France, upon the Balance of Trade, about One Million: And it is concluded,
that for Thirty Years successively they had a very great advantage upon us. The
Wines, Brandies, Silks, Linnens, and other Goods Imported, usually amounted to
One Million and half, and the little they took from us not half a Million,
having either prohibited or laid such Duties on many of our Goods, as hindered
their Expense: Therefore not strange the inequality should be so great, or that
vast quantities of our Bullion, Coin, or Treasure, was carried from us to
adjust those Accounts.

The immente Quantities of Deals and Timber which have been Imported into this
Kingdom, Northern.
for the building Thirty or Forty Thousand Houses in and about London, and many
in other places, since the great Fire, added to the Cost of our Naval Stores
from Denmark and Swedeland, have for Thirty Years brought us Annually much in
Debt to those Nations; for those Countries take few of our Goods from us,
therefore most of what we take from them is paid in Money.

In One Year there has been Exported for carrying on the East India Trade,
India Trades.
about One Million in Bullion, and every Year great Sums. Whether the Goods
they bring, and Export to Foreign parts bring back the like Sums in Bullion,
may be worth an inquiry.

There may be other Trades that may have sometimes carried out our Coin or
Bullion; but if no great Sums, and by the alterations which often happen in
Trade do at other times bring back the like Species, cannot be so pernicious as
these mentioned.

The Trades we drive to Spain, Portugal and Italy, Of Spanish, Portugal, Italy
Trades.
are not suspected to occasion the carrying out of our Coin, though the Wines
from the Canaries and Currants from Zant, which cost great Sums Annually, do
abate much out of the Balance of those Trades, which would otherwise stand
more in our favor: But if great difficulties should appear to any method that
can be proposed to prevent it, better to be permitted than endanger any
interruption in those Trades; because upon casting up the total of our
Exportation and Importation, will probably appear beneficial.

The Turkey Trade consumes so great quantities of our Cloth, Turkey Trade.
and other Commodities, that it may be reckoned as one of our best: But of late
Years the sending of Silver thither (though it be most from Spain or Italy) to
purchase Raw Silk, or other Goods, is too much increased, may deserve an
inquiry to be prevented, if possible; if not, being most is for purchasing Raw
Silk to be further Manufactured here, or Exported, if we cannot have it from
any other places on better terms, may be found advisable to permit it. This
Trade is carried on under a Regulated Company, whether in all Points
convenient, or their Charter needs additional Powers or Alterations, or the
Power lodged in the Company, by their Charter, be duly executed, without
oppression or hinderance of Trade, may be worth an inquiry.

Our Trade to our Plantations or West India Collonies takes off great
quantities of our Products and Manufactures, Plantations.
as well as Provisions and Handicraft Wares, and furnishes us with some Goods
for a further Manufactury, and others in great abundance to be Exported to
Foreign Nations, especially of Sugar and Tobacco. And although some Objections
may be made against the use and necessity of those Commodities, yet being so
introduced amongst us as it may be impossible to prevent our having them from
other Countries, and being a Trade which imployes vast numbers of Ships and
Seamen, ought to be encouraged; for having lost so great a part of our Fishing
Trades, these Trades, and that to Newcastle, are now become the chief support
of our Navigation, and Nursery for Seamen. And if all back doors could be shut,
that all the Products Exported from those Collonies might without diminution be
brought to England, that what are not spent here, might be Re-exported from
hence; and those Collonies, as the proprietors are English, made to have their
whole dependence on England, the fruits of their labors to be as much for the
advantage of England, as of those that stay at Home, then all encouragement by
easy Laws, Regulations and Protection, should be given to them, they having
more opportunities, and being under a greater necessity of gaining more
Laborious People, (from whence Riches must arise) to help to make great
improvements than England, or any other of the Dominions belonging to it: And
if it be considered what Porests and Deserts have been improved, and Riches
acquired, in some of those Collonies, in so short a time, as the Age of a Man,
it must be agreed what has been asserted, That the Original of moveable Riches
is from Labor, and that it may arise from the Labor of Blacks and Vagrants,
if wed managed.

Holland being so near us, Holland.
the Trade between us is like our Home Trade from one Town to another. When
they have any Commodity they can afford cheaper than we, a small Consideration
brings it here; the like from us to them; which amounts to a great quantity in
a Year: Because being a Trading People they furnish a great part of Germany,
and many of their Neighboring Countries, being as a Magazine for a General
Trade, supply what they want of their own, by fetching Goods from the
East Indies and other parts; by which, and by being Frugal and Laborious, and
having great conveniences in their Navigation by Building and Sailing cheap,
they have advanced themselves by Trade, more than other Nations that have
plenty of their own. To adjust how the Balance of this Trade stands will be
more difficult than any other, because it varies very much every Year, and at
this time most difficult, because of our Expenses with our Army in Flanders;
but they do take from us great quantities of our Products, and Manufactures,
and of Plantation Goods. Which Nation has the Advantage is uncertain; but
being very knowing and crafty in Trade, a constant watchful Eye should be kept
over them.

Ireland is a Fertile Country, Ireland.
and well Seated for Trade; but the People being about Four Fifths bigotred to
the Roman Catholic Religion, and impatient to be under the Government of
England, have often occasioned great effusion of English Blood by the many
Rebellions, which has made that Kingdom chargable to us. It is computed to
contain about Twelve Millions of English Acres of Arable, Meadow and Pasture,
and Two Millions of Rocky, Boggy and Shrubby unprofitable Lands, and about a
Million of People; therefore well worth improving: But the insecurity that
arises from so great a number of the People being of that Religion, the many
Lazy Priests that are amongst them, and the averseness the Natural Irish have
generally to Industry, has been a hinderance to the improvement of that
Country, and to the making it more advantageous to it self, and England. And
unless some way can be found out to secure their entire dependence upon
England, grounded as well on Religion as Laws, that England may be sure to reap
a lasting advantage by the Labors of the People there, and they can be brought
to be more Industrious, perpetual Obstructions will from such Objections arise
against endeavors to increase Riches in that Kingdom, by improving it to the
uttermost, which will be a continual prejudice to the English Interest there.
The increase of the Woolllen Manufactury in that Kingdom may prove fatal to
those of England, if speedy care be not taken. The Manufacturing of Linen and
the increase of Fishing Trades on the Coasts that are there convenient for it,
may happily, upon an inquiry, be found less dangerous.

Scotland not so Fertile nor so well Seated for Trade; Scotland.
but their late attempts to increase and extend it so far as the East Indies,
may give cause for making some defensive Laws, that they may not be prejudicial
to the Trade of England.

Great quantities of our Products are Exported Annually to Hamburgh, Hamburgh.
and from thence many of them to other places; to Germany, by the River Elbe,
Weser and Eyder. This Trade is great, and beneficial, and under the management
of a Regulated Company, the Settlement very Ancient, the Members of which
Company reserving sending of Goods to Germany, by those Rivers, to themselves
exclusive to all others, has occasioned many Complaints, that it is a great
hinderance to the Consumption of our Woolen Goods: But whether the Complaints
arise from the Interest of Foreigners, who would get that Trade out of the
English hands, or from others that would weaken the Company, should be well
examined before any Alteration be made. There have been also Complaints against
their Regulations and Bylaws, which may deserve an Inquiry.

The Greenland and Russia Trades are also, Greenland, Russia, and Newfoundland.
and have been for a long course of time, under the Management of Companies,
and yet are in a manner totally lost, our Newfoundland Trade much diminished,
and all our Northern Fishing Trades disused: By which we have suffered two
great inconveniences, The loss of the greatest Nurseries we had for Seamen,
and the use our Neighbors have made of it, to increase theirs. By the Northern
Fishing, the Dutch have made their greatest numbers of Seamen, and by the Banks
of Newfoundland, the French, and thereby make those Trades difficult to be
retrieved; for as long as we have not a number of Seamen over and above what
may be employed in our other Trades, difficult to be found that they will go to
the Fishing Trades, in any great abundance, because are attended with great
labor and hardship. As to the Northern Trades, the Dutch have likewise another
Advantage, by Building, Maning and Sailing cheaper; and though it is probable
ways may be found out to recover that to the Newfoundland by the help of our
Western Ports, and our possession there, yet the others more difficult.
However, all endeavors should be used.

The Trade to Swedeland and Denmark having of late Years carried from us great
Sums of Money Annually, Swedeland and Denmark
and the more, because those Princes have by great Impositions discouraged the
expense of our Manufactures, and, by their own Example, encouraged some of
their own, though much meaner. Whether any alteration can be made by any
Treaty, or by Building more great Ships of our own, that we may have the
Carriage of the Goods from those parts, which is considerable, or whether it be
possible to improve the Trade to New England, which has hitherto been of
little use to us, so as to have more Masts, Pitch, Tar, Hemp, and other Goods,
from thence, in the room of those from the North parts notwithstanding its
great distance, for which the Employment of our own Ships and Seamen will make
us some amends, or whether some Agreement might not be made with the
Hanse-Towns, or one of those Princes, that might reduce the others to better
terms than we stand on at present, or whether some Alteration in the Act of
Navigation might help, may be worth an Inquiry.

The French Trade will deserve a more particular Inquiry, French Trade.
because has been for many Years carried on to our Loss and their great
Advantage. Though they were always potent at Land, yet could never make any
figure at Sea, till since the Year 1657, that their greatest Councils, and
Ministers of State, begun to apply their Thoughts how to increase Trade and
Navigation. Then by making Laws, or Edicts, to encourage all Trades, they
thought would prove advantageous, especially such as might encourage the
increase of Seamen; which they also multiplied, by obliging the Commanders of
all Ships to carry, and breed up, a proportion of Young Men every Voyage, for
which the Government make an allowance; as also by making good Docks, Arsnals,
conveniences for all sorts of Stores; by encouraging good Artists for the
Building of Ships; and by Prohibitions, or otherwise discouraging all Trades
they thought pernicious. By such Methods as these in about Ten Years it was
observed, that their Ships, Seamen and Trade, was increased from One to Ten;
and from having their Power confined to Land, are now become also so Formidable
at Sea, as in some measure to contest with both Englands and Hollands United
Strength. In Times of Peace we did Import from that Country Annually vast
Quantities of Silks, Linnens, and other Goods, perfectly Manufactured, 30 or
40000 Tuns of Wines and Brandies, great Quantities of Paper, Prunes, Salt,
Rozin, Glass, Cork, Oakum, Soap, etc. besides Points, Laces, Gloves,
Imbroidered Vestments, Beds, Toys and Nicknacks, to a very great Value. Though
it be hard to define what Commodities we ever had from that Nation that were
Profitable for us, or absolutely Necessary, (unless the Salt) fit for any
Improvement or further Manufactury, yet we permitted that Trade to go on,
though at the same time that we took such vast Quantities of Unprofitable
Commodities from them, they totally prohibited the expense of all East India
Goods from us, and laid such Impositions on our Woollen Goods as was tant amont
to a Prohibition; thereby bringing us indebted to them for great Sums every
Year, which they took from us in Coin, Bullion, or Treasure, as
beforementioned. They also had another great Advantage at that time by our
Nobility and Gentry being so sond of Traveling or Living in France. It has
been computed that by this Article only they might get near 200000 l. a Year
from us in Money.

The Ambition, Conduct, Strength, and Riches, of that Nation having lately
appeared so terrible to all Europe, and particularly to this Kingdom, by their
endeavors to get the possession of Flanders, and so consequently Newport, and
Ostend, and thereby to have had the United Provinces by Compact, or Conquest,
entirely in their Interest, and to out-match us by Sea, which would have
brought us into an irrecoverable condition, as it gave just cause for the
present Confederacy against them for the carrying on of the War, so it concerns
all the Confederates that it should ever be continued, in point of Trade, that,
if possible, they may not hereafter reap any such Advantages as formerly by it
from us, or any other Nation; for it is that which has chiefly enabled them to
carry on these Designs, especially by Sea: And as all Europe are concerned to
reduce them to their Old Limits by Land, so is England more particularly to
diminish their Naval Strength; not likely to be effected without solid Counsel,
a great Charge, and circumspection in matters of Trade. As has hitherto made
War upon us with much of our own Money, gotten by Trade and by the War, so may
again, if we should permit our Trade so to go on, as may enrich them and
impoverish our selves. Nothing can be more dangerous, as matters now stand
between us and the French, than to permit any thing we can prevent that may
tend to the increase of their Naval Strength, or the diminishing of ours; what
they have already being such an impending Evil, and a Rod over us, by the
Advantage they have by their Ports in the Mediterranean Ocean and our Channel,
as may require ever hereafter what may be called a standing Army of Seamen, as
well as many Men of War, in a constant readiness to protect our Trade, in which
there will be great difficulties, as well as to prevent Surprises, which will
be a great addition to the Charge of the Government, even in times of Peace.
The Law already made for making all French Goods liable to pay such
extraordinary Duties as amounts to a Prohibition, will put a necessity upon
them to come to a Treaty of Commerce; in which care may be taken that they have
not any Advantage upon us, by any Trade in Gross Goods, but it may be difficult
to find out any way to prevent their pilfering upon us by smuggling Trades, by
which, carried on in Goods of no great Bulk, in time of Peace, they drained us
of more Money than by their Gross Goods; and since this War have constantly
drawn from us great Sums. Nothing more like to prevent it, and the like from
other Countries, than a Law, that all Wrought Silks, Linnens, Ribbons, Points,
Laces, and such like Commodities, shall be forfeited in all hands or places
where they are found, unless sealed with Seals, that may be put on by Officers
of the Custom-House, or others, which may possibly be so contrived, as to put
it beyond the Art of Man to counterfeit, and not be found out. Without some
such Law, and Certificates from Abroad, by which it may be known from what
Countries such Goods do come, not likely to prevent Foreign Nations from
putting upon us, on any terms, what Goods they please of great Value, though of
small Bulk; by which as the King has always been defrauded of great Sums in
his Customs, so will ever, and the Nation of more, by such losing Trades, not
to be prevented but by a strict Law for siezing of such Goods. Also the
encouragement of our Silk, Linen, and Paper Manufacturies, which are the great
Staple Commodities of France, may conduce very much to the altering the
Balance of that Trade, or to bring them upon an equal foot with us. If we
should hereafter take from them as many Wines and Braendies as formerly, they
may serve to intoxicate, but never to enrich us. And though it may be argued
that the first Cost and Charges in France of 40000 Tons Shipped Aboard is not
above 200000 l. yet it would be a great Mortification to the French if that
were withheld, hard to be born by their Landed Men, whose Incomes arise from
those Commodities, and be a great encouragement to the Portugal, and other
Trades, from whence we can have Wines in return of our Products; but most for
our Interest, to spend no more Wine than our Forefathers did.

Those Countries and Kingdoms which we usually comprehend under the name of the
East Indies, East India Trade.
being Naturally stored with Rich Commodities, Materials good and cheap for
Manufacturies, People ingenious in Fabricking of them, and skilful at many
Handicraft Trades, working in some places for a Penny per Day Wages, Spices
very plenty, because many sorts afford two, others four Crops or Harvests in a
Year, Diamonds in abundance, and other precious Stones, as well as several
sorts of Druggs, and other Useful and Valuable Commodities, has fixed the Eyes
and Hearts, of all the Trading Nations of Europe upon them, and occasioned
great Contests, who shall enjoy the greatest part of that Trade; though, if
should increase, the Vaults of the Great Mogul, and his Nhabobs, may in time
prove to Europe, as the Gamesters Box to Gamesters, get the Gold and Silver
near as fast as it may come in from Africa, West India, or other places, and by
the Manufactureed Goods from thence endanger the making of their own Trades, in
a great measure, useless.

This Trade has been for many Years managed by a Company, with a Joint Stock
exclusive to others, which has occasioned great Contests and Differences
amongst the People, amounting to a kind of Civil War. The Exports for this
Trade are most in Bullion, and whatever may be objected, not less than 600000
hill. per Annum, taking any number of Years when the Trade was carried on
without any great obstruction, tho their Charter from King Charles allowed but
50000 hill. per Annum, and the Imports, as may appear by the Custom-House Books,
are Druggs, Saltpetre, Wrought Silks, Diamonds, Spices, Thrown Silk, Raw Silk,
Callicoes, Indigo, Sheets, Shifts, Cabinets, China VVare, Cornelion Rings,
Quilts, Petticoats, Gowns, Neckoloths, Ebony Chairs, Cotton Yarn, Cotton
Wool, Ereny Yarn, Floretta Yarn, Clouts, Fans, Guinea Shifts, Goats Hair,
Girdles, Garters, Ink, Wax, Handkerchiefs, Muslins, Persian Silks, Herba
Taffaties, Herba Longees, Japan VVare, Heads for Canes, Lacquered Dishes,
Plates, Bowls, Trunks, Chests, Skreens, Pillowbeers, Landskips, Pictures, Red
Earth, Silk knobs, Wrought Silks with Gold, Slippers, Shoes, Silk Flowers,
Table Cloths, Baskets, Combs, Vmbrelloes, Wax Candles, of which one half in
Value are usually Transported, and the rest consumed here.

Being the giving a full Account of the Original, Progress, Management, Causes
of the Increase of this Trade, and Complaints about it, may conduce to the
making a good and speedy Settlement of it, the following particulars, though
may appear tedious, will not be unnecessary.

Several Charters have been formerly granted for the Management of this Trade
by a Corporation, and Joint Stock, which upon an examination will be found were
always attended with great Complaints, and no good success. The last Stock was
underwrit by Virtue of a Charter granted Anno 1657, since often confirmed, and
augmented, with extraordinary Powers, the Stock then underwrit about 744000 l.
of which only 372000 l. was taken in. The Trade carried on for some Years by
the Exportation of Goods and about 40000 l. in Bullion, Shipped off by a Privy
Seal, or License from the Court, for that purpose, till Anno 1663, when an Act
of Parliament came in force for the Free Exportation of Bullion, then it begun
to be carried out in much greater quantities; but the Importations were chiefly
Druggs, Saltpetre, Spices, Course Callicoes, and Diamonds, until after Anno
1670, then Throwsters, Weavers, Dyers, and such like Tradesmen, were sent out
by the Company to teach the Indians to make all sorts of Manufactured Goods, in
such manner as might best please the Europeans, and be most profitable for the
Company. Till then the Trade in Manufactured Goods, or Raw Silk, was
inconsiderable in Value, and not much Bullion Exported; those Gentlemen, that
had the Management of the Affairs of that Company before, often declaring, That
they would not adventure on those Commodities, least should endanger the ruin
of our own Manufacturies, and of the Turkey Trade, and raise a storm against
the Company.

As ill Weeds grow apace, so these Manufactured Goods from India met with such
a kind reception, that from the greatest Gallants to the meanest Cook-Maids,
nothing was thought so fit, to adorn their persons, as the Fabrics of India;
nor for the ornament of Chambers like India-Skreens, Cabinets, Beds and
Hangings; nor for Closets, like China and Lacquered VVare; and the Melting down
of our Milled Money, that might by the name of Bullion be Exported to purchase
them, not at all considered.

The Humors and Fancies of the People thus combining with the design of those
that had the Management of the Affairs of that Company, to make a beneficial
Trade to such as had ingrost the Stock, no Endeavors were omitted, no
Addresses to the Court neglected, nor Expenses valued, that might tend to
improve this good Opportunity; which soon occasioned a very great increase for
the supply of all those that were fond of those Commodities, and large and
plentiful Dividends out of the Stock, for those that had ingrost this Trade.

But this great increase of Trade in such Goods could not be made without some
hinderance to the Profit of others, by the diminution of their Trades, which
were in a manner swallowed up by this from the East Indies; that they might
help themselves by proper Methods, Anno 1681, presented a Petition to King
Charles the Second, for the enlarging the Stock and Adventurers in this Trade,
Signed by the Ablest Merchants on the Exchange of London, and great numbers,
and the Matter was referred to the Consideration of several Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council; where it was Argued in the behalf of the Petitioners:

That though this Trade be now increased to be above one quarter part of the
Trade of this Nation, yet it does not now support or entertain, as Adventurers
or Proprietors, more persons than it did when the Company was first Settled,
though the Trade was not the One Tenth part so much; for the Stock not being
increased by New Subscriptions proportionable to the Trade, but continuing the
same 372000 l, as at first, upon which all Sales and Dividends are made, the
Adventurers instead of being increased from 900 they were at first, to 9000, as
the increase of the Trade required, are reduced to 550 persons.

Such are the corruptions that have grown up with time in the Management of
this Trade, that the major part of the Gains therefore is divided amongst Forty
Persons, and the whole Administration and Command of it in the hands of Ten or
Twelve Men, who under the name of a Public, carry on a Particular Interest by
Private Trade, owning the Ships they employ, and other bywayes.

Because the Method which this Company practiced of carrying on the Trade by
taking up One Million of Money on a Common Seal at Interest, is not only
indirect and dangerous (because oftentimes they have not in England to pay One
Fifth of what they owe, and there is a possibility their Ships may miscarry but
also very unequal to the Subject, the Members of the Company reaping near 100
per Cent. Gains per Annum thereby, but the Lenders only 4 or 5 per Cent.

Because the major part of the People of this Nation now living, were either
minors or unborn when this Trade was first Settled, and many that Traded in
Linnens from Hamburgh, Flanders, Holland and France, and in Silks from Italy,
France, and of our own Manufacturies, have their Trades swallowed up by this
from the East Indies, and are thereby deprived of their Livelihoods, and can
have no reparation but by an Admission into this Trade.

Because the enlarging of the Stock would occasion the enlarging of the Trade
to Moca, Arracon, Achein, Sumatra, St. Lawrence, Pegu, Mozambig, Sofoia,
Melinda, Borneo, Persia, and Japan, all places capable of a great Trade, which
would be of great Advantage to the Navigation, his Majesty's Customs, and his
Subjects in General.

It is agreeable to the order of a General-Court, which this Company made at
their first Setting up, and the Arguments which they then offered to induce his
Majesty to Grant them their Charter, that they would at the end of Seven Years
Balance their Books and open them for New Subscriptions, that so other Persons
might come into the said Trade; which is a more Natural and equal way then
Carrying on the Trade by taking Money at Interest on a Common Seal.

Though this Company had been the first Discoverers of this Trade, yet it is
not usual to permit that those who Invent or Discover any thing Improveable for
common Good, should keep such Discoveries to themselves and Successors to
perpetuity; only a certain Term of Years for Encouragement: But this Company
being not the Discoverers, and having enjoyed the Trade 24 Years, and made Ten
for One of their Money, have been sufficiently Rewarded; others without Reaping
what they Sowed have expired for Public good.

If this East India Trade should go on Increasing as of Late, and come to be
Double or Treble what it now is; yet without a new Settlement and larger Stock,
the Advantages will be Contracted to as few Persons as now; it being probable
that as it has been more and more ingrost ever since the Year 1666, when first
it begun to get Repute, no one Man having then to the Value of 4000 l. Stock,
now several 50000 l. a Piece, and One above 100000 l. So the same Temptations
will occasion the further Ingrossiing of it, thereby to keep the Management in
their own hands, by which they will continue Reaping the Advantages of the said
Trade, though should grow never so great, and have as much Security for their
Money as the Treasure of the Nation taken up on a Common Seal can afford.

Because other Trades having for several Years past afforded no Considerable
Gains, several Persons who could not procure Admission into this Company, have
engaged into an Interloping Trade, which may in time prejudice the Trade it
Self, which the opening of Books for new Subscriptions, and the enlarging of
the Stook may probably prevent, because it would draw in most of the Trading
People of the Nation to be concerned, and Leave no Temptations for the
Interlopers to continue Trading Separate.

Because it is apparent the Turkey Trade is of great Advantage to this Nation,
Exporting Yearly above 400000 l. in our Manufacturies, and bringing home
profitable and necessary Goods in return thereof, and in danger to be destroyed
by this from the India, by their Importation of such an abundance of Wrought
and Raw Silks. It would be Severe, if they who have deserved well of the Nation
by Carrying on that Trade, should have no way to come into this, which is like
to destroy theirs.

Without New Subscriptions there can be no way of coming into this Trade under
this Charter, but by Buying Shares in the Stock of the present Adventures,
which is to reduce the Liberty and Freedom which has always been approved for
Admission into Trade to the same difficulty as to attain the Possession of
Lands; for one Man cannot Buy any Stock, unless another will Sell, nor unless
the Buyers will give the Price demanded; and experience has discovered that
it is so seldom any Stock offers to be Sold, that it can no way Answer the
Objections made against the Present Company: For those who have the greatest
Stocks, instead of Selling, accumulate more; and it is only some small Sums by
chance escape their hands; but if there were more to be Sold, it would but
exchange the Interest of A. B. for C. D. and no way be Subservient to the
bringing in of more People or Stock into the Trade; and it will be more
agreeable to his Majesty's Bounty, and Goodness, that his Subjects should enter
into this Trade by a Door of his opening, then by the Courtesy of the Present
Adventurers, and such a narrow disadvantageous way as they allow of, which
cannot extend to any Considerable number of People, nor to those who most want
his Majesty's help, [the meanest] because they have not Money to Buy 100 l.
Stock at the Rate it now goes of 500 l. and less Sums are seldom or never
Sold; by which means if there were no other, the Major part of the People are
prevented from coming into this Trade.

Because this Company by sending over to the East Indies, Dyers, Throwsters,
Weavers, and Instruments for the Setting up of Manufacturies there, and by the
Contraction which they have made of the Advantages of this Trade to so sew
Persons, and the inequality and danger which arises by carrying on this Trade
by Money taken up on a Common Seal at Interest, and by the particular Interest
which they carry on in their Private Trade, owning of Ships they employ, and
other Sinister ways, have Degenerated from their Primitive Nature, and directed
and managed His Majesty's Charter to purposes different to His Gracious
intendment and Royal Grant, which was the Good of his People in general, by
Converting and Wresting the said Charter to be only Subservient to their
particular Advantage; and therefore ill deserve to be continued in the
enjoyment of such extraordinary Gains so contrary to the Interest of the Nation
in General.

Because the Members of this Company have enjoyed it so long, as they have
almost forgot the Donors Right, and the Nature of their Tenure, Pleading their
Charter, Prescriptions, and Possession (which cannot give them any Right but
during His Majesty's pleasure) in opposition to His Majesty's Royal Bounty, and
Goodness, intended to be equally distributed amongst all his Loyal Subjects, as
he is a Common Father to them all.

Though His Majesty, and former Kings his Royal Predecessors, have Granted
Charters for Incorporating of Trades to a set number of their Subjects named in
them; yet it was never intended to their private Use, nor as an Inheritance to
them; but such Persons Names were only used as in trust for the Public good,
that being the Royal end, which His Majesty, and the Kings Predecessors, always
designed. And this is manifest by the Proviso His Majesty was pleased to make
in this Charter, That when this Charter either in Whole or in Part was not
profitable to his Majesty or his Realm, that then and from thenceforth after
Three Years warning it should expire to all intents and purposes.

By the Example of former Ages, it is apparent that other Companies have had
their determination for public Good, as may be Instanced in many Companies
that have managed the East India and Guiney Trade, and most of them after had
lost great Estates in the Carrying on of the said Trade; which if particular
Interest must be Considered will be found much Severer than to have this
East India. Company expire after 24 Years enjoyment, and the Reaping of so
great Advantages thereby.

Trade is to the Body Politic as Blood to the Body Natural, if have it is
Circulation apt to relieve the Wounded, or most needy Part, (the meanest) but
if obstructed, or otherways disordered in Motion, may probably weaken one part,
and over nourish others: If all the other Trades of this Nation should be
Incorporated, and thus contracted, it is obvious that it would enrich only 160
Persons, and not maintain as Adventurers above 2000 Persons in all: And if such
a Contraction would have a bad effect, if all Trades were so managed, so it
must have some proportion in the Contraction; which is apparent in this great
Trade to the East Indies; especially if it be Considered what a numberless
quantity of People there are in this Nation, which have their dependence on
Trade for their Livelihoods.

If this Trade be not intended for an Inheritance to these few Persons who are
now in the Possession of all the Advantages and Profits of it, the present
Conjunction is opportune for the determination of this Company, as well in
reference to affairs abroad, as at home: Our Neighboring Nations not being in
a Condition to take advantage of the Transition, and at home it will answer the
Complaints which are made of the badness of other Trades, and want of
Employment for Ships Stock, and people designed for Trade.

Because there can be no danger of any Inconvenience to the Trade by this
enlargement; for if time be given to this Company for the drawing in of their
Effects, in that time the Pulse of the Nation will appear by the new
Subscriptions, if Books be opened for that purpose, and if there do not offer
sufficient Subscribers for such a New Stock, as is proposed, then this Company
may be prolonged, notwithstanding any intimation that may be given for their
determination; but if Two Millions, or what else may be thought a Convenient
Stock should be underwrit, then there will be no difficulty in Carrying on the
Trade without any Intermission, with no more danger then the Exchange of
Committees now Annually made does occasion; and the increase of the Stock, as
it will prove several ways Advantageous to the Nation, and satis fie the
Complaints that arise from the Contraction of the said Trade, and difficulties
of Admission into it, so it will occasion the Enlarging thereof; and if the
present Company have time to draw off their Effects, and satisfaction for their
dead Stock, and leave to underwrite in the New Company the 372000 l. which they
have Original Stock in the Old, there can be no injury done them; they will be
only reduced to an equallity of Trade with the rest of the Trading People; in
doing of which there can be no more danger then in Lopping of the exuberant
Branches of a Tree, opening the Root and giving it fresh supplies of Water.

That if it should appear that any Manufactured Goods were broguht from the
Indies, that were a detriment to the Nation by hindering the Expense of such as
were made here, or that Raw Silk could not be brought from thence upon as good
terms as from Turkey; that Provision might be made in the New Charter to prevent
all Inconveniences from such Commodities.

Upon this Petition these Arguments and others that were offered upon that
occasion, the King was pleased to direct that the Petitioners should propose
some Methods how the said Stock and Adventurers should be enlarged without
prejudice to his Customs, and the Trade, which were accordingly made, but after
some time all endeavors of that kind were rejected; upon which many Merchant,
sand others, having the opinion of Counsel Learned in the Law, that the Clauses
in the Charter impowering the Company to Seize the Ships, or Goods of their
fellow Subjects, were Illegal, did equip several Ships with Rich Cargoes to
send to the Indies; amongst the rest, the Ship Commerce, Captain Sands with
50000 l. Cargoe, and although did not enter his Ship or Goods in the
Customhouse for the Indies, yet upon a Petition from the Company to the King,
Suggesting they were informed that the said Ship was designed for the
East Indies, after several stops to his dispatch at the Custom-House, an Order
was sent to the Court of Admiralty, that they should cause the said Ship to be
Arrested until sufficient Security were given that the said Captain should not
sail within the Limits of the East India Companies Charter. The said Ship being
stopped, and Men put aboard to keep possession, that she might not stir, Sands by
Writ brought the Case to the Kings Bench at Westminster, in order to get a
Prohibition, but after much Cost, Charge and Delays, a Prohibition was denied
him; then the Company to ease themselves of the Charge of keeping their Men
aboard, obtained the following Letter.

HIS Majesty having Information that the Court of Kings Bench has this day
resolved not to grant a Prohibition to Sands the Interloper, has commanded me
to signify to you, that it is his desire and pleasure, that all care
imaginable be used to continue the Ship in question under the Arrest of the
Admiralty, as now she is, till it be otherwise ordered by due course of Law:
And to the end there may be no possibility to break that Arrest, and to sail
away the Ship, His Majesty would have all the Sails and the Rudder it self,
taken away by the proper Officer, and secured, so as no use may be made of
them. His Majesty is pleased to give this Order thus soon, because it is told
him, That as soon as this News reaches the Interlopers, they may very probably
direct and attempt to have the Ship sail away, and consequently render the
Judicial Resolutions of this day of no effect or avail to His Majesty's Rights,
and just Prerogative.

February 10. 1682/3.

The Contents of which Letter was exactly executed by the Admiralty, and the
Ship lay under the said Arrest Twelve Months, notwithstanding all endeavors in
Courts of Justice, or elsewhere, then the concerned sold their Ship and Cargoe
with great Loss, and so ended their Voyage.

Notwithstanding this discouragement, other Merchants did equip other Ships,
and got them clear out; of which the Company being informed, they obtained an
Order under the Kings Sign Manual, to the Commander of the Phoenix, a Fourth
Rate Frigate, that he should sail to the East Indies, to secure the Trade
granted by Charter to the East India Company, against Pirates and Interlopers,
as might from time to time receive Directions from the General or Presidency at
Surrat; and accordingly the said Ship proceeded for the Indies, and the said
General and Companies Factors at Surrat did frequently by Letters advise the
said Captain, where fat Interlopers (as they call them) might be met with.

And for the further Security of the said Trade against Pirates and
Interlopers, the Company gave Commissions to the Commanders of their own Ships
under their Common Seal in these words:

The Governor and Company of Merchants Trading into the East Indies, to
Captain N. T.
THE Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Having by His Royal Charter, bearing date
the 3d. day of April 1661, in the 13th. Year of His Majesty's Reign, granted
unto us the Trade of the East Indies, and declared that the Ports, Cities,
Towns, and places thereof, shall not be Traded unto, visited, frequented, or
haunted, by any others of His Majesty's Subjects without our License, upon pain
of forfeiture of Ship and Goods, and Imprisonment during His Majesty's
pleasure; and that if we conceive it necessary, we may send either Ships of
War, Men or Ammunition, into any of our Factories or other places of Trade for
the security and defense of the same, and to choose Commanders and Officers over
them, and to give them Power and Authority, by Commission, under our Common
Seal or otherwise, to continue and make Peace or War with any Prince or People
that are not Christians in any places of our Trade, as shall be most for our
advantage and benefit; and also to right and recompense our selves upon the
Goods, Estates or People of those parts, by whom we shall sustain any injury,
loss or damage, or upon any other People whatsoever, that shall any way
interrupt, wrong or injure us in our said Trade: And that we may sieze the
persons of such English, or other of His Majesty's Subjects, in the said
East Indies, which shall sail in any English or Indian Vessel, or inhabit in
those parts without our License, and send them for England. And whereas His
Majesty by His further Royal Charter, dated the 9th day of August, 1683, has
been pleased to grant unto the said Company full Power to enter into any Ship,
Vessel, House, Shop, Cellar or Warehouse, and to sieze all Ships and Goods
which shall be brought from, or carried to the places abovementioned, the one
Moiety of all Forfeitures to be to the use of His Majesty, and the other Moiety
to the Company; and to nominate and appoint Governors and Officers in their
Forts, Factories and Plantations, who are to raise Arms, train and muster such
Military Forces as shall be necessary, to execute Martial Law for the defense
of the same; and likewise to erect a Court of Judicature in such places in
India, as the Company shall think fit, to hear and determine all cases of
forfeiture and seisures, of any Ship or Ships, Goods and Merchandises trading
and coming within the Limits aforesaid, contrary to the said Charters; and all
other Maritine Causes.

These are therefore to authorize and require you to put in execution, or cause
to be put in execution, all the Powers and Authorities granted unto us by His
Majesty's said Royal Charters, as above-recited, against all Interlopers in
India, Madagasear, and all other places within the Limits of His Majesty's said
Charters, which extend to all Ports and Places between the Cape of Good Hope,
and the Streights of Magellan; and whatsoever you shall do, or cause to be
done, in the Premises, conformable to the several Clauses of His Majesty's said
Royal Charters before-recited, in this our Commission, or according to any
further Instruction you shall receive from us, or any Thirteen or more of the
Committees of the said East India Company (whereof the Governor or Deputy for
the time being to be one) we shall always indempnify, and save harmless, you,
and all employed by or under you, therein. In Witness whereof we have hereunto
caused our Common Seal to be put this 25th day of February, 1684/5.


The East India Company in Holland are said to be a little Monarchy under a
Commonwealth, ours would have Powers equal with them, as they then pretended,
for which Reason happily these Commissions were granted, which must be agreed
were a high flight, and near approach to Sovereign Powers, but that the King
could delegate such Powers, as mentioned in the aforesaid Commission, not
agreed.

By Virtue of these Commissions and Directions, amongst others the Ships
Adventure and Bristol, whose Cargoes cost in England about 60000 l. were siezed
or destroyed.

But some others that went escaped from being siezed as Pirates in the Indies,
coming Home in safety were for some time permitted to sell their Goods, without
any great interruption, but about the Year 1686. Resolutions were taken to make
such Pirates also. As for Instance, The Ship Andulazia, who arriving at
Portsmouth from the Indies with a Rich Cargoe, an Order was obrained, and sent
to the Admiralty, for apprehending the Men, and siezing the said Ship: the Men
were brought Prisoners to London, no Bail being admitted, and some days after
an Order was sent to the Admiralty in these words.

WHereas we have received certain Information that the Master, supra Cargoe,
Purser, and several other Persons, belonging to the Ship Andulazia (now lying
under Arrest at Portsmouth, by Process out of Our Court of Admiralty) are gone
down, under pretense of attending the Inspection and Appraisment of the Goods
on board the said Ship, lately decreed by Commission out of Our said Court;
which persons at this present, are accused for Acts of Pyracy, as well as
Interloping, and are to be tried for the Pyracy. And whereas We are likewise
informed, that they or some of them have been actually on board the said Ship,
and have begun to rummage there, pretending to remove the Goods in order to
their Inspection and Appraisment, by means whereof we cannot but suspect their
ill intent and design, to imbezil the Goods to Our Prejudice, in case of
Forfeiture. To the intent therefore that there be no Imbezilment or Damage
caused by them, or any other person whatsoever, but that the Goods be kept
entire and safe for the benefit of Us, and Our Just Rights, in case of
Forfeiture, or of others who may have a right to the same, Our Will and
Pleasure is, that you forthwith issue out an Order to Our Marshal, and Deputies
of Our said Court, to unlade the said Goods, and put them in some secure
Warehouses in Our Town of Portsmouth, to the end that they may be preserved as
aforesaid; and for so doing this shall be your Warrant. Given at Our Court at
Whitehall the 17th day of March, 1686/7.

The persons that were named in the Warrants for the execution of these Orders
were most, or all, Servants to the Company. After Imprisonment, great Losses
and Charges, this Affair ended in an Agreement (as it was called) made in these
words:

WHereas the Ship Andulazia, Captain John Jacobs Commander, now Riding in the
Harbor of Portsmouth, has Traded in India contrary to His Late Majesty's
Proclamation, and the East India Companies Charters (without leave from the
said Company) and is suspected to have committed some Acts of Hostility in
India, which in strict construction of Law might be counted Piracy, although it
may be Reasonably hoped that the fact committed in the Indies was only to
promote that Private Trade in which they were unfortunately engaged. And
whereas the said Ship, Commander, Officers, and Seamen, and also the Cargoe
aboard her is now under Arrest of His Majesty's Court of Admiralty, for Piracy
and Interloping, and there have been some Proceedings in the Admiralty Court in
order to an Adjudication of the said Ship and Goods, as forfeited by the
East India Companies Charters, one half to His Majesty, and the other half to
the said Company: Now for as much as the Interessed in the said Ship and Goods
do apply themselves to the said Company, and entreat they will favor them with
their earnest Endeavors and Petitions to his Sacred Majesty in their behalf,
that His Majesty will be graciously pleased to grant His Royal Pardon to all
persons concerned in the said Ships, and of all Forfeitures incurred by the
facts aforesaid, the said East India Company and Proprietors of the said Ship
and Goods, do mutually agree to the Conditions following, viz.

That the said Commander and Owners, and all Persons concerned as Desendants in
the said Court of Admiralty, or otherwise, shall in the said Court (as most
true it is) confess the fact of Interloping, and submit to the determination of
that Court without further Appeal or moving for any Prohibition, or bringing
any Actions, or Action of Trover, or causing any further littigation or trouble
in any of the Courts of Law, or Equity, concerning the Ship or Goods, or any of
the Persons aforesaid.

That the said Persons, Defendants, or their Assigns, shall bring the said
Ship about at their own Charge into the River of Thames, without any
imbezilments, with the Kings and Companies Officers aboard, and shall at her
arrival in the River of Thames (the danger of the Seas excepted) deliver up all
the said Goods into the Companies Warehouses, the Company being to defray the
Customs and incident Charges in landing upon the following terms; viz. That the
Goods be sold by the Companies Candle, and the said Custom, incident Charges in
Landing and Housing with discompt, be deducted from the whole sale of the said
Goods, or Net amount of them.

That 10000 l. immediately after the Sale, out of the first Money received
thereon, be paid to -- for the Ships Freight, Damage, Commons, and other
Charges for the said Commander, Owners, and others concerned.

That after the foregoing deductions, the remaining Nett proceed of all the
said Goods shall be paid, viz. The One Fifth part to the Honorable East India
Company, and the Four Fifths to -- for the use of the respective Proprietors.
That the time of the Sale shall be within One Month after the Goods are landed,
or as shall be thought convenient for advance of the Cargoe.

That when all is sold and paid, mutual Releases shall be given and
interchanged between the Company and the concerned: For performance of the
Premises we give this under our Hands this 23th day of March, 1686/7.

On the behalf of the E.I. Company, if His Most Excellent Majesty approve
thereof.

According to this Agreement 3161 l. 00 s. 02 d. was paid upon a Privy Seal,
and the rest to complete One Fifth to the Company; upon which General Releases
were given, and the Delinquents were pardoned for their Piracy and Interloping.

The bloody Tragedy which was acted at the Island of Sancta Helena, Anno 1685;
the Illegal Imprisonments which have been frequently made at Fort St. George,
Bombay, and other places Abroad; the violent Prosecutions that were about that
time carried on in the Courts of Westminster Hall; the vast Sums of Money that
have appeared, and much greater which have not yet been made public, that have
been expended in Secret Services, to gain the steps beforementioned, to defeat
all endeavors to obtain any alteration in the management of the said Trade,
and to justify and defend the execution of such Powers; and that those which
suffered could never obtain any Redress or Satisfaction; as may hereafter be
thought a blemish on our Government, so does deserve to be entered as a Caveat
against the Incorporating of Trades with Joint-Stocks, or at least for the
taking of great Care that the like Oppressions and Violations may not happen
again by such Settlements; for there will always be a great temptation from
particular Interest to extend their Powers beyond their due Limits; the persons
that have the management being too apt to conclude there cannot be any great
danger of making Compensations, or being called to an account; for if they have
a good Stock, and profitable Trade, will suppose that in Cases of difficulty
they shall always be able to charm the Great, and overpower their Equals; and
that the Common Seal only must bear the reproach and blame of all. The
integrity and ability of the Members concerned in such Stocks having been found
by experience to be no security against the Abusing of Powers granted to
Corporations.

The Advocates for Settling this Trade in a Joint Stock usually allege, That
the Trade to the East Indies is remote, and cannot possibly be carried on
without it: That there are and must be several Forts and Castles, and
Factories, in several Princes Countries, with which Princes differences do
arise, and oftentimes with the Dutch: That there is a necessity of Soldiers
and Garrisons at the Isle of St. Helena, Fort St. George, Bombay, etc. none of
which can be maintained without a great Charge: That there is occasion to make
Treaties and Agreements with the Great Mogul, and other Princes, which cannot
well be managed by particular persons: That they employ great Ships, and breed
up a great number of Seamen: That they bring a great deal of Treasure to the
Nation by what Goods they bring and transport into Foreign parts; and that
others spent here at Home are very useful, and come cheaper to us than we
should otherwise have them: That they have been long in the possession of this
Trade, and have a right to their Forts and Castles which they bought and paid
for: That their Adventurers are numerous, and therefore the Trade as diffusive
under the Company as can be made otherwise, and that all persons may come in
at any time by buying Stock: And that it being laid open before the Year 1657,
when this Charter was first obtained, it was reduced to such a languishing
condition in a few Years, that the Traders that pursued it soon lost much by
it, and all joined in an application for getting it settled by a Charter in a
Joint Stock; and that the like will happen again if it should be laid open, if
not lost to the Dutch or French, or other Nations.

The Opposers have offered against these Arguments, That though the Trade be
remote, yet that the Indians do as kindly receive all persons that come there
to Trade, and with as much Civility and Security, as any people in Europe; and
that the Company could never get any favor in Trade amongst the Natives above
other people, unless by force and indirect means, as the Interlopers have
experienced: That the Inhabitants of St. Helena are English, under the
Jurisdiction of England, and without much Charge may be maintained, so as to
serve for a watering place for the Ships as they come home: That the Forts of
St. George, Bencoolon, and St. David's, were never of any use more than as
Warehouses; and as such Fort St. George and Bombay not very serviceable,
because most of the Trade is carried on at a great distance, and none of them
capable to be defended against the Indians by Land, or Dutch by Sea, if they
should come with any force to attack them: That Treaties and Agreements with
Princes in the Indies, may be made with their Ministers, by any single person,
the Governors, and others, being always ready to treat with any Merchants,
and that there is no need of going to the Prince himself: That the East India
Trade imploys many Ships, and some very good, but that it is rather a
Consumption than Nursery of Seamen, carrying away generally only the choicest,
and sometimes burying half of them: That the long possession this Company have
had of this Trade for near Forty Years, makes against them, it being not
reasonable any set of Men should keep so great a part of the Trade of the
Nation in succession to perpetuity, exclusive to others, who have as much right
to it as they: That the Forts and Castles cannot properly be said to belong to
them, but only in Trust for the Government; and the Trade not so diffusive as
ought to be, because the Stock is ingrost by a few: That the Dutch being in
possession of so many Ports and large Territories in the Indies, have such
strength at Sea, that it is impossible for the English, as the case now stands,
to keep them in awe by strength there; and that this Company never could, as
appears by their having lost to them all that they ever thought worth taking,
Amboyna, Polleroone, and all the Spice Islands, or Factories which we had in
any such Islands, and lately Bantam; and what we now have, the Dutch would not
be at the Charge of keeping, if they had them.

But leaving these Old Complaints and Disputes. If Corporations in Trade with
Joint-Stocks should appear to be in their own Nature to all intents and
purposes Monopolies, mischievous to Trade, and as much an Excise upon such
People that buy any Goods Imported by such Companies, and not concerned in the
Stock, as if it were said in direct words, that all such persons should pay in
all they buy 20 or 50 per Cent. extraordinary toward the enriching the
Proprietors of that Stock, added to the inconveniences beforementioned that
attend the contracting or incorporating of Trades, whether then it be not worth
an inquiry if some Method for Regulated Companies may not be contrived to
answer all Arguments offered for Joint-Stocks, and prevent the inconveniences,
where any Trade absolutely requires Regulations? But all attempts of this kind
may meet great opposition; it being a fair step to Riches to have a great
Trade, and happily the most beneficial, separated and confined chiefly for the
advantage of those few that can get the management of it; therefore not strange
that most of our Richest and Greatest Traders should now be engaged in Joint
Stocks, and endeavor to support them.

If Companies with Joint-Stocks were at first intended for the good of Trade,
have certainly of late deviated from their Original Constitutions; for too many
have by dividing their Stocks amongst themselves much prejudiced the Trades
they have been entrusted with, selling Pretenses and Privileges (after the
Stock is divided) to such as were excluded, who must come into such Trades upon
such terms as they please to impose on them, or not at all, made Stock-Jobbing
their chief Trade, and ruined thereby some good designs for the promoting of
Trade.

It is true, when a Trade is first Incorporated it is usually on condition,
that all may come in, and subscribe within a time prefixed, that will, and such
as do not subscribe within that time, to be excluded.

But such Corporations when once settled being not easily broken, those that
get into possession usually endeavor to keep such Trades, if Profitable, as if
were their Inheritance, such Merchants-Traders or others that may be excluded,
because at the time of the Books being opened were beyond Sea, or under some
Natural Incapacity, as Minors, or otherwise, not then in a condition to
subscribe, have always and may probably ever complain, that they are deprived
of their Birthrights, and that it is hard and unequal they should be excluded
from such Trades when the Members of such Incorporations are not excluded from
coming into theirs.

And as the settling of Trades in Joint-Stocks makes a great inequality between
those that are of the Company and those that are excluded, so more amongst
themselves: For when the East India Trade was in its most flourishing
condition, ten Men owned one quarter part of the said Stock, and under Forty
the one half, who thereby getting the Management made more Gains in proportion
than any of the rest of the Adventurers, getting the ascendent and commands by
engrossing the Stock.

As those that live in Middlesex and Essex would probably complain if a
privilege were granted to the County of Surry and Sussex, to have the sole
selling of Corn and Cattle to the City of London, and the Citizens that should
thereby have Provisions dear; so all incorporating of Trades will always be
attended with the like Complaints, for they will have in some measure the same
effect, and afford the like grounds.

All will agree that Trade ought not to be stinted and contracted to the
Advantage of some few; but diffusive for the encouragement of Industry, and
free for all persons to engage in. Joint-Stocks may be a good way to advance
some Trading Men, but whether may probably advance the Trade of the Nation, or
answer the chief ends designed by Trade should be considered.

The Manufactured Goods from the East Indies, and the Toys and Nicknacks,
before this War, being in great esteem, and generally consumed, it has been
computed that 400000 l. per Annum was usually laid out here at Home, for the
purchasing of them; and if it be considered that all persons of all degrees did
wear or spend some of those Commodities, it may reasonably be concluded the
Cost of those Goods did rather amount to more than less.

If upon examination it should appear that the Persian Taffaties, Wrought
Silks, Painted and Dyed Callicoes, are spent here in the room of our Home-made
Silks, and of several sorts of Stuffs made at Norwich, Canterbury, Bristol,
Exon, and other places.

That the Course Callicoes, Muslins, and other Linnens, are a great obstacle to
the improvement of our Linen Manufactures, and are purchased with Money;
whereas we might have such Linnens as we could not make our selves in returns
of our Products.

That the Cabinets, China, Lacquered and Japan Ware, and several other sorts of
Goods that come ready made, are too costly to the Nation, a great hinderance to
the employ of our own People, and a prodigal unprofitable Expense.

That the Raw Silk and Goats Hair hinders the Importation of so much from
Turkey from whence we might have most of it in return of our own Manufacturies
and Products.

That the Cotton Yarn and Cotton Wool hinders the Consumption of those
Commodities from our Plantations.

Then the only Question will be, whither we had best send our Money to India to
Employ and enrich the People, and advance Lands there by purchasing their
Goods, or keep our Money at home that it may circulate amongst our Selves, and
have the same Effect here by using our own Goods, or such as can be purchased
by Exchange of them?

It was never affirmed, nor presumed that Goods brought from India, and spent
here did bring us in any Bullion in return of the great quantities carried out.
The Bullion that ever was pretended to be brought in by that Trade, has always
been supposed to be by the Goods brought thence, and Transported hence to
Foreign Markets; which part of that Trade may be continued, though the expense
of the forementioned Goods here should be Prohibited.

If it be found that notwithstanding we have had such scarcity of Bullion of
late, that above 400000 l. was Shipped off for the Carrying on of this Trade by
the Company and Interlopers between Christmas and Midsummer last past; and that
the Five Millions of Milled Money Coined in the last Reigns, much of our Gold
and of our Broad and Weightiest Money has been Exported; and that no Law is
like to hinder the Melting down, or Exporting of our New Money without
rectifying Trades. If we are in good earnest to endeavor to prevent it, where
shall the Reformation begin, if nothing must be done to this Trade, which it is
obvious does Carry it out as well as some others already mentioned.

If a stop be put to the Consumption here of Goods Manufactured in the
East Indies, then the Woollen Goods that Company are now obliged to send out,
with a much less Sum of Bullion then hitherto, may be sufficient to purchase
the Goods brought home to be Transported, which may prevent the Exportation of
much Bullion Annually; and it would be our own Faults if we should take either
Silks, or Linnens, or the like sorts of Goods from our Neighbors for Money in
the room of them; for our Weavers are come to such perfection in making of
Silks and Stuffs, and such sorts of good Linen have been, and are now made
here, and may probably be improved, as that we may want few from abroad, or
none, but what may be obtained in return of our Products and Manufacturies.

But it is not to be expected that our Workmen should ever cope with, or beat
out the expense of the Goods Manufactured in India; because of the advantage
the Indians have in the price of Materials and day Laborers, which being
extraordinary cheap in those parts, must if the Consumption be encouraged prove
a hinderance to the Consumption, if not end in the destruction of a great
quantity of the Manufacturies of England.

The Trade to Africa deserves all encouragement, Trade to Africa.
being beneficial both in it is Exports and Imports, Carries from us great
quantities of our Draperies made of our Coursest Wool, which would not be
vendible elsewhere, and many other Commodities we can well spare, returns
chiefly Gold, and Elephants Teeth brought here, and great quantities of Negroes
that are carried to our Plantations; so that it is hard to name any Trade we
drive that deserves better to be enlarged, being a Country in which Rivers,
Bays, and Creeks are very plenty. It may be a question if we ever yet made the
best of it, especially as to the Trade of Negroes, which the Spaniards are
ready to take from us in Exchange of Gold or Silver. No Trade more likely to
supply the want of Coin in this Nation, nor less liable to objections that any
prejudice can ensue by carrying it on to the largest extent.

This Trade has been also managed by a Company in a Joynt-Stock, which was
Subscribed about the year 1672. Springing out of the Ruins of a former Company.
A Charter was then Granted, and the Powers afterward enlarged and executed
after the Pattern of that for the East India Trade, by which also many Suffered
to the greatest extremity, and the Plantations whither because they were not
plentifully Served with Negroes, or not upon good Terms, or because they were
unwilling to have their all (for their being supplied with Negroes is so to
them) Subjected to the mercy of a Corporation, have made frequent Complaints
against this Company as well as those that lost their Ships, Goods, and
Liberties, or were deterred from Trading thither. This Trade was never yet
advantageous to any Company. Upon the Settling of this last some scrupulous
persons took the opinion of our ablest Divines, whether it were Lawful or not
to Sell and Buy Mankind, upon which this Trade does much depend? Most agreed
that it was practiced in the Primitive times; for which they Quoted good
Authorities, but condemned their being used ill, either at the time of their
Transportation from the Country where they were Bought to any other, or
afterward; and recommended that all Christians should Treat them, as having
the Image of God; and use their best endeavors to instruct them in the
Principles of the Christian Religion. The covetousness of most Commanders to
Carry many to advance their Freight (for they are generally paid by the Head,)
as it has occasioned unanswerable abuses; so the death of abundance which
should be prevented if possible, that their Condition after Bought may be
better then before; which may be the best Argument that can be given for the
Buying and Selling of Mankind.

All Trades Settled in Joynt-Stocks must restrain the Trade to London; from
thence all Ships for the Carrying on of such Trades must have their egress, and
thither must return; which as well as the grievances before mentioned will
occasion complaints from the rest of the Trading Towns: The City of Exon and
Bristol, and others being as well Seated and Accommodated for Carrying on a
Trade for Africa, as London.

The many discoveries that have been made of Countries and Trades, which now
consume great quantities of our Products, were always by bold Adventurers the
Incorporating of Trades in Joynt-Stocks, will be a discouragement and
hinderance to such undertakings; for as the Original of such Incorporations is
from hopes of Gains, as we may Judge by the vast Sums of Money that have been
expended to procure Charters, and Support their Powers, so the way to make this
Gain is to make use of that Privilege (which is a consequent of having a sole
Trade) to Deal Secure, Buy Cheap and Sell Dear; from which must follow
Adventuring Little rather than much: If by 20000 l. Worths of Goods sent to
Guiny, when bought cheap and sold dear they can get as much as by 40000 l.
Bought and Sold at moderate Prices, they will to lessen Adventures send only
20000 l. But this Method not is advantageous to the Nation, which depends upon
the Exportation of as many of our Goods to Africa, as can by any means be
Consumed there; and it is not likely that Companies will make bold Adventures
to open New Trades. And it may be suspected that the two Charters for the India
and Africa Trades, which Comprehend above one quarter Part of the World, and
those Places where it is most likely New and Beneficial Trades might be
discovered, have been a great hinderance thereto; for notwithstanding the many
Flourishes that have been made to ingratiate, nothing of that kind has
appeared in effect to be done by either of the said Companies.

As long as we had Judges that were of opinion that the Clauses in these
Charters were good in Law, and gave Judgments accordingly, no application was
made to have these Trades settled by Act of Parliament, but of late Petitions
have been preferred for that purpose, and it has been proposed that those Trades
should be Settled in Joynt-Stocks for 21 Years; which it may be feared, would
in effect, subject our best Trades, and our Treasure to the Mercy of an
East India Company, and the Trade of our Plantations to the Mercy of an
African-Company; and the variations and changes that usually attend Trade, and
the great Interest these Companies have for many Years made; by which they
supported their Powers though Granted only by Charter, may be added as
Arguments against Settling of those Trades in Joynt-Stocks for 21 Years
exclusie by Act of Parliament, least whatever Mischiefs or Inconvenienices.
should attend it, a new Settlement or alterations should be found difficult or
impossible to be attained.

As there is no president for settling Trades in Joint-Stocks by Act of
Parliament for 21 Years, and a prospect that may be inconvenient to the
Public, so improbable that such a Settlement of the East India Trade should
prove Advantageous to any particular persons excepting the Proprietors and
Creditors of the Present Stock, to whom the Common Seal is indebted from 5 to
600000 l. upon Loans; for as 325565 l. of the Money paid in by the last New
Adventurers was presently taken and applied, to pay what was then owing on the
Common Seal, which now lies heavy on those Adventurers, so either the 750000 l.
which was lately proposed to be subscribed and paid in by the New Adventurers,
if those Proposals should be reassumed and take effect, will be taken out
immediately, and applied for the payment of the Money now owing, and so leave
little or none to carry on the Trade; or if not paid, then must continue
running on at 6 per Cent. Interest, and so prove a gread load upon the New
Adventurers; which added to the disadvantageous Valuation of the Old Stock to
which they must join their Money, may probably deter all Persons from
adventuring; and then the consequence of such an Act will be, that the Trade
will be secured to the present Adventurers for 21 Years longer, which happily
is chiefly designed. Whether any Act may be so made as to prevent these, and
all other discouragements to New Adventurers, must be left to Time to discover.
But as the great Reroute this Trade did get was by their great Dividends, which
did arise from their confining their Stock to 372000 l. and Trading with 7 or
800000 l. of the Peoples Money, taken up at Low Interest, on a Common Seal;
then doubling it, calling 100 l. 200 l., and selling it accordingly without
bringing in any Money; by excising the People by virtue of their Privileges to
have the sole selling of East India Goods, and by such additions as made; by
their War on the Moguls Subjects, and Interlopers, or by Stock-Jobbing, Private
Sales, Private Trade, etc. Though by such Methods as these, great Gains have
been made, which have put it out of dispute that the Managers were a true Body
Politic in Fact as well as in Name, yet happily, if ever this Trade should be
settled by Act of Parliament, such a Management as this may be exploded, and
care taken to prevent the like for the future. And if Dividends should be made
hereafter on 1500000 l. instead of 372000 l., and the Trade be so settled that
the Gains should arise by what got from Foreigners, which can only enrich the
Nation, and not so much out of our own people, which can only make Riches
change hands. Such provisions, and the encumbrances of the Debt before
mentioned, and high valuation of the Old Stock, will probably render such a
Settlement of this Trade in a Joint Stock a grievance in a short time, either
to the New Members, if any come in, because may not answer their expectation in
point of Gains; or to others, not Members of the Company, if notwithstanding
such care, extraordinary means to get Riches out of our own people should be
practiced as formerly; or to the Nation in general, if the Exportation of our
Coin without limitation, and the Consumption of their Manufactured Goods from
India should be permitted. Therefore it is as unlikely that such a Settlement
should afford a general lasting satisfaction, as that a House built on the
Sand, or with ill tempered Mortar, should be strong. And the African Company
being also indebted, and having followed much the pattern of the East India
Company, the like difficulties may be suggested.

If our Necessities and Condition, as well as Reason, call upon us to settle
Trade, as may be most for the advantage of the Nation, it will be in vain to
think it can be done, as long as Arguments that have no ground but from
particular Interests shall be allowed. Those that are engaged in any Profitable
Trade will always be loath to part with it, whatever Arguments may be given
that it is Unprofitable to the Nation. Those that are in possession of any
Charter, that conveyes to them a Trade exclusive to others, know it to be a
great privilege, and therefore will always do their utmost to preserve it to
themselves. Though the great Gains such Corporations expect to make must be by
squeezing and griping our own people, which though may enrich the Members of
such Companies, yet cannot tend to enrich the Nation.

Few Arguments can be given for incorporating the Eaest-India or Guinea Trades
in Joint-Stocks, but what may be given for the incorporating of any Trade
whatsoever, if any assurance could be had that when Men are incorporated for
the carrying on of a Trade, they would mind the public more than their
particular Interests, not extend their Powers to the prejudice of others, and
be sure to determine at a certain time, it would give some encouragement for
such Incorporations to be settled by Charters, or Acts of Parliament; but the
contrary having appeared from time to time, that Private Interest has
overruled, without any regard to the Public, or to the Laws of the Nation, or
to Liberty or Property, and that they have not only extended but prolonged
their Powers, even when the persons so Incorporated were untainted, as to their
dealings in their private Capacities. It thereby appears there cannot be any
such assurance, and therefore that unless for the encouraging of some New
Invention, for a short term of Years, the consequence of setting up
Corporations must be dangerous, both in reference to the public and particular
persons, a Common Seal having, as we may judge by what has past, been taken as
a shelter and protection for any illegal or unjust dealings, and a security
against any Man's being accountable for what they may do, if act in a Body
Corporate; the Power and Interest of most Corporations having rendered all
endeavors for satisfaction ineffectual, as too many have found by experience.

No good Argument that we must carry on these Trades by Companies in
Joint-Stocks, because the Dutch do thrive by it, and will get these Trades from
us if not so settled.

The East India Company in Holland is so established, as that the Trade is not
made a Property for some few Men, as has been here, but the Benefits and
Profits extensive, and National, and the Trade not carried on by the
Exportation of Bullion, but their Gains is chiefly made by the Importation of
Spices from Ceylon, Polleroon, Bantam, and other places which they have in
their possession, or where they have Factories under their own command. What
Manufactured Goods they bring from India are most purchased by what they get,
by employing their Ships, and the Trade they drive in Spices, and other
Commodities in those parts, and the expense and consumption of the Manufactured
Goods not encouraged amongst themselves; it being affirmed, That they enjoin
their Hangmen to wear Callicoe for their upper Vestment, to disparage the
expense of them, that they, as well as their Spices and other Goods, may be
Transported to other places to their great advantage They send out Ships to
carry necessaries for the defense of their Plantations, and supply of their
Factories, and to fetch home these Goods, but no considerable quantity of
Bullion. Their Strength in those parts is so great, and so much exceeding ours
in Ships and Men, that nothing but our Power here, can keep them in awe. They
having got from us Amboyna, Polleroon, Bantam, and our Factories on the Spice
Islands, have got all that would be of use to them, and would not probably be
at any Charge to get what we now have, unless to be rid of our Neighborhood.
And the West India Company in Holland, which comprehends Africa, is also
National and extensive.

Though it should be supposed that all the inconveniences which have been
mentioned will be prevented if settled by Act of Parliament, yet the
appropriating of 1500000 l. for the carrying on of the East India Trade, if
intended that such a Stock in Money shall really be employed in it, and the
settling it for 21 Years without Limitations, as to the Exportation of Bullion,
or Importation of Manufactured Goods, will yet make it liable to many
Objections: Therefore if it appear to better Judgments that this Trade cannot
be secured or carried on, but by a Joint Stock, it may be more advisable so to
settle it, as may best prevent the inconveniences feared from the Trade it
self, by the Exportation of too much Bullion, and Importation of Manufactured
Goods to be consumed here.

The prohibiting the expense of their Manufactured Goods and Toys here, would
very much lessen the Exportation of our Bullion, especially if we should
continue the obligation of sending out for the carrying on of that Trade 100000
l. per Annum in our Goods, if not we should be sure of a good return for our
Bullion by the Transportation of those Goods to Foreign Markets, if none were
allowed to be brought in but on condition to be Exported again, and then a less
Stock might serve for the carrying on of this Trade: And if two or three Ships
the less should then be employed in that Trade, the Advantages we shall have in
the consumption of our Home-made Silks, and Woollen Goods, and in the increase
of our Linen Manufactury, would make us a sufficient amends, the Druggs,
Spices, Saltpetre, etc. to be permitted as formerly. And being few or no
Arguments can be given for managing the East India Trade, in a Joint Stock,
which may not also be given for the Turkey Trade, being also remote, and to an
Infidel Country, and yet has been carried on under a Regulated Company for a
long succession of time, without any material Complaints. Whether these Heads
for a Regulated Company, both for the Trade to Africa and East India, if those
under which the Turkey Trade is now carried on be not found sufficient, may not
with some additions, alterations and amendments, be so improved as not to be
liable to the inconveniences aforementioned, and yet serve for all the ends
proposed, where Companies are pretended to be necessary, for the carrying on of
any Trade, is submitted to the Judgment of those that are more intelligent in
such Affairs.

1. That several persons be Incorporated by the Name of the Governor and
Company of Merchants Trading to the Coast of Africa, and that a Governor,
Deputy Governor, and 24 Assistants, be named to continue for one or two Years,
as may be thought convenient, then new to be chosen Annually by the General
Court of Adventurers.

2. That no person whatsoever shall Trade to the said oast of Africa but this
Company, and such as they shall License.

3. That the said Company shall not deny at any time to give License, to any
persons being His Majesty's Subjects, to send Ships and Goods to Africa, such
persons paying to the said Company 20 l. per Cent. of the Cargoes they carry
from time to time.

4. That the Money thus received shall be employed by the said Company in the
Trade to Africa for the advantage of the said Company, and out of it, or Gains
out of the arising thereby, shall pay and discharge the Charges of Forts and
Castles, or public Expenses necessary for the preservation of the Trade.

5. That such persons as pay in the said 20 per Cent. shall by the said payment
become Members of that Company, such as pay in 50 l. be entitled to have a
right to Vote at the General Courts, such as pay in 100 l. to be capable to be
chosen Committees, and 200 l. Deputy-Governours, and 400 l. Governors.

6 That out of the said Money thus paid in, the said Company shall pay to the
present Company, what upon a valuation made by indifferent persons, may appear
just to be paid to them, for Forts and Castles, etc.

7. That the said Company, after the said Stock is increased either by the said
Payments or Gains made thereon, having over and above what may be thought
necessary to pay and defray all public Charges, shall make Dividends to the
said Members that paid in the said Stock, to every one according to his
respective proportion paid in, and time when such Payments were made.

If some such Method as this can be made practicable, there would soon be a
greater Stock, if thought convenient to have it, to answer all pretenses made
for Joint-Stocks than either of these Companies now really have, yet room left
for all persons to come into the said Trade hereafter upon as good terms as
those that went before them, and all the Adventurers will at all times be as
one Body, and upon the same foot, and no temptations left for such practices,
as beforementioned.

Some of these Notions about Companies with Joint-Stocks and Trade, do agree
with what may be found in the New Discourse of Trade, Printed December 1692,
Writ by a Gentleman, whose Knowledge, Judgment, and Experience in Trade cannot
be doubted, and therefore are quoted to corroborate what has been here offered.

Page 81. That all Restrictions of Trade are naught, and consequently no
Company whatsoever, whether they Trade in Joint-Stocks or under Regulations,
can be for Public Good, except it may be easy for all, or any of His
Majesty's Subjects to be admitted into all, or any of the said Companies, at
any time for a very inconsider able Fine; and that if the Fine exceed 20 l.,
including all Charges of Admission, it is too much.

Page 82. Nothing in the World can enable us to cope with the Dutch in any
Trade, but increase of Hands and Stock, which a general Admission will effect.

Page 161. It is our Interest by Example, as well as other means, above all
kind of Commodities to prevent the Importation, as much as may be, of Foreign
Manufactures.

Page 203. When we cannot preserve our Colonies by our Shipping, or so awe our
Neighbors by our Fleets and Ships of Men of War, that they dare not attempt
them, our Case will be sad, and our Propriety will be lost or in eminent
danger, not only Abroad but at Home likewise.

These Maxims about Trade in Joynt-Stocks have had great Confirmation from
experience. The first Charter for the East India Trade was Settled Anno 1600
for 15 Years; afterward Four more, which did not prove in any respect useful
to the Nation by increasing Trade; whatever advantages some particular Persons
might make by the management of such Stocks. After some course of Years all
broke, to the Loss of the Adventurers in General, and prejudice of the Trade;
for the Trade to Africa there have been also the like number of Charters with
no better success: And it may appear upon examination, that when that Trade was
open, near double the quantity of our Goods were sent there, more then when
Carried on by a Company. The Management of the late Corporations for the Linen
Manufactury, Paper, making Saltpetre, and others, may be given as Instances to
prove, that whatever Specious pretenses may be made for Corporations whatever
Advantages have been made by particular Persons by Stock-Jobbing, or indirect
ways, that few or none have ever yet proved Advantageous to the Nation; and if
the Ways and Means before mentioned, by which the present East-India-Company
have Increased Trade, and made great Dividends be true, no good Arguments can
be drawn from thence for erecting Corporations in Trade exclusive to others:
And therefore if the Method proposed for Regulated Companies to Trade in such
Goods as may be thought convenient to be received from India, can be made
practicable should be preferred before Joynt-Stocks, being the most probable
way to make that Trade advantageous, it being possible that a Trade may be
opened to China for the Expense of our Cloths, where great quantities if
Introduced would be Consumed, and Gold is plenty; or from Gambroon to Persia,
being the Carriage of our Goods that way is not so Chargeable as from Aleppo,
or to the Kingdom of Mindavo, or other Countries or Places, of which there are
great numbers in those Parts, to which we have not yet Traded; or that we
should then fall into a way of Employing our Ships in those Parts, by Trading
from Port to Port: The most likely way to make any clear Gains by that Trade,
and the Trade to Africa under such Regulations most likely to increase the
Consumption of our Goods in those Parts.

The more has been said about these Trades, because it is high time some
Settlement were made of them, as may be most Advantageous for the Nation.

The Reasons upon which the Lord Chief Justice Jefferies grounded his Judgment,
in the Case between the East-India-Company and Sands, as to the validity of
their Charter having been Printed and Published; it is thought convenient to
make Public at the end of this Treatise, the Argument of one of the Learned
Council that Argued in the behalf of Sands upon that occasion.

But whether Trade be Settled in Joynt-Stocks, Protection at Sea.
Regulated Companies or open, no Nation can Thrive by Trade, without Protection
at Sea, for though the Merchants after Losses may sometimes Sell their Goods
that come in safety so dear, as to make themselves a recompense for what Lost:
Yet that makes no recompense to the Nation; for what they may so get by Selling
Dear, is gotten out of our own People; but what lost remains with the Enemy, or
in the Sea, and is so much lost to the Nation.

No great Trading Nation can be at War with another Nation, but must undergo
the disadvantage of a Confederacy against their Trade. Hopes of making Gain by
Privateering, will draw all the Sea Vermin upon them from all Parts; and
therefore where Fleets and single Ships are many, Protection must be difficult,
and yet so Essential, that without it Trade will have a quite contrary effect
to what designed; for what is taken by Enemies will enrich them, and impoverish
our Selves, but impossible to agree on any Scheme, but what must be subject to
many variations and changes: Enemies may incresae their Strength and alter
their Stations, and the going and coming of Fleets and Ships uncertain and hard
to be Regulated; Storms may occasion separations, and Winds and Weather a
disappointment to any thing that can be designed; to which remedies must be
applied, as such Emergencies may require; but little hopes of a good effect,
unless our Men of War be so provided or ordered, as that they may spend more
time at Sea then in Port; and a Breach could be made upon the Methods our
Enemies have taken to Ingross Intelligence. A constant Fleet of Men of War at
the Chops of the Channel, and Guard Ships to ply about our Chief Head-lands and
entrance to our Chiefest Ports, may force Privateers to look for their Prey
further off at Sea, where they are not so sure to meet it; to which the
Carrying on of Trade by Fleets, and those Protected by good Convoys may be a
further security. Protraction of time for the departure of Convoys; whether
occasioned by Merchant-Ships, or Convoys not being ready has occasioned great
Losses, and should be prevented if possible: Our Steights and Plantation Trades
being remote, will always require a particular care, and great Strength to the
diminishing of our Convoys for other Parts. How to secure all is a matter of so
great difficulty, that it may be much easier to find Fault, then provide
effectual remedies, though of all things the most desirable belonging to Trade;
and therefore Necessary to be considered by our greatest Councils. Book of
Rates.


The Book of Rates by which the Prizes of all Goods are Regulated at the
Custom-House for the Payment of the Customs and Duties, being of above 30 Years
standing, though some additional Duties have been since laid on some
Commodities, is a Burden, if not a Grievance; because some Commodities are
since the making of that Book so Risen, and others so Fallen in Price, that it
Carries no equality. As the perusal and new Settling of it, might be a great
ease to Trade without any diminution to the Kings Customs; so by it much might
be done toward the Regulation of Trade, by increasing or diminishing the
Duties; and if some recompense could be found that the Impositions now Paid on
our Manufactures, and Products Exported might be taken off, and none Paid for
the future, would occasion the increase of the Export and Consumption of them;
for though the Duty be not great, yet being an addition to the first Cost, and
paid before Adventures born it is a great discouragement to Exportation, and
that addition to the cost is some hinderance to the Consumption abroad.

The Act of Navigation though a very good Act in the main, Acts of Navigation.
yet having been made also many Years since, may deserve an inspection, for
some Clauses may appear convenient to be repealed, and others Strengthened to
Fence against such Contrivances as have been carried on to defeat the intent of
that Act. Employment of Ships.


The Commanders of our Merchant Ships and Seamen, had formerly so great a
repute for their Courage and Integrity, that all Foreign Nations did covet to
employ them which was of great Advantage to us; but much declined before this
War, if not Lost, other Nations getting the preference. The Cause imputed to
the Debauchery, and carelessness of our Seamen, which rendered them unfit to be
trusted, in the opinion of those that had occasion to employ them. The reducing
them to good order and Sobriety, that we may recover our Credit with Foreign
Nations, would be of great use; for what so gotten would be clear Profit, and
the Employment so given to Ships and Seamen, an increase to both.

Some are of opinion that Laws for Regulating of Trade are unnecessary, Laws
necessary jor Regulating Trades.
if not inconvenient, and that it had better be left to take its own Course;
but this opinion has been contradicted by Experience; and if it should be
allowed, as a General Rule, will upon inquiry be found liable to many
exceptions.

Merchants and Traders, in carrying on their Trades, have regard chiefly to
their own Interest, whether their Gains arise by what they Export, and sell
Abroad, which can only tend to enrich the Nation, or out of our own people, by
what Imported, and sold dear to them, though spent in Luxury, which may
impoverish the Nation, has not hitherto been thought their province to mind.

If the management of all Trades be left to discretion, without restraints or
encouragements from Laws, no doubt but that the Traders will be careful to
pursue those that afford them most Gains, with diligence and industry, but it
is probable decline those where cannot have such expectations for themselves,
though afford a prospect of Gains to the Nation. More of Real Riches may be
acquired by the Fishing Trades than by others that may appear more glorious;
but those will be most followed that afford most Gains to particular persons,
unless Authority interpose, and afford help, as there may be occasion.

If a Merchant can by sending out 20000 l. in Bullion, bring any sorts of Goods
home that may sell for 40000 l., the Merchant may by such an Adventure get
20000 l. to himself, and yet the 20000 l. sent out in Coin or Bullion may be so
much lost to the Nation; unless such Goods be proper for a further Manufactury,
or to be Exported.

Some Traders have made great Gains by diminishing the Length, Breadth, or
Goodness, of some of our Staple Commodities, which cannot be gotten by any such
contrivance without a great hazard of loss to the Nation, because its probable
the expense of such Goods will decline upon a detection of such Abuses.

As the Act of Navigation has been in many respects advantageous, so other
Laws might have prevented what we have suffered by the French Trade, and the
inconveniences we lie under by the present management of the Baltic Trades;
which with other instances that might be given, would make it clear that
without a continuance or reassumption of Care in the Government, Trade will lie
open, and be exposed to the incroachment of Foreigners, and our own people; and
that it is high time now to take it into consideration, because most of the
Laws that have been made relating to Trade, since the Act of Navigation, may be
presumed were calculated rather for particular Interests than public good;
more to advance some Tradesmen than the Trade of the Nation.

If the meaning of leaving Trade to take its own course, be limited to Trades
carried on by the Exportation of our Products and Manufacturies, not liable to
any great Objection, as it relates to that only; for the Care of the Government
will then only be necessary how to encourage, promote and secure such Trade
that it may continue and increase; but if our Importations, Consumption at
Home, and the Exportation of Coin or Bullion be left at liberty, we may drive a
great Trade, and yet in the end be found losers by it. As many particular
persons have Traded away their Estates, and been reduced to Poverty, by Buying,
Selling and Trading (without any Losses at Sea), so a Nation may exhaust their
Treasure, and become Poor by Trade, unless Care be taken to prevent it. If all
Trades should be left to take their course till they mend themselves, we may be
reduced to a low ebb before that may happen; for in most Cases, nothing but our
Poverty and Inability, longer to support a bad Trade, like to occasion any such
change.

As too many Limitations of Trade may be inconvenient, so too much Liberty
dangerous. After an exact inquiry into the general state of Trade, upon which
the state of the Nation does much depend, good Resolutions, good Examples, and
good Laws, will be found necessary for the putting of bounds to the prodigal
expense of Foreign Commodities, and increase of pernicious Trades; otherwise
some Trades will prove to the Body Politic, as a Canker or Consumption to the
Body Natural

If the state of our Trade in Woollen Goods, The declining state of our Woollen
Goods.
which is of the greatest importance to us, be considered, there will be found
great Reason to fear that it is on the declining hand, as well occasioned by
the alteration of Habits, and Fashious, in several Countries, which has
brought in the use and expense of more Silk than formerly, to which our own
Examples have contributed, as also because Manufacturies of Wool are set up in
Ireland, Portugal, France, Germany, and other places, which threaten the
destruction of ours. Upon an inquiry it will appear that few Merchants have
inricht themselves by the Exportation of our Woollen Goods or Products for
these 30 Years past, though they have been Exported in great abundance, yet
rather out of Necessity, to employ Ships or to provide Effects, than out of
Choice; and that their chief hopes has been, that Goods brought Home would
sell dear, and that they should thereby make their profit, and so have made
their Gains out of our own People, and not out of Foreigners; which as to the
Nation makes a great alteration in Trade: For though we have thus been provided
with what we wanted from Abroad, yet so costly to us as that our Riches have
been impaired thereby.

The great Losses we have had by Sea in these Seven Years War with France, Ways
and means to increase our riches
will not be recovered without more than ordinary Care. If a great Stock be
absolutely necessary to carry on a great Trade, we may rationally conclude,
that the Stock of this Nation is so diminished, that it will fall short; and
that without Prudence, Industry, and good Husbandry, we shall rather confume
what is left, than recover what we have lost. No particular Person, nor Nation,
was ever fettled upon any foundation so secure, but might destroy themselves.
We ought not to conclude we shall be Rich, and Happy, whether we will or no.
Care and trouble is allotted to all Men, the greatest Nations having in all Ages
been subject to Mutations and Vicissitudes of Fortune, either by their own
folly and ill management, or because the Race is not always to the swift, nor
Battle to the strong; but as Prosperity has usually made Men careless, so
Adversity ought to make them serious, and cast about how they may mend their
condition. If upon an examination it be found that we have walked in indirect
paths, and thereby, or by misfortune, consumed or lost much of our Treasure,
Stock and Trade, and brought our selves into a precarious condition, it will be
in vain to continue in the same, and longer depend upon sandy foundations, and
neglect to use such means as are in our power to establish us in a better; it
appearing by the new Coining of our Money, and by the Trades we yet drive, and
great Fleets we have, that there is not only an Ability in the Nation, but also
a Spirit in the People, which if cultivated, improved and encouraged, by proper
Methods, might be sufficient to attain that end. Nothing more convenient than
that good Resolutions upon solid Consultations should be taken in order thereto.

Such Observations as these, Reformation at home.
upon matters relating to Trade, and upon several other Trades we drive to
other Countries, might be enlarged; but if these hinted at, appear to be the
most material, and sufficient to occasion a more exact inquiry, no more was
designed, least should divert too much from looking into what is of great
importance in order to amend our Condition, our Trade, Practices and Economy,
at Home.

For it will be difficult, if not impossible, to retrieve what we have lost, or
be established in a good condition for the future, by any Settlement, or Laws
that can be made in reference to our Foreign Trades, unless the Genious of our
People, course of Living, and Management, can be so changed as to cooperate
therewith: Not using proper Methods to get, or consuming Riches as soon as got,
will render all endeavors of that kind ineffectual. As Idleness, and the
transports of Luxury, have brought us into this condition, so the contrary
practices most likely to afford us a cure.

If the original of our moveable Riches must be from Labor, Industry, and
Foreign Trade, and the way to keep and retain Riches, when got, must be by good
Husbandry, in the consumption and expense of the Goods of Foreign Nations, and
in all our Dealings with them, no reformation can be proposed, that can do us
any good, but what must begin amongst our selves.

Though several sorts of Trades and Employments must be allowed, as well for
the support of the Public as for private Families, yet a great difference
should be made between such Trades and Employments that in their nature and
design tend to get and bring Riches into the Nation, and those that can only
serve to make it change hands; for when such Trades are increased to be
extensive and numerous, they will prove a hinderance to those Trades that are
most subservient to bring it in, by drawing off both Stock and People. If to
maintain vain and extravagant Customs and Habits, 1000 Persons be employed
(instead of 500, that would do as well for what is necessary) as in many
Professions might be instanced, then 500 of the 1000 instead of being useful to
the Nation, must live by preying, pilfering or spunging upon other Men's
Labors. The new Buildings about London have occasioned the drawing of great
numbers of People out of the Country, where they were very necessary and
useful, to live in London upon such Employments and indirect ways: For it may
be difficult to give an instance where any great numbers of Artificers or
Manufacturers are set up in those Buildings, excepting in Spittle-Fields and
places adjacent, where such did formerly inhabit.

That great Estates have been gotten of late Years, and that persons of all
degrees live more splendid and expensive than in former Ages, cannot be any
proof that our Riches are increased, unless it did also appear that such
Estates had been acquired by the Exportation of our Products and Manufacturies,
and Gains made on them, or by some other profitable engagements with
Foreigners. If gotten at Home amongst our selves, then it could not add too,
nor diminish the Stock of the Nation, though might occasion a great alteration
in the Fortunes of particular Men. A prodigal expensive way of Living is a
proof that a Nation has some Stock and Riches; but as all extravagant Expenses
have a natural tendency to exhaust the treasure of a Nation, so ought rather to
create a suspicion that such a Nation must grow Poor, than afford any Argument
that therefore must be Rich.

The Millions of Money gotten by farming the Revenues, Advantages taken in
receiving and paying the Public Money, and by several other ways unknown in
former Ages, as it occasioned the giving of great Supplies, which has fallen
hard upon the people, to make good what was thus gotten out of the Public
Incomes, and diverted to private uses, so when Land could not well bear the
Charge, was levied by several Impositions on Trade, which as they have been, so
ever will be (as long as they are continued) a load upon some Foreign Trades;
so the drawing of such great Sums of Money out of its right channel, has made
a great alteration in the employing of the Stock of the Nation, and of the
People: For though Impositions on Trade are in effect but a charging Land, or
Landed Men, by another name, at least with the greatest proportion of what so
charged, yet being the Traders are first to pay it, and such Impositions have
always been found troublesome, and a hinderance to Trade, and so a diminution
of their Profits, they will always think themselves most concerned therein.

If upon an inquiry into the usefulness of the several Orders, Ranks, Degrees
and Employments of Men, it appears that Merchants, Tradesmen and Seamen, and
such as are employed under them, that carry on our Foreign Trades, Husbandmen,
and such as are employed under them, to make the Products of the Earth useful,
are chiefly those that can be a means to bring in Riches, or to provide
Necessaries for the support of a Nation; then nothing can be more necessary and
beneficial than to use all means to encourage and increase such, and to
discover what Trades and Employments are practiced that are unprofitable and
useless, that they may be discouraged, or rather discharged, as a superfluous
burden and a load upon the Nation; least such, like Pharaohs lean Kine, should
in time destroy those that are good.

As the Employment and good Management of our People must be the way to get
Riches, so good Husbandry in our Dealings with Foreign Nations will be found
the best and surest way to preserve and retain them. The expense and
consumption of such Commodities as have, and are always like to be, purchased
with our Money should in the first place be taken care of, that we may have as
few of such as may consist with our Safety and Interest.

It is true, that the continuance of Trade depends much upon a mutual
convenience, but the advantage and increase of Riches, expected by Trade,
depends upon our Exporting more Goods than we Import; to which nothing can
conduce so much as the making at home as many sorts of Goods as is possible, or
having them from Foreign parts for Transportation, so cheap and good as that
they may be preferred by, and sold to Foreigners by us, before the Goods of
such other Nations as are our Competitors; and the spending of no more of our
own Goods, or of those we bring from Foreign parts, at home than our
necessities require, is the best way to run little in Debt to Foreign Nations;
for then we may either bring the less, or have the more to Transport to Foreign
Markets All prodigality at home in the consumption of Commodities that are fit
for Foreign Markets, is in effect a consuming of so much of the Treasure of the
Nation, because would yield and produce Treasure (more or less) if it were not
so consumed; from which it may be concluded, that as nothing is more dangerous
to reduce a Nation to Poverty than an unlimited, vain, prodigal way of Living,
so impossible to propose any way to recover and enrich a Nation, next to Labor
and Industry, like frugality and Parsimony. Labor and Industry must be the way
to bring it in, and Frugality and Parsimony the only way to keep and retain it.

Therefore if we design to be rich we must alter our Course of Living, Economy
and disposition of affairs at home, that industry may be promoted and
extravagancies prevented, that we may increase our good Trades, and lessen our
Expenses, and then we shall soon find that the Balance will be brought to
stand in our favor; but to get little and spend much, will be sure to have the
quite contrary effect.

Our Landed Men should reform their depraved appetites, and be content to be
served with their own products, instead of costly varieties from abroad, which
has of late Years Swollen the Expenses of many beyond their due proportions;
this they would soon find (as their Ancestors did) to be their true Interest,
though the Consumption of costly Foreign Commodities has too much also
advanced the Annual expenses of the Trading People; yet they may make
themselves some amends at the end of the Year by what may have got by the
increase of their Traffic in such Luxurious Commodities: But the Landed Men
cau have no such prospect, nor of any good return; they do not only impair
their Estates by such Expenses without hopes of advantage, but are thereby the
chief incouragers of such Trades as abate the Value of their Rents and
Products, which could not be carried on so much to their prejudice, and
impoverishing of the Nation without their help, in the Consumption of such
Commodities. As we have good Provisions for the supply of Nature, so good
Silks, Cloths, and Stuffs of our own make for all uses; which ought to be
esteemed, and not rejected and despised, because do not come from France, or
some Foreign Country; and we had better keep our old Fashions, if we cannot
Invent better then imitate those of Foreign Nations to our destruction. Such
alterations as these in our Course of Living, would soon alter the Course of
Trade for the better; for when Traders may not find it so easy to get Money out
of our own people by what bring from abroad, and Sell here at home, will then
be under a necessity to employ their thoguhts how to get Money from Foreigners,
and to apply themselves to Store their Shops and Warehouses with such
Commodities as may have that effect. The chief end designed by Trade, was to
make us Rich, not Extravagant: by diminishing the expense of those Commodities:
By which we Lose, we shall increase the Making of those by which we get; all
which may be done without abating much of our State and Grandeur (But in
opinion:) as the Balance of England lies in Land, so the Ballancing of Trade
lies in the Landed Men; a power very fit for them at this time to assume, as
well for the Public as their Private Interest, that may not longer submit the
direction of their expenses, and so consequently their Estates to those that
Serve them; who under pretense of keeping them up to unintelligible niceties in
points of Gallantry, as to Modes and Fashions, in a course of Years get their
Lands for payments of Bills so Contracted, which has proved the ruin of many
ancient Families, though by a turn in Fancy and Humor might have been
prevented. As have hitherto been too Fond of spending Goods that come from
abroad, if would now resolve to spend what are made at Home, would cultivate an
industrious Spirit in our People to improve their Art in the Making of them;
which Spurred on by emulation and Interest, would in a short time come to such
perfection as that we might be in hopes to have the advantage hereafter, of
Furnishing those Nations with our Goods, who have hitherto Furnished us: It
having been a great discouragement to our Manufacturers to engage heartily in
the Making of them hitherto, to find them rejected and despised, only because
they were of our own Make, though equal (if not Superior in goodness) to those
from abroad. The difficulties we are under, and the Losses we now sustain only
for want of a Currency to the Coin we have, may afford us a prospect in what a
Condition we shall be, if by our own folly and Extravagancies, we should
consume what we have now left, and occasion a perpetual scarcity of it, or at
least for a long time; it being a Commodity that may soon be spent, but not
easily recovered: Certainly we had better Practice good Husbandry out of choice
in order to preserve what we have, then be forced to it out of necessity
hereafter in hopes to regain it; for if ever we should be reduced to such a
want of Coin, we shall soon find our Selves under the difficulties represented
by this Spanish Proverb. In a House where there are many People and little
Bread all will be crying, and all with a great deal of Reason.
Hen la Caza, ahonde ay mucho gente y poco Pan todos Llorando, y todos con
mucho Razon; and the Landed Men, if that should happen, would not be able to
clear themselves of being most in Fault; for the Trading People may allege
that it was agreeable to Reason, and their Interest to Store themselves with
such Goods as were most vendible; which is more then can be said for the Landed
Men's Buying and Consuming any Sort of Goods that were contrary to their own,
and the Public Interest; therefore more Reason to expect that the Landed Men
should first begin to Retrench and Reform, then the Trading People.

As we ought to make a Reformation in our Course of Living, so such alterations
in our Trades as before mentioned, or such as may be proposed by those who have
better Judgments. We should Consider how long our Stock of Money may hold out
before we permit it to be Exported to Carry on Trades as hitherto. The expense
here at Home of Manufactured Goods, and Toys from India should be prohibited,
and that Trade reduced to its former Establishment, as it was Carried on Anno
1666, and Limited as formerly to export only 40 or 50000 l. per Annum in
Bullion, at most not to exceed 100000 l. which happily will be found upon an
inquiry to be near as much as can be Rationally made out, was ever brought back
to us in Bullion by those Goods Transported to Foreign Parts; for though a much
greater value have been always Annnally Transported; yet it may be a Question
if we ever had more returned in Bullion, or any great advantage thereby, being
some have hindered the Exportation as well as Consumption of our own Fabrics,
and others have always been Exchanged for other Commodities abroad, to be spent
here in Luxury. As it cannot be denied that the great quantities of
Manufactured Goods brought here from India, do hinder the Consumption of the
like quantity of the Manufactured Goods of Europe; So it may be made out that
we have the greatest Share by the Loss occasioned by the Consumption of such
Goods. If we will continue sending out our Wool to be Manufactured abroad,
whither the Goods made therewith be spent here, or in Foreign Parts, to the
hindrance of our own Woollen Manufacturies, we shall Lose about 8 Parts in 10,
of what we might have made of our Wool if had been Manufactured here, and not
much less by fending our Money to Buy Silks or Linnens, when we might be
supplied at Home, or in return of our own Manufacturies, as long as those great
and subtle abilities which have been Conspicuous this last Age, are wholly
applied, and with success, to get Estates by the late invented Trades of
Stock-jobbing, or Preying on the Public Incomes, or other Men's Labors, and
such other Contrivances as have of late been too much practiced at Home; and
there be no great endeavors used to promote and protect such Trades as may
gain and procure us Wealth from abroad, encourage our own Manufacturies, and to
discourage those that occasion the Exportation of our Coin. We may as well hope
to make the Nation Rich by geting Money out of the Clouds, as by Trade.

Those that may understand such Notions and Propositions as these, to be
penurious, malicious, dishonorable, or a stinting of Industry and Trade,
should at the same time offer others more likely to be effectual; for it will
be but little Comfort to us, if our Enemies should come upon us, to be found
Jovial, Gallant, Idle, divided in opinions or minding particular Interest more
then the Public; but in no Condition to defend our Selves. The alterations
which have happened of late Years in the Affairs of Europe, ought to exert our
best thoughts how to prevent the Mischiefs that Threaten our Trade and Nation.
We formerly looked on the Dutch as out only Rivals; now the French by their
indefatigable Industry to promote Trade, and by their additions made to their
Strength at Sea appear more dangerous; and though we may hope that our peace
with Holland may long continue, yet we ought to be provided to contest with
both if occasion be given; for what has been, may be again. As our constant
Charge and Expense is like to be much greater for the future to preserve the
Nation as well as Trade, so a good and sure Foundation should be laid for the
supporting of it. As the French have found their ends in promoting of Trade, so
it is probable that after this War is over will apply themselves Industriously
to increase theirs, and decrease ours: and we may be assured that their
greatest Councils will give their utmost Assistance to the minutest Projects of
that kind, and that no Craft, Cost nor endeavors will be spared, not only to
undermine us in the Carrying on of any Manufacturies here at Home that may
prejudice theirs, but also to hinder our Foreign Trade by their endeavors in
the Courts of all Princes, where there may be grounds for any such attempt: As
this War has exhausted their Treasure, they having no Mines of Gold or Silver,
have no way to replenish their Stores but by Trade, Rapine or Conquest, nothing
more likely to keep them Poor, then the continuance of a Confederacy against
spending of their Goods; to which the long disuse of them, Enmity and
Jealousies they have by this War Contracted may conduce; also the retrieving of
our Fishing Trades, and the Increasing of the Silk, Linen, Paper, and other
Commodities here, upon which their Trade does much depend, may have a good
effect. Our endeavors for our preservation should be adequate in all
Circumstances to our dangers, which appear great. As Fleets and Armies should
be minded, so Debaucheries and Immoralities should be discouraged, because have
a Natural tendency to Weakness and Destruction, and to the drawing of Gods
Judgments upon us; it being in vain to suppose that he that made the Eye does
not see.

But such Considerations as these deserve to be handled by some abler Pen, that
more perfect Remonstrances, and more sensible Impressions may be made, to
excite us to a due consideration of our ways, and to take compassion on our
selves before things come to the last extremity; which though should carry some
appearance of sharpness, would yet be strokes of real kindness, that we may
throw off those enchantments and infatuations, which have too long
predominated, and have recourse to proper methods to establish us in a good
condition, to secure our selves against all attempts that may be made by our
Enemies; for if we could abandon our Passions, and break the measures we have
taken against our selves, we should soon break those our Enemies have taken
against us, and prevent our sinking under the great weight that lies upon us.
If Virtue, Industry, good Husbandry, and Sobriety, could regain their Empire
amongst us, and Rewards and Punishments (the chief supporters of Government) a
due distribution, before we make nearer approaches to destroy all trust and
confidence as to our Dealings one with another, then we should see the Riches
we have applied to the operations most necessary, and afford such an increase
as might Reasonably be expected; but Luxury and its inseparable Companions,
Idlenefs, Debauchery, Immoralities and Corruptions, as have formerly reduced
great Nations to Poverty and Weakness, and laid their Glory in the dust, so we
may justly fear that the same cause may produce with us the same effects, and
that without a universal change in our course of Living and Practices, all good
expected by Laws of any kind, and all the endeavors of our Superiors, will be
in danger to be defeated; it being impossible that they should, have the effect
of making us Rich or Happy, as long as the generality will conspire and combine
to make the Nation poor and miserable. But the many Mistakes and Imperfections
in this Treatise may justly occasion that the Author be censured for having
adventured too far already, and that went out of his Trade when undertook this
Task: But it being not designed to impose or mislead, but chiefly to provoke
others of more Judgment and Experience in matters of Coin, and Mercantile
Affairs, to offer their Thoughts; being Subjects of so much nicety, that few
agree in Notions relating to them, and yet of so great importance that nothing
can more conduce to the enriching of the Nation, then that they should be
settled on the most advantageous and lasting foundations, agreeable to the
Rules of Prudence, Honor and Justice; therefore it is hoped, that they that
have more Ability will correct the Matter, without endeavoring to correct the
Author, who has taken this pains only in hopes it may be of some use to the
Public, without any design against Men's particular Interests, further than as
such Interests were understood to be destructive to the common good; for if we
could agree what is our true Interest, in reference to the Public, and to
sacrifice our Passions and private Interests thereto, then by Gods Blessing on
our endeavors we may hope to retrieve our Trade; but if instead thereof we
should continue wallowing in Luxury, and scrambling who shall get most one from
another, it may be feared we shall endanger the loss of all, and justly incur
the Sentence pronounced by the Wise Man, He that is in love with his folly,
shall perish in it.

London, July 15. 1696.
FINIS.
THE ARGUMENT OF A Learned Counsel, UPON AN Action of the CASE Brought by the
East-India-Company, AGAINST Mr. Thomas Sands, an Interloper.

LONDON: Printed, for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, 1696.

De Termino Paschae, Anno xxxvi. Caroli II. Regis: In Banco Regis.
Gubernator' and Societas Mercator de London in Oriental' Indiam negotiant'.
against Tho. Sands.

AN Action upon the Case, wherein the Plaintiff declares, That, Our Lord the
King, 3. Apr. 13 C. II.
by his Letters Patents, reciting that the Company of Merchants trading to the
East Indies, have been long a Corporation, and enjoyed diverse Liberties and
Privileges, by diverse Grants from Queen Elizabeth and King James.

That the King was informed, that diverse Inconveniences and Disorders were
committed, to the Prejudice of the Company; at the Petition of the Company, the
King grants, ratifies, and confirms to the Governor and Company of Merchants
of London, trading to the East Indies,

That they should for ever be a Body-Politique by the Name of Gubernatoris and
Societatis Mercator' de London in Oriental' Indiam negotiant'.

Ac eos per Nomen Gubernatoris and Societatis Mercator' in Oriental' Indiam
negotiant' Vnum Corpus Corporal' and politicum in facto and nomine realiter in
perpetuum fecit, ordinavit, constituit, stabilivit, and declaravit per Literas
Patentes illas.

With Powers to purchase, sue, and be sued by the Name of Governor and Society
of Merchants of London, etc.

And that they, and all those that then were, or should be of the said Company;
and all their Sons at their Ages of 21 or more; and all their Apprentices,
Factors, and Servants, who should be employed by the Company, in the said
Trade, to the East Indies, beyond the Seas, might traffic and use the Trade of
Merchandise by Sea, by the Passages and Ways discovered to the East Indies.

Beyond the Cape de Bona Speranza, unto the Straits of Magellan, in such Order,
Manner and Form, Freedom and Condition, as from time to time, at any public
Assembly or Court, holden by or before the said Governor and Company; by or
betwixt them of the said Company, or the greater Part of them present at such
Assembly or Court, shall be limited or agreed, and not otherwise; any Diversity
of Religion, notwithstanding; so as the Trade be not with any Christian Prince
or State in League with our King, who shall not accept of their Commerce, but
refuse to accept the same.

And that the Company, their Factors, Servants, and Assigns in the Trade of
Merchandise, shall for ever have the whole and sole Trade and Traffic, and the
whole Freedom, Use and Privilege of trading and merchandising, to and from the
East Indies, in such manner as before mentioned.

And that the East Indies, or the Isles and Places thereof, shall not be used
or haunted by any of the King's Subjects, against the true Intent of the
Letters Patents.

And by the same Letters Patents, the King commands all his Subjects, that none
of them shall visit or frequent, or trade in the East Indies, unless with the
License and Agreement with the Company, first had under their common Seal.

That by Virtue of this Patent, the Plaintiffs have been, and still are a
Corporation, trading to the East Indies, with the Inhabitants thereof; who, at
the Time of the Letters Patents granted, were not, nor yet are Christians, nor
Subjects of any Christian Prince or State, but Infidels, Enemies, and
Adversaries of the Christian Faith: And that their Trade has been to the
Profit of the whole Kingdom, and Increase of the King's Customs. That this
Trade cannot be carried on but by a Company or Body Politic.

And that from the making the Letters Patents, they have had, and ought to have
had the sole Trade there.

That the Defendant Sands, being a Subject of the King's, but no Member of the
Company, nor being Son, Factor, Apprentice, or Servant, or Assignee after the
Letters Patents (viz.) 19 Jan. 34. Car. nunc, to the East Indies, beyond the
Cape de Bona Speranza, and this Side the Straits of Magellan, in certain Places
called Atcheon, Mecklapaton, and Porto Novo, with a Ship called the
Expectation, has traded and merchandized.

And diverse Wares in the said Ship, to these Places transported, there
bargained and sold, and other Merchandise there bought, and into this Kingdom
Imported, without the License, and against the Will of the Company, in eorum
praejudicium and depauperationem manifestam, and against the Form of the
Letters Patents, ad damnum of the Company, 1000 l.

Plea. The Defendant demands Oyer of the Letters Patents, which are set forth
in haec verba. And thereby, after the naming the Governor, the 24 and
constituting a general Court of Assembly, and the Powers of Elections of their
Officers.

That the King does grant, as in the Declaration, so far as there mentioned.

But then in the Clause of Grant of sole Trade, at the End thereof, they have
omitted this,

And that the said Governor and Company, and every particular and several
Person that now is, or hereafter shall be of the Company, shall have full and
free Liberty and License, in form aforesaid, to and from the said East Indies,
according to the Orders, Ordinances and Agreements hereafter to be made at
their public Courts.

In the Recital of the Clause prohibiting others to trade without License under
the common Seal, they leave out a Part of that Clause, which is this.

Upon Pain that every such Person that shall trade to or from the East Indies,
shall incur the Forfeiture of his Merchandise he shall bring into the King's
Dominions, contrary to the Purport of this Charter; or which the Company shall
find in the East Indies, where they traffic; and also of the Ship wherein the
Merchandises are transported, one half to the King, the other to the Company,
and Imprisonment of the Offender.

Then follows a Clause of Grant.

That the Company, for any Consideration or Benefit to be taken to their own
Use, may grant License to any Stranger or other, to trade to or from the Indies.

Then the King grants to the Company,

That the King will not, without the Consent of the Company, give License to
any to or from those Places.

Then there is a Clause,

That none of the Company shall have a Vote in the general Assembly, unless he
have 500 l. in the Stock.

And after Oyer, the Defendant pleads the Statute of the 5 E. 3. c. whereby
it is enacted,

That the Seas shall be open for all Merchants to pass with their Merchandises
wherever they please.

And that he, by Virtue thereof, did trade as in the Declaration alleged,
prout ei been licuit.

To this the Plaintiff has demurred.

Before I come to state the Points and Questions, upon which this Question
truly depends; I desire to show what are not the Points or Questions in this
Case.

1. It is not the Question, whether the King, by Law, can restrain any of his
Subjects to go out of the Kingdom.

For the King may so do, and this without Distinction of Christian or Infidel
Country, pro hic and nunc, as Occasion may be.

2. It is not the Question, whether the King can restrain all his Subjects to
such a Country or City.

It may be done upon particular Occasions, as of War or Plague.

But from hence to argue, that the King can grant you and your Successors for
ever, a sole Trade to such a Country or Place, excluding all other his
Subjects, except with your Leave or License: Because he can restrain this or
that Subject, therefore he can grant a sole Trade to the Plaintiff, and exclude
all others, but you, and such as you, license for ever: Because he can, upon
particular Occasions, as of War or Plague, restrain or prohibit his Subjects to
go or trade to such a City or Country: That when there is neither Plague nor
War, the King should grant a sole Trade to any particular Person, whether Body
Politic or Natural, and restrain all others for ever.

Can this be by the Law done?

If this Foundation will warrant it, though in this Case this be with Infidels;
and upon that ground, some difference imagined betwixt an Infidel and a
Christian Country: Yet remember your Reason or Foundation does not distinguish
or make a Difference.

For if because the King has Power to restrain or prohibit Subjects to go out
of the Realm: Or by Occasion of War or Plague, all his Subjects from trading to
such a City or Country; since this Power (you must agree) extends as well to
Christian as Infidel City or Country;

The granting of sole Trade to one Subject or Body Politic, and restraining
all others, is the same; whether it be to Christian or Infidel City or Country.

And when you cite the of Statute 3 Jacc. 6. which enacts,

That the King's Subjects shall freely trade to Spain and Portugal,
notwithstanding the Charters of Incorporation granted to some Merchants, and
the Prohibitions in those Charters:

And from thence argue, that because there were Prohibitions or Restraints by
Charters, as to those Countries which were Christian, therefore such a sole
Trade to an Infidel Country is well granted:

You must have it admitted, that such a Grant to those Countries is good and
legal; or else you argue from that which you grant not to be lawful, to prove
another like Grant to be lawful. Or at least by the same Arguments and Reasons
maintain such a Grant of sole Trade to be good, whether made to Christian or
Infidel Country.

If then it not being the Point or Question in this Case,

Whether the King can restrain his Subjects from going beyond the Seas? Nor,

Whether the King can lawfully restrain his Subjects to trade to a particular
Country or Place, whether Christian or Infidel?

Then the Questions plainly and shortly are,

1. Whether this Grant of sole Trade to the Plaintiffs, be a good Grant or not?

2. Supposing that it should be, then whether this Action be maintainable or
not?

1. By the Common Law, Trade is free and open for the King's Subjects. And this
I shall endeavor to show from Authorities.

Commercium jure Gentium commune esse debet and non in Monopolium and privatum
paululorum questum convertendum. 3 Inst. 381.
Iniquum est, aliis permittere, aliis inhibebere Mercaturam.

The Taylers of Ipswich's Case, That no Trade, Mechanic nor Merchant, 1 Rols
Rep. 4.
can be hindered by the Patent of the King; a Patent that only 100 Persons
shall use such a Trade, is void.

Note, F.N.B. 85.
that by the common Law, every Man may go out of the Realm for Merchandise, or
travel without demanding Leave of the King.

Stat. 5R. 2. c. 2. Prohibited all but Great Men and Merchants to pass out of
the Realm without the King's License: But this Statute is repealed by 14 Jac.
c. 1.

That every one may, at his Will, go with his Goods; Dyer, 165.
and cites F. N. B. for it.

2. And in the next place, That appropriating Merchandise and Trade to a
particular Person or Persons, or a Body Politic, excluding others, is an
engrossing such Trade: And that all engrossing Trade is against the common Law.
3 Inst. 196.


That engrossing any sort of Merchandise is an Offense at common Law.

In this Court lately, Dom' Rex verse. Crisp. and al.
an Agreement betwixt diverse Coprice Makers and Coprice Merchants, for the
buying of all Coprice, that the Coprice Makers should, for three Years, make at
so much a Tun, and restraining them from selling to any others.

Adjudged an engrossing upon an Information in this Court.

And if a Company of Merchants should buy up, in like manner, all the
Merchandise of Spain or Portugal, or the Canaries, or other Town or Place for
three Years to come: This I think would be an engrossing, and the Contract
against Law.

For the Consequence of it must be, that they would sell at their own Price,
and thereby exact upon the King's Subjects. And your Patent, for the sole Trade
to the East Indies, invests you in all the Merchandises of those Countries, and
ingrosseth them all into your Hands.

And if a Patent grant to any the engrossing of Merchandises; this Patent is
against Law, and void. Engrossing is in Truth but a Species, or another Name
for monopolizing; for all the Difference between them is, that engrossing is
commonly by Agreements and Contracts made betwixt Subjects one with another,
without the King's Grant; but Monopolies are Ingrossings by Color of the
King's Grants.

The Case there of John Peachy, 3 Inst. 181.
who 50. E. 3. was severely punished for a Grant under the Great Seal, for the
sole selling of sweet Wines in London.

This was engrossing by Color of the King's Grant, Case of Monop. 11 Rep. 84.
Moor. 673. and in Noy.
and a Monopoly.

Darcey had the sole importing from beyond Seas, and selling of Cards, granted
him by Patent for 21 Years, under a Rent, prohibiting all others to sell; and
this, Trin. 44. Eliz. adjudged a void Grant.

And the Statute, 21 Jac. c. 3. declares all Monopolies to be against the
common Law. So that this being so; If this Grant be a Grant to you, to ingross
or monopolize, then by the common Law this Grant is void.

3. That that this Grant of sole Trade is against Magna Charta, and diverse
other the ancient Statutes. 9 H. 3. Mag. Chapter c. 30.


All Merchants (if they were not openly prohibited before) shall have their
safe and sure Conduct to depart out of England, and to come into England, to
buy and sell without any manner of evil Tolls, by the old and rightful Customs,
except in Time of War.

My Lord Cook says, 2 Inst. 57.
That the Words in this Act [nisi public prohibeantur] are intended a
Prohibition by the public Council of the Kingdom by Act of Parliament.

This Act then being general, all Merchants to have safe Conduct, to go out,
and come into England, if not prohibited by Act of Parliament, is probably a
Declaration of the common Law.

Stat. 2 E. 3 c. That all Merchants Strangers and Privy, may go and come with
their Merchandises into England, according to the Form of the Grand Charter.

Stat. 9 E. 3 c. 1. That all Merchants Strangers and Denizens, and all other,
and every of them, of what Estate soever they be, shall sell their
Merchandises, from whencesoever they come, freely, without Interruption: Except
the King's Enemies. And that this Act shall be observed and performed
notwithstanding any Charters to the contrary. And that Charters to the contrary
are of no force, but are to the King's Damage, and to the Oppression of the
Commons.

But your Charter gives you the sole Merchandising to and from the East Indies.

Stat. 14 E. 3. c. 2. Recites Magna Charta, and enacts, That all Merchants,
Aliens and Denizens may, without Let, safely come with their Merchandises,
safely carry, and safely return.

Stat. 25 E. 3. c. 2. Confirms the former Statute of 9 E. 3. and enacts, That
if any Letters Patents, Proclamation or Commandment be made to the contrary, it
shall be void.

Stat. 2 R. 2. c. 1. and 11. c. 7. Both confirm the two former Statutes, and
enact, That all Letters Patents, and Commands to the contrary, shall be void.

By these four Statutes, the Freedom of Trade and Traffic is amply
established, and all Letters Patents, Grants, Proclamations, and commands to
the contrary made void, if they had not been so at common Law.

And my Lord Cook, 2 Inst. 63.
upon Consideration of Magna Charta, and these Statutes, after Examination of
several Grants of Tolls and Duties to be paid upon Merchandise, says, That
upon this Charter this Conclusion is necessarily gathered, that all Monopolies
concerning Trade and Traffic, are against the Liberty and Freedom declared and
granted by this Great Charter, and diverse other Acts of Parliament, which are
good Commentaries upon this Charter.

And then cites the other Statute that I have before cited.

Object. But say they, tho we have the sole Trade, yet we are no Monopoly.

Resp. To prove it to be a Monopoly, 3 Inst. 181.
let us see how a Monopoly is described.

My Lord Cook, in his Chapter of Monopolies describes it; An Institution or
Allowance by the King's Grant to any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, of or for the sole buying or selling, or using of any thing, whereby
any Person or Persons are to be restrained of any Freedom or Liberty that they
had before, or are hindered in their lawful Trade.

This Description, I think, exactly suits with your Patent. For,

1. By your Patent you have the sole Trade granted to you.

Sole Trade is sole buying and sole selling: for Merchandising consists in
buying and selling.

The sole using any thing, is another general Part of this Description. Is not
sole Trade, sole using or merchandising?

And for the latter Part of it, whereby any Person is restrained or hindered in
his Liberty,

2. Your Patent grants to you to seize the Ships and Goods of any that come
thither.

And your bringing this Action, shows you are sufficiently a Hinderer of the
Liberty of others to trade.

So that I think you cannot deny but that you are comprehended under this
Description.

But for further Evidence of its being a Monopoly, let us see what the Evils
and Mischiefs are that were in Monopolies which the Law speaks so hard of.

The Evils and Mischiefs are:

First, That the Price of the Commodity they sell, shall be kept and risen
higher than otherwise it would be.

For, he that has the sole Trade, will keep up the Price as he pleases. And
this is one of the Evils mentioned in the Case of Monopolies, 11 Rep. 86. b.

The Truth hereof I think is evident enough, and no Man in Reason thinks but he
that has the sole Trade, trades for his Advantage: And the highest and dearest
Rates he can sell at, and the cheapest he can buy at, are his Advantage.

Secondly, A second Mischief or Evil is, that Monopolies or sole Trade is pro
privato paululorum quaestu. So it is said to be in the Margent of the Book
before cited, 3 Inst. 181.

No Man will doubt hereof, that considers the present State or Condition of
this Company.

Thirdly, Another Evil or Mischief of Monopolies or sole Trade, is the
Impoverishment and Oppression of the King's Subjects.

Trade is not in its own Nature fixed and stable, but varying and altering,
sometimes better, sometimes worse. Sometimes one Trade beneficial, another not;
according as Wares, Sicknesses, Scarsity of this or that sort of Commodity or
Merchandise in this or that Country; Modes, Fashions, Customs and Habits of Men
do occasion.

And the Merchants, by their Education and Observation, manage and govern this
Trade, for the Maintenance of themselves and their Families, and the general
Good of Men. And direct and employ their Estates, and traffic into this or
that Part of the World, as Time and Occasion shall give them best Encouragement.

But sole Trade into this or that Part of the World, granted to one Company,
and of another to another, sets up the particular Men that head the Companies,
but destroys all other Merchants and inferior People.

Such Patents must undo all other Parts of this Kingdom besides London. For,
the Companies cannot drive these great Trades, but must manage them in London,
and consequently, the other Parts of the Kingdom, must be excluded. All
shipping must be subjected to the Rates and Prizes these Appropriators of Trade
will give them; or else lie still and be destroyed. And so must all Masters of
Ships, Mariners; all Artificers, Laborers, Factors, and Servants, whose
Employments depend upon these Trades, must all be subjected to their Wills.

And of how great Consequence that may be, deserves Consideration.

The Instances of your Oppressions and Dealings with your Factors, Captains,
Servants, and Seamen that got any thing in their Service, are well known.

So that if the Evils and Mischiefs which the Common Law forbids and endeavors
to prevent, by judging all Monopolies, Ingrossings, and sole Trade unlawful, be
to be avoided; The Evils and Mischiefs attending your Patent and sole Trade,
are perhaps the greatest, because your sole Trade is the greatest that ever
England knew.

That every Grant of the King has this Condition implied in it, F. N. Br 222.
viz. Quod Patria per talem donationem magis solito non oneretur seu gravetur.

Grant le Roy al charge ou prejudice del Subject est void. 13 H. 4.^^.


And if the Evils and Mischiefs of this Grant be as I have stated them; It Is a
Grant to the Oppression and Prejudice of the Subject: And therefore the King is
deceived in it, and the Grant by the common Law void, as I have before shown.

Object. But perhaps it may be objected, that this Patent is granted for good
Government and Order, and Preservation of this Trade, which will otherwise be
destroyed, and for the Good of the Kingdom: And there have been in all Times
such Patents, as to Turkey, Barbary, Guiny, and others.

Resp. 1. Remember what our Books say.

That new Corporations, trading to foreign Countries, 2 Inst. 540.
under the fair Pretense of Order and Government, in Conclusion, tend to the
Hindrance of Trade and Traffic, and in the End, prove Monopolies.

In the End of the Case of Monopolies. 11 Rep. 28. b.
Privilegia quae rever a sunt in praejudicium Reipublicae, magis tamen speciosa
habent Frontispicia and boni publici praetextum, quam bonae and legales
concessiones. But praetextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum. The Words of
that Book.

And there also it appears, and is taken notice of, that Darcie's Patent had a
glorious Preamble, viz.

That the Subjects might exercise their Husbandry and lawful Employments, and
not be corrupted to Idleness by the wicked thing called Cards, the sole Sale
and Trade of Cards is granted to Darcey.

Observe, says the Book, what a glorious Preamble and Pretext this odious
Monopoly had.

That Patent which (made 3 Years after this, Horn and Ivy, Mich. 20. B. 2. c.
403.
and dated 17 of March, 17 Car. 2. in Imitation of this) erected the Canary
Company, and granted them the sole Trade, Recites, That the Trade to the
Canaries, was of greater Advantage to the King's Subjects formerly, than at
that Time: That by reason the too much Access and Trading of Subjects thither,
our Merchandises were decreased in their Value, and the Wines increased to
double Value; so that the King's Subjects were forced to carry Silver and
Bullion there to get Wines.

And that all this happened for want of Regulation of Trade. And thereupon the
Patent constituted Sir Arthur Ingram, and about 60. Persons more by Name, and
all others of the King's Subjects, Merchants or Factors, trading, or that had
within seven Years, traded to those Islands, to the Value of 1000 l. per Annum,
and all others that after should be admitted should be a Body Politic.

That there should be a Governor, a Deputy Governor, 12. Assistants, and names
them; but to be continued by Election.

That they should have the sole Trade to these Islands. And that none other
should haunt or visit those Islands, under Pain of Forfeiture and Imprisonment:
With non obstante to the Statute of Monoopolies.

Judgment was given against this Patent.

Here is in this Case, the same Pretense and Preamble, asin yours. The Abuse of
the Trade, and the Regulation of it, for the general good was the thing
pretended, but few Men doubt what was intended.

Under the Name of Regulation and Government, to ingross all into the Hands of
10 or 12 Men, is most excellent Regulation and Government.

Resp. 2. And as to other Companies and Charters that have been granted.

Supposing that all these Grants were such as this, and practiced and used as
this; yet it is no Argument that they were legal or good Grants.

Have not there been in all Ages and Times, Patents and Grants, such as by Law
were void and of no Force? If it be so; it is no Argument that because there
have been many such Grants, therefore this is good.

But to keep my self to Monopolies.

Monopolies have been frequently in all Times granted; even in the best of
Times; many by Queen Elizabeth. Darcy's was granted by her. In the Recital of
it appears, that there had been granted before it, diverse others of that
Monopoly of sole selling and making Cards.

But when it came in Question, it was condemned.

Stat. 9 E. 3. c. 1. And the other Statutes before cited. The Clauses that say
that all Patents granted or to be granted, contrary to the Freedom of Trade in
these Statutes mentioned, Prove, 1. That such Patents had been. 2. That they
did foresee and provide against those that would be.


43 Eliz. c. 1. Sect. 9. That Proviso shows that there were Monopolies granted;
but yet so far from receiving any Allowance, that that Statute made in the End
of her Reign, for confirming her Patents, by special Proviso, excepts and
provides,

That that Statute shall not extend to make good any Letters Patents made or
granted, of and concerning Licenses, Powers, or Privileges, commonly called
Monopolies.

The Statute of Monopolies, and this Statute, sufficiently show that there were
such Grants, and that they were not allowed. This therefore is no Argument.

But on the contrary, it has not, nor cannot be shown (as I believe) that ever
any had any Judicial Allowance in any Times past for any sole Trade, or sole
buying or selling, which is a great Argument to the contrary. And further,

The Practice of these Companies has been generally to the contrary; and till
within these late Years, no sole Trade practiced amongst them.

This and the Charters to the Companies of Turkey, and the rest perhaps are in
this particular alike (viz.) that there is in Words granted to them the sole
Trade: But the Use and Management of these Charters vastly differ.

For the great Companies, Turkey, Muscovy, Russia, and Hamborough Companies,
they trade not by any joint Stock, but the Members of each Company, every Man
uses his own Trade, buys and sells his own Commodities, has his own Servants,
Factors, and Imployers.

They take care, by sending out Consuls and Agents, to preserve the Trade; and
by small Imposts, maintain such Consuls and Agents.

They take care that the Market be not overstock'd or glutted with Commodities
they send out; and therefore only order what Ships shall go, but leave to every
one of the Company to send his Merchandise at his own Will and Pleasure.

They trade not upon any Joint Stock, or the Stock of the Body-Politick. If you
deal with any of them, you know your Chapman: No Man is refused to be free of
their Companies that has a mind, paying some small Sum for his Freedom.

But this Company of the East Indies, are of quite another Nature, and use
their Patent to quite another End.

The East India Company trade only upon the Company's Stock; every Man, whether
Merchant or not, if he can buy such a Share in their Stock, is of their Company.

The Committee manage, and the rest must submit to their Pleasures and
Distributions: Those few of them that have the most Shares, have the Disposal
of the whole Stock: No Member trades, buys or sells, or has any thing that he
calls his own, but only such a Share in the Stock: No Member of theirs either
buys or sells his own Merchandise, or imploys any Factors or Servants. The Body
Politic, the invisible Corporation trade, perhaps for 1000000 l. per annum.
They get into their Hands, and sell perhaps 7. or 800000 l. worth of
Merchandise at a time: The three last Sales that they made, came to 1800000 l.
No body has these Commodities but they.

Is this trading, and no engrossing or no monopolizing? It Is their wonderful
Virtue, their Hatred and Contempt of Riches that makes them not to raise and
increase Values and Prizes, and be as rich as they please, if they do not do
it. No Man is admitted to come into their Company by their Patent to have a
Vote, unless he have 500 l. in their Stock, which values above 1500 l. to be
bought: So that by the very Foundation, they can have no more Persons in their
Company, than they have 500 l. Shares, and these Shares being engrossed into
few Hands, the few Hands have all, and call themselves the Company.

So that Men that will not be deceived by Words, but distinguish things
different one from the other, will distinguish bet wixt one Company and
Society, and another, who are Ingrossers and Monopolizers, and who not.

The Turkey Company, and the rest like it, may truly be said to be Managers,
Regulaters, and Improvers of Trade. They have no joint Stock that they trade
upon; they ingross not; they admit every Man that will, to be free of their
Companies, to trade with his own Money, his own Credit, and buy and sell his
own, and to employ whom he pleases, and none amongst them, under Pretense of
Government, Regulation and Preservation of Trade, makes unreasonable Advantages.

But the invisible East India Merchant, the Body Politic covers and
countenances some few Men amongst them, to engross, buy and sell at their own
Rates, and excludes all others from the great and excessive Advantage of the
few.

The other Companies, as the Turkey, etc. have not any sole buying or selling;
nor exercising any sole Trade or engrossing. Every Member of these Companies,
which are a Multitude, and every one that is not, may, if he will, be a Member;
no Man is excluded.

But this Company quite contrary; and therefore if ever any was, these are
great Engrossers and Monopolizers of Trade.

I do not argue or speak against Companies, nor regulating or managing Trade
(which was the true intent of this Patent) such as I have mentioned, and is
virtuously and commendably practiced in the great Companies of Turkey, Muscovy,
Hamborough and others, where the Members of the Company trade upon their own
particular Stocks and Estates, and no Merchant hindered or denied to be a
Member, that desires it, paying his ordinary Fees of Admission.

But against the Invisible Merchant, this politic Capacity trading in joint
Stocks.

Suppose a like Patent to any one, or two or three Men, Farmers or Partners, in
their private Capacity, of this sole Trade, and they had the Management of it,
and thereby Possessors of such vast Wealth and Merchandise.

What would this politic Body (I mean the principal Members; for the Body
cannot think or have Sense) judge of it?

Perhaps yours is much worse, there a Man should know with whom he dealt, who
were his Debtors, and how to come to them; but dealing with you is a kind of
dealing with Spirits, an Invisible Body subsisting only in intelligentia legis.

Therefore being so unlike the other Companies, and so contrary to them, you
ought to have no Countenance from them; and though they are good and
commendable, you are Ingrossers and Monopolizers.

3. But to proceed and consider the Statutes made against Monopolies.

Stat. 21 Jac. c. 3. By which it is enacted, That all Monopolies, Commissions,
Charters, and Letters Patents, granted, or to be granted to any Person or
Persons, Bodies politic or corporate, of or for the sole buying or selling, or
using any thing within this Realm.

And all Proclamations, Inhibitions, and Restraints, and all other matters and
things, any way tending to the instituting. erecting, furthering or
countenancing the same, are contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and shall be
utterly void and of none effect.

And that all Persons, Bodies politic and corporate, which now are, or
herefter shall be, shall stand and be incapable to have, use, exercise, and put
in use any Monopoly, or any such Commission, Charter, Letters Patents,
Inhibitions, and Restraints; or any Liberty, Power, or Faculty granted upon
them.

Then follow Clauses of Forfeiture of treble Damages to the Party grieved by
the using any such Monopoly.

Then the Provisoes for new Inventions, and several other things.

Then the Proviso concerning Corporations, which, as to this Case, is thus;

Provided also, and be it enacted, that this Act shall not extend, or be
prejudicial to the City of London, or other City or Towns corporate, for or
concerning any Charters granted to them, or any Customs used within them.

Or unto any Corporations, Companies, or Fellowships of any Art, Trade,
Occupation, or Mystery.

Or to any Companies or Societies of Merchants erected for the Maintenance,
Enlargement, or Ordering of any Trade or Merchandise.

But that the same Charters, Corporations, Companies, Fellowships, and
Societies; and their Liberties, Privileges, Powers, and Immunities, shall be
and continue of like Force and Effect as they were before the making of this
Act, and of none other; any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

The next Proviso extends to Patents, granted or to be granted for Printing,
making Salt Peter, Offices, etc. which do not concern the Case in Question.

By the Description of a Monopoly, which I have before, out of my Lord Cook,
stated and expressed; This sole Trade granted to you, and the Exclusion of all
others, is a Monopoly within that Description, as I have before shown.

That your Charter is directly contrary to the enacting Clause of this Act. For
you have by your Charter granted,

Sole buying.

For all others are prohibited as much as to come or go into the East Indies.

Sole selling.

All others are prohibited to import into this Realm; and they cannot sell here
unless they can import.

Sole using.

For you have granted to you the sole Trade, which includes all buying,
selling, sole using. That appropriates all to your selves, and excludes all
others.

How can your Letters Patents and this Statute stand together?

When the Statute says, That all Letters Patents, granted to any Body
politic, of or for the sole buying, selling, or using any thing, shall be void;

How can yours be good?

When the Statute says, That all Inhibitions, Restraints, and other things any
way tending to the instituting, erecting, furthering, or countenancing any such
sole buying, selling, or trading, shall be void;

How can yours be good?

When the Statute says, That all Bodies politic and corporate shall hereafter
stand and be incapable of having, using, exercising, or putting in ure any such
Charter, Inhibition, or Restraint;

How then can the Plaintiff, in this Case do it?

In the Comment upon this Statute, 3 Inst. 182.
it is there said, that this Act is forcibly and vehemently penned for the
Suppression of all Monopolies.

And the Words [Sole using] is there said to be so general, as no Monopoly can
be raised, but will be within the Reach of this Statute.

The Word [any thing] shows also the general Scope and Intent, that nothing
should be excluded that was a Monopoly.

Object. But the Proviso excepts Charters to Companies or Societies of
Merchants, erected for the Maintenance, Enlargement, or Ordering of any Trade
or Merchandise.

Resp. 1. This Proviso extends not to this Charter, or any Letters Patents
granted after the making of that Act. And this appears from the penning of the
Proviso.

The enacting Clause says, That all Letters Patents, granted or to be granted
for sole buying any thing, shall be void.

The Proviso says,

That this Act shall not extend to, or be prejudicial to Towns Corporate
concerning any Charters granted to them, or Customs used by them.

Or to any Companies or Societies of Merchants, erected for the Maintenance,
Enlargement, or Ordering of any Trade or Merchandise.

This extends to those that were granted and erected. Here is no Words of
salving for any that should be hereafter granted or erected: the Words
[hereafter to be granted,] would have been in this Clause of salving, as well
as in the enacting Clause, if ever so intended. But the following Words
concluding this Proviso, further show it,

That the Charters, Corporations, Companies, Fellowships, and Societies, and
their Liberties, Privileges, Powers, and Immunities shall be and continue as
they were before the making of this Act.

This governs and concludes the whole Proviso, and extends only to those that
then were, to leave them as they were. That is,

To leave the Charters and Companies, their Powers and Privileges in the same
State and Condition as they were before this Act.

The Beginning of the Proviso says, this Act shall not prejudice them; the
Conclusion says, they shall be as they were before this Act was made.

Therefore those that were excepted must have a Being before this Act: No Words
therein extend to those that then had not a Being.

The next Proviso for Printing, Saltpeter, Offices, etc. expressly provides for
Patents granted or to be granted.

This (if so intended) would no doubt in like manner have been penned.

Resp. 2. But suppose it should be construed to extend to Companies,
Privileges, and Immunities erected and granted after this Act.

Yet you are not within this saving.

1. For it extends only to Companies and Societies erected for the Maintenance,
Enlargement or ordering of Trade or Merchandise, and to their Powers and
Privileges that they have for that End.

Not to Companies and Societies erected to have a sole Trade by a joint Stock,
or a Stock of the Corporation, excluding all others.

The Turkey Company, Russia and Hamborough, and other Companies, that trade not
as Bodies politic, or upon joint Stocks, but every Merchant that will, may be
thereof a Member, and every Member thereof trade upon his own private Stock and
Account of a Merchant.

The Companies only order an consult for Maintenance and Preservation of it,
and not for the engrossing and cousening their Members of it.

These are the Corporations that are within this Exception and Proviso.

But we must be as silly as the Infidels you deal with in these Matters, not to
distinguish betwixt these Corporations and their Management, and yours.

They exclude none from Trade; they trade not in a public Capacity, in a sole
Stock, but every Member is a Trader upon his own peculiar Stock.

But you take upon you in your politic Capacity, as you have expressed in your
Declaration,

Totum integrum and solum Commercium and negotiationem habere uti and gaudere.

And to exclude, not only all Strangers, but all your own Members to have any
distinct or separate Trade upon their ownaccount (except a little to excuse you
to pay off Charges) and thereby ingross all that vast Quantity of Merchandise.

The many 100000 l. worth you bring in and carry out: In whom is the Property?

In the Corporation.

Who buys and sells all?

The Corporation.

Who are the Debtors for the Money, that buys and provides these Merchandises?

The Body Politic, the Corporation, the invisible Body.

Who shall be sued for these Debts?

The Body Politic.

Sue them as you can, they will either be too rich and great to contend with,
or else in that Condition as you know not how or where to have them; they are
an invisible Body, subsisting only in intelligentia legis, a Body Politic,
without Soul or Conscience, as the Law says it to be.

We have seen them in a Years time in both these Qualifications; so great as
scarce any Man will contend with them; so invisible at another time, as a Dun
could scarce find them.

This surely cannot be for the Maintenance or Enlargement of Trade, to deal with
I know not whom, where no Security or person is subject.

It is indeed for the Maintenance of the Company's Trade, to enable some of
them to get 10 or 20000 l. per Annum by it, and to keep this vast Trade in a
few Hands.

But sure this is not the Trade the Proviso intends.

Restraining to the Body Politic, which is but one Person or Man in
Partnership, is quite contrary to the Enlargement in the Proviso mentioned.

And therefore, to say that you are within the saving, by this Proviso; a
Company erected for the Maintenance and Enlargement of Trade, when you restrain
all but your selves to trade, seems to be a Contradiction.

And for the following Words in the Proviso,

[Or ordering of any Trade or Merchandise,]

If you say you are saved within the Extent of these Words, then must you make
a Construction of these Words in this Sense.

That ordering Trade and Merchandise is excluding all others, and taking the
whole to your selves.

A most excellent ordering indeed.

But the true Sense of these Words in this Proviso, is to save the Corporations
and Fellowships of Arts, Trades, Occupations, and Mysteries, and to Companies
of Merchants, the Powers and Authorities that they had for the Maintenance,
Enlargement, or ordering of Trade.

By taking care that the Commodities were honestly and rightly made, without
Fraud or Deceit in their Measures or Quantities.

That the Servants and younger sort were honest, and industriously educated in
their Trades and Mysteries, by the Masters and elder sort.

To place and keep good Order and Decorum amongst those of the same Mystery and
Trade.

For assembling and consulting for the common Good, and Management of their
respective Trades and Employments.

This is that which the Proviso excepts and provides for.

Not for a sole Trade in a Company, in a joint Stock, excluding all others as
this is.

The Company there made a By-Law, Tailors of Ipswich Case, 11 Rep. 54.
to exclude Tailors from using their Trades within that Town, unless by the
Masters and Wardens of the Company, or three of them admitted to be a
sufficient Workman.

In this Case here seemed to be a good End and Meaning, to exclude insufficient
Workmen, and encourage good Workmen; a good Order one might think.

Yet so jealous and careful they then were, lest, under any Pretense they
should exclude Men from their lawful Trades that they adjudged this a void
By-Law, as tending to restrain Men of their Freedom in using their Trades, and
introducing Oppression of the young Tradesmen, by the old and rich Tradesmen.

And in that Case adjudged,

That Ordinances for the good Order and Government of Men of Trades and
Mysteries are good, but not to restrain Men in their lawful Mystery.

To the same purpose is Norris and Stop's Case, Hob. 211.

So that this being the Sense of this Proviso, to except Powers and Authorities
that Companies have to regulate Trade, for the Maintenance and Enlargement of
it, but not to restrain any from their Trades or lawful Mysteries, it extends
not to salve or preserve such Authority or Power in you to have a sole Trade,
excluding all others.

2. For another reason, it cannot be the Sense of this Proviso, to except or
save to any Body Politic, the buying in their public Capacity, a sole Trade.

The Proviso then will be repugnant and contradictory to the enacting Clauses.
For taking the Proviso as they would have it;

To save to Bodies Politic the having the sole buying and selling, and using
any Merchandise or Trade as a Corporation, and then compare the Proviso with
the enacting Clause, and it will be just thus,

Enacted, That Letters Patents to any Body Politic, for sole buying, selling,
or using any thing, shall be void. And that no Body Politic shall be capable
of having, using, or exercising any such Patent, Inhibition, or Restraint.

Provided that Bodies Politic may have the sole buying, selling, and using any
Trade:

Is not this in plain English, repugnant and contradictory? Examine it as much
as you can, and it will be no other than a downright Contradiction.

Suppose the Statute that enacts, that no Man shall use a Trade that he has
not served an Apprentice to, by the Space of seven Years, had a Proviso.

That Men might use a Trade that they had not served an Apprentice to by the
Space of seven Years.

This had been a void repugnant Proviso.

This is as plainly repugnant,

That no Body Politic shall be capable of having a sole Trade,

Provided that a Body may have a sole Trade.

And repugnant Provisos are in Law void.

Statute gives the Land of J. S. to the King: 1 Rep. 46. Pl. Com. 563.
Then a Proviso comes to save the Right of all Persons.

This shall be construed, all Persons besides J. S. not to destroy the Premises.

Therefore when the Act says, That all Patents granted to Bodies Politic for
sole buying and selling or using any thing, etc.

Shall the Proviso that says, That it shall not extend or be prejudicial to
Companies of Merchants erected for the Maintenance, Enlargement, or ordering of
Trade,

If construed in the same Sense that they would have it, to give the Companies
sole buying, selling, and using any thing as Companies in their Corporate
Capacity, it is repugnant and contradictory.

But to give the Companies the Management, Order, and Government, is the Sense
as I conceive.

And this is the general Practice of the Societies and Companies allowed in all
times.

But a sole Trade, under the Color and Pretense of Order and Management,
never, as I believe, has had any judicial Allowance.

Object. Another thing that the Counsel of the other side, have objected to
evade this Act, has been this. The Proviso is;

That the Act shall not extend to Companies of Merchants erected for
Maintenance and Ordering of Trade, but that their Charters, Liberties, and
Privileges shall be of like Force as they were before the making this Act.

And therefore, say they, Patents to Companies of Merchants for ordering Trade,
if good before this Act, shall be good still; and therefore, say they, the Act
cannot hurt us.

This is curious, but if examined, is but the same Objection in other Words.

For the Conclusion of this Proviso extends no further than the Charters
mentioned in the Beginning of it: It extends but to the same Charters; so are
the very Words.

What Charters or Patents then shall remain in the same Force they were before
the Act?

Those that are excepted.

What are excepted?

Those that are for Order and Management; as I have before shown.

Not those that are for sole Trade granted to a Body Politic. That is
repugnant to the enacting Clause; therefore those (as I have said) are not
excepted or within the Proviso.

If then not excepted, you are most plainly and fully within the enacting
Clause, and your Patent quite contratrary to, and void by this Act; unless the
matter of Infidel will save you.

Object. But this is a sole Trade with Infidels, and such a Trade the Subject
had never any Right to have without the King's License. And to prove it, they
cite Michelburne's Case.

Wherein Mr. Brownlow being Prothonotary, 2. Brownlow 296.
does relate what my Lord Coke said, That no Subject of the King might trade
with any Realm of Infidels, without the King's License.

And that the Reason was because he might relinquish the Catholic Faith, and
adhere to Infidelism: And that he had seen a License in the Time of E. 3. where
the King recited the Confidence that he had in his Subject, that he would not
decline his Religion; and so licenced him.

And that this did arise upon the Recital of a License made to trade to the
East Indies.

They cite also Calvin's Case, 7 Rep. 17. where it is said, That Infidels are
perpetui inimici; there is perpetual Hostility, there can be no Peace; an
Infidel can maintain no Action, nor have any thing within this Realm; and to
prove this there is cited, R. 282.12 H. 8.4.

1. Supposing the Law to be as these Books intend, and as the other side urge
them, and the Consequence will be, that the Plaintiff cannot maintain this
Action, but that the Charter granted to them, is void.

The Reason that is given in Michelburn's Case is grounded upon this: That the
King has the Care and Preservation of Religion by the Law vested in him: That
his Subjects shall not trade with Infidels, lest thereby they may be brought to
relinquish the Catholic Faith, and adhere to Infidelism: And that the King
shall take care, that Licenses to trade be only given to such as the King has
Confidence in, that they will not decline their Religion.

Supposing this, then your Patent must be naught, for then it is only grantable
to Persons in whom such Confidence may be.

1. Your Corporation or Body Politic is indefinite as to Persons; the Members
thereof are daily changeable; some go out, sell their Stocks, or dye; others
buy their Stocks, and are daily coming in to be Members of your Company.

I doubt you do not much examine, nor care how fixed or certain those are in
Religion, that come into your Company.

How then can there be any Confidence in a Body Politic?

The Law says, that a Body Politic has neither Soul nor Conscience: What
Confidence then concerning their Religion can there be in a Body Politic?

2. It Is not only the Members of the Company that were at the Time of the
Corporation, but those that after should be Members, and their Sons, their
Apprentices, Factors, and Servants that are licensed by this Patent.

If licensing to trade with Infidels be a Trust and Prerogative in the King, to
be given to such Persons in whom the King can have Confidence, that they will
not be conversing with Infidels, change or prejudice;

This cannot be granted to a Body Politic and their Successors, which may have
Continuance for ever; or to their Sons Factors, Apprentices, and Servants,
Persons altogether unknown, not born, nor in rerum natura, when the Patent was
made.

Suppose such a License to you to trade with Enemies. I say,

3. Supposing it to be in the King's Prerogative, in Preservation of Religion
to license; yet he cannot grant this Prerogative to you, that you shall have
Power to grant License to whom you will.

Yet all this is done by your Patent; for you have not only thereby Power
granted you for your Apprentices, Factors and Servants, which are Persons that
you your selves nominate and appoint at your Discretions; and undoubtedly very
religious:

But by your Patent it is expressly granted, that the Company, for any
Consideration or Benefit to themselves, may grant Licenses to any Merchant,
Stranger, or other, to trade to or from the Indies:

And that the King will not, without the Consent of the Company, license any
other to trade.

Can this be a good Grant? Can the King grant from himself his Kingly Care and
Trust for Preservation of Religion, to you, that you shall manage it, and that
the King will not use such his Power without your Consent?

So that supposing that there is, by the Law, such a Trust reposed in the King,
for Preservation of Religion, as you would have it; yet the Grant to you is
void in it self, and then you have no more Right than we, and consequently can
maintain no Action against us.

2. To consider the Books that you have cited to maintain this religious Point.

1. Brownlow's Reports, a Book printed in the late Times, not licensed by any
Judge or Person whatsoever.

The Roll is, Michelburn against Bathurst, Mich. 7 Jac. B. C. Rot. 3107.
setting forth, that the King had granted the Plaintiff his Commission to go
with his Ship Tiger, to the East Indies. to spoil and suppress the Infidels,
and to take from them what he could. That there were Articles betwixt the
Parties for Account and Shares of what should be got, and upon those Articles a
Suit in the Admiralty.

And what is it that is in the Case? Nothing to the purpose; but the Book
mentions only what my Lord Coke said upon the Motion for the Prohibition: Only
a sudden occasional Saying, not upon any Argument or Debate, nor to the then
Case.

So that a Man must be very willing that will much rely upon such a Saying, I
cannot call it an Authority.

2. For Calvin's Case;

That an Infidel is perpetuus Inimicus, and can maintain no Action, or have any
thing, and that we are in perpetual Hostility, and no Peace can be made with
them.

It is true, that this is said in Calvin's Case; but there was nothing there in
Judgment that gave Occasion for it, so that I cannot think that it was much
considered before it was spoken.

The Books there cited to prove it are, Reg. 282. And all that I can find
therein, is, that in a Writ of Protection, granted to the Hospitallers of the
Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, it is said, that the Hospital was founded
in Defense of Holy Church against the Enemies of Christ and Christians.

But does this prove, that Infidels are perpetui Inimici, with whom no Peace
can be made, that can maintain no Action?

The other Book cited is, 12 H. 8.4. a Trespass brought for taking away a Dog,
and in the debating whether this Action did lie or not; it is said,

That if the Lord beat his Villain, an Husband his Wife, or a Man outlawed, or
a Traitor, or a Pagan, they shall have no Action, because they are not able to
sue an Action.

So that this also is but Discourse and sudden Thoughts and Sayings, where the
thing was not in Question: And what Authority is there in such Sayings? It is
true, that Christian Religion and Pagaism are so contrary one to the other, as
impossible to be reconciled, no more than Contradictions can be reconciled.

But because they cannot be reconciled that therefore there should be perpetual
War betwixt them and us, perhaps is an irreligious Doctrine, and destroys all
Means of convincing Infidels to the Faith.

And besides, these extrajudicial and occasional Sayings in these Books cited,
are of little Authority: For I cannot find any Book or Case, much less Judgment
or Authority for such Opinions in so great a Point as this is.

But on the other side, if a Man considers the general Course and Practice,
Trade and Commerce, and legal Proceedings; a Man would think, That my Lord Coke
could not be in earnest in what he has said about Infidels.

For let a Man consider what a great Part of the World we have Commerce with,
that are Infidels, as Turks, Persians, the Inhabitants of Barbary, and other
Countries.

Spain and Portugal were also possessed by the Moors, who were Infidels, till
about the Year 1474. about 200 Years since they were driven out, for till then,
for near the Space of 700 Years the Moors possessed both Spain and Portugal.

Have we not Leagues and Treaties with the Princes and Inhabitants of the
Infidel Countries, receiving Ambassadors from them, and sending Ambassadors to
them, and Ministers always residing with them? Have we not from Time to Time,
Peace or War with them in like manner, as with Christian Kings and Countries?

If Infidels be perpetui Inimici, if in perpetual Enmity, then we may justify
the killing of them, as those that we are in Hostility with, wheresoever we
meet with them.

17 E. 4.13. b. 2 H. 7.15. Adjudged that any Man may seize and take to his own
Use, the Goods of an alien Enemy.

It Is the Price of his Adventure and Victory over his Enemy.

If an Infidel be any Enemy, any Man may then take away the Goods of an
Infidel, and have them to his own Use: And this would be a good Trade if this
be so.

Mr. Solicitor, in his Argument, was pleased to cite many ancient Rolls out of
H. 3. and E. 1. and about those Times, concerning those Princes handling the
Jews.

In Mr. Pryn's Book that he calls The second Part of a short Demurrer to the
Jews long discontinued Remitter into England; printed in 1656.

In which Book, I believe, an hundred Records and Histories are cited to show
how they were about those times handled.

The Time that they did exact, and much enrich themselves by Usury, to the
great Impoverishment of the People: And that the Princes of those Times polled
them, taxed them, and took it from them again at Pleasure.

But besides Mr. Pryn,

Stat. of Merton, C. 5. made 20 H. 7. was, my Lord Coke says, 2 Inst. 89.
principally intended against the usurious Jews.

Stat. de Judaismo 18 E. 1. Recites, that the King's People were disinherited
by the usurious Jews: And enacts, That no Jew, for the suture, shall take Usury.

My Lord Coke says, 2 Inst. 507.
that 15060 Jews thereupon departed the Kingdom.

But for the Use that in arguing is made of this matter of the Jews and of the
King's seizing their Estates, and pardoning for dealing with them.

1. As for those ancient Records in general.

Time has hidden the Knowledge of the Laws, and Transactions of those Times: It
is impossible to know what the Laws of those Times were, or rightly to
distinguish betwixt legal and violent Acts: And to bring Inferences from
thence, to conclude in Judgment now, is Notum per Ignotius: Or like
Dependencies, which, unless latter Times have concurred or agreed with, are
only fit to make Disorder and Confusion.

2. But that which is deducible from thence is not, as I conceive, what has
been endeavored.

That is, that they had no Property, because the Princes of those Times took
from them their Estates when they pleased, or taxed them how, and in what
manner they pleased.

But perhaps the Reason was because those People lying under the Curse, and
being a vagrant People, without Head, Prince, or Governor, or Country; it was
no Difficulty to tax, or take from them at Pleasure, being hated of the People
where they lived.

For it could not be as they would have it, that they should be amongst us as
alien Enemies; for an alien Enemy can make neither Bargain nor Contract, nor be
capable of Property.

But the Subject may, at his Will and Pleasure, fall upon and take all that he
has to his own Use, as upon the King's Enemies; and what he can take from him
is his own Acquisition, as the Prize of his Adventure, and Conquest over his
Enemy: And to prove this, two Books are cited, 17 E. 4. and 2 H. 7.

But by what is admitted by them, that they were great Usurers, and had great
Estates,

It is evident that they were treated as alien Amies: How could they else, in
such Multitudes, live amongst us? How could they be Usurers or get Estates if
they could not make Contracts? How is it possible they could preserve their
Bodies or Estates against the King's Subjects, unless they had the King's
Protection, and treated as alien Amies?

And of latter Times, how many of them have lived amongst us, driven great
Trades, have had, and have, at this present, considerable Estates?

Let it be now adjudged, that any Man that will, may take away their Estates,
that they can have no Remedy or Action for any Debt owing to them, but instead
thereof, may be beaten and imprisoned as Enemies to the King: And we shall
probably see what the Success of such a Judgment will be.

The Act of Navigation, made the 12 Year of the King, 12 Car. 2. cap. 18.
concerning Trade, shows, that Infidels have the same Liberty of Trade as
others.

That Act being made for Increase of Shipping and Navigation, and prohibiting
Goods to be imported by any foreign Ships, except the Ships of the same Country
where the Goods do grow or arise, distinguishes not betwixt Infidel and
Christian Countries: But expressly says, That Currants, nor Commodities of the
Growth of the Turkish or Ottoman Empire, shall be imported but by English
Ships, except Ships of the Built of that Country or Place where the Growth is,
and whereof the Master of the Mariners is of that Country or Place.

This Clause shows plainly, that the Infidels of the Turkish and Ottoman Empire
have Liberty of Trade here.

And the Acts of Tunnage and Poundage tax all their Merchandises without saying
brought in.

In Southern and How Is Case, 2 Cr. 469. where a Man employed another to sell
Jewels for him in Barbary, as true Jewels, and he sold them to the King of
Barbary for 800 l. as true Jewels, when they were counterfeit, and thereupon
the King of Barbary finding himself cheated, imprisoned the Plaintiff that sold
them, to him, till he repaid his Money

In that Case 'twas of all sides admitted, and not as much as objected, that
this Contract was void, because the King of Barbary was an Infidel.

So that this Opinion, that Infidels are perpetual Enemies, and in perpetual
Hostility, can maintain no Action, nor have any thing amongst us, has no
Authority for its Foundation, but only some extrajudicial Sayings, without
Debate or Consideration: And is against all the continual Practices of Princes
and People at all Times.

Perhaps it is no small Part of Religion, that Men should speak and deal plainly
and uprightly one with another. We do know that Religion has been too often
made a Cloak and Vail for other Ends and Purposes. It should not be so: And I
hope, will not be so used in this Case.

The Statutes that I have cited of Magna Charta, c. 9. E. 3. 25 E. 3.2. and 11
R. 2. All declare and enact the Freedom of Trade in general Words, except only
such as are in War with the King. In none of them is there any Exception of
Trade with Infidels.

Can it be imagined, that in those Days we had no Trade with Turkey or Barbary?
Our Kings went with Armies to the Holy Land. King (...) had made War and Peace
with the Turks. Had we no Trade there but with our Swords?

But to look nearer home, Spain and Portugal were Infidels, and in the Hands of
the Moors, until anno 147 4. which w^ 14 E. 4. Can it be thought that in all
those Times betwixt Magna Charta, H. 3. and E. 4. we had no Trade with Spain or
Portugal?

Stat. 12 H. 7. c. 6. was made in the Year 1497. which is but 23 Years after
the Moors were driven out, and in that Statute it is Recited,

That the Merchants Adventurers, dwelling in diverse Parts of England, out of
London, did show,

That whereas they have had free Passage, Course and Recourse with their Goods,
Wares, and Merchandises in diverse Coasts and Parts beyond the Seas, as well
into Spain, Portugal, Venice, Danzick, East-land, Frize-Land, and diverse, and
many other Regions and Countries in League and Amity with the King;

That they were imposed upon by the Company of Merchants in London, and forced
to pay Duties.

I only make use of this Recital, to prove the free Passage there mentioned, to
Spain and Portugal, and to other Countries and Regions. There is no Distinction
of Infidel from Christian Country, though Spain and Portugal had been so lately
Infidel; and though most probably, the Trade they had then, was with Turkey and
Barbary, as well as with Venice: The Words [other Regions and Countries,] seem
to imply as much, and the Freedom equal.

So that I think, as to this Objection, that Infidels are perpetual Enemies,
that we have no Peace with them, nor they maintain any Action, or have any
Property by our Law; I think the Authority to maintain it is none at all; The
constant Practice, as well by Princes as People, has been always against it.

But be that Point of trading with or without License, how it will;

That Point cannot be sufficient to found a Monopoly upon, that cannot warrant a
Grant of a sole Trade, sole buying, and sole selling, to be granted to you and
your Successors, your Sons, your Servants, your Apprentices and Factors, and
such as you shall license for ever.

Here is a License in Perpetuity, not only to those that then were, but to
their So^s and Successors, and those whom they shall license for ever: And this
into a very great Part of the World: And by the same Reason all Turkey and
Barbary, a great Part of the West Indies, and other Parts of the World may be
monopolized, and perhaps all Christian Countries.

The Statute of Monopolies has no Allowance or Exception for monopolizing to
Infidel Countries.

That Statute is against all sole buying, sole selling, or sole using any thing.

And the Turkey Trade was used long before that Time, as by the Charter granted
23 Eliz. So was the Barbary, as by the Charter thereof; and I believe to the
Indies also.

And the Statute of Monopolies being so general (the Proviso not reasonably
construable, to except this Company out of the Extent of that Statute, unless
all Patents that may be granted to Companies of Monopolies are, by that
Exception or Proviso, out of the Statute) and deserving for the suppressing so
great Evils as Monopolies are, and always have been accounted:

I hope it will not be avoided upon an imaginary Difference in Law betwixt
Infidel and Christian Countries, to monopolize thereby the Trade, perhaps, of
the greater Half of the World; as Turkey, Persia, Barbary, East and
West Indies; for those of the West Indies, a great Part, I think, are Pagans.

In the great Debates that were about 3 and 4 Car. 1. about the King's Power of
imposing Rates, Exch. 4. C. 1. Lane 24. 2 Inst. 63.
Subsidies, or Impositions upon Merchandise, in Bates his Case; and in the
Parliaments are many things said concerning the King's Power of prohibiting
Trade.

Restraining by a Ne exeat Regno. And from these Arguments they reason the
Lawfulness of Imposition upon Merchandise.

The Arguments and Reasons in those Debates did not distinguish betwixt Infidel
and Christian Countries. But betwixt Native and Foreign Commodities or
Merchandise: And did endeavor to have a Prerogative to tax foreign Commodities.

And their Reasons run thus,

The King can prohibit or restrain any Merchant to go out of the Kingdom: He
can restrain any sort of foreign Commodities to be imported: If he can
restrain, then none can go or import contrary to such Restriction or
Prohibition without License. Then the License is grantable upon Payment of such
or such Duty or Imposition, or as it can be agreed for and had; and
consequently such Imposition, Farm, or Rent lawful.

And in the Argument of those Matters, it appears that a Restraint in its
Consequence may import a Tax, or an Imposition, or Rent or Farm.

If Licenses be requisite, whether that will introduce Rates to be imposed
otherwise than by Act of Parliament, may be considered.

Suppose it true, that there have been Licenses granted, to go into Infidel
Countries. So there have been to go beyond Seas.

But it is no Consequence, that because such have been granted, that therefore
it is unlawful to go or trade without Licenses.

Much less does it follow from thence, that such a Patent as this to any one or
few Subjects to have the whole and sole Trade into any one Place, can be
warranted.

I do not question but the King may restrain the Passage of Merchants and
Merchandise in some Cases, and Embargue Ships in some Cases. But these are upon
several Reasons.

1. In Cases of War. 2. In Cases of such Merchandises as are necessary for the
Safety or Defense of the Kingdom, to restrain their Exportation. 3. In Cases of
Plague from particular Place to import.
But then these Prohibitions are general, and their particular Reasons and
Grounds are apparent.

But if under any Pretense, any sole Trade to some one Person, Body-politick,
or Natural, be granted, excluding all others, That Grant is, I conceive, in
Deceit of the King, and to the Prejudice of his Subjects, and void.

Never any such Grant has hitherto had any judicial Allowance; but so far from
that, that as far as I could observe, no Opinion has been, till within 4 or 5
Years, that such Grants were good to exclude others: Nor any Action or Suit
ever adventured before now to be brought upon any such Ground.

But if the Law should be so, and that the Defendant ought not to have traded
there without License,

Then he may be punishable at the King's Suit, by Fine and Imprisonment.

But that you should maintain an Action against him; what Cause of Action, or
what Damage or Loss to you have you laid in your Declaration?

You say in your Declaration. That the Defendant Sands, not being a Member of
the Company, nor Son, Servant, Factor, Apprentice, or Assignee of the Company,
traded and merchandized in the East Indies, within the Places granted to you by
your Charter, and has there bargained and sold Wares and Merchandises, and
there bought others, and imported and sold them in England, against the Will of
the Company, to their Prejudice and Impoverishment, against the Form of the
Letters Patents, to the Damage of the Company, 1000 l.

1. You have not alleged that he had no License from the King. 2. You have not
shown any Loss or Damage that you have.
Did he buy so much Merchandise in the Indies, as that he left not there
sufficient for you to furnish your Ships withal, so that they came home empty?

No such thing is alleged.

Or did he here export, to sell so much Merchandise, as not sufficient left for
you to buy here?

No such thing alleged in your Declaration.

Or did he bring home here so much as that there were not Buyers sufficient for
his Goods and yours also?

No such thing is alleged.

Or is the Truth so, as that hereby your imposing your Prizes upon your own
Commodities, selling at your own Rates, and exacting what you thought fit, was
hindered; and for this you would maintain an Action?

It will be the first Time, I think, that a Man did ever recover Damages for
being hindered of imposing and exacting his own Prizes, or having the Advantage
of his Monopoly.

A Commoner may bring an Action of the Case against a Stranger, who puts in his
Cattle into the Common; provided that thereby the Common be impaired, and the
Commoner have not sufficient Common, as before, but have a Damage; otherwise he
can maintain no Action.

Resolved, that for every feeding of the Beasts of a Stranger in a Common, Co.
9 Rep. 113.
the Commoner shall not have an Assize or Action upon the Case, but the feeding
ought to be such, that thereby the Commoner cannot have Common of Pasture for
his own Beasts.

It Is the Consequence, the Loss of his Common that gives him Cause of Action.

It Is not alleged in the Declaration, that your Trade was any thing the worse:
No Damage to you appears by it.

What Reason is there that you should recover Damages where you have not
sustained any Loss? And if you have alleged none in your Declaration, how can
your Declaration be good? It then contains no Cause of Action.

The last Point in that Case is there resolved, 11 Co. Rep. 88. b. Rols Abr. 1
part. 106.
that admitting the Patent good, yet no Action would lie.

In that Case the Queen, by her Letters Patents, had granted to Mr. Darcey,
that he, his Servants, Factors, and Deputies, the whole Trade, Traffic and
Merchandise of Cards for 12 Years should have and use: That none else should
use the Trade, nor buy or sell Cards: That the Defendant did, contrary to this
Patent sell Cards.

1. Adjudged that this was a Monopoly, and the Patent void.

2. That if the Patent had been good, yet no Action would have lain against the
Defendant upon it.

2. But for another Reason you cannot maintain this Action.

It is grounded upon the Restraint and Prohibition of others to trade,
contained in the Letters Patents.

That Restraint or Prohibition is not an absolute Restraint or Prohibition, but
sub modo, under a Pain of Forfeiture of Ship and Goods; One half to the King,
another half to you that are the Company.

Now supposing all that you can desire; That this Patent should have the Force
and Virtue of an Act of Parliament, yet such an Action as this could not be
maintained upon it; but you must sue for the Forfeiture.

For whenever a new Law is made, you must take that new Law as it is, and it
cannot be extended.

Co. 7 Rep. 37. 11 Rep. 59. and Pl. Com. 206. All prove it.

Stat. E. 6. gives treble Damages for not setting out of Tithes.

Can the Party wave this Way, and bring an Action of the Case? Yet here the
Damages are given to the Party.

The like of all other penal Statutes; a Man must forfeit only the Penalty the
Statute inflicts.

So that this Action cannot, as I conceive, be maintained.

So that to conclude:

1. That which this Company claims in this Case by this Patent, to have the
sole Trade to the East Indies in their Politic Capacity, excluding all others,
is a Monopoly and engrossing against the common Law; the ancient Statutes; the
Statute of Monopolies 21 Jac.

And therefore they have no Right to have what they claim.

2. That what the Defendant has in this Case done, he has lawfully done, and
therefore not to be punished.

3. That though the Company had a lawful Claim to the Trade in such manner as
in their Declaration set forth, and the Defendant have done what he ought not,
yet they cannot maintain this Action.

And upon the whole matter, Whether best for the Company to have Judgment for
them or against them, may deserve their Thoughts.

And this being so great in the Conseqence, as the whole Trade of the Kingdom
depending upon it, I have labored the more.

The ancient Laws, the ancient Ways, is what I endeavor, and against new Ways
upon any Pretense whatsoever.

Some Books printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
THE Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing Fifty four Sermons and Discourses on Several Occasions;
together with the Rule of Faith. Being all that were published by his Grace
himself, and now collected into one Volume: To which is added, an Alpabetical
Table of the Principal Matters. Price 20 s.

Six Sermons; viz. Of Stedfastness in Religion. Of Family Religion. Of
Education of Children. Of the Advantages of an early Piety. By his Grace, John,
late Archbishop of Canterbury. In 12o. price 18 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper;
also by his Grace, John, late Archbishop of Canterbury, in 12o. Bound 6 d. or
Stich'd in 8o. 3 d. or something cheaper to those that are so Charitable to
give away Numbers.

The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New; with Annotations and
very exact Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed the Harmony of the Gospels;
as also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to our English
Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel Clark, Minister
of the Gospel. Printed in Folio on a very Fair Letter; the like never before in
one Volume. To which is newly added, a very exact and useful Concordance. Price
30 s.

The Works of the Learned Isaac Barrow D. D. late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge. Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Third Volume. Containing Forty five Sermons upon several
Occasions, completing his English Works. Price 14 s.

Now in the Press, and will be published in Michaelmas Term, an Exposition of
the Apostles Creed, by the learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge; (never before printed, being very different from his
Volume of Sermons on it;) to which will be added, his Exposition of the Lord's
Prayer and the Ten Commandments, etc.

Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our Latter End, and the Danger
and Mischief of Delaying Repentance. By Dr. Isaac Barrow, in 8o. Price 18 d.

The Four Last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell: Practically
considered and applied. By W. Bates, D. D. in 12o. Price 2 s.

Sermons of the Forgiveness of Sins. On Psalm 130. v. 4. Also by Dr. Bates,
Price 18 d.

Enchiridion Medicum: Or, a Manual of Physic. Being a Compendium of the whole
Art. In 3 Parts. viz. I. Of Diseases of the Head. II. Of Diseases of the
Breast. III. Of the Diseases of the Belly. Wherein is briefly showed; 1. The
Names. 2. The Derivation. 3. The Causes. 4. The Signs. 5. The Prognostics. And
6. A rational Method of Cure. Comprehending the substance of the more approved
Authors both ancient and Modern. Published for the Benefit of all Persons,
being fitted to the meanest Capacity. By R. Johnson, Med. Profess. Price 2 s. 6
d.

FINIS.

