ARMATVRA DEI: OR, A PREPARATION FOR SUFFERING IN An Evil Day: SHOWING How
Christians are to bear Sufferings, and what Graces are Requisite thereunto:
Suited for all good Christians in this present Time.

By EDWARD POLHIL of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three-Legs in the Poultrey, 1682.

TO THE READER.
IT is the saying of Grave Divine, That in the School of Satan, the first A B C
of Atheism is this, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me; but in the School of Jesus, the first A B C of Religion is this, If
any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and
follow me. Opposition is Evangelij Genius, the Church has the Cross for its
Inheritance: It is the Ordinance of God, That through Tribulation we must enter
into his Kingdom: This has been the way of the Saints in all Ages; The Cloud
of Witnesses have walked in it to Heaven; Jesus Christ, the Captain of our
Salvation, was made perfect through Sufferings; and therefore Christians, who
are to follow him whithersoever he goes, must provide for the Cross,
Especially at such a time as this. Now, not only the common Lot of
Christianity, but the dark aspect of the Times bid us prepare for Sufferings:
Charity is cold, Differences are hot, Moderation Vanishes, Enmity every where
appears, Popery lifts up itself in the World, Protestants help on the Design,
by destroying each other, Sin is gone up with a great cry to Heaven, black
Clouds of wrath hang over our heads for it, the decays of holy Love threaten a
removal of our Candlestick, lukewarmness in Religion shows, that we are fit to
be spued out of Gods mouth: Every one that has Eyes in his Head, may see the
tendency of such things as these; and therefore Christians have more than an
ordinary Obligation on them to provide for the Cross, and nothing less than a
stock of holy Graces can put them into a posture for it. It Is true, Diogenes,
when he was asked, what be gained by his Philosophy, answered, that he gained
this by it, that he was ad omnem fortunam paratus, ready for every thing that
should fall out. Philosophy may pretend to this, but nothing but true
Christianity can effect it; it is an easy matter to speak finely, and say, as
one did, Si fractus illabatur Orbis, impavidum ferient Ruinae; if the broken
World fall about our Ears, the Ruins of it shall not startle us: But nothing
less than Gracious and Divine Principles can enable a Man piously to suffer for
the Cause of God and Conscience; he, that parts with all outward things here,
had need have an interest in Him, who is better than all: He, that stands fast
in a Storm of Persecution without, had need of a pure serene Conscience within;
He that will adhere to persecuted Truth, had need to be well settled in it, and
carry the sweet savor of it upon his heart: He, that will stand out against the
Threatenings of Men, had need be well-fixed in the Promises of God, and from
thence draw out Comfort in an Evil Day How can a Christian part with the
present World, if he has not another, a better, to go to; or lay down a
Temporal Life, if he has not a lively hope of an Eternal one in Heaven? How
can he lift up himself above the Dregs of a Corrupt World, if he be not
extasied and raped up in Love to God: or bear the Terrors and Cruelties of Men,
if the fear of God do not prevail and overruled his heart? Humility must make
him a Worm, a Nothing in his own Eyes, that he may be willing to be trampled on
by Men. Obedience must work him to a compliance with God's Commanding Will,
that Patience may fit him to subject to his disposing one. Believe it, it is a
great, an Heroical thing, to suffer for Religion; it must be Grace, true Grace,
(such as carries a man up above himself and the World, and joins him to the
Fountain of Comfort and Happiness) that will make him fit to suffer and lose
all for Righteousness sake.

Reader, The ensuing Discourse has no other design, but only to show, how
Christians are to bear Sufferings, and what Graces are requisite thereunto: If
any Glory may come to God, or Profit to Men by it, it is as much as is desired
by him, who is

A Lover of Truth, Edw. Polhil.

ARMATVRA DEI: OR, A Preparation for suffering in an Evil-day.
CHAP. I.
Persecution will come on good men. This World is mixed of Comforts and Sorrows.
The old enmity will persecute. Corruption in Saints will show it self inwardly
and outwardly. The Church is heir to the Cross. God orders Sufferings for good.
Things abroad and at home admonish us.

ONe Apostle tells us. That all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer Persecution. Another acquaints us, That this is no strange thing; A
third wishes us, not to marvel at the Worlds hatred. Its true, the Sufferings
of good men have been an old Stumbling Block. Pompey complained, that
Providence was very dark: The Poet was ready to think that there were no Gods:
Nay, the holy Psalmist cried out, I have cleansed my heart in vain; as if
Religion were to no purpose: Yet, if we consider all, those Sufferings are not
to be wondered at.

This World standing between Heaven and Hell, must partake of both: Heaven is
all comfort; Hell is all misery: The middle World must have a mixture; here
evil men may meet with Comforts, and good men may meet with Afflictions.

The old Enmity between the Seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman will
stir up Persecution to the Worlds end. He that is born after the flesh, will
persecute him that is born after the Spirit: It Is his nature and property to do
so; a thing no more to be wondered at than the stinging of a Serpent, or the
tearing of a Briar. Many pretenses were made to palliate the Persecution of the
primitive Christians. Under Trajan it was said, That the Christians were too
numerous; under Antoninus Pius it was given out, That all kinds of Penal Evils
came for their sakes; under Severus it was alleged, That they were guilty of
all kind of Villainies; under Dioclesian it was fairly pretended, That there
must be but one Religion in the Empire; But in truth all these were but so many
colors, the venom of the Serpent was at the root; the devilish Enmity, which
is in carnal men against the Saints, was the very proper cause of all those
Persecutions. Wickedness will proceed from the wicked; the old Enmity will
break out, and that not only in men grossly wicked, but in fair Moralists too.
A Trajan or Antoninus can persecute, as well as a Nero: The same root of
bitterness is in all carnal men.

The inherent Corruption in the Saints will show it self inwardly and
outwardly: Inwardly it will raise up a Prosecution in their own Bosom; the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit. No sooner is the New Creature born, but the
indwelling Sin does hunt it as a Partridge upon the Mountains, and seeks the
life of its Infant-graces, as Herod did the life of Christ in the Cradle. And
how can the Saints wonder at a Persecution without, when they have one within
in their Souls? Or how can they expect less than Briars in the world, when they
feel a Thorn in their own flesh? Outwardly it will, even in Saints, when let
out, be injurious to others. A David, when his Corruption breaks forth, can be
inhumane toward the Ammonites; an Asa can imprison the Seer, and oppress the
People. And if Corruption may do so in a Saint, in whom it is in part
mortified, what may it not do in a Son of Belial, in whom it is the total
ruling Principle? In the one, the regenerate part holds back; but in the other,
the whole Soul is carried out to wickedness. It is no wonder that such an one
should persecute; his Principles are entirely for it.

The Church is Heir to the Cross. It Is suffering began from the blood of Abel,
and has continued eversince. Israel, Gods peculiar People was first oppressed
in Egypt, under cruel Bondage; then vexed in Canaan by the neighbor Nations
round about them; after wards carried captive into Babylon, and at last trod
under foot by Antiochus Epiphanes. The Christian Church was first persecuted by
the Pagan Emperors; then torn in pieces by Arians and other Heretics;
afterward overrun with Goths and Vandals, and at last trod down by Mahomet
and Antichrist: All along it has been in a suffering condition, and it is no
wonder, if it suffer on till it come to rest in Heaven.

God orders the sufferings of the Church for his own glory, and his Peoples
good. He orders them for his own glory; Providence is admirable in preserving a
suffering Church. The Ark sloats upon the waters, and drowns not; the Bush
burns, and is not consumed; the Lilly is among Thorns, and withers not; the
Saints are perplexed but not in despair; persecuted but not forsaken; cast down
but not destroyed. Strength comes forth out of weakness; Light arises out of
darkness; the Bones, though sometimes dry and hopeless, live; the Witnesses are
slain and revive again; Pressures multiply the Church, and Sufferings propagate
it; And what a sight is this? Who may think much at those Sufferings, in which
so much of God appears? Again he orders them for his Peoples good; the Fann
will purge away their Vanity; the Furnace will melt out their Dross; every Name
of Persecution will lift them up nearer to Heaven; their Sufferings will make
them white; their Graces will come forth as Gold out of the fire in their pure
Luster; the Rod will blossom, and bring forth peacable fruit of Righteousness;
the holy Spirit will come down upon them in larger effusions of Grace and
Comfort: And what things are these? Who can imagine those Sufferings needless,
which have so excellent an issue?

To conclude; Things abroad and at home admonish us: Abroad, the Protestant
Religion runs very low; Idolatry grows in the world, and where that goes
before, Cruelty fallows after: The fiery Furnace waits upon the Idol; the
Scarlet Whore, full of Fornications, will drink the blood of Saints; the false
Worshippers will persecute the true; the Sighs and Groans of the poor Souls in
France do alarm all that have any sense of Piety or Humanity: Who can but mourn
at such mourning Providence? At home our sins are grown up to Heaven; Oaths,
Blasphemies, Perjuries, Hellish Plots, Uncleanness Excesses, A theism,
Contempt of Ordinances, Deadness and Formality in Religion, Unthankfulness and
Unsaithfulness to God, are found among us. The Cloud of Guilt which hangs over
our heads, is very black and ready to come down in Storms of wrath upon us:
Sword and Plague and Fire have already consumed us; and, because we Sin on with
a stiff neck, heard heart, and impudent face, more Judgments may be expected:
Eliphas seeing the wicked taking root, Suddenly cursed his Habitation, Job 5.3.
He that sees our aggravated Sins, may easily foretell our sudden destruction.

CHAP. II.
It is useful to Christians to discern the signs of the Times, and to be ready
for all the Will of God. Providence bids us prepare for sufferings; we have
need to do so. Suffering is hard to sense, and the excellency of a Christian.
The prepared Christian is an happy man, and the unprepared miserable.

Two things are of great use to Christians; the one is, to discern the Signs of
the Time. He that looks without and sees the State of things there, and then
turns to Scripture, and there sees the issues that wait upon such States, may
discern the signs of the Time. The Luxury of the old World was a sign of the
Deluge; the Persecution of the Prophets was a sign of Jerusalems Desolation.
When Ephesus declined, and left its first love, the Candlestick was removing:
When Laodicea was lukewarm, God was ready to spue them out of his mouth. And
so it is in other things; such and such a State of things will have such and
such an issue. The discerning of this will make Christians time their duties,
and do every thing in the true season of it, which is no less profitable then
beautiful. The other thing is, to be ready for all the Will of God; to have
Graces aptly answering to Providence: Such holy Joy as may tune the heart to
Prosperity; and such humble Submission as may frame the heart to adversity:
This is that blessed temper, that bids every thing welcome that comes in the
Will of God.

If we observe the signs of our Times, we may easily discern Judgments a
coming, and therefore nothing can be more necessary than to prepare for
Sufferings. God has a controversy with us, and seems to speak to us by his
Providence, as he did to Israel by his Prophet, Prepare to meet thy God. Sit
down then, O Christians, and consider how to do it, and think with your selves,
with what penitential Tears, Wrestling, Supplications, real Reformations, and
holy Resignations you will meet with him. Jesus Christ the Captain of your
salvation, seems now to ask you by his Providence, as the Roman General did his
Soldiers, Are you ready? Reflect upon your selves, and consider; are you ready
to keep the Word of Christ's Patience, to take up his Cross and follow him?
Though the cross be not yet upon your backs, yet you must carry it in your
Hearts; your minds must be ready at his call to suffer any thing, rather than
to part with the Gospel.

Preparation is necessary to every good work. The Pagan Priests had preparatory
Washings before the sacrifice; the People had an hoc age cried to them to
awaken their Attention. The Jews were to wash their Clothes at the giving of
the Law; they had their Preparations to Sabbaths and Ordinances: Christians are
to prepare for the Wood and for the holy Table; but above all, Preparation is
necessary to sufferings. The greater the thing is, the more requisite is the
Preparation: Suffering is a great thing, hard to Sense, harsh to Flesh and
Blood. It may be it takes away the worldly Goods which are dear to men; it may
be it comes nearer, and touches the Bone and the Flesh, which is dearer then
outward things: It may be it goes further, and treads down the precious Life,
which is highly valuable. Nature in the best, shrinks and flies away from such
things as these; and, supernatural Graces and Assistances lift up men above
themselves, they will never bear them. In such a case as this we have need to
put on all our Spiritual Armor; not this or that piece only, but all of it; and
not only to put it on, but to gird it on too: All will be little enough to make
us stand in the evil day. Again, the more excellent a thing is, the more
requisite is the Preparation: Suffering for Christ is the excellency of a
Christian, the top and Complement of all his Graces; Faith cannot rise higher;
Love cannot show it self better than in this: No Profession of Christianity is
so high, nor Imitation of Christ so full, as that which is made in blood: Here
is the Christians consummatum est; his work is done, and Heaven opens to
receive him into glory: And how should we prepare our Souls, and gird up the
Loins of our Minds, that we may be capable of that which is the highest Stature
of a Christian in this World, and the nearest capacity to a better?

This Preparation is of very great moment to Christians: Upon their having, or
not having of it, depends their Happiness or Misery.

He that is prepared for Sufferings, come what will come, is a happy man; if
sufferings do not come, he is yet a Martyr in mind and purpose. God sees the
suffering frame that is in him; his willing mind is accepted as much as if his
blood were actually Shed; and being ready to dye for Christ, he is ready to
live with him in Heaven; If Sufferings come, he is provided for then. St. Paul
was ready to be bound and die for the name of Jesus. Polycarpe, when threatened
with Various deaths, made this reply, Quid tardas? Why do thou delay? Inflict
what thou will. The prepared Christian is ready for all the Will of God, which
is an happiness that no Suffering can interrupt: He is in a posture to overcome
all the World, and he will do it. The very Pagan Emperors did observe the
primitive martyrs to be Victors in death. It is said of the Martyr Vincentius,
Magd. hist. cent. 4. cap. 12.
that according to his name, he overcame in Words, and overcame in Punishments;
overcame in Confession, and overcame in Tribulation; overcame in Fire, and over
came in Water; overcame Living and overcame Dying. The prepared Christian is a
Vincent, a Conqueror of the World; his Love is above the smiles of it, his Fear
above the Terrors of it: Nay, he is more than a Conqueror; he overcomes by
suffering, and lives by death; nay being dead, he yet speaks forth the truth he
suffered for, and propagates it to all posterity: Neither need we wonder at
this Conquest, he is not alone but has God with him: And, as the Emperor
Antoninus Verus said of the Primitive Christians, He carries God about with him
in conscience; and where God is, there must be happiness in the most afflicted
Condition; the whole sacred Trinity are present with him; the everlasting
Father will strengthen him; the Son will walk with him in the fiery Furnace;
the holy Spirit will come to him with all his cordials. Stephen was never so
full of it as when he was stoned. Hist. mag. Cent. 2.
The Martyr Felicitas professed to her Persecutor, That she had the holy Spirit
in her: The prepared Christian has a Spirit of Power in Infirmities, a Spirit
of Glory in Reproaches, a Spirit of Comfort in Distresses. There are no such
rich Anointings, as those that wait upon the Cross of Christ: At other times a
Christian has some measures of the Spirit; but then he has such large
effusions of it, that no Sufferings can make him miserable: The Clouds without
cannot break the serenity in his Conscience; the noise of a troublesome World
cannot interrupt that Divine Peace which keeps his heart; no malice of man can
hinder the sheddings of Gods Love into him; no wants or exigencies can deprive
him of the hidden Manna promised to the Overcomer; he is happy even in a Vale
of Tears: And what will he be in Heaven? There his reward will be great, nay,
greater than that of others.

On the other hand; he that is not propared for Sufferings, is a miserable man:
He has a Name of Religion and that is all; a Notion of the Gospel, but without
a Root; he has a false Christ, that is, a Christ without a Cross, but the
right Christ he knows not; a pretense to Heaven he has, but he is not in a
posture for it, neither will he go thither in an hard way: If Sufferings come,
he is snared, as Fishes in an evil Net; the surprise will rob him of that which
he seems to have; he will not have so much as the Name or notion of Religion
left: Christ will be an Offense, or Stumbling Block to him; Heaven it self will
not be worth suffering for. Thus those of the Stony ground received the word
with joy, but because their hearts were not ready for it, as soon as
Persecution arose, they were offended. Magd. hist. Cent. 2. cap. 3.
Thus it was observed among the Primitive Christians, that the unready and
unprepared did faint and fall in time of Persecution. The Cup of Sufferings is
bitter, Nature starts at it: The unprepared Christian, rather than drink it,
will in all likelihood turn Apostate in the day of trial; prosperous error will
be embraced by him before persecuted Truth; Idolatary with the World will go
down better than the pure Worship without it; Christ coming in Poverty and
Tribulation will be forsaken; Antichrist appearing in the Pomp and outward
greatness of the World, will be followed: Mere Vanity will outweigh all the
great offers of the Gospel; a Soul and a God will be laid at stake for a little
outward prosperity: And what a forlorn Condition is this? And without
Repentance, how dismal must the end be? The Good God, whom he has forsaken,
will depart from him; Jesus Christ the Savior will cast him out; a curse and a
blast will be upon his Prosperity; a sting and a wound in Conscience will make
him weary of himself; in a word, he will become loathsome to God, Men, and
himself. Cypr. de Lapsis.
It is storied, That in the third Century the tokens of Gods wrath came in an
extraordinary way upon those Christians that fell off in time of Persecution;
some of them were struck dumb, some vexed with Devils, some tormented in their
bowels unto Death; and, though not in these ways, yet in other will his wrath
come down upon all Apostates; if they are not dumb before men, they will be
speechless before God; if Devils vex not their Bodies, they will yet possess
their Souls; if there be no torments in their Bowels, yet there are in their
Consciences: The miseries, which Apostates incur, are much greater than those,
which they avoid by their Apostacies. It is therefore highly reasonable, that
we should prepare for Sufferings, lest by Apostasy we make our selves more
miserable, than any outward Suffering can make us.

CHAP. III.
Preparation for Sufferings considered more generally. A Christian that will be
prepared for Sufferings must secure to himself three things; that is, A good
Cause, a good Heart, and a good God.

Having seen the necessity of Persecution, and the necessity of Preparation, I
come now to the main thing intended; to consider how a Christian may be
prepared for Sufferings: And here I shall first speak in General, and then more
Particularly. In General, a Christian, that would be prepared for Sufferings,
must secure to himself three things; a good Cause, a good Heart, and a good
God; The first will make Suffering honorable; the Second will make us us meet
for it; the third will give assistance and comfort in it.

1. The Christian must secure to himself a good Cause; he must take care not to
suffer as an Evil doer; this is not grateful to God, nor honorable among Men;
in it Christ is not imitated, but Christianity is shamed: Such Sufferers are
the Devils Martyrs; it cannot be reasonably expected that they should have the
gracious Presence of God, or any comfort in Conscience; their own hearts cry
out, Guilty, and plainly tell them, that their Suffering is but the just wages
of their Iniquity. A Christian must be sure, that there be no guilt in that
which he suffers for. Holy Daniel says, that Innocence was found in him, Dan.
6.22. He speaks not of the innocence of his Person, as if he were without sin;
but of the innocence of his Cause, for which he suffered: His praying against a
Law did not merit a Den of Lions; he broke the Humane Command only to keep the
Divine. It highly concerns the Christian to have an innocent Cause; it is the
Cause, not the mere Suffering, that makes the Martyr. Again, the Christian must
take care, that he suffer not as a Busy-body in other men's Matter; he must not
have his own Station, nor forfeit Gods protection, he must abide with God in
his Calling, and do his own Business. God took care of the Bird sitting over
her young in her Nest, Deuteronomy. 22.6. but not of the wandering one. The learned
Johannes Fancius, of a Minister of the Gospel in his Prince's Court, turned
Minister of State to his Prince, and was at last for some evil Counsel,
condemned to dye; and before he suffered, he much lamented the leaving of his
Calling, and left this Distick.

Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi,
Et fuge ceu pestem (...)
Learn this of me, thine own Office to bear,
In others meddle not, the Plague is there.
It is very uncomfortable to a Christian, when he runs into Sufferings by going
out of his own Sphere. Moreover, the Christian must take care, that he suffer
not for his own rashness. He that defaced the Emperors Edict against
Christians, and Suffered for it, was not accounted a Martyr. Bishop Audas
demolished the Persian Temple, dedicated to the Fire, as their Numen, and
suffered for it; but it was reckoned as a Piece of rash and unreasonable Zeal:
We must not cast our selves into dangers; God will keep us in our ways, Theod.
Hist. Lib. 4, cap. 39.
not in our Precipices. We must take up the Cross that God makes for us, but
not make one of our selves by our own rashness: If we must suffer, let it be
for that good Conscience which is a continual Feast; for that Righteousness
which is in Conjunction with Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: Let it be for
that Jesus who suffered for us; for that God who crowns momentary Sufferings
with eternal Glory. This was the case of the Primitive Christians; they
suffered, but it was in a good Cause. Justin Martyr and Athenagoras in their
Apologies for them, show, That there was nothing amiss found in them; no
Atheism, no Thyestean Suppers, no unclean Copulations, no unjust Actions; the
only Crime was Christianity. And afterward Tertullian shows, That the name in
Christians was condemned, but no Crime was found in them toward God or man.
This is the first thing we are to do, we must secure a good Cause.

2. We must secure good Hearts. It is said of the Children of Ephraim, that
being armed, and carrying Bows, they turned back in the day of Battle, Psalm.
78.9. and the reason of this we have in the precedent Verse, they set not their
hearts aright. Unless the Heart be good, as well as the Cause, men will turn
back from God, and the pure Religion: Corrupt Hearts will fall in with the
World, and ever be on the Sunny side: In Dioclesian's time they can be Pagans;
in Constantine's Christians; in Constantius's Arrians; in Julian's Pagans
again. Purpuram colunt, non Deum.
It is the good Heart only that is sit for Sufferings. Now two things are
requisite to make a good Heart; it must be purged from sin; and again, it must
be furnished with principles of Grace. 1. It must be purged from sin; from the
guilt and power of it: It must be purged from the guilt of sin. A man that has
inward wounds is unfit to bear outward ones. Guilt upon Conscience, like a Boil
upon the Back, makes one incapable to bear the burden of a Cross. They, that
are partakers of Christ's Sufferings in Martyrdom, had need first partake of
them for Remission: They, that wash their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb, by
suffering for him, had need first wash their Consciences in it to take away
their Guiltness. It is not imaginable that a man can piously embrace a Temporal
Death, when immediately after it he shall fall into an Eternal one: Or that he
can patiently bear the wrath of Man, when the wrath of God is to ensue upon it.
It was a very forlorn Case with the Egyptians, when they were drowning in the
Sea, and God looked through the Cloud upon them; and so it will be with
Christians, if the World be as a troubled Sea to them and withal; God look with
an angry Face upon them: Therefore it much concerns them to get a pardon
sealed in the Blood of Jesus Christ, that, when they come to suffer, they may
have nothing to bear but the single Cross, without any pressure of Guilt upon
Conscience to aggravate it. Again, It must be purged from the power of Sin.
Every Lust is a Dalilah, an Exhauster (as the Hebrew word signifies,) it takes
away the Heart, drains and debases the man, makes him vile and impotent, and by
consequence altogether incapable of so heroical a thing as suffering for God
is: He that has sin reigning in his Heart, will comply with it reigning in the
World; he that carries an Idol within will fall down to an outward one: Such
an one will do any thing rather than suffer; The power of sin must be broken,
that a man may be ready to take up the Cross. Further, the Heart, that it may
be good, must not only be purged from sin, but furnished with Principles of
Grace. The old Heart will not Hear, or Pray, or give Alms, or do any thing for
God in a right manner, much less will it suffer for him. A man must have
gracious Principles, such as holy Knowledge, Faith, Fear, Love Zeal, Hope,
Humility, Obedience, and Patience are, that he may be ready for suffering.
There is a double preparation for it, Habitual and Actual; Habitual stands in
the having those principles, and actual in the using of them. He that has them
has a Divine temper disposing him for every piece of the Divine Will; he is in
the frame of his Heart above Creatures, and has no Center but in his Creator;
he is higher than Time and this lower World, and lies upon the Borders of
Heaven and Eternity: His great Concerns are not in the Smiles and Frowns of
men, but in the Will and Favor of God; His fear is of greater evil than the
World can inflict; and his expectation is of greater good than the World can
bestow: His Principles make him habitually ready for Suffering, and when
occasion comes, the use of them will make him actually so. Such an one may say
at the fiery Trial, as the famous Jerome of Prage did when the Wood was laid to
him, Salve festa dies, Welcome thou joyful day of suffering for Christ. This is
the second thing, we must secure good Hearts.

3. We must secure a good God to be with us in our Sufferings. A good Cause
will not bear us up without a good Heart, nor will a good Heart stand without a
good God to support it. The prayer of David is very remarkable, Let Integrity
and Vprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee, Psalm. 25.21. Integrity is a
Preservative; but we must wait on God to have our very Integrity preserved; and
pray, as the holy Psalmist does in the precedent Verse, O keep my soul; the
most upright soul needs it. Graces keep the Heart, but those very Graces must
be kept by the Keeper of Israel. The God of Grace is as necessary to the
New Creature as the God of Nature is to the Old: If he withdraw, Faith will
fail, Love will cool, Hope will wither, Zeal will be extinct, and all Graces
will Vanish, as the Beams do upon the absence of the Sun; The gracious presence
of God is necessary to us at all times, especially in times of Suffering.
Joseph's Prison would have been very dismal, if God had not been there. When
all men forsook Paul, he had been very forlorn if God had forsook him too. How
hard is it to be in wants, if the All-sufficient one be gone? How intolerable
are Distresses, if the God of all Comfort be absent? How shall we bear the
Cruelties of men if the Father of Mercies do not assist us? Or how shall we
stand under own Creature-weakness, if the never fainting Creator do not
strengthen us? What shall we do in doubts if the only Wise one do not guide us?
Or what shall we do in the Valley of the Shadow of death if the living God be
not with us? The Presence of God (says a worthy Divine) will turn a Prison
into a Palace, a Fiery Furnace into a Gallery of Pleasure, and the Stocks into
a Musick-School. Acts 16.25. I may add, it is in stead of all things to us:
With it no Suffering can be too heavy; without it none can be tolerable. Let us
therefore labor to secure this Presence with us, and for that end, let us
secure our being in Christ, and our walking in him. First let us secure our
being in Christ: God manifest in the Flesh, is the foundation of God sin
habiting in the Spirits of men: If Christ had not come and mediated for us, God
would never have come to dwell and to walk in us: If we are in Christ, God, who
is personally present with his Humane Nature, will be graciously present with
us as Members of of him: We shall be preserved in Christ, as pieces of him, by
that special Presence which accompanies those that are in him. Our blessed
Savior prays, that those that were given him might be kept through the Fathers
Name, Joh. 17.11. that is, through that Divine Power, Wisdom, Mercy, and Grace
which is with them, Again, let us secure our walking in Christ. Let us walk
after his Command and Pattern; that is, in Meekness of Wisdom, in Zeal for Gods
Glory, in readiness of Obedience, in sweetness of Charity, in an universal
Compliance witht the Divine Will. Let there be somewhat of Christ in every
step, this is the way to have the Divine Presence with us. Thus our Savior
left us, If any man Love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him, Joh. 14.23. Such as
keep his words, shall have the Shechinah, the Divine Presence in a peculiar
manner with them: This will be to them Joy in Sorrow, Security in Fears
Strength in Weakness, Life in Death, and All things in the want of All.

CHAP. IV.
Preparation for Suffering; the first direction is, Try thy Heart; see the
Deceit of it; what Relics of Sin are there; how it steals out of Duties; how
false it is in Promises; how it extenuates Sin: Search and see what uprightness
is there: Does thy Heart set God before thee; does it respect all Commands;
does it eye Gods Glory, and did it make a right contract with Christ?

HAving spoke somewhat in general touching Preparation for Suffering; I now
come to speak of it more particularly: And here I shall lay down several
Directions, and show how a Christian may be in a fit posture for suffering.

1. If we would be in a fit posture for Suffering, let us diligently try our
own Hearts: Suffering is a searching thing; it tries a man as fire does Metals;
sifts and winnowes him as Corn is shaken in a Sieve; and discovers his thoughts
and the bottom of his Heart. Many a man seems to be fully for God, yet when the
Test comes, proves to be for the World: Therefore it is very proper for us, to
search our selves before hand; to try our Hearts inwardly before the outward
trial come; to sift and winnow our selves before Providence do it; to discover
our Hearts to our selves, before God discover them to others: This is Gods own
direction to his People; Gather your selves together, yea, gather together O
Nation not desired; or (as the words in the original may be rendered) search,
lift your selves, yea, search, lift your selves, O nation not desired, before
the Decree bring forth, before the day pass as the Chaff, before the fierce
Anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords Anger come upon
you, Zeph. 2.1.2. Approaching Judgments alarm us to self examination: Sit
down, O Christian, and consider, what the state of thy Heart is; what of
Corruption is there and what of Grace; how much is there for the World, and how
much for God; what concupiscential Strings are there that tie thee to the
present world, and what Anchors cast in Heaven are there to bear thee up in a
Storm; what Chaff or Vanity is there that will go away with every Wind, and
what massy Grace that will abide the trial: Never is it more necessary to
descend into our selves, than in a time of Suffering.

Search out the Corruption and Deceitfulness in thy Heart: If thou will believe
him that knows the Heart better than it knows it self, The Heart is deceitful
above all things Jer. 17.9. full of windings and turnings; deceitful beyond its
own power of reflection, which, when acted, knows the deceit in part, but
cannot dive into the bottom of it. Commune with thine own Heart, O Christian;
ask it seriously, Is there not much Corruption within? are there not relics
of Unbelief, Earthiness, Sensualness, Pride, Hypocricy, Apostasy found in thee?
Consider what these are; these fight under the same Colors, and aim at the
same end with the persecuting World; these would root grace out of thy Heart,
as wicked men would root Good out of the World. As it was with Israel, there
went up with them out of Egypt a mixed multitude, which was ready to return
again thither; so it is with good men, there are corrupt mixtures in them which
would turn back to Egypt again: Be not deceived, thy whole entire self is not
for suffering; the unregenerate part will hang back, and say to thee, as Satan
in Peter did to our Savior, Master, Spare thy self: When dangers approach, the
Flesh will cry out, Oh, Spare thy Estate Spare thy Relations, Spare thy Life,
why should thou destroy thy self? Take notice therefore, that there is a
Traitor in thine own bosom, which unless thou watch, will like the Idolaters
deceived Heart, turn thee aside from God. Again, ask thy Heart, Does it not
Steal out of holy duties? When thou art a hearing the holy Word, will not thy
Heart go out to worldly objects? When thou art joining with others in Prayer,
do not thy thoughts rove up and down about Carnal things? If thy Heart be a
little elevated toward Heaven, does it not immediately fall down again? If it
be a little inflamed toward God, does it not instantly cool again? Think with
thy self; that Heart, that steals away from Duties in which there is nothing
grevious to the Body, will be ready to steal away from Sufferings which grate
upon the Flesh and Sense: Thou had need to get thy Heart fixed on God in
Duties, that when thou come to Suffering, thou myest not start away from him.
Further yet, ask thy heart; Has it not been false in Vows and Promises of
better obedience, and those made at Sacraments or upon Sick-beds? Is not thy
Goodness as a morning Cloud, and thy life a vain circle of commissions of Sin
and Confessions? And can thou trust such an Heart as this? Assure thy self,
that an Heart, which is false in Promises, will not be true in Sufferings; that
goodness that passes away like the early Dew at other times, will utterly
vanish when a scorching Persecution comes: Learn therefore to be true in
Promises, that thou may be true in Suffering; get such a real Goodness as may
abide the trial in an Evil day. Moreover, ask thy self one question more,
Cannot thy Heart color over evil things? Is it not apt to extenuate sin and
say, It is but a little one; to make nothing of idle Words or petty Oaths? And
what may not such an Heart do to avoid Sufferings? May it not put a fair gloss
upon Popery it self, and say, the Papists have the substance of Religion, and
why should we scruple humane Rights and Ceremonies? They have the sacred
Scriptures, and why should we stumble at superfluous Traditions? Their Images
are not the terminative object of Worship, but the motive only; and why may we
not use Humane Inventions to move us to Devotion? Transubstantion it self is
but a kind of nicety, they say, the body of Christ is in the Eucharist after
the manner of Spirits; we say, Bellar. de Euch. Lib. 1 ca. 2. Lib 3. cap. 4.
that it is there Spiritually: And how little does the difference seem to be?
Praying to Saints and Angels is but a vanity, a void thing: Humane merit is an
harmless thing, if it be grafted upon Christ and the Promise: The Pope himself
is a Bishop, and what need we think him Antichrist? The false heart can paint
the Whore in every part, and make her look as if she were not Mystery, Babylon,
the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth. Labor then to know more
and more of the deceitfulness of thy heart, that it may not cheat thee in times
of Persecution: He that trusts in his heart is a Fool, nay a secret Idolater;
let us carry an holy jealousy over our hearts: The Carnal heart will presume,
but knows not its own weakness; it will promise much, but perform little or
nothing. Peter was in a very high strain, though all men be offended, yet will
not I, Matthew. 26.33. And again, though I should die with thee, yet will I not
deny thee, Verse 35. But alas he was herein (as Forus observes) but a Figure of
those that lean upon their own Free Will; Ecce columna firmissima ad unius
aurae impulsum tota contremuit; ubi est illa promittentis audacia, and dese
plurimum presumentis? Aust. in Joh. Tract. 11 3.
he knew too little of himself, presumed too much upon his own power, and fell
miserably in the denial of his Lord: This great Pillar fell before the breath of
a poor Damsel; his Confidence and Presumption proved but a mere Vanity; Do not,
O Christian, think thy self better than this great Apostle; study thine own
heart, and see the Corruption there, that thou may not fall by presumption;
but stand in the Power of his Grace, who is able to confirm thee to the end.

2. Search thy heart and see what uprightness is there; thou have a name, a
notion of Religion, a form of Godliness; but have thou the thing, the truth of
grace, the power of Religion in thy heart? It is grace, true grace that must
establish the heart Hebr. 13.9. It is Gold tried in the fire Revel. 3.18. that
is, pure grace, that must endure the fiery trial. Consider thy self, O
Christian, Is there any true integrity in thee? Where are the Marks and
Caracters of it appearing in thee? Put Interrogatories to thine own heart; Do
thou indeed set the Lord always before thee? Do thou do every thing as in
his Presence and under his Eye? This is very comfortable; he that truly walks
with God in other things, will through grace walk with him in Sufferings too:
He that has an holy respect to Gods Presence and Eye at other times, will have
so in a time of Trial also. The Constancy of God's People set forth in Psalm
44. is very observable; they were given as Sheep for meat, sold for naught,
made a reproach, and a scorn, a byword, and a shaking of the head among the
people; yet their heart was not turned back, neither did their steps decline
from Gods ways, Verse 18. They were broken in the place of Dragons, covered in
the shadow of Death: Yet they did not forget the name of their God, nor stretch
out their hands to a strange God, Verse 20. And whence was this close adherence
unto God? The Reason is rendered in the 21th. Verse; if they should forsake God,
he would search them out, for he knows the secrets of the heart: We see how
they were affected with the Presence and All-seing Eye of God, and how does it
affect us? If it make us depart from other sins, it will much more make us
depart from so great a sin as Apostasy is. Again art thou true in thy active
obedience to God? Have thou an universal respect to all the Commands, even to
those that call for right Hands and right Eyes? This is very well; he that is
true in active obedience, will be so in passive; he that is for all the
Commands of God, will be for the Command of taking up the Cross, and Suffering
for Christ. The Commands are copulative, one of them is linked to another; the
stamp of Divine Authority is upon all; the Glory of God is concerned in all;
they are all united in the root of Charity. Those Principles of Grace which
prompt to the obedience of one, will prompt to the obedience of all: He that is
sincere in doing, will be sincere in suffering. Further, have thou a single
Eye, a pure intention at the great end? is it thy real aim that God in all
things may be glorified? This is a good Sign; he that has a single Eye in one
thing, will have it in another; he that glorifies God in other things, will
glorify him in sufferings too. A man is as his end is; what the form is in
Naturals, that the end is in Morals: He, that has God for his Center and
ultimate end, will embrace all the Mediums that tend thither, and Suffering as
the highest Medium of all; therein is the highest Love demonstrated, and God is
practically lifted up above all; his glory is upon the Throne, and Estates,
Relations Lives; all Earthly Concerns are at the Footstool: Let us set our
hearts upon the great end, that, whether we be doing Gods Commanding Will, or
suffering under his Disposing one, the great design of God's glory may be still
carried on by us. Moreover, ask thy self, what was thy original contract with
Jesus Christ? How and upon what terms did thou espouse him? Did thou take
him entirely as he is offered in the Gospel? Did thou take him, Cross and all?
Did thou sit down and count what Christianity might cost thee? It may be thou
may be called to part with all, to hate Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Life
it self for Christ: Did thou deliberately consider these things, and yet
piously resolve, that thou would have Christ whatever he cost thee? this is
very excellent, thou art now a Martyr in purpose, Veniant crux, ignis, ossium
confractiones, modo Christum habeam. Said Ignatius.
and Virtually have swallowed down all the Persecutions that go along with the
Gospel: When the Cross comes thou will take it up upon thy back: The flesh
possibly may murmr; but thou will say, this was my original contract with
Christ; these were the terms of my Espousals: I accept the Cross, and will
follow my suffering Savior; he is worthy for whom I suffer, and the sufferings
are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come: Let us therefore be sure
that we have made a right contract with Christ and accepted him Cross and all,
that when Sufferings come, we may not fall off from him.

CHAP. V.
The second direction for Suffering, Mortification of sin; an unmortified man
is not in a capacity to suffer. We must mortify all sin, particularly the
unbelief of the Heart, the Love of the World in the three great Lusts of it;
the Hypocrisy in the Heart, and the vain Superstition that is there.

Having dispatched the first Direction, I come to a second: If we would be in a
posture for suffering, let us seriously set our selves to mortify sin: There is
in Christians a double conformity to Christ's Death; the one stands in the
mortification of Sin; our old man is crucified with him, Romans 6.6. dying away
by a secret virtue from his Cross: The other stands in bearing the Cross;
thereby we fill up the afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. The Sufferings of
Christ in his Natural Body were full, but the Sufferings of Christ in his
Mystical Body at daily to be filled up: The first conformity makes way for the
second: The mortifying of inward Lusts, is an excellent preparative to the
enduring of outward Sufferings. An unmortified man, that is under the power of
his Lusts, is in no fit capacity to suffer for Christ: He is a part of that
World that lies in wickedness; the World will love him as a part of it self,
and he will comply with the World as a part does with the whole; a little
particle of Water will, if it be possible, fall into a round drop, that it may
answer to the figure of the great Ocean whereof it is a part; and an
unmortified man will be All-amode, and of the same figure (be it Pagan or
Popish Idolatry) with the corrupt World, whereof he is a part; his compliance
will be such that he will have no occasion for sufferings, neither is
imaginable for what he will suffer from the World: Will he suffer, as good men
do, to avoid that greatest of evils, Sin? That is it which he allows and
indulges in himself, that is the darling of his Soul, the joy of his way, the
current of his life, the only element in which he converses, and may he suffer
to avoid such a thing as that is? Or will he suffer to avoid, the greatest of
punishments, Hell and Death? No surely, in willing his Lusts he virtually wills
Hell and the torments of it; in acting his sin, his feet go down to death, and
all the wrath that is to come; Or will he suffer for God, out of Love to him,
and respect to his glory? It is not imaginable, that he should suffer for God
whom he Serves not, or Love him with the Idol in his heart, or respect his
glory against whom he is in arms, and wose Laws and honor he treads down under
his feet: Or will he suffer or Christ his Savior, who died to wash away his
Sins in his own blood? It is not credible that he should suffer for a Christ
whom he never yet received, or take up the yoke of the cross when he casts off
the yoke of the command; he cannot be saved in his sins, no, not by Christ
himself; the atoning blood will not wash him that wallows in those corruptions
that are the price of it; Or will he suffer for the Gospel; He turns a deaf car
to the Calls; violates the sacred Commands, casts away the precious offers of
it, and it is not to be thought, that he will suffer for that Gospel which he
so despises. Indeed it would be a very strange thing for him to suffer; in so
doing he must part with all this World in which his portion and total sum of
happiness lies; he must suffer the spoiling of his goods when he has no
eneuring substance in Heaven; be a reproach among men when he has no honor
with God; and cast away a temporal life when he has no title to an eternal
one. We see by these things that an unmortified man is not in case to suffer
for Christ. Awake therefore O Christian, set upon the work of Mortification;
resist inward Corruptions that thou may stand against outward temptations,
lay holy restraints upon sin that thou may bear a Guison for Christ; die
unto sin that thou may be able to die for the Gospel; set thy heart against
every thing of Concupiscence that breaths in thee, that there may be nothing to
turn thee aside from the sure Religion; cast out every secret idol out of thine
heart, that thou may not fall down and worship the outward Idols in the
World: Do this work impartially, do not mortify one or two sins, but all: Every
indulged Lust is a Traitor in thy bosom, a false Byas upon thy heart, Spare it
not. But to give some particular instances labor to mortify the sins following.

1. Mortify the unbelief in thy heart: This is the foundation of Apostasy,
Aquin. 22 qu. 10.
the greatest of sins, because the greatest separation from God, it dep irts
from the living God, Hebr. 3.12. it gives the lie to the true God, 1, Joh.
5.10. it blasts the precious Gospel, as if it were not worthy to be obeyed in
its Precepts, or credited in its Mysteries or promises. If it totally prevail
in the heart, there can be no such thing as suffering for Religion. To such an
unbeliever Christ is but a Fancy, and the Gospel but a golden dream, for which
suffering is plainly ridiculous; and if it be in thy heart but in some degree,
it will in the same degree weaken thee and make thee ready to stagger at the
Cross: Watch therefore over the unbelief in thy bosom; assure thy self of this,
that which inwardly departs from God will be ready to depart from him outwardly
too; that which Secretly gives him the lie will be ready to deny him openly
when suffering comes: Look narrowly to thy heart, if there arise there Scruples
touching the Mysteries or Promises of the Gospel, bid them be gone, drive them
out of thy heart in the power of the word; these come to undermine thy
Christianity and make thee fall in a day of trial If distrusts and
diffidential fears disquiet thee, chide thy base heart, charge it to trust in
that God that never leaves those that are his: When thou art ready to sink in
the deep waters, call to thy fearful heart, ask it, why it doubts, the Lord
will be with thee to bear thee up in his Arms: When thou startest at the fiery
Furnace, telthy self, that the Lord will be there in those inward comforts
which will make outward torments tolerable; set thy heart to hate and extirpate
this cursed root of Apostasy; expost ulate with thy Soul, and say, Has God let
down a Gospel of Grace and Salvation from Heaven to us, and shall it not be
believed? Has he given us the two immutable things, his Word and his Oath, and
will thou yet be such a wretch as not to believe him? Has thy Savior Christ
sealed up the Evangelical Truth with his own blood, and will thou be so vile as
not to seal it up by Faith? Arm and strengthen thy heart against unbelief, that
when the trial comes thou may be ready to speak to thy soul, as Hilarion
did, egredere, animamea, egredere, quid times? quid dubitas? Go out, my soul,
Go out, why do thou sear or doubt? Heaven is ready for thee, and great is thy
reward there.

2. Mortify the Love of the World, the three great Lusts mentioned 1. Joh.
2.16. the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, that
is, the inordinate Love of Sensual Pleasures, Earthly Riches, and Wordly
Honor: These three make the World in the heart, and join us to the outward
World to become one with it; Unless these Concupiscential Chains be broken, we
can never be in a posture for suffering; if thou will not part with a little
Sensual Pleasure for Christ, thou will never suffer for him; if Lust blind thee
and turn thee into a Bruit, thou will be too low and base to be capable of it:
He that is melted in the fire of Lust, will not endure the flames of
Martyrdom; he that makes his belly his God will never suffer to avoid
Idolatry. It is very observable in the Prophet, that first he tells them, that
whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the heart. Hos. 4.11. and then adds,
My People ask counsel at their stocks; that is, their Idols, Verse 12. A
Sensual man, that is unhearted by his Lusts, is much fitter to fall down to an
Idol, than to suffer for Religion. Separate thy self therefore from the
sensuality of the World, that thou may never fall into the Idolatry of it:
Put away the Cup of Pleasures, that thou may be in capacity to drink of the
Cup of Sufferings; the Sensual Cup leads to stings and torments; but the
Suffering one tends to the pure Pleasures that are above. Again, if thou will
not part with one earthly Estate for Christ, thou will never suffer for him.
When our Savior bid the young man, sell all, he went away sorrowful, Math.
19.22. S. Cyprian, Facultates sue velut compedes ligaverunt; illa fuerunt
vincula, illae catenae, quibus virtus erat retardata and fides pressa, and
anima vincta. De lapsis.
speaking of some in his time that fell off in persecution, says, that their
estates were as chains and fetters to them; that they could not go and suffer
for Christ. The covetous man, who is a mental Idolater, will, if occasion
require, be an outward one too, and fall down to a Stock or Stone rather than
lose his Land. If thou would be able to suffer for Christ, thou must break
off the earthly Chains from thy soul, that, when the Temptation comes and thou
art offered, as the blessed Martyr Julitta was, to have thy estate upon the
denial of Christ, thou may then be able to give the same answer as she did,
Magd. hist. cent. 4. cap. 12.
Valeat vita, valiant meae facultates; Farewell life, farewell Estate: Take heed
that thy poor soul do not hang about Houses and Lands, when thou art called
forth to suffer for Christ and the pure Religion. Further, if thou will not
part with thy worldly honor for Christ, thou will never fuffer for him: An
ambitious man will do any thing for advancement; he will bow to an Idol, that
himself may be honored; he lives upon a blast, a little popular air, and is
too vain and light to suffer for Religion; cast away therefore the love of
Mundane Glory, that thou may bear the reproach of Christ; humble thy self
before God, that thou may be able to suffer for his Truth: Count it an
honor to suffer shame for Christ; be willing to be reproached for him who can
give thee the Spirit of glory.

3. Mortify the Hypocrisy that is in thy bosom: This sin is the art of seeming
goodness, or vice in a Vizor: It is by this that men personate more grace than
they have, and enlarge their forms of Godliness beyond the power, and make a
profession much greater than is ever filled up: It is from the remnants of this
in good men that they sometimes take false steps, and Squint at By-ends, and
start aside from God like a deceitful Bow: It is from hence that the Saints now
and then faint in their Faith, cool in their Love, and halt and make stops in
their Obedience: Watch therefore, O Christian, against this close evil,
consider the vileness of it, think with thy self how grievous a thing it is to
be false to that God, who makes all other things true to thee; the Sun to give
thee true light, and the creatures true nourishment; the blood to run right in
thy veins and the breath in thy nostrils: loath and abhor this abominable
thing, cry to heaven for more truth in thy inward parts, labor to have the
very power of Religion that thou may fill up thy profession; mourn over thy
Falls and withering Graces, check thy starting heart and charg it to maintain a
firm and close adherence to God, set thy self all manner of ways to root out
and extirpate the remnants of hypocrisy out of thy heart, that, when thou
come to suffer for Religion, thy Heart may not decieve thee: Truth in the
Heart is necessary in hearing, praying, repenting, believing, obeying but above
all it is so in suffering for Christ; hypocrisy can personate all other graces,
but usually it stumbles and discovers itself in a day of trial; therefore
mortify the secret guil that is in thy heart, that thou may stand fast under
the cross.

4. Mortify the vain superstition that is in the heart: It is natural to us to
desire the same thing as the children of Israel did, to have Gods to go before
us, to have visible images or pictures of the deity, a pompous and stately
worship, a gaudy Religion made up of humane additions and inventions, and such
a way of serving God as is accommodated to sense and framed after the
commandments of men; every one is ready to think in his false heart, what
Ticonius said with his lips, Aug. Contr. Ep. Parmen; Lib. 2. cap. 13.
Quod volumus Sanctum est, that which we will is holy; That which in the
worship of God is fine and decent, in our eyes, is so in Gods too: But consider
with thy self; he that places his Religion in such things as these, may chance
to fall in Love with that fine Whore which is decked with gold and precious
stones, Revel. 17.4. He that will have a Religion suitable to Sense, will hardly
stand to that Religion which has a Cross annexed to it: If the Command of man
be the reason of thy Worship, thou will turn to every Point as that Command
does vary: If thou can nod in Superstition, thou had need watch lest thou
fall into flat Idolatry. Remember, God is a Spirit; the true Worshippers
worship in Spirit and truth; and the true Worshippers will prove the true
sufferers: Stand to the pure Worship, thou may not fall into a corrupt one:
Worship God in Spirit, that thou may never fall down to an Idol.

CHAP. VI.
The third Direction for Suffering is the Knowledge of God. An ignorant man is
not capable of suffering; neither will every knowledge serve the turn. The
Knowledge, that prepares for Suffering, must be a well-rooted, a right
estimating, a tasting or savouring, a practical or operative Knowledge.

THe third Direction for suffering is this, if we would be in a fit posture for
suffering we must labor after the knowledge of God and the things of God: An
ignotant man, who is a man in shape, but a beast in heart, is not a person
capable of pious Suffering; He knows not the Principles of Religion, and for
what should he suffer? He has no Principles of Grace in him, and how should he
suffer? He is in darkness, and to him Truth or Error, one God or more, pure
Worship or Idolatry, are all one; he is alienated from the life of God, Ephesians.
4.18. and therefore it is not imaginable that he should dye for God or his
Truth: For him to suffer for an unknown God or Christ, is to suffer for he
knows not what. As the Samaritans worshipped they knew not what; so the
ignorant man, if he suffer, suffers for he knows not what. The Athenians had an
Altar to the unknown God, Acts. 17.23. and possibly they offered up other
Creatures to him: But for a man to offer up himself as a Sacrifice to an
unknown God, and to part with all this World when he knows nothing of a better,
is a very strange unaccountable thing. Let us therefore cry after Wisdom, and
lift up our voice for Understanding: Let us seek her as silver, and search for
her as for hid Treasures, as the Wiseman exhorts Prove. 2.3. and 4. Let our
Prayers ascend up to Heaven, to bring her down from thence; and our Endeavors
dig in the Mines of Scripture to fetch her up from thence, that so
Understanding may keep us, as it is Verse 11. Knowledge is a preservative to
him that has it; the People that know their God shall be strong, Dan. 11.32.
The young men, who have the word. of God abiding in them, are strong 1 John
2.14. Understanding is a wellspring of life to him that has it, Prove. 16.22.
It streams out in living Graces, and strengthens the Inner-man, and prepares it
for a day of trial; only it is to be remembered, that every knowledge will not
do this, but it must be a well-rooted, a right estimating, a tasting or
savouring, a practical or operative Knowledge that does it.

1. It must be a well-rooted Knowledge that will prepare us for suffering. Job
tells his Friends, That the root of the matter, or, (as the original, will bear)
the root of the wood was in him, Job 19.28. He was sorely afflicted by God and
men, yet he held fast his integrity, because he was not a man of mere Leaves,
but had a root of Knowledge and Grace in him. It is with Christians as it is
with Trees, the more the Tree is rooted in the ground, the faster it stands in
a storm; the more a Christian is rooted in Evangelical Truths, the firmer he
stands in a time of Persecution. Those of the stony ground received the word
with joy, but fell off in time of perpersecution because they had no root in
them selves, Math. 13.21. The Heavenly Truth did but lie upon the face of their
Hearts, and never sunk into them to become a virtual Principle in them. The
Truth, that we would suffer for, had not need be a loose Notion, but Truth in
the hidden parts, fastened there as a nail in a sure place, sealed up to the
heart by the holy spirit, ingrafted and innaturalized in the mind that we may
not let it go: We had need be grounded and settled in the faith, as the Apostle
speaks, Col. 1.23. Grounded as an house upon a sure Foundation, and settled as a
man sitting fast in a Chair: We had need have a good Scripture bottom, and be
firmly seated in the Truth, that we may be capable of suffering for Religion.
The Scripture tells us, that there is but one God, one only to be worshipped and
served, that his glory may not be given to another, nor his praise to graven
Images; that Idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands; that they have
mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and hear not, noses and smell not,
hands and handle not, feet and walk not, that the Makers and Worshippers of
them are like unto them, as stupid as the senseless Images are; that an Idol is
nothing, a thing of no moment or power at all, a mere nothing to be it self
made a God, or so much as to represent one. If such truths as these (of which
St. Cyprian has given a great Catalogue in his Exhortation to Martyrdom) be
intimately radicated in the heart, they will strengthen it against Idolatry.
Magd. Hist. Cent. 4. cap. 12.
The glorious Martyr Eulalia seemed to be full of them, when in her great
sufferings she sung, that Isis, Apollo, Venus, were nothing, and Maximianus the
worshipper of them was himself nothing: O let us adhere to the holy Truths in
the Word; these came down from Heaven, and like their Original are nothing but
pure Truth without any mixture of Error in them; these appear to us in the
light of the first Truth, and lead to the bliss-making Vision of him in Heaven;
and as we desire to be there, let us firmly adhere to them, especially to the
word of Christ's Patience; The Truth that must be suffered for at such at time
as this, to that we must cleave closest, because in that will be the greatest
stress and trial. It is good to be established in all Truth, but now it is in a
special manner necessary to be well fixed in the Truth that concerns the Pure
Religion, which runs very low in the Christian World, while in the mean while
the Idolatrous one is like to be triumphant.

2. It must be a right estimating Knowledge that will prepare us for suffering,
Every Notion of the things of God will not do it; he, that has an high notion
of them, but a low estimation, has but a knowledge falsely so called; he knows
them not as he ought to know them, because he knows them only to know them, but
not to value them: We must so know them, as to rate them above a World; this is
of great moment in order to Suffering: A man is capable to suffer, or not,
according as his estimate of Spiritual things is higher or lower. When the
Martyr Polycarp was urged by the Proconsul to deny Christ, Eustb, Lio. 4. cap.
15.
his answer was, A potioribus non esse transeundum ad pejora; we must not pass
from better things to worse. He esteemed Christ better then the World, and
therefore he suffered for him: But if he had esteemed the World better then
Christ, he had never been a Martyr: As the estimation is so is the man. We know
the Evangelical Truth, but if we do not rate it higher then all the World, we
shall never be able to suffer for it: It is indeed in itself a glorious Beam
let down from Heaven, a pure discovery of the great Salvation that is in Jesus
Christ, and in that respect incomparably more worth then all the World; but if
we do not so account it, we shall fall from it to embrace the World as being
better in our eyes. It is very remarkable, that when the Emperors Presect
allured the great Basil to the Arrian Doctrine, Tneod. b. 4. cap. 19.
as being but a small thing, the holy man answered, That he would not part with
one syllable of Scripture, no, not to save his life. Such an esteem of Truth is
of excellent use to make a man adhere to it in an evil day. We know the pure
worship, but if we do not prize it above all earthly things, we shall never be
able to suffer for it: It is in itself a thing exceeding precious: it is the
choicest part of life that is spent in it; the honor of God is more immediately
concerned in it then in other things. That noble Convert Galeacius Caracciolus,
who left all for Christ, prized one days Communion with Christ more than all
the Gold or Silver in the World: And if we can rate it so, we shall never turn
aside from it to the Idolatrous World, nor be carried into sin by the stream of
the Time: Or say as one going to Mass did, Eamus ad communem errorem; let us go
to the Common Error. We know the Glory of Christ is to be promoted, but if we
do not value it above our own Reputation, we shall never suffer reproach for
him. Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt, Hebx. 11.26. Reproach in itself is a vile thing, no way estimable, but
the reproach of Christ has an honor in it, and outshines all the glories of
the World. Marsacus, a French Soldier, being adjudged with others to the Fire,
and for his Military service not having, as others had, Thuan Lib. 12. An. 1553.
a With put about his neck, demands the reason why he might not be permitted to
wear such a Chain as his Fellows did, and to be made of the same illustrious
order as they were of. If we have such a Divine Spirit, as this is, in us, we
shall count in an high honor to suffer reproach for Christ. A right estimation
of things, is an excellent help to bear sufferings for Religion.

3. It must be a tasting or Savouring Knowledge that will prepare us for
suffering. Treat. of Faith. cap. 9.
It is the taste of God's Word (says Dr. lackson) that sweetens sufferings to
us, and makes us courageous to adventure upon all difficulties that are
objected to deter as from entering into the land of Promise; Such speculative
conceits of the Food of Life as we may find in the Schoolmen, are of as little
force to inflame our hearts with longing after that Heavenly Kingdom, as
Poetical Descriptions of far Countries, are to make us undertake their
Conquest: We must have Knowledge and Sense, Phil. 1.9. Theory and Experience
too, to make us stand in the evil day; we must taste and see that the Lord is
gracious, that we may be able to suffer for him. A spiritual relish of the
sweet streams of Grace that flow from him, is a choice preparative to make us
take and drink of the bitter Cup. Gotteschalcus suffered a close imprisonment
for twenty years together, merely for preaching up the Doctrine of Grace; and
it is without question, that he had not a mere Notion, but an experimental
taste of it in his Suffering: Many have the Knowledge of Christ in a way of
Speculation, but we must have the Savor of his Sweet Ointments upon our heart
that we may follow him into Suffering. We had need feel the sweetness of his
blood in the calms of Conscience, that we may Shed our own blood for him: Let
us not content our selves to have Christ only in our Bibles, but endeavor to
have a proof of him in our Hearts; a proof of his sweet smelling Sacrifice in
our inward peace; a proof of his rich Anointings in our supplies of Grace: The
experience of Christ in us, is a strong encouragement to suffer for him. He
that has a Christ only in Notion, will fall off from him, but he that has a
tried Christ will hardly leave him.

4. It must be a Knowledge practical and operative in the life, that will
prepare us for suffering: A mere notional Knowledge of Christ is not a right
one: He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar,
and the truth is not in him, 1. Joh. 2.4. Such an one contradicts himself; his
Conversation gives the lie to his Profession; the Truth is not in him in a
practical way; his Knowledge is but a Flash, a vanishing Vapor, that gives no
vital influence to his life; he will not do other Commands, much less will he
take up the Cross, which is a Command more grievous to Sense then others are.
He, that would be prepared for Sufferings, must labor for such a knowledge as
gives a proof of itself in holy Obedience: Doing is a good preparative for
suffering; he that sincerely does other Commands, will take up his Cross too,
that being a Command as well as others: He, that indeed is subject to Gods
commanding Will, will be subject to his disposing one too, which orders the
coming of the cross to us: It is the active Christian that will, if occasion
serve, be passive. Our Savior Christ does notably set forth what kind of
Christians will stand in time of Persecution, and what will fall: He that
hears his sayings and does them, builds upon the rock, and when the storm
comes, he stands fast, because he is founded upon the Rock, Math. 7.24.25. that
is, he is founded upon Christ by Faith and Ocedience; and in the Storm he
continues upon him by Patience; the Rock bears him up as a part of itself: But
he that hears Christ's sayings, and does them not, builds upon the sand, and
when the storm comes, he falls. Verse. 26, 27. Because he is upon the Sand; he
has no true Foundation for his Religion, he never did dig deep enough to come
to Self-denial, and therefore in the Storm, his fall is very great, he and his
Religion utterly perish; as when a house is broke up from the very Foundation,
or a Tree is blown up by the Roots. Therefore if we would stand firm and
unmovable in a Storm, let us labor to have Such a lively and operative
Knowledge of Christ, as may diffuse itself into an universal Obedience to his
precepts: He, that enures himself to do the Will of God, will be ready, when
the Cross comes, to take it up, and say, This is the Will of God too and must
be done.

To conclude, that we may have this excellent Knowledge, we must not only read
the holy Scriptures, but with Zuinglius, look up to Heaven for that holy Spirit
that is able to lead us into all Truth, and to seal it upon our hearts for ever.

CHAP. VII.
The fourth direction for Suffering is precious Faith; This has a triple
respect; arespect to God, his providence, Power, and Grace: Arespect to Christ,
as a propitiation, a Pattern. an Head and Helper: Arespect to the Promises; the
Promises of Gods Presence, the Promises of Confirmation, the Promises of a good
Issue.

THe fourth Direction is this, if we would be in a fit posture for Suffering,
we must labor after a precious Faith: A Dogmatical Faith will not do it; the
Devil himself, who is the Chief Agent in Persecution, has such a Faith;
neither will a temporary Faith do it, this is but a mere blossom, that falls off
in a storm of Persecution; it must be a precious Faith, a Furnace Faith, that
will endure the fiery Trial: This is the Apostles (...), Shield like a door,
broad enough to cover the Soul and all its Graces, Ephesians. 6.16. this is to be
taken above all other pieces of Spiritual Armor; it is eminent among the Graces
as the Sun is among the Planets: It is the great conquering Grace; all other
Graces act in conjunction with it. In the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews,
styled by some the little Book of Martyrs, the Saints are brought in doing and
suffering great things, but all is ascribed to Faith, as the Captain-grace of
all the rest, the first mover to other Graces: It works by Love, and not only
so but by Meekness, Obedience, Patience, running like blood and Spirits in
every part of the New Creature. Faith has a triple respect, to God, to Christ,
to the Promises, and in each of these it is of singular use in order to
sufferings.

1. Faith has a respect to God; it makes its approaches to him, nay, it fixes
the the Soul in him as in its Center. Hence it is that the righteous fears no
evil tidings, because his Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7.
The word rowles about, but he by faith stands fast in the unmovable God. Hence
it is that the Church becomes unmovable too. God is in the midst of her, she
shall not be moved, Psalm. 46.5. There are three things in God which Faith fixes
upon in order to pious Suffering.

1. Faith fixes upon his Providence. The Stoic could say, That there was no
living in a World empty of God and Providence: Much more may the Christian that
is tossed up and down in a persecuting World, say so. But his Faith tells him,
that persecution comes not by Chance, Man rages, but God reigns: The World is
as a tempestuous Sea, but God sits at the Stern and governs all: He limits the
fury of Persecutors; the wrath of man shall praise him; the remainder of wrath,
(or as it is in the original) the remainder of wraths he will restrain Psalm.
76.10. He lets out wrath in the singular number, and restrains wraths in the
plural; nothing of it comes forth but what is permitted; nothing of it is
permitted but the minor part only. He it is that orders the sufferings of the
Saints: Sense indeed sees only the outward Confusion, but Faith knows, that
there is a live, a Divine Order in it: Sense looks at the wicked hands that are
red with the blood of Innocents, but Faith looks at the holy hand that is in
it: This is one thing, that bears up good men, that their Father in Heaven
disposes of all. Spond. An. 451.
When Attila called himself, Flagellum Dei, the scurge of God; Lupus bid him
come and do as he pleased. When Christians by Faith look on Persecutors as the
rod and staff in Gods hand, they are ready to Subject themselves to the Cross:
It is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well-doing, than for
evil-doing, 1. Pet. 3.17. That interposed phrase (if the will of God be so) is
very remarkable to Believers: were there nothing in their Sufferings but the
Will of bloody men, they would bear them more hardly and unwillingly; but
because the Will of the good God is there, they endure them more easily and
freely then otherwise they would do: They know very well that God will turn all
to good; his ends are far other then those of Satan and his Instruments. Our
Savior tells the Church of Smyrna, that the Devil should cast some of them into
Prison, that they might be tried, Rev. 2.10. In which words it is to be
observed, that Gods end is joined unto Satan's act: Satan would have them in
Chains, but God would try them that their Graces might come forth as gold out
of the fire. The Assyrian Monarch meant to cut off Nations not a few, Esaias.
10.7. but God meant to chastise his People, and then to burn the Rod, Verse. 12,
and 17. He, that by Faith can see the holy Land and ends of God in Persecution,
will be ready to suffer under it.

2. Faith fixes upon his Power. When Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego were
threatened with a fiery Furnace for not worshipping the Golden Image, their
answer was, Our God is able to deliver us, Dan. 3.17. Persecutors may be
strong, but Faith assures the Soul that God is much stronger, and can deliver
his People; nay, and will do it also; not, as those three Worthies were, in a
visible manner, yet in an invisible one: Suffering Saints, have ever found by
experience that the Power of God has bore them up in their Sufferings. When
Coelocerius, in the Persecution under the Emperor Adrian, saw the supports and
patience that Faustina and Jobita had in their sufferings for Christ, he cried
out, Vere magnus Deus Christianorum; the God of the Christians is truly great.
When Justin Martyr saw the Martyrs cheerfully dying for their Religion, he
thereupon fell off from Plato's School to Christ: St. Paul the great
experienced Sufferer, exhorts Timothy to be partaker of the Afflictions of the
Gospel, according to the power of God, 2 Timothy 1.8. that is he should suffer not
in his own power, but in God's. Think thus with thy self, O Christian, God can
and will give such internal Supports and Comforts as shall more then
counterpoise all thy Sufferings for him: Fix thy Faith upon his Power, and thou
can not fail in the Trial.

3. Faith fixes upon his Grace and mercy: Men are cruel, but God is gracious
and merciful to his People at all times, but especially in a time of Trial: He
chooses them in the Furnace of Affliction, Esaias. 48.10. When men reprobate them
as the offscouring of all things, then God does as it were choose them afresh;
I mean, his electing love, which was in his heart toward them, as early as
eternity it self, does then break out in fresh acts of Grace toward them. St.
Paul tells the Philippians, that it was freely given to them in the behalf of
Christ not only to believe on him, but to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29.
Faith which is the first gift, and Suffering which is the last in this life,
do both issue out from the Fountain of Grace. Cast thy self, O Christian, upon
the Grace and Mercy of thy good God; that Grace, which calls, justifies,
sanctifies thee, will also give thee the gift of suffering; that mercy, which
spares thee in thy ordinary duties, will in a time of Suffering be indulgent
over thee in a more then ordinary manner: The mercy of God will be upon us
according as we trust in him; the sweetest Strains of Mercy are reserved for
the highest acts of Faith, which are seen more in Sufferings then in other
things. If we carry Faith with us into Prisons and fiery Furnaces, Goodness and
Mercy will follow us thither in an eminent way. Faith has a respect to Christ,
it comes to him as to a Center of rest, receives him as a precious gift, leans
on him as a sure foundation; nay, (...), it individuates and appropriates him
to the Soul. There are three things in Christ which Faith looks to in order to
Suffering.

1. Faith looks to him as a Propitiation: It hides in his Wounds, as in the
clefts of the Rock; it washes the soul in that atoning blood that cleanses from
all sin, Hereby the Christian is so strengthened in the Innerman that he can
glory in Tribulations, Romans 5.3. The World persecutes, but he has peace with
God; man hates, but he has the Love of God in his Heart; Sufferings may come,
but they fall only upon the outward man; there is no sting within, nor guilt
pressing upon Conscience. When Luther was in fear of an Apoplexy, he cried out,
Feri, Domine, feri, paratus sum, quia a peccatis absolutus; strike, Lord,
strike, I am ready, because absolved from Sin. A Christian, that is washed from
sin in the blood of Jesus, may bear the persecuting stroke; he has refrigerium
Christi, a sweet refreshment from Christ's Atonement in that inward peace,
which is made by it in Conscience.

2. Faith looks to Christ as a Pattern: He is not only a Propitiation to be
trusted in, but a Pattern to be imitated by us: He suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Whom should we follow
but our Lord and Savior? How can we Spare our own blood, if we be washed in
his? He drunk up the bitter Cup to the bottom, and shall we not take some drops
of it? He bore the wrath of God for us, and shall we not bear the wrath of man
for him? He learned obedience by the things which he suffered, and how much
more should we poor Creatures do so? He entered by suffering into glory; and why
should we dream of another way thither? If we would be ready to suffer, let us
look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was
set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame; Let us consider him
that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest we be weary
and faint in our minds, Hebr. 12.2, 3. The noble Alzearius, being asked, Arr.
Tact. 161.
how he could so patiently bear injuries, answered thus; Converto me ad
injurias Christi, I turn me to the injuries done to my Savior. We must look to
Christ's Cross, that we may bear our own it being now, no longer mere
suffering, but sanctified by the sufferings of our Savior.

3. Faith looks to Christ as an Head and Helper: He is not a mere Pattern, but
an Head and Helper too; Were there no other supporting Grace for the Saints but
that little in their own bosom, they might expect to fail in the Trial; but
there is an inexhaustible Fountain of Grace in their Head in Heaven, and that
will bear them up in all their Sufferings. This made St. Paul glory in
Persecutions, because the Power of Christ would rest upon him; and when he was
weak in himself, he was strong in that, 2. Cor. 12.9, 10. St. Cyprian, speaking
of Christ in the Martyrs, says, Qui pro nobis mortem semel vicit, Epist. 9. ad
Mort.
semper vincit in nobis; he that once overcame death for us, alwais overcomes
it in us: This the Martyr Blandina, though weak in body, found by experience,
being bore up in the midst of Torments by the Power of Christ, Eusebius. L. 5.
cap. 1.
and finding a fresh refreshment; as often as she said, Christiana sum, I am a
Christian. The same was seen in the Martyr Sanctus, who bore various Torments
above all humane Strength, because he was bedewed and confirmed out of the
Celestial Fountain of living water flowing down from Christ. Whatever thou
do, O Christian, be sure to apply thy self by Faith unto the neverfailing
Fountain of Grace in him, that thou may have such Supplies of Grace, as may
bear thee up in an evil day.

3. Faith has a respect to the Promises; These are the Breasts of Consolation,
the Channels in which the Grace in Gods heart flows down to the Sons of men:
Here the Christian may provide himself with Cordials against the time of
suffering. I shall here only mention three kinds of Promises, for Faith to live
upon in a day of Trial.

1. Faith must live upon the Promises of Gods gracious Presence: God tells his
People, that he will be with them in the fire and in the water, Esaias. 43.2.
that is, in all danger and calamities whatsoever; neither shall this Presence
be for a little time only, but constant and perpetual: He will never leave
them, nor forsake them, Hebr. 13.5. This is a choice comfort to good men, that
in Tribulations they are not left alone, but God is with them. St. Paul had
experience of this; all men forsook him, but God stood with him and strengthened
him, 2. Tim. 4.16, 17. The Presence of God was to him more then a World, and
able to support him against all his Adversaries. St. Cyprian, speaking of the
Martyrs in his time, Epist. 9.
says, That God was not a mere spectator in their sufferings, but ipse
luctatur in nobis, ipse concongreditur, ipse in certamine coronat, pariter and
coronatur; he strives in us, he encounters our adversaries, he crowns us in the
Battle, and is himself crowned therein. Let us therefore by Faith rest upon the
promise of Gods Presence, and assure our hearts that he will be with us in our
Suffering: All the Promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ, and his being
Immanuel, God with us in the humane Nature, is a Pledge to the Saints, that God
will be with them in their Sufferings for him.

2. Faith must live up on the promises of Confirmation. The Apostle tells the
Corinthians, That God shall confirm them unto the end; and adds this as a
reason, God is faithful by whom ye are called into the fellowship of his son
Jesus Christ our Lord, 1, Cor. 1.89. God does as it were pawn his faithfulness
upon it, that they being once brought into union with Christ, shall never fall
off, but be confirmed unto the end: The gates of hell shall never prevail
against them; they shall be kept through faith unto salvation; nay, and their
Faith shall be kept too. Christ did not only pray for Peter, that his Faith
fail not, but he prays so for all the faithful: Oh how comfortable are such
promises to the Saints! Let us by faith lay up these rich Cordials in our
hearts to keep up from fainting in Persecution.

3. Faith must live upon the Promises of a good Issue: All the paths of the
Lord are mercy and truth to his people, Psalm. 23.10. All things shall work
together for their good, Romans 8.28. Persecutions and all. God alters the
property of his Peoples Afflictions, and by an Almighty Alchimy turns Dross
into Gold; he makes persecution turn to the refining of the Saints Graces, and
to the glorifying of his own great name: O! what great good things does he
bring out of evil? How much of his Love and faithfulness may be seen in the
Cross? Let us therefore fix our hearts upon such promises, that, passing
through the fiery Trial, we may see the good end the Lord makes of it.

CHAP. VIII.
The fifth Direction for Suffering, is Love to God and Christ. Love to God; such
as value him desire him, delight in him, and will and endeavor to serve and
honor him: Love to Christ, such as value him, desire him, delight in him, and
will and endeavor to serve and honor him.

THe fist Direction is this; if we would be in a fit posture for suffering, we
must get a sincere Love to God and Christ; St. De Civit. Lib. 14. cap. 28.
Austin says, That two Loves made two Cities; the Love of self made the
Earthly City, the Love of God makes the Heavenly one; the persecutor dwells in
the one, and the Martyr in the other. There is an assimilating efficacy in Love
whereby it casts the mind into the Mould of the thing beloved; Siterram amas
terra es; si Deum, quidni dicerem Deus es. Aug.
If thou love Earth, thou art Earth; if thou Love God, thou art partaker of the
Divine Nature, and do resemble God himself. The greatest impediment to pious
suffering is the Love of the World and self; and the greatest preparative to it
is the Love of God and Christ. I shall first speak of love to God, as a
preparative thereunto; and then of Love to Christ as such.

1. Love to God is a preparative to suffering: If we love him above all things,
no outward Object will draw us from him; if we love him with all the heart, no
inward Lust will make us fall from him. Love to him stands in four things; each
of which will dispose us to suffer for him.

1. Love to him stands in an high valuation of him; it esteems him to be such
an one as he is set forth in Scripture: To be the only wise God, the only
Potentate, the only One that is good; to be all these essentially, fontally,
supereminently: He, that has such an estimate of him, will be ready to suffer
for him: To such an one it is folly to learn the only Wise, weakness to leave
the only Potentate, misery to leave the only Good; And how can he leave so
excellent an Object? to such an one it is prudence to adhere to the only Wise,
strength to adhere to the only Potentate, happiness to adhere to the only Good;
And how can he choose but adhere to him? It was the saying of an Ancient, Minut.
(...). 18.
Tum digne Deum aestimamus cum inaestimabilem dicimus; then we rightly esteem
God, when we account him inestimable. Estates, Bodies, Lives may be valued, but
he is infinitely beyond all estimation: All creatures are but as shadows, and
little drops of being in comparison of him; It is a just debt we owe to him, to
rate him incomparably above all things, and in so doing the Soul it self is
ennobled and made fit to suffer for him: As a man by valuing the World above
itself, becomes base and brutish, and like the Beasts that perish; so a man by
estimating God above all things, becomes heroical and Divine, and like the
Angels that live altogether upon him: Such an one is able to part with life in
the Channel, to have it in the Fountain; to let go all other things, to have
all in the one All-sufficient God.

2. Love to God stands in holy D sires after him; it makes the soul pant after
him; as the heart pants after the Waterbrooks, Duleissimo Deo totus immergi
cupit and inviscerari. Carthus.
and go out of itself in holy anhelations after union with him: Such is the
Heavenly property of it, that it aspires to be one Spirit with him, to have
idem Velle and idem Nolle, to will as he wills, and nill as he nills; and when
once our Wills are melted into his; every thing that comes from him will be
welcome to us. Though Flesh and Blood may cry out of Suffering, as a very hard
thing, yet Love will say, that nothing can be wiser or better then that which
our Father orders and lays out for us. If desire after God as the supreme good
once put our Souls into motion, we shall follow him not into Ordinances only,
but into Sufferings also: His gracious Presence is in both; In Ordinances it is
in a good measure, but in Sufferings, which are the highest Services on Earth,
it is in a more eminent manner. God does not barely say to his afflicted
people, I am with thee; but I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea,
I will uphold thee with the right hand of my Righteousness; Esaias. 41.10. many
words are heaped up together to impart the excellency of his presence with
them. O let our hearts burn within us with ardent desires after him, that we
may be able to bear the fiery Trial at its coming.

3. Love to God stands in an holy Complacence in him; it makes the Soul rest
upon him as Noah's Dove did upon the Ark, and Center in him as in the supreme
Good. Holy desires end in inward satisfaction; David thirsting after God comes
to have his soul satisfied as with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.5. And
Christians that breathe after him, come to have sweet spiritual joys and
delights, tastes of Heaven and drops from the pure rivers of pleasures that are
above: These are able to sweeten the bitterest sufferings. It is said of the
Thessalonians, that they received the word in much affliction with joy of the
holy Ghost. 1 Thessal. 1.6. The Gospel does not go alone, but Affliction
accompanies it; neither will affliction go down alone, but the joy of the holy
Ghost sweetens it: The blessed Martyrs have experimentally found these divine
joys in their hearts. It is said of Alexander the Martyr, Magd. hist. Cent. 2.
Chapt. 12.
famous for his Love to God, that ne ingemuit, he did not so much as fetch a
groan in the midst of his Torments; and doubtless he had strong consolations
within to bear him up in his Sufferings. The Martyr Algerius being in prison
wrote thus; in the dark Dungeon I find a Paradise of Pleasure; in a place of
sorrow dwells tranquillity; in an Infernal Cave I have joy of Soul: O how good
is the Lord! How easy and sweet his yoke! Such Heavenly Cordials will bare up
Christians in the greatest trials: O let us labor to delight our souls in God,
that we may be able to suffer for him.

4. Love to God stands in an holy Benevolence toward him; it delivers and
surrenders up the whole man to him; it wills and endeavors (so far as a poor
Creature can to an Infinite Creator) to bring all service and glory to him.
Thus the 24. elders fell down before him and cast down their crowns, saying Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, Revel. 4.10, 11.
renouncing themselves they referr all that they have and are to him alone: This
is an excellent preparative to Suffering. If we would indeed serve him, we must
be willing to suffer for him; for that is the highest Service that can be done
to him on earth: If we would indeed glorify him, we must be ready to Suffer for
him; for that is the greatest glory that we can possibly give unto him; therein
we do practically declare to all the World, that God is our All, Riches,
Honors, Relations, Life it self, are as nothing to him. O let us labor to
surrender up our selves to him in other things, that we may not fail to make
the greatest surrender of all in Suffering.

2. Love to Christ is a preparative to suffering: Ignatius (whose Motto was,
Amor meus crucifixus, My Love was crucified) would suffer any thing for Christ.
The Martyr Felicitas was so in love with Christ, Magd. hist. Cent. 2. cap. 12.
that she would not only suffer herself, but have her seven sons suffer for him
also. Love to Christ stands in four things, each of which will dispose us to
suffer for him.

1. Love to Christ stands in an high Valuation of him; it esteems him
altogether precious: Precious in his Person, being Immanuel, God and man in
one; precious in his atoning sufferings, which (being by his Deity elevated
into a kind of infinity) were enough to pay for the sin of a World; precious in
his holy words; his Mysteries being heights, his Commands rectitude, his
Promises Grace: precious in the rich Treasures of Grace, which are in him, and
everflowing out toward Believers: He that thus esteems of him will be ready to
suffer for him. To leave his atoning sufferings is to run into Hell; to leave
his words is to run into all Error; to leave his Treasures of Grace is to run
into Spiritual Poverty: And how can we leave him? To adhere to his Atonement is
peace and comfort; to adhere to his Words is to keep the way of life; to adhere
to his Treasures of Grace, is to have continual influences of grace from him:
And how can we choose but adhere to him? St. Paul counted all things dross and
dung for him, Phil. 3.8. St. Cyprian, in his Exhortation to Martyrdom, gives
this as one rule, that we should nihil Christo praeponere, prefer nothing
before Christ. To esteem any thing better then him, is the way to turn
Apostate; but to esteem him better then all, is the way to stand in a day of
Trial.

2. Love to Christ stands in holy desires after him; it causes a man to long
and faint for him, and, as one in extremity, to cry out, Give me Christ, or
else I dye: Without the laver of his blood, I dye in my sins; without the
supplies of his Grace, I dye in my wants: O! that I may have him! the Spouse in
the Canticles was sick of Love, languishing and ready to fall into a Spiritual
Swoon with her passionate desires after him and his gracious Presence; nothing
in all the World could cure or satisfy her, but his all-desirable self. That
soul that truly desires Christ, does not desire aliud praeter illum, aliud
tanquam illum, aliud post illum; any thing besides him, any thing equally to
him, any thing after him: Such an ardor and holy flame of Love, as this is, is
an extatical thing; it makes a man go out of himself to seek after him; it will
sell all for him, and, like those virgin souls, Revel. 14.4. follow him
whithersoever he goes; not only into the Banqueting House of Ordinances, but
into Sufferings and Afflictions for him. The Martyr Gordius had such an ardent
Love to Christ. Magd. hist. Cent. 4. cap. 12.
that he was ready to suffer, mill mortes, a thousand deaths for the name of
Jesus Christ, O let us Labor to have our hearts kindled and inflamed with holy
desires after him, that we may be able to stand and endure the fiery trial.

3. Love to Christ stands in an holy Complacence in him, it makes the soul
enjoy a kind of heaven in his Presence, and delight itself in his satisfying
Sweetness. The Spouse in the Canticles was ravished, and, as it were, swallowed
up in him; the savor of his sweet Ointments lay upon her heart; his Love was
better to her then all the Wine of the World; she sat under the broad shadow of
his Merits with great delight, Pardons and Graces dropping down from the Tree
of Life upon her; he is in her eyes, totus desideria, all loves or desires;
every thing in him has a divine sweetness in it. This spiritual joy and
delight in Christ our Savior, is an excellent preparative in order to
suffering: The Church will have him lie all night between her breasts Cant.
1.13. all night, that is, in times of fear and temptation, that his presence
may sweeten the bitterest condition to her. The Cross of Jesus, if we taste the
sweetness of it, will turn a Marah into joy and comfort: Tua praesentia,
Domine, Laurentio ipsam craticulam dulcem fecit; thy presence, O Lord, made the
tormenting Gridiron sweet to St. Lawrence, says an Ancient. Philip Lantgrave
of Hesse, being a long time Prisoner under Charles the fifth, felt the divine
consolations of Martyrs supporting of him. O let us labor to taste more of the
sweetness of Christ, to find his blood in every Pardon, his Spirit in every
Grace, his Wine-cellar in every Ordinance, that the Divine Comforts, that we
experimentally feel in him, may sweeten the Cross to us.

4. Love to Christ stands in an holy Benevolence toward him; it surrenders up
the whole man to him; it endeavors to serve and honor him to the utmost. Thus
those many thousands cry out, worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing. Rev. 5.11, 12. they give all to Christ. This is an excellent
Preparative for Suffering: If we would serve him in other things, we must serve
him in suffering for him; if we would honor him in obedience to other
Commands, we must honor him in taking up the Cross too. St. Paul desired, that
Christ might be magnified in his body, whether it were by life or by death:
Phil. 1.20. If he lived he would magnify Christ by Active Obedience; and if he
died, he would do it by Passive: Either way he would have Christ glorified in
him. Tot laudant-ora, quot sunt vulnera. Magd. hist. Cent. 4. cap. 12.
The Martyr Romanus, having a multitude of wounds in his body, thanked the
Persecutor for opening so many mouths to glorify Christ. In nothing is Christ
so much glorified as, in his suffering Saints; therein they demonstrate the
highest Love, Seal up the Evangelical Truths with their own blood; practically
prefer Christ before all the World, and offer up themselves for him who gave
himself a Sacrifice for them. O let us labor to make a total resignation of our
selves to him, that if sufferings come, we may be able to bear them for his
sake.

CHAP. IX.
The sixth Direction for suffering, is a lively hope of eternal Life: Hope
assures us, that there is another World, that the good things of it exceed
those of this, that we have an interest in them: Hope disposes us for them;
Hope waits for them unto the end.

THe sixth Direction is this: If we would be in a fit posture for suffering, we
must get a lively hope of eternal Life: As our life is a Sea, Hope is compared
to an Anchor, which makes us stand steady in a storm: As our life is a warfare,
Hope is compared to an Helmet, which covers the soul in times of danger: As the
body lives Spirando, by breathing, so the Soul lives Sperando, by hoping. A
man cannot drown so long as his head is above water; Hope lifts up the head,
and looks up to the Redemption and Salvation that is to come in another World
in its fullness and perfection. Hope does three things; it assures good things
to come; it disposes us for them; it waits for them unto the end: Each of which
will be of singular use to fit us for pious Sufferings.

1. Hope assures good things to come: It is called the Hope of Salvation,
Thessal. 5.8. the hope of Glory, Romans 5.2. the hope of eternal Life, Tit. 1.2.
because it assures these things: To this I shall speak in three Particulars

1. Hope assures us that there is another World, called in Scripture the World
to come; without this there can be no foundation for pious Suffering; no man
can freely part with this World unless he be assured of another: If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable, 1 Cor.
15.19. Miserable indeed, to be persecuted out of one World, and to have never
another to go to. If Christians were in as dark a case, as the Emperor Adrian
was, when dying he cried out, O my poor soul, whither art thou going? they
could be in no rational capacity of suffering: But hope assures them, that
there is another world, where things are administered in a different manner then
they are here in this: Duas vitas novit Ecclesia, una est in fide alterain
specie, una in tempore, alterain aeternitate, una in labor, altera in requie;
una cum host pugnat, altera sine host regnat, Aug. in Joh. Tract. 124.
Here good men bear the Cross, there they wear the Crown; here they are black
with reproaches, there they shine as the Sun; here they are tossed at Sea,
there they enter into rest; here they drink of the bitter Cup, there of the
Rivers of Pleasures above; here they are in the bloody hands of men, there in
the arms of a gracious God: Hope is sure, that these things are so; God's
Promises secure them, and, that we might have strong consolation, God's Oaths
is superadded also: Our Savior has sealed up the truth of them with his own
blood, and we may venture our dearest lives upon them. Hence it is, that hope is
said to be the anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast, entering into that within
the Vail. Hebr. 6.19. Other Anchors may break, but this will never fail; other
Anchors are fastened in this World, but this enters into that within the Vail,
and fixes it self in the unmovable Heaven; and in respect thereof, Christians
become in some measure unmovable in the midst of all the storms here below. St.
Cyprian says of the Christians in his time, that their Faith and Hope did
stand unmovable and unshaken inter ipsas seculi ruinas, Ad Demetrianum.
among the ruins of the World. When the excellent Melancton was threatened by
his enemies, Mel. Ad. in vita ejus.
that they would not leave him a footstep in Germany, he replied, That he
should have one in Heaven: In like manner when a poor persecuted Christian is
ready to be cast out of this World, he may comfort himself with this, that he
has another to go to, where he shall have better usage: and a reward for his
sufferings.

2. Hope assures us, that the good things of the World to come do incomparably
exceed the things of this World. If the things of this world were the better,
no man would leave better for worse; nay, if they were but equal, no man would
part with that in possession for that in expectation; But Hope assures us, that
the good things of the World to come do far transcend those that are in this
World: The mansions in glory are better then the houses of clay; the
incorruptible inheritance exceeds a fading one; eternal Life is much more
precious then temporal; the crowns of immortality above outshine all the titles
of honor here below; the pure rivers of Pleasure in Heaven are far sweeter then
the delights on earth; the fruiton of God (who is the supreme Good, Center of
Souls, Sabbath of rest, and Fountain of blessedness) cannot but be infinitely
beyond the enjoyment of Creatures. A good assurance, that these things are so,
will dispose us, to part with the lesser concerns here below, that we may enjoy
the greater that are above. We read of some Worthies, that took joyfully the
spoiling of their goods, because they had in Heaven a better and enduring
substance, Hebr. 10.34. And again, of some, that would not accept deliverance,
because they would obtain a better resurrection, Heb. 11.35. Suadows and
trifles were to be parted with, rather then Masiy and durable Felicity; the
bubble or vapor of a transitory Life was to be let go, rather then an
everlasting one. When in the Persecution under Dioclesian, the Martyrs were
asked, What made them bear such torments; and what they expected after all
their sufferings? They made this answer, That they did hope for those good
things, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, which God has prepared for them that Love him. We see what bore
up their spirits in their sufferings; Let us labor to have an high sense of
the excellencies of the World to come, that, if need be, we may part with all
for it.

3. Hope assures our interest in the good things of the World to come: And here
two things are to be noted; the one is this, Hope in its initial Existence
assures our interest in them fundamentally; he that has a true lively hope of
them, has a real interest in them; every right Grace touches upon Heaven, and
gives a right to it; but Hope does it in a kind of peculiar way; it enters in
within the Vail, and in a sort takes possession of the other World: As the ship
is at Land in its Anchor, so the Soul is in Heaven in its Hope; and he that
has a true interest there, will not part with it in a time of suffering: The
Anchor, being in Heaven, and fastened in the unmovable felicity there, will
hold out in a Storm: Such an one will reckon, as St. Paul did, that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. Or, if a comparison be made, the
sufferings in respect of the Glory, will be but as a drop of wormwood, to a
vast Sea of infinite Sweetness. The other thing is this; Hope in its full
stature assures our interest in the good things to come sensibly; he that has
a plerophory of Hope, certainly knows that he has an interest in them; We know
that we have passed from death to Life, says Sr. John, 1, Joh. 3.14. As if the
Apostle had said, we are in the borders of Heaven, and we know it as it were
sensibly, as we do our passage from one place to another. Holy Job says, I
know that my Redeemer lives; and, maugre all the Worms, in my Flesh I shall
see God, Job. 19.25, 26. He was sure of the blissmaking Vision, and could look
through the dust to Immortality: Such a full hope ushers in a kind of Paradise
into the Soul, and admirably fits it to bear sufferings; the internal Suavity
is able to sweeten any outward Condition. The Learned Rivet, at his dying hour,
brake forth into these words, Expecto, credo, persevero, dimoveri nequeo, Dei
Spiritus meo Spiritui testatur, me esse ex Filiis suis, O amorem ineffabilem! I
expect, believe, persevere, cannot be moved; Gods Spirit witnesses to mine,
that I am one of his Children; O! ineffable Love! Let us Labor to have, not
only a lively hope, that we may have a title to Heaven, but a full hope, that
we may know our title to it: This will be an high Cordial in an evil day, and
make us able, whatever the sufferings be, to go on triumphantly and with full
Sails to Heaven.

2. Hope does not only assure the good things to come, but disposes us for
them: Hope is not an idle Dream or Notion, but it is an active and lively
thing; it does not merely look to the glory above, but puts the Soul into a
posture for it: Every one, that has in him the hope of so great a thing as the
seeing the blessed God is, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1, Joh. 3.3.
He knows Darkness cannot have communion with Light; unclean eyes cannot be
opened in so pure a place as Heaven is; the earthly heart is too gross to be in
the Region of holy Spirits; he that drowns himself in Sensual Pleasures, is not
meet to drink of the pure Rivers that are above: Malicious Spirits cannot be
capable of dwelling there, where infinite Love opens it self in all its
sweetness: The false-hearted Hypocrite can never be admitted to see Truth in
the Original, nor the evil man to drink Goodness at the Fountainhead: He
therefore that has a right hope of being with God in Heaven, will purify
himself for such an high estate; he will labor to have more of the light of
Faith to fit him for that of Vision; to have more purity of heart, to make him
meet to see the holy One; to have more of Heaven in his affections, to prepare
him for that blessed Region; to have more spiritual delight here, that he may
be capable of entering into the joy of his Lord hereafter; to have his heart
more filled with holy Love, that he may be in an apt posture for the rich
effusions of Love in Heaven; to have more truth and goodness in his heart, that
he may be the more ready to enjoy the Fountain and Fullness of both, I mean, the
blessed God who is All in All: Thus this lively Hope makes a man meet for
Heaven, and in so doing it makes him meet for those Sufferings that lie in his
way thither: That Purity, which disposes him to enjoy God in Heaven, does also
dispose him to suffer for him on Earth; and the greater disposition is to
Heaven, the Center of blessedness, the stronger will the motion be to break
through all difficulties that are in the passage thereunto: Let us therefore
get a purilying Hope, that we may be fit for the Cross.

3. Hope does not only dispose us for the good things to come, but it waits for
them unto the end. Hope is a waiting grace, it makes a Christians life to be a
perpetual waiting: All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change
come, says Job, Chap. 14. Verse. 14. Job had many changes, but he waited for
that great one, which should bring him into a state of unchangeaale happiness.
Whatever holy men are a doing still they are in a waiting posture: When Jacob
was blessing his Sons, he did not for get this, but broke out in a Sudden sweet
Ejaculation, I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord, Genesis 49.18. Hope makes
Christians to wait for the good things to come at all times, but in a Special
manner in time of Sufferings: St Paul speaking first of the suffering Saints,
and then of the groaning World, Expresses himself thus; We our selves also,
which have the First Fruits of the Spirit, groan within our selves, waiting for
the Adoption, the Redemption of our Body, for we are saved by Hope, Romans 8.23,
24. Here we may observe the true state and posture of the Saints; Afflictions
make then groan, but the Divine Hope, the Firstfruits of the Spirit, make them
wait for a better World, in which Adoption and Redemption shall have their
complete perfection: A Chrisstian in Afflictions being tormented in this World,
will wait for a better. The Martyr Agatha, having her Breasts cruelly cut off
for Religion, told the persecutor, That yet she had two breasts remaining, such
as he could not touch; the one of Faith, the other of Hope; which afforded her
great Comforts in her Torments: Faith adheres to the Promise, Hope waits for
the good things promised; both strengthen in a day of Trial: It is the very
nature of Divine Hope, to wait for the good things to come: When the Sun of
Prosperity Shines, it waits in a way of obedience; Lord, I have hoped for thy
salvation, and do thy Commandments, says David, Psalm. 119.166. He waited in a
way of obedience to Gods Commands. And when the storm of Perfecution comes, it
waits in a way of Patience. Hence the Apostle speaks of the patience of hope:
1. Thessal. 1.3. That hope, which in Prosperity waited in a way of Obedience,
will in Adversity wait in a way of Patience: Hope would have the Christian to
be always waiting for the upper World, but when the Cross comes, it presses
upon him more vehemently, and will speak after this manner to him; what, have
thou waited for the great reward in Heaven in Duties and Ordinances, and will thou not wait for it in Sufferings too? Heaven is the same still, and
Sufferings are not worthy to be compared with it: Do but suffer a little, and
thou shall be there. When the Martyr Ananias, in the Persian Persecution,
seemed to tremble at the approaching Cross, Pusices spoke thus to him, Sozom.
L. 2. cap. 10.
Paulisper, O senex oculos, claude, nam statim lumen Dei videbis; Shut thine
eyes a little, O old man, and immediately thou shall see the light of God.
Excellent is that of the Apostle: Our light Affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while
we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen;
for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal; 2. Cor. 4.17, 18. Here it is observable, Affliction is light and
momentary, but glory is a weight and eternal, there is no proportion between
them: If by hope we look at the invisible and eternal things, this will support
our hearts, that it is but a little short suffering, and we shall be in
Heavenly bliss for ever: Let us therefore labor after a waiting hope, that we
may patiently bear the Cross.

CHAP. X.
The Seventh Direction for Suffering is holy Fear; not the Fear of man, but of
God; not a diffidential Fear, but a fiducial one; not a servile Fear, but a
filial one: Holy Fear looks at Sin more then at suffering; at Sufferings in
Hell more then at those on Earth; at Spiritual and Eternal losses more then at
Carnal and Temporal.

THe Seventh Direction is this, if we would be in a fit posture for suffering
we must get an holy Fear in our hearts. The wise Solomon begins his Proverbs
with this; The fear of the Lord is the beginning or head of Knowledge, Prove
1.7. and ends his Ecclesiastes with this, That to fear God and keep his
Commandments is the whole duty of Man, Eccl. 12.13. Other things appertain to
the Beast or the Devil, but holy Fear is the All of man; it makes him a perfect
man, not only to do Gods Will, but to suffer under it. In speaking to this I
shall first consider what that Fear is which prepares us for Suffering, and
then how it prepares us thereunto.

1. I shall consider what that Fear is which prepares us for Suffering; and
this I shall dispatch in three things.

It is not the Fear of man but of God that does it: It is not the fear of man,
that can do it; God gives us a charge against this, Who art thou that thou
should be afraid of a man that shall dye? Esaias. 51.12. There is no cause to
fear a weak piece of Clay, a very Breath, a fading Leaf; he must dye and there
is an end of him, and all his thoughts perish with him. The wise man tells us,
That the fear of man brings a Snare, Prove. 29.25. It made Abraham dissemble
as if he had no wife; David change his behavior as if he had no reason; Peter
curse and swear as if he knew not his Master: This Fear disposes to apostasy,
and must be cured by that Fear of God, which disposes to suffering: When we are
ready to drown in worldly sorrow, it is of singular use to spring another, a
godly sorrow in our hearts; and when the Fear of man puts us into trembling
fits, it is an excellent remedy to raise up the Fear of God in our Souls above
the other. Thus God directs his People not to fear the confederate Enemies, but
to sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and to let him be their fear and their
dread, Esa. 8.12, 13. He is Lord of Hosts, God over all, and the fear of him
should be above all other fears; this is the way to have him to be a Sanctuary
to us, as it follows. If we Fear him he will be an inviolable place of retreat
where we may repose our selves in a day of Trouble.

2. It is not a diffidential Fear, but a fiducial one that does it: A
diffidential Fear makes the mind, as Meteors in the Air, to hang in suspense,
and, in case Affliction come, to fail under the burden. St. Peter walked upon
the water to go to jesus; but when he saw the wind boistrous, he was afraid,
and began to sink, Math. 14.29, 30. By Faith he walked, and by diffidence he
began to sink. Non ambularet, nisi crederet nec mergeretur nisi dubitaret.
Aust. de Verbis Romans Sermon. 14.
Our condition is the very same; in the waves of a troublesome World we stand
by Faith, but fall by diffidence; That Fear, which prepares us for suffering,
must be a fiducial one. Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their
help and their shield, Psalm. 115.11. Holy fear is and must be in Conjunction
with faith. Fear flies from the evils of Sin and Hell; Faith closes in with the
Promises of Grace and Glory, both concur to make a man fit for suffering; and
such a sufferer shall have God for his help and shield.

3. It is not a servile Fear, but a filial one that does it: He that has a
mere servile fear of the wrath to come, may forbear an act of sin; but he has
the Love of it in his heart, adbuc vivit in eo peccandi voluntas, the Love of
sin lives in him still, as an Ancient has it. Such an one is not in a fit case
to suffer for the Truth; he has not a Love to God to move him to it, nor a
capacity to have Heaven after it; and how can he suffer? It is very hard for a
man to suffer for a God that he Loves not: Or part with the good things of This
World, when he has no hope of those in a better. That Fear, which prepares for
Suffering, is not servile, but filial; it stands not in conjunction with the
love of Sin, but with the Love of God; the nature of it is such, that he that
has it will displease man rather then offend God; part with a World rather
then let go the Truth and pure Worship; nay, and lay down his Life rather then
forfeit the Divine Presence and Favor which are better then Life. Thus much
touching the nature of that Fear, which prepares us for suffering.

2. I come to consider how holy Fear does prepare us for sufferings; and this I
shall open in three things.

1. Holy fear looks upon sin as an evil much greater then any suffering:
suffering is opposite to the Creature, but sin is opposite to the infinite God;
it is a Rebellion to his Sovereignty, a contradiction to his Holiness, a
provocation to his Justice; an abuse to his Grace; a stain cast, as much as in
us, lies, upon his Glory; nay, as the Schools speak, it is a kind of Deicidium,
it strikes in a sort at the very life and being of God; it wishes, that there
were none at all; and, if it could effect it, there should be none: Suffering
does not make a man worse then he was before, but sin does it: Those Saints
that were destitute, afflicted, tormented, wandering in Deserts, and Mountains,
and Dens and Caves of the Earth, were yet such excellent ones, that the World
was not worthy of them, Hebr. 11.37, 38. On the other hand, Antiochus
Ephiphanes (who was, as his name imports, illustrious and glorious in the
World) was yet but a vile person, and was made such by his wickedness.
Suffering strikes at the estate or body of man, but sin strikes at his Soul, a
thing more precious then a World; nay, and at the Divine Image there, which is
more worth then the Soul it self: It does, where it can prevail, turn men into
Beasts in its sensual lusts, or into Devils in its spiritual Wickednesses:
Suffering may have good, nay great good in it, but sin is evil, only evil; it is
called by St. James (...), the superfluity or excrement of all evil, Jam. 1.21.
It contains all evils in it; and if all evils (says a worthy Divine) were to
have a scum or excrement, crement, sin is it, as being the abstracted
quintessence of all evil, and having nothing at all of good in it. Sin, says
Bradwardine, is a thing not to be done, pro quantiscunque bonis lucrandis, aut
pro quantiscunque malis praecavendis; for the gaining never so great a good, or
for the avoiding never so great an evil. He that has this holy Fear in his
heart, will choose suffering as the lesser evil, rather then sin, which is much
the greater. When Antitiochus Epiphanes brought forth Wheels, Rodds, Hooks,
Rakes, Racks, Caudrons, Joseph. Ant.
Cages, Gridirons, Gantlets, Awles, Bellows, Brazen Pots, and Frying-pans,
before Salamona and here seven sons to terrify them, they could not be induced
by all his tormenting Engines to trespass so far as to eat of a little
sacrificed Swines-flesh, to save themselves from a cruel death. It was the
saying of Anselm, That if Sin were set before him on one hand, and Hell on the
other, he would rather choose Hell then sin. Scult. Decad. An. Dom. 1528
Henry Flander, being a Prisoner for the Protestant Religion, would not say,
that his Wife was his Whore, no, not to save his life offered to him on those
terms. Holy Fear will tell us, that sin must not be done to avoid suffering;
that we were better bear all reproaches then dishonor God; lose our Estates
then leave our Religion; nay, and lay down our lives then be separated from the
Divine Love. O let us look upon sin as the Maximum formidabile; as that which
has in it the most proper cause of fear and flight, that no external miseries
and dangers may be able to drive us into it.

2. Holy Fear looks at the sufferings which God inflicts in Hell, as
incomparably greater then those which man does or can inflict upon Earth. Our
Savior directing our fear to its right Object, takes notice of the vast
difference between them, Fear not them, which kill the body, but are not able
to kill he soul; but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and
body in Hell, Math. 10.28. Man's killing is one thing, but Gods destroying
another: Man may kill the Body, and it may be in a tormenting manner; but there
is no death like the second; no torments on Earth are comparable to those in
Hell; no finite arm can strike so hard as the infinite One; no Culinary or
Elementary Fire can burn so hot as the Infernal does. God bid Moses take and
sprinkle the ashes of the Furnace, and they should become boils and blains,
Exodus 9.8, 9. A Great Doctor of ours glosses on the words thus; The sufferings
here on Earth are but the ashes of the Furnace, small things in comparison of
the Furnace itself; an Hell of unquenchable fire; man may kill the body, but he
is not always a killing of it; he may torment, but he cannot bear up the
Patient in long suffering; the torments in a little time will cease, and the
Martyr Sleep in Jesus; but God kills the damned, and is still a killing them,
power supports them, and Justice punishes them; the fire of Hell, kindled by
eternal breath, never goes out, and the smoke of their torment ascends for ever
and ever: After thousands, and ten thousand of years, still there will be wrath
to come, such as no time can measure: Man may kill the body, but after that he
can do no more, his Engines of Cruelty cannot reach the Soul, or touch the
inward man, which is a Sanctuary for God; but God kills the soul, his wrath is
in a peculiar manner poured out there where the chief seat of sin was; the
neverdying Worm is ever growing upon corscience: The spirit of the damned
furiously reflects upon itself over the eternal misery that it lies under: All
the horrors of a Spira or a Judas are far short of that desperate rage and
anguish which tortures the lost souls in Hell. He that has this holy fear in
him will choose any sufferings on Earth rather then those in Hell. One of the
sons of Solomona told the Tyrant Antiochus, that his fire was cold, and indeed
it was so comparatively to the Fire of Hell: St. Austin putting the question,
whom we should obey; God commanding one thing or the Emperor commanding
another, makes his answer; Da veniam, Imperator, tu carcerem minaris, ille
gehennam, Gives place, O Emperor, De Verb. Dom. sermon. 6.
thou threatnest a Prison, he a Hell. When Polycarp was threatened with Fire,
his answer was, That the Persecuter threatened only a momentary Fire, but knew
not The Eternal one. He, that ever heard that true Thunder, which is the voice
of God, would hardly be afraid of such Artificial Cracks as the Emperor Cajus
Caligula used to make to show himself a God: And he that carries upon his heart
an awe of those sufferings which God inflicts in Hell, will hardly fear those
which men inflict on Earth.

3. Holy Fear looks upon Spiritual and Eternal Losses, as incomparably greater
then Carnal and Temporal ones: The loss of the World may be made up in the
saving of the Soul; but for the loss of a Soul, nothing can make a recompense:
That little sparkle of Divinity mightily outweighs the great Globe of the
World: What are Bodies to Spirits? Nemo (says Austin) been se inspexit, qui
non omni corpori qualemlibet animam praeponendam esse fateatur; he that looks
well into himself must confess, that any Soul is to be preferred before all
Bodies. The loss of man's favor may be richly made up by the presence of Gods.
Moses endured the King's wrath, as seeing the invisible one; the presence of
God was so with him, that he feared no human frowns: But if the Divine Favor
be wanting, nothing can supply the defect of it. It Is true, a man without it
may have all outward blessings flowing round about him; but he eats, and
drinks, and Sleeps, under the wrath of God, which hangs over his head, as the
sword did over the head of Damocles at the Tyrants Table; and, as soon as the
thread of life breaks, it comes down upon him in an utter ruin. The loss of
Creatures may be made up by an interest in God; a real Christian having
nothing, may possess all things in him: but if a man forsake God, what will the
World give in exchang for him? It Is Riches are but poor moth-eaten things,
which in a little time vanish away; its Pleasures are but the titillations of
Sense, and perish in the using; its Honors are but a blast, a little popular
Air, which soon go away and come to nothing. When once God, who is the Fountain
and Spring of all good, departs, it is in vain to hope for any thing from the
little Rivulets and Cisterns of the Creature. He, that has this holy Fear in
him, will choose to suffer loss in Carnal and Temporal things, rather then in
Spiritual and Eternal. It is the saying of St. Ambrose, Eaest vera pietas,
quaepraeponit divina humanis, perpetua temporalibus; Lib. 7. Epist. 56.
that is, true Piety, which prefers Divine Things to humane, and perpetual
things to temporal. St. Austin sets out servile and filial Fear by an
Adulterous and a Chaste Wife; Timet mulier adultera, In Joh. Tract. 63. in E
pist. Joh. Tract. 9.
ne vir ejus veniat; timet and casta ne vir ejus abscedat: The adulterous woman
sears, lest her husband may come; the chaste woman fears lest her husband
depart. In like manner servile Fear makes us afraid that God will punish, and
filial Fear makes us afraid that God will depart: The loss of him is more then
the loss of all things. When the Martyr Menas, under the Persecution of
Dioclesian, Magd. hist Cent 4. cap. 12.
was brought forth to suffer, he gave this reason for it; Nihilest, quod mea
sententia conferripossit cum regno coelorum; neque enim totus Mundus potest,
aequa lance expensus uni comparari animae; there is nothing in my judgment like
the Kingdom of Heaven; neither may the whole World, if weighed in an equal
balance, be compared with one Soul. He had rather lose any thing in the World
then an Heaven and a Soul. O let us labor to know where the great loss lies,
that we may never forsake Spiritual and Eternal things for Carnal and Temporal.

CHAP. XI.
The eighth Direction for Sufferings is Humility. A high Fabric must have a
low foundation. Humility has such rays from God, as makes us very low in our
own eyes: It is a Capacity for larger Effusions of Grace; it subjects a man to
to all the pleasures of God; it causes him to depend upon God for support and
comfort.

THe eighth Direction is this, if we would be in a fit posture for Suffering,
we must labor after humility of mind. It is the direction of our Savior to
Christians, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, De Verb. Do n.ser.
10.
Math. 11.29. St. Austin upon those words gives an excellent Rule; Cogitas
magnam fabricam construere celsitudinis, de fundamento prius cogita
humilitatis: Thou think to build a great high Fabric, but first think to
make a low Foundation: The higher the Building is, the lower must be the
Foundation. If we would build our Christianity as high as Suffering for
Religion, we had need lay a deep Foundation in Humility for it. Our Savior
Christ was not only a Pattern of Suffering, but of Humility too: St. Peter tells
us, that he suffered, leaving us an example, 2. Pet. 2.21. St. Paul tells us,
how he came to Suffer; he emptied himself, or made himself of no Reputation, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, the death of the Gross. Phil.
2.7, 8. He laid by his Robes of Majesty, and became, as it were, nothing, that
he might suffer for us: If we would follow Christ in Suffering, we must put off
our Ornaments, and lay by our proud Plumes; we must empty our selves of all our
Self-excellencies, and become vile; yea, nothing in our own eyes, that we may
endure the trial. Ex Saulo factus est Paulus, ex superbo modicus: Paulum enim
modicum est. Aust. in Psalm. 72.
St. Paul was a great Sufferer For Christ, but withal he was one of the
humblest that ever lived: Indeed before his Conversion he was a Saul, a proud
Persecutor; but after it he was a Paul, persecuted, and little in his own eyes.
Athanasius, who suffered so much under the Arians, had this Character given him
by Nazianzen, That he was high in worth, and humble in heart. There are four
things to be noted in Humility; each of which tend to prepare us for Suffering.

1. Humility dwells in an enlightened mind, and has such rays from God, as make
the heart where it is, take up very low thoughts of itself. Of old the
appearances of God in outward Symbols of Glory, made men lie very low before
him. When Job heard the voice of the Lord out of the whirlwind, he abhorred
himself in dust and ashes, Job 42. 6. When the Prophet saw the Lord sitting
upon a throne high and lifted up, he cried out. Woe is me, I am undone, Esaias.
6.5. When Daniel saw the Vision of the bright shining man, his comeliness was
turned into corruption, Dan. 10.8. The noble man now has not such outward
appearances, but he has an inward light of faith, and when he looks up to God,
and reflects upon himself, it makes him go in fundum, into the Center of the
Earth, and there to see his own nothingness. I shall give a triple instance of
this: When the humble man looks up to the glory and greatness of God, he
reflects and communes with his Heart after this manner, O how high is God! his
glory is above the Heavens, his Majesty is infinitely brighter then a thousand
suns, the rays of it bid me go down and hide my self in the dust of my own
vileness and nothingness; how great is he, that spans the Heavens, weighs the
mountains, and measures the Seas in the hollow of his hand? To him all Nations
are but as a drop of the bucket, a dust of the Balance; nay, less then nothing
itself: And I, what am I? the drop of a drop, a piece of a dust, and much less
then that which is less then nothing itself. Such thoughts as these do so abase
and annihilate a man in his sense, that the great and glorious God may do any
thing with him; his own littleness will keep him from murmuring under any Cross
or Affliction that comes from the most High. Again when the humble man looks to
the holiness of God, he speaks to his heart: God is very holy, he is perfect
purity without any spot, infinite light without any darkness at all; the glance
of his pure eyes bids me go down into my Spotted self, and there cover my self
with the shame of that Corruption, that is worse then nothing: The Stars are
not pure in his sight, and how can I be so? The glorious Angels cover their
faces, and cry to him, holy, holy, holy; and what should Worms do! What reason
have I to cry out over my self, as the Leper was to do, Unclean, Unclean. The
sense of this is so deeply humbling, that it disposes him that has it to be
willing to go into any Furnace, which God orders for the melting out of his
Dross. The excellent Martyr Mr. Hooper, carried his humility with him to the
Fiery Trial, there he prayed thus; Lord I am Hell, but thou art Heaven; I am a
Sink of Sin, but thou art a gracious Redeemer: The sense of his own
imperfections made him lie very Low. Moreover, when the humble man looks to the
Grace of God, he adores that pure self-moving Fountain of all Good; and withal,
abases himself under his great unworthiness of the Least drop of it: The evil
that is in me (says he) is my own, but all the good that is in me is entirely
from Grace. This taste of Grace to a man's unworthy self, admirably disposes him
to bear the Cross: Such an one will argue with himself, Shall God give me Grace
and Glory, and shall I not suffer for him? The suffering is not the Hell I
deserve, but that which is much less, and shall I not suffer? There is a
glorious Heaven to come after it, and why should I hang back? Exposit. on the
Thessal.
The words of Doctor Sclater are very remarkable, God (says he) rewards ultra
condignum, afflicts citra condignum; that Persuasion who so carries, and is
acquainted with his foul sins, willingly prays with Austin, Hic ure, hic seca,
ut in aeternum parcas; here burn, here cut me, that thou may spare for ever.
Thus humility, by the rays that it has from God, makes a man very vile in his
own eyes, and so prepares him for the Cross. The proud man, that thinks highly
of himself, will murmr at any thing; and the humble man that thinks meanly of
himself will bear with any thing.

2. Humility puts the Soul into a capacity to have larger effusions of Grace
bestowed upon it; God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble,
Jam. 4.6. God has two hands; with the one, he casts down the proud that lift
up themselves against him; with the other, he lifts up the humble, that lie at
his feet for mercy. Humility is not only a Grace, but a capacity to receive
more of it. He, that goes to a River to take up water, puts the mouth of his
Vessel downward to do it; he that goes to God for Grace, must put his mouth in
the dust, and cry to have it, not for his worths sake, but for his spiritual
poverty. An humble Heart is (as Parisiensis calls it) a spiritual Vacuum; and as
nature does not suffer a Vacuum in Bodies, but fills up the space one way or
other, so Grace does not suffer a Vacuum in Spirits, but fills up the humble
Soul with fresh supplies of Grace. St. Austin sets out this by a notable
similitude, Si humiles sunt, valles sunt, quod infuderis capiunt, non
dimittunt. Aust. de Verb. Apost. ser. 9.
The water that falls down from Heaven upon the Mountains, flows away, but the
water that falls upon the Vallys, stays there; In like manner the Divine Grace,
that distills from above, does not rest upon high proud persons, but upon humble
ones: God leaves the full Souls, and fills the empty; abases the exalted, and
exalts the abased: All other Graces grow together with Humility; the more
humble we are, the more we have of God with us, the more we have of Grace in
us; and the more we have of these, the more we have of strength in the inner
man, and the more we have of preparation for a day of Trial. If we build so
high as suffering for Christ, we must dig deep, and lay the Foundation low;
that, when the storm comes, we may stand fast and unmovable.

3. Humility makes a man freely to bow and subject himself to God in all
things: This is a choice and excellent preparative for suffering; the same
which our Savior commends to weary and heavy laden souls; take my yoke upon
you; and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Math. 11.29. Christians
are to take up a double yoke, the yoke of Evangelical Commands, and the yoke of
the Cross that accompanies them; in both subjection is requisite; In the one,
Subjection to Christ's Authority commanding; in the other, subjection to his
Providence ordering: And that Christians may be subject to both, they must look
to the great Pattern, and learn meekness and humility from him. The heart of
man naturally is a very proud Belial thing, that will bear no yokes, it will
not be under Christ; not under his Righteous Commands by Obedience; nor under
his Afflicting Providence by Patience; it lifts up itsel, and by a kind of
Blasphemy practicalls aspires to be above God himself: But when the Divine
Grace has melted the heart and made it humble, then it will bow down and take
both yokes upon itself; it will become freely subject to God and all his holy
pleasure. I say, freely: A proud man may be bowed down under the pressure of an
external Calamity, but an humble man bows himself down by an internal Principle
of Grace; in the one, the subjection is merely of necessity, in the other it is
free and of choice. Humility makes a man lie at Gods foot, and say, Lord what
will thou have me to do? or What will thou have me to suffer? Let the word of
God come (says Baldasser the German Divine) and we will submit to it six
hundred necks, if we had so many. Let the Cross come (says the humble man) and
I will submit to it: Humility is virtually all obedience and patience, it makes
a man to be as a little child, ruleable by all the Will of God: Whether that
Will come forth in Precepts or providence, Humility will comply and bow down
under it: The lowly in heart will do, or be any thing for God; therefore our
Savior promises rest to such, De Tempore Ser. 213.
as the gracious reward of their labors and sufferings. It is good counsel that
St. Austin gives, Esto parvus in oculis tuis, ut sis magnus in oculis Dei; be
thou little in thine own eyes, that thou may be great in Gods; Subjecting thy
self to all his pleasure is the way to be exalted by him.

4. Humility causes a man to depend upon God for support and comfort in his
Sufferings. The proud person stands in the posture of the Pharisee, (...),
standing to himself, Luke 18.11. he stands upon his own bottom, and thinks
himself able by his own power to do or suffer any thing as he pleases: But
standing in his own presumption, it is very likely that he will fall off as
soon as the trial comes. But it is otherwise with the humble man; he knows that
he is weak in himself, and must be strong in God, and therefore he will not
trust in his own Power or Will, but look up to God for support and comfort in
the evil day. De Verb. Dom. ser. 13.
It is a notable passage of St Austin, Multos impedit a firmitate praesumptio
firmitatis, nemo a Deo fit firmus, nisi qui a seipso sentit infirmum: A
presumption of firmness hinders many from being firm; no man is made firm by
God, but he that feels infirmity in himself. The story in the Marian
Persecution is very memorable; Mr. Sanders the Martyr at first showed much
weakness and fear, but Dr. Pendleton said to him, What man! fear? I will see
every drop of my grease melted before I forsake Christ and his truth: But
afterward, Sanders triumphantly Suffered, kissing the Stake, and saying,
Welcome the Cross of Christ; but proud Pendleton turned Papist. Unto this
instance I shall add a more ancient one; Peter a Great Apostle fell and denied
his Lord; but among the Primitive Christians, Women and little Children
suffered in a brave and heroical manner. Aust. in Joh. tract. 113.
The greatest Christians may fall, by presuming upon themselves; the Least may
stand, by depending on the power of God: The poor in Spirit would not be their
own Keepers, but would commit themselves unto God, Psalm. 10.14. as being safer
in his hands then in their own. Humble souls, not being able to bear up their
own weight, lean upon the Rock of Ages; and, having no rest in themselves, they
acquiesce in the Center of Souls. The feeble Conies have their houses in the
Rocks, and the weak Christians dwell in the secret of the most high. Annas
Burgus, a Senator of Paris, suffered for the pure Religion with that constancy,
that many were curious to know what Religion that was, for which he so
patiently endured death; and one reason of his patience was his humble
dependence upon God, which he expressed in that often repeated prayer at his
death, Deus mi, ne me derelinquas, ne ego te derelinquam; Thuan Lib. 23.
O my God leave me not, lest I leave thee: He knew that his strength was in God
only. Oh let us labor to have an humble dependence upon God, that, when
sufferings come, we may look and be supported, wait and renew strength, be
nothing in our selves and have all in God: So we shall be safe and secure from
anxious fears; dabitur in hora, support and comfort will come in the time of
need.

CHAP. XII.
The ninth Direction for Suffering is Active Obedience to the will of God; it
flows from a good and honest heart; it respects Gods will and Glory; it makes
us to grow up into Christ, and to be allied to him; it increases Grace and
spiritual strength; it obtains the gracious Presence of God, and it is the way
to Heaven.

THe ninth Direction is this; if we would be in a fit posture for Suffering, we
must labor after an Active Obedience to the Will of God; to do in a right
manner as he would have us to do. It is a notable saying of the Rabbis, Marces
praeceptum praecepti; one Precept is the reward of another: He that rightly
observes one Precept, shall have in the name of a reward such Grace from God,
as shall enable him to do another and a more difficult Command. It is an
excellent thing to enure our selves to the doing of Gods will; Obedience is the
chain about the Spouses neck, Cant. 4.9. one link hangs upon another; one piece
of Obedience draws on another; Active Obedience will prepare us for passive;
the doing of Gods Will, will dispose us for the Suffering of it. The Apostle
prays for the Colossians first, that they might walk worthy of the Lord, unto
all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work; and then in the next Verse,
that they might be strengthened with all might according to his glorious power,
unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness, Col. 1.10.11. Where we
may observe, that an holy Life goes before, and then suffering Graces follow
after. There are in Obedience six things observable, each of which tend to
prepare us for Suffering.

1. True Obedience flows from a good and an honest heart; nay, I may add, it
flows from the holy Spirit of God. It flows from a good and honest Heart; many
unprofitable hearers that are, but the good and honest Heart brings forth
fruit. It was an high Character which the Apostle gives to the Romans, That
they had obeyed from the Heart, that form of doctrine, which was delivered to
them, or (as it is in the original) into which they were delivered, Romans 6.17.
The Gospel was not only delivered to them, but they were delivered, and, as it
were, cast into the mould of it, and that was the reason that they obeyed from
the heart. Nay, further, Obedience flows from the holy spirit; it is a choice
Promise in the Covenant, I will put my spirit into you, and cause you to walk
in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27. Obedience being a mere supernatural act, comes
from the holy Spirit as the prime Cause thereof; a general Concourse suffices
not, there must be a peculiar Motion and Impulsion of the Spirit in it; which
made Gerson say, That all spiritual life was founded in miraculo influentiae
divinae, in the miracle of a Divine Influence. We see what are the Principles
and Fountains of Active Obedience, and the very same will produce Passive too.
The good and honest heart brings forth fruit with patience, Luke. 8.15. The
words (with patience) are very remarkable; the good and honest heart may meet
with Persecutions in the world, yet it would blossom and bring forth fruit in
the midst thereof. The righteous flourishes as the Palm Tree, Psalm. 92.12. The
Palm Tree is a Symbol of Immortality, growing under its burden; and the
Righteous, who has an Immortal seed in him, flourishes under all the pressures
of a persecuting World. Again, the holy Spirit; which makes good men do Gods
will, will enable them to suffer it too; St. Paul took pleasure in
persecutions, because when he was weak, then he was strong, 2 Cor. 12.10. that
is, the holy Spirit did strengthen his inward man to bear the Cross. The holy
Spirit in the Saints is a Well of water, springing up to everlasting Life,
John. 4.14. The persesecuting World would fain stop and damme it up; but in the
midst of all Oppositions it Springs, and never leaves springing till the Saints
be in Heaven; and before they come thither, it is, as St. Peter speaks, a
spirit of glory resting upon them, 1 Pet. 4.14. it brings down some glimpses of
Heaven into their hearts, whilst they are suffering for Religion.

2. True Obedience has a pure respect to Gods Will and Glory: It has a pure
respect to Gods Will; it does not do the Commands of God upon a by-account, as
Jehu destroyed Ahab's house; but it does them intuitu Voluntatis, because it is
the will of God; it is that which swaies and casts the balance in a good man's
heart and life: As in matters of Faith he believes, because God has said it;
so in matters of Practice he obeys because God has commanded it. Also it has
a pure respect to Gods Glory; Men's cujusque id est quisque; the man is as his
mind is, and the mind is as his end is; An obedient person will not be a Center
to himself, nor make God the most excellent Being, a medium to any other thing:
His great design is that God in all things may be glorified: His Holiness is
but to shine as a beam from the holy one; his Mercy is but as a little drop
flowing from the Divine Ocean; his Obedience is to tell the World that God is
supreme; like his Savior Christ, he seeks not his own glory, but his Fathers.
Such an Obedience as this admirably disposes a man for suffering; He, that does
some things because they are commanded, will take up the Cross too, because it
is in a peculiar manner commanded in the Gospel: The stamp of the Divine
Authority is not only found upon the Precepts of Piety and Justice, but upon
that of Patience too: Also, he that does sincerely glorify God in other things,
will, if occasion be, glorify him in pious sufferings: Some honor may be done
to God in other Duties, but in no other thing is there such honor given to him
as in bearing the Cross; therein a man does practically declare that he values
God above all the World; and therefore the Martyrs have (as the Schoolmen tell
us) a greater reward in heaven than others: Others have the essential Glory in
the Vision of God, but for the Martyrs is reserved an Aureola, a peculiar
Coronet to be added to their Crown of Glory, propter victoriam de mundo, for
their victory over the World

3. True Obedience makes us to grow up into Christ the Head, and to be of near
alliance to him. It makes us to grow up into Christ the head, Ephesians. 4.15.
Obedience, being the exercise of all Graces, brings us into a near union with
Christ, and makes us more and more like to him: The more we act our Love,
Meekness, Mercy, Goodness or any Grace, the more we are united to him and
incorporated with him; nay, true Obedience makes us to be of near alliance to
him. When our Savior was told, that his Mother and Brethren stood without to
see him, his answer was, My Mother and my Brethren are those which hear the
word of God and do it, Luke 8.20, 21. St. Ambrose upon these words tells us, In
Lucam. cap. 8.
Religiosiores copulae mentium quam corporum; the conjunction of Minds is more
sacred than that of Bodies. The Obedient Christian is Brother to Christ, being
born of the same holy Spirit in Regeneration, of which he was conceived in his
Incarnation; nay, he is Mother to Christ, bringing him forth in the exercise of
holy Graces; somewhat of the Love, Mercy, Piety, Meekness of Christ is still a
coming forth from him: In both these respects does obedience dispose us to
suffering; the more we grow up into Christ the Head, the more Divine Power and
Virtue we have from him; our chief strength lies not in our selves, but in our
Head; we may do, nay and suffer any thing, through him strengthening us: And the
more we are allied to him, the more we are bound to adhere to him: Our
supernatural Birth obliges us to live to him, nay, and if need be, to die for
him; and we are to bring him forth not only in other holy Virtue, but in that
of Patience. St. Paul bore about in his body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2
Cor. 4.10. and the Allies of Christ must be ready at Gods call to suffer with
him.

4. True Obedience produces an increase of Grace and spiritual Strength:
Obedience is a Christians daily walk; the more he exercises himself to
Godliness, the more grace he has in his Soul: That Faith, which was but as a
little grain of Mustardseed, becomes a Tree spreading itself forth at last as
high as assurance: That love, which was as a little spark raked up in the
ashes, comes to be a vehement Flame aspiring after the fruition of God in
Heaven: That Hope, which was but a poor weak thing in the Soul, comes to have
more liveliness and supernatural stature. The path of the just, which is in
obedience, is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect
day in heaven, Prove. 4.18. The more a Christian exercises himself in Obedience,
the stronger he grows in the Inner-man: of a Plant he comes to be a Tree of
Righteousness; of a Babe he comes to be a Man in Christ: His vital Principles
become more strong, his supernatural hear increased, he holds on his way of
Obedience, and so grows stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. Such an Obedience as
this admirably Disposes a man for suffering: The greater his stock of Grace is,
the better will he hold out in the straits of the World: The more strength he
has in the inner-man, the more able he will be to bear the burden of the
Cross: If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small, Prove.
24.10. Great strength will keep a man from fainting. When the Children of
Israel were come to be above six hundred thousand, Numb. 1.46. it was a great
encouragement to make them go on gallantly against their Enemies: And when
Christians have their Graces multiplied, and among the rest Patience comes to
be all Patience, as the expression is, Col. 1.11. it gives them spirit and life
to bear sufferings.

5. True obedience obtains the gracious Presence of God to help and comfort
good men in the doing his Will: The Rabbis say, That if two sit together
conferring about the Law, the Shechinah is among them: I may say, if one single
Christian be a doing of Gods will, the Divine Presence is with him: Thus our
Savior says: If any man love him, and keep his words, the Father and the Son
will come and make their abode with such an one, John 14.23. Such an one has a
Shechinah in his heart; God will be there helping and comforting of him. Whilst
he is a doing of Gods will, strength will come in, as it did to the Levites, 1.
Chron. 15.26. and not only strength, but comfort too: In keeping his commands
there is great reward; some of the oil of Joy, which is upon Christ the great
doer of Gods will, drops down upon good men in their sincere obedience; they
have an inward peace, and joy unspeakeable: In this respect obedience prepares
the heart of Christians to endure suffering: An obedient Christian can argue
thus with himself; I have found Gods gracious Presence strengthening and
comforting me in the doing of his will, much more shall I have it when I come
to suffer, and part with all for his sake. When all forsook St. Paul, yet the
Lord stood with him, and strengthened him, 2 Timothy 4.16.19. When Mr. Sanders was
examined about his Religion, he was wonderfully comforted, and received a taste
of the Communion of Saints, a pleasant refreshing did issue from every part of
his Body to his heart, and from thence into all parts again. Cicely Ormes was
filled with such joy and comfort, that at the kindling of the fire, she said,
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit does rejoice in God my Savior. O
let us firmly conclude this with our selves, that God will not leave or forsake
his people, no not at other times, much less will he do it in the time of Fiery
Trials: Then they shall have strength and comfort in a more than ordinary way,
enough to make them to triumph over their Sufferings, or at leastwise to bear
them with Patience.

6. True Obedience is the way to Heaven: Those blessed ones, that do the
commands of God have right to the Tree of Life, and enter in through the gates
into the City, Rev. 22.14. The more obedient a man is to the Divine Will, the
richer entrance he has into the blessed Kingdom: After sowing to the Spirit
comes the Crop of Eternal Glory; after walking in holy Obedience, comes the
blessed end of Life and Immortality. In this respect Obedience fits us for
Sufferings: A man that is in the way to Hell, is not capable of suffering; it
is not imaginable that a man should bear Reproach for Christ, who has no hope
of Glory; or that he should part with his Treasure here, who has none in
Heaven; or that he should lay down his Life Temporal, who has no right to an
Eternal one; or that he should let go his Portion of good in this World, who
has none in another. But the Obedient Christian, who is in the way to Heaven,
is in a capacity to suffer any thing that meets him in the passage thither:
Reproaches may come, but he is going to shine in glory; Worldly Goods may be
spoiled, but he has an Inheritance incorruptible that fades not away;
Temporal Life may be lost, but in the very instant there begins an Eternal one
with the blessed God in Heaven; he may by a Persecution be justled out of this
World, but he has a better to go to, where there are Crowns of Glory, Rivers
of Pleasures, Plenitudes of Joy, and all in the blessed God. Our Savior Christ
for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, Hebr. 12.2. St. Paul
would finish his course that he might have the Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy
4.7, 8. When the Martyr Babylas suffered, he sung that of the Psalmist, Magd.
hist. cent. 3. cap. 12.
Return unto thy rest O my Soul; his mind was upon the eternal Sabbath in
Heaven. When Basil the great was threatened with Banishment, and Death, he was
not at all moved at it: Banishment is nothing to him that has heaven for his
Country; neither is Death any thing to one to whom it is the way to Life: He
that is in the way to Heaven has great reason to break through all
Difficulties to get thither.

CHAP. XIII.
The tenth Direction for suffering, is Patience under Gods will: With respect
to the Christian, it makes him possess his Soul, conquer the World, and have
inward Satisfaction: With respect to God, it subjects the Soul to his Will; it
waits upon God for strength and a good Issue; it produces spiritual Joy and
Praise.

THe tenth Direction is this; if we would be in a fit posture for suffering, we
must labor after Patience under the will of God; this must be joined to our
Obedience, that we may be able to answer to all his will; As obedience respects
Gods commanding will, so Patience (which is also a duty) respects his disposing
one. Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise, Says the Apostle, Hebr. 10.36. We are not only to
do other Commands by Obedience, but, when Providence calls us to it, we are to
do that of taking up the Cross by Patience: Other Graces may help to bear the
Cross, but Patience takes it up upon its back: It is its proper peculiar office
(...), to make a man abide piously under the Cross. This Grace may be
considered two ways; either in that which it does with respect to the
Christian in whom it is, or in that which it does with respect to God; both
ways it is of singular use in order to sufferings.

1. Patience may be considered in that which it does with respect to the
Christian in whom it is; and thus three things may be noted.

1. Patience makes a Christian possess his soul, Luke 21.19. there is a great
difference between the wordly man's patience and the Christians: The word by man
endeavors much that he may possess the things that are without him, but the
Christian bears that he may possess his own Soul. The Christian, in a fit of
Impatience, loses himself, and puts himself, as it were, out of possession, not
only of his Rational Faculties, but of his Graces too; at that time he acts not
like a Man or a Christian. When Jonah told God, that he did well to be angry
unto death, Jon. 4.9. he was in his furious passion, more like a Beast than a
Man or a Saint. If thou deal thus with me, (says Moses to God) kill me out of
hand, Numb. 11.15. The word (thou) here is of the Feminine Gender, At for Aita;
the perturbation of Mind. made Moses, the meekest man on earth, unable to fill
up his words, or to speak as he meant to do. It is by patience that the
Christian possesses himself, and has the free use of his Reason and holy
Graces: While he is patiently bearing the Cross, his Faith will roll out as
Gold out of the Fire, his hope will fix itself in the unmovable Heavens, his
love will burn within him toward God and his Glory. All the Powers in Earth
and Hell cannot put him out of the possession of himself, or hinder his Graces
from coming forth into act; he will be like himself in his suffering.

2. Patience makes a Christian to be a Conqueror of the persecuting World. The
Overcomer, mentioned in the second and third chapters of the Revelation of St.
John, to whom so many precious and excellent promises are there made, is not
one, that overcomes by Martial Fighting, but one that has the Victory by
Patient Suffering. Who shall separate us (says St.) Paul from the Love of
Christ? Shall Tribulation or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness,
or Peril, or Sword? In all these things (...), we are more than Conquerors
through him that loved us, Romans 8.35, 37. More than Conquerors, because they
conquered by suffering; while their Bodies were slain their souls were
triumphing over death itself. Thus St. Austin says, Epist. 42.
that the Pagans were overcome, non a repugnantibus, sed a morientibus
Christianis, not by resisting, but by dying Christians: Patience makes their
Persecutors secure them, and frame Crowns of Glory for them. This made the
Martyr Vincentius tell his Tormentor, Nunquam aliquis adeo been servivit mihi
actu; no man ever served me so much as thou have done. Patience does so frame
the heart to the will of God, that it makes a Christian to be a King overhis
Crosses, losses to him are gain, reproaches glory, confinement liberty,
anddeath life: While he suffers in any thing, he is above it.

3. Patience makesa Christian to have inward content and satisfaction in
suffering. It is the Apostles Exhortation, Let patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, Jam. 1.4. He that has not
Patience, is but a lame and imperfect Christian; he may go a little way in
Religion, as far as his Principles reach, but if he come to suffering, which is
beyond them, he will halt and turn aside: But if a Christian has an effectual
Patience, he is then perfect and entire, wanting nothing; he has every thing
that may fill up his Christianity or happiness in this Life. The Cross may
come, but he has Principles to bear it: Outward Blessings may be taken away,
but he has all in God. St. Austin brings in patient Job, De Simb. ad Cateck.
stripped of all, but only his God; speaking thus, Quid mihi deerit, si Deum
habuero? quid mihi alia prosunt, si Deum non habuero? What can I want, if I
have God? What can other things profit, if I have him not? Patience gives the
suffering Saint quiet and sweet satisfaction in God, and, not only so, but in
the very suffering as it is a pious submission to his will: There is a
sweetness and a secret reward in the doing of Gods will, much more in holy
suffering for Him. The blessed Martyr Baynham at the Stake told the bloody
Papists O ye Papists! ye talk of Miracles, behold here a true one, these Flames
are to me a bed of Roses. It Is true, all holy Sufferers cannot say thus; but
all of them find by experience, that there is a sweet satisfaction in suffering
for the good God.

2. Patience may be considered in that which it does with respect to God; and
here are three things to be taken notice of.

1. Patience subjects the soul to the will of God; when the Cross comes the
patient Christians will with Aaron hold their peace; or if they speak, they
will do it in some such language as that of Eli, It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good. Patience will instruct them to lie in the lowest posture
of Humility, and to argue the matter with themselves in this manner: Is God the
Rector of the World, and shall we not subject to him? His Presence is in all,
his Power is over all, his Wisdom and Righteousness orders all; who can stay
his hand, or say to him, what do thou, or call him to give account of any of
his matters? To strive with him is folly; to murmur at any piece of his
Government is Rebellion; to think that things might have been better, is to
blaspheme his wise and just Providence; And is he the Father of Spirits, and
shall we not be under him? We give reverence to the Fathers of our flesh, and
how much there is should we be in subjection to the Father of Spirits and live?
Our Savior Christ, who suffered for us to sweeten sufferings to us, argued
thus with himself, The Cup that my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?
John 18.11. After his pattern we should submit our selves to suffering,
remembering that, though it come through bloody hands to us, yet it is ordered
by the Father of Spirits; nay, and by the Father of Mercies too, who assures
us, That all things, even Afflictions among the rest, shall work together for
good: In those very sufferings, in which man is cruel, God will be merciful:
While the world hates and persecutes us, God will embrace us in the Arms of his
Love, and carry us through the Cross to the Crown of Glory: Upon such accounts
as these, Patience does subject the Soul unto the Cross. Our Savior, the
Mirror of Patience, being to drink up the cup of Wrath, expresses himself thus;
not my will, but thine be done, Luke 22.42. His will was swallowed up in his
Fathers, St. Ambrose in his Commentary on those words gives us this excellent
note; Disce Deo esse subjectus, ut non quod ipse vis eligas, sed quod Deo scias
esse placiturum: Learn to be subject to God, that thou may not choose, what
thou would, but what thou know to be pleasing to God. Patience teaches us
to be pleased with Gods pleasure, and to will every thing, not as it is in our
own will, but as it is in Gods.

2. Patience waits upon God for strength to bear the Cross, and for a good
issue out of it: We have both these promised in that of the Apostle, God will
not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the
temptation make a way to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. In the first Clause we have a
Promise of strength proportionable to the Temptation; in the last, we have a
Promise of a good issue out of it. First, Patience waits upon God for strength
to bear the Cross; this is the right Method of obtaining strength: Wait on the
Lord, and he shall strengthen thy heart, Psalm. 27.14. Strength comes in a way
of dependence upon God. St. Austin speaks of a double patience; De patientia.
cap. 15.
there is patientia superborum; the patience of the proud; and patientia
pauperum, the patience of the poor humble Soul: The one waits upon the will of
man, the other upon the Grace of God: True Patience knows, that it is God only
that can strengthen the Inner man by his Spirit, Ephesians. 3.16. No other but his
glorious power can strengthen with all might unto all patience, Col. 1.11. De
Martyr form. 5.
Notable is that of St. Austin, Haec est vox Martyrum, omniatolerare, and de se
nihil praesumere: This is the voice of the Martyrs, to bear every thing, and to
presume of themselves nothing. Thus the noble Martyr Potamenia, Spondan. Annal.
An. 310.
being threatened to be cast into a Vessel of burning Pitch, begged, that she
might not be cast in all at once, but piecemeal, that they might see, how much
Patience the unknown Christ had given to her. True patience waits upon God for
strength; but this is not all, it also waits upon God for a good issue out of
the suffering; Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and he gives many good issues
to his suffering people: If they have an increase of Graces and Comforts,
that is one good issue: If they hold out and persevere to the end, that is
another good issue: If by death they pass from the Cross to the Crown, from a
Temporal Life to an Eternal one, that is the best issue of all: For such issues
as these do patient Souls wait, till the Lord put an end to all their troubles

3. Patience produces spiritual joy and praise: This is the difference between
Philosophical Patience and Christian Patience; Philosophical may bear
adversity, but Christian has joy in the bearing of it. It was the ancient
custom of the Primitive Christians to have often in their mouths, Aust. in P.
l. 132.
Deo gratias, God be thanked for this mercy, and for that mercy: The patient
Christian, that looks upon the good issues of suffering, may sit down and sing,
Deo gratias, not to Blessings only, but to Afflictions also. Job being stripped
of all, cried out, The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name
of the Lord, Job. 1.21. St. Austin speaking of Job, observes, That, when he had
nothing of outward things, yet there were Gemmae laudis Dei, Aust. de Temp.
Ser. 105.
the Jewels of the Praise of God found with him. Suffering Saints have so much
of the Love of God shed abroad in their hearts, that they have praemium ante
praemium, a lesser Heaven before a greater. St. Paul says, (...), I super
abound, or overflow in joy in all our Tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. The gracious
Presence of God did not only cause joy, but the overflowing of it in his heart.
St. James says to the seattered Christians, Count it all joy, when ye fall
into diverse Temptations, Jam. 1, 2. That is when ye fall into Afflictions for
the Gospel: All joy, How can poor afflicted Souls reckon thus? In the Trial,
their Graces appear in their pure beauty; Strength is made perfect in Weakness,
Consolations abound as much, nay, more than Afflictions; the beams of Divine
Love irradiate the heart, and fill it with a sweet serenity; Hope enters
Heaven, and fixes upon the Crown of Life, and Heaven comes down in a Spirit of
Glory upon the heart. Here is joy, all joy indeed; the total sum of it in this
life is made up in these things. It was the saying of the Martyr Mr. Philpot,
That to dye for Christ is the greatest Promotion, that God can bring any unto
in this vale of misery; yea, so great an honor as the greatest Angel in Heaven
is not permitted to have. It was the Prayer of Mr. Bradford the Martyr God
forgive me my unthankfulness for this erceeding great mercy, that among so many
thousands, he chooses me to be one, in whom he will suffer. It was the
observation of one of the Ancients, That it was peculiar to Christians to give
thanks in adversity: Jews and Gentiles can praise God for benefits, but the
patient Christian can thank him for Afflictions: O let us labor after Patience,
that we may not only suffer for Christ, but do it with joy: Thus our Savior
directs his persecuted ones, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in heaven, Mat. 5.12. Inward and outward Joys are very proper in
suffering Saints, because then they are arrived at the highest pitch of
Christianity, and ready to enter into the blessed Heaven, there to enjoy God
for ever and ever.

CHAP. XIIII.
Some Inducements to suffer any thing, rather than part with the pure Religion.
Pious sufferers glorify God; they propagate the Church; they give a token of
Wrath to come upon Persecutors; they are happy here and hereafter: Here in the
proof of Sincerity, and in the presence of God; hereafter in a freedom from all
Evil, and a Communication of all Good.

HAving laid down Directions in order to suffering, I will shut up all with a
few Considerations, which may serve as Motives to induce us at Gods call to
suffer any thing rather than part with the pure Religion, which is a Jewel
incomparably more worth than all those things, which we can lose for it.

1. Pious Sufferers do glorify God in a very signal eminent manner: What is
said of St. Peter's death, That it was a glorifying of God, Joh. 21.19. The
same may be said of the death of all other Martyrs; we glorify God by offering
Praise; much more by offering our lives for him: We glorify him by giving some
of our Estates in Charity, much more by giving our blood for his Name: We
glorify, him, when we present our Bodies a living sacrifice to him in Active
Obedience, much more when we present them a dying one in Passive: Much of the
glory of God breaks forth in his Suffering Saints; Free Grace shines out in the
raising up Witnesses to his Truth in a contradicting persecuting World; Power
admirably appears in bearing of them up with holy Joy and Pleasure in the midst
of all the Torments, which men and Devils can invent against them. Excellent is
that of the Apostle; Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious
power, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness, Col. 1.11. Gods
power is glorious in other things, but in his suffering Saints it lets out
itself in a most illustrious manner: The Persecutors have all Torments, all
kinds of Death, but the Martyrs have all might, all patience, and
long-suffering with joyfulness: As it was with Christ, his Power appeared in
Miracles, but above all, in that he triumphed over Principalities and Powers
upon the Cross; so it is with Christians, the Divine Power appears in other
Graces, but above all in that patient suffering which overcomes the World: The
Truth of God is in Martyrs practically proved to be exceeding precious. The
Fathers, in the first general Councils, were so earnest for the Truth, that
they would not exchange a letter or syllable of it. The Arian (...) would not
pass instead of (...), nor the Nestorian (...), applied to Christ as man,
instead of (...) applied to the blessed Virgin: All Believers seal up the
Evangelical Truths by Faith, but the Martyrs seal them up by their blood also:
Plainly showing, that the least jot or tittle of truth is more worth than life,
and not to be sold for a World. It was the pretiousness of truth, that made
Athanasius stand it out against an Arrian World, and Luther stand it out
against a Popish one. Moreover Divine Worship is by Martyrs maintained to be a
Prerogative due to God alone. When all the World was given to Idolatry, the
primitive Martyrs would die rather than rob God of his Honor: Their Sufferings
told the World, that his Glory was not to be given to another, nor his praise
to graven Images; no, not to save the lives of those that were the only pure
Worshippers of him: Their lives could not be better spent than in suffering for
his pure Worship; and after them, he would raise up others to Worship him. When
the Emperor Commodus, Magd. Hist. Cent. 2. cap. 12.
asked the Senator Julius, Why he could not worship Jupiter and Hercules;
Julius, ambitious of Martyrdom, told the Emperor plainly, That Jupiter and
Hercules were no Gods, and that the worshippers of Idols muh perish in eternal
Torments; and soon after he sealed up his Profession with his blood. Auxentius
would rather suffer banishment, than set a branch of a Wine-tree at the feet of
Bacchus his Image, because it had an appearance of Idolatry. The suffering of
the Saints for the pure Worship, proclaims it to all, that God has a sacred
jealousy over his Worship, and will no more part with it, than he will with his
Crown. If we would indeed glorify God, here is the highest medium to do it; No
Praises, no Alms, no Services, no Active Obedience do so lift up the Glory of
God, as pious Suffering does, in which we do practically, declare that we value
him above all things.

2. Pious Sufferers do propagate and multiply the Church. When Abel, the first
Martyr was slain, there was a Seth raised up in his room. When righteous
persons are slain by Persecutors, more of them spiring up in the Church. The
more the Children of Israel were afflicted in Egypt, the more they multiplied
and grew, Exodus 1.11. As the ground, that is most harrowed, is most fruitful;
so God's People, the more they were straightened under the burdens of men, the
more they were enlarged by the blessing of God. The Roman Emperors did design
utterly to extirpate Christianity: Dioclesian (the greatest Persecutor of all,
who filled the World with the blood of Martyrs) thought he had effected it;
this Inscription was upon his Coin. Nomine Christianorum deleto, qui rem
publicam everterunt: The name of Christians, who overthrew the Commonwealth, is
extinct: But they were all in a mistake; in the midst of the Ten bloody
Persecutions, there was still a new Generation of Christians springing up out
of the blood of the Martyrs. Tertullian tells the vexing torturing Persecutors,
Apol. cap. ult.
Plures efficimur, quoties metimur; semen est sanguis Christianorum: The more
we are mowed and cut down, the more we grow and multiply; the blood of
Christians is the Seed of the Church. St. Austin says of the persecuted
Christians, Coedebantur, De Civi^ Dei. Lib. 22. cap. 6.
torquebantur, urebantur, laniabantur, trucidabantur, and multiplicabantur:
They were beaten, tortured, burned, torn, killed, and yet they were multiplied.
Julian the Apostate learned this from persecution under Diocletian, and upon
that account he abstained for a time from exercising Torments and bloody
Cruelties upon Christians, Magd. cent. 4. cap. 3.
because he saw that the Christians by patient Suffering were multiplied and
became more glorious in the eyes of the People. Antichrist has shed a great
deal of precious blood, and the witnesses of the pure Religion have been slain
under him, yet has the Evangelical Truth remained, and the Witnessess, which
were Slain, have from time to time revived and stood up in illustrious
Successors, who have held forth the same Truth, and spoke in the same Spirit
and Power, as those before them had done. When after the Parisian Massacre
there happened to be a great serenity in Heaven, Thuan Lib. 52.
and a Barbery-tree blossoming in a time unusal, some Papists said, That the
thing was grateful to God, as if Heaven and Earth had rejoiced at it: But the
Protestants took it as a sign, that the Church should revive and flourish
again, like the bush that burned, and was not consumed. The true Church, which
is founded in Christ's blood, is not propagated or multiplied by Martial Arms,
but by patient Sufferings: This is the true way to do good to the Church, and
to continue the Gospel among us; if we are indeed in a posture for suffering,
and ready to Seal up the Truth with our Blood, we may comfortly hope, that,
whatever Sufferings come, the Gospel and gracious Presence of God shall not
finally depart from our Nation.

3. Pious Sufferers do give an evident token to the Persecutor, that the wrath
of God will come upon him. When the Emperor Commodus was worshipping Jupiter,
Vincentius, Eusebius, Peregrinus, Magd. hist. cent. 2. cap. 12.
and Potentianus, went about and exhorted the People, to depart from the
Worship of Devils, and honor the One only true God, lest they perished with
Commodus; and soon after they suffered Martyrdom for the same thing. Though
all the Martyrs did not in words warn the Persecutors, that the Wrath of God
would come upon them, yet they all by their patient Suffering gave them an
evident token of it. St. Paul exhorts the Philippians to patient suffering upon
this account; Stand fast, says he, in one Spirit, with one mind, striving
together for the Faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by your
adversaries, which is to them an evident token of Perdition, but to you of
Salvation, and that of God, Phil. 1.27, 28. The Persecutor comes with his
Torments and Engines of Cruelty, to terrify the Martyr, but the Martyr by his
Christian Patience and Courage, gives the Persecutor and evident token, that
the wrath of God will come down upon him at last: If bloody Persecutors, who
look upon the suffering Martyrs, had but their Eyes open, they would see cause
enough to reflect upon themselves, and say, Surely these men have a patience
more than humane, and therefore they suffer for God; and if so, we in
persecuting them, fight against him, and may expect, that his wrath should come
down upon us, as it has upon former Persecutors. Herod Agrippa was eaten up of
Worms; Nero with a trembling hand, cut his own throat; Trajan was thought to
have poisoned himself; upon the Persecution in the time of Antoninus Verus,
there followed Wars, Earthquakes, Inundations, Pestilences, as so many Tokens
of Divine Vengeance; Decius was slain, together with his Children; Dioclesian
died of fearful and miserable Diseases; Julian in the Persian war was mortally
wounded by an Arrow from Heaven, and threw up his blood thither with that
horrible Blasphemy, Vicisti Galilaee; Valens in his war against the Goths, was
wounded, and, flying into a Cottage, was burnt with it by the Enemy. The
temporal Judgments, that have befallen former Persecutors, tell the after-ones
what they may look for here in this World; or if they might escape here,
eternal Vengeance will surely meet them hereafter. Our Savior Christ will at
the great day bid those that did not feed, cloth, and Visit him in his Members,
depart into ever lasting fire, Matthew. 25.41. much more will he say so to those
that Imprison, torment, and kill him in his Members. When Henry the second of
France, in his running a Tilt, received a fatal wound in his Eye, he looked to
the Prison, Thuan. L. 22.
where the poor Protestants were shut up as Captives for their Religion and
often uttered these words, That he was afraid, that he had done the poor
innocent men wrong: Conscience then told him, what it was to persecute. Oh!
That such things as these might stop Persecutors in their bloody ways, as the
Thunderbolt falling near the Emperor Anrelianus did him in his intended
Persecution of the Christians: The patience of those, that suffer under their
cruel hands, tell them, that the wrath of God will fall upon them at Last. I
conclude with that of St. Cyprian, Ad Demetrianum.
Quanto major persecutio, tanto gravior pro persecutione vindicta, The greater
the Persecution is, the heavier will be the Vengeance for it.

4. Pious Sufferers are happy here and hereafter. They are happy here upon a
double account.

1. They give the highest proof of their Sincerity, that can be given: Abraham
gave a great proof of his Sincerity in leaving his Country, and a greater in
offering up his only Son Isaac at Gods command; but I take it, the Martyr gives
a higher proof of it than is done in either of those, it being more to part
with all the World than to part with our Country, and to offer up our selves
to God than to offer up a Son. The highest proof of Grace is in Suffering; That
Faith muh be right that endures the fiery Furnace; that Love must be pure, that
practically lifts up God above all other things; that Hope must be lively that
lets go a present World for a future one; that Obedience must be glorious that
continues unto the death. The Martyr has a fair prospect, with a comfortable
sight of his own uprightness, Conscience gives an Euge to his Graces and
Sufferings; nay, the holy Spirit is as a seal and earnest of his Heavenly
Inheritance; It bears witness with his Spirit, that he is a Son and Heir of God.

2. As they give the highest proof of their Sincerity, so they have the
gracious Presence of God in the most eminent way with them: All his glorious
Attributes do, as it were, pitch their Tents round about them, and put forth
their Virtues in a gracious manner for their good. His Power rests upon them to
bear them up, how weak soever, in the fiery Trial; his Wisdom directs them how
to carry the selves under the Cross; his Mercy melts over them, while they are
under man's Cruelty; his Love is shed abroad in their heart while they bear the
World hatred: The Presence of God will be to them in stead of, nay, infinitely
more than all other Comforts: They may say, If God be for us, who can be
against us? Romans 8.31. Why? Devils can, wicked men can, but, Aquinas expounds
the words, Quis contra nos laesive and prevalenter? Who can be against us to
hurt us, and prevail over us? That which is of God, cannot be overthrown; they
may break out with St. Paul, in that gallant triumph, (...) I am persuaded,
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor hight, nor depth, nor any other
Creature shall be able to separare us from the Love of God in Christ, Romans
8.38, 39. What St. Bernard says of the Church, is true of them a noble part of
it; In Cant. ser. 79.
Nec Verbositate Philosophorum, nec Cavillationibus Haereticorum, nec Gladiis
Persecutorum potuit illa Separari a Charitate Dei, quae est in Christo: They
cannot be separated from the Love of God in Christ, neither by the words of
Philosophers, nor by the Cavils of Heretics, nor yet by the Swords of
Persecutors: God is in the midst of them, and they shall not be moved.

Again, They are happy hereafter, and this stands in two things:

1. They are freed from all evils: In Heaven they shall have no Corruption
within, nor Oppression without; no Noise of Passion in the heart, nor rout of
turbulent Persecutors to disquiet them; the will of the Flesh shall have a
total Circumcision; the infirmities of the Body shall have a perfect cure; the
Serpent cannot hiss in Paradise; no temptations or miseries can fasten on a
Saint in Glory: There is Day without Night, Love without Fear, Joy without
sorrow, Life without Death, all Happiness without the least mixture of Evil:
There the blessed Martyrs shall be freed from all their troubles and miseries.

2. They are endowed with all good and happiness: The promises made to the
Overcomer in the Revelation of St. John, shall be made good to them, they shall
eat of the Tree of Life in a blessed immortality; they shall have the white
stone in a perfect absolution; they shall be clothed in Robes of Glory; they
shall be Pillars in the heavenly Temple, standing there as ornaments in an
immovable Felicity; they shall sit down with Christ in his throne, and judge
their Enemies that condemned them; they shall inherit all things; they that
lost all for God shall enherit all in him, who is goodness itself, and the
fountain of it: They shall see him, who is the original and Crystal ocean of
all truth; they shall enjoy him who is the supreme good, and sabbath of souls;
they shall be swallowed up in the joy of infinite truth and goodness; and their
happiness shall not be for a time, but run parallel with eternity itself; they
shall be for ever in the Lord in the blessed Region: De Civit. Dei. Lib. 22.
cap. 30.
There, as St. Austin has it, God who is all in all, Sine fine Videbitur,
since fastidio amabitur, sine fatigatione laudabitur, shall be seen without
end, loved without disdain, and praised without weariness. In the next World
there will be a vast difference between Persecutors and Sufferers. The Pride
and Cruelty of the one will be paid for in Torments and endless Misery in the
Prison of Hell, and the Patience and Suffering of the other will be returned in
Joys and eternal Felicity in the blessed Heaven.

FINIS.

