THE LIFE OF THE Right Honorable AND Religious Lady CHRISTIAN Late Countess
Dowager OF DEVONSHIRE.

LONDON,

Printed by William Rawlins for the Author, 1685.

SIC DONEC
The Right Honble. Scroop Egerton Earl of Bridgwater Viscount Brackley Baron of
Elsmere 1703
family blazon

TO THE Right Honorable AND Truly NOBLE WILLIAM Earl of Devonshire, etc.
MY LORD,
SINCE I must acknowledge, that of all men in the World, I am the most unfit to
speak such great Things, as the following Relation does justly challenge; I was
in some suspense, whether I should lay it at your Feet, for Patronage, or
Pardon. But being Conscious that I have performed it very ill, and that it may
fall into some other hands, that may think so too, I must humbly beg them both.
I shall most willingly confess, that for the same Reasons I blame the writing,
I ought to have foreborn the Impression; because Folly is the more excusable
when it dwells within its own Retirements, and goes not abroad to give others
the Trouble, or Occasion of a freer and more public Censure. But I have sent
it forth with my own Condemnation; and shall only Beseech Your Lordship to
expound the Mistake, as a Testimony of that value I had for the Countess of
Devonshires Memory, and Virtues. And having named to Your Lordship, that Dear
and Honorable Lady, I may rest assured, that for the sake of that Relation,
the following Account has to Her, it must have also a kind Reception from You;
if it be, but for those Regards the thing it self has to Your Mother. And then
I am the less concerned what Fortune I meet withal from others; since I did
not intend it as a Stratagem for Applause, but as plain Relation of the great
Merits of a Personage, that ought to be Dear to Your Lordship; and of such
Worthiness that Renders her mighty valuable to all others. And though, I have
failed in giving just Accounts of her Virtues (which were in themselves the
greatest) yet I have at least signified what should have been said by

My Lord, Your Honors Most humble Servant Tho. Pomfret.

THE LIFE OF Christian LATE Countess of Devonshire.
THOUGH the Number of Ladies, eminent in Goodness is very great; and we may
raise Ideas of the most resplendent Virtues from those that are the living
Ornaments, and might also be the noblest Patterns to the present Age: yet
considering that no one of These (though the most Accomplished) can be brought
forth, as a President to others, without the suspicion of Flattery on the one
side, or raising Envy, and Indignation on the other; I have chosen a Noble
Personage, out of the number of the Dead, of incomparable Piety and Prudence,
(intended by Providence to make Virtue lovely and imitable) to speak truth of
whom, can Regret none; and whom too, as her Merits were above, so it has
pleased God to remove from the Opportunities of being flatterd. A Vice, to
which, if I could be tempted, it would here be the most useless, her Native,
Genuine, and Real Beauties being so many, and so illustrious.

It is Christian late Countess of Devonshire; who in all her Actions did so
excel, and in some of them was so extraordinary, that not to commemorate them,
would be a great injustice to her self; but a greater to the World.

Not that I think so many Great things done before the eyes of so many yet
alive, can easily pass into Forgetfulness in the present; or for their Rarity,
will not be transmitted to future times; but rather, because some (and perhaps
those of the greatest Luster) may be incompleatly Related, if they be not
faithfully collected into one bundle, for the Admiration of this, and the
Imitation of Posterity. I foresee, and shall now therefore confess, that I am
no ways competent, well to Acquit my self in so great an Undertaking, and
should endeavor to captivate the Reader, by telling him the Reasons inducing
me to this Publication, and bring them in to bear the blame of the whole
miscarriage: but I shall only say; that the Fame of her Virtues which had
spread through this Kingdom, and gone into others, (many years since) did so
delight me; and that having the Honor of knowing much more, of the great
Passages of her Life from a Noble Person, nearly related to her, I could not
forbear declaring what I have heard; but whither the thus publicly telling
them will not bring upon me some Censures, I am not at all concerned, nor at
leisure to account for.

I will not be so Confident of my own opinion of things, to Impose upon any,
and to conclude, that what to me was so pleasurable to Hear, must also be an
equal entertainment to all that Read; yet I humbly conceive that the following
Narrative, may yield some Profit, and Delight, to all, but such, as come to it
with Prejudice, and Humor, because it is a Ladies Life. For some there are (and
those too many) that love to express their own great Accomplishments, by making
Invectives against the whole Sex: and so far Indulge themselves in Satyr, and
License, that God Almighty himself cannot escape their Railery, but his Wisdom,
must be called in question, for making so useless, and mischievous a Part of
the Creation, as they would have Woman.

And in this Opinion they think themselves mightily defended, because Solomon
once asked the Question, who can find a good one? To which Inquiry, though all
Nations, and Ages have given sufficient satisfaction, yet I beg leave, (to put
it beyond all dispute) to represent to the World, the Perfections of a Lady,
that was an Ornament to her Sex, and may be allowed to be a just Model of all
Virtues. Only I would take leave to remarque, (before I come to her particular
Qualities) that the World was ever enlightened with the Charms, and Excellencies
of this Sex.

Solomon himself found an Egyptian, Pharaohs Daughter that was all glorious
within; nothing but Rays, and Glories, the Court of Heaven it self, in his own
opinion, dwelling in her Bosom. Of his own Nation, it was a Woman, that more
than once, delivered Israel; when the Men, and Baruch himself too were turned
Cowards. Deborah, Judeth, and Hester, are high in the same Records of Fame: and
it was a Woman that fed Elisha, when the whole Nation had forsaken him. Wicked
Herod found a Mariamne, a sweet, sober, constant Patience; Theodosius, a brave,
pious, heroic Eudoxia. One, disfigures her Face to quench the sparks, a Tyrants
love had kindled: another of Alexandria lives amongst the Dead, to defend her
Chastity. A third, Leucy by name, plucked out her eyes, that she might
extinguish the enraged flames of unlawful Love inkindled at them.

For Conjugal Fidelity; Clara a young Virgin, sixteen years old, obliges her
self to a strict Attendance on her Husband, infected with a Disease, incurable,
noisome, and insupportable to all the World besides. Cabadis, a Persian Queen,
disguises her self, and changes garments with her imprisoned Husband, and dies
for him. Eponina lives nine years, in a Sepulcher with hers, and after
discovery dies with him. The Mother of the Maccabees brings up her Children to
Martyrdom, and dies her self, bravely after them.

Others are as famous in the Monuments of Antiquity, for Piety. Clotilda
converts France to Christianity; Indegondis, her Grandchild recovers her
Husband and part of Spain, from the Arrian Heresy; Helena plants Christianity,
in the Roman Empire; Cesaria in Persia; Theolinda in Italy; Margaret, in
England; Gisellis, in Hungary; Dambruca, in Poland; Olga, in Russia;
Ethelbirga, in Germany.

And for private Virtues; Abigail, Susanna, S. Agnes, S. Cicely, S. Monica, S.
Felicitas, Zenobia, Pulcheria, Theodora, Marcella, Paula, Eustochium, and ten
Thousand more are the noblest Images. They were Women that in the Infant
Church, led on the Men to Martyrdom; and thronged themselves in little Armies
to Martyrs Fires; that brought up their Infants to the most glorious
sufferings; who, smiled the Tyrants into Rage, and posed the subtlest
inventions, of Pains, and Tortures.

And indeed the numbers, and sorts of virtuous Women have so increased in later
Histories, that to refuse them their honor, would be the same thing, as to
deny the Splendors of the Sun; and either we must have no eyes, to see into the
present, nor any faith to credit past Records, or we must allow, and admire
their merit. But I might have superseded all these Authorities, and relied
wholly upon the following Life, to have demonstrated this verity.

Necessary it will be, before we come to relate what she did, to know from
whence she was; it being not the least Glory of her Character, that as God had
equaled her by Birth, to the greatest of her time, so she her self equalled
her Virtues, to her Extraction.

Daughter she was to Edward Lord Bruce, of Kinloss, Privy Councellor to King
James, both in England and Scotland, and Master of the Rolls. He, Edward Lord
Bruce, discending from Robert Bruce the Norman, to whom William the first gave
the Castle, and Lordship of Shelton, which was a Barony by Tenure. From him
descended all the Noble Bruces both of England and Scotland: and particularly
Robert, and David, both Kings of the Scots; whose Sister marrying into the
Family of the Stewarts, They in her Right inherited the Crown of that Nation.
It cannot therefore but be worthy our first thoughts to contemplate how the
divine Providence, designing her for the most illustrious Life, besides, that
it furnished her Soul, with extraordinary Graces, took care that it should be
united to a Body descending from a Family, flourishing in Riches and Honors;
intending to Remarque to her, what she soon understood, and as truly practiced,
that as God had raised her by her Birth to the heights of Glory, so she should
conduct her self to excel others as much in the Eminencies of Goodness, as she
did in Blood.

Such a Beauty therefore, we have here to delineate, not as we could wish were,
or a strong Imagination can Fancy; but such an one, as is true and solid; and
far better expressing her self in her own life, than is possible by this Copy;
she not being to be paralleled, by any thing but her self. Who as she was
prepared by the Divine goodness for Scenes of Difficulty, and Honor, so was
she better taught to act her own Part, by observing, how her noble Father
performed his.

He, the Lord Bruce amongst other great Services done for his Royal Master King
James, was also a Principal, and happy Instrument, of facilitating his
obtaining the Crown of England: to which though he had an undoubted Right, yet
he met with very potent Obstructions; which in a great measure were removed by
the Interest this noble Lord had before made in Secretary Cecil (afterward
Earl of Salisbury) and diverse others of the English Nobility.

A friendship he had contracted, both intimate, and fortunate, with some of the
greatest Interest, and Power, during his Embassy here in England to Queen
Elizabeth; joined in it to the Earl of Mar; proving afterward an opportunity
of a nobler conjunction; that of the two Crowns, which, the King had no sooner
well settled to his Head, but he took this good Servant, nearer to his Heart,
and Person; Animadverting, that he could not wear them with that security, and
pleasure, he desired, unless he might be Assisted by so useful, and loyal a
Servant; brought him therefore into England with him, that he might continue
him in his Favors, and have him near, to conduct his Affairs, and Councils.

Several Sons he had; and but this only Daughter; she born to him on Christmas
day, and for that reason had the name of Christian: answering up to the highest
measures, the glorious Omen, both of the Day and of her Name; appearing so soon
to be Christian, as if indeed, she had been born one; expressing in her younger
years, such vigorous Demonstrations of Goodness, that the World might easily
see, she had a Soul, and Body, made at first to all possible Perfections.

Such Impressions did this Purity of her Youth, the Pregnancy of her Wit, her
freedom from Passions, that neglect of Vanity, and hatred of Excess, together
with that Modesty, and Sweetness which were naturally hers, made upon the mind
of her Indulgent and Discerning Father; that he expressed his value of her, and
her own merit, by the first public notice he could make; which was to marry
her to an Heir of one of the greatest Families, and Estates in England; and by
giving also such a Portion, as in those Days, did exceed, and would also now be
a very great one, viz. 10000 l.

Her Husband was Sir William Cavendish, Son to the Lord Cavendish (made
afterward Earl of Devonshire) descending from the ancient stock of the Jernon,
and Norman blood. Made thus a Wife, she soon put in practice all those Virtues
which such a Relation required from her. Such a Respect she paid as Saint Paul
commended to Christian Women, that should also increase to Reverence, and
Obedience. Considering wisely with her self, that when the Wife once falters
from the Command of her Husband, storms and tempests invade the Family; and
that her own, her Husbands, her Childrens, and her Friends happiness, and quiet
are not endangered only, but scattered into disorders, worse than Hell.

This Obedience she looked upon as no hard Task, because love assisted, to bear
the pleasing burden. Her own, and Husbands Soul met in equal Poize; and the
thoughts and desires of the one, were the thoughts and desires of the other.
God made them two into one; and they were one in Judgment and in Will, and in
Affection, and in Care.

And as Love made them so, Loyalty another of her Conjugal Virtues so kept
them. The Husband enclosed her to himself when he espoused her with his Ring:
his was the Right, and hers the Virtue to be only his.

Assistance also, one of those ends, for which God made her Woman, and marriage
a Wife she gave to that eminent Degree, that it is not easy to resolve, whether
it was more for the Interest, or Honor of the Cavendish Family, that she was
united to it. For Sir Williams Father having married a second Wife (which too
commonly brings disadvantages to the Children of the first Venture) took not so
much care, as he ought, of his Sons Concernments; nor made Allowances, such as
might render him capable of living in that Dignity, requisite for the Son of
such a Father, and the Husband of such a Wife.

King James therefore taking notice of it, became himself an Advocate for the
noble Pair: and amongst other things told the old Lord Cavendish, that his Son
being matched into a Family, for which he must be highly concerned, he would
expect accordingly, that out of that plentiful Estate he himself had, such a
Proportion be settled, that Sir William might bear up the Port of his Fathers
Son, and his Lady the Quality of the Kings Kinswoman. This Mediation proved so
effectual, that the Lord Cavendish did what the King thought reasonable.

But this Addition though it answered the Kings; yet it did not rise up to the
Generosities of the Sons mind; the greatness of which, (having in himself a
noble disdain to be limited to the Expense of so many thousands only) was the
Occasion of contracting a very great debt: which being entered into by an Excess
of Gallantry; he could not relieve himself from, when he had much a greater
Fortune than formely; but even when Earl of Devonshire, he rather increased it,
by the Magnificence of his living both in Town, and Country, (his House
appearing rather like a Princes Court than a Subjects) for nothing but the
greatest Actions could answer the Heights of his nobler thoughts.

And if any Blame can be derived, from a Debt contracted by so generous an
hand, and made yet greater, by a continuing, and growing Generosity, we shall
see that not the least Censure can light upon our Excellent Lady. For besides,
that she neglected all Delicacies, and came not near the least Excess, either
of Games or Vanity, (the usual Consumers of Estates) she had also the greatest
Prudence, both in the Management, and to increase them when they fell under her
own Economy, as we shall see in the sequel of this Narrative.

Her Lord dying about the year (27) though he left her a Dowry that for
greatness (being near 5000 l. a year) might abundantly testify his own
extraordinary kindness, and her more than usual Deservings: yet the other Part
of the Estate, descending upon her Son, was so complicated with Lawsuits, as
must in the Redemption, testify her, to be a Woman of matchless Discretion,
and of a Fortitude able to surmount all Opposition.

And to make public those Virtues, she had many great and troublesome
Opportunities during her Widowhood. The Suits in Law in which she was left
involved, were in number near thirty, and in their nature the most intricate:
and what yet added more to her trouble, by the Cunning and Power of her
Adversaries, they were rendered as perplexed difficult, and tedious, as was
possible.

But to that Right, which was on her side, she added Diligence and Resolution;
and by these, not only Acquitted her self with the greatest Bravery, but
prevailed in them all to the highest satisfaction. Such great Deeds, rendered
her justly Famous, insomuch that the late King jestingly said to her; Madam,
You have all my Judges at your Disposal: as what Courts would not be influenced
by such commanding Charms, to do justice?

And yet she would not Arrogate much of all this to her self; but would always
(next to God) Attribute the Success of her Undertakings, to the Care and
Industry of her Brother the Earl of Elgin: who, besides the most generous
Inclinations, which he had; to assist the Distressed, the rather undertook this
troublesome Province, that he might declare both to her self, and the whole
World, the extraordinary Kindness, he had for his Sister; the dear Respects he
bare to his deceased Brother in Law; and the tender Care he had for his young
Nephew, the Earl of Devonshire, that now is, being then, but nine years of Age.

But the Discharging the Estate, from those numerous Lawsuits, was not the
only thing that required her Care: there was a great Debt also, which must take
up her thoughts; and be another Specimen of her Trouble, as well as Prudence.
Her Lord indeed, had before his Death, provided some Materials, by obtaining an
Act of Parliament, for cutting off an Entail, in order to the sale of Lands: a
thing not usual in those times; and that then had not been effected, but for
the sakes of those, for whom it was done; as the late King was pleased to
express it.

My Lord of Devonshire had been a great speaker; and much beloved, and admired,
in both Houses of Parliament, she her self also, a Lady of that Affability, and
sweet Address; had besides, so great a Wit, and Judgment of what was fit to be
urged and done, that she captivated many both of the Lords and Commons, who had
in a manner Resolved never to have consented, to the Passing of such a Bill.

But gained it was; though when obtained, it bore no Proportion, toward the
Payment of that vast Debt for which it was designed: however, with what money
the sale of Lands brought in, together with her own Care, and Management,
(though with Difficulty enough) she discharged the Debt. Having thus cleared
the Estate for the Heir; her next Concern was, by the most generous Education,
to prepare her Son, that he might answer his great Fortune, and greater Name,
by the noblest Actions.

For considering wisely with her self, that the good or evil condition of
Children did not depend upon any kind Aspects, or malevolent Configuration of
Planets at their Birth; or that they were made Fatally evil, by any Original
Necessity of being wicked; she concluded that (next to Gods Grace) the best
Impresses of Virtue ought to be stamped upon Children when they are young; if
their Parents would have them Eminent in the Practice of it.

Upon these Reasonings, our prudent Lady, (who both by her own Prince, and
Strangers, was Reputed to live greater than any Subject whatsoever, as to
Hospitality, Resort, and Retinue,) spared no cost in Breeding the young Lord:
who in his Minority, was maintained both at Home, and in his Travels, beyond
any of his Quality; and by her Care instructed also, by such Tutors, as could
read to him, the most Accomplished Lectures, in all those Sciences that must
Render him, a perfect Gentleman.

Toward which that she might give him the most inviting Encouragements, to the
Indulgencies of a Mother, she added the Prudence of the Housewife; and at the
same time, she was so expensive in his Education; yet then and at other times
by her frugality, made such Purchases, which when she died, added considerably
to his Fortunes: becoming at once a Pattern of the largest Generosity, and
strictest Houswifry; and giving Demonstrations to all of their mutual
Consistence. For when Courts, both Domestic and Foreign, did admire the one;
the most Parsimonious did confess that she surpassed them in the other.

But these extraordinary Actions her great Prudence, though conjoined with a
Resolution, not to be wearied out, could not have Effected; if she had not also
with the most discreet, as well, as Christian Forecast, wisely proportioned the
right Expense of Time. Her Mornings therefore, being disposed to Devotion, and
the Household Affairs; every day, after she had first Accounted to God for her
self, she then took the Accounts, even to the minutest Expenses, of what the
preceding Day had consumed.

But Prayers and pious Readings were her first Business; Virtues almost natural
to the Sex: the devout Sex, the Fathers call it; as if the very Inclinations,
of Women, were to Religion; to teach them, how much they degenerate from
themselves, even from Women, when they grow impious. They are the Beauties of
this lower world; Natures sweetest Pride; and Grace, though it springs not out
of Natures Garden, yet it often is transplanted thither, as the aptest Soil to
nourish it.

The softest, Natures are usually the most pliant; receive the motions of
Heaven with the most ready willingness; and the softest Natures usually are
Women; and Devotion takes first, and surest Root, in their tender Breasts. And
well Radicated it was in hers we are speaking of; for though none managed
Family Affairs, with more Care, than she; yet always God was preferred to
business, him first served, and then that was attended.

The Remainders of the Day were determined to her Friends; in the Entertainment
of whom, her Conversation was so tempered with Courtship, and Heartiness; her
Discourses, so sweetened, with the Delicacies of Expression, and Harmony of
Reason; that such as did not well know the Expense of her Time, would have
thought, she had employed it all, in Address, and Dialouge.

In both which she exceeded most Ladies; and yet never affected the Title of a
Wit; carried no snares in her Tongue; nor counterfeited Friendships; maintained
no Paradoxes or imperious Disputes; and as she was never known to speak evil of
any, so neither would she endure to hear it, from any, of others; reckoning it
not only a Vice against good manners, but the greatest Indecency also, in the
Entertainment of Friends, to spend the time in useless talkings, and calumnies,
and therefore always kept her self within the measures of Civility, and
Religion; from whence, her Conversation was wise, and profitable, witty, and
innocent; and in her lips, the very Law of kindness, and sweetness of Language.

Her Gestures corresponded to her Speech; no giddy head or proud Eyelids, no
haughty Brow, or perplexed Countenance; but of a free, native, genuine, and
graceful Behavior; as far from affected, and extraordinary Motions, as they
from Discretion.

These admirable Qualities drew to her House all the best Company, toward
whom, she had so easy, and such an obliging Address, without the least Allay of
Levity, or Disdain, that every one departed with the highest satisfaction; she
ever distributing her respects according to the Quality, and merit of each:
steering the same steady course in the Country also; between which, and the
Town, she commonly divided the year.

Her Country Seats, were many, and noble; some of which when her Son came of
Age, she delivered up to him: (viz.) his great Houses in Darbyshire, all ready
furnished; she her self, living in that, of Leicester Abbey; (near to which she
had purchased a considerable Estate) until the Rebellion broke out.

Then it was, that the Education which she had given her Sons, began to express
it self, by the most generous demonstrations; both of them adhering faithfully
to the Crown: for that Care which the Mother took, to season them at first with
the just Tincture of all private and public Virtues, prepared them to give the
most signal Testimonies, of their Loyalty and Valor, upon the first
opportunities.

The Earl of Devonshire her Elder Son, made an early Express of the severest
Loyalty, mixed with the noblest Resolution, in that famous Occasion of the Earl
of Straffords Bill, and many others; being then firm to the true Interest of
his Prince and Country, when many others Relinquished their Posts, out of
sinister Ends; or were Affrighted from them by Popular Clamors.

But this noble Lord, having an undaunted Integrity, and a mind clear sighted,
the one, made him, consider his Dignity, as an Obligation of Conscience, not to
deliver a Peer to the Block, to quench the thirst only of Blood, and Ambition;
or satisfy a State necessity: the other assured him, what would be the fatal
consequences to the King, and Nation; and therefore would not Vote to the
Acting of such a Crime, which introduced the ruin of them both; and which too
in the Opinion of the Lords House made the very Record of it to be Razed out of
their Journals.

From whence we may see also, what Estimation that Honorable House had, for
those noble Parsonages who consented not to that unhappy Vote; Eternizing their
Names for Statesmen of Conscience and Courage.

Amongst whom the Earl of Devonshire, ought to be in the foremost Lists,
proceeding in all his Actions, with marveilous Freedom, and Integrity;
concluding, that to be an ill Method of preserving Commonwealths by destroying
Kingdoms.

That man certainly is the bravest Courtier, as well as Christian, who to the
Serpents subtilty, joins the Doves Innocence; and will not be brought under the
Tyranny of Passion, or self-interest. And so well this Noble Lord was fortified
against all surprises from these mean, and mischeivous Principles; that in all
public concerns, he directed his course by the Rules of Honor, and Justice;
which secure the most lasting and certain Advantages to all Kingdoms.

And let the Events of honest Prudence, be what they will, yet the Observation,
is every Statesmans noblest Character. That Councellor is a Cyclops, without an
Eye, who thinks to secure the greatest Interests of Government, by Caballing
with Faction, or laying Stratagems for his own Grandeur upon the destruction of
great Favorites: for every man sees through this Disguise, and finds under it
a dissembling of their Pride, and Revenge, Envy, and a desire of Pre-eminence:
and it is not so much a removing the Kings Enemies out of the way, as their own
Rivals.

But nothing could tempt our brave Lord to a dishonest Action; nor to preserve
himself, but together with his Reputation; chose Sequestration rather than to
prevaricate in the least title from Christian Fortitude, and Nobleness; or to
change his Propositions according to the Necessities, or Advantages of the
Season. For when ever Loyalty, and Religion, were the Question, he always chose
to participate in the common Calamities of the Orthodox, and the Brave; Riding
safely, in that Storm, which Dashed others to pieces, upon the Plank of
Innocence, and suffering: nor would he at last have been prevailed with to
remove any part of his Troubles; or the Sequestration from his Estate, but by
the Importunity; or rather the Commands of his Mother; Detesting in it self
what in Duty to her he complied with.

But I must not pretend to his just Character; thinking it better to pass it
over in silence and with veneration: he being also of that Gallantry of mind,
that though he delights in great things he does not care to hear of them.

Leave howsoever I may take, to make it up, from the younger Son, of our Lady,
Colonel Charles Cavendish; a Person that equalled the bravest of his time in
the Accomplishments both of mind, and body; which as they rendered him the
delight of all that knew him, so too the most favored by his Prince.

And not without just Reason; for he was a Gentleman so furnished with all the
interior, and politer parts of Learning, (obtained at home and abroad, both by
reading Books, and Men,) as well as Courage; that he was prepared to defend his
Prince, with his head and hand; by the strongest Reason, and most generous
Valor.

Of both which, he gave such great, and glorious Instances; that those brave
Gentlemen of the Temple, who offered themselves as a Guard to the Royal Person
of the late King (in the first breaking out of those Tumults which ushered in
the Rebellion) chose him for their Captain; knowing he would thither lead them,
where Law, Honor, and Conscience, would oblige them to follow.

A Gentleman that made the true Figure, both of Valor, and Virtue; that
carried forth, his Arms (with the first,) under the Standards of Loyalty; and
for the same reason, they ought to be hung up in the Temple of Glory. The
Profession of Arms in his case, was the most renowned, marching with the Hosts
of God and the King; and he esteemed himself more innobled by the blood, he
lost for his Prince, and Country, than by that he drew from the loins, of his
Progenitors.

And indeed being excited by so generous a Design, as to Cement the Breaches
that were made upon Monarchy, (though with his blood,) he did such things in
War, as increased the Palms and Crowns, which had long environed the heads of
his Predecessors; and seemed to be the Person, reserved by Heaven to Finish the
Honors of his Family.

Many eminent Actions he performed for his Prince in the late Rebellion: and
one particularly in the sight of the Queen, (which is to be a Trophey to his
memory) as she was coming from Burlington (where she landed) to Oxford. He took
Burton upon Trent by Storm; encouraging his Soldiers, by his own example to
swim over; where you might have seen him, under showers of Bullets, defye all
the most dreadful Images of death, and with such a Resolution scale the Works
beset with Arms and Terrors, as if his Life had been as Immortal, as he has
made his Honor.

And it is not the least part of his fighting Glory, that it could never have
been taken from his head, but by such base men, who added Treachery, to their
Treason, murdering him in cold blood, near Gainsburrough, after Quarter given,
by Colonel Bury; who made himself dear to the Usurper, Cromwell, by this, and
some other Acts of Cruelty.

But the memory of Colonel Cavendish could not thus be destroyed; nor his
Esteem; for when his Body was brought to Newark to be interred, the whole Town
was so fond of it, (even dead) that they would not suffer it, for some days to
be laid into the Ground, but wept over it, and admired it, and not without the
greatest Reluctance, at last committed him to his Dormitory; covering the Hears
with Tears and Laurels; nay and about Thirty years after, when his body was
removed to be interred at Darby, with his Mother, fresh lamentations were made
by those that knew, and others that had heard his Fame; and the whole People of
Newark expressed, the most sorrowful unwillingness, to part with the Relics
of so dear a Person, who had been, when alive, the Ornament and Defense of that
Place.

But sit it was he should be laid as near as possible to his indulgent Mother,
because his death, came nearest her heart, of any affliction God was pleased to
try her Patience with. And indeed but for his loss, and that of her only
Daughter, the Lady Rich, Daughter-in-Law to the Earl of Warwick, she had an
uninterrupted Prosperity during the whole time of her Widowhood; abating also
her great Concern, for those common Calamities, which befell her self, together
with the King and Church.

But it cannot be imagined what grief seized her Spirits, upon the death of two
such Children: it being the hardest Contest that ever was seen, (as those
observed that were present with her,) between a Maternal Affection and
Magnanimity of mind. And though by Reason and Religion, she restrained her
Passion from breaking out into a Tempest; yet she had sunk under the Pressure
of her dolours, if she had not (next to those supports, which she received from
Heaven) had great comforts, from the company, and pious Assistances of her
Brother the Earl of Elgin, who stirred not from her, on both these sad
Occasions, her Son the Earl of Devonshire, being young, when under the former,
and at too great distance, when under the later of these Trials.

That worthy Daughter of hers, (whose death gave a great part of these sorrows)
was whilst alive the noblest Transcript of her Mothers Virtues: and for that
reason became the Darling of the Family, she was matched into, as well as her
own.

A Lady, of that comprehensive and known Goodness; that her very Name is a
sufficient Character; nor dare I venture, at any other; it being endeavored by
the Wits, and Orators of her own time; my Lord Faukland, Mr. Waller, Mr.
Godolphin, and others.

However, I may Remarque so far: That though she was a Lady, that might derive
Honor from the Greatness of her Blood, she rather chose to do it by the
worthiness of her Actions; her Wit and Discretion kept equal measures; and her
freedom of conversation, was bounded with modesty; she had a great mind,
without disdain; the sweetest Mien, but not without Majesty: and in sum; every
thing she said, or did, like her self, fair and transcending, and what became a
Daughter of the Countess of Devonshire.

To whom it is time, to return; and we shall now find her in the exaltation of
her Virtues: for toward the later end of the Rebellion, spending some part of
her time at Greenwich, the deplorable condition of the King, and Church, which
had lain for a long time heavy upon her thoughts, set her mind into the noblest
Ferment; and that produced the most vigorous Resolutions, at least, of
endeavoring, with her utmost skill, and diligence, the Recovery of her Prince,
and the Nation from those Usurpations that were upon his Crown, and their
Liberties, by an insolent, hypocritical and ill natured Party.

And a fair Prospect she apprehended there was, of effecting this brave
Undertaking, (the Projecting of which was the Enamel and Beauty, of all her
other Deeds) because Devereux, Earl of Essex, and the Earl of Holland, seemed
at this time, desirous to expiate their former Crimes, by such a Repentance, as
should make full restitution to the King and People by returning Him to his
Dignity, and them to their Freedom.

To which glorious Designs, they were not a little invited by her carnest
solicitations; and very much encouraged by her Prudence: and in which Essex had
given the surest Demonstration of his loyal Purposes, had not Death prevented
him in the end of the year Forty six.

The Presbyterian Faction in general, that first fomented, and still carried on
this unnatural Rebellion, beginning the War in the name of God, would not put
an end to it, neither for his sake, nor the Kings: having other Apprehensions
and making other Advantages of the Kings, and Churches sufferings; For because
God was pleased to make them the Crucifiers of his People, they supported their
Persons and their Pretenses by their successes; and reckoning their own
Christianity from their Victories, would not allow either the King, or his
Cause to be so much as Christian: for they themselves are the men that were
Fortunate, and Prosperous, and therefore had the Baseness, as well as ignorance
to declare that they were setting up Christ's Kingdom, (though by the breach of
all his Commandments) being suffered by Heaven to satisfy their lust, ambition
and revenge upon the Crown, and Mitre.

A Principle, that equally serves, Presbitery and Mahumetism; for we have seen
the Grand Segnior to prevail upon a great part of Christendom, and to have made
both the Kings and Bishops of the Eastern Churches his Slaves and Tributaries;
and yet he is prosperous: hence the Sultans of each Party do agree, that every
thing is Right, that is Fortunate; and what mischief both the Turk and the
other, have wrought to Christian Princes the whole World can tell; or what
hopes there may be to find Penitents, amongst such men who will declare a
Prevaling Villain, to be Gods General, the next Age must expect, for we can
find but very few in this.

The Generosity indeed of Essex, ought to have its due allowance, and
commendation; and the rather, because even after all his successes, he saw the
Error of his Arms; and the Kings Right did then appear to him, when he had
triumphed over all his Power. But he could live no longer than only to see his
Faults; and it may be, his being infected with Loyalty was the Poison that
dispatched him.

Essex being dead, the Janissaries of the Rebel Army, by the basest Treachery,
and Violence, soon made themselves Masters of the Kings Person: and carrying
him from place to place, whether they pleased; brought him to Latimers; where
our noble Lady happening then to be with her Son the Earl of Devonshire, his
Majesty had much private Consultation with her concerning the State of his
Affairs; and at the same time expressed both to her, and the Earl, the great
sense, he had of the faithful Services they had done him.

The latter end of that year, increasing the Kings troubles and the
consideration of his, multiplying her own; being much depressed in mind, with
such a load of public Calamities, she would try if Privacy might give ease to
any part of her Sorrows: retire therefore she did to her Brothers, the Earl of
Elgins House at Ampthill; a place, if any in the world, (next to her Sons) that
could compose her distracted thoughts; and the only means, she could then think
on, to give any tolerable comfort, under those circumstances of the Kings, and
her own Afflictions.

And thither she was the rather invited, by that unparallelled kindness that
ever had been, between her self and Brother; the extraordinary love, she bare
to his Lady the Countess of Oxford; and the dear Respects, she had also, for
her Nephew, the Lord Bruce, his Lady, and Children.

Here, as she would always acknowledge to her death, she both lightened her
griefs, and her expenses, and at this time, (during her three years stay there)
she became Mistress of those Riches, which her Retirement gave her opportunity
to gather.

For when at home her expenses in the noblest Housekeeping, and the most
generous Charity, kept equal measures with her Incomes, and her Goodness so
vied her Huswifry, that she could scarce tell how to lay up money so long as she
had a friend to entertain, or any in distress to relieve. For Charity was one
of her dear Delights; nor would she stay for, but find out Opportunities;
though indeed she lived in such times, that afforded daily Objects for her
tenderest Compassions.

The War had made Loyalty poor; and Sequestrations upon the Priests of God, had
reduced the Clergy to such lamentable wants, that they had nothing left to
cloth them, but their own Righteousness; nor any thing to feed on, but a good
Conscience, and their passive Virtues.

Here our noble Lady saw, and pitied; and as ever she had been the Defender, so
now she became the succourer of the Righteous Cause; Fed, and Clothed, and
Comforted all, that lived within the Vicinage of her Charity; and as one Act of
goodness creates Appetites after others; so neither could her Desires be
satisfied with the next occasions for her Bounty, but she sought abroad, and
diffused it round the Nation, and beyond it also, to such as were made poor for
Gods sake, and the Kings.

And in this, she had a peculiar Generosity, for though she would give with
both hands to the loyal Sufferers yet she would not endure it should be
reckoned as an Alms, but rather as a just Debt to them, out of her Abundance.

And God was pleased to invite her forward, to keep the Fountains of her
Nobleness, and Charity, continually open, by the greatest encouragements: for
as she laid up Riches in Heaven, by her mighty Expense, in the Acts of mercy;
so those waters upon which she cast her bread returned with such Fertility and
Increase, that she became Owner of larger Possessions upon Earth; and collected
money, and Blessing by her Dispersions to the Poor. Removing in the year 50 to
that pleasant seat of Rohamptom in Surry; she had not lived much above a year
in it, ere it became her own by Purchase.

And now began again the usual Resort of her former friends, and her own
magnificent way of living: which she improved not only to raise to her self the
Memoirs of a private Greatness, but a Name of everlasting Honor, for her
concerns in the Public good.

Hence she took opportunity from such loyal Persons as frequented her House, to
discourse with, and persuade them, to the most Active endeavors for the Kings
Restoration: and her Counsels in this business, as they were the most Prudent,
and steady; so neither could any to whom she communicated them, scruple in the
least, their own joining in such honorable Designs, because they saw that she
invited and encouraged, her nearest Relations, into the same generous Hazards.

For during her abode at Amphthill, she had continual Correspondencies with
such Persons, both in England, and Scotland, as she found would assist to the
resettlement of the King, and the Recovery of the Church, and State, from those
thraldoms, under which they both groaned.

To this end, many Letters passed between her, and Duke Hamilton, the Earls of
Holland and Norwich, (that Norwich, who was General of those Forces raised by
Esquire Hales in Kent) and many others of eminent conduct: which Letters were both
written, and received in Characters; in the writing and opening of which she
entrusted none but her Nephew, the Lord Bruce (now Earl of Ailesbury) and her
Chaplain, Mr. Gale.

Her Nephew, though too young to be concerned in the first War, did as soon as
possible give the noblest Demonstrations, what he would have done then by his
engaging in the Kings Cause, immediately upon his Return from his Travels in
the year 56.

He had indeed that Part of Felicity, which the Orator esteemed to be one of
the bravest Portions of the Character of Constantine the Great (viz.) to be
born happy: and our Lady therefore considering his very Extraction, as his
great Engagement to the Crown; and finding him prepared by his Principles, as
well as Birth, to do every thing that should be to the reputation of both;
though he was as dear to her, as one of her eyes, yet she would have him, put
his Person, and his Fortunes, into the same bottom with Caesar, and either stem
the storm of Tyranny, or suffer shipwreck: from which it was only the Divine
Providence, that delivered him; he being once, in the hands of Cromwell his
Major General; men thirsty enough of such loyal Blood.

But he had given himself to the public, and therefore considered not his own
concerns in the least, when the services of the King and Church, called him
forth, to the greatest dangers: and entering upon his Duty, with such brave
intentions, and without the least mixture of base, and mercenary ends, God was
pleased to deliver him from great Disasters, and to bless his purposes, by
seeing that King and that Religion restored, which are both the best in the
whole World. And though the glory of this must be wholly ascribed to Heaven;
yet God was pleased to prepare a way to his own designs by the vigorus, and
restless endeavors of the loyal and orthodox Lords, and Gentry; for could
These have been seduced, to have complemented, and addressed to Cromwell, and
his Son, as it is notorious all others but those of the Church of England did;
it had in humane speaking been the most probable establishment of the
Usurpation. But our Church restrains, as from Assisting, so likewise from
wishing well to an Usurper; both which all the World knows, the whole Faction
did. It is well therefore for Monarchy and the Church of England, that they
have such sure and constant Friends, as this noble Lord I am speaking of; who
was not only, industrious in their Resettlement, but has been as great an
Instrument ever since of their mutual preservation.

It is not unknown to any, how both the Crown, and Church, have been Deserted
in their Necessities, when they most wanted the Constancy and Fortitude, of
those, that seemed to be fast Friends, to each, in their prosperous days; but
even then, when it was a popular Crime, to be just and loyal, this noble Lord
stood as firm as a Rock; having such a greatness, as well as steadiness of
mind; that no Flatteries could charm, no Importunities force, or Dangers
terrify, either to the doing, or so much as consenting, to any Evil to the
Government; or making one false step from the closest and most fixed Rules of
Honor and Justice.

And one thing more, I must take leave to add; that it is impossible, his
Loyalty and Religion should ever languish or faint, they not at all depending
upon the nourishments of Ambition or Avarice, but resuming new vigours
continually from the source of his own Virtues.

In these things, He was our Excellent Ladies Relative as well as by Blood; nor
was her Loyalty without its hazards. For though her Actings were not thoroughly
discovered, yet so much suspected they were, by the then usurped Powers, that a
Troop of Horse, had been sent down to fetch her up from Ampthill, (about the
same time, that the Countess of Carlisle was put into the Tower) had not her
Goldsmith, (a Confident of the Rebels) given a Bribe to one of the then
Council of State, whose great Licentiousness, and narrow Fortunes rendered him
greedy enough of Money.

Escaping thus narrowly, did not in the least abate, but rather redouble her
Fortitude, and reinforce her Resolutions not to give over till she had attained
her ends: of which she had the fairest Prospect, in that Critical time of
General Monks Action. With him therefore she enters into a speedy and secret
Correspondency; and though he was one of a most retired and prudent wariness,
yet so far he entrusted her (which he did few besides) that he sent her by a
considerable Officer, a private Signal by which she might know his Intentions;
and so managed they were by this brave Man, that they proved according to his
Assurances, and her Wishes, the Kings Restoration.

And if there be any thing by which this great Lady may be allowed to have
obliged the Present, or to fill Future times, with Admiration and
Acknowledgments; it must be this glorious Act of Assisting toward that
universal good, which the whole World stood in expectation of, and so many
Thousands of hands were lifted up to Heaven to Accomplish.

The General in all this knew her Merit, and valued her accordingly; and
entering into a noble Friendship, continued it with the greatest Respects, to
her death. The King himself also, that she might receive the utmost Honor, as
well as Satisfaction by his Return, was pleased (as his Father of Blessed
Memory had done before) Graciously to assure her that he had a great sense of
her constant Zeal in his Service, and as a particular mark of his extraordinary
Favor, would Himself with the Queen, Queen Mother, and Royal Family, often
Dine with her; and sometimes break in upon her on a sudden after hunting.

And that no Token of Respect might be wanting, toward the Declining part of
her Age, when she could not pay her Attendance upon the Queen, with the usual
and due Solemnities of Court Address, she was admitted to wait upon her Majesty
with more than ordinary Ease and Kindness.

But there were other Courts, to which as she had through her whole life, been
preparing her self; now she began with greater Intentions, and the expense of
larger portions of her time, to Dress up her Soul for. Enter she does into a
beloved Retirement, from the noise, and imbroilments of business with silence
and devotion, to fit her self for Paradise: drew the Curtain to the Affairs of
the world, some years before her Death to entertain her self, with Meditations
and Preparations for Eternity.

Not that she excluded her self from any offices of Civility to her Friends, or
the most indearing expressions of Tenderness toward her Relations; but rather
did with more Passion, and Earnestness desire their continual Company: and when
without that, of her Son the Earl of Devonshire and his Lady, she would be more
importunate for the useful, and agreeable Conversation of her Nephew the Earl
of Ailesbury, and his Countess.

For still, she had a numerous Family, and a Crowd of Servants; which now in
her Age must have incircled her with as many Troubles also, if by the Advice of
her Niece the Countess of Ailesbury, the Decency, and Composure of her mind, as
well as Business, had not been secured.

For her great Age had rendered her own Virtues something unactive; but this was
abundantly supplied by such Methods and Guards of Prudence, which she received
from another hand; by whose Care, and Wisdom, her Thoughts and Affairs were
defended from a great many Vexaions, and Hazards. And the more our good Lady
wanted the Assistance of a true and prudent Friend, the more the Countess of
Ailesbury considered her Duty, and with the most generous Compassions, (in the
lowest Declination of our Ladies strength and years) increased her Attendance,
and by such Counsels, as she had always ready in her Prudent mind, and a wise
observation of things, made the last Scenes of her life, more easy and
honorable.

Before Death seized her, it showed it self at a distance, and God was pleased
so to order it, that by some previous Infirmities, (as well as by a great Age)
she should be called upon to provide for her greatest Interest. And she soon
understood the Intent of Gods Providence; and by Methods, truly Christian,
prepared her self for Him.

Her last sickness (though it continued for some time) was entertained with
great Patience, and repeated Devotions; with a perfect Resignation to Gods
Will, and all the Offices preparatory to an holy Dying: but considering with
her self that Charity was that only Grace which entered Heaven, her Love to God
became now more intense and operative, nor could she even under her Pains,
forbear her usual Compassion and Bounties to the Poor, but would often inquire
of her Niece, the Countess of Ailesbury, whether there were none that wanted
Relief, and would by the hands of her Chaplain, to the very last minutes of her
Life, continue the beloved Practices of Beneficence.

Her Servants had received many, and those very great Instances of her Bounty;
but she could not leave them without a farewell Testimony; and therefore besides
the large Legacies left to them by Will, she ordered a great sum to be given
amongst them, not long before her Death, by the Countess of Ailesbury.

To whom our Lady thought her self so infinitely obliged, that she beseeched
her to make choice of her own Retributions, which she would confirm by signing
any Instrument which should be offered to her; But the Countess had had her
Reward before, and would have no other than the inward satisfactions of mind,
arising from the Delights of doing well.

And now our good Lady was hastening to Heaven, and being Crowned with many
Years, and Honors, she went to receive that of Immortality, in January, 1674.
The Noble Lord, her Son, took care that the solemnities of her lying in State,
and those also of her Funeral should correspond to the Magnificence of her
living. The Train which waited on her to her Burial, was great, and noble; and
besides her own Retinue, (which was more numerous than any other of her
Quality) her Nephew, the Earl of Ailesbury, his Eldest Son, the Lord Bruce, his
second Son, Mr. Robert Bruce (whom for some years she had taken into her own
Care, and Family, and Colonel Cook, (whom as a constant Friend to her self, and
her Relations, she had made one of the Overseers of her Will) did atttend her
to Derby, the Burial Place of the Earl of Devonshires Family; where during her
life she had Erected a Monument for her Lord, Her self and Children. One of
them, Colonel Charles Cavendish, (a Person of that Bravery, and Worthiness,
that his very Ashes ought to be sacred) was so Dear to his Mother, that
according to her desire, his Corpse were taken up at Newark, and in another
Hearse, waited that of his Beloved Mothers to Derby. To both, passing through
Leicester, were due Respects paid to their Memories; the Magistrates of that
Place attending in their Formalities; the Gentry o the County also, meeting
there and waiting them out of Town. The same Honorable Reception they had at
Derby, where they were both interred: Her Funeral Sermon preached by Mr.
Frampton (Chaplain to the Earl of Elgin) now Bishop of Gloucester; his, by Mr.
Naylor Chaplain to the Countess. Never was a Woman more honored through her
whole life, and at her death; and by both she has taught all Ladies, That the
surest Path to Honor, is by Virtue.

And both for the Method, and the Experiment, we have not had of late a more
pregnant Instance than this of our Noble Lady; for by the Methods of Virtue,
she obtained the Reputation to be a Person of the greatest Character, and
Blessings. Amongst which, it was not the least, in her own Account, that she
had such fair hopes that her Nobleness would descend, and continue in her Son
the Earl of Devonshire, and her two Grandchildren, the Lord William, and the
Lady Anne Cavendish.

He, the young Lord, appearing one of the finest Gentlemen in the World,
married to a Daughter of his Grace the Duke of Ormond; a Lady of great
Goodness, and singular Charity. She the Lady Anne Cavendish, improving her
youth to such early Virtues, that she soon became Eminent for her extraordinary
Modesty, and most punctual Duty to her Parents: married first to the Lord Rich,
Grandchild to the Earl of Warwick; who dying left her a young Widow, to make
Fortunate the Lord Burleigh, now Earl of Exeter, her second Husband.

One thing more there was, which she would say, added infinitely to her
Contentments, to see that excellent, and noblest Friendship between the Earl of
Devonshire, her Son, and the Earl of Ailesbury, her Nephew. Which as it was one
of the greatest Pleasures of her life, so the continuance of it, was one of her
latest and most passionate Desires.

And such effect it had upon these two noble Lords, that the Friendship which
began at Relation, and Acquaintance, stayed not there; but went forward to the
best thing in all the World, to the most particular Indearment, and most
useful Love. For seeing a Worthyness in each other, which is the just and
proper Motive for Friendship, They united such Affections as were natural and
virtuous, made up of great Dearness, and the bravest Combination of Councils,
and Fortunes, and Interrests.

And it were well that when ever we enter into such a Friendship, which we
intend should be (as indeed true Friendship is) the Pleasure of Life, and the
Delight of Conversation, that we would choose a Friend, amongst the Prudent,
and the Generous, the Secret, and the Faithful, the Ingenuous and the Honest;
for no other are fit, or able to do those Offices, for which Friendship is
useful, and excellent.

FINIS.

