An Advertisement concerning the Fourth and Last Part of Mr. POOLE'S Synopsis
Criticorum aliorumque S. Scripturae Interpretum.
WHereas my Work was at first proposed to be comprised in Three Volumes, and in
the progress of it it was found necessary to add a Fourth: In which, though
the Reverend Bishops, Doctors, Trustees, and others concerned in it were fully
satisfied, yet I would not resolve to do it till I had given the Subscribers
an Account of my Intention, and the Grounds and Reasons of it, (to which I
refer them,) and wholly submitted it to their choice. Whereupon the Subscribers
did generally declare their Consent to that Proposal, and did not only judge
such an Addition necessary, but a considerable number of them did then and
since express their Desire that I would make Two Volumes upon the New
Testament, for which they freely offered to pay accordingly. And, I confess, if
it had been res integra, I should have been of their mind, not for my own
interest, (for I doubt not to make it evident, that the completing of the Work
in Three Volumes had, all things considered, been more to my advantage then
either Four or Five,) but for the peculiar Excellency and Importance of the New
Testament, which did both require and deserve a more elaborate Explication. But
having engaged my self in my last Proposition, that there should be no further
Addition then of that One Volume proposed, and that I would require no more of
the Subscribers for it then 20 Shillings, I conceived my self disabled to
comply with that Desire, and obliged to put no other burden upon the
Subscribers. Nevertheless, that I might gratify their Desire as far as I could
without the Injury of others, and, because I perceived it was the unanimous
Sense of all, that I should not streighten my self upon the New Testament, I
designed to comprimize the Difference; and (whereas the stated number of Sheets
for a Volume was 280) to make this a Volume of 400 Sheets. But herein, I must
acknowledge, there did arise in my mind many considerable Objections: That I
might, without great difficulty, finish the Work (so as to keep to my own
Proposals) in a Volume not much exceeding the stated bulk; that the Enlargement
of it (besides the incidental Charge and Pains) would certainly cost me many
Hundreds of pounds out of my own purse, a Loss which I was not in Condition to
bear, because of the Emolument of my Work, which I had already reaped, a great
part was swallowed up by necessary Expenses belonging to it, and the rest by
some casual Infelicities; that the future Profit of it was exposed to many
Uncertainties; that I should have small thanks from some, and harsh Censures
from others, though what I did should be more for their, then for my own,
Advantage. Against these and other Suggestions I relieved my self by the
Conscience of my own Sincere Intentions in serving the Public to the best of
my skill, though with the hazard of my private Inconvenience and Loss; as also
of the Quality of my Subscribers, who were generally Learned and Ingenuous
Persons. And, as I was content to be no Gainer by these Enlargements, so I
concluded, Persons of that Character would not suffer me to be a Loser by their
Benefit. And therewith having satisfied my self, I have proceeded accordingly.
And because the Length of the Work would necessarily require proportionable
Time, and diverse of the Subscribers have, with some Impatience, expressed their
Desires of the Publication of this Last Volume, and, though it were in truth
but One Volume, and might be bound up together, yet the most of the Subscribers
would probably bind it in Two, I thought fit (not without the Advice of some
Prudent Persons, to whom I communicated my Intentions) to publish the First
Part of it, which would make a moderate Volume, containing all the Gospels and
the Acts of the Apostles. And this the Subscribers are to exspect before next
Michaelmas Term, without looking for any further notice, unless there happen
some extraordinary cause. And those of the Subscribers who shall send up the
half of their Money for this Last Volume to S. John's Gate House, near
Smithfield, shall receive the said First Part of the Last Volume. An Account
whereof, so far as concerns the Gospels (for the Acts I have not yet begun)
here follows. The Authors contracted, being comprised in the Critics, printed
at London, are these, Mursterus, Valla, Revius, Erasmus, Vatablus, Castalio,
Zegerus, Drusius, Casaubonus, Camero, Gualtperius, Ludovicus Capellus, Iacobus
Capellus, Pricaeus, Scultetus, besides many others taken out of the Two Volumes
of Appendices to those Critics; and Grotius. Concerning whom I must entreat
the Subscribers to reflect upon my Proposal, wherein they will find nothing
peculiarly promised (except the Translation of Greek Quotations) but only this
declared of him in common with the rest, That I should take care to collect out
of them whatsoever belongs to the explication of Scripture. Which course if I
had observed in him, I am persuaded, as far as I can conjecture, I might have
saved my self near Thirty Sheets in this First Part: not only because, though
he was an accurate and polite Writer, yet a great number of his words might
have been left out without any detriment to the Sense of the Text; but
especially because he has many large Discourses wholly extrinsecall to the
Explication of those Texts where they are introduced. But because it was the
concurring Desire of a great number of the Subscribers (which had with me the
force of a Command) that I would take in as much of Grotius as possibly I
could; and because his Discourses were for the most part so clear and solid and
useful to all Divines, I have entirely transcribed them into my Work, and, I
suppose, I may truly say, I have left very few of Grotius his words out of it,
excepting his Quotations out of other men, wherein I have taken greater
liberty, especially where they were large, or not considerable to the clearing
of the Text, in which case I have made references to them: but where they were
short or of any moment to the Explication of the present Text, I presume I have
commonly produced them, and the Greek Quotations which were such, I have
generally translated, mentioning only the first words of the Greek. In the
next place, I have collected out of the Authors contained in the Biblia Maxima,
as also out of Piscator, L. de Dieu, Mr. Mede, Dr. Lightfoot's Harmony, and his
Chronicle, and his Horae Hebraicae, etc. upon each of the Gospels, Gataker's
Cinnus, Adversaria, Anti-Pfochenius, and his Manuscript Notes, Glassius,
Bochartus, etc. as in the former Volumes. And whereas I stand engaged no
further by my Proposal, then to supply the Defects of the mentioned Writers
out of other and larger Commentators, and I have accordingly in the preceding
Volumes perused only 4 or 5 of them, I have here with care and diligence
perused Camerarius, Beza, Lucas Brugenfis (consisting of Three great Volumes,
and being one of the best Commentators upon the Gospels, in the Judgment of
most Learned men,) Maldonate, an acute and Learned, though a Passionate,
Writer, Dr. Hammond, Schmidius, the German Greek Professor, who writ the Greek
Concordance, Walaeus his Collections out of Salmasius, Bartholinus, Budaeus,
Buxtorsius, Dallaeus, L'Empereur, Seldom, Mountague, Petitus, Novarinus,
Vossius, and diverse others. Concerning whom I suppose I may say, without injury
to truth or my reputation, I hope there are not many things in them of any
considerable use to the Explication of any Text (except what I have out of my
proper and primary Authors) that I have not endeavored with Care to select out
of them. Besides these I have made ample Collections out of that Large and
Learned Comment of Chemnitius and Gerhard upon the Evangelicall Harmony and
Spanhemius his Dubia Evangelica. I have also inserted many things, where it was
necessary or expedient, out of Gomarus, Iunius his Parallels, Heinsius his
Exercitations upon the New Testament, and his Aristarchus sacer, Tolet upon
John, Vossius de Genealogia Christi, some small Tracts of Capellus and
Cloppenburgius, and Sir Norton Knatchbull his Animadversions on the New
Testament. Out of Calvin I have taken more sparingly, for the Reasons I have
formerly mentioned, and especially because his Comments upon the New Testament,
as they have been sufficiently recommended to the World by Learned Men of all
Parties, so they are to be bought by themselves at a very low price. And for
the Latter Part of this Volume, upon the Epistles and the Revelation, supposing
it to be done in some proportion to this Part, (which I take for granted the
Ingenuity of the Subscribers will oblige and encourage me to do,) they may
exspect it, if God give me Life and Assistance, about the end of the next
Summer. If that time seem long to any of them, I humbly offer for their
satisfaction, That this Volume will much exceed any of the former in bulk, and
therefore may challenge a proportionable addition of time; that the Care of my
Health, as diverse know, will require at least a quarter of a years time out of
that which is allotted to the Work; and especially, that two Presses cannot
possibly dispatch the Work before that time. And if I keep pace with two
Presses (as hitherto through God's Goodness for the most part I have done) I
hope I shall not be charged with slothfulness in carrying on the Work. All
which being considered, I think, I may say without vanity, I have dealt
ingenuously with the Subscribers, and therefore promise my self they will not
deal otherwise with me. And, I humbly conceive, if I expect thirty, instead of
twenty, Shillings for the whole Last Volume, I shall not be censured by any
ingenuous Person as a Transgressor of the Rules either of Justice or Modesty.
But because I earnestly desire that what is done may be done willingly and
without regret, I do hereby declare, that if any of the Subscribers shall
insist upon my last Proposal of twenty Shillings for the whole, and
proportionably shall send up only ten Shillings for the First Part, it shall be
delivered to them. And, as I return my most humble thanks, in the first place,
to those few Gentlemen who have been Benefactors upon the account of my second
Proposal, whose Favor I shall, as I am obliged, particularly acknowledge in
due time and place; and, after them, to that small number of the Subscribers
who were pleased to subscribe more then twenty Shillings, so those of the
Subscribers who shall think fit to send up more then ten Shillings for this
First Part, it shall be thankfully acknowledged. To conclude, I must entreat
the Subscribers not to fail to send for their First Part, both because it is an
entire thing of it self, and especially to prevent those many hazards which
Prudent men will easily forecast may befall the printed Sheets when they ly by,
or may otherwise bereave them of the Work after it is done: which if it should
happen, I shall satisfy my self that I have given them seasonable notice of
it, and therefore am clear from any Loss or Inconvenience which may arise from
their neglect.

Postscript.
THE Subscribers are desired to send for their Books to St. John' s Gate House
in London upon the 19th day of October next, or any time within 6 weeks after,
during which time the Ware-house-keeper will wait there for them every day from
Two till Four of the Clock, for which he refers himself to their Courtesy,
having no reason to distrust their Kindness, his Time and Pains being in effect
as much as in any of the former Volumes. And whereas many Subscribers, not
hearing of my last public Notice, have not yet sent for their Third Volumes,
they may then also receive them upon their Payment of fifteen Shillings for
each, according to the Propositions.

If any Person desire these Advertisments for himself or his Friends he may
have them gratis at Mr. Henry Mortlock's Shop, at the White-Hart in
Westminster Hall; Mr. Charles Smith's, now at the Black-Swan, but removing to
the Angel near the Inner-temple-gate in Fleetstreet; and Mr. Tho. Parkhurst, at
the Bible and three Crowns in Cheap Side.




