A MODEL For the maintaining of Students Of choice Abilities at the UNIVERSITY,
and Principally in order to the MINISTRY. WITH EPISTLES and Recommendations,
and an Account of the Settlement and Practice of it in the UNIVERSITIES from
the DOCTORS there.

As also with Answers to such Objections as are most Plausible, which may be
made against it.

And with the Names of the Trustees.

PROVE. 3. 9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of
thine increase. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for I. Rothwell at the Fountain in
Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside. 1648.

(...) more conducing than another to the attainment of that great end, that
way is most eligible, by wise and pious Christians; And although it is a
laudable and necessary work to exercise Charity toward the bodies of
distressed persons, yet those must needs be the most noble acts of Charity
which concern the souls of men, seeing both the object of them is more
excellent, and the effects more durable. And as the means instituted by Christ
for the good of souls, is the erection and maintenance of his Church, and the
supplying of it with an able and pious Ministry: So it has been in all ages
the care of those whose hearts have been touched with a sense of Gods honor,
and a fervent desire of the Churches enlargement, to afford such liberal
supplies and encouragements as might both prepare men for, and support them in
the work of the Ministry. And these are the ends which have been principally
aimed at by all, but all have not used the same means to those ends, nor are
all means equally effectual: It is therefore our desire in this Model to make
choice of such ways as to us seem most useful for the forementioned purposes:
And because the foundation of the Work lies in the excellency of the natural
parts of such as are designed that way (a few such being more worth than a
far greater proportion of other men) it is therefore of great use, and we
shall endeavor that it may be our great care, to single out such persons to
whom God has given the most high and promising abilities: Who, if they be
placed under the most learned and godly Tutors we can find, and obliged as
far as possibly we can, to a diligent and eminent improvement in knowledge of
all sorts and solid piety, we conceive it will be no arrogance humbly to expect
a more then ordinary advantage to the poor Church, which now, if ever, calls for
Teachers of exquisite abilities; And because there are some Church-works of
great concernment, which cannot be conveniently managed by such as are
overwhelmed with preaching work (such as the resolution of weighty doubts and
cases of conscience, the stopping of the mouths of gainsayers, and the like)
it must needs be judged of great advantage to have some particular persons
exquisitely fit for such works, both in regard of natural and acquired
endowments, who should be set apart for them, and attend upon them without
distraction. The rather, because there are diverse men, peradventure not eminent
for preaching gifts, who being wisely improved, may be very serviceable to
other of the Churches necessities: And these are the chief intendments of the
following Model: Yet, for as much as there may be diverse towardly youths, of
competent parts (though short of the eminency that some others attain to) and
mean condition, who may be of good use in the Ministerial work, and seeing the
ordinary necessities of the Church are not to be neglected, especially the
condition of Ireland and Wales, and some dark parts of England, being so
doleful and dismal, we hope it will be an acceptable work to lay in provision
in this Model, whereby fit persons may be sent into those places, which by
reason of their d^stance, many cannot, and others do not go into: We confess,
as we shall not be wanting in our prayers and endeavors, as far as God shall
enable us sincerely and impartially to look to these ends and ways propounded;
so we cannot but hope in God that the bowels of many precious souls will be
refreshed by these means. And we are confident whoever shall engage their
hearts in this free-will-offering to God, will have no cause to repent of it,
nor shall it be a grief of heart to any at the last day (when the rust of other
men's silver shall rise up against them to their everlasting confusion) to have
been the happy instruments of enlarging the Church, and propagating the Gospel,
and saving of souls; and in this life also the generations to come shall call
them blessed.

Read and Approved, and appointed to be Printed by the Trustees. Mat. Poole.

To the Rich that love Christ, the Church, the Gospel, and themselves.
Gentlemen,
I Have here a happy opportunity to offer you an excellent benefit, by inviting
you to an excellent duty. If receiving be unpleasant to you, how came you to be
rich? If you like it, come while the Market lasts. Come before Thieves, or
Fire, or Soldiers have seized upon your perishing wealth, come before death
has taken you from all. You see here that Christ is contented to be your
Debtour, at the usury of a hundred for one, in this world, and in the world to
come, eternal life. Mat. 19. 29. If you are covetous, take this bargain, for
all the world cannot help you to the like for your Commodity: If you are not
covetous, you will not be tenacious of your money: The offer is so fair, and so
unmatchable, that I know not what can keep you from accepting it, unless it be
that you dare not trust the word, the Promise, the Covenant of Christ. And whom
then will you trust? who shall keep your wealth? will you? But who shall keep
you then? will you undertake to keep your selves? Alas, how long? Is God to be
trusted with the sustentation of the whole Creation, and the government of all
the world, and with the lives of you and all the living, and with the
prospering of your labors, and your daily preservation and provision? and yet
is he not to be trusted with your money? you will say you trust God? let us see
now that you do not play the Hypocrites? If you are friends to Christ, you may
see in the work here offered to you, your Masters name, and interest, and
honor: It Is certainly his voice that calls you to this adventure, and therefore
never make question of your call. If you are friends to your Country, now let
it be seen: If you live an hundred years, perhaps you will never have a better
opportunity to show it. If you are Protestants and love the Gospel, show it by
helping to plant and water the Seminaries of the Lord. Perhaps you cannot
dispute for the Truth, or preach for it your selves: But you can contribute for
the maintenance of some to do it: This then is your work, know it and perform
it. You may have a Prophets reward, without being your selves Prophets. Matthew
10. 41. At least therefore, show that you love your selves, and that you love
your money better than to lose it, by casting it away upon the flesh, and
leaving it in the world behind you. If you can stay here always with it, then
keep it: I speak to none but those that must die, and methinks such should be
glad to learn the art of sending their wealth to meet them in another world. If
you understand not that giving is receiving, and that the giver is more
beholden, than the beggar, and that it is for your selves that God commands
you to give, and that the more you thus lose, the more you save and gain, you
are then unacquainted with the reasons of Christianity, and the life of faith.
I hope you are sensible of Englands privileges, above the dark Mahometans or
Indians, in the freedom of Ordinances, and plenty of receiving opportunities.
And know you not that an opportunity of giving may be as great a mercy to you,
as of hearing or praying, and should be as forwardly and thankefully accepted.
He was never acquainted with the Christian life of doing good, that finds it
not the most sweet and pleasant life. Though we must snatch no unsound
consolation from our works, but detest the thoughts of making God beholden to
us; yet we must walk in them as his way, Ephesians. 2. 10. in which we are
likeliest to meet him: he is likest to God, that does most good, and that would
do most. This is such an improvement of time and stock, that you may omit a
Prayer, a Sermon, or a Sacrament for it, rather than omit it: you may violate
the rest of a Sabbath to show mercy, Mat. 12. 4, 5. Your Lord and Master with a
special remark has set you all this lesson for to study. Mat. 9. 13. But go ye
and learn, what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice And yet such
is here the happy combination, that it is mercy and sacrifice, because it is
mercy for sacrifice, that you are called to. And doubt not but with such
sacrifice God is well pleased, Heb. 13. 16. Forget not therefore to communicate
and do good. It is more blessed to give, than to receive, Acts 20. 35. For the
nature of the work before you, consider, First, Is it not pity that so good a
breed of wits as England is renowned for, should be starved for want of culture
and encouragement? Secondly, Is it not pity that so many thousands of souls
should starve in ignorance, or be poisoned by seducements, for want of cost to
procure a remedy? And what abundance that may be saved by the Ministry of such
as you maintain, may bless God for you as the helpers of their salvation.
Thirdly, The necessities of the Church have of late called Students so young
into the Ministry, that eminent Proficients in Languages, Sciences,
Antiquities, etc. grow thin, and are in danger of being worn out, if there be
not some extraordinary helps for chosenwits addicted to these studies. And what
a dishonor, what a loss that would be to us, the Papists would quickly
understand. Fourthly, The barbarous face of the Greek and other Eastern
Churches tells us, what need there is of Learned Instruments, for the
maintenance and propagation of the Truth. Fifthly, what abundance of Colleges
and Monasteries can the Romanists maintain, to fill the World with Missionaries
of all sorts, which is the very strength of their Kingdom. And is it not pity
that a better work should be starved through our want of pious charity? and
that Papists should dare us, and we be unfurnished with Champions to resist
them, when we are furnished with so much evidence of truth, which yet may
easily be lost by ill managing! Sixthly, If you are the servants of Christ,
above all, you must now look about you for his Church and Ministry. For the
Devil has given you so strong an Alarm, that he that now sits still, and runs
not to his Arms, to help the Church, is a Traitor, and no true Soldier of
Christ. Papists are up, and Atheists and Infidels and Jews are up, and
abundance of secret Apostates are up openly reproaching the Ministry, that
privately deride Christ and the Scripture, and the life to come, (I know what I
say to be too true) Quakers are up, and all the profane as far as they dare:
And shall not we be up to further that Gospel and Ministry and Church of
Christ, which so many bands of the Prince of darkness, are armed to assault.
Let us discourage the Devil; by making an advantage of his assaults. Let him
see that we never do so much for Christ and the Church, as when he assaulteth
them with the fiercest or cunningest malignity. He that has not so public a
spirit, as to value the welfare of the Church, and the souls of men, before the
fullness of his own estate, may go away sorrowful from Christ (as Luke 8. 23,
24.) but a true Disciple he cannot be. It would make a man's heart ache to think
of the dark state of the world, for want of Preachers. Were it but the state of
Ireland and Wales, it should move us to compassion. And now I offer it to your
sober thoughts, as to men that are going to be accountable for their Talents,
whether you have a better way to dispose of your money, and a way that will be
more comfortable to you at death and judgment. I would not have you
unmercifull to your children: but if you think you may not lawfully alienate
any of your Estates from them, you are far from the mind of the primitive
Christians, that sold all and laid it at the Apostles feet. If you ask, why we
leave you not to your selves to be charitable where you see cause; I answer,
First, there is so much difficulty in every good work, even in giving so as to
make the best of it, that you should be thankful to those that will help to
facilitate it. Secondly, Great works must have many hands. Thirdly, Conjunction
engages and encourages, and draws on those in the company, that else would
lag behind. What need we else associate for our Ministerial works of
Instruction, Discipline, etc. and leave not every Minister to himself: In
company we go more cheerfully, easily, regularly and prevalently. And should
you not associate also in your duties?

Well Gentlemen, seeing it is undoubted that the work before you is of great
importance to the honor of Christ, to the welfare of the Church, to the
Protestant Religion, to the souls of thousands, and to your own everlasting
benefit, take heed how you refuse to do your best, lest God distrain on you
before you are aware, and then hold it or your souls if you can. And say not
but you were warned by a friend that would have had you have saved your money
and your souls, by making the best of your Masters stock. And if what I have
said do not persuade you, I entreat you to read a Preface to a Book that I have
written to this purpose, called, The Crucifying of the World, etc. Read Gal. 6.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Accept this invitation to so good a Work, from

A servant of Christ for his Church, Richard Baxter.
February 26. 1658.
A Model for the Education of Students of choice abilities at the University,
and principally in order to the Ministry. April 1. 1658.
CHAP. I.
Of the Contribution and Contributers.
. 1. THat they, who through their affection to Gods glory and the Churches
good, in the advancement of Learning and Piety, shall be willing to contribute
to this work, be intreited to signify their desires by way of subscription,
that so it may be more certain in it self, and more visible and exemplary to
others.

2. And because subscriptions of this nature, though happily begun, have
heretofore failed, lest it should happen so in this case (whereby the whole
design would be frustrated, and Youth^ of excellent parts, hopefully planted at
the University, forced to remove* besides many other inconveniences) we do
earnestly desire that God would stir up the hearts of those, whose: Estates
will bear it, to subscribe for eight years or for more, or for ever, which we
shall look on as a noble and eminent act of charity, and which present and
future ages may have cause to bless God for, and as the most proper and only
certain course to promote the intended design, and to prevent the forementioned
mischiefs: Yet if any shall contribute any thing upon other terms, we judge it
a very acceptable service, and we hope it will occasion thanksgiving to God on
their behalf.

. 3. That the Name of every Contributer be fairly written in a Book of Velume
appointed for the purpose, together with the sum which it shall please him to
contribute to his Work.

CHAP. II.
Of the Trustees.
. 1. THat the money collected be disposed of, and the election of Scholars made
by sixty Trustees, whereof 36 to be Gentlemen or Citizens of eminency, and 24
to be Ministers in or within five miles of the City of London, of which number
any seven shall make a Quorum, in ordinary cases, whereof three to be Ministers.

. 2. And because it is of great importance to the good of the work, that there
be a special inspection into it upon the place, it is thought fit that there be
seven Trustees chosen for each University, who shall be entreated to take
notice of the proficiency and deportment of the exhibitioners in the University.

. 3. That the Trustees proceed in all things without partiality, as they shall
judge best for the public good, and suffer not themselves to be biased from
it by any favors or recommendations whatsoever: And particularly that in the
election of Scholars, or Trustees, when there are any vacancies, the Trustees
declare themselves, that they will according to their Trust proceed therein
with all fidelity and integrity: And that the Clerk put the Chairman in mind of
it.

. 4. That when any one of the Trustees dies, or refuses to act further in the
business, or removes ten miles from London, or by the rest of the Trustees is
judged to deserve dismission from his Trust, the rest of the Trustees, or any 7
of them, whereof 3 shall be Ministers (notice being given to the Trustees of
the meeting, and of the end of it) being met together, proceed to choose
another: And that no Trustee be completely chosen at one meeting, but that he
be nominated one meeting, and (if they see fit) chosen the next meeting: And
that they choose one whom for wisdom, candor, activity, publick-spiritednesse,
integrity, affection to Religion and Learning, and other necessary
qualifications, they judge fit for the work: And that they choose a Minister in
the room of a Minister; and upon the vacancy of one who is no Minister, that
they choose one who is no Minister.

CHAP. III.
Of the Officers and Expenses.
. 1. THat in the month of March yearly the Trustees choose one of themselves
being a Minister, who shall be desired from time to time for the year ensuing,
to appoint meetings of the Trustees; and to be present at all meetings and
transactions, and to take special care to promote the work, and to keep
correspondency with others in relation thereunto.

. 2. That the Trustees in the month of March also choose a Treasurer (being a
person of unquestionable fidelity) from year to year: And that the Treasurers
or Collectors discharge shall be sufficient to any that shall pay the money:
And that the Treasurer be accountable once a quarter to the Trustees, or any
seven of them (a meeting being called) whereof three to be Ministers: And that
the Treasurer shall not dispose of any of the moneys, but according to the
direction of the Trustees or any seven of them (three being Ministers) at a
general meeting assembled.

. 3. That a Clerk be chosen to be present at all meetings, to draw and enter
all Orders made by the Trustees, and keep the Books, and write such things as
are necessary, as also a Collector to gather in the moneys, and to call
meetings and do other necessary works, and that they have such salaries as the
Trustees shall think fit.

. 4. That all the charges incidentall to the work, which the Trustees shall
judge expedient, shall be allowed out of the Stock.

CHAP. IV.
Of the quality of the Scholars to be chosen.
. 1. THat the Scholars to whom the exhibitions shall be granted, be chosen out
of the University, or out of Schools, as the Trustees from time to time shall
judge most fit, and that strict enquiry and diligent examination be made, and
all possible care used that fit persons be chosen, and that the Election be
made by seven of the Trustees at the least, whereof three to be Ministers,
notice being given to the Trustees of the meeting, and of the end of it. And
that no Scholars hereafter shall be chosen, but such as have been personally
and diligently examined by three at least, being either of the Trustees in
London (who are Scholars) or of the University Trustees, or of such as shall
be chosen and desired by the Trustees to examine Candidates, etc. and attested
by their hands. And that no Certificate be owned from the Universities, but
such as comes from known persons, or from such persons as some of the
University Trustees shall attest to.

. 2. That the Scholars to be chosen, be of Godly life, or at the least,
hopeful for Godliness, of eminent parts, of an ingenuous disposition, and such
as are poor, or have not a sufficient maintenance any other way: That not only
the pregnancy, but the solidity of their parts be observed. And that a special
regard be had to Godliness.

. 3. And, although our great aim in this work be, the bringing up of Scholars
of eminent parts and learning, and the supplying of the Church with choice
Ministers, and such, as through Gods blessing may be pillars of the Church; yet
because the ordinary necessities of the Church also are to be provided for, and
the sad condition of dark corners, both in Ireland and Wales, and several parts
of England cries loud for out assistance; the Trustees therefore may (after
provision made for the forementioned ends, as far as they shall think fit)
choose some Scholars of Godly life, and good parts (though it may be their
parts rise not to that eminency which some others attain to) in order to the
supply of such desolate and necessitous places and Congregations.

. 4. That the exhibitions be generally given to such as intend the Ministry,
and direct their studies that way; yet so, as that the Trustees may upon
weighty reasons and sparingly dispose of some of them, to such, as, though not
intending the Ministry, may be other ways eminently serviceable to the Church
or Commonwealth.

. 5. And whereas diverse Scholars after four years continuance in the
Universitie, being raised to an higher degree, which they cannot support, are
forced to remove and betake themselves to Schools or to enter into the
Ministry, through necessity, raw and unfurnished, to their own perpetual
discouragement, and to the great mischief of the Church; that a special regard
be had to such of them as during their continuance, have given the best proof
of their parts, learning and godliness, and they be enabled to continue four
years after their degree of Bachelor, whereby they may be solemnly prepared
and well fitted for that weighty work.

CHAP. V.
Of the education of the Scholars.
. 1. THat the exhibitioners shall be obliged to study to be eminent in the
Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and other Oriental Languages, and in the several Arts
and Sciences, so far forth as their Genius's will permit.

. 2. That over and besides their ordinary University exercises, they be tied to
special exercises in those things as shall be thought fit by the Trustees, and
others whom they shall advise with. And that when the Trustees shall think fit,
two or three be picked out of the Students to come up to London (their charges
being born) to do some learned exercises in the City, that so the Contributers
may see some fruit of their cost, and others may be excited and encouraged.

. 3. That their three last years be principally employed in the study of
Divinity, and the praeparation of themselves for the work of the Ministry, such
only excepted, as are mentioned, chapter 4.. 4.

. 4. That such Scholars as are taken from Schools, be sent to the University,
and there placed under such Tutors as the Trustees shall choose, who shall be,
as near as may be, eminent for Godliness and Learning and care of their
pupils; who shall be entreated to have a special eye upon them, as to their
Godliness, and to press them to a diligent attendance upon all means public
and private conducing thereunto.

. 5. That none of the exhibitioners be absent from their Colleges above six
weeks in a year, unless special leave be obtained from some of the Trustees
of that University.

CHAP. VI.
Of inspection over the Exhibitioners.
. 1. THat once in a year the Trustees or any three of them (Whereof two shall
be Ministers) go to the University, and there with the help of the University
Trustees, find out their profiting, and diligently enquire into their abilities
and conversations, and encourage them accordingly.

. 2. That those Doctors of the University, etc. who are Trustees, be desired
(so far as they can) to take special notice of the Exhibitioners, and to
enquire into their proficiency in their studies, and the godliness of their
conversations, and admonish or advise them, as they see cause, and give notice
to the Trustees at London, when occasion shall require: Also that they be
entreated to direct them in the course of their studies, and resolve them in
difficulties, as need requires.

CHAP. VII.
Of encouragements to be given or denied to the Exhibitioners according to
their Merit.
. 1. THat the Exhibitioners shall have such allowances as shall be judged
expedient, according to their deserts, poverty, and standing in the University;
and that such of them as most need and most excel in abilities and piety,
shall besides their yearly allowance, have some consideration for their degree,
when, and so far as the Trustees shall conceive meet.

. 2. That after eight years standing in the University, the Trustees and
Contributers do by themselves and friends endeavor to promote them to a place
answerable to their merit.

. 3. That such of the Exhibitioners as shall at any solemn Examination, be
found eminently to excel the rest, shall have such special encouragements as
the Trustees shall judge fit.

. 4. That when there shall be satisfying evidence of the Idleness or
dissoluteness or any depravednesse of any of them, the Trustees may, after
admonition and trial, for so long time as they shall think fit, withdraw the
Exhibition from them, and choose others in their places.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Model.
. 1. THat the alteration or addition of circumstances be left to the wisdom of
the Trustees, or any seven or more of them (whereof three to be Ministers)
provided that notice be given to the Trustees generally, of the meeting, and of
the end of it, and provided always that the Substantials remain untouched, to
wit, the bringing up of eminent Scholars at the University, in order to the
Ministry, and the selection of Scholars for special uses, mentioned in the
Ninth Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Of the selection of some Scholars for special uses.
. 1. THat provision being made for the maintenance of Scholars in order to the
Ministry, so far forth as the Trustees shall judge necessary and sufficient,
there be besides some fit persons selected and chosen by the Trustees in the
University, of sufficient standing and convenient leisure, and employed in that
way wherein they are most eminent, one to be the Linguist, and principally for
Greek, and for Jewish, and Rabbinicall learning; another the Historian, and
Antiquary, especially for Ecclesiastical antiquity; another the Philosopher and
Mathematician, another the Civilian, another the Polemical Divine (one or more
if need be) another the practical and casuisticall Divine, another well versed
in all parts of Learning: And that each of these employ themselves (when
occasion shall require, and the Trustees, reasonably desire) in such works as
shall be useful and necessary: And that they have such allowances as the
Trustees shall judge fit, and as the excellency of their parts and the nature
of their work shall require. Or, if it be not thought expedient to maintain
persons constantly for each of these, that any person or persons, be employed
in any work which shall appear to be of great concernment and usefulness to
the public good, and for which he or they are eminently fit, who shall have
such encouragement as the Trustees shall judge convenient. And to the end
abuses may be prevented, it is resolved, that no money be disposed of by the
Trustees to any work, but such as eight of the Trustees at least (being all
Scholars) and two at least of the Trustees in each University, shall under
their hands: declare that they judge to be such a work. And also that it be
approved at a meeting of the Trustees in London.

CHAP. X.
Of the encouragement of Foreigners, and promotion of the Gospel abroad.
. 1. AND because there is a great desire in many foreign persons to learn the
English Tongue, that so they may understand our English Divines, and be the
more able to preach practically and powerfully to their people, which may much
further the work of conversion and edification in foreign places; if it shall
please any to contribute any sum or sums to this end, and with this desire;
it shall be faithfully employed to that purpose, viz. To the maintenance of
such foreigners, as being poor, are and shall appear to be most eminent for
parts and learning and piety, who shall be maintained in London or one of the
Universities, as shall be judged most expedient, for so long time as shall
suffice for the forementioned ends.

FINIS.
The Names of the Trustees.
Christoph. Lord Pack Robert L. Tichburne Sir Thomas Andrews Sir Thomas Foot
Sir Thomas Viner Maj. Genesis Brown Alderman Frederick Alderman Allen Alderman
Tompson Alderman Milner Alderman Laurence Alderman Higginson Alderman Warner
Alderman Love Andrew Ricard Esquire Colonel Gower Tho. Bromfield Esquire Tho. Arnold
Esquire Theo. Biddulph Esquire Walter Boothby Esquire Will. Pennoyer Esquire Walter Bigg Esquire
Martin Noel Esquire Maurice Tomson Esquire Dr. Thomas Cox Deputy Johnson Mr. John
Iurian Mr. Henry Spurstow Mr. Maskal Mr. Keate. Mr. Nath. Barnardiston Mr.
Valent. Wanley Captain Story Mr. Brinley Mr. Crumlum Mr. Bathurst.
Ministers.
Doctor Reinolds Doctor Spurstow Mr. Ash Mr. Caryll Mr. Calamy Mr. Iackson sen.
Mr. Case Mr. Slater Mr. Clarke Mr. Cooper Mr. Arthur Mr. Tailor Mr. Manton Mr.
Ienkins Mr. Griffith Mr. Watson Mr. Lie Mr. Iacomb sen. Mr. Iacomb jun. Mr.
Bates Mr. Poole Mr. Whitaker Mr. Woodcock Mr. Vinck.
A word to the Rich, that desire to give up their Account with comfort.
SUffer I beseech you one word of exhortation, and with attention read a few
lines which may be of everlasting concernment to you. I will suppose I speak
not to Atheists, but to such as are possessed with a belief of an eternal estate
of infinite happiness or misery: not to fools, but to wise men who would not
wilfully neglect any thing, which is necessary to secure them from the wrath to
come. It is also notoriously known, that the wilful continuance in the neglect
of any one evident duty; or the commission of any manifest sin is sufficient to
entitle a man to damnation, notwithstanding any professions of Religion or
practices whatsoever: You cannot but know that many perish eternally, not for
any gross wickedness visible to the world, but for sly and secret and
unobserved omission sins, and that these are the only sins which our Savior
forms a process against in that famous representation of the last judgment,
Mat. 25. And amongst those duties which men are most prone to neglect, are
those which are difficult and costly and troublesome, which made Christ
pronounce it so hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven: And
therefore you that are rich had need double your diligence to make your calling
and election sure. And truly it is an unspeakable happiness (if the Lord give
you hearts to consider it) that your riches wisely managed, may afford you a
special and eminent evidence and assurance of Gods love, and your own future
happiness; forasmuch as if you freely lay out those riches that God has
graciously given you, for his glory, and the Churches good, it may be a notable
and sound discovery of a lively faith, (which can part with present comforts in
hopes of those future and unseen consolations) a fervent love to God and the
brethren, a resolution to part with all for Christ, and a serious and true
desire of salvation: As on the other side, it is a token of perdition, when a
man's heart is glued to his riches, and the present evil world, when a man is so
destitute of charity, that rather than part with his riches, he will suffer,
bodies and souls to perish, and the glory of God to be turned into shame; I
beseech you therefore by the bowels of God have compassion upon your immortal
souls, make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, throw not your
selves overboard to preserve your riches, from which you can expect no other
requital, but this, that the rust of them shall rise up in judgment against you
at the last day: and this duty I may the more boldly exhort you to, because, if
you make use of your reason, you will find the performance of it is no way
disadvantageous to you: for, as you will gain this excellent advantage, besides
eternal salvation, that, that portion of your estates which you lay out for
God, will be a means to sweeten, and secure all the rest to you and your
posterity, so, by the doing of it you will lose nothing of substance, seeing
that is most true and evident by daily experience which our Savior says; That
the comfort of a man's life consists not in the abundance of what he
possesses. For what are riches, but for use, without which a man's chest has
as much good by his riches as he; and how can a man use them, but for his
pleasure or credit, or posterity, or the like? and who knows not that many
discreet men of competent estates between want and affluence enjoy more real
pleasure in their estates, than they that have ten times a larger portion? and
if a man look to his credit, let any impartial man judge, whether it more
advances a man's reputation, sordidly to hoard up his riches to the dishonor
of Religion, his own shame and contempt (whereby he live; lamented, and dies
desired) or generously to lay them out in such ways as not only procure him
favor with God, but respect from men here, and at last a Crown of glory that
fades not away? and if a man aims at posterity, methinks this City has
afforded sufficient experiments to convince any ingenuous man, that the leaving
of vast estates to children, does commonly betray them not only to the
greatest wickednesses, but also to manifold miseries, which they that carry
their sails lower, and whose estates are nearer the golden Mediocrity are
preserved from: I may added to all this that diverse of you in this City may say
with Jacob, with may staff I came over Jordan, and now God has made me two
bands. That God that has brought down others, has exalted you, that God that
has impoverished others, has enriched you, and therefore, if others owe their
thousands to God, surely you owe your ten thousands. Remember I beseech you,
that hand that gave you your estates, can recall them when he pleases, and if
you deny him the interest, he can revoke the principal. Remember you will not
always have such opportunities: Ere long you and the poorest wretch must be
upon the same terms, now you have an advantage over them, and a means to do God
more special service: I shall trouble you no further, but only this, lay out
your estates, but do it freely, not grudgingly, do it liberally, not sparingly:
I shall not here determine that Question, whether God expects a tenth part of
your estates to be employed in his service, and for public good. But thus much
I may safely say, that where God sows liberally, he expects to reap liberally.
And as Gods Ministration to us under the Gospel does exceed the legal
Ministration, so I know no reason why our Ministration to God from our
superfluities should not exceed theirs under the Law: And however men can
easily deceive themselves here in things which concern their profit, yet I
doubt not when men shall at last come to make a review of all their actions,
their consciences will justly condemn them, not only for the total neglect of
such duties, but also for the not doing of them in a fit and full proportion:
For this particular occasion, I shall say nothing more than what is said in the
Preface, and in these other annexed Papers: Consider what has been said, and
remember it comes from one whose design is not his own profit, (nor to lay a
yoke upon you which he will not take upon his own shoulders) but merely that
God may be glorified, and that, at that last day, fruit may abound to your
account.

Matthew Poole.

An Answer to some Objections which may be raised against this Work.
OBject. 1. This Design is needless: Universities are for this purpose, What
is all that means given there for, but to fit men for the Ministry?

Answ. 1. So great is the scarcity of able and godly Ministers in the Nation,
comparatively to the many places which are destitute of such (as all judicious
persons observe) that it is a vain thing to expect a supply of the Churches
necessities in an ordinary way: We see by experience, that although of late
years the Universities have sent forth diverse very hopeful persons into the
Ministry, and although besides the ordinary allowances for Students there,
diverse exhibitions have been allowed by wel-willers to Religion and Learning,
yet, all this not withstanding, there is still a great famine of the Word in
diverse places; especially in Ireland, Wales, etc. which are not so likely to be
supplied, and which are here in a special manner provided for.

Answ. 2. The main design of this Model is not barely to send forth Ministers,
but to endeavor to send forth eminent Ministers; and whereas Universities are
and must needs be (nor does it in the least reflect disparagement upon them)
like Lotteries, whither Students of all sorts come, some of good parts, and
some of mean parts, and from whence (through the negligence of Students, and
their forwardness in entering into the Ministry) diverse come into the Ministry
much unfurnished, to the grief and scandal of their University-Governours; here
is a more certain course, care being taken, 1. To select choice wits. 2. To
oblige them to a sufficient continuance, as also to extraordinary diligence.

Object. 2. Good designs are generally perverted and abused to other ends than
they were intended, and so will this in all probability degenerate into a
business of faction and partiality, and favor and friendship.

Answ. 1. We can neither foresee nor prevent all possible abuses, and much
less all jealous surmises; but thus much is plain, that we are to do our duty,
and to refer events to Gods Providence, and however men's benevolences may be
abused hereafter, contrary to their desires and intentions, yet God will accept
of their sincere ends, and no less reward them than if they hid been never so
religiously used.

2. Here is abundant care taken to prevent partiality: The execution of it is
committed to diverse persons of different persuasions, of known integrity,
wisdom and godliness; and care is also taken that when any die, there be a
substitution of such other men in their places, and the Trustees are engaged,
not only by their promise, but by their judgments and interect to choose such
men as themselves.

3. The Feoffees, as they now are, so they will for ever be obliged to manage
this business with all impartiality for the encouragement of lads of all
parties (provided they be true to the interests of Learning and real piety) not
only because they are conscientiously engaged to it, but also, because their
interest and the advancement of the work will constantly oblige them to it*
seeing if once partiality be observed in it, it will not only reflect upon the
Trustees, but also bring the whole business into disrepute.

4. This objection strikes at all lasting good works, for how can a man settle
any thing for any good work, but it may be abused; so that the effect of this
objection should be not to prevent the doing of good works, but to make men
cautelous how to do them in as safe a way as may be.

Object. 3. It is better for a man to see with his own eyes, and to do with his
own hands.

Answ. 1. But then there is one doubt whether he can get any to put in good
security that he shall enjoy his eyes and hands for ever, or else (if he be
able and willing to settle something for ever) it must come into other men's
hands, and therefore it is better to commit it to other men's hands while he
lives, and may observe how they use it, than to commit it to them after his
decease, of whom he had not experience in that kind.

2. For the generality of Contributers to such works it may be said without
arrogancy, it is likely to be far better managed by a conjunction of heads
and hands of wise, and honest, and learned men for the glory of God, and the
good of the Church, than can be expected from one man.

Plus vident oculi quam oculus, and as those small sprinklings of water which
signify little when they are asunder, being united together into one River are
very considerable and effectual to diverse excellent uses* so those
Contributions which being managed singly and dividedly are not so eminently
useful, when they are united together, prove of great influence for a general
good: and moreover, he that contributes in such a common way as this, does not
only an excellent piece of service himself, but also draws others along with
him.

FOr those Gentlemen or others in the Country who shall be pleased to
contribute, although we shall wholly leave them to themselves to give what they
please, and in what way they please, and shall thankfully accept any thing
given upon any terms, nor do we desire this business should be burdensome to
any, yet we humbly offer to their consideration, that it will be a most
excellent service, and most rarely useful for any (who can do it) to settle
what they give, for ever, though it be in a less proportion, both because it
is in it self likely to bring forth more fruit, and because it will be a good
encouragement to others to contribute when they see a solid foundation laid
which is likely to continue: And we hope they will not think it a wrong to
their children to alienate some small proportion from them to the more
immediate service of God, but rather a special means to procure a blessing
from God upon the rest of their estates both to them and to their posterity.

If it shall please God to put it into the mind of any to contribute, if they
signify their desires to any of the Trustees, especially to any of the
Ministers, they may receive further information and direction as to any of the
particulars.

A TESTIMONIAL from some Oxford DOCTORS.
THE great usefulness of humane Learning and University education for the
Ministers of the Gospel has been abundantly evidenced, both from the powerful
and happy influence of Ministers so qualified, in the Reformation of Religion,
from the bondage and darkness of Popery, and also from the miserable
consequence of the want and neglect thereof in persons undertaking the work of
the Ministry: Besides those more noble infusions of Grace, there are two things
of great necessity for the profitable discharge of the Ministerial work; to
wit, a sufficiency of natural endowments, and acquired abilities. And it is the
conjunction of these which thoroughly furnish the man of God unto every good
work. We cannot therefore, but exceedingly approve of, and heartily bless God
for that late design undertaken, and so considerably carried on through Gods
blessing by diverse persons, for the encouragement of poor Scholars of greatest
abilities and piety in the Universities: The rather, because we have
frequently, with sad hearts, observed the miscarriage of persons of great hopes
and eminent parts, through want of those means and helps which are necessary:
And we heartily recommend it unto all the lovers of Learning and Universities,
as that which (by Gods blessing) is likely to prove of singular use, for the
quickening of diligence, and provoking of emulation, and the growth of knowledge
and piety: Nor do we know, how any, whom God has enriched with talents for
such a service, can lay them out to better advantage, than in such a way as
this: And for the better encouragement of those whose hearts God shall incline
to this pious work, we, whose names are here underwritten, having knowledge of
diverse of the Trustees, and having had experience of the management thereof,
hold our selves bound in Justice to give this testimony, unto those Gentlemen,
to whose trust it is committed; that to the best of our observation, it has
been faithfully discharged according to the real worth of persons, without
respect to parties: And it is sufficiently known, that there are diverse
Students already chosen by them in the Universities, who are persons of
singular abilities, and of pious inclinations, whose poverty had exposed them
to many inconveniences, and deprived the Church of that great benefit (which we
comfortably hope for from them) if they had not been relieved by such
seasonable succors. And we are further considently persuaded, that as it has
been for the time past, so it will be for the future, the care of the Trustees,
to discharge that trust reposed in them, with all fidelity and conformably to
their proposals and Declarations.

Edmond Staunton, D.D. John Wallis, D.D. Dan. Greenwood, D.D. Hen. Langley,
D.D. Seth Ward, S.S.T.D. Joshua Cross, L.L.D. Thomas Barlow, C.R.P. Hen.
Hickman.


A TESTIMONIAL from some Cambridge DOCTORS and others.
AS we cannot but sadly resent and lay to heart the many and great mischiefs,
which have befallen the Church of God, through the miscarriage of such as being
crude and unfurnished for so weighty an undertaking, have engaged themselves in
the work of the Ministry: So we cannot but impute them in a great measure to
the want of means for subsistence at the Universities; whereby such persons
have been untimely taken from those breasts and fountains, whence by a
continued use of the helps there afforded, they might have been stored with
sound and well-digested knowledge, and thereby have not only prevented those
difficulties and temptations, which their own ungroundednesse does often expose
them to, but also become eminently serviceable in the Church of Christ, The
consideration whereof affords us abundant occasion of blessing and praising
God, for his goodness to his Church, as in continuing these Schools of
Learning, heretofore founded and established, so also in these late supplies by
men of public Spirits conferred in way of exhibition, for the further
encouragement and support of hopeful Students in the Universities. Which good
and pious design, we do with thankfulness rejoice to see so far already put in
execution, as that diverse hopeful plants are thereby refreshed and made to
flourish in these fruitful Nurseries, who else for want of so seasonable a
supply, might soon have been withered and parched up, or constrained to an
unseasonable remove, to their own and the Churches exceeding prejudice and
disadvantage.

But although there be a considerable number already chosen, and made
participants of this beneficence, yet are there also many others still among
us, truly deserving and really needing the like encouragement; which we doubt
not but many will be the more ready and willing to promote, when they shall
together with us, observe these hopeful beginnings, which promise (through the
blessing of God upon them) a plentiful harvest to be reaped in due season. For
we can truly testify that (according to the best of our observation) this
matter has been hither to managed, and the election of Scholars made according
to their parts, piety and poverty, with much faithfulness and impartiality; as
we hope also it will be carried on for the time to come.

Anthony Tuckney. Tho. Horton. Benj. Whitchcot. Lazarus Seaman. Ralph Cudworth.
William Dillingham. Thomas Woodcocke. Joseph Hill. John Stillingfleet.


IF it shall please any to settle something for ever they may conveniently do it
in this way which has been propounded to, and approved by skilful Lawyers.
They may single out three or four of the Trustees whom they can most confide
in, and make them special Trustees, and when any one of them dies, appoint the
other three to choose another in his place, and may make all the rest of the
Trustees overseers, and in case those four Trustees fail, that then it shall
fall to all the rest of the Trustees, and in case they fail, then it shall fall
to any College or Company (whom the Doner shall please to nominate) to be
disposed of, according to the Model: And in case it be perverted or alienated
to any other use, then it revert to his heirs, etc.

An Advertisement.
Whereas it has been suggested by diverse and was supposed by some of the
Trustees, that the present settlement of this trust was not Legal (not being by
way of Corporation) nor perpetual, it was agreed by the Trustees that some very
able Lawyers should be advised with; which accordingly was done, and the result
of their discourse was this: That there were two ways for the selting of such
a trust, frequently practiced among us, and both unquestionably Legal; the one
by way of Corporation, the other by way of Feofment, in which latter way we are
for the present settled, and in which way some Hospitals, etc, are settled. This
being an undoubted Principle in Law and Reason, that it is lawful for any man
to give what he will, to whom he will, for what uses he will, unless it be to
an use prohibited by Law, such as this is confessed not to be.

An Account of the Scholars already Chosen.
IN order to the practice of the things proposed in the Model, three of the
Trustees, to wit, Mr. Manton; Mr. Thomas Iacomb, and Mr. Poole were by the rest
of the Trustees sent to the two Universities, to advise with the Doctors the
Trustees there, and to settle the business, which was done, and diverse persons
of known ability and fidelity were desired, and did willingly consent to take
upon them the business of examination of all such poor Scholar as did propose
themselves to trial: Upon which, diverse persons of great hopes, were then and
have been since examined: And out of them, such as gave the best satisfaction
for Parts and Learning, and had the best report for Piety, were selected: And
two and twenty are already chosen in each University; It being resolved to
carry an equal respect to both Universities: Of whom some were through
necessity already gone from the University, and now to their great comfort, and
(we hope) the Churches great good, are settled again: Others were about to leave
it, others forced much to discontinue, and all much discouraged and prejudiced
by those pressing wants and difficulties they were overwhelmed with.

FINIS.

