THE Divine Will Considered in its Eternal Decrees, AND Holy EXECUTION Of Them.

By EDWARD POLHILL of Burwash in Sussex Esquire.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Thomas Shelmerdine, at the Sign of the
Rose-Tree in Little-Britain, 1695.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Doctrine of Gods eternal Decrees, with their Execution in his works of
Providence and Grace, is of great importance in it self, and was ever so
esteemed in the Church. It is that Revelation which God has been pleased to
make unto us in his Word, of those Counsels of his sovereign will and pleasure,
with those actings of infinite wisdom, power, goodness and grace in the pursuit
of them which rise and issue in Eternity. Hereby the whole series of divine
Operations is represented unto us, in their beauty and order, wherein God
disposes all things in this World, unto the final issue of his eternal glory.
An Enquiry therefore into these things is so far from being a needless and
curious Speculation, as some fondly imagine, that without some diligence
therein, we can never attain that distinct apprehension of divine Excellencies
and their effects which is necessary unto the direction of our Faith and
Obedience. The nature indeed of the things themselves, which is sublime and
mysterious, with that opposition which the pride of corrupted Reason rises up
unto, against the Sovereignty and Wisdom of God, has exposed the Truth
concerning them unto great and fierce Contradiction in all Ages: But as God in
the primitive times preserved the knowledge and interest of it in the Church,
by the holy and learned endeavors of persons famous on that account in their
several Generations, against the subtle assaults of men of corrupt minds; so in
these later Ages he has provided for its vindication and defense, by the
faithful Labors of many worthy Instruments, against all that opposition which
under various pretenses and apprehensions has continually broken forth against
it. And it has so fallen out, that among all those Digladiations which the
Church has been exercised withal about spiritual things, there are none which
have been managed with more confidence and seeming satisfaction, unto the
parties at variance about them, than these concerning the Decrees and Grace of
God: For whereas they proceed on various Principles, each Party find such
assurance in those they build upon, as they suppose is not capable of any
reasonable contradiction. Those who judge it their safest course in heavenly
Mysteries to captivate their Understandings unto the obedience of Faith, and to
regulate their apprehensions about them by divine Revelation, with a due
reverence of the infinite Wisdom and Sovereignty of God, can discern nothing in
the reasoning contrary to what they have so learned, that is of weight with
them or takes any impression on their minds; when others, who proceed upon and
make their own inclinations, desires and Reason the Rule and Measure of their
Conceptions, forcing divine Revelation and Mysteries into compliance with them,
have no valuation of those Arguments which are resolved purely into divine
Revelation, as representing an Idea of God, his Excellency, his will and his
Power, unsuited unto what in themselves they conceive of them: but it will be
found that as God, who alone perfectly knows himself, and all the effects of
his Wisdom and Power, can alone give us true notices and apprehensions of them,
so it will be found that it is our wisdom and understanding to confine our
conceptions about them, and Faith concerning them unto divine Revelations. And
whatever contradictions there may be therein unto the carnal Affections of men,
there is none indeed unto right Reason, when the infinite distance between God
and us is once really admitted and acknowledged. Of these things treats the
ensuing Discourse, if I mistake not, in words of truth and soberness, for the
substance of what is pleaded therein; and I could not but upon the first view
judge it both useful and needful unto the present season. For whereas the
Truths here declared and contended for, have in former Ages been opposed with
more subtilty, diligence and specious pretenses, than of late by any; yet being
never that I have observed treated with more rage, contempt and scorn, the
common way whereby men supply their defects in Learning and Ability, to oppose
what they dislike and condemn, the worthy Author has handled them with that
gravity and modesty, with that particular regard unto express divine
Testimonies, as is best suited to rebuke unchristian Virulency about sacred
things, without taking any notice of them. And sundry things in perusal of his
Discourse I take no small satisfaction in; as (first) that in handling of these
mysterious and sacred Truths he chose briefly to state and solidly to affirm
his assertions with Scripture and Reason, clearing positive Truths, and not
handling them merely in a way of Controversy, though he avoid not the
consideration of any material Objection against what he has asserted and
proved: for as this way of teaching divine Truths is suited unto the nature,
use and end of them, as also the manner of their Original Revelation; so the
mind is therein preserved sedate and free from such disturbing or diverting
provocations as we are commonly too incident unto, when engaged even in the
defense of Truth by way of controversy. Again there appeared unto me that Vein
of Piety and spiritual Affection, Reverence unto God, and satisfaction in the
things themselves pleaded about, as has given me a great esteem of the Author
as well as of his Work, though he be otherwise utterly unknown to me; and this
respect was increased, when I found he was no Minister or Churchman, whose
business it is or ought to be to enquire diligently into these things; but a
Gentleman acted by a voluntary concernment in Truth and Piety. It would not be
to the disadvantage of the Nation, or the Church of God in it, if we had more
of that rank and quality alike able and alike minded. The Modesty wherewith he
dissents from others or opposes their sentiments, without severe reflections on
Persons or Opinions, is also another thing which deserves both commendation and
imitation; and the consideration thereof gives me the confidence in these few
lines, designed unto another end, to express my own dissent from some of his
apprehensions, especially about the Object and Extent of Redemption. Had I seen
this discourse before it was wholly Printed, I should have communicated my
thoughts unto him upon that Subject, and some few other passages in it: but
where there is an agreement in the substance and design of any Doctrine, as
there is between my judgment and what is here solidly declared, it is our duty
to bear with each other in things circumstantial, or different explanations of
the same Truth, when there is no incursion made upon the main Principles we
own. The Argumentative part of this Book is generally suited unto the Genius of
the Age past, where in accurdcy and strictness of Reason bare sway; the
Language of it unto this, concerning which every one may judge as he pleases,
Truth is little concerned therein; nor is it thereunto that I assign that
perspicuity which appears in the main parts of this Discourse, but unto the
clear and distinct stating of the things themselves in the Authors mind, which
alone enables any to speak with evidence unto the understanding of others. And
hence it is that although he be forced to make use sometimes of Scholastic
Notions, yet he has so expressed the matter intended, as to make it obvious
unto the meanest Capacity any whit exercised in the knowledge of these things.
Having said thus much of this Discourse, which I hope God will bless unto good
use and fruit, I shall not need to mind the Reader of how great importance it
is to have the Truths here pleaded for, well vindicated and established; the
fullness and frequency of the Scriptures in the Revelation of them the great
influence into our Faith, Obedience and due Reverence of God, with the eminent
tendency unto the exaltation of his Glory, and the debasement of the pernicious
Pride of corrupt Nature which they have, the Opposition made unto them by all
sorts of persons for saking the Truth, who, however differing and fiercely
contending among themselves, as Papists, Socinians, Arminians, Quakers and
others, yet all agree in contradiction unto the Sovereignty of God in his
Decrees, the special fruits of eternal Redemption by the Blood of Christ and
the infallible Prevalency of Divine Grace, do all sufficiently evince, both the
weight of these Truths themselves, and the eminency of the Service which is
done to the Church of God in their Vindication.

John Owen.

A Preface to the Reader, concerning the Author of the Tract ensuing.
IT may well be reckoned among Problems or hard Questions, whether it were
better for those who write and print, to publish their Names or conceal them;
because many things Pro and Cou might be argued upon that Subject; especially
about things Polemical, when they are handled. But when Causa Dei, the Cause of
God (as our learned and famous Bradwardine entitled his Book, when he wrote
against the Pelagians) comes to be treated of, all Circumstances are duly to be
weighed. Quis, Quid, Quare, Quando, Quomodo, etc. Who, What, Why, When and How.
Among those of this kind, it is very momentaneous to know for one, that this
Gentleman is one of the Sages of the Law, an Oracle in the Country where he
lives. An Eirenarches, well worthy of that Name and Place. A Justice of Peace
and not of Trouble, according to the distinction which our unhappy times have
made. Conformable himself; yet one who affects rather to be Orthodox, and to
mind the Power of Godliness, more than the Form thereof. I write this Testimony
of him (though be neither needs, desires or knows of it) because I have bad
knowledge of him a teneris, from his Childhood, and have been certified of his
Domestical Piety, and Exemplariness in all which appertains to the Practice of
Piety. Concerning the Book, it needs not Patron or Advocate: Let it speak for
it self. Aetatem habet. It quickly shows Arma Virumque, the Spirit of the Man
and his Weapons. This pleases me above all the rest, that though it treats of
most intricate and mysterious Controversies, yet that is done humbly,
reverently, freely and with Candor. I make not my self his Hyperaspistes or
Second, or a Party to his Opinion; but because his Habitation is remote in a
Corner of the Land; his Converse more with Books than with Men; he seldom sees
London; and is not yet in these parts, any of our Anshe Shem, noted or famous
Persons. Lest any Reader should cast him off with a scornful Ignoramus, I know
not the man, I have presumed to prepare this little Lenitive, that no offense
should be taken in such respects as are herein mentioned. I shall not conclude
with Ecce hominem, but ad rem.

Lazarus Seaman.

ERRATA.
Page 25. lin. 27. read object. p. 28. l. 24. betwixt Election. and And,
insert, 2. What the things designed. p. 37. l. 8. r. Predefinition. p. 43. l.
6. r. person. p. 82. l. ult. r. (...). p. 94. l. 28. r. forbearance. p. 97. l.
3. r. nolition. p. 148. l. 16. r. crea^rix. p. 180. l. 8 for nail r. vail. p.
204. l 22. r. agony. p. 212. l. 3. after, that Law, add, and that it was. p.
272. l. 9. for Romans 20. r. Acts 20. p. 291. l. 26. r. mea. p. 295. l. 3. r.
little. p. 376. l. 11. r. vegetative. p. 384. l. 7. for Creature-deadness r.
Creature Comforts. p. 433. l. 17. r. actively. p. 456. l. 6. r. (...). p. 470.
l. 11. r. no object.

Chap I. That God is.
THat God is, is a Primordial Verity, from whence all other Verities derive
their Original. If God were not, (which is the highest Contradiction) there
could be Nothing but perfect Nullity; because Nullity can never pass that
infinite vast Gulf, which lies between it self and Being, without an infinite
God. If God were not, he could not be; a mere possible God is utterly
impossible: for a God he cannot be, unless he be supreme Perfection, a pure
Act, immovable Eternity, and eternal Necessity, in suprema essendi vehemontia.
This glorious Truth, that God is, can no where be doubted of; not in Heaven,
where his glorious face is opened to the blessed Spirits; not in Hell, where
his righteous Breath, as a River of Brimstone, does kindle the fire
unquenchable; nor on Earth, whilst any glimpses of Heaven irradiate the godly,
or any sparks of Hell flame out in the guilty Consciences of the wicked;
whilst the Candle of the Lord shines within men, or the Heavens and the Earth
(those Natural Preachers) declare a Deity without, and wonderfully render the
invisible Power and Godhead as it were visible unto them. Every Particle of
being in heaven and earth leads us to the infinite Being of Beings; every
Motion within the Sphere of Nature and Grace draws us to adore a first
immovable Mover; every breath of life in the old and new Creature tells us of
the great Fountain of Life; every beam of Light in the natural and spiritual
World owns the high Father of lights; every drop of Rain, natural on the earth,
and spiritual on the heart, witnesses a Deity. This truth is so indubitable,
that none but a fool in his greatest folly can deny it. Cur dixit stultus, non
est Deus? cur, nisi quia stultus est?

CHAP. II. That God has a Will.
GOd's Being being laid down as a sure foundation, I proceed to prove that God
has a Will. Which may be evinced by these Reasons.

1. God is an immense Sea of infinite Perfections, or rather one infinite
transcendent Perfection; and a Will (the fountain of Liberty) cannot be wanting
in him, but there will be a Maim in his perfection. Liberum Arbitrium (says
Luther) est nomen plane divinum; solum competit divinae Majestati: si hominibus
tribuitur, nihilo rectius tribuitur quam si Divinitas ipsa eis tribueretur, quo
sacrilegio nullum esse majus possit. Sovereign and Supreme Liberty is a
perfection too high for any Creature; for that, by natural and intrinsecal
Justice, owes subjection to its Maker. This is one of God's Crown-jewels, who
sits King for ever and ever, dwelling in that light, which no Creature can
approach unto, and in that Liberty, which no Creature can attain unto.

2. God is blessed for evermore, blessed in all perfection, and perfect in all
blessedness in the fruition of himself: he is infinite Light, to see his own
infinite Perfection; he is infinite Love, to embrace his own infinite
Loveliness: As he cannot comprehensively know his own infinite Perfection,
unless he have an infinite Understanding; so neither can he adequately embrace
his own infinite Loveliness, unless he have an infinite Will. God has but one
simple Nature, and therefore but one simple Pleasure, which is no other than
the intellectual and amatorious reflection of the divine Understanding and Will,
on the divine Goodness for ever.

3. If there be no divine Will at all in God, then the divine Arm must needs be
shortened, so that it can produce no creature at all; for if it produce any
thing, it must do it either freely, or necessarily: not freely, for want of a
divine Will; nor yet necessarily; for then it must produce things ad extremum
virium, and so must produce all the possible Worlds and Creatures lying in the
bosom of Omnipotence (which would be infinite actual Beings) and produce them
all as early as Eternity it self; and all those infinite actual Beings, so
produced, should be necessary Beings, as well as God himself. In all which many
great Contradictions are involved.

4. If there be no divine Will in God, then the Glass of the divine Prescience
must needs be broken; because, as God knows all Essences in his own glorious
Essence, all Possibles in his own wonderful Omnipotence, and all congruities
and tendencies to his own Glory, in his own unsearchable Wisdom; so he knows
all Futures in his own Will. For all things future were in their own nature but
mere possibles, and could never of mere possibles become futures without the
Divine Will; and unless they become futures, they could never be known as such,
no, not by the Divine Intellect it self: For, as infinite Omnipotence cannot
effect that which is not possible, and potenter non potest; so infinite
Omniscience cannot know that which is not knowable; for this were to err, and
not to know, and consequently a blemish in the clarity of the Divine Intellect.

5. The Glory of God (which passes before the faith of his Children) is his
Grace and Mercy; and the Glory of his Grace and Mercy is the Freeness and
Self-movingness of it; and this Freeness and Self-movingness can no where be
found but in the Divine Will alone, into which all grace and mercy is resolved
by God himself, who says, I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and
will show mercy to whom I will show mercy, Exodus 33. 19.

6. God is a living God, and lives the most perfect life, because he is the
most perfect Being; and this Divine Life does not merely consist in the
comprehension of his infinite Understanding, nor only in the exertion of his
infinite power; but also in the volition of his Divine Will. With thee, (O
Divine Will!) is the pure Fountain of Life, the precious Wellhead of Grace and
Glory, all the Saints and Angels must stand still and adore thee, in the
embraces of free Election, and Crown of Eternal Glory, in every Drop of
Christ's Redeeming Blood, and Gale of his gracious Spirit.

CHAP. III. Of the Decrees of God in general.
HAving proved that God has a Will, I proceed to the Acts thereof. The Divine
Will (although one pure Act) is considerable under a double Notion; either as
it is Voluntas Complacentiae, or else as it is Voluntas Decreti. Voluntas
Complacentiae is that whereby God does love himself and his own Image. Himself,
for himself, as infinite Love does by an Amatorious Reflection embrace himself
as infinite Goodness: And his own Image; for wherever that is found, whether
shining out in holy Laws, or living in holy Creatures, there is his delight.
Voluntas Decreti is that whereby God does foreordain Events. Both these are
Acts of his Will, and free Acts; because they spring out of his divine
Knowledge. Even God himself, through the intuition of his own Beauty, loves
himself, as well as he makes his Decrees out of the Treasury of his Wisdom: but
herein they differ, that God's Act of loving himself is such as cannot be
otherwise; but his Act of Decreeing (if he had been so pleased) might have been
otherwise framed than it is. Pretermitting his Complacential Will, I shall
direct my Discourse to his Decretive.

The Decrees of God may be thus described, viz. That they are the Wise,
Eternal, Immutable, Immanent Acts of his Will, whereby for his own glory he
decrees whatsoever comes to pass in time. Every Decree of God is an Act of his
Will; hence it is called (...), the Will of God, Acts 21. 14. it is an Immanent
Act; hence it is called (...), a purpose in himself, Ephesians. 1. 9. it is a wise Act;
hence it is called (...), the counsel of his Will, Ephesians. 1. 11. it is an eternal
Act; hence it is called (...) and (...), a foreknowing and foredetermining, Romans
8. 29. it is an immutable Act; hence it is called (...), the immutability of his
Counsel, Heb. 6. 17. it is an Act definitive of Events; hence it is called (...),
the determinate counsel of God, Acts. 2. 23. and the end of all is his own
glory, whereby the whole Will of his Decrees circulates into that Will of his
complacence, whereby he loves himself; himself being the ultimate end, all meet
there as in their true center. Now in the Decrees of God there are four things
to be chiefly considered.

1. That they are founded on infinite Wisdom. 2. That they are situate in
Eternity. 3. That they are cemented with Immutability. 4. That they are crowned
with Infallibility as to the Event.
1. The Decrees of God are founded on infinite Wisdom: God has a Mass and
Treasury of all Wisdom in himself, and from thence he draws out all those
Orders and Series of things, which through his Decrees are poured forth into
being. Extra Deum there is no Reason of his Decrees, but within there is Summa
Ratio; God, even as decreeing, dwells in Light, though to us unapproachable:
every Decree is irradiated with infinite Wisdom, though our eyes cannot enter
into it. The Apostle calls the World the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. and no
wonder; for all the rare Artifices and Harmonies in the Sphere of Nature, are
but the Shadows and Picture of his wise Decrees: all the excellent Shows in
time, are but the Apocalypse or Revelation of the wise Co^trivances in
Eternity. God possessed Wisdom in the beginning of his way, even in the framing
of his Eternal Decrees; not only when he prepared the Heavens in Creation, but
also when he prepared all things in his Ideal Counsel; not only when he set a
compass on the face of the Depth, but also when he set the Compass of his
Decrees upon the face of all Futuritions. Every one of his Decrees is most wise
and rational; hence it is called his Counsel, and the Counsel of his Will. In
the Eternal Rolls, Causes and Effects, Means and End, Modes and Methods of
Being are all set down, but not a tittle without the advice of an infinite
Understanding; there is no such thing as mere Will in God; no caecus impetus,
but a (...), a depth of Knowledge in every one of his Decrees.

2. The Decrees of God are situate in Eternity. Mutable Creatures and their
Acts are measured by Time, which is a perpetual Flux; but God and his immanent
Acts have no other Measure but Eternity, which is a perpetual Instant.
Scripture and Reason will both assert this.

1. Scripture will do it. When that speaks of the Decree of Election, it says
that God has chosen us (...), before the foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. 4.
Heaven was made (...), at the founding of the World, Matthew. 25. 34. but God's
choosing of us to it was long before, his mercies are from everlasting to
everlasting, Psalm. 103. 17. reaching (as I may say) from one end of Eternity to
another. So also when it speaks of other pieces of Providence, it intimates an
eternal Preordination of things before the great Hourglass of Time was set up.
There were (...), foreappointed times, Acts 17. 26. Not a Sand of Time but it
runs out according to an Eternal Decree; not a member in the body, but it is
written in the eternal Book, Psalm. 139. 16. not a place of habitation, but it
was eternally bounded, Acts 17. 26. not a Sparrow falls to the ground but by an
eternal Will; not an hair but it was numbered in Eternity; not a Particle of
Being among all the hosts of Creatures but it was registered in Eternity. All
God's works are known to him (...), eternally, Act. 15. 18. Known eternally as
Essences they might be in the Divine Essence; known eternally as Possibles they
might be in the Divine Power: but known eternally, as Works to be done by God,
they could not be, but only in his Eternal Decree, which is Rerum omnium
amantissima Genetrix, and suavissima Nutrix.

2. Reason also will make out the Eternity of his Decrees; for

1. The Act of God's Will is all one with God's Will, and his Will is all one
with his Essence, and his Essence is one pure Simple Act; God is Love,
essentially Love: Amat Deus, nec aliunde hoc habet, sed ipse est unde amat, and
ideo vehementius, quia non amorem tam habet, quam ipse est. All the Decrees of
God are but Deus volens; and, as God being, and God knowing inhabit Eternity;
so likewise does God willing: the very Creatures willed, as they are in God in
Esse Indeali, are Eternal. Notable is that of Anselm, Creaturae, prout sunt in
Deo, sunt Essentia Creatrix. Suitable is that of S. Austin, who on those words
(in ipso vita est) distinguishes between arca in art and arca in opere; arca
in opere non est vita, sed arca in art est vita, quia vivit anima Artificis:
Sapientia Dei, per quam fact a sunt omnia, secundum artem, continet omnia,
antequam fabricet omnia; terram vides, est in art terra; coelum vides, est in
art coelum; Solemn and Lunam vides, sunt and ista in art; sed foris corpora
sunt, in art vita sunt. Videte, si quo modo potestis; magna enim res dicta
est. Oh the Comprehensions of the Divine Essence, Wisdom, Power and Will!
Essences are Life and Eternity in the Divine Essence; Congruities are Life and
Eternity in the Divine Wisdom; Possibles are Life and Eternity in the Divine
Power; and Futuritions are Life and Eternity in the Divine Will.

2. The Eternity of Futures does demonstrate the Eternity of the Divine
Decrees: it is impossible that any thing should begin to be future. Si aliquid
nunc non futurum (says Bradwardine) incipiet esse futurum, ergo post aliquod
instans futurum erit, ergo erit, ergo est futurum, ergo aliquid non futurum est
futurum. Now if it be impossible that any thing should begin to be future, then
all futures must needs be Eternal; and if so, whence are they? Not from
themselves, for in their own nature they were but mere possibles; and if one
possible might by a self-motion become future, all the infinite possibles lying
in the bosom of Omnipotence might also become such; Nor from any Creature; for
that which is but temporal, cannot be the Cause of that which is eternal. The
Spring then of eternal futures cannot be found any where but in the Eternal
God, and where in him? not in the Divine Essence, for that in it self, and
abstractively from the Divine Will works no Change in any thing at all; not
in the Divine Prescience, for that does suppose and not make its objects. And
how then without eternal Decrees can there be any foundation of Futures? I may
conclude with that of Anselm, Nihil est futurum nisi in summa veritate. If then
God should make any Decree in time, the thing decreed would begin to be future,
which is impossible.

3. The Decrees of God are cemented with Immutability. Aristotle by the light
of Nature saw the Simplicity of God's Nature, and from thence rationally
concluded the Simplicity of God's pleasure. The Eternal and Immanent Acts of
his Understanding and Will are ever immoveably the same, or else infinite
Simplicity could not take pleasure in them. God says of himself, Mal. 3. 6. I
am the Lord, I change not. Should he change, he would lose his Name, I am that
I am. I know (says the wise Preacher) that whatsoever God does, it shall be
for ever, Eccl. 3. 14. His Decrees are Unchangeable. The Apostle speaking of
the Decree of Election, says, The foundation of God stands sure, having this
seal, the Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Every word has its
weight: Election is not a structure upon Faith, but a foundation; humane
foundations may be destroyed, but this is the foundation of God, laid by him,
nay in him in the bosom of the divine Will; there is no standing, much less
sure standing, in the flux of Time and Matter; but this foundation, because of
God, and in God, stands sure; it stands in God's Eternity, which is Nunc
stans; it is sure in God's Immutability, which is ever the same; and the seal
upon all this, is God's unerrable and infallible Knowledge, including within it
unvariable and unchangeable Love to his people: God is the Father of lights,
with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning, James 1. 17. The
visible corporeal Sun rides circuit round the World; but whilst he salutes one
Hemisphear, in the turn he leaves a dark shadow on the other: but God is an
immutable and supercelestial Sun, there can be no shadow in his eternal and
unconvertible Light. Neither are the various changes among the Creatures,
shadows cast by any turn in God or his Will, but events ordered and disposed by
him. And because the Apostle speaks in this Verse of perfect gifts, and in the
next of Regeneration by God's. Will, therefore there is a further sense in it,
That if the Father of Lights purpose to make the Day Star arise in any poor
Soul, his gracious purpose never turns away from that Soul, nor leaves it in
the dark shadow of Death. The Names of the Elect are all indelibly written in
God's Book; and if the Scripture cannot be dissolved, Joh. 10. 35. surely the
Book of life must be irrasible. Saint Austin on those words, Deleantur de libro
viventium, and cum justis non scribantur, Psalm. 69. 28. raises an Objection, si
homo dixit, Quod scripsi, scripsi, Deus quemquam scribit and delet? quomodo
isti inde delentur, ubi nunquam scripti sunt? To which he answers, Hoc dictum
est secundum spem ipsorum, quia ibi se scriptos putabant. Quid est, deleantur
de libro viventium? and ipsis constet non illos ibi esse. Deleantur ergo
secundum spem ipsorum, secundum autem aequitatem tuam non scribantur. In a
word; whatsoever God does in his Decrees is immutably the same, his Decrees are
as Mountains of Brass, Zach. 6. 1. unremoveable by any Creature, because
situate in the Eternal Will. The strength or eternity of Israel will not lie or
repent, 2 Samuel 15. 29. If God's Time cannot lie, but will infallibly show forth
the Verity of his Promises and Prophecies, surely God's Eternity cannot lie,
wherein he decrees and knows all. The World is full of Vicissitudes, Matter is
in a perpetual Flux, the Glass of Time is running out, and (...), the Wheel of
Nature is running round: but all the while, God's Will is immovable; it does
not roll about with the Heavens, rise or set with the Sun, or ebb and flow with
the Sea; but sits King for ever and ever upon the Throne of its own Immobility.
Apud te, Domine, rerum omnium instabilium stant causae, and rerum omnium St.
Aust. Conf. Lib. 1. cap. 6.
mutabilium immutabiles manent origines, and omnium irrationalium and
temporalium sempiternae vivunt rations. Now besides what has been said out of
Scripture, to prove the Immutability of his Decrees, these Reasons may be
offered.

1. The Decrees of God are Immanent and Eternal Acts in God, therefore cannot
but be Unchangeable. God in framing his Decrees non egreditur extra seipsum,
goes not out from his own Eternity.

2. As the Eternity of Futures proves an Eternity in God's Decrees, so the
Immutability of Futures proves an Immutability in his Decrees. If the Decrees
(which are the Basis of Futurition) may be changed, then that, which was future
by the Decree, may yet cease to be future, sine positione ejus in esse actuali,
which is impossible. If a new Decree be made in succession after a former, then
the thing decreed begins to be future, which is also impossible.

3. If the divine Decrees should change, Oh! what amazing Changes? what an
horrible Tempest must needs ensue? Must not God's own dwelling house, even his
glorious Eternity, sink and fall to the ground? Non enim est vera Aeternitas,
ubi oritur nova voluntas, nec est immortalis Voluntas, quae alia and alia est.
Must not God's eternal Prescience fall a doubting and faltring about every
Future? Seeing God cannot now know his own works, no, not a moment before their
actual Existence; because even then their being may be prevented by a Change in
his Will: May not eternal Grace and Truth lose their glorious light, and Jesus
Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, drop out of the Gospel-orb, and all the
Starry Promises in the Word, and lightsom Comforts in the Saints go out in a
moment, leaving all in darkness and confusion? May not the Evangelical Banquet
let down to poor Worms be called back again into Heaven, and the precious Blood
of Christ return again into its Veins, and his Humane Nature be cast away into
nothing, and every Saint, instead of Grace and Peace in his heart, may have a
Lie in his right hand, and lie down in sorrow? Nay, in such a case, must there
not fall a Change upon the very Being of God himself? And seeing every Change
is a kind of Death, must not the Deity suffer, and as it were die in this
Mutation? All which astonishing Catastrophes being to be for ever abhorred, I
conclude that God's Decrees must needs be Immutable, as long as there is any
Stability in his Eternity, Infallibility in his Prescience, Sureness in his
Grace and Truth, or Immortality in his Life or Essence.

4. The Decrees of God are crowned with Infallibility as to the Event; the
Event is so certain, that the Spirit of God in Scripture speaks of future
things as if they were already done. Behold! (says Enoch in the morning of the
World) the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, as if he had been then
in the Clouds coming to Judgment. Jesus Christ cries out of God forsaking and
men piercing him, Psalm. 22. 1. and 16. as if he had then been upon the Cross
with all the wrath of God and fury of men upon him. Whom he did predestinate
(says St. Paul, Romans 8. 30.) them he called; whom he called, them he
justified; whom he justified, them he glorified; he speaks as if all the Elect
were already in Heaven: Hence God is said to be (Isai. 45. 11. as the Sept.
there has it) (...), a Maker of things to come; the Event is as certain as if
it were already done. Now for the understanding of this point, we must
distinguish of Events; either they are good things, or else evil, viz. sins.
Touching the first, the Decree of God is Effective; touching the last, the
Decree of God is Permissive. The first come to pass, Deo efficiente; the last,
Deo permittente; but both do fall out infallibly.

1. Those Events which fall under his Effective Decree do fall out infallibly.
This is clear upon a double Account.

1. The Will of God is Causa Causarum, an Universal Supreme Cause, having all
things under it; It reigns over all the armies in heaven and the inhabitants of
the earth, Dan. 4. 35. The poor Sparrow is no more forgotten by it, than the
great Image of Worldly Monarchy. Natural Agents must be under it, as the primum
Movens; Free Agents must be under it, as the primum Liberum: the Lot is the
greatest Casualty, and yet wholly disposed of by it: Sin is the most monstrous
Ataxy, and yet it is reduced into order thereby. Now albeit Particular and
Inferior Causes may fail of the intended Issue; yet the Universal and Supreme
Cause cannot be frustrated, because it governs all.

2. The Effective Decree of God is backed with his Omnipotence. Who ever
resisted his Will? He that does it must first grapple with Omnipotence. The
Lord of hosts has purposed, and who shall disanul it? his hand is stretched
out, and who shall turn it back? Isai. 14. 27. Can any Creature hinder the
purpose of the Lord of hosts? All Creatures are ready pressed for his Service.
But if one Creature could steal away all its Fellow Creatures from him, yet who
shall turn back his Almighty Hand? None can stay his hand, nor say to him, What
do thou? Dan. 4. 45. His power is insuperable, therefore none can stay his
hand; his Sovereignty is unaccountable, therefore none can say, What do thou?
He works all things after the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 11. and if he
work, who can let it? Isai. 43. 13. Surely none. When God's Hand and God's
Counsel go together, the Effect cannot fail.

2. Those Events which fall under his Permissive Decree, do also fall out
infallibly. As on the one hand, without God's permission, no sin can come into
being; If God suffer it not, no man can wrong Israel, Psalm. 105. 14. and (which
is less than an injurious act) Balaam cannot curse her, Numb. 22. 38. and
(which is yet less than a cursing word) the idolatrous Nations cannot so much
as desire her land, Exodus 34. 24. So on the other hand, upon God's permission
sin does follow. All Nations will walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. Nay, and
the Israel of God (if but suffered) would do so too, Deuteronomy. 18. 14. If God
permit it, the wicked will do wickedly, the Jews will fill up the measure of
their sins, Mat. 23. 32. wickedness will build her an house in Shinar, in the
Reprobate world, there it will be established and set upon her own base, Zach.
5. 11. And what would not a Saint do, if but left in manu consilii sui? Jeremy
falls from praising his God, to cursing his Birthday, as it were in one breath,
Jer. 20. 14, 15. Peter falls from his profession of Martyrdom, to the denial of
his Master, Matthew. 26. If God permit sin, sin follows upon it; I say, upon it,
not from it, as an Effect from a Cause, but upon it, as a Consequent upon an
Antecedent. To shut up this point; The Decrees of God, whether as effective of
Good, or as permissive of Evil, are still infallible as to the Event.

CHAP. IV. Of Gods Decree of Election, as touching Men.
HAving spoken of God's Decrees in general, I pass on to his Decree of Election
in particular; this is respective either of Angels or Men: pretermitting it in
the first respect, I shall treat of it in the second. God's Decree of Election,
as touching Men, is set forth in Scripture under various words, which do not a
little illustrate the nature of it: it is called (...), because God's purpose;
(...), because his gracious purpose; (...), because he separates or singles out
some to mercy, in a way of Choice; (...), because he knows them as his own, in
a way of singular love; (...), because he infallibly predestinates them to
Grace and Glory; and (...), because all is out of the pure Self-motion of his
own good Will. Election is that gracious Decree of God, whereby, out of the
mere good pleasure of his own Will, he chooses some certain individual men out
of the corrupt mass of Mankind, unto the infallible attainment of Grace and
Glory, in and through Jesus Christ. Now in the opening of this Description,
there are several things considerable, viz.

1. Who is the Great Agent? 2. What are the things designed? 3. To whom these
things are designed? 4. What is the Impulsive Cause thereof? 5. In and through
whom it is done?
1. Who is the great Agent? It is no other than God himself: He chooses us, Ephesians.
1. 4. he predestinates us, ver. 5. Hence the Elect are called God's Elect, Tit.
1. 1. and Election is styled God's Election, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4. the Elect are said
to be God's own, John 17. 6. and Election is named God's own purpose and grace,
2 Timothy 1. 9. He that frames this high Design must be a God indeed, a Creator of
Souls, and Infuser of Graces, one able to provide an infinite Ransom for the
satisfaction of Justice, and a glorious Heaven for the patefaction of Mercy; no
less than an Almighty Potter, able even out of the Mass of perdition to make
Vessels of Mercy, and fill them with Glory. All Divines will at least in words
confess God to be the great Agent; but how the Remonstrants according to their
Principles can own him as such, is well worthy their consideration: for they
assert that the Object of Gods Election is a Believer; and whether there shall
be a Believer or not, after all the operations of Grace, ultimately depends
upon the Will of Man; and if so, how can God choose at all? seeing the Act of
his Election depends upon the Object, and the Oject upon the Will of man. The
Remonstrants will contend, That Man, with his petty created Liberty, cannot
choose as a man, if he be under the Pre-determining Will of God; and can God,
with his Sovereign Supreme Liberty, choose as a God, if he be under the
Pre-determining Will of Man? And what is he less than under it, when, whether
he shall have an Election or not, depends upon the Object; and whether there
will be an Object or not, depends upon the Will of Man? Man's Will must go
before, and make the Object, or else for want of one, God's Will must stand
still and not choose at all. And is this for God to choose like himself? Are not
all Souls his own, and may he not choose which he pleases? Is not all Grace and
Glory his own, and may he not do with his own what he pleases? But how can he
do so, if as to the Act of Election he be under the Pre-determining Will of
Man? But you will say, God is not under it for all this: for he first, and
antecedently to any foreseen Faith in Man, did decree in general to save
Believers, and Believers only, as appears in the Gospel; and thereby did, out
of his mere good pleasure, set down this Law or Rule to himself, That
Believers, and Believers only, should be the Object of particular Election; and
so he is not pre-determined by man's Will, but his own, and chooses particular
persons in his own way: Unto which I answer two things.

1. That God has set such a Law or Rule unto himself, That Believers, and
those only, should be the object of his Election, is utterly untrue: for then
all Infants, dying such (because no Believers) must be out of the Sphere of
Election, and by consequence, out of the Sphere of Salvation also; unless
(which is very strange) we could imagine those to be actually saved, whom yet
God never elected or decreed to save. Neither is there any such Law or Rule
manifested in the Gospel: there God's Will is thus set forth, Whosoever
believes shall be saved; which imports that Believers are the objects of
Salvation, but not in the least that they are the objects of Election. It is
written in the Gospel, Relieve and thou shall be saved; but in what Gospel is
it written, Believe and thou shall be Elected?

2. That Law or Rule (if supposed) does not answer the Argument; for still (as
to particular Election) God is under the pre-determining Will of Man: If that
say, Nay, God shall have never a chosen Vessel in all the World to fill with
Grace and Glory; and how then is he the great Agent in Election? Solomon set a
Law or Rule to Shimei, That if he passed over Kidron, he should die for it; he
passes over, and dies: What now was the chief cause of his death? Solomon's Law
or Execution, or else Shimei's passage? Clearly, it was Shimei's own Act;
Solomon was but as a Legislator. Pariratione; If God set a Law or Rule, that
Believers should be elected, if a man believe and be elected, that which
chiefly determines the business is not God's first Law or after Choice, but
Man's Faith; God is no Agent therein, but as a mere Legislator. So naturally do
the Remonstrant Principles run out into that of Theophylact, It Is God's part to
call, but Man's to be elect Theoph. on Matthew. 22.
or not; which Principles must be renounced, or else God cannot be owned as the
Great Agent in Election. And here a threefold Enquiry offers it self.

1. What the things themselves are? 2. In what Order these are designed? 3. In
what manner these are designed?
1. What the things themselves are? These are Grace and Glory, or Faith and
Salvation.

1 Grace is designed: hence we are said to be called according to purpose, Romans
8. 28. and chosen that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. Do we see a Saint in his
spiritual Glory, clothed with Humility, arrayed with Righteousness, girt with
Truth; his Eyes flowing with repentant Tears, his Heart burning with holy Love,
and his Hands laden with good Works? All these were prepared in Eternal
Election, as well as wrought by the Holy Spirit in Time; there was Decretum Dei
in the foreordaining, as well as Digitus Dei in the forming of them. Thus shall
it be done to the man whom the King of Heaven will honor. In Election there is
a designing of Grace, nay all Grace; Faith it self not excepted. The
Remonstrants shut out Faith from this design, in as much as they pre-require
Faith thereunto. But how unscriptural is this? Paul was chosen to know God's
will, Acts 22. 14. not to a bare notional Knowledge, but to a saving practical
one, such as justifies, Isai. 53. 11. such as is Eternal life, Joh. 17. 3.
which must needs include Faith. The Apostle calls Faith, the faith of Gods
elect, Tit. 1. 1. If Faith had been precedent to Election, he would have told
us, that Election is of Believers; but because it is consequent, he says, that
Faith is of the Elect. And how irrational is it also? Election is a design of
secretion; it is (...), a choosing or singling out of some to Grace and Glory;
the Elect are said to be chosen out of the world, Joh. 15. 19. and chosen unto
God, Acts 9. 15. (...), (says Christ) thine they were, Joh. 17. 6. thine in a
select peculiar manner: and Faith is the choice and prime Grace of secretion,
it is not (...), of all, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. If all men did believe without any
(...), or difference, the Righteousness of God would be upon them all, Romans 3.
22. the Rivers of living Water would flow in them all, Joh. 7. 38. but Faith is
not of all, whereby it appears, that of all inherent Graces, Faith firstly and
properly makes the secretion. Now that such a prime Grace of secretion as Faith
should not be decreed, in suoh a great design of secretion as Election, seems
to me incongruous even to absurdity. If Faith go before Election, then how does
God choose them out of the World, who by Faith are out of it already? How does
he choose them unto himself, who by Faith are his own before? If Man's Will in
believing make the first and proper secretion, then God's Will has no room to
make one by electing; wherefore, if we will allow God his choice indeed, we
must confess Faith it self to be designed in Election.

2. Glory is designed in Election; we are chosen to Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
and before prepared to glory, Romans 9. 23. the Names of the Elect are written in
heaven, and registered in the Book of life. All the glory above rays out of the
bosom of Election, and every Crown of bliss is set on by God's good pleasure.

2. In what order are these things designed? No doubt, by one pure simple Act
in God. But what is our most congruous conception thereof? Some Divines assert,
that God first decreed Salvation and then Faith. Salvation is the end, and
therefore first; Faith the means, and therefore last in God's intention. But
this Reason is not cogent; for neither can any thing in the Creature, no, not
its utmost perfection (such as Salvation is) be God's end, all whose Decrees do
circulate into himself: Neither (if it were such) should God therefore will it
in the first place, and in order before Faith; for he wills the End and Means
with one simple Act. Excellent is that of Aquinas; Sicut Deus uno actu omnia in
essentia sua intelligit, it a uno actu Pars prima quast. 19. Art. 5.
omnia in sua bonitate vult: Unde sicut in Deo intelligere causam, non est
causa intelligendi effect us, sed ipse intelligit effect us in causa; it a
velle finem, non est ei causa volendi ea quae sunt ad finem, sed tamen vult ea
quae sunt ad finem ordinari ad finem. Vult ergo hoc esse propter hoc; sed non
propter hoc vult hoc. Other Divines conceive thus; That God first decrees Faith
and then Salvation, and that upon this account: Such and in such order as God
in time does save, such, and in the very same order, does God in Eternity
decree to save: But God in time does save only Believers, therefore God in
Eternity did decree to save only Believers, that is, such as were so considered
by him; and so considered by him they could not be, without a precedent Decree
of giving Faith unto them. Wherefore Faith is first decreed, and then
Salvation; and thus the Decree and its Execution harmonize, and both suit with
the Gospel Method, which sets Faith in order before Salvation. But neither has
this colorable Reason any Nerves in it: For that Proposition, Such, and in
such order, as God saves, such, and in the very same order, he decrees to save,
may be taken two ways: Either thus; God decrees to save in the very same order
as he saves, that is, as in time Faith goes before Salvation, so in Eternity he
decreed that Faith should go before Salvation; and this is true. Thus the
Decree harmonizes with the execution, and both with the Gospel; but thus Faith
is not made first in the Decree, but first in the execution according to the
Decree. Or else thus: there is the very same order observed in God's decreeing
as in his saving; that is, as Faith is first in time, so it was first in God's
Decree; and thus it is untrue: for it stands upon this false bottom in general;
There is the very same order in God's internal Intention, as there is in the
external Production, that which is first in the one is first also in the other.
This bottom is such, as neither the harmony between the Decree and the
Execution, nor yet the Gospel-way and Method does require. The harmony between
the Decree and the Execution does not require it; for that only requires that
that, which is decreed to be and exist first, should accordingly be and exist
first; but it requires not that that, which is first in Production, should be
first in Intention. In production the Sun was first before the Beams; but was
it first also in intention? then God decreed a Sun, and in that instant meant
no Beams. In production, the Chaos was first before the complete World, but was
it so in intention? then God decreed a Chaos, and in that instant meant not a
complete World. Neither can it avail to say, that these instances are in
Naturals; for the harmony between the Decree and the Execution is as accurate
in Naturals as in Spirituals. Neither does the Gospel-way or Method require it;
for that only requires, that Faith be and exist first, but not that it be first
intended or decreed. In order of nature, Faith is first before Adoption; but
was it first also in intention? then God decreed Faith to some persons, and in
that instant meant not their Adoption, which yet by the Gospel is a necessary
resultance from their Faith. In order of existence, Faith is first before
Salvation; but was it first also in intention? then God decreed Faith to some
persons, and in that instant meant not their Salvation, which yet by the Gospel
is a necessary consequence of their Faith. And this is the rather to be marked,
because the Remonstrants assert, That God first, and antecedently to his Decree
of giving Faith, did decree in general to adopt and save all Believers; and if
so, then how does God decree Faith to a person, and not in and by the same
Decree, decree Adoption and Salvation to him? These are a Conclusion naturally
flowing from Faith, by virtue of the general Decree; and therefore that Decree,
which designs Faith to a person, cannot but design these also to him. In order
of nature Faith is before Perseverance, yet both are by one and the same
Decree: for God in decreeing Faith, decrees the duration thereof, which is but
Mora in esse a kind of stay in Being; else his Decree would be very imperfect.
In point of existence, Perseverance is not simultaneous or all at once, but
successive, one sand as it were dropping after another, and one instant drawing
on another: yet all Perseverance is in one and the same Decree. To imagine a
succession of Decrees in Eternity, suiting with the succession of instants in
Time, were strangely to Metamorphose Eternity into Time. Thus it evidently
appears, that there is not the same order in the internal Intention, as in the
external Production; that which is first in existence here, is not first in
contrivance there. Wherefore the Argument for Faiths firstness in the Decree,
because of its firstness in the Execution, falls to the ground. In brief;
waving both these opinions, as built on sandy foundations, I conceive it is
most congruous to say, That God decreed Faith and Salvation in the very same
Decree, yet so, as that withal he intended, that in the execution, Faith should
go before Salvation. As in Naturals, God decrees the Sowing and Harvest in the
very same Decree, yet so, as that in actual existence the Sowing shall precede
the Harvest: So in Spirituals God decrees Grace and Glory, the sowing to the
Spirit and reaping of Life eternal, in the same Decree; yet so, as that in
actual existence, first there is Grace and then Glory; first sowing to the
Spirit, and then reaping Life Eternal. Wherefore in God's Decree Faith is not
before Salvation, nor Salvation before Faith, but both are simultaneous:
nevertheless, in time Faith comes forth first, according to the Gospel-method,
and afterward Salvation crowns it.

3. In what manner are these things designed? I answer, in an Infallible way,
such as never fails: Hence Election is called (...), an infallible
Predestination, or Predestination of Grace and Glory to the Elect. Thus the
Apostle: Whom he did predestinate, them he called; whom he called, them he
justified; whom he justified, them he glorified, Romans 8. 30. The first link of
Predestination and the last of Glorification are surely joined by the middle
links of Vocation and Justification. The Remonstrants to decline the force of
this golden place, tell us, that the Apostle here speaks only of Believers,
such as love God, Ver. 29. and of a predestination and vocation to the Cross,
and of a justification and glorification after it patiently endured. But what
is this interpretation but mere a perverting of Scripture? The Apostle speaks
of Believers, such as love God; but did they believe and love antecedently to
God's Election or consequently, and as the fruit thereof? If antecedently, What
is the Calling according to purpose? What purpose is this but the purpose
according to Election, Romans 9. 11? the purpose according to which God saves and
calls us, 2 Timothy 1. 9? What Calling is this, but that efficacious one which
makes a man hear and learn of the Father, so as to come to Christ by Faith and
Love, Joh. 6. 45? Wherefore Faith and Love stream out of the fountain of
Vocation, and Vocation comes down out of the bosom of God's Purpose. To say,
that the called according to purpose, are those which are ready to obey all the
Will of God, is against the usage of Scripture, to turn God's Call into man's
Obedience, and God's Purpose (which is the measure of his own acting) into his
Command (which is the measure of man's.) Again, if antecedently, what becomes
of the (...), Ver. 29? How could God foreknow, that is, fore-love them who
loved him before? If they loved first, the (...) must out, it is not
Pre-dilection, but Post-dilection. It remains then that they did believe and
love consequently to God's Election, and by a divine influence from thence. But
to go on; What is the Predestination here, but to a Conformity to the Image of
Christ? And are Sufferings all the Image of Christ? Are and Glory no part
thereof? What Divine will not blush to say so? And how then is not
Predestination to these? But if Sufferings were all Christ's Image, yet are all
Sufferings his Image? What if they be mere Sufferings, such as have no tincture
of Faith and Holiness upon them? Are these his Image also? If not, the
Predestination to his Image must include in it a Predestination to Faith and
Holiness. And what is the Calling following upon Predestination? Is it a
Calling to Sufferings? Such a Calling uses to be particularly expressed;
Hereunto were you called, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 21. and We are appointed
hereunto, says S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3. But where in all the Scripture does the
word [Calling] being put absolutely, and without such addition, ever signify a
Call to Sufferings? (...), we meet with therein, but not (...) Wherefore the
Calling is to Faith and Holiness. And what is the Justification which hangs
upon Calling? If the Calling be to Sufferings, are they not justified before
that Calling? No doubt they are in the instant of believing; and how then is
Calling set first and Justification last? You Will say, this place speaks not of
the Justification of their persons, but of the Approbation of their cause. And
where in all this Epistle is the word [justifie] so taken? And why so here?
Lastly, the Called are Justified, and the Justified Glorified, says the
Apostle. And are all those which are called to Sufferings Justified and
Glorified? The experience of thousands denies it. You Will say, they are all
justified and glorified, if they bear the Cross with Faith and Patience. But
who dares add an [it] to Gods Word, and in this Text to the two links and not
to the former? The Apostle faith expressly, whom he did Predestinate, them he
also Called, and whom he Called, them he also Justified, and whom he Justified,
them he also Glorified. In the Original, the words (...) fasten every link to
its precedent, and that with appropriation to the very same persons; (...)
fastens Calling to Predestination, and Justification to Calling, and
Glorification to Justification, and the (...) appropriates all throughout the
whole chain to the same persons. If therefore any person predestined or
called within this Text, be not also justified and glorified, the chain is
broken, and the truth of the Text cannot (for ought I see) be salved. Wherefore
I conclude that this Text does not treat of Predestination and Calling to
Sufferings, notwithstanding which many fall short of Justification and
Glorification; but of Predestination and Calling to Grace and Glory, such as
does infallibly bring them to Justification and Glorification. God's Electing
mercy toward his chosen ones is sure and unfailable; before they had any
being, free Grace embraced them in an Eternal Decree, and laid them in its
bosom, and when they left the Common Nullity, and in the first moment of their
Being, lay in the blood of their natural enmity and iniquity, free Grace would
not pass them by, but there must be (...), (as the Sept. has it, Ezekiel. 16. 8.)
a time for love to let out and dissolve it self in gracious operations; to cast
its skirt over them, wash them in the blood of the Covenant, anoint them with
the holy Spirit, and put a Chain of Graces about their necks. And after all
this, when their Faith wavers like a Wave of the Sea, his Faithfulness is as a
Mountain of Brass; when their Love cools and slacks, his Love is ever the same,
and inflames theirs afresh; when their Holiness is full of Creature-weakness
and impersection, there are with him (...), holy Mercies and Compassions which
never fail; when they sin and go on frowardly in the way of their hearts, yet
he will see their way and heal them, as the Expression is, Isai. 57. 18. How
many millions of times, after their Conversion, might he have seen their way
and damned them? but because of his unchangeable Love he will see their way and
heal them. His Covenant is as the Waters of Noah, Isai. 54. 9. When they sin
again and again, yet his pardoning Mercy and healing Grace will never suffer
them to lie under water, nor the deluge of sin to overwhelm them for ever. In a
word; his Electing Love never leaves off till it has lodged them safe in
Heaven. Thus the Foundation of God stands sure, and the Election infallibly
obteineth Grace and Glory.

3. To whom are these things designed? I answer in two things.

1. These are designed to some certain individual persons.

2. These certain individual persons are considered as lying in the Mass of
perdition.

1. These are designed to some certain individual persons. The Lord knows
them that are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Their names are all down in the Book of life,
Phil. 4. ^. he called them (...), by name, Joh. 10. 3. (...) (says God to
Ananias) this individual persons, this very Paul, who but now was breathing out
blood against tho Church, this is a vessel of Election, Acts 9. 15. The Elect
are a determinate number; What else were the 7000. which bowed not to Baal, 1
Kings 19. 18? What the 144000. which were sealed in their foreheads, Rev. 7. 4?
If there were no set number, why are they called a remnant according to the
election of Grace, Romans 11. 5? What remnant can there be unless made up of
individual persons? What Election but of such? A choosing or singling out, if
not of individuals, is no choosing or singling out at all. And this is one
remarkable difference between the Will of God's Complacence, and the Will of
his Benevolence: the Will of his Complacence is properly respective of Graces,
and that wherever those Graces are, without any distinction of persons, in
every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted with
him, says St. Peter, Act. 10. 35. If Cain do well, shall he not be accepted?
If a Judas believe, shall he not be justified? Without any (...), the
righteousness of God is upon all them that believe, Romans 3. 22. His pleasure is
in them that fear him, Psalm. 147. 11. A good man (wherever he be) (...)*
draws out favor or complacence from the Lord, Prove. 12. 2. And the reason is,
because this Will of Complacence, issuing out of his perfect Sanctity, cannot
but embrace his Image wherever he finds it; but the Will of Benevolence (such
as Election is in the supreme degree) is distinctive of persons: for this is
decretive of certain blessings, and (unless the persons, to whom those
blessings shall be given, be designed also) the Decree is very imperfect: and
this is decretive of certain blessings out of supreme and sovereign liberty;
and to this as a flower of its Crown, it appertains to define all persons as
well as blessings. Wherefore, in Election, not only Grace and Glory, but the
very individual persons, who shall have and receive the same, are punctually
designed. In Heaven there are many Mansions, and the Elect Vessels must fill
them up; or else there might be a Vacuum in that blessed place: Wherefore those
Elect Vessels are all numbered in God's Decree.

2. These certain individual persons are considered as lying in the Mass of
perdition: this (as I conceive) is most congruous to Scripture. There Election
is styled Voluntas miserendi, a will of showing mercy, Romans ^. 18. and the
Elect are called vessels of mercy, Romans 9. 23. there we are said to be chosen
in Christ, and chosen that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. there we are said to
be appointed to obtain salvation, and that in and by Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.
9. But if God electing did not consider men as sinners lying in the corrupt
mass, what need was there of Mercy where there was no misery? What room for a
Christ, a Mediator, where there was no Transgressor? Why should Holiness be
designed, which was yet in being and unforfeited? Why should Salvation be
appointed, when as yet there was none lost, or in the state of perdition?
Wherefore I conceive, that in Election Men are considered as sinners lying in
an undone condition; such only are objects capable for Mercy to embrace, Christ
to redeem, Holiness to sanctify, and Salvation to crown. The Remonstrants
assert, that Men in Election are considered not merely as Sinners, but as
Believers; but the Scripture does pregnantly contradict them: for
Predestination is set before Vocation, Romans 8. 30. and yet Vocation goes before
Faith. Christ calls the Elect his sheep, before their bringing home, Joh. 10.
16. and yet that bringing goes before believing. Again, Christ tells us, Thine
they were, and thou gave them me, Joh. 17. 6. which passage, if compared with
that other, All that the Father gives me shall come to me, Joh. 6. 37. does
evidently point out to us the true Method of these things: Election, imported
in that phrase [thine they were] is antecedent to giving, and giving to coming
or believing. Whence it appears clearly, that Faith is not antecedent to
Election as a Condition prerequisite in its object, but consequent thereunto,
as a stream flowing out of its fountain. Wherefore I conclude, that in Election
men are considered not as Believers, but as Sinners.

4. What is the impulsive Cause of Election? I answer, There is no other
impulsive Cause but his own good pleasure. It was the saying of Plato, That the
first Mover moves himself. God in the volition of himself, does as it were move
himself; the divine Essence, as volent, being ravished with it self as infinite
Goodness. But in other volitions he moves other things, himself remaining
unmovable. Learned Bradwardine distinguishes the objects of God's Will into
Volita priora and posteriora; priora ut Deum esse, posteriora ut Mundum esse:
Volita priora sunt aliqua causa divinae volitionis, volita autem posteriora
nonsunt causa ejus; Voluntas Dei cst causa omnium posteriorum: si ergo aliquid
esset causa Volitionis divinae, illud esset causa sui ipsius. But to speak in
particular; the Decree of Election has no other Cause but the divine pleasure
only. This is evident in Scripture; we are predestined according to the good
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1. Ver. 5. To the praise of the glory of his grace,
Ver. 6. According to the purpose of him who works all things according to the
counsel of his own will, Ver. 11. If we ask, why God will call a Church out of
the common Mass, Samuel will tell us, It has pleased the Lord to make him a
people, 1 Samuel 12. 22. But if we ask, why it pleased him so to do, Moses will
tell us, God loves his people because he loves them, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. When God will
set forth the Self-beingness of his Essence, he styles himself by that
wonderful Name, I am that I am. When he will magnify the Selfmovingness of his
Grace, he gives a wonderful Reason, I love because I love. God is an immense
Sea of Being and Love; let the Elect vessels sail by the Plerophories of Faith
and holy Contemplation, as far as they can, still there will be a boundless Sea
of Being and Love before them. He that will presume to spy out the Cause of
either of these, must first pass over Immensity, and through Eternity. When
Moses desired to see God's Glory, God proclaims the absolute sovereignty of his
Will, I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious. Methinks these words, I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, import a perfect Absoluteness and
Incausability in Gods Will; even as that Name, I am that I am, imports a
perfect absoluteness and Incausability in God's Essence. Some have grounded
Election on good Works foreseen; but this is utterly exploded by the Apostle,
who tells us, that God has saved and called us, not according to our works,
but his own purpose, 2 Timothy 1. 9. and that there is a remnant according to the
election of grace, and if it be by grace, it is no more of works; otherwise
grace is no more grace, Romans 11. 5. Canaan, the land of Promise and type of
Glory, was divided by Lot, and suitably the Apostle says, that (...), we
inherit by lot, Ephesians. 1. 11. Now in the disposal of a Lot, what reason or cause
can be assigned, exparte creaturae? Is not the whole disposing thereof of the
Lord, Prove. 16. 33? Can any thing in the World hang more purely on the Will of
God than a Lot? Why have such and such Worms a lot in light, and not in utter
darkness? The Apostle answers in that place, (...), Predestination lots them
in, the Lord shows whom he has chosen by giving Grace and Glory, according to
his good pleasure. When Ahasuerus could not rest, he calls for the Records, and
reading there of Mordecai's service, he thereupon resolves to honor him, Esth.
6. this was done like a man: But it is not so with God, who does not honor
after the manner of men, 2 Samuel 7. 19. but in a way becoming his glorious
sovereignty and bounty, he purposes in himself, Ephesians. 1. 9. Perinde valet (says
Calvin) ac si diceretur, nihil extra se considerasse, cujus rationem in
decernendo haberet; he rests in his love, Zeph. 3. 17. and unless that
complacential rest, which he takes in his own Will, could be broken, we cannot
imagine, that he should fall a searching the Records of his Prescience; and for
the good Works written therein, make a Decree of Election unto glory; for such
an Election would not be an Election of grace but of works; and the Elect
Vessels would be vasa Meritorum, and not vasa Misericordiae. But where is the
holiness and obedience of the Saints recorded, but in the very Decree of
Election? Therein God does not only choose men to glory, as the end, but also
unto says and holiness, as the way leading thereunto. God has chosen us that
we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. Non quia futuri eramus, sed ut essemus sancti. I
have chosen you (says Christ) that you should go and bring forth fruit, Joh.
15. 16. and happy are ye if you do these things, says he, Joh. 13. 17. But
would all the Apostles bring forth fruit? would they all do so and be happy?
Our Savior answers plainly, Ver. 8. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have
chosen. He speaks not of Election to the Apostleship, but of Election to Grace
and Glory; for it is such an Election as shuts Judas out of the number. Neither
does he say, I know which of you will be holy and obedient, but I know whom I
have chosen, because all the holiness and obedience of the Saints is built upon
free Election. Inter gratiam and praedestinationem hoc tantum interest (says
De Prad. Cap. 10.
St. Austin) quod praedestinatio est gratiae praeparatio, gratia vero est ipsa
donatio. Quod ait Apostolus, Ipsius sumus figmentum creati in Christo Jesu in
operibus bonis, gratia est; quod autem sequitur, quae praeparavit Deus ut in
illis ambulemus, praedestinatio est. Si proprie appellentur (says St. Bernard)
ea quae dicimus nostra merita, sunt quaedam spei seminaria, De Great. and Liber.
Arbitr.
charitatis incentiva, occultae praedestinationis indicia, futurae foelicitatis
praesagia, via regni, non causa regnandi.

Others build Election on foreseen Faith and Perseverance, as if these were the
moving Causes, or at least the antecedent Conditions thereof. Thus the
Remonstrants, herein outstripping the Jesuits themselves. Praedestinatio,
(says Ruiz.) tota est ex voluntate De Praed. Disp. 15.
Dei, and quantum ad merita, and quantum ad retributionem. And in another
place; Deus dat ut velimus, facitque ut faciamus, and withal gives an instance
in Faith and Perseverance. Bellarmine spends some Chapters in proving this
Thesis, Praedestinationis De Great. and Lib. Arb. Li. 2.
nulla est causa in nobis: Electio (says he) non pendet ex ulla praevisione
operum nostrorum, sed ex mero beneplacito Dei. Si spectes (says Gregory de
Valentia) praedestinationis rationem, nihil est De Praed. cap. 1.
in praedestinato, sed potius in ipso Deo; imo est ipse Deus, a quo (quae sua
est infinita perfectio) nulla ejus operatio reipsa distinguitur. And,
Praedestinationi sunt ascribenda omnia Dei dona quibus salus nostra continetur.
Deus suos electos (says Suarez) ante praevisa Opusc. 346.
merita sua gratuita voluntate elegit, non tantum ad unum vel aliud beneficium
gratiae, sed ad totam seriem Mediorum, quibus infallibiliter perducuntur ad
regnum. And again, Electio non est ex praescientia perseverantiae futurae, sed
est origo illius. Who can but blush at these passages, wherein the Jesuits
themselves attribute more to free Grace, than the Remonstrants? But for the
thing it self; the very same Scriptures, which overthrow Election as founded on
foreseen Works, do overthrow it as founded on foreseen Faith. That place, Romans
11. 5. is very pregnant against it; There is (says the Apostle) a remnant
according to the Election of grace: the reservation there spoken of is not
man's act but God's, (...), says the holy Oracle, Ver. 4. Non dixit (says
Austin) relicta sunt mihi, aut reliquerunt se mihi, sed reliqui mihi. The word
in the Old Testament is very emphatical (...) faciam remanere, I will cause or
make to remain, 1 Kings 19. 18. And how does God reserve or make men to remain
unto himself? how, but by giving of Faith unto them? This is that which puts
them into the Ark of Salvation, neither is there any other way of reserve found
in the Gospel. Now this reservation (which imports in it the giving of Faith)
is (says the Apostle) according to the Election of grace: Election therefore
is not according to Faith, but Faith according to Election. But as if the
Apostle had not yet spoken enough in calling it the Election of grace, he goes
on, and if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
grace; where he does include Faith within the word [works.] Indeed in other
places treating of Justification, he opposes Faith to Works, but here speaking
of Election he includes Faith within them; and the reason is evident, Faith
has a peculiar Organicalness or Receptivity to receive the free Grace of God,
that the Believer may be justified, Gal. 2. 16. but it has no Organicalness or
Receptivity to receive the free Grace of God, that the Believer may be elected:
Wherefore, as to Justification it is opposed to Works, but as to Election it is
included within them. It is written in the Gospel, Believe and thou shall be
justified; but in what Gospel is it written, Believe and thou shall be elected?
Now that Election is not bottomed on foreseen Faith and Perseverance, I shall
demonstrate diverse ways.

1. From the glory of Election, which breaks forth in its Eternity,
Sovereignty, Grace and Efficacy. If Election be founded on foreseen Faith and
Perseverance, where is the Eternity of it? No man, according to the
Remonstrants Doctrine, is completely Elect until he believe, nay, not until the
last instant of Perseverance, wherein he ceases to believe. But if this may be
salved by the Divine Prescience, yet where is the Sovereignty of it? Has not
the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel to honor,
and another to dishonor, Romans 9. 21? To order different Vessels out of the
same lump to different ends is glorious power; but to sever out Believers from
Unbelievers is not so much power as skill. Whether God in Predestination look
on men in statu integro, or in statu lapso, it is out of the same lump still;
but if he elect out of foreseen Faith, it is not out of the same lump with the
unbelieving World; for he looks on them in statu reparato. To elect out of
skill, according to the goodness of the object, becomes a Rational Creature;
but to elect out of Sovereignty and supreme Liberty becomes the great God, who
can make and meliorate the object as he pleases. But if this also might be
satisfied, yet where is the Grace of it? If God do but eligere eligentes, if
Man's Faith be earlier than God's Grace, then we choose God before he chooses
us, contrary to that of our Savior, Joh. 15. 16. then we loved God before he
loved us, contrary to that of the Apostle, 1 John 4. 19. To love, as moved by
the attractive goodness of the Object, is to love like a man; but to love
Blackamores, and then give them beauty; to love enemies, and then overcome them
with love, is to love like God, whose Grace is pure Grace, whose Love is all
from himself; which is emphatically implied in that remarkable reduplication,
Mark 13. 20. The elect whom he has chosen; as if our Savior should have said,
In Election there is nothing but pure Election; like that speech of God, I will
be gracious to whom I will be gracious, in which there is nothing but Will and
Grace, Will and Grace doubled, as the only reason of it self. But if all the
rest might consist, yet where is the Efficacy of it? If Election be founded on
foreseen Faith and Perseverance, then it affords no help at all to any man in
the way to Heaven. How can that (says a Learned Bishop) be the cause leading
infallibly in the way to Eternal Life, which comes not so much as into
consideration, until a man have run out his race in Faith and Godliness, and
be arrived at Heavens Gates? Such a falsely named Predestination might more
truly be called Postdestination: but call it as they please, it enacteth only,
per modum legis, that men thus living and dying shall be received into Heaven;
but it does not, per modum decreti operantis, infallibly work those Graces
whereby men are brought unto Heaven. If Election take its rise from the last
gasp of persevering Faith and Holiness, then how came the poor Church by the
Chain of Graces on her neck, the Bracelets on her hands, the Crown of Gold on
her head? Whence had she her fine Linen, Wedding Garment, Gold tried in the
fire? These are not Natures Riches, but Pearls of Grace; common Providence
gives no such gifts; wherefore they are the love tokens of Election, sent
indeed in time unto the Church, but prepared for her in Eternity. O how much
better were it that the Sun should be snatched out of the World, than that the
Influences of electing Love should be suspended from the Church! All her light
and life, holiness and comfort comes down from God in these precious Beams. But
the Remonstrants (instead of these heavenly influences) have framed such an
Election, as has no more influence on the Faith and Holiness of the Church,
than a Sun set up at Domesday would have upon the World that was before it: it
is so far from working, that it presupposes all the Faith and Holiness of the
Church, even to the last minute of Perseverance.

2. It Is evident from the Predestination of Jesus Christ, who was God's chosen
servant, Matthew. 12. 18. The Lamb foreordained, 1 Pet. 1. 20. and (as St. Austin
styles him) Praeolarissimum lumen praedestinationis and gratiae, he was, as
man, predestined unto the superlative glory of the Hypostatical Union; and
this high Predestination was not out of any foreseen holiness in his Humane
nature, for all that did flow out of the Hypostatical Union, but it was ex mera
gratia. Respondeatur quaeso, (says the same Father) ille homo, ut a Verbo
patri coaeterno in unitatem personae assumptus silius Dei unigenitus esset,
unde hoc meruerit? quid egit De Prad. Sanct. cap. 15,
ante? quid credidit? quid petivit, ut ad hanc ineffabilem excellentiam
perveniret? Nonne faciente and suscipiente verbo ipse homo, ex quo esse coepit,
silius Dei unicus esse coepit? Nonne filium Dei unicum foemina illa gratia
plena concepit? Nonne de Spiritu sancto and virgin Maria Dei filius unicus
natus, non carnis cupidine, sed singulari Dei munere? Respondeat hic homo Deo,
si audeat, and dicat, Cur non and ego? and si audierit, O homo! tu quis es qui
respondeas Deo? nec sic cohibeat, sed augeat impudentiam, and dicat, Quomodo
audio, tu quis es, O homo! cum sim quod audio, id est, homo, quod est and ille
de quo ago, cur non sim quod and ille? At enim gratia ille talis and tantus
est, cur diversa est gratia, ubi natura communisest? Certe non est acceptio
personarum apud Deum. Quis non dico Christianus sed insanus haec dicat?
Apparuit it aque nobis in nostro capite ipse fons gratiae, unde secundum
uninscujusque mensuram se per cuncta ejus membra diffundit; sicut est
praedestinatus ille unus ut caput nostrum esset, it a multi praedestinati sumus
ut membra ejus essemus. Humana hic merita conticescant, quae perierunt per
Adam, and regnet quae regnat Dei gratia per Jesum Christum. Surely the Members
must not be set above the Head. The Members were not elected to the beatifical
vision out of foreseen Faith and Perseverance, when the Head was elected to the
Hypostatical Union out of mere Grace. The elect Stones in Zion were not laid
for their orient luster and beauty, when the precious Cornerstone (who bears
up all the building) was laid with a Behold, in a wonder of Grace and Love.

3. It Is utterly impossible that Faith and Perseverance should be the causes or
antecedents to Election, when these are the fruits and effects thereof. If we
search the Scripture for the Wellhead of these, we shall find it to be in the
Decree of Election. Therefore when the Apostle blesses God for the work of
Faith in the Thessalonians, he elevates his praises as high as Election it
self, knowing brethren beloved your Election of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4. And in the
very same strain of praise, blessing God for blessing the Ephesians with all
spiritual blessings in Christ, (amongst which Faith cannot but be a prime
blessing) he sets forth the eternal Rule of dispensing them, he has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings, (...), according as he has chosen us, Ephesians. 1. 3,
and 4. Where it is plain, that those whom God blesses with Faith and
Perseverance, he chooses unto Faith and Perseverance, because he blesses
according as he chooses. The Remonstrants strangely interpret these words, he
has chosen us in Christ, that is, say they, being in him in the divine
Prescience. But this Interpretation cannot stand; the Apostle says not, he
has chosen us (...), or (...), but he has chosen us (...), in him, that is,
in Christ; now where in all the Scripture do the words [in Christ] import our
being in Christ in the divine Prescience? The words [in Christ] in such
Scriptures as relate to Justification or Adoption, do import our being in
Christ by actual Faith; but in such Scriptures as relate to Election, they do
import that all the Grace and Glory, prepared in Election, is conferred in and
through Christ: this appears in that famous place, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has saved
us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began: here the words [in Christ] relating to Election, do not
import our being in Christ; for the Text says, that he called us according to
his Grace given us in Christ, and Calling goes before Faith or being in Christ,
and is the immediate cause or fountain thereof: but they import that Vocation
and Salvation, with all the blessings thereof, are communicated unto us in and
through Christ, and that the eternal Decree or Design was so to communicate
them. Neither does the Apostle simply say, he has chosen us in him, but he
has chosen us in him (...), that we should be holy; thereby pointing out unto
us Christ as the designed Fountain of all the holiness in the Elect. Moreover,
the Apostle says, that he has chosen us in him, that we should be holy, and
Faith is a choice part of holiness; and that he has blessed us in him with all
spiritual blessings, and Faith is a prime spiritual blessing; and that he has
blessed us according as he has chosen us, and therefore he chooses us to Faith
as well as blesses us with Faith: but if he choose us for Faith, and bless us
with Faith, he does not bless us according as he chooses us. By all which it
appears that the Remonstrants Interpretation is an Arrow shot besides the Text.
But to go on to other Scriptures; Blessed is the man (says the Psalmist, Psalm.
65. 4.) whom thou chusest and causest to approach unto thee; and what approach
can a sinful worm have to the holy one, what but by the Faith of Christ? and
whence is this approach but from God and God electing? He chooses and causes
to approach unto him. If Faith were antecedent to Election, the approach must
have been before the choosing, the contrary whereof appears in the Text. As many
as were ordained to eternal life, believed, Acts 13. 48. The Apostle says not
as many as believed were ordained to Eternal Life, but as many as were ordained
to Eternal life believed. But here the Remonstrants tell us, that in the Text
it is not (...) but (...), and that imports not God's eternal preordination, but
man's present condition or disposition; so that the meaning is, as many as were
disposed or well-affected to Eternal Life, believed. Should it (say they)
import God's preordination, then all of that Assembly (which were elected) did
believe at that one Sermon, and all the rest were absolutely reprobated; for
the [(...)] in the Text is an universal particle: now that all the Elect of
that Assembly did believe that day, or that all the rest were Reprobates, is
not imaginable. I answer; first, as to the word (...), the import thereof will
best appear by taking notice in what sense St. Luke does use this word, in the
Book of the Acts, Acts 15. 2. (...), They decreed or appointed that Paul should
go up. Acts 28. 23. (...), having appointed him a day. Acts 22. 10. God
promises Paul that it should be told him of all things (...), which are
appointed or ordained for him to do; and what these were Ananias sets forth by
(...), God has chosen thee to such and such things, Ver. 14. Now in all these
places of the Acts, the word signifying appointing or ordaining, why should it
be taken otherwise in this controverted Text? Nay, where in all the Scripture
does this word import an inward quality or disposition? In that place (which
seems most of any to speak that way) (...), they addicted themselves to the
ministry of the saints, 1 Cor. 16. 15. there this word imports no less than a
certain purpose of mind in them to do that work. Wherefore I conceive that the
(...), in the Text, does import an ordination, and that of God: neither does
the absence of (...) at all hinder it; for the (...), Acts 2. 23. does without
a (...) import God's eternal counsel, and the (...) designs an antecedent
ordination, and that ordination must be God's; unless (which is the grossest
Pelagianism) it be said that they were ordained by themselves to Eternal life.
But to pass over the word; the Remonstrants take the Text thus, As many as were
disposed to Eternal Life, believed: but can a man without Faith, who neither
lays hold on Christ the Prince of life, nor yet has any thing of the Spirit of
life, can such a man be disposed to Eternal life? Every disposition to Eternal
life must be such, either because it has some intrinsecal dignity meriting
Eternal life, or else because it has some Evangelical congruity, to which
Eternal life is annexed by Promise. As to the former, the Remonstrants as
Protestants cannot own it; and as to the latter, they cannot in all the Gospel
show forth one Promise of Eternal life made to a man void of Faith; and how
then can a man void of Faith be disposed to Eternal life? But if he could, the
Remonstrants of all others must not say so, for they assert that none but a
Believer can be the object of Election; because (say they) God cannot will
Eternal life to any but to a Believer, to a man in Christ; and how then can an
Unbeliever, a man out of Christ be disposed to Eternal life? Such a man's
disposition to Eternal life, if it be not such by its meriting condignity, must
be such divina ordinatione; and if so, what is that but to say, this is the man
to whom God wills Eternal life; and if before Faith God may will Eternal life
to him, why may not he before Faith elect him? Again; This disposition to
Eternal life must be either some moral Virtuousness, or else some better Grace
of the Spirit; if but a moral Virtuousness, how can it dispose to Eternal life?
if a better Grace of the Spirit, how can it precede such a Mother-grace as
Faith? But let us hear how the Remonstrants paint out this disposition in words
of Scripture. These disposed ones (say they) are the sheep of Christ, Joh. 10.
4. the drawn of the Father, Joh. 6. 44. such as do the truth, Joh. 3. 21. such
as will do God's will, Joh. 7. 17. such as have honest and humble hearts, apt
and idoneous to embrace the Gospel. But what a perplexed Labyrinth of words is
here? To be the sheep of Christ, argues a being in the state of Election, which
is antecedent to all good dispositions in us; they are called sheep before
their bringing home to God, Joh. 10. 16. and their bringing home goes before
all gracious dispositions. The Fathers drawing imports God's action, and not
man's disposition; the doing of the Truth is man's action, and not his
disposition; the willing to do God's will is a gracious disposition, but such
as goes not before Faith. Indeed the young man (who yet had no true Faith) had
some kind of will to walk in God's Commandments, Mark 10. 20. but it was not of
the true stamp; but with a reserve of his darling Covetousness. To have a right
Will to do God's Will is to be one spirit with the Lord, which without Faith is
unimaginable. It Is not to be conceived that an heart can indeed be either
honest to God, which is not purified by Faith, or humble before him, which is
not irradiated by Faith. As for the last objection, That if these words import
God's Preordination, then all the Elect of that Assembly did believe at that
one Sermon, and all the rest were reprobated, it is built upon two false
hypotheses; The one as if the Evangelist spoke only of one Sermon, whenas the
Apostle had now preached two Sabbath Days there; so that these words are most
properly to be understood of the continued success of the Gospel, according to
that, Acts 2. 47. The Lord daily added to the Church such as should be saved;
which continued success is also hinted out in the (...), immediately following
after the words, Ver. 49. The other as if the word [(...)] were always an
universal Particle; whenas in some Scriptures, as Acts 4. 6. it does not design
universality, (for all the High Priest's kindred were not at that meeting) but
quality: also in the Text in question, the (...) rather points out the
condition of Believers than their number. Wherefore I conclude, that this
famous Text holds out such an Eternal Preordination of God, as is the very
Wellhead of Faith in men. Every Believer is an Isaac, a child of Promise,
wonderfully begotten, begotten of God's own will, says St. James, Chap. 1. 18.
and begotten according to his abundant mercy, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 3. And
what is this Will and Mercy but God's gratuitous design of Grace and Glory to
his Elect? The Will in St. James is such a Will as designs Grace and
Consecration to God in holiness, even as the first fruits were holy; and the
Mercy in St. Peter is such a Mercy as designs Glory, even an incorruptible and
undefiled Inheritance in Heaven: and both places demonstrate that the Believer
is generated out of Electing Love. And as Faith is an effect of Election, so
also is Perseverance, which is no other than Fides continuata, Faith standing
in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 5. and fulfilled by the same power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
11. God (says the Apostle) shall confirm you unto the end, 1 Cor. 1. 8. and as
a Reason, he subjoyns, God is faithful, Ver. 9. Faithful, as in his gracious
Promises, so in his gratuitous Election; therefore he confirms his own unto the
end. There are Rivers of living Water in the Godly, but the eternal Spring
thereof is Election; there is the Seed of God in them, but the vital Root of it
is Election. Hence the false Christ's and false Prophets cannot seduce them,
Mark 13. 22. The canker of Hymenaeus and Philetus cannot eat into them, 2 Timothy
2. 19. Now if Faith and Perseverance are the fruits of Election, they cannot be
the causes or antecedents thereof. Let me shut up this Reason with that of
Fulgentius: Deus praedestinatione sua and donum illuminationis ad credendum,
and donum perseveraniiae ad proficiendum and permanendum, and donum
glorificationis ad regnandum, quibus dare voluit, praeparavit; nec aliter
persicit in opere, quam in sua sempiterna and incommutabili voluntate habet
dispositum.

4. My last Reason shall be taken from the grand Scope and Design of the
Scriptures, which is to exalt God and abase the Creature. There God's glory is
revealed, and all flesh is but grass; there God is all in all, and all men are
nothing; the willer and runner are nothing, and Gods mercy is all; the planter
and waterer are nothing, and Gods giving the increase is all. There all men lie
very low in a Dungeon of Darkness, Grave of Sin, and miserable Chains of
Hardness and Unbelief; and God sits very high, and out of the sovereign
Self-motion of his own Will, shines into one Heart and not into another; opens
one Grave and not another; frees one spiritual Prisoner and not another. There
Zions dust, I mean the Creatureweakness, and defectibility of the Church and
all her inherent Graces, appear on the one hand, and the sureness of God's
Mercy, and the everlasting immutability of his Love and Counsel shines forth on
the other: and what is the meaning of all this, but to cut off boasting and
stain pride, abase the Creature and exalt God? In nullo nobis gloriandum quando
nostrum nihil est. But if (as the Remonstrants assert) Election be built on
Faith and Perseverance, and this Faith and Perseverance be wrought by God in a
superable way only, so as men may believe or not, or believing, may persevere
or not; then the Crown is plucked off from Free Grace and clapped upon Free Will;
God is dethroned and man is exalted, and so may fall a boasting in some such
language as that of Theophylact; It Is God's part to call, but mine to be elect
or not; it is God's part to reveal Gospel, but mine either to believe and
persevere, and so found the Decree of Election, or else not to believe and
persevere, and so to impede it. And if, to silence such swelling words of
vanity, God should put forth such astonishing questions to him about the
Spiritual World, as he did to Job about the Natural, yet might man return an
answer to his Maker. Should God ask, Where wast thou when I laid the foundation
of my Church in my divine Decrees? when I laid the measures of her Graces in my
Eternal purpose? Man may say, My Faith was there stretching out the Line, and
fastening the Cornerstone of Election. Should he ask, Can thou bind the sweet
influences of Predestination, that it shall not cause a Spring of Faith and
Holiness in my Church? Man may say, I can so bind them up, that (if I please)
God shall have never an Elect Vessel to fill with Mercy, nor Christ any where
to lay his Merits among all the sons of men. Should he yet ask, Who has known
the mind of the Lord, or been his Counselor? Man may answer, My Free Will was
consulted with from time to time, even to the last gasp of Perseverance, before
the Decree of Election was concluded in Heaven. Should he ask on, Who made thee
to differ from another? The Believer may answer, Adam did not difference me,
for he left me in the common Mass; neither did God difference me, for he gave
me only the Common Grace: but I my self have made the difference, by freely
embracing the very same Grace which others freely rejected. In a word; should
he expostulate with his Church as with Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 15. 2, 3. What is the
vine-tree more than any tree? Will men take a pin of it to hang a vessel
thereon? The Church may answer, My own Free Will is such a pin, that my Faith
and Perseverance chiefly hang upon it, and my Faith and Perseverance are such
pins, that God himself hangs up the eternal Rolls of his Election upon them.
Thus and much more may the Will of man by the Remonstrants Principles, sit as a
Queen glorifying her self, and opening her mouth in Blasphemies against the
Sovereignty of God's Will, and the freeness and power of his Grace. But all
this while a deaf Ear is turned to the Scriptures, which cry aloud, No flesh
must glory in it self; he that glories must glory in the Lord; it is not of the
runner or willer, but of God who shows mercy; he has mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will he hardneth: And if any man reply to this, he must hear his
own nullity; Nay but O man who art thou? and God's sovereignty, has not the
potter power over the clay? that so he may fall down astonished at the Glory of
God, and cry out, (...), Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out! Indeed according to the Remonstrants Doctrine (which bottoms God's
Election on man's Faith and Perseverance) there is no (...) at all in it, all is
ultimately resolved into the shallow Will of man; there is no unsearchableness
or untraceable difficulty at all in it, all is plain and easy, every jot of it
carries a clearness and visible equity. Election being only God's Decree to
save Believers, there is no more scruple or intricacy in it, than there will be
in the Judicial proceeding at the last Judgment, when all things shall be as
obvious to every eye, as if they were represented in a Sea of Glass. But if,
according to the Apostles Scope, we do consider the absolute Sovereignty of
God's Will in that Expression, He will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardneth, there is a very glorious abyss in it, such as may justly
astonish us into eternal admiration. Oh the heights and depths of divine Love!
All the Elect of God may here lose themselves in holy Mazes and trances, My
God! my God! (may every one of them say) Why have thou chosen me? I know, and
not without wondering, that Heaven is mine through Christ, and Christ is mine
through Faith, and Faith is mine through the Election of Grace: but my God! my
God! why have thou chosen me? I know that thy blood was shed for me, and thy
Spirit is shed into me, and thy Glory is reserved for me; and all this out of
love: but my God! my God! why have thou loved me? Oh that I could adore
Calling, Justifying, Glorifying Grace, from the top of Predestination! Thou
have loved me because thou have loved me; thou have chosen me because thou have
chosen me: Even so (holy Father!) because so it seems good in thy sight.

5. Having dispatched the Impulsive Cause of Election, I proceed to the last
thing, viz. in whom God does Elect us; I answer with the Apostle, God chooses
us in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. But because these words are variously taken, it is to
be considered how Christ may be styled the purchaser of Election; whether only
quoad res in Electione volitas and praeparatas, or also quoad actum volentis:
to which I answer.

1. Affirmatively; Jesus Christ as Godman our glorious Mediator did purchase
Election, quoad res in Electione volitas. All the Churches Grace and Glory,
Sanctity and Salvation, Faith and Fruition must sing Hosannahs and Hallelujahs
to him, whose precious Blood (more worth than a thousand Worlds) is the
glorious price of all these. God, in the Decree of Election, did not only
design the communication of these to his own Elect, but also he did design that
communication to be in and through Christ.

2. Negatively; I conceive that Jesus Christ as God-man our Mediator did not
purchase Election, quoad actum volentis: and that for these Reasons.

1. That phrase [chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4.] does not evince Christ to be the
Cause of Election; for in another place we are said to be chosen to Salvation
(...), in the sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Which
sanctification is for all that not a Cause but an Effect of Election.

2. Christ was delivered up to death (...), by the determinate counsel of God,
Acts 2. 23. First, he was delivered (...), by a Counsel or Decree of God; and
if being delivered by God's Decree, he merited the Decree of Election, then God
made one Decree, that Christ should come and merit the making of another.
Christ our Mediator stands in the midst between God and man; but that he should
stand so between the two Decrees of God, as a fruit of the one and a cause of
the other, seems very incongruous. But further, he was delivered (...), by the
determinate counsel of God, that is, by a Decree perfectly designative of his
Death and the fruits thereof, and in a special manner perfectly designative of
those individual persons, who should have Grace and Glory in and through him.
If it be not so perfectly designative, how is it a determinate Counsel? If it
be so perfectly designative, is not the Decree of Election at least included
therein? Undoubtedly it is. Now this determinate Counsel (which is inclusive of
the Decree of Election) was not merited by Christ; for he was delivered by it,
and did not merit that by which he was delivered.

3. Christ came to do his Fathers will, Heb. 10. 7. all that he did and
suffered was a faithfulness (...), to him that made him a Mediator to do and
suffer the same, Heb. 3. 2. Now aliud est facere voluntatem Deo, aliud facere
voluntatem Dei. Christ did not make a new Will in God, but do the Will of God:
if he had made a new Will in God, then at his death there was not only a
passion in the flesh of God, but (as it may seem) in the very Will of God too;
wherefore he not making a new will in God, did not merit the Decree of
Election. But further; how did he do the Will of God? Did he not do it by
laying down his life for his sheep, Joh. 10. 15? By redeeming a people out of
every nation, Revel. 5. 9? By purifying to himself a peculiar people, Tit. 2.
14? By bringing many sons unto glory, Heb. 2. 10? And what is all this but the
executing of the Decree of Election? And if Christ's errand into the World was
to execute Election, then how did he merit it?

4. God might have exacted satisfaction from poor sinners in their own persons,
he was not bound to accept payment from another; wherefore Christ's Blood and
Righteousness are meritorious as for us, not merely by their intrinsecal
dignity, but by the divine acceptance; God receiving them as on our behalf.
Whence it clearly appears that the divine Will does guide the Merit of Christ
in all its procurements; and how then does the Merit of Christ guide the divine
Will in its eternal Election? Can it guide its Guide? Can it go before its
Leader? Surely that divine Will which goes before those meritorious
procurements by its Acceptance, does not follow after them in its eternal
Decrees.

5. The Father is the first Person in the sacred Trinity, and works from
himself; the Son is the second and works from the Father. Thus he tells us,
that he can do nothing of himself but what he sees the Father do, Joh. 5. 19.
And in his Prayer to his Father, he says; Thine they were and thou gave them
me, Joh. 17. 6. Thine they were by Election, and thou gave them me, as the
peculiar purchase of my Passion. But now if Christ by his Merits do found the
very Decree of Election, is not the Order of working in the sacred Trinity
inverted? Is not the Son the first Origin of our Salvation? Does not the
Father, even in his Eternal Election, work from the Son? Might not the
Scripture rather have said, that the Elect were given by the Son to the Father,
than by the Father to the Son? Wherefore to me it seems most congruous to say,
That the Fathers Love laid the first plot of our Salvation, and then the Sons
Blood purchased Grace and Glory for us.

I shall shut up all with an Answer to an Objection. This Thesis [that Christ
did not merit the Decree of Election] seems to abase Christ, as if he were a
mere medium for the executing of Election; nay, to nullify his Merits; for it
supposes, that God does amare peccatores ad salutem etiam extra Christum, that
God does destinate eternal Life to them, even without a Mediator; and then what
necessity is there at all of Christ's Merits?

I answer: Far be it from every Christian to abase and nullify the Merits of
Christ; but (as I take it) the Thesis aforesaid does neither of these. Not
abase Christ as a mere medium under the Decree of Election: for though he
merited not the Decree of Election, yet must his praise be ever glorious, and
his Name above every name; in that he is both the glorious Head of the Elect,
and the meritorious Fountain of all the blessings and good things of Election.
In Eternity the Elect are predestined to be conformed to his Image, as the
firstborn of all, and in time they are called, justified, sanctified and
glorified in and through him, as the purchaser of all. Neither does he vilify
Christ, who calls him the grand Medium for the executing of Election: the
Apostle cries up Christ by those glorious Titles, The head of the Church, the
beginning, the firstborn from the dead, one who has the primacy or
preeminence in all things, Col. 1. 18. yet immediately after puts all under the
Father's (...), Ver. 19. His Decree or good pleasure did preordain and direct
all. Neither does this Thesis nullify the Merits of Christ; for these consist
not in procuring the Decree of Election, but in procuring Grace and Glory; and
these he procured, though not the Decree it self. Neither does it at all
follow, that, if Christ merited not the very Decree, then God does amare
peccatores ad salutem extra Christum, or destinate Eternal life to them without
a Mediator. For seeing Christ is predestined to be the Head of the Elect, and
Fountain of all Grace and Glory unto them; and the Elect are predestined to
be the Body of Christ, and to receive all Grace and Glory in and through him;
and both these Predestinations are simultaneous in the heart of God, and framed
together in the same instant of Eternity: There is not, nor cannot be any
color at all to say, that God does love sinners extra Christum, or destinate
Eternal life to them without a Mediator. When God in free Election resolves
with himself, such individual persons shall by an effectual Call be united to
Christ as members of his Body, and being such, shall be washed in his blood,
filled with his Spirit, and at last crowned with his everlasting Salvation;
when he resolves, every grain shall come through Joseph's hands, every particle
of Grace, every income of the holy Spirit, every glimpse of Divine Favor,
every beam of glory in Heaven, shall pass through Jesus Christ's hands; nay,
through his very Heart-blood and crucified Flesh unto the Elect, Does he now
love them extra Christum? Does he yet destinate them to Eternal life without a
Mediator? Undoubtedly he does not. If therefore you ask me, what necessity
there is of Christ's merits, I must answer, That all Grace and Glory, Sanctity
and Salvation, Faith and Fruition are thereby purchased and procured for the
Elect. The pure fountain of Election rises of it self in the Will of God, but
the gracious streams thereof issue forth through the bleeding Wounds of Christ.

CHAP. V. Of Gods Decree of Reprobation, as touching Men.
HAving treated of the Decree of Election, as respective of men; I proceed to
the Decree of Reprobation, as it relates to them. In the Old Testament we find
(...) which is opposite to (...) in the Septuagint rendered by (...), and
importing as much as reprobare, to reprobate or reject. In the New Testament we
have (...), importing a rejectaneous or disallowed person, and rather pointing
out man's State than God's Act. But to pass over the word; Reprobation is that
Eternal Decree of God whereby he purposes in himself not to give Grace and
Glory to some individual persons lying in the Mass of Humane Corruption, but to
leave them to final sin, and for the same to punish them with Eternal
Damnation. In this Decree the Divine Will has (as I may so say) a Triple Act:
For

1. It purposes, not to give Grace and Glory to some persons, and this is
called among Divines Preterition or Non-election; and is of all other the most
proper act of Reprobation, as it stands in opposition to Election. Hence
Reprobates are called the (...), rest or residue, in opposition to the Elect,
Romans 11. 7. the nunquam noti, or never known, Matthew. 7. 23. in opposition to
the foreknown, and the not written in the book of life, Revel. 13. 8. in
opposition to the written ones, whose names are enrolled in Heaven.

2. It purposes to leave them to final sin. I say final sin; for God permits
sin even in the Elect, but final sin only in the Reprobate. Thus God suffered
the Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. and thereby gave them
pereundi licentiam. Thus he hardneth whom he will, Romans 9. 18. and hardening in
that place imports a not giving the mollifying Graces of Faith and Repentance,
and withal a permission of final sin in the Reprobate; for it is set in
opposition to that mercy which bestows those mollifying Graces, and thereby
prevents final sin in the Elect.

3. It purposes to punish them with Eternal Damnation for their sin; and this
is styled among Divines Pre-damnation, or Positive Reprobation. And hence
Reprobates are said to be vessels of wrath, Romans 9. 22. made for the day of
Evil, Prove. 16. 4. and of old ordained to condemnation, Jude, Ver. 4. in the
Original we have, (...), of old forewritten or registered to this condemnation;
forewritten, not (as some would have it) in Scripture-prophecies, but in the
Eternal Decree of God; the ordained Event whereof is notably pointed out by the
(...) in the Text. To say that men are forewritten in a Decree to condemnation
is very proper, but to say that they are forewritten in a Prophecy to
condemnation, is very incongruous; for a prophecy is of an Event, and not to it
as a Decree is. In that place where it is said that Christ (...), Gal. 3. 1.
(...) imports not a Decree, but a setting forth or lively painting out of
Christ; for there is no (...) at all as in the former Text, but (...), to whom
before the eyes Jesus Christ was set forth. But the plain meaning of the former
Text is, they were decreed to this condemnation, viz. to spiritual Judgments
(which the (...) specially points at) and by consequence to Eternal Damnation
also.

Now touching this Triple act of Reprobation I shall enquire

1. Who is the Author thereof? 2. What are the things decreed therein? 3. To
whom those things are decreed? 4. What is the Impulsive Cause thereof?
1. Who is the Author thereof? Even the same great God who is the Author of
Election; he, who chooses some, passes by others; he, who has mercy on some,
hardens others. Grace and Glory are at his dispose; the Keys of Heaven and Hell
are in his hands alone. In some he prevents final sin, by the mollifying Graces
of Faith and Repentance; others he leaves to final sin, actual or at least
original. Some he raises up out of the Hell of their Corruption into an Heaven
of Glory; others he tumbles down from one Hell to another, from the Hell of
Iniquity to the Hell of Misery. This is the Almighty Potter, who, out of the
same lump of corrupted Mankind, makes one Vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor; and all the while, the earthen Pitcher must not strive with his
Maker, or say, Why have thou made me thus? but rather hasten down into the
Abyss of his own Nullity and Pravity, and from thence adore the infinite
heights of Sovereignty and Equity in the Divine Decrees.

2. What are the things decreed therein? These I shall consider according to
the Triple Act thereof?

1. As for the first Act of Preterition or Non-election, the thing decreed is
the not giving of Grace and Glory to the Reprobates.

1. It Is the not giving of Grace unto them. Not that there is a preterition of
them as to all kind of Grace; for Reprobates may be Children of the kingdom,
Matthew. 8. 12. called to the marriage-supper, Matthew. 22. 12. and coming may eat
and drink in Christ's presence, Luke 13. 26. they may be enlightened and
partakers of the holy Ghost, and taste the good word of God and the powers of
the world to come, Hebr. 6. 4, 5. and (which is a very high expression) they
may be said (...), to believe in the name of Jesus, Joh. 2. 23. But that there
is a preterition of them as to the (...), those better things which accompany,
and by a near contiguity touch upon Salvation, Heb. 6. 9. as to such a precious
Faith, Love in incorruption, Holiness of truth, Repentance unto life, real and
thorough Conversion, as are found in the Elect. There is not then a preterition
as to all kind of Grace, no, nor all kind of preterition as to saving Grace;
for God does will the Conversion of Reprobates in a double manner.

1. God wills their Conversion, Voluntate simplicis complacentiae; Conversion
even in a Reprobate would make joy in Heaven, it would be (...), grateful and
well-pleasing to God; if we believe him swearing by his life, his pleasure or
delight is (...) in the wicked man's turning, Ezekiel. 33. 11. God delights in his
Image wherever it be.

2. God wills their Conversion Voluntate virtuali vel ordinativa Mediorum; for
the right understanding whereof I shall lay down four things.

1. The proper end and tendency of all means is to turn men unto God: within
the Sphere of the Church, such is the end and tendency thereof. Why did Christ
come but to turn every one from his iniquities, Acts 3. 26? Why did he preach,
but that his hearers might be saved, Joh. 5. 34? Why did the Apostle warn and
teach every man, but to present every man perfect in Christ, Col. 1. 28? John's
Baptism was (...), Matthew. 3. 11. Churchcensures were (...), 2 Cor. 10. 8. Even
the delivering to Satan was for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
Conversion is the true Center of the Means. Nay, without the Sphere of the
Church, the true end and tendency of things is such, that God might be seen in
every creature, Romans 1. 20. Sought and felt in every place, Acts 17. 27.
Witnessed in every shower, Acts 14. 17. Feared in the sea-bounding sand, Jer.
5. 22. Humbled under in every abasing providence, Dan. 5. 22. Turned to in
every judgment, Amos 4. 11. In a word, the end and tendency of all God's works
is that men might fear before him, Eccl. 3. 14. The whole World is a great
Ordinance, at it is in it self, preaching forth the power and goodness of God
who made it; and as it is the unconsumed Stage of so many crying sins,
preaching forth the clemency and mercy of God who spares it, and dashes it not
down about the sinners ears. All the goodness and forbearance of God leads men
to repentance, Romans 2. 4. That piece of Gospel [Whoso confesses and forsakes
his sins shall have mercy] seems legible in his patience; for it may be
naturally and rationally concluded, That that God, who in his clemency spares
men though sinners, will in his mercy pardon them when repenting and returning.
This is the true duct and tendency of his patience, even that men might turn
and repent.

2. The tendency of the Means to Conversion is such, that if men under the
administration thereof turn not unto God, the only reason lies within
themselves, in their own corrupt hearts. If God purge and men are not purged,
it is because there is lewdness in their filthiness, Ezekiel. 24. 13. If he would
gather, and men are not gathered, it is because they will not, Matthew. 23. 37. If
he spread out his hands, and men come not in, it is because they are rebellious,
Isai. 65. 2. If he be patient and long-suffering, and they repent not, it is
because of their hardness and impenitent heart, Romans 2. 5. The Apostle calls
the heretical Seducers in his time (...), such as did turn or transfer the
grace of God from its true end or scope, Jud. ver. 4. And what those Seducers
did doctrinally, that do all sinners practically; so far forth as they live
under the means and turn not, they do thereby transfer and remove the means
from their genuine end.

3. God does by a formal Decree will the Means with their tendencies. All
Ordinances are sealed by the Divine Will, and go out in its name, and are what
they are from its Ordination. Without this, Means are no longer Means, but mere
empty names and vain shadows.

4. Out of God's formal Decree of the Menas does result his Virtual Will of
men's Conversion. That God, who does formally will the means with their
tendencies even unto Reprobates, does virtually will their Conversion as the
true scope and end of those Means. Hence it is said, that Christ would have
gathered the unbelieving Jews, Matthew. 23. 37. and God would have all men to be
saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. viz. in respect of his Virtual or Ordinative Will. Hence
God is brought in, wishing, Oh! that there were such an heart in them, Deuteronomy. 5.
29. Oh! that thou had hearkened to my commandments, Isai. 48. 18. And what
are these wishes? Surely all the diffusions of Light, promulgations of Laws,
expansions of Gospel Grace, waitings of divine Patience, and strivings of the
holy Spirit are (as I may so say) God's O's after Conversion, in as much as
they have a tendency thereunto; and God in willing that tendency, does
virtually will men's return also. Excellent is that of learned Ames; Deus
eminenter and virtuali quadam ratione eatenus vult salutem hominum, quatenus
vocat ipsos ad salutem. Thus with this Virtual Will God does will the
Conversion of Reprobates. But then you will say, If so, God's Will is frustrated;
for Reprobates are never actually converted. I answer, That God's Formal Decree
is only of the Means with their tendencies; and therefore is not frustrated but
fulfilled in the actual exhibition of such Means. And God's Virtual Will
(though it be of the Conversion of Reprobates) yet in their Non-conversion is
not frustrated, because it is not an absolute but conditional Will, nisi per
ipsos steterit, unless their own voluntary corruption do impede the Effect;
which in Reprobates it always does. But you will yet reply, Then God's Will is
conditional, and by consequence imperfect. To which I answer with the Judicious
Bishop Davenant, That Volitions merely conditional agree not with the
perfection of the Divine Nature; for that were to suspend God's Will for a
time, and then, post purificatam conditionem, to make it become absolute. But
mixtly-conditional Volitions, that is, such as are grounded on some absolute
Decree, may be allowed: As for Example, that mixed conditional Decree, That if
Cain or Judas believe they shall be saved, is grounded on that absolute Decree,
that whosoever believes shall be saved. Now this Virtual Will of the Conversion
of Reprobates is not purely conditional, but mixtly conditional; for it results
out of God's absolute Decree of the Means with their tendencies. Wherefore
(notwithstanding these Objections) I conclude, That God does virtually will the
Conversion of Reprobates, so far forth as the Means have a tendency thereunto.

These things being thus laid down; I conceive that the thing decreed in
Preterition or Non-election, is the not giving or working saving Grace or
thorough Conversion in Reprobates, in such a sure and insuperable way as in the
Elect. Reprobates have not such intimate in-shining, efficacious drawing,
Law-engraving, and heart-opening and melting Grace as the Elect. And this not
giving or working Conversion in such a way, clashes with neither of the
aforesaid Wills. Not with the Will of Complacence; for still if a Reprobate did
turn or convert, he should be accepted with God: nor yet with the Virtual or
Ordinative Will of God; for still Means are Means, and Ordinances are
Ordinances, and their true end and tendency is to turn men unto God: I say
their true end; for there is a vast difference between an infallible Ordination
of means for the working of Conversion in men, and a true Ordination of Means
for the same purpose. As to the Elect, there is an infallible Ordination of
Means thereunto; and as to the Reprobate, there is a true (though not
infallible) Ordination of the same. The perfection of the Non-elect Angels was
truly ordinated to their Perseverance, but not infallibly. The integrity of
Adam in innocence was truly ordinated to his continuance in Obedience, but not
infallibly. Wherefore Non-election or Preterition, though it stand not in
conjunction with an infallible Ordination, yet it carries no contradiction to a
true Ordination of the Means. Notwithstanding the Decree of Non-election or
Preterition, God may still expostulate with a Reprobate, as the Apostle did
with the Galatians, Quis te impedivit? Who hindered you from obeying the truth,
Gal. 5. 7? Have you not had many awakenings of Conscience, thundrings from the
fiery Law, wooeings from the gracious Gospel, strivings from the holy Spirit,
and long waitings of infinite Patience and Forbeance; and all these to draw you
to Repentance? And what hindered you from turning unto me? What, but your own
perverse rebellious heart? How often have I called and you would not hear?
knocked and you would not open? moved and you would not stir? offered Christ
and Heaven and you would not accept? And why would you not? Let Conscience say,
if it were not for some base indulged lust; which, when I had searched after,
you have hid it in the secret of your heart; when I have stripped and laid it
naked before you, you have sewed Fig Leaves and covered it; when I would have
slain and crucified it, you have spared it and laid it in your bosom. Well, I
can truly say, Perditio tua ex te, thy destruction is from thy self alone; it is
not because thou had no means of Grace; it is not because those Means were not
ordinated to thy Conversion; it is not because thy Conversion should not have
been accepted with me; no, it is merely from thy voluntary corruption.

2. Another thing decreed in preterition is the not-giving of Glory unto
Reprobates. But this is not such a not-giving, as if God would upon no terms at
all give Glory unto them: No; for the Promise [Whosoever believes shall be
saved] does both import God's Will, and extend in general to all, Reprobates as
well as others; but it is a not-giving Glory to them in such a sure infallible
way as to the Elect. Heaven is seriously offered to the Reprobates, and offered
upon the very same terms as to the Elect; but here lies the difference: God
gives special Effectual Grace to the Elect, clothes them in the fine linen of
righteousness, makes them meet for the inheritance in light, Col. 1. 12. works
them for this very thing, 2 Cor. 5. 5. and at last causes them to arrive safe
at Heaven. But thus he deals not with Reprobates; for he leaves them without
that Effectual Grace which infallibly leads to Glory.

2. As to the second Act of Reprobation, viz. the permission of final sin, the
thing decreed is double.

1. The permission of sin in Reprobates. 2. The permission of the Finality of
sin.
1. The permission of sin in them is decreed. Now what is this permission? It Is
not an Ethical permission, as if they might sin by a Law; for this were to
unsin sin. It Is not a mere dreaming Speculation, as the sleeper suffered Tares
among the Wheat; for divine Providence never slumbers nor sleeps. It Is neither
a simple Volition, for then God would hinder sinful actions from coming into
being; nor yet a simple Volition, for then God should be the Cause and Author
of sin. It Is not such a permission of sin, as if Reprobates had no remora's at
all in their sinning; for every beam of Light, item in Conscience, rod of
Affliction, striving of the holy Spirit, and particle of holy Means is a kind
of impediment cast in their perverse way. But Permission is an Act of
Providence issuing forth from God, not as he is a righteous Legislator, but as
he is the supreme Rector and Provisor, moderating in all Events. Hence the
Scripture owns God's mission in Joseph's sale, Genesis 45. 5. Gods commission in
Ahab's seduction, 1 Kings 22. 22. God's bidding in Shimei's Cursing, 2. Sam.
16. 11. and God's hand and counsel in Christ's crucifixion, Acts 4. 28. More
particularly; it is such an Act of Providence as carries with it, First, an
Administration of such objects and circumstances; which are good in themselves;
yet occasionally like Achan's golden Wedge draw out men's corruption into act;
Then a suspension or nondonation of such Grace and Means as would effectually
and de facto prevent the commission of sin; Next, an actual concurrence of the
Holy One to the Material Act or Entity of sin, though not in the least Measure
to the anomy or sinfulness thereof; And withal a bounding sin in its measure
and duration, and ordering sin to his own Glory. Thus God permits sin, and
permits it Volent: for none will say that he does it Nolent; therefore all must
say, that he does it Volent. And in all this, neither can the Reprobate ery out
of hard measure; for in the same manner God permits the sins of the Elect: Nor
can the least blot light upon the holy One; for which of all these may he not
justly do? May not he marshal objects? Then he may do nothing in his own World.
Not so much as proclaim his Law; for sin will take occasion thereby: No, nor
his Gospel neither; for Grace will be turned into wantonness. May not he
suspend his Efficacious Grace? Then Grace is not his own; but if it be, by what
Law is he bound to give it? If there be no such Law, why may he not suspend it?
But if there be, how can he permit sin, seeing he is bound to give such Grace
as will actually prevent it? But you will say, Permission is no such suspension of
Grace, but a leaving a man in manu consilii sui, a dimission of him to his own
Genius and free Will; if so, then how does God hinder sin? Does he in hindering
sin offer violence to man's Liberty, as in permitting it he leaves him
thereunto? Surely, if God hinder it, it must be by some kind of Grace or other;
and therefore if he permit it, it must be by some suspension of Grace, or not
at all. But to go on. May not he concur to the Material Act of sin? Then how
much Motion is there independent from the first Mover? How much Entity is there
independent from the Being of Belings? May not also the great Clock of the
World stand alone without the Everlasting Arms, and all the Creature-wheels
therein go alone, without any touch of Providence? Lastly; If God did not bound
sin, would not that Moral Monster soon devour all Religion and Humanity? And if
he did not order it to his own Glory, how should Light come out of Darkness,
and Order out of Confusions? In a word: God in great Wisdom permits the folly
of sin; in providential power the weakness thereof; and in unspotted purity the
pollutions thereof.

2. The second thing decreed is the permission of sins Finality; and this is
the Critical difference between the Elect and Reprobate. God permits sin in the
Elect, but sins Finality only in the Reprobate. Now how does God permit sin's
Finality, but by that blinding and hardening of Reprobates, which is so frequent
in Scripture? But how does he blind and harden them? Not by infusing the least
drop of malice into their hearts: No, darkness may sooner issue from the Sun,
than blindness from the Father of Lights; and drought may sooner issue from the
Sea, than hardness from the Father of Mercies: but he does it in a double
manner.

1. Deserendo, or by way of Negation. Dicitur Deus (says St Austin) excaecare
quando non illuminat, indurare quando non emollit. Every Reprobate is born with
a Veil upon his Eyes, and a Stone in his heart; and in that condition God
leaves him, not imparting to him such enlightening and mollifying Grace as he
does unto the Elect. Not such enlightening Grace; and hence Reprobates are
called blinded ones, Romans 11. 7. nor such mollifying Grace, and hence they are
called hardened ones, Romans 9. 18. In this Negative blinding and hardening, does
properly and formally consist the Permission of final sin. For as God does
impede Final sin in the Elect, by irradiating and softning them by his Grace;
so he does permit Final sin in the Reprobate by not irradiating and softning
them thereby.

2. Judicando; or by way of penal infliction. After many rebellions against
light, God at last gives men up to a reprobate mind, void of all spiritual
judgment; to a fat heart, void of all spiritual sense; to a spirit of slumber,
such as wakes not under the loud calls and roaring judgments of Heaven; to a
(...), a brawny hardness and senseless obduration, such as feels nothing, no not
the weighty mountains of sin and wrath lying on the soul. And this he does
partly by a tradition to Satan, who rules in darkness and hardness, and has a
wonderful art to promote and aggravate both these in the children of
disobedience; partly by a giving them up to their own lusts, which are the most
intimate Devils of all, and by degrees put out the eyes, and obstinate the
hearts of men; partly by presenting such objects as occasionally prove snares
and stumbling blocks to them. Hence we find in Scripture an ensnaring table,
Psalm. 69. 22. a destroying prosperity, Prove. 1. 32. a sin-irritating Law, Romans
7. 8. a death-savouring Gospel, 2 Cor. 2. 16. an enraging adversity, such as
makes them like a wild bull in a net, Isai. 51. 20. with many more like
providence, which occasionally harden and blind men into further degrees of
sin and wickedness. Now this Judicial hardening and blinding is neither to be
found in all Reprobates, but in the grand Rebels; nor yet only in Reprobates,
but in the Elect, at least some of them. Hence that outcry, O Lord! Why have
thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? Isai.
63. 17. Only here is the difference; this Judicial blinding and hardening in the
Elect is but partial; all the holy light is not out, all spiritual tenderness
is not gone. Wherefore in that place they groan after a return; but in the
Reprobate it is more total. Again, in the Elect it is but for a time; through
auxiliary Grace the closed eyes will open again, the stony heart will melt
again: but in the Reprobate it is final, the darkness is upon them till they
come to utter darkness, the stone is in them till they come to hellish
obstinacy. Wherefore in them it is a kind of sealing up of Damnation. Negative
blinding and hardening suffices to the permission of final sin, but Judicial is
an earnest of final perdition.

3. As to the third Act of Reprobation, the thing decreed is Eternal Damnation;
hence Reprobates are said to be made for the day of evil. Neither can any man
doubt that there is such a Decree; for God does actually condemn them in time,
and both Reason tells us, that whatsoever God does, even in his judgments, he
does it Volent; and Scripture tells us, that whatsoever he does, he does it
according to the counsel of his own Will; wherefore both assure us that there
is such a Decree. But you will say, Does not that Promise [whosoever believes
shall be saved] both import God's Will, and extend even to Reprobates, and how
then can God decree their Damnation? Which way can both these Wills stand
together in the heart of God? I answer; It Is true that the Promise does both
import God's Will, and extend to Reprobates; nevertheless it very well consists
with the Decree of Damnation, and this will appear by a double distinction.

1. Let us distinguish the Decrees of God: Some of them are merely productive
of Truths, others are definitive of Things which shall actually exist. The
first are accomplished in connexions, the last in events. To clear it by
Scripture instances: The Decree, that David should be King of Israel, was
definitive of a thing; but the Decree, that if Saul obeyed, his Kingdom should
have continued, 1 Samuel 13. 13. is but productive of a truth. The Decree that
David should not be delivered up by the men of Keilah, was definitive of a
thing; but the Decree, that if he had staid there they would have delivered him
up, 1 Samuel 23. 12. was but productive of a truth. The Decree, that Jerusalem
should be burnt with fire, was definitive of a thing; but the Decree, that if
Zedekiah did go forth to the King of Babylon it should not be burnt, Jer. 38.
17. was but productive of a truth. Moreover, that there are Decrees definitive
of things, is proved by the events; that there are Decrees productive of
truths, is proved by the connexions; if there be no such connexions, how is the
Scripture verified? but if there be, how are these things connected? There is
no natural connection between Readiness Obedience and his Crown, David's stay and
the Keilites treachery, Zedekiah's out-going and Jerusalems firing: wherefore
these connexions do flow out of God's Decrees as productive of truths. Now to
apply this distinction to our present purpose: The Decree of damning the
Reprobate for final sin is definitive of a thing; but the Decree imported in
the general Promise, is but productive of a truth, viz. That there is an
universal connection between Faith and Salvation; such a connection, that
Reprobates themselves, if Believers, should be saved. Now these two Decrees may
very well stand together; for Decrees definitive of events contradict not
Decrees productive of truths; unless the event in the one Decree contradict the
truth in the other. Wherefore if (which is not) there were a Decree of damning
Reprobates, whether they did believe or not, it could not stand with the
general Promise; for the event of that Decree would contradict the truth of the
Promise. But the Decree (such as indeed it is) of damning Reprobates for final
sin, may well consist with the general Promise; for the event of that Decree no
way crosses the truth of the Promise. Reprobates are damned for final sin,
that is the event of one Decree; and Reprobates, if Believers, shall be saved,
that is the truth of another: both which may well consist together.

2. Let us distinguish the objects of these Decrees; the objects stand not
under the same qualifications as to both of them. The Decree of Salvation upon
Gospel terms respects men as lapsed sinners; but the Decree of everlasting
damnation respects them as final sinners; and so there is no inconsistency
between them.

Thus much by way of Answer to the Objection: Yet withal, before I pass on to
the next thing, suffer me a little to stand and adore the stupendous Abyss of
the Divine Decrees. The Elect arrive at Heaven, yet by the way see Hell flaming
in the Threatening; the Reprobate sink to Hell, yet by the way see Heaven
opening in the Promise. The Elect cannot live and die in sin, but they will be
sub gladio; the Reprobates cannot repent and return, but they will be sub
corona. Tremble, work and watch, O Saints, for the holy One thunders out from
Heaven in that sacred Sentence, If you live after the flesh you shall die.
Repent, return and believe, O Sinners, for the Divine Philanthropy wooes you in
those real undissembled Offers of Mercy, Whosoever believes shall be saved;
Whosoever forsakes his sins shall find mercy. Here, O here, is (...), the
manifold wisdom of God; a fit reserve for the Apocalypse of the Judgment day,
whose clear light will display these wonderful consistencies before men and
Angels.

3. Having dispatched the things decreed in Reprobation, I proceed to speak of
the persons to whom these things are decreed; and here I shall consider,

1. What they are for Quantity. 2. What they are for Quality.
1. What are they for Quantity? they are certain individual Persons. As some
certain individual persons are chosen, so others are passed by; as some are by
name in the Book of Life, so others are by name left out of it. There is a
great difference between the Reprobation of sin and the Reprobation of sinners:
the Reprobation of sin issues from the Sanctity and Holiness of God's Will; but
the Reprobation of sinners issues from the Sovereignty and Justice thereof. The
Reprobation of sin is universal, and without any distinction of persons; God
hates sin wherever it be, be it in his own beloved Jedidiahs, it is an
abominable thing, such as his soul abhorrs: but the Reprobation of sinners is
particular; Esau and not Jacob was hated; Judas and not Peter was a Son of
perdition. Indeed he that denies particular Reprobation, must by necessary
consequence deny particular Election; and he that asserts an Election of some
individual persons, does, in eodem rationis signo, assert a Reprobation of
others.

2. What are they for Quality? I answer in two particulars.

1. Reprobation, as to the first and second Acts thereof, viz. Preterition, and
Permission of final sin, respects them as lying in the corrupt Mass. This
appears by those Names and Titles whereby Reprobation is set forth and
described in Scripture: there it is hatred, and God hates none but sinners; it is
hardening, and God hardens none but such as are in a corrupt estate; it is
abjection or casting away, and God does not cast away an upright one, or a man
standing in integrity; it is, not knowing, and God knows and approves every
sinless creature; it is, not showing mercy, and that supposes men to lie in a
state of misery, or else they are not capable of mercy, or the denial thereof.
Wherefore I conceive that in Preterition, and Permission of final sin, men are
considered as lying in a corrupt and undone Condition.

2. Reprobation, as to its third Act, viz. the decreeing of Damnation, respects
them as final sinners. It Is true, every sin, as sin, is in it self
intrinsecally meritorious of Damnation; but through Gospel Grace in Jesus
Christ, no sin but such as is final, does actually produce Damnation. God
condemns none but for final sin, and decrees to condemn none but for it. Those
vessels of wrath (...), fitted to destruction, Romans 9. 22. are (as I take it)
final sinners only. Great sinners may be vessels of Mercy, and repent unto Life
Eternal; but final sinners are vessels of Wrath and fitted to destruction. God
swears by his life, that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, Ezekiel.
33. 11. not unless he be a final sinner, in whom there is no true turning or
repenting: not in such a way as to leave no place or room at all for
Conversion; for the sinners turn is in the Text opposed to his death, and
opposed as a thing more destrable to God than his death. Should the Decree of
Damnation objectively terminate on a sinner, merely as a sinner, there could be
no place or room for Repentance; but if it terminate on him as a final sinner,
there is no such obstruction at all. Wherefore I conceive, that as God condemns
none but for final sin, so he decrees to condemn none but for the same; and by
consequence, that Decree respects them as final sinners, that is, they are
first considered as final sinners, and then the Decree of Damnation terminates
on them.

Object. But here an Objection meets me; God condemns none but final sinners,
and decrees to condemn none but such; yet hence it follows not, that the Decree
of Damnation respects them as final Sinners, or that they were considered as
such antecedently to that Decree: for God saves none but final believers, and
decrees to save none but such; yet from thence it follows not, that the Decree
of Salvation respects them as final Believers, or that they were considered as
such antecedently to that Decree: for (as has been laid down before) Faith and
Salvation are comprised in one and the same Decree; and therefore there is no
antecedency of Faith to Salvation in the very Decree, but only in the execution
thereof.

Answ. To which Objection I answer, That between the two Cases there is a
triple difference, which (if considered) will make it appear, that the
consequence which fails in the one case, does hold good in the other.

1. These two Propositions [God decrees to save none but final Believers, and,
God decrees to damn none but final Sinners] must be taken in a different
meaning. When we say, God decrees to save none but final Believers, the meaning
is not, final Believers so preconsidered antecedently to that Decree; for Faith
and Salvation are comprised in one Decree; but final Believers so to be made by
force of that Decree. But when we say, God decrees to damn none but final
Sinners, the meaning is not, final Sinners so to be made by force of that
Decree; for God's Decree makes no man a final Sinner; but final Sinners so
preconsidered antecedently to that Decree. Wherefore, from that Proposition,
[God decrees to save none but final Believers] it cannot be concluded that the
Decree of Salvation respects them as final Believers: but (because of the
different meaning) from that other Proposition, [God decrees to damn none but
final Sinners] it may be rightly concluded, that the Decree of Damnation
respects them as final Sinners.

2. There is an immediate contact between Grace and Glory; hence these two may
very aptly be comprised in one Decree, and if so, final Faith is not
preconsidered to the Decree of Salvation. But between Preterition or Permission
of sin and Damnation there is no immediate contact; for the Act of the
Creature, even his final sin, comes between: hence Preterition or Permission
and Damnation cannot (according to our understanding) be congruously comprised
in one Decree, but in distinct Decrees; and if so, final sin is preconsidered
to the Decree of Damnation. For no sooner does the Decree of Preterition and
Permission pass in the divine Will, but therein, as in a Glass, there is a
Prescience of final Sin; and thereupon passes the Decree of Damnation. But
you will say; Neither is there such an immediate contact between Grace and Glory,
as you assert; for between the donation of Grace and Glory the act of the
Creature, viz. final Faith, does intervene. I answer; It Is true, it does
intervene, but as a fruit or effect of that Donation; it does intervene, but
that Donation has a Causal influence and attingency into the Creatures Act,
and its Perseverance: wherefore it so intervenes as not to break the immediate
contact in the least measure. But between Preterition or Permission and
Damnation the Creatures Act, viz. final Sin, does intervene, not as an effect
of Preterition or Permission, but as a fruit of man's corrupted and depraved
Will; and that intervention cannot stand with an immediate contact. Wherefore
there being distinct Decrees, first Preterition and Permission are decreed, and
then (upon the prescience of final Sin) Damnation.

3. The third difference is that of the Apostle, The wages of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 23.
Eternal Life is a gift freely given; therefore the consideration of final Faith
is not a prerequisite to the Decree of Salvation: But Death is wages exacted by
the intrinsecal merit of Sin, and paid only to a final Sinner; therefore the
consideration of final sin is a prerequisite to the Decree of Damnation;
without that consideration I see not how it can be decreed as Wages. But you will
say, Is not Eternal Life also a Reward of Faith and Holiness? and how then can
that be decreed as a Reward without a preconsideration of these? I answer;
Eternal Life is a Reward, but it is a Reward of pure Grace, it is Grace upon
Grace, glorifying Grace upon sanctifying; therefore to the Decreeing thereof,
as a Reward, it suffices that it be decreed to Believers and Saints. Not
Believers and Saints so preconsidered to that Decree; for Grace and Glory
(being both mere gifts, and gifts of immediate contact) are comprised in one
Decree; but Believers and Saints so to be made by force of that Decree, and so
to be made before they wear the Crown. This is enough in the decreeing of a
Reward so purely gratuitous. But in Eternal Death there is nothing at all
gratuitous; all is mere wages and pay for Sin, Sin does really and
intrinsecally merit it. Wherefore Eternal death, as such wages, is decreed only
to final Sinners. Not final Sinners so to be made by force of God's Decree, for
that makes no man a final Sinner; but final Sinners so preconsidered to the
Decree of Damnation: for, without that preconsideration, it is not, as I
conceive, decreeable as wages or pay due unto them.

To shut up this point in a word. Reprobation, as to the Decree of Preterition
and Permission, respects men as lapsed Sinners; and as to the Decree of
Damnation, respects them as final Sinnets.

4. What is the Impulsive Cause of Reprobation? To which I make answer.

1. As for the Decree of Preterition and Permission of final Sin, it is from
God's Will, as clothed with supreme Sovereignty. God passes by and hardneth
whom he will. This appears in two particulars.

1. First, God does not give so much as the Gospel-means unto some men. He
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. Some sin and
perish without Law or Gospel; all the Law they have is the dark glimmering of
Nature, and all the Gospel they have is the patience and goodness of God
leading to Repentance. The Sun, Moon and Stars are divided to all nations,
Dent. 4. 19. but Jesus Christ, a Sun of infinite light and luster, shines in a
narrower compass on the earth than the finite Sun; the Moon is lesser than the
Earth, the visible Church than the World of Men. The Apostles, those Stars of
light, must not shine in Asia and Bithynia, Acts 16. 6, 7. By what way is this
Evangelical Light parted? Surely by the divine Will alone; the difference is
not from the worthiness or unworthiness of men: for those in Asia and Bithynia
were as good as others. Christ was manifested to a Thief, and not to a Socrates
or Plato. Rebellious Israel has the light of the Word in it, and a more
flexible Nation, which would hearken thereunto, wants it, Ezekiel. 3. 6, 7.
Impenitent Corazin and Bethsaida have a visible Deity before them in Christ's
Miracles, when poor Tire and Sidon, much nearer to Repentance, has it not,
Matthew. 11. 21. In all which the sovereign Will of God is to be adored; for that
is it which divides between the Light and the Darkness.

2. In the Visible Church, the Orb of Gospel Light, God does not give saving
Grace unto all. It Is true, the mercy of God is so immense, that all the sins of
men are but as the drop of the bucket to it; the Blood of God is so
meritorious, that all the crimson Crimes in the World are as nothing to it; and
the Spirit of God is so almighty, that all the chains of hardness and unbelief
fall off before his converting Grace. Nevertheless this immense Mercy does not
pardon all; this meritorious Blood does not wash all; nor this almighty Spirit
does not convert all unto God. Oh the wonderful Abyss of the divine Counsel!
All men naturally lie in bloody pollution, and God says to one, Live, and not
to another; all are as it were one entire Rock of obstinacy against God, and he
calls Abraham's children out of one part of the Rock, and leaves all the rest
to be Rock still. All are dead in sins and trespasses, nay, and sealed up in
their Graves with a stone of hardness and unbelief; and one Gravestone is
rolled away, and the dead under it raised up by almighty Grace, and not
another. External Revelation is all over the Church, why is not the inward holy
Unction so too? The Gospel sounds in every Ear, why do not all hear and learn
of the Father? The Gospel calls and knocks at every door, why are not the
Demonstrations of the Spirit, and the drawings of the Father in every heart?
The Gospel says in general, Whosoever will, may take the Water of Life freely,
why does not God work the Will in all? Why are any dimissi libero arbitrio,
left to the miserable servitude of their own free Will? Here there is no other
resolution but that of the Apostle, He will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardneth; and beyond this we can only wonder, and in
quodam mentis excessu cry out, Oh the depth! Cur hoc illi operetur (says St.
Austin) illi non operetur, Hypognost. Li. 3.
metuentem me and trementem judicia ejus inscrutabilia and incomprehensibilia
nolo interroges, quia quod lego ercdo and revereor, non autem discutio. And, Ne
dicas Deo interrogando, Quae est voluntas tua? sed tremendo, Fiat voluntas tua.
And again; Posset Deus (says he of wicked men) ipsorum voluntatem in bonum
convertere, quoniam Omnipotens est; posset plane, cur ergo non fecit? quia
noluit; cur noluerit? penes ipsum est. If there were any thing extra Deum
moving him to the Decree of Preterition and Permission, it must needs be sin,
either Original or Actual, or final Impenitency and Infidelity therein; but
none of all these moved God thereunto: Not Original sin; for this is the common
blood wherein all men, Elect as well as Reprobate, lie by nature. And this is
St. Ambrose's Mirum, touching Infants; Ubi actio non offendit, ubi arbitrium
non resistit, ubi eadem De Voc. Gent. Li. 2. cap. 8.
miseria, similis imbecillitas, causa communis est, non unum esse de tanta
parilitate judicem; quales reprobat abdicatio, tales adoptat Electio. Indeed
Original Sin makes all men reprobable; for all are by nature Children of wrath,
Transgressors from the womb, an unclean and corrupt Seed, lying in bloody and
abominable pollution; fit and worthy to be put away from the holy One as dross,
and for ever to be cast out into utter darkness: but it makes no man a
Reprobate; for the Elect are as deep in this filthy mire as others. Nor yet
does Actual sin do it; for Jacob was loved and Esau hated before they had done
good or evil. Artaxerxes decreed that Jerusalem should not be built again,
because upon search of his Records he found that it had been a rebellious City,
Ezra 4. 19, 21. Should God have founded his Decree of Preterition and
Non-election on a Prescience of humane Rebellion, the holy City of the Church
had never been built, nor the divine Image ever repaired therein: All men had
eternally lay as Sodom and Gomorrah in the dust and rubbish of Adam's Fall,
with a line of spiritual confusion stretched upon them. Who is there that lives
and sins not? What man on earth has not rebelled, and vexed God's holy Spirit?
Even little Infants rebelled in voluntate Adae; and besides, Imbecillitas
membrorum infantilium innocens est, non animus infantium. Neither yet does
final Impenitency and Infidelity do it; for there is no final Impenitency and
Infidelity but such as is permitted; and permitted it is not, but out of the
Decree of Preterition and Permission; wherefore that Decree cannot be caused
thereby. Final Impenitency and Infidelity may be considered two ways; either as
being in actual existence, or else as foreseen by the divine Prescience: but
neither way does it cause the Decree of Preterition and Permission, but
presuppose the same. Not as it is in actual existence; for final Impenitency
and Infidelity come into being after Permission, and Permission flows out of
the Decree; wherefore final Impenitency and Infidelity coming after Permission,
are not the Cause of the Decree out of which Permission does issue. Nor yet as
it is foreseen by the divine Prescience; for the Decree of Preterition and
Permission is that very Glass wherein final Impenitency and Infidelity are
foreseen: for had God made no Decree of Preterition and Permission, he had seen
all men repenting and believing, as the fruit of his effectual Grace unto all;
had he made that Decree universally touching all, he had seen no man repenting
and believing. Wherefore final Impenitency and Infidelity, as foreseen, do not
cause but presuppose the Decree. In a word; I conclude, That the Decree of
Preterition and Permission does merely depend upon the supreme and sovereign
Will of God. Neither is there any color of Injustice in all this; for

1. Non-electio (as Suarez has it) non est poena, ut culpam praerequir at; sed
est quaedam negatio gratuiti beneficii, quod Deus ut supremus Dominus negare
potest. God may do what he will with his own; Election (the primum indebitum)
is God's own, therefore he may pass by whom he pleases: the holy Spirit (the
fountain of all Faith and Repentance) is God's own, therefore it may breath
only where it lists. All Souls and Graces are God's own; therefore he may
infuse or not infuse Graces into Souls ad placitum. Neither is it imaginable
that God should be obliged to give restituent Grace to fallen Man, when he was
not obliged to give custodient Grace to the innocent Angels. If Faith and
Repentance are the gifts of God, may he not suspend them? If he be bound to
give them, why is there ae peradventure put upon some men's Repentance, 2 Timothy
2. 25? Why a cannot upon some men's Faith, John 12. 39? Why a perhaps upon some
men's Forgiveness, Acts 8. 22? Why aforbidding upon the means of Grace, Acts 16.
6? Why a manifestation to disciples and not to the world, Joh. 14. 22? Why a
Revelation to babes and not to the wise and prudent, Matthew. 11. 25? In short;
God's Election must be either arbitrary or necessary; If necessary, how is his
Election free? If arbitrary, how is Nonelection unjust? The donation of Faith
and Repentance must be Grace or Debt; If Debt, why is not the Veil off from
every Eye, and the Stone out of every Heart? Why is not Grace as common as
Nature, and Saintship as Humanity? But if Grace, then where it is conferred, it
is freely conferred out of self-moving mercy; and where it is denied, it is
justly denied out of unaccountable sovereignty.

2. In the Permission of final sin there is much of Sovereignty, but nothing of
Injustice; the great God is absolutus faber suae permissionis; he could let
legions of Angels at once drop out of Heaven into Hell; he could let innocent
Adam (as rare a piece as he was) break himself all to shivers by a fall; and
what may he not permit sinful Worms to do? What are Creatures to him? If they
miscarry, how many thousand thousand Worlds are there in the bosom of his
Omnipotence? If he suffer all Nations to walk in their own ways, he does but
let a drop fall off the Bucket, or a small dust fly off the balance; he does
but leave Vanity to its own lightness, and a Quasi-nothing to its own nullity
and defectibility. If he suffer sinful Man to run into sin, and that finally,
he does but leave the Dog to his own vomit, the Swine to his own mire, the
Viper to his own poison, a corrupted piece of old Adam to act (...), out of his
own, as the Expression is, Joh. 8. 44. He does but let the fountain of blood
flow out, the corrupt flesh putrify, the vicious womb of concupiscence
conceive and bring forth, and the depraved Will of man forge out its own
iniquities, and fetter and entangle it self with the cords and bonds of its own
voluntary rebellions; and what Injustice can be in all this? especially seeing
this Permission is not a subtraction of any inherent Grace, but only a
suspension of assistent Grace as de facto would impede sin. If God be bound to
afford such Grace, where is the Charter of that engagement? If he be not bound
thereunto, where is the Injustice of that suspension? The Saints before a
temptation, cast down their Souls before God and cry out, Neinducas, Lead us
not into temptation; and after a victory, they cast down their Crowns before
him, and sing out, Thanks be to God who gives us the victory through Jesus
Christ. Wherefore when sin is prevented, God's free Grace is to be praised; and
when sin is permitted, God's absolute Sovereignty is to be adored.

3. Justice in God is agere juxta condecentiam bonitatis and veracitatis suae;
therefore the Decrees of Preterition and Permission must needs be just, because
they cross not either his Goodness or his Truth. Not his Goodness; for that
does not necessitate him either to diffuse one drop of Grace unto fallen Man,
or to prevent one jot of sin in him: nor yet his Truth; for (notwithstanding
the Decrees of Preterition and Permission) all the Promises in the great
Charter of the Gospel are Yea and Amen, not a tittle thereof fails or falls to
the ground.

2. As the Decree of Preterition and Permission is from God's Will, as clothed
with Sovereignty; so the Decree of Damnation is from God's Will, as clothed
with Justice. In the former God acts as supreme Lord, according to his
transcendent Sovereignty; in the latter God acts as a Righteous Judge,
according to his Vindictive Justice. Now here I shall offer my thoughts in two
Positions.

1. The final Sin of Reprobates is not properly the very Cause of the Decree of
Damnation; it is the proper very Cause of Damnation, but not of the Decree it
self. That passage in Scotus is remarkable; Non est aliqua causa propter quam
Deus effective reprobat, in quantum est actio in Deo; quia tunc Deus esset
passivus. What is moved by a thing ab extra, seems in order of nature before
that motion to be in potentia, and in that motion to be passive in some degree.
But God's Will in all its Decrees, even in that of Reprobation, is a pure Act,
perfectly excluding Passiveness and Potentiality, and by consequence Motion ab
extra.

2. The final Sin of Reprobates, though it be not properly the Cause of the
Decree it self, yet it is conditio in objecto necessaria, making men meet
Objects for the Decree to terminate upon. The Vessels of wrath are fitted to
destruction. Final Sin as produced in actual Existence fits them for actual
destruction; and final Sin, as foreseen in the divine Prescience, fits them for
a Decree of destruction. Where final Sin is foreseen, there the Decree of
Damnation terminates; and where final Sin is not foreseen, there the Decree of
Damnation terminates not. After all thy wickedness, woe, woe unto thee, says
the Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 23. Hells woes are after final wickedness, and the Decree
of Hells woes are after the Prescience of final wickedness. In a word; That
which causes men to be capable objects for the Decree of Damnation to terminate
on, is the final Sin which is in the unrighteous Will of Man; and that which
causes the Decree of Damnation to terminate on them, is the Vindictive Justice,
which is in the righteous Will of God. In Tophet the Torments are as
unquenchable fire. The final sin is as much wood, and that which kindles it is
Vindictive Justice breathing out from the righteous Will of God; in all which
there is nothing at all but exact Righteousness. God may say to Man, Thy
perdition is of thy self, and Man must say to God, Thou art righteous, O Lord
in all thy ways.

I will shut up all with an Answer to an Objection. You will yet say, God's
Justice is not cleared in this point; for the Decree of Preterition and
Permission is merely out of Sovereignty, and upon this Preterition and
Permission does infallibly follow final Sin, and upon final Sin does infallibly
follow eternal Damnation: Wherefore hereby God is made the great Author of the
Reprobates Sin and Damnation.

To which I answer in three Propositions.

1. It Is true that upon Preterition and Permission final sin does infallibly
follow. When God gave them up to their own lusts, they walked in their own
counsels, Psalm. 18. 12. When he suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways,
they did so, Acts 14. 16. If upon God's Permission Man's Sin follow not, then
(which is very strange) God may permit that which yet will never be. But

2. Upon Preterition and Permission final Sin does infallibly follow; but not
as an Effect from a true Cause, but as a Consequent upon its Antecedent. Hence
God is no more the Author of Sin, than the Sun is of the darkness which follows
upon its departure. Also the Objectors may be asked, Does not God foreknow that
the Creature set in such a state and order of things will finally sin?
Foreknowing this, does not he willingly and actually set the Creature in that
state and order? From or upon this setting the Creature in that state and
order, does not its final Sin infallibly follow? I suppose they will deny
nothing of all this; yet they will by no means say that God is the Author of
sin, neither need they say so; for in Sins following there is only sequela
ordinis, and not sequela causalitatis. Moreover, God, in Preterition and
Permission, does not subtract from men any Creaturedue, but suspend such
special effectual Grace as is undue unto them. This is clear; for Preterition
and Permission respect men as sinners lying in the corrupt Mass, and to sinners
God owes nothing but punishment. Verbum [Debet] venenum habet, nec Deo proprie
competit, qui non est debtor nobis nisi forte ex promisso, says Peter
Lombard. If God be bound to give special effectual Grace to all, show me a
Promise for it; if he be not bound, the suspension of that Grace can in no wise
make him the Author of Sin. Wherefore final Sin is indeed no fruit of God's
Reprobating Will, but the proper issue of Man's perverse Will. And this is one
grand difference between Election and Reprobation; Election does effectually
work final Faith and Holiness in the Elect, but Reprobation does not effect the
least drop of Sin or Malice in the Reprobate. Faith and Holiness come down from
Heaven, out of the bosom of free Grace; but Sin and Malice grow at home in the
Reprobate's own heart, Dea non operante sed permittente.

3. Hence it follows, That God is the Author of the Reprobate's Damnation only
as a just Judge inflicting the same for final Sin: God's vindictive Justice is
the inflicting Cause of Damnation; but Man's final Sin is the proper
meritorious Cause thereof. And thus God is perfectly justified in the Decree of
Reprobation, because that final Sin of Reprobates, which follows consequently
upon God's Preterition and Permission, does flow effectively from man's
perverse and corrupt Will; and that everlasting Damnation of Reprobates, which
is inflicted by God as a Righteous Judge, is also merited by a man as a final
Sinner.

CHAP. VI. Of the Work of Creation.
HAving treated of the Divine Will as to its Eternal Decrees, I proceed to
speak thereof as to its External Works, which are (as it were) the Royal
Display thereof. And that there may not be a Chasme in my Discourse, I shall
first touch upon Creation as the first of God's ways. There are besides the Ens
Entium, three several Worlds or Ranks of Beings, viz. Spiritual, Material and
Mixed; the first, is the Intellectual World, made up of those invisible Glories,
Spirits by Nature, Angels by Office, Principalities and Powers, spiritual Stars
of Light and Flames of Love, all of them at first Inhabitants of that pure
spiritual Body the Heaven of Heavens; but afterward part of them were for
their proud Apostasy cast into Hell. The second is the World of visible
wonders; the stupendous Heavens eyed with a glorious Sun, and spangled with
Moon and glittering Stars, encircling all the rest with their spherical
Stories, and wheeling round about with an indefatigable Motion, spinning out
time for all the World, and with admirable influences hatching and hovering
over all the living Creatures. Under these is the vast Air, encompassing the
Earth and Sea, coated with woolly clouds, and those sometimes laced with the
curious Rainbow; every morning putting on the bright-shining Robes of Light,
and at evening exchanging them for the black Mantle of the night: now all on a
flame with flashes of Lightning, and anon all in a Sea with the Bottles of
Heaven: sometimes rent in pieces with thundering Tempests, and then made up
again into serenity, and clear as a molten Looking-glass. This is the Fan of
all Creatures breathing on the Earth, and it self is fanned with various Winds:
This is the Inn where the visible Species, the Imagery of the Worlds Beauty and
Glory, and the audible Species, the multiplied progeny of Sounds and Voices,
lodge together: This is the common Road, where the influences of the Heavens
and the vapors of the Earth, the beams of the Sun and the sweet perfumes of
Herbs and Flowers meet and embrace each other in their passage. Within this is
the massy Earth the Center of the World, hanging upon nothing, inwardly
boweled with rich Minerals and precious Stones, and outwardly teeming with
numberless births of Grass and Corn, shaded with Trees and Woods, and laughing
with odoriferous Herbs and Flowers, bubling with lively Springs and Fountains
of Water, and admirably enterlaced with gliding Streams and Rivers, inhabited
with strange variety of Beasts, and lorded with Man. And the Girdle of this
Earth is the wonderful Sea, swadled with Clouds, swarming with Fishes, lodged
and locked up in the hollows of the Earth, and from thence secretly winding and
straining its moisture into the inward Veins thereof: now swelling with the
pride of Winds and Waves, as if it meant to swallow up Heaven and Earth; and
then sinking down again into its Den, as if it were afraid to be drunk up by
the little Sands. The third is the Mixed World, the marriage or copula of the
other two, made up of Men; whose Immortal Souls claim kindred with the World of
Angels, and whose Earthen Bodies are the Breviaries and Epitomes of the visible
World; virtually summing up the Elements in their harmonious Mixture, the
Plants in their Life, the Beasts in their Senses, and the Heavens, with the
Sun, Moon and Stars in their Heads, Eyes and beautiful Faces. Now touching all
this Catalogue of Beings I shall briefly demonstrate three things.

1. That all these Beings had a beginning. 2. That their beginning was from
God. 3. That it was from God as a free Agent, and according to the counsel of
his own Will.
1. All these things had a beginning; and this I prove three ways.

1. I argue ex absur do; if they had no beginning of being, then every one of
them is a God by Nature, a Jehovah in Self-beingness, and an Alpha in Primacy:
If they had no beginning of duration, then are they all inmates in God's
Eternity, copartners in his Immutability, and (which is a step higher)
possessors of his Infinity, and boundless Beings without any limits of Being:
For what imaginable limits of Being can they have, which want a beginning,
which is the first limit of Being?

2. The Motions of the Creatures evince this; the Elements have their
enterchanges, the Earth its seasons, the Sea its tides, the Air its winds, the
Stars their courses, the Moon her variations, the Sun runs its race between the
Tropicks, the Heavens, the common carriers of all the rest, turn about with an
uncessant Motion; nay, the immaterial Angels and rational Souls are never
without some Motions in their Understanding and Will; neither can they do any
thing without a change, because their being and their doing are two things. Now
what do all these Motions speak but a first Mover, a beginning at some first
point, and a measure of time ever since? Such moveable Beings cannot be
measured with Eternity; for that is unmovable and unvariable, but these are in
motions and mutations; that is instantaneous and simultaneous, but these are
under a flux of priority and posteriority in their motions and mutations:
wherefore it must needs be that these had a beginning.

3. If these had no beginning, then what shall we say of the Years, Days and
Minutes past? Are they finite or infinite? If finite, then numerable, and there
was a beginning; if infinite, then how past? Infinity cannot be passed over;
but and if it could, then there are infinite numbers of Minutes past, infinite
numbers of Days past, and infinite numbers of Years past, and (because there
cannot be infinito infinitius) by most necessary consequence, there are as many
Years past as Days, and as many Days past as Minutes, which is utterly
impossible; therefore these things must needs have a beginning.

2. The beginning of all these was from God. The Scripture speaks evidently; In
the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, Genesis 1. 1. Of him and
through him and to him are all things, Romans 11. 36. He that built all things is
God, Heb. 3. 4. When we look upon the stately Palace of the World, roofed with
the glorious Heavens, floored with the fruitful Earth, chambered with the
cloudy Air, watered with the stupendous Sea, and furnished with all variety of
Creatures; we cannot dream of any other Architect but God alone. And (because
Job bids us speak to the earth, Job 12. 8. and the Psalmist tells us that there
is a language in the heavens, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. and the Apostle asserts that
there is a witness of God in the rain, Acts 14. 17.) therefore suffer me to
parley their Original out of their own mouths, Creatures, whence came you? Ex
nihilo. What, ex nihilo? How then came you over that vast infinite Gulf which
lies between Nothing and Being? Infinite Power filled it up to make our
passage. But since you came over, where do you stand? In a Being betwixt two
Nothings, Nothing negative and Nothing privative. And who set you there at
first? The first and chief Being, who is ipsum Esse, suum Esse, infinitum Esse,
infinite elongatum a non Esse. But whence had you all that truth and goodness
which is in you? Our truth is but a beam from his infinite Verity, and our
goodness the Redundance and Super-effluence of his infinite Goodness. And
whence came all these numbers and hosts of Beings? Out of perfect Unity; every
one of us is numbered by our finiteness and composition, and every Number is
from infinite simple Unity. Monas est principium and radix omnium; there is but
one God of whom are all things. But how came you into such ranks? Why have not
the Elements Life, the Plants Sense, the Beasts Reason, and Men Angelical
Perfections? When infinite Power brought us out of nothing, infinite Wisdom
shut up every one of us within the bounds of his proper Being. But your Beings
being of such different sorts, how came you to be so kind each to other? the
Clouds drop down Rain on the Earth; the Earth brings forth Grass; that feeds
the Beasts; and these serve for Man, the Breviary of all, and Steward of all.
All these and innumerable more links of Amity were made by the God of Order.
But if you be of God's own make, show me your tokens. It Is most apparent that
all Beings must be from the chief Being, all Truth from the first Truth, all
Goodness from supreme Goodness, all Numbers from perfect Unity, and all Ranks
and Orders from infinite Wisdom; and this chief Being, first Truth, supreme
Goodness, perfect Unity, and infinite Wisdom can be no other than God alone.
But if this satisfy not, you may yet further see God's glorious Immensity in
the vast capacious Heavens, his invariable Immobility in the unmovable Earth,
his Faithfulness in the great Mountains, his unsearchable Judgments in the
great Deep, his dreadful Justice in the devouring Fire, his wonderful
Omniscience in the Sun the rouling Eye of the World, his transcendent Beauty in
the Varnish of the Light; the plain footsteps of the Eternal Power and Godhead
in every Creature, and the glorious impress of his own Image and Likeness in
Men and Angels. Thus the very Creatures themselves tell us, that their
beginning was from God.

3. Their beginning was from God as a free Agent, and according to his own
Decree; for either God did produce them naturally and necessarily, or else
freely and voluntarily. Not naturally and necessarily; for then he should
produce things ad extremum virium, and so (besides these Beings) produce all
the possible Beings producible by his glorious Omnipotence, all the possible
Orders and Congruities contrivable by his unsearchable Wisdom, all the possible
Goodness effluxive out of his infinite Goodness, and all the possible Numbers
which his infinite Unity can bring forth into being and produce them all as
early as Eternity it self; and all of them so produced must be necessary Beings
as well as God himself: in all which many great contradictions are involved.
Wherefore it remains that he did produce them voluntarily and according to his
own Decree; the Will of God was the first Mover in this great Work. It Is true
that the World is (as Damascene styles it) (...), a kind of Redundance of God's
infinite Goodness; but not a drop of this Goodness runs out ad extra but by his
good pleasure. It Is true that there is the various and admirable Wisdom of God
in this Work; but that Wisdom shows forth never an Order or Rank of Being,
unless it be taken into the divine Decree, and so become the counsel of his
Will, according to which he works all things. It Is true that the Eternal
Power and Godhead are clearly seen in the Creation; but these had never showed
themselves at all, if the divine Will had not spoken the word. God made all
things by the word of his power; that is, the divine Will eternally expressed
to the divine Power, what Beings it should produce in time. It Is true that all
the numbers and hosts of Beings (...), they flow from him who is perfect Unity;
but not in the way of natural Necessity, but of his free Decree. Qui dicit,
Quare Dous fecit coelum and terram? Respondendum est ei, quia voluit; Aust. Li.
1. de Genesis contr. Man. cap. 2.
qui autem dicit, Quare voluit? majus aliquid quaerit quam est Volunt as Dei:
nihil autem majus inveniri potest. When the Psalmist made that general summons
to the Angels, Heavens, Sun, Moon, Stars, Waters, Dragons, Deep, Fire, Hail,
Snow, Vapors, Wind, Trees, Beasts, Cattle, creeping Things, flying Fowl, even
all the hosts of Nature to sing praises to their great Makes, he added this as
the supreme Reason of all, he commanded and they were created, Psalm. 148. 5.
Sermo Dei Volunt as Ambr. H^^^m Li. 1. cap. 9.
est, Opus Dei Naeturae est. Unto whatsoever his Will speaks a fiat, it comes
forth into being; but if that be silent, not the least Atom can appear. The
Egyptian Magicians cannot produce so much as the shadow or counterfeit
semblance of a Louse, but as men mazed and nonplus'd they are forced to cry
out, This is the finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. And what these wicked Atheists
mutter out touching this poor Creature upon the rack of Conviction, that the
Catholic Church confesses touching all the World in a triumphant Gratulation.
The Twenty four Elders (in the name of all Saints) falling down and worshipping
before the Throne of the Everliving God, cry out, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, honor and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are and were created, Rev. 4. 11. O thou divine Will! thou art
worthy to be adored in the Angels above, and Men below; in the Luminaries of
Heaven and fruitfulness of Earth; in the Meteors of the Air and wonders of the
Deep; in the life of the Plants and senses of the Beasts: at thy imperial Word
all these came pouring out of the barren Womb of Nothing; the births of their
Existence were all dated by thine hand; the dowries of their goodness were all
given by thy Love; the proprieties of their Being were all stamped on them by
thy Ideal Truth; and the various Ranks and Orders of their standing were all
set out by thy glorious Wisdom. O glorious Creator! who have made all these
things, go on one step further; create in us an admiring Heart, which by the
scale of Creatures, as by Jacob's Ladder, may ascend higher and higher in the
Adorations of thee; when we are at the lowest step of all, I mean mere Being,
let us remember thee the chief and first of Beings; when at the second step,
which is Being with Life, let us praise thee the only Fountain of Life; when at
the third, which is Being and Life crowned with Sense, let us tremble at thee
the All-seeing and All-hearing Deity; when at the fourth, which is Being, Life
and Sense irradiated with beams of Reason, and empowered with liberty of Will,
let us adore thy infinite Wisdom which contrived, and thy allmighty Will which
created all these things, and us to see thy Glory in them; when at the highest
step of all, Angelical perfections, let us be lost in holy mazes and trances at
thy infinitely purer glory, in comparison whereof, the very Angels themselves
are but as spotted lamps and duskish beauties. In a word; from the sublimest
Seraphim to the poorest Worm, let us admire thee, humbly confessing that none
can show forth all thy praise.

CHAP. VII. Of the Works of Conservation and Gubernation.
HAving briefly touched upon Creation, I proceed to its appendants,
Conservation and Gubernation. The Almighty and All-wise Creator is not as man,
who builds a House or Ship and leaves it, but like a faithful Creator, he
repairs the House of the World by his Conservation, and steers the Ship of it
by his Gubernation, and that according to the Counsel of his own Will; aliter
mundus ne per ictum oculi stare poterit, as the Father expresses it.

And first, as touching Conservation, I shall demonstrate four things.

1. That no Creature can preserve it self. 2. That no Fellow Creature can
preserve another. 3. That the Preservation of all is from God. 4. That it is
from God according to his Decree.
1. That no Creature can preserve it self; and this is clear

1. From the Creatures Station; even the highest Seraphin stands juxta non
esse, at the brink of Nullity, his Being is between two Nothings, Nothing
negative and Nothing privative: and as his passage from Nothing into Being
could not be without an infinite Power creating; so his natural fall from Being
into Nothing would certainly be without an infinite Power conserving. Creatur a
habet redire ad non esse a se; if God should but say to the highest Angel,
Toll quod tuum est and abi, he must immediately away into Nullity. All
Creatures by their natural vanity press downwards toward nothing, as their own
Center, and none but the Almighty shoulders can bear them up in Being.

2. From God's Royal Prerogative, which the Scripture most emphatically
decyphers out, as it were in Figures of Glory: He only has immortality, 1 Timothy
6. 16. as if there were none at all in Angels and Rational Spirits: Nay, there
is None besides him, 1 Samuel 2. 2. as if there were no Being at all in the
Creature. And the reason of these expressions is this; God has Being and
Immortality originally from himself, but the Creature has them but
derivatively and in a dependence upon him; wherefore in comparison of his Being
Creatures are but nullities, and in comparison of his Immortality Angels are
but smoke. But now if a Creature could preserve it self in Being, and so
immortalize it self, it would become a Self-subsistence, and consequently a God
unto it self.

2. That no Creature can preserve another, (I mean as a principal Agent) and
this is evident; for

1. If one Creature might so preserve another, it should be a God to it, yet so
weak as not to preserve it self: But if it could preserve another, it must be
by some transfusion of virtue into it, and that but finite, (for more a
Creature cannot give;) and then if God transfuse as much virtue into the
Creature conserved as the Creature conservant did, the Creature conserved might
subsist of it self, and be a God to it self.

2. The nature of Conservation evinces this: What is it but an Influx of Being?
Now suppose all the Angels in Heaven would try to guard the poorest Worm in the
Earth, and that but for one moment only, what could they do toward an Influx
of Being? being only streams from God, as light from the Sun; If the Sun be
gone, who can keep light in the Air? If Jehovah withdraw, who can keep Being in
the Creature? All the Creatures are (as I may so say) sensible of this
dependence, and look up to God for their preservation, Psalm. 104. 27. which
leads me to the next thing,

3. That the preservation of all is from God; as of him, so through him are all
thing, Romans 11. 36. and this appears

1. By a survey of all the Creatures; Angels are under God the strongest of
Spirits, but cannot subsist one moment without him; he is (...), Heb. 1. 7. he
is making the Angels even to this day by a daily Conservation; their
Immortality is a continual. Spiration from the Father of Spirits. The Heavens
are the strongest of Bodies, yet cannot stand alone; God is (...) building his
stories in the Heavens, Amos 9. 6. he is still a building of them, or else all
those glorious Arches would totter down; If he be but angry, the Pillars of
Heaven tremble and are aghast, Job 26. 11. If he withdraw his hand, all the
heavenly Volumes pass away as a Scroll, and out go the fair Letters of Sun,
Moon and Stars in the twinkling of an Eye. The Earth is the Center of the
World, and as to Sense it hangs upon nothing, as if it were only poised by its
own gravity; but this created Center is bore up by the infinite Center of all
Being, and as to Faith and Reason hangs upon him; The pillars of it are the
Lord's, 1 Samuel 2. 8. he by his strength sets fast the mountains, Psalm. 65.
6. or else they would be wavering toward nullity. The Sea is a vast spreading
Element, but (lest it should be contracted into nothing) it is held in the
hollow of his hand, Isai. 40. 12. and that imports no less than a preservative
comprehension. All the numberless Birds in the Air, Beasts in the Earth, and
Fishes in the Sea wait on him for their preservation; the sending forth of his
Spirit is their Being, the opening of his hand their Provision, and the shadow
of his wings their Protection; not a Sparrow forgotten before him; not a poor
Fly without an infinite Preserver. Man (who is the Epitome of all the rest)
cannot but own him; O how soon would the earthen Pitcher break, if he did not
keep it! how soon would the Lamp of the Soul go out, if he did not light it
even every moment! Hence God is styled the preserver of men, Job 7. 20. a most
universal preserver, even from the utmost hairs which are numbered by him,
Matthew. 10. 30. unto the inmost spirit which is preserved by his visitation, Job
10. 12. Thus running through the whole Catalogue of Creatures we must conclude
with St. Austin, Deus est per omnia diffusus, non ut qualitas mundi, sed ut
substantia cratrix; sine labor regens, and sine onere continens omnia.

2. By the very nature of Preservation, what is it but continuata Creatio? God
is still a making the Angels, and building the Heavens, my Father works
hitherto, says Christ, Joh. 5. 17. He does per intimam operationem continuo
facere. Creatura (says a famous School-man) quamdiu est, creatura Deo, quia
pro quolibet instanti habet esse a Deo. Preservation is but the eeking out of
Creation, and therefore can be from no other but God alone. Omnia in illo
subsistunt a quo creata sunt. But to pass on;

4. The preservation of all is from God, according to his Decree; and this is
evinced by these Reasons.

1. Either God preserves Creatures naturally or freely: not naturally, for then
he should preserve them perpetually, and so every Fly must run parallel in
Eternity with an Angel; nor naturally, for then he should preserve them
uniformly, and so every mortal body would subsist without food as well as the
immaterial Spirits; therefore he preserves them freely. There be various ways
of Preservation, viz. Preservation of Creatures as to their Being, and as to
their adjuncts of order, beauty, goodness and truth; Preservation of them as to
their individuals and as to their kinds; Preservation of individuals by means
and without means; preservation of them in perpetuum and for certain periods of
time. Now all this variety of Preservations does evidently display the glorious
liberty of the divine Will in the dispensing thereof. Angels are preserved in
their individual Beings, and that in perpetuum, and that without means; but the
Nodus perpetuitatis is the divine Plat. in Timao.
pleasure; or else their Immortality would dissolve in a moment. Men, Beasts
and Vegetables are preserved in their Individuals, but it is by means, and but
for a time, and lest the kind should perish with the individuals; Generation is
a supplement to their Mortality, and the ruler in all this is the Will of God.
As for Preservation by means, it is God who brings food out of the earth,
Psalm. 104. 14. and when it is in our hand, we cannot eat thereof unless God give
us an heart, Eccl. 6. 2. and when we do eat thereof, 'twill not be the staff of
life to us without the word of his blessing, Matthew. 4. 4. without this we may
eat and not be satisfied, drink and not be filled, Hag. 1. 6, 9. Every Creature
says, The blessing is not in me, but in the Will of God. As for the Periods of
Preservation, they are all fixed in the divine Decree; there the days of men
are determined, their months numbered, and their unpassable bounds appointed,
Job 14. 5. Hezekiah had fifteen years added to his days; but there was no
addition to the divine Decree. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days, Psalm. 55. 23. yet they live out all the days set down in the divine
Decree. If a Sparrow fall not without God's Will, Matthew. 10. 29. much less can
a man do so; if our very hairs are all numbered, Matthew. 10. 30. much more are
our days. As for the preservation of kinds, all propagations are from that
primitive Benediction, Crescite and multiplicamini, which dropped from the divine
Will. Vegetables multiply, but it is God who gives to every seed his own body, 1
Cor. 15. 38. Men and Beasts generate their like, but it is God who sows a land
with the seed of man and the seed of beast, Jer. 31. 27. The man written down
childless in God's Book must be without the blessing of posterity; the Member
unwritten or left out in that Book, must never be extant in Nature. When
Monsters are brought forth, there is an abertation in the particular Nature,
but none in the Will of God: when Bastards are generated (which cannot be
without a moral Monstrosity) the sin is Man's, but the Creature is God's. In
brief; If we run through all varieties of Preservation, either as to the Being
of Creatures, or as to the Adjuncts of order, beauty, goodness and truth, we
must resolve all into the Will of God. Alas! what is the mutable Being of
Creatures, unless fixed by the Will of the Necesse esse? What are all the
Orders and Harmonies of things, unless kept in tune by the counsel of his Will?
By him all things (...), Col. 1. 17. not only subsist in their Beings, but
consist in their Orders. His Will is the Virtus unitiva, which glues and tacks
the whole System of Heaven and Earth together, or else all would unframe and
fall asunder in a moment. What an empty nothing is Creature-beauty, unless
shined upon by his gracious pleasure? It Is he that renews the face of the
earth, Psalm. 104. 30. or else (...). Wisd. cap. 13. 3.
the Spring would lose her fresh complexion; nay, and the face of Heaven too,
or else all the Starry Beautyspots would drop off. What is all the Goodness in
the Creature, unless supplied from the great Original? It Is but as water in a
broken Cistern, soon running out, and never to be gathered up again. What is
all the Truth in the Creature but an Impress made from his Ideal Truth? The
Impress the Creature can no more preserve in it self, than it could at first
stamp it there. Wherefore the Will of God is that vas conservativum, which
preserves and conteins all things within their Beings and modes of Being, or
else they would immediately run into nullity.

2. Preservation is but continuata Creatio; if Creation had been natural, so
must Conservation have been too; but seeing Creation is voluntary, such also is
Conservation: hence the Twenty four Elders attribute both to God's pleasure;
for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev. 4. 11. they were by his
Creation, and are by his Conservation, and both were and are for his pleasure.

3. Whatsoever God preserves, he preserves rationally and for some end; as he
made all for himself, so he preserves all for himself. The Heavens and the
Earth are by God's word kept in store, 2 Pet. 3. 7. his Word, that is, his Will
is the great Storier, which treasures up the World with all its furniture for
its own ends; God preserves all rationally, and by just consequence freely
also. Thus far of God's Conservation; but to proceed.

2. God's Gubernation is also to be considered by us. Now here I shall touch on
two things.

1. That God rules and governs all Creatures and Events. 2. That God does it
according to his Decree.
1. God rules and governs all Creatures and Events; He is King of Kings, 1 Timothy
6. 15. his kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103. 19. (...), Wisd. 14. 3. he
steers the Ship of the World and all the passengers in it; (...), Wisd. 12. 18.
he orders the great House of the World and all the Families of Creatures
therein. All the hosts of the Universe are ruled by him: the spiritual World is
ruled by him, the holy Angels are still a doing of his Will; sometimes they are
guarding the godly, sometimes destroying the wicked; sometimes transporting
souls to heaven, sometimes striving with Devils; but they are always beholding
God's face, Matthew. 18. 10. waiting for his imperial Command as their perpetual
rule. These have a great share in turning about the Wheels of the World; when
these stand still, the Wheels stand also, when these go, the Wheels go too; but
these go not one step of their own heads, but whither the Spirit of God goes,
they go, Ezekiel. 1. 12. and when they go, they go straight on to the period of
their work, and then they return, Ver. 14. that is, to the face of God for a
new Commission, and till that come, they let down their wings, Ver. 24.
listening to his voice, and adoring at his footstool; all that they do is
subordinated to his pleasure. Nay, not only the good Angels, but the Devils
(will they, nill they) are subject unto him. They lost their obediential Wings
in their fall, and since that, he never trusts them to go without their Chains.
Hence, without his divine sufferance, these, though Princes of the Air, cannot
raise a storm, though Gods of the World, cannot enter into a Swine, though
Rulers of darkness, cannot inject a temptation; indeed they would undermine the
Fathers Election, cheat Christ of his purchased Possession, and murder all the
new Creatures made by the holy Spirit; but they cannot get off their Chains,
and when their Chains are a little loosened, yet their actings fall under
Providence. An evil Spirit troubled Saul, but 'twas from the Lord as a
righteous Judge, 1 Samuel 16. 14. Satan afflicted Job, but 'twas with a
Commission to try his Graces; the Devil tempted Christ, but 'twas that he might
succor the tempted, Heb. 2. 18. Which way soever Satan turns himself, still he
is under God, as the supreme Moderator. But the spiritual world is not all, the
Material World is also under his dominions; the (...), the Wheel of Nature is
all turned about by his counsel; the Heavens with all their Luminaries, rapid
Wheelings, spinnings of Time, and hovering indulgent influences are under his
Ordinance, his immense hand spans them, Isai. 48. 19. at once twirling them
about with an indefatigable Motion, and squeezing out their quickening
influences into the lower World; it is he (...), Matthew. 5. 45. raises up the Sun
to rule the day, and the Moon and Stars to rule the night; the Air with all its
Meteors is at his command, he makes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the
earth, Psalm. 135. 7. and forms them into Clouds in an admirable and exact
proportion, the airy and watery parts ballancing each other, Job 37. 16. These
are the Bottles of Heaven; when he breaks a Bottle, down comes a refreshing
shower; when he turns and tosses a Bottle, it is by his counsel, Job 37. 12. The
Winds are all in God's hand, Prove. 30. 4. and when he lets out any of them,
it is by weight, Job 28. 25. just so much and no more, and it is to fulfill his
will, Psalm. 148. 8. and when one command is done, it returns by its circuits to
execute another, Eccl. 1. 6. Thunder is God's majestic Voice, and Lightning
his glittering Arrow; both are at his beck, and say to him, Here we are, Job
38. 35. The treasures of Snow and Hail he purses up in the Clouds, and those
pay them out again according to his pleasure. The stupendous Sea is but a
little Babe in his almighty Arms, Clouds and darkness are its swadling-band,
Job 38. 9. and the hollow of the Earth its Cradle, there he rocks and rules it
as he pleases; if it cry and roar, he stills and rebukes it, till he lull it
fast asleep in a calm. The vast Earth is but instar puncti before him, at his
command are all the living Creatures; the greedy Ravens were Caterers for
Elijah, untrained Kine faithful carriers of the Ark, the dumb Ass a reprover to
the Prophet, clamorous Dogs moved not their tongues at departing Israel,
Laban's Cattle change color to pay Jacob's wages, Peter's Fish brought
Tribute-money in his mouth; and when proud Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord? an
answer was sent him by wonderful hosts of Frogs and Flies, Lice and Locusts
proclaiming the sovereignty of their great Maker and Master. In sum; Man is
the Epitome of all the rest, and in governing him God governs all; Man has an
inward Principality of Reason and Will, yet still he is under the Almighty and
All-wise Moderator, who rules and disposes the hearts of men as he pleases.
'Twas but his touch on their hearts, and Saul had a band, 1 Samuel 10. 26. 'Twas
but his turning the key in Lydia's heart, and the Gospel had entrance, Acts 16.
14. Titus went to the Corinthians (...), 2 Cor. 8. 17. a word importing high
liberty, yet God put it into his heart, Ver. 16. The King's heart (and who can
be freer than he?) is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters he
turns it whither he will, Prove. 21. 1. he turns it whither he will, there
is the sovereignty of Providence; yet he turns it as the Rivers of waters,
there is the salving of Humane Liberty. For as when the Husbandman leads the
Waters this and that way by Channels and Trenches, they lose nothing of their
natural fluency; so when God turns the hearts of men to such and such Objects,
they part with nothing of their natural liberty. God is infinitely greater than
our hearts, wiser than our reason, and freer than our liberty; therefore he is
able and worthy to rule over us in our freest actions. Lastly, as his
gubernative Providence is over all Creatures, so it is over all Events, the
greatest Events are not above it. When Kingdoms are tossed and bandied up and
down like a Tennis-ball, Isai. 22. 18. not one Event can fly out of the bounds
of Providence; the smallest are not below it, not a Sparrow falls to the ground
without it, not a hair but it is numbered by it; he is maximus in minimis; the
most natural Effects are but casual, till his free concourse makes them
certain. The Iron with all its gravity is not sure to sink, 2 Kings 6. 6. the
Fire with all its fury is not sure to burn, Dan. 3. 27. The most casual effects
are not casual to him; when the Lot is cast into the lap, the whole disposing
thereof is of the Lord, Prove. 16. 33. When a Bow was drawn at a venture, 1
Kings 22. 34. Providence sent it as a certain messenger of death to the King of
Israel. Thus far I have been surveying the hosts of Creatures and Events; I now
proceed to demonstrate that God is the great and universal Governor over them
all: For

1. He has an absolute Authority over all; his just Title is King of kings and
Lord of lords; all the Sphere of Nature and World of Creatures was of his
making; he that ruled over Nullity it self in their Creation, is worthy to rule
over all Creatures by his Providence: but (because Authority is liveless
without presence) therefore

2. His presence is every where; Creatures lie in the shell of Time and Place,
Angels have their definitive Ubi; the Body of Christ, which subsists in an
infinite Person, is circumscribed by a finite place; but God is every where
present, he is higher than Heaven, deeper than Hell, longer than Time, and
greater than Place; and who like him to be universal Governor? If he were only
on the Throne of Heaven, how should the Footstool of the Earth be ordered? If
his hand only spanned the celestial Spheres, what should the Sea do? But he is
every where; wherever any Creature is, there is I AM supporting and governing
it. But (because power is the Crown of presence) therefore

3. He is Almighty, the only potentate, 1 Timothy 6. 15. power belongs to him,
nay, (...), Ephesians. 1. 19. a pleonasm of power, such as can do (...), Ephesians. 3. 20.
superexcessively above all thoughts of men. No wonder then if the Omnipotent
reign; who should reign else? he can call things that are not, Romans 4. 17. even
a World of Creatures out of the barren Womb of Nullity, and a Church of
New-creatures out of the dead Womb of Nature. He is a God doing wonders, Exodus
15. 11. Wonders to us, but none to himself; for all things are easy to
Omnipotence; his Government can have no blemishes, because his Power can have
no obstacles. But (because Powers hands cannot be without Wisdoms eyes)
therefore

4. He is Infinite in Wisdom to manage all. He is a God of knowledge, 1 Samuel 2.
3. seeing the thoughts afar off, even from the high Arch of Eternity. He has
Treasures of Wisdom, such as cannot be told over: Sapientiae ejus non est
numerus, Psalm. 147. 6. and who should rule but the only wise? If we cast our
eyes on the millions of Creatures, Angels above and Men below, Stars in Heaven,
and living Creatures in Earth and Sea; and all these pouring forth millions of
Acts, and falling under millions of Events, and that from the morning to the
evening of the World; surely nothing less than an infinite Understanding can
comprehend all these, and reach a fine usque ad finem, Wisd. 8. 1. If we ponder
the beautiful Timings, harmonious Orders and sweet Compaginations of things,
The heavens hear the earth, the earth hears the corn and the wine and the oil,
and these hear man, Hos. 2. 21. Surely it must be an all-wise Artist who made
these golden Chains, and stands at the uppermost link ordering all. I will hear
the heavens, says he, or else all the Creatures would turn a deaf ear to one
another. He guides every Wheel, in Nature, and when there is a wheel within a
wheel, never so much intricacy and crossness of motion, yet the wheels are full
of eyes, Ezekiel. 1. 18. directing them to their journeys end, and those Eyes are
always open to perpetuate that direction. St. Austin derides the Gods in the
Roman Capitol, Dii dormiebant, Anseres vigilabant; but divine Providence is
(...), an Eye that never slumbers nor sleeps; his waky Wisdom claims an
universal Government over all: But that which makes up his Imperial Crown is,

5. His perfect Unity. His sovereign Authority, glorious Omnipresence, almighty
Power and infinite Wisdom are his Crown-jewels; but that which completes and
makes up all these into a Crown is his Unity; he is Unus, nay Unicus, nay
Unissimus, his Singularity cannot bear a Compeer, nor his Simplicity a
Compound; if there were either of these, what would become of the Government of
the World? Suppose a Compeer; then one Omnipresent might resist the other, one
Almighty counterwork the other, and one All-wise counterplot the other. Suppose
a Compound; then his Power might go one way, his Wisdom another, and his
Presence might withdraw from both. But now he being one God, one in
Singularity, so that there is none else, and one in Simplicity, so that his
Presence, Power and Wisdom are but one Essence in him, he and only he is worthy
to govern all: Omnis multitudo revocanda est ad unitatem, and perfect Unity is
no where to be found but in him alone. Thus much for the first point; but to go
on.

2. God rules all according to his Decree, he works all things according to the
counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. he does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven
and in earth, Psalm. 135. 6. That which escapes the pleasure of his Will, must
first fly out of the Sphere of Nature. Now this I evince by these Reasons.

1. All those rare Jewels of his Imperial Crown, cemented in his perfect Unity,
do show forth their luster according to his Will; because his Will put forth a
World out of nothing, therefore does his sovereign Authority give Laws to it,
and his glorious Omnipresence fill and cherish it, his infinite Wisdom
ministers to the making of his gubernative Decree, and his Almighty Power
ministers to the executing of it. There are infinite Orders and Congruities
lying in Wisdom's breast, but his Will chooses out of them all what it pleases,
and so makes up its decree; there are infinite possibles within Powers Arms,
but his Power only exerts it self according to his Decree: Wherefore it is
plain that God governs all according to his Decree.

2. The various ways of Government set forth the freedom of the Governor; all
things are not ruled in the same way: Matter is ruled by Forms, Bodies by
Spirits, inferior Bodies by celestial, the visible World by invisible Angels,
Angels and Spirits immediately by God himself. Neither do the same things
always keep the same track; in Joshua's time the glorious Sun did make a stand;
in Daniel's time the Fire did not burn; in Elisha's time the Iron swam, as if
it had forgot its Center; in Moses's time the floating Sea stood up as a Rock,
and the flinty Rock flowed as a Sea; In Christ's time oh! what excesses of
Nature! what actings by Prerogative! what Epiphanies of Divine glory! How many
wonderful ways did the divine Will triumph over the Order of Nature, evidently
demonstrating that the supreme Order of all was in it self alone? If the God of
Nature did govern naturally, all the Wheels would move one way, and in one
road; wherefore the variety of Motions does display the liberty of the first
Mover or Governor.

3. The Government of all things is no other than the efficacious Direction of
them by congruous Means to their supreme End, and that is done by the divine
Will alone; the End of all is the manifestation of his Glory, and this his Will
freely embraces. I say, freely; for the All-sufficient God was under no
necessity to manifest himself, the congruous Means are all of his own choice,
and that out of the infinite Mass of Wisdom in himself; and the efficacious
Direction of all by those Means to that End is according to his Decree. God had
designed preferment to Joseph, but first he lay bleeding under the murderous
intentions of his Brethren, then he was sold as a slave to the Ishmaelites,
afterward he was wretchedly accused by his Mistress, rashly imprisoned by his
Master, and ungratefully forgotten by the chief Butler; and yet after all these
windings and turnings of Providence, this is the worshipful Sheaf, the Ruler
over Egypt, and the wise preserver of Jacob and all his posterity in the
famine. There are millions of Creatures which know not what an End means, but a
divine Intelligence conducts them thither; millions of Events casual, as to us,
but the divine Will has fixed them; millions of Acts free, as to us, but the
divine Liberty is above them; millions of Confusions dark, as to us, but the
divine Decree orders them. In all God is Alpha and Omega, the first Mover and
the last End, the wise Contriver and sure Moderator of every thing for his own
Glory, according to the Counsel of his own Will. O thou divine Will! the tender
Nurse and sweet Disposer of all, thou bear up the Pillars, and turnest about
the Wheels of the Universe; the Guide of every Creature to its journeys end is
thy wise Ordination, and the safe conduct of it thither is thy gracious
Preservation. The swiftest Angel cannot fly out of thy Dominions, and the
poorest Worm has a safe abode within them. Thou have an Eye in every Wheel, an
Order in every Ataxy, and a Line in every Confusion: without thee all Beings
would moulder into Nothing; congruous Means prove vain abortions, and Natures
Harmonies jangle into sad confusions. Without thee the Breath of the living is
but a puff of Vanity, the Reason of the intelligent but a snuff in the socket,
and the Liberty of the free but a dead broken Idol. Should thou but for one
moment withdraw thy hand, oh! what a tumbling cast would there be among the
Angels? what a crack in the heavenly Orbs? what a Chaos in the Elements? what a
strange Doomsday by the blending of Sun and Sea, Heaven and Earth together?
Thou, O divine Will art all in all; thy Wisdom is a wakeful Eye, thy Power a
supporting Center, thy Presence a lively Cherisher, thy Authority a supreme
Lawgiver, and thy Pleasure an universal Orderer to all the World. Oh that
there were such an heart in us as to eye thy Wisdom in every Wheel, own thy
Power in every Preservation, awe thy Presence in every place, acknowledge thy
Authority in every Law, and submit to thy Pleasure in every Event; always
praying, Fiat Voluntas tua, which cannot be perfectly prayed sine infima
humilitate and altissima charitate.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Work of Redemption.
I Have now passed over the Work of Creation, with its Appendices of
Conservation and Gubernation; but behold! a greater than Creation is here,
stupendous Redemption, the wonder of Angels and envy of Devils; at which
Creation starts back and gives up its Sabbath. I am come to the Tree of Life
growing in Paradise, hanging full of Pardons and Graces, and spreading forth a
broad and indefective shadow of Merits over sinful Worms. I am now at the pure
Well of Salvation springing out of the Deity of the Son of God, issuing through
the bleeding Wounds of his Humanity, and filling every Vessel of Faith. I am
now to open my eyes upon the most tremendous Mystery that ever was; God in the
Flesh, the brightness of Glory under a Veil, the Fullness of the Godhead
tabernacling in Dust, and a Sun of infinite light and luster clothed in
Sackcloth in his Incarnation, and turned into Blood in his Passion. Oh! for
some illapses of that holy Spirit which takes the things of Christ and shows
them in their spiritual Glory.

Redemption may be thus described; It is the procuring of Freedom for a Captive
by a Price paid by him who is to redeem, and accepted by him who is the Supreme
Detainer in that behalf, that the Captive may be delivered out of a state of
Captivity into a state of Liberty according to the Wills of the Payer and
Receiver of that price. I say, it is the procuring Freedom: Actual Freedom is
the Crowning Issue of Redemption; but the procuring of Freedom is an essential
ingredient in it. Hence Christ is said to obtain eternal Redemption for us,
Heb. 9. 12. It Is the procuring of Freedom for a Captive, Freemen are not
capable of it, but Captives only; and such are all men become by sin. They owed
ten thousand Talents to God as the great Creditor, and Traitor-like they
rebelled against God as the great Lawgiver; and for those Debts and Rebellions
God as a righteous Judge (...), shut them up in the prison of wrath, Romans 11.
32. It Is the procuring of Freedom for a Captive by a Price, not by mere Power,
but by a Price: when it is procured by mere Power, it is but a naked
Deliverance; but when it is procured by a Price, then it is a true proper
Redemption. Hence in the Evangelical Charter we find (...), a Price, and that
which issues from it is (...), true proper Redemption. Again, it is the
procuring of Freedom for a Captive by a Price paid by him who is to redeem, and
accepted by him who is the supreme Detainer in that behalf; for if it be not
paid, it is no Price; if it be not paid by him who is to redeem, he cannot be a
Redeemer; the Detainer must accept of it in that behalf, or else no Freedom can
be justly procured; and the supreme Detainer must accept of it, for not the
Jailor or Fetters, which are but Under-detainers, but the Creditor and
Lawgiver, who is the supreme Detainer, must receive satisfaction, or else the
Captive cannot be justly released. And all these are couched together by the
Apostle; Christ gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ, there is he who was to redeem; gave
himself an Offering and a Sacrifice, there is the Price paid down by him; to
God, there is the supreme Detainer: the Jailor Satan, and the Fetters of guilt
are but under-detainers, but God is the supreme and must have satisfaction; and
for a sweet smelling savor, there is the Price accepted by God in that behalf.
Lastly, the end of all is, that the Captive may be delivered out of a state of
Captivity into a state of Liberty, according to the Wills of the Payer and
Receiver; Redemption moves toward the actual deliverance of the Captive, as
its proper Center; and that actual deliverance comes forth according to the
Wills of the Payer and Receiver, as its rule and measure. If their Wills be,
that upon the very payment and acceptance of the Price the Captive should be
ipso facto delivered, then he is delivered without any more ado; but if their
Wills be, that the Captive should be delivered but upon certain conditions to
be by him first performed, then he is not delivered till after the performance
thereof. Thus the Redemption wrought by Christ moves toward the actual
deliverance of sinful Captives, and that actual deliverance, according to the
Will of the Father and the Son, comes forth not immediately upon the payment
and acceptance of the Price, but upon Faith and Repentance, which are the Terms
of the Gospel. Hence the Apostles testified Repentance toward God and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. Hence also those expressions of
Propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25. and of Receiving the
atonement, Romans 5. 11. which with many more show us the Terms, upon which
actual deliverance comes forth into being. Now in this discourse of Redemption
I shall gather up all under four Heads.

1. The Captive. 2. The Captivity. 3. The Redeemer. 4. The Price.
1. The Captive is fallen Man; and here two things are considerable.

1. Man fallen in opposition to Man standing. 2. Man fallen in opposition to
fallen Angels.
1. Man fallen in opposition to Man standing; Man as he came out of his Makers
hands was a spotless Creature, his Mind a pure Lamp of knowledge, his Will a
Throne for the holy One, his Heart a Sanctuary of all Graces, his Affections
all in harmony with the Rational Faculties, the Image of God sparkling within
him, and the Favor of God sunning him round about. Here all was Freedom, no
Chain but that of Graces, no Bands but Cords of Love, no Prison but a Paradise,
no Captive but the Lord's Freeman; the least drop of wrath could not fall on
him here. But alas! how soon was this Star shot! Man turned from God, and God
departed from Man, and instantly the Captive appeared all in Chains of Sin and
Wrath; his Lamp went out in obscure darkness, Satan ascended up into the
Throne, the fire of Lust rose up in the Sanctuary, the Affections were all in a
mutiny against the upper Powers, and the whole Man became a Prisoner under Sin
and Wrath; and all this because he left (...), his original State of rectitude
and holiness.

2. Man fallen in opposition to fallen Angels: When Man (though but an earthen
Pitcher) fell from God, the whole Trinity seemed to be moved at it; the bowels
of the Father yearned over him, and as not content with inward compassions,
Grace breaks out at the Lips of the Son, Unto you, O men, do I call, says the
eternal Word, Prove. 8. 4. and (because words, such as made a World, could not
do it) (...), Heb. 2. 16. He catches hold of the Humane Nature, and rather than
fail, he would live and bleed and die in it for our Redemption: And lest after
all this Man should not catch hold of his own Salvation, out comes the holy
Spirit to make sure work of it in an application of it unto us. (...), says
St. Chrysostom. When Mankind fled, and fled far from Christ, he pursued and
caught hold of it: But when those Vessels of Gold, the Angels, dropped out of
Heaven, there was no such matter; the Father's bowels (though of immense
largeness) were shut up, not a thought of mercy rose in his heart toward them;
the Son's Lips, which drop sweet smelling Myrrh unto men, let fall never a
syllable of comfort unto them, he saw them tumbling down from Heaven, yet
caught not hold of them: the holy Spirit would not stir a foot to recover
(...), their original Rectitude for them again, that so they might be capable
of staying in the holy Heavens, but down they must into Chains of darkness,
such as for ever shut out every glimpse of Mercy. But why a Philanthropy rather
than a Philangely? Why a Redemption for Men and not for Devils? Here men give
their conjectures. Man (say some) sinned by seduction, but Devils by
self-motion: In the Fall of Men (say others) all the Humane Nature fell, but in
the Fall of Angels all the Angelical Nature fell not. Others allege that the
Sin of Angels was more damnable than Man's, because their Nature was more
sublime than his. Others yet affirm, that Men are capable of Repentance, but
Devils not, because whatever they once choose, they do immobiliter velle; the
Devil sins from the beginning, 1 John 3. 8. it is not said, he sinned, but he
sins; because from his first Apostasy he sins on uncessantly. But alas!
Who can limit the holy One? Might not his boundless Mercy have saved the
selftempted Devils? What if his devouring Justice had broke out against
devil-seduced Men, nay, against all the Race of Men? Who should accuse him for
the Nations that perish, which he has made and Sin has marred, Wisd. 12. 12?
Could not the Blood of God have washed out the blackest spots of fallen Angels?
Was not the Almighty Spirit of Grace able to melt a Devil into Repentance? Had
we poor Worms been to dispute with the Devil about the Body of Christ, as
Michael did with him about the Body of Moses, O how easily would he have
reasoned us out of our Redeemer! What (would he have said) shall the tender
bowels of God be let down to you on Earth and restrained to us in Heaven? Will
the All-wise God repair his Clay-images in the Dunghill of the lower World, and
neglect his fairer Pictures once hung up in his own Palace of Glory? May not
the Son of God be a Redeemer at an easier rate, without stepping a foot out of
his Fathers house, and will he travel down so far as an Incarnation? How much
better were it for him to spot himself with an assumed Cherubin, than to take
Flesh into his glorious Person? But the great God has neither given Angels a
day to plead for a Redeemer, nor Man a license to pry into his Ark. Wonder
then, O Man, at this astonishing difference made by the divine Will alone.
Angels must be damned and men may be saved; golden Vessels are irreparably
broken, and earthen Pots are set together again; Inmates of Glory drop to Hell,
and Dust and Ashes fly up to Heaven. When I consider thy Heavens and the Stars
glistering there, Lord, what is man that thou mindest him, Psalm. 8. 4? but when
I consider thy Heaven of Heavens, and thy Angels dropping from thence into
utter darkness, Lord! what is man that thou savest him? Misericordia Domini
plena est terra; quare non dictum est, plenum est coelum? quia sunt spirituales
nequitiae in coelestibus, sed non illae ad commune jus indulgentiae Dei,
remissionemque peccatorum pertinent, as holy Ambrose expresses it. Even so
gracious Father, because so it seems good in thy sight. Thus having found the
right Captive I pass on

2. To the Captivity; and this I shall set out in three things.

1. The Chains. 2. The Prison. 3. The Jailor.
As for the first, I shall first touch upon the Chains themselves, and then
upon the distinct links thereof.

1. The Chains themselves are no other than Original and Actual Sin.

1. Original Sin is a very heavy Chain; and here I shall view

1. The upper end of this Chain, I mean, that first Sin of eating the forbidden
fruit, called in the Schools Peccatum originale originans: here there was truly
magnum in parvo, a vast World of Sin in a small Act. There was an Idol of
self-excellency a framing, and to adorn it, a concupiscential stealth of the
forbidden fruit; and in this stealth a bloody Homicide, a slaying of all Humane
Nature at one blow; and which is more, a kind of Deicide too, a slaying (as
much as in Man lay) even of God himself; the Pride of this primordial Sin
snatching at God's excellency, the Unbelief stabbing at his Truth, the
Rebellion fighting against his Sovereignty, the Ingratitude trampling his
Goodness under foot, and the Presumption as it were daring out his Justice into
warlike Arms; and all this contra praeceptum tam breve ad retinendum, tam leve
ad observandum. This is the upper end of this Chain, and it reaches down to us
all; for in him we all sinned, Romans 5. 12. The sweetest Bonaventure cannot say,
In Adamo non peccavi: For Adam was not here considered as a private person, but
as the Root and Head of Mankind; Adam's person was the fountain of ours, and
his Will the representative of ours; we were all in him naturally as latent in
his Loins, and legally too as comprised within the Covenant made with him;
therefore we all sinned in his Sin. Omnes nos unus ille Adam, says one Father;
Genus humanum in primo parente velut in radice computruit, says another. But
that of Nazianzen is fullest of spiritual sense, who cries out, O infirmitatem
meam! mea^ enim duco primi parentis infirmitatem. If any reply, But how could
we sin in Adam? I answer, that our humane Nature was in him, and why might it
not sin there? You Will say, It could not for want of a Will; I answer, that our
Wills were put into Adam's by that Covenant which was made with him for himself
and all his posterity. If one Man may put his Will into another Man's Will in a
Comprimise, why may not God (who is more Lord of our Wills than our selves) put
all our Wills into Adam's by a Covenant? and here God did it with abundant
Equity, because our Wills were put into Adam's as well for the obteining
blessedness upon his Obedience, as for the incurring punishment upon his
Disobedience.

2. The lower end of this Chain, the universal depravation of Nature, called
Peccatum originale originatum; this hangs upon the former, all habitual Sin
has an essential relation to some actual Sin precedent. It Is impossible that
one should be a Sinner habitually, who in no kind sinned actually. If Adam had
not sinned actually, he had never been habitually vitiated; nay, if we had not
sinned in his Sin, we had never been so. This original Depravation is the
sinning Sin, the Body of Sin, a Body in our Souls, Flesh in our Spirits, a Nail
on our Eyes, a Plague in our Hearts, and a Root of bitterness in our whole
Nature; this turns our Minds into Dungeons of darkness, our Wills into Gulfs of
Sin, our Memories into leaking Vessels, our Fancies into Forges of Vanity, our
Affections into Chambers of Imagery, our Members into Weapons of
Unrighteousness, and our whole Man into a Man of Sin; insomuch that to be
carnal is to walk (...), 1 Cor. 3. 3. When we are formed in the Womb, this
Chain lies upon us, even in primo ardore, in the first warmth of natural
Conception, Psalm. 51. 5. And when Christ is formed in our Hearts, this Chain
presses so hard upon the spiritual Embryo, that as soon as ever it begins to
live, it falls a sighing and groaning with tears, Oh! my hard heart! Oh! my
unbelieving heart! Oh! my carnal sensual heart! Oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7. 24. Nay, the very
Philosophers themselves (who never kenned so far as the top of this Chain, I
mean Adam's Sin) yet seem to feel the weight of it: Wherefore sometimes they
complain of a Sepulchrum Corporis, as if (...) were become (...), a Grave to
the Soul; and sometimes they cry out of a Defluvium Pennarum, as if the Soul
had lost her Wings. Whither also may be referred the Trismegists Indumentum
Inscitiae, Pravitatis Fundamentum, Corruptionis Vinculum, Velamen opacum; with
many such like expressions touching the weight and pressure of this Chain,
involving Men in a horrid slavery and captivity.

2. Besides the Chain of Original Sin, there is that of Actual; the whole World
(...), 1 John 5. 19. lies in wickedness, as a Slave in his Chains. Oh! the open
Profaneness, secret Hypocrisies, spiritual Wickednesses, carnal Pollutions,
daring Presumptions, faultring Infirmities; Impieties against God,
Unrighteousness against Men, vast Armies and Hosts of Sin which cover the
World. As Original Sin turns Man into a Man of Sin; so Actual Sin turn the
World into a World of Sin. This is a long Chain reaching from Adam's Fall to
the Worlds Period, and from first to last enwrapping Captives all along.

2. The Links of the Chains are considerable, and those are three great ones.

1. The first Link is Macula peccati, the Stain of Sin; this is the filth of
the Chain, a brand of deformity on the naked Captive God is the beauty of
Holiness, and there is no turning from him without a Blot: God is a Sun of
infinite light, and there is no holding up our hands against him without
casting a dark shadow on our faces. Every Sin is a filthiness; If it be a
brutish lust, it is (...), filthiness of flesh; if a spiritual wickedness, it is
(...), filthiness of spirit, as the Apostle distinguishes, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Nay,
that which is filthiness of flesh in the external commission of the Act, is yet
filthiness of spirit in the internal commaculation of the Soul. The wicked cast
out mire and dirt, and the more they cast out in the transient Acts of Sin, the
more there is within in the abiding spot of it. When the Act of Sin is passed
and gone, the Spot and Stain thereof stays behind, and denominates us (...),
children of disobedience.

2. The second Link is Reatus peccati, the Guilt of Sin, a dreadful Link
chaining the naked Captive to divine Wrath, fastened within him by the desert
of Sin, and bound upon him by the Justice of God; and hence he becomes (...), a
child of wrath. No sooner does he turn from God as his Lawgiver, but he meets
him as his Judge, and that in the face; The face of the Lord is against them
that do evil. Whilst he flies extra ordinem praecepti, he falls intra ordinem
justitiae, the wages of sin is death.

3. The third Link is Regnum peccati, the Reign of Sin, Sin is an absolute
Tyrant over us; his Laws are all writ in Letters of blood, his strong Holds are
in our very Reasons, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. His Throne is in our Wills, his winged
Chariot in our Affections, his Weapons in our earthly Members; and our whole
man is (...), the slave of sin, Joh. 8. 34.

2. The next thing in the Captivity is the Prison, and that is the Wrath of
God: But here we must distinguish the Walls from the Dungeon, the Walls are
very strong and dreadful, infinite Justice and Holiness are the flaming
Cherubims that guard them; and the Handwriting upon them is, A curse to the
sinner and woe to the worker of iniquity. The poor Captive (as long as his
Chains are unbroken) lies within these Walls (...), under the judgment of God,
Romans 3. 19. Wrath abides upon him, Joh. 3. 36. a sad State. Nevertheless,
whilst but here, he is a Prisoner of Hope, a Captive capable of Redemption.
The Dungeon is Hell it self, a place of Darkness, a gulf of unquenchable Fire,
a bottomless Pit of Perdition, into which impenitent Sinners are still a
sinking deeper and deeper, without any hope of ascending out of it; when the
Captive is once here, the utmost farthing will be exacted of him.

3. The last thing in the Captivity is the Jailer, even Satan, and he does
three things.

1. He takes the Captive into his custody, the Natural Man's Heart becomes his
Palace, and every room in it is full of hellish furniture; not the Turret of
Reason, nay, not the relics of the divine Image left free, but have (as a
learned Bishop speaks) habitatorem Rob. Sar. De Ver. Great. 66.
Diabolum; and it appears that a proud Devil dwells under the same roof,
because men seek to be justified thereby.

2. He keeps on the Captive's Chains, he sooths up the Old Man, as if there
were no such thing as a New Creature, and flatters the earthly Members as if
there were no such place as Heaven; he blows up the miserable Captive into
proud reflexes, as if he had Reason enough to span all Mysteries, and Will
enough to teem all Graces out of the dead Womb of Nature. He stands at the
right hand of Original Corruption, brooding and fly-blowing corrupt Nature into
Concupiscences, Concupiscences into Acts, Acts by iteration into Habits and
Customs, which are a second corrupt Nature; and all this while he keeps the
House in peace, that the Captive may sleep on in his Chains. And if the Chains
rattle too much in crying Scandals, he lines them with some Moralities; If
legal Convictions make them too hot, he sprinkles and cools them with some
presumptions of Mercy; if they be weighty and pressing upon Conscience, he
lightens them with some forms of Godliness; if after all this the Captive will
yet awake, he shall (if Satan can do it) Dives-like open his Eyes in Torments,
and Desperation shall swallow him up for ever. He works all manner of ways in
Men, that he may keep on their Chains, and add one link of filth and guilt to
another.

3. He keeps the Captive (as much as in him lies) within the Walls of the
Prison. Oh! what serpentine Windings! what circumventing Methods! what
untraceable Depths! What lying Promises! what shows of Happiness does he use to
keep them there! He is well content to allow the Ambitious one his Pinacles of
Honor, the Covetous his Bags of Mammon, the Voluptuous his Paradise of carnal
pleasures, the Curious his fine-spun Cobwebs of School-notions, every Captive
his peceatum in deliciis, his beloved Corruption, so as they will but stay
where they are, in a state of Wrath.

3. Having seen the Captive and Captivity, let us pass on to consider the
Redeemer; and here I would first premise that no Creature could redeem us out
of this Captivity. Sin is an infinite evil, objectively infinite; it is a
fighting against an infinite Majesty, a striving against infinite Sovereignty,
an enmity to infinite Holiness, a provocation to infinite Justice, a Deicidium,
a striking at the very Life and Being of God; God has no other Opposite but
Sin, and were it possible that the least drop of it could get into him, he
would instantly cease to be God; and now where shall God have satisfaction for
such an evil as this? Shall the Brutal World be a Sacrifice for the Rational?
Alas! the blood of bulls and goats cannot take away sin. Can the Captive do
ought in it? Can he wear off his Chains with repentant Tears, or work them off
with after-holiness? Alas! the Captive is in love with his Chains, and
therefore at a vast distance from Repentance and Holiness. But if he had both,
doubtless those repentant Tears would be black or salt in some measure, and
therefore want a Laver; that Holiness in comparison of spotless Perfection
would be but as a filthy Rag, and therefore want a Cover. But suppose he had
such tears as are the pure Blood of a filial heart without any blackness or
saltness in them, and such Holiness as is pure Linen, fine and white without
any spot in it; yet all this must be of free Grace and nothing of his own, and
then how can he who sins ex proprio, satisfy ex alieno? But admit that these
Graces were his own too; yet how can finite Graces satisfy for an infinite
Evil? There is no proportion at all between finite and infinite. But you will say,
Sin is infinite objectively, and so are Repentance and Holiness too; therefore
they may satisfy for Sin. I answer; The difference is vast, for Sin is
measured by the Object, and therefore being against an infinite God is in a
sort infinite; but Satisfaction is measured by the Subject, and therefore
Repentance and Holiness being subjectively finite cannot satisfy for Sin. But
you will yet reply, These Graces flow from an infinite Spirit, and therefore may
satisfy for Sin. I answer; This is the grand disproportion between those works
which Christ works for us as a Surety, and those works which the Spirit works
in us as a Sanctifier: In the first there is God and Man in one Person, and
therefore they are of an infinite Dignity; but not so in the second, and
therefore they are but of a finite Value. The forlorn Captive can by no means
help himself, and what shall he do? Shall he pray in aid of the holy Angels?
But O! what trembling fits would there be in them? What paleness in the
Cherubims at such a task? But suppose they could all be induced to become a
Sacrifice for us, would the holy One open his Eyes upon such a Satisfaction?
But if he did, what would become of them? How soon would our Debts empty all
their Coffers, and God's Wrath break all their backs, and who should redeem
these Redeemers? Therefore every Creature must say, it is not in me to redeem.
This premised, the Redeemer is the Lord Jesus Christ, the true Immanuel, the
Word made Flesh, the Man God's Fellow, the great Trismegist, a Royal Priest,
Priestly Prophet, and Prophetical King all in one; a Priest upon his Throne, a
Couquerour on his Cross, a Healer by his Wounds. Oh! could we see his Glory,
his Head is a Fountain of holy Oil, his Hairs woolly with Eternity, his Eyes
flaming with Omniscience, his Feet brassed with invincible Power, his Robe of
Righteousness as long and broad as the Law, his Girdle of Truth all of pure
Gold, his Heart graven with the Names of Saints, and his tender Bowels showing
themselves through his bleeding Wounds. This is the Savior of the World, and
Redeemer of Man, this is he; and he has a threefold Right to be so.

1. Jus Proprietatis, as God. 2. Jus Idoneitatis, as the Son of God. 3. Jus
Conjunctionis, as Man, as a Surety for Men, and as a Head to his Church.
1. Jus Proprietatis, as God, who should redeem a Creature but the true Owner?
And who is he but God the Creator? Ovem perditam quis requirit, (says
Tertullian) nonne qui perdidit? Adv. Merc. Li. 4.
Quis autem perdidit, nonne qui habuit? Quis autem habuit, nonne cujus fuit?
Homo non alterius res est quam Creatoris. He that is (...), truly a Savior (as
the Expression is, Joh. 4. 42.) must be God indeed. Should one mere Creature
redeem another, he should ipso facto pluck away a Creature from his Creator,
inasmuch as Redemption is a greater Tie than Creation. Now Jesus Christ, who
came to redeem us, is very God, not a Metaphorical but the true God, 1 John 5.
20. not a petty, but the great God, Tit. 2. 13. not an under subordinate God,
but over all God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. not a God by office, but a
Jehovah, Jer. 23. 6. a God by nature; though not (...), as to his Subsistence,
yet (...), as to his Essence. Gods name is in him, Exodus 23. 21. One great
Letter of that Name is Eternity, and his going forth was from everlasting, Mic.
5. 2. another is Immutability, and he is yesterday, to day and for ever the
same, Heb. 13. 8. another is Omniscience, and he knows all things, Joh. 21.
17. another is Omnipotence, and he has all the power in heaven and earth,
Matthew. 28. 18. another is Immortality, and he has life in himself, Joh. 5. 26.
another is Immensity, and he whilst on earth was in heaven, Joh. 3. 13. and
though long since ascended to heaven, is still on earth, Matthew. 28. 20. All
these golden Letters are graven on the Godhead, and (...), all the fullness of
the Godhead dwells in him, Col. 2. 9. all these shed forth a divine Glory and
Majesty, and he is (...), the brightness of divine glory, Heb. 1. 3. and what
need we any more witnesses of his Deity? His Name is wonderful, Isai. 9. 6. far
above all Creatures; his Generation is unutterable, being (...), the proper Son
of the Father, Romans 8. 32. not as Creatures made ex nihilo, but as a proper Son
begotten out of his very Substance; his standing is (...), in the essential
form of God, the very divine nature, Phil. 2. 6. and his special Ubi there is
the Fathers bosom, Joh. 1. 18. and from thence together with him he breathes
forth the holy Ghost. His Works are divine and all one with the Fathers, Joh.
5. 19. He sat in counsel with him in framing his Eternal Decrees, and since
wrought with him in making first a World of Creatures and then a Church of
Saints; and still he works with him in the preservation and gubernation of
both. Lastly, his two Testaments (which face each other as the Cherubims upon
the Ark) by their sweet glances and respective aspects upon each other do
disclose his Deity. For in the Old Testament it is said, that Jehovah brought
Israel out of Egypt, Exodus 20. 2. in the New Testament it is said, that Christ
did it, Jude 4. and 5. Ver. in the Old Jehovah circumcises the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.
6. in the New Christ does it, Col. 2. 11. in the Old Jehovah poured out the
Spirit, Joel 2. 28. in the New Christ, Acts 2. 33. in the Old every knee bows
to Jehovah, Isai. 45. 23. in the New to Christ, Romans 14. 11. in the Old
miracles were done in Jehovah's Name, 2 Kings 2. 21. in the New in Christ's,
Acts 9. 34. in the Old Jehovah is the first and the last, Isai. 44. 6. in the
New Christ is Alpha and Omega, Revel. 1. 11. in the Old there is Deus
absconditus, Isai. 45. 15. in the New Deus manifestatus in carne, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
All which do most pregnantly prove the Deity of Christ unto us. Nevertheless
proud Reason will be babbling, How can the Father beget the Son ex propria
Substantia? Can any part of the Divine Essence be discinded in such a
Generation? Or if not, can the whole be given to the Son? And if so, how is it
retained to the Father? I answer; The Father gave unto the Son the whole
Essence, non alienatione sed communicatione, non generatione emanante, sed
immanente; the Father so begets the Son, as that he still possesses him, Prove.
8. 22. the Son so goes forth from the Father as that he still abides in him;
his eternal egress, Micah 5. 2. is (...), not by defluxion, but immansion, I am
in the Father and the Father in me, says Christ, Joh. 14. 10. Indeed if we
speak accurately, the Father begets the Son out of himself rather in Essentia
divina, than ex essentia divina. Hence the entire Essence is in the Father; and
the entire Essence is in the Son too; and what if it could not be thus in a
finite Essence? yet why may it not be so in an infinite? What if Reason cannot
fathom it? must therefore Faith reject it? I conclude then, that Christ is very
God, and as God has a right to redeem us his Creatures.

2. Jus Idoneitatis, as the Son of God, he was most fit to be our Redeemer;
what can be more perfectly congruous than Reconciliation by God's beloved one,
Adoption by his Natural Son, Reparation of his gracious Image by his
substantial, a shine of Favor by the brightness of his Glory, beams of Light
by his Wisdom, Restitution of Life by the Prince of Life, and Mediation between
God and Man by the middle Person in the sacred Trinity? There be three great
goings forth of God, into which all others may be resolved; the first is that
fundamental one of Creation, and upon Sins Entry, which is but an Apostasy
from Creation, in comes the second, viz. Redemption, and out of this as out of
a Fountain flows the third, and that is Sanctification; these hang in order one
upon another. Unless there had been a Creature, and that Apostate, there had
been no place for Redemption; and unless there had been a Redemption, there had
been no room for Sanctification; for God would never have reimplanted his Image
of Holiness in a Creature left under the eternal stroke of his Justice, nor
have plucked away the spot of Sin there, where the guilt of Sin is left behind.
Now albeit it is a most sure Rule, that Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa, yet among Divines Creation is in a sort peculiarized to the Father as
the first, Redemption to the Son as the second, and Sanctification to the
Spirit as the third Person in the Glorious Trinity. Thus in these three goings
forth of God, each person in the Trinity has his special Shine, and that in
the very Order of his Subsistence; wherefore it was very congruous that the
Son, of all the Persons in the Trinity, should be out Redeemer.

3. Jus Conjunctionis; he that redeems a Captive must be Persona conjunct a
with him, and so was Christ with us in a threefold respect.

1. Conjunctione naturali, he was our Goel, Isai. 59. 20. that is, our next
kinsman by his Incarnation, and our Redeemer by his Passion; he assumed our
Nature into himself that he might redeem us; (...) was made (...), the great
God a sucking Child; regens Sydera, yet sugens Ubera, he that ruled the Stars
sucked the Breasts. The word was made flesh, Joh. 1. 14. and a strange making
it was; all other Creations are (as it were) extra Deum, but here was a
Creation in the very person of God. The glorious Trinity in the very instant of
drawing the Humane Nature exnihilo interweaved it with the Person of the Son,
so that it never was any where but there; all other Creations stand under the
Roof of Providence and Preservation, but here the Humane Nature is an Inmate in
the very same Person with the Divine: all other Creatures have their proper
suitable seats and Ubi's in the Sphere of Nature, but here is the Sackcloth of an
Humane Body cast upon, and the Rushcandle of a Reasonable soul lighted up in
the Sun it self. The glorious Son of God espoused Flesh and Blood, and the
Bridechamber (where the knot was tied) was the Virgins Womb; there was he made
of a Woman, consubstantial with us as to his Humanity, who was consubstantial
with the Father as to his Divinity. O how great is this Mystery, God manifest
in the flesh! O Domine! quam admirabile nomen tuum! non Cypr. de Nativ. Christi.
modo mundi hujus staturam admiror, non stabilitatem Terrae, non Lunae defectum
and incrementum, non Solemn semper integrum and laborem ejus perpetuum: Miror
Deum in utero Virginis, miror Omnipotentem in cunabulis, miror quomodo Verbo
Dei caro adhaeserit, quomodo incorporeus Deus corporis nostri tegumentum
induerit; in caeteris aliquae satisfaciant rations, hic solus me complectitur
stupor. God never came so near to us as in this wonderful Conjunction. In the
Creatures we see God above us, in the Law we see God against us; but here we
see Immanuel, God with us: he is one with us by a natural Conjunction, but
that is not all; for being in our Nature he became one with us

2. Conjunctione Legali, he was our Sponsor or Surety, and so in Law one person
with us; his Style is (...), Surety of the covenant, Heb. 7. 22. and the
Covenant being mutual on both parts, from God to Man and from Man to God, he is
in both respects a Surety of it; a Surety on God's part that his Promises
should be performed to us, and a Surety on our parts that our Debts should be
paid to God. We were double Debtors to God; as Rational Creatures we owed
perfect Obedience, and as Sinful Creatures we owed eternal Sufferings; the
first is a debt to God's Holiness, and the second to his Justice. Now Jesus
Christ was our Surety for both, a Surety to fulfill all Righteousness for us,
and the Fidejussorial Bond which he gave for this was his Circumcision; for he
had no sinful flesh to be cut off, but would become a debtor to the whole Law
for us; and in Circumcision he signed security for it with his own Blood: and
also a Surety to take our Sins on him. Hence the Righteous God (who cannot but
judge according to truth) charged our iniquities upon him, Isai. 53. 6. and he
as our Surety accepted the charge, and those words, my sins are not hid from
thee, Psalm. 69. 5. are (as St. Jorom thinks) spoken ex persona Christi, for he
was though not commissor, yet susceptor delictorum; our Flesh and Blood was
taken into his Divine Person, and our Sins (which could by no means enter in
there) were yet cast upon him, and being cast upon him, God exacted
satisfaction of him, (...) it was exacted and he answered, Isai. 53. 7.
Satisfaction was exacted from him as our Surety, and he answered for us; and
what was his Answer? Why, I Will lay down my Life, I Will pour out my Soul, says
he; let all the Wrath due to those Sins be squeezed into one Cup and I Will drink
it up to the bottom; let the Fire of God's Anger drop down from Heaven, and
I Will be the Paschal Lamb roasted in it. Thus Jesus Christ was a Surety, nay,
(...), the noblest of Sureties, putting his Soul in our Souls stead, to bear
our Sins and God's Wrath; and for this very purpose was he one with us in
Nature that he might be one with us in Law too. But neither is this all, for
both these Conjunctions are crowned with a third, and so he is one with us

3. Conjunctione Mystica, Christ is the Head, and the Church is the Body, and
both together make up one mystical Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. the Head in Heaven,
and the Body on Earth; and the spiritual Continuity between both is one and the
same holy Spirit, which is on the Head without measure, and on the Members
according to measure. If the Jew ask us where is Christ? we can truly answer,
He is at the right hand of God in Heaven; and on Earth, loc here is Christ and
there is Christ living and breathing in his Saints; every Saint is a piece of
him, and all together are his fullness, Ephesians. 1. 23. so that he does not count
himself complete without them. This Conjunction is so near and full of
spiritual Sense, that a poor Member cannot suffer on Earth, but instantly the
Head in Heaven cries out of Persecution, Acts 9. 4. and even the suffering
Member reckons himself sitting in Heaven, as long as his Head is there, Ephesians. 2.
6.

Thus our Redeemer comes very near unto us in a threefold Conjunction, and in
each Conjunction there is a rare Condescension. In the first he came down into
our Natures by a stupendous Incarnation, in the second he came down into our
Hell by a Fidejussorial Passion, in the third he comes down into our Hearts by
the Spirits Inhabitation; the first opens a way to the second, the second is
the purchase of the third, and the third, as in design, was a Motive to, and,
as in existence, is a Crown upon the Work of Redemption.

4. Having considered the Redeemer, I pass on to the Price; and here I shall
reduce all to three Questions.

1. What this Price is? 2. What manner of Price it is? 3. For whom it was paid?
1. What this Price is? and this is the Humane Nature of Christ, as subjected
to the Law. When the Son of God came forth to redeem us, he was made of a
woman, made under the Law, to redeem us that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5.
Made of a Woman, there is his humane Nature; made under the Law, there is his
subjection to the Law, and the End of all is our Redemption: Christ through the
eternal Spirit offered up himself to God, Heb. 9. 14. and that in a way fully
answering the demands of the Law. The Law demanded of the Captives two things;
perfect Obedience from them as rational Creatures, and penal Suffering from
them as sinful Creatures; and Christ gave up his Humane Nature a price both
ways, in doing and in suffering; he gave himself, that is, his humane Nature
for us an offering and a sacrifice, Ephesians. 5. 2. an Offering in his Active
Obedience, and a Sacrifice in his Passive, and both these together were the
entire Price of our Redemption.

1. Christ gave up himself in his Active Obedience. That holy thing, his humane
Nature, as soon as it came out into the World, fell a breathing forth of
Holiness, burning with zeal for God, melting in compassions over Men, bowing it
self down in miraculous humility, and in a rape of love doing all the Will of
God, even to the last gasp upon the Cross. His thoughts were all births of
Holiness, his words oracles of Truth, his works a fulfilling all Righteousness,
and his meat and drink was to do his Father's Will: He ascended up to the top
or pinnacle of the Moral Law in the sweetest strains of Love, and fetched about
the breadth or vast compass of it in the largeness of his Obedience, and passed
down to the very hemm or border of it in the lowness of his Humility. Rather
than fail, he would be subject to his own Creature, Luke 2. 51. pay tribute to
his own Subject, Matthew. 17. 27. and wash his Disciples feet with those very
hands which had all the power in Heaven and Earth in them, Joh. 13. 3, 4, 5.
Nay, he stooped down as low as the fringe of the Ceremonial Law; his sinless
flesh was circumcised, Luke 2. 21. his holy Mother purified, Luke 2. 22. the
true Passover kept the typical one, Matthew. 26. 20, 21. and so obedientially
stood under his own shadow. In every respect he was obedient unto death: His
Obedience was a fair Commentary on the whole Law, written in glorious
Characters of Holiness and Righteousness all his life long, and at his death
clasped and sealed up with his precious Blood. Thus the Mandatory part of the
Law was answered; now for the Minatory.

2. He gave up himself in his passive obedience, he was in some sense crucified
in the womb, in that he was made of his creature; and coming forth into the
world, all his life was a perpetual passion. The Gospel shows us the immense
God in swaddling clouts, the builder of all things working as a Carpenter, the
holy one hurried up and down by a tempting Devil, the filler of all things
hungry, the fountain of living water thirsty, the power of God weary, the
eternal joy of the Father weeping, the owner of all things extreme poor; and
not knowing where to lay his head in his own world. Thus as a man of sorrows he
passes on toward his Cross; one of his own Apostles betraying him, another
denying him, the rest forsaking him, the chief Priests bloodily conspiring
against him, false witnesses unjustly accusing him, the tumultuous rabble
crying out, crucify, crucify, and Pilate first confessing his innocence, and
then condemning his person. And now arriving at his Cross, sorrows break in
upon every part, his head raked with thorns, his face besmeared with spittle,
his eyes afflicted with the tears of friends, his ears filled with the
blasphemies of enemies, his lips of grace wet with vinegar and gall, his hands
and feet nailed to the Cross, and his sacred body hanging between thieves,
racked and tortured to death in a Golgotha of stench and rottenness. But all
this is but the outside of his passion; at the same time hell was let loose,
and from thence the Devils as so many roaring Lions came with open mouth to
devour him, and (which is much more) Heaven thundered over his head, and the
righteous God, as angry as our sins could make him, fell a smiting of him,
Isai. 53. 4. and smote him in his Soul too, verse 10. and with smiting wounded
and bruised him, verse 5. the smart and anguish whereof was so great that he
was afraid, Hebr: 5. 7. and his fear was so high, that he began (...) to faint
away, and (...), to be sore amazed, Mark 14. 33. and in this amazement, the
Eclipse was so dark, that he was (...) surrounded with sorrows even unto death,
verse 34. and in this spiritual Siege, he falls a praying, Father if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26. 39. and in prayer he sinks into an agnony. His soul became
like that poor ship, that fell into a place where two seas met, the forepart
sticking fast, and remaining unmovable, and the hinderpart broken with the
violence of the waves, Acts 27. 41. Even so here were two seas met, a sea of
wrath storming against him as our Surety, and a sea of love breathing in him
after our Redemption: His humane will as nature shrunk at the sense of Gods
wrath, but as reason it steadfastly pointed at the work of our Salvation.
Redemption stood fast and unmovable in his heart, yet the same heart (though
without the least spot of sinful contrariety) was broken with the waves of
amazing horrors, and so dreadful was this agony, that it cast this grand Hero
(the strength of all the Martyrs) into a bloody sweat, there fell from him
great drops of blood, Luke 22. 44. The sins of the world ascending up as a vast
cloud before Gods Tribunal, now came dashing down upon him in an horrible
tempest of incomprehensible wrath, and this makes him cry, nay (as the Psalmist
has it Psalm. 22. 1.) roar out upon the Cross, My God! my God! Why have thou
forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. One would have thought at the first blush, that the
humane nature had been dropped out of his divine person; but though that were
not, yet the sense of Gods favor was for a time suspended from his humane
nature. Never was sorrow like to his sorrow. In all the legal sacrifices there
was destruction rei oblatae, and all those destructions were summed up in his
sufferings. As the corn he was bruised, as the wine and oil poured out, as the
Lamb slain and roasted in the fire of Gods wrath, and as the scapegoat driven
into the dismal wilderness of desertion. He did as it were sport in Creation*
but in Redemption he sweats, suffers, bleeds and dies.

Now his humane nature thus made under the Law, both in his active and passive
obedience, is the complete and integral price of our Redemption; I say, both in
his active and passive obedience, for these were not sundred either in
existence or merit.

1. Not in existence; for there was passion in his actions, and action in his
passions: from first to last, his obedience was with suffering, and his
suffering with obedience. There was passion in his actions; 'twas a great
suffering for the great Lawgiver to be under the Law, for the Lord of the
Sabbath to observe it. The noblest and purest piece of the Law is the knowing
and loving of God, and yet even in that there was a great suffering; for he who
eternally knew the Father in an infinity of light, now knew him as it were by
candlelight in a finite reason; he who eternally embraced the Father in an
infinity of love, now loved him in the narrow compass of a finite will; and
therefore even in these (...) he emptied himself as the Apostle speaks, Phil.
2. 7. And on the other side, there was action in his passion; his passions were
with knowledge, he shut not his eyes when he drunk off the cup of wrath; his
passions were free will offerings, Lo I come, says he, to do thy will O God,
Hebr. 10. 7. Gods will was, that he should suffer, and his will runs before,
and as it it were anticipates his sufferings, Lo, I come: nay, in his passage
he breaks out (...), How am I straightened till it be accomplished? Luke 12. 50.
He was as it were in pangs of forward obedience to be baptized in his own
blood, and posted on toward an agony of wrath in an agony of love; and when he
arrived at his extremest sufferings, his signal willingness turned his
suffering into doing, and his Cross into a triumphant Chariot, he triumphed in
it, says the Apostle, Col. 2. 15. even there his obedience and love rode in
triumph; triumphant obedience spread out his hands upon the Cross, and
triumphant love opened his naked heart to the wrath of God. His Soul was not
snatched away but poured out, Isai. 53. 12. his life was not merely taken away,
but laid down, Joh. 10. 18. He was willing to be forsaken of God himself for a
time, that thereby he might fulfill the will of God; and before the fire of Gods
wrath could fall on him, he was all in a flame with his own love. Thus the
active and passive obedience of Christ were not severed in their existence; but
like his seamless coat were interwoven from the top throughout even to his last
gasp upon the Cross.

2. Neither were these severed in merit; Christ is not so to be divided as if
his sufferings apart by themselves were the price of Remission, and his
righteousness apart by it self the price of Glory. If the active obedience of
Christ apart make us perfectly righteous, where is the glory of the passive? if
the passive obedience of Christ apart purchase all for us, where is the glory
of the active? But if both together make up the total sum, the glory of both is
preserved. Our Redeemer was made under the Law that he might redeem us; now as
he was under the whole Law as to the command, and as to the curse of it, so his
active and passive obedience adequately answering both, is the entire price of
our Redemption.

But here I am obviated by 2 Objections.

1. Says the Socinian, there is no price at all.

2. Say some of our Divines, the passive obedience of Christ is all the price*
and the active no part at all of it.

As to the first, I shall not need spend many words about it, because the
Scripture is so pregnant in it, (...), ye are bought with a price says S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and this price (as S. Peter tells us) is not corruptible
things as Silver and Gold, but the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
a transcendent price able to purchase as much, nay far more in the spiritual
world, than silver and gold can in the material; and it is not merely a price of
emption, but of Redemption: Christ gave his life, (...), a price of Redemption,
Matthew. 20. 28. and which is more emphatical, he gave himself (...), a
counterprice of Redemption, 1 Timothy 2. 6. doing and suffering in the room of
poor captives; and this price was paid into the right hand, viz. into Gods,
Ephesians. 5. 2. and hence issues out, (...) proper Redemption, the prison doors are
opened* and the poor captives may go out (...) free indeed, John 8. 36. That
then there is a price is as clear in Scripture, as if it were written with a
Sunbeam; But yet the Socinian shuts his eyes, and cries out, all is but a
Metaphor. God redeemed (says he) Israel Racov. Catech. de mort^ Christ.
out of Egypt, and Moses is called (...), Acts 7. 35. and yet there was no
price at all paid. But alas! that ever such vain consequences should drop from
the masters of Reason; Redemption in some Scriptures is metaphorical, therefore
it is so in all; Moses was but a naked deliverer, therefore Christ is not a
proper Redeemer; Moses's Redemption was a Redemption by power only, therefore
Chists Redemption is no Redemption by price; Redemption out of the hands of an
unjust Pharaoh was without price, therefore Redemption out of the hands of a
righteous God was so too. But on the other side how cogent is the argument? If
Moses paying down no price was but a naked deliverer, then Christ paying down
one was a proper Redeemer. If I believe that to be but a Metaphorical
Redemption, because the Scriptures speak of no Price paid for the same; pari
ratione I must believe this to be a proper Redemption, because the Scriptures
tell us of a Price. If there must be Power to redeem a Captive from humane
Oppression, surely theremust be a Price to redeem him from divine Justice. We
were all as Captives locked up under the Curse of the Law and Wrath of God, and
Christ was (...) and (...), both a Redeemer and a Ransom for us: Wherefore
concluding that there was a Price, I pass on.

2. As to the second Objection, I conceive that the Active and Passive
Obedience of Christ do both together make up the perfect Price of our
Redemption; I say, both together. The Active is part of the Sum: And this I
shall demonstrate

1. In general by those Scriptures which set out the Managery of Redemption.
Long before our Savior Christ came about it, the Father calls him his servant,
Isai. 42. 1. and one part of his service was his Active Obedience; and just at
his entrance into the World he expresses himself, Lo I come to do thy will, O
God, Heb. 10. 7. He came in his Incarnation, his errand was Redemption, and the
way to compass it was by doing God's Will, and that he did partly in his Active
Obedience; being come, his state was subjection, he was made under the Law to
redeem us, Gal. 4. 4, 5. His humane Nature was so far a Price as 'twas made
under the Law in part as to his Active Obedience; this being his state, his ear
was bored, Psalm. 40. 6. which the Apostle renders, a body was prepared, Heb.
10. 5. His humane Nature was (as I may so say) all Ear to the Commands of God,
among which one was that he should fulfill Active Obedience; this Obedience he
fulfilled all along even unto Death, nay, and in Death: and by this entire
Obedience accomplished in doing and suffering we are made righteous, Romans 5.
19. and so righteous, that the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us,
Romans 8. 4. and so fulfilled, that the Law has its end, Romans 10. 4. and this so
accurately, that one jot or tittle does not pass from the Law but all is
fulfilled, Matthew. 5. 18. In all which series of Scriptures his Active Obedience
concurrs as part of the Price.

2. In particular, I evince this Truth by three Reasons.

1. Because he fulfilled his Active Obedience not merely for himself, but
mainly for us; he was our Surety, and so received the Obligation of Obedience
on himself. Hence he would be baptized, because it was (...), it became him to
fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. it became him, not as for himself, for he
was the spotless Lamb, and needed no Baptism at all, he could baptize with the
holy Ghost, and needed no Water Baptism; but it became him as our Surety, to be
subject to Gods command even in this. And so in all other his Active Obedience:
For the impletion of the Law was by God translated upon him: What the Law could
not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 3, 4. Here all the
Obligations of the Law are cast upon Christ as our Surety; we could not
satisfy for our sins, Christ did it; we could not fulfill Righteousness, Christ
did it. But you will say, this place only concerns his Passive Obedience; for it
speaks of condemning Sin, and that was done in his Passive only. I answer, that
this place extends to all Christ's Obedience, Active as well as Passive, and
this seems clear by the first and last part of the words compared together: the
first are, What the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh; and
what was that? Could it not curse the Sinner? Yes undoubtedly; And here the
flesh, that is, Sin was the strength of the Law; but for want of perfect
Obedience, it could not give life, Gal. 3. 21. and here the flesh, that is, Sin
was the weakness of the Law. Now Christ (the Power of God) came to supply this
weakness: but how does he do it? The latter words tell us, Sin was condemned in
his flesh, that is, his humane Nature; and it was condemned there not only by
his Passive Obedience, but by his Active too. Every Act thereof did as it were
sit in judgment on Sin; even as every knock of Noah on the Ark condemned the
old World: Sin was so condemned, that (...), the righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in us, the Law has its rightful demands, one whereof is perfect
Obedience; the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, that is, for us, in
our stead and room: Wherefore Christ's Active Obedience being fidejussorial and
on our behalf, must needs be part of the Price. But you will say, Christ's Active
Obedience was not fidejussorial, for it was the debt of his humane Nature, as a
rational Creature; and therefore being due as for himself, it could not be paid
down as for us. I answer, that Christ's humane Nature was but a Creature, and
so its Will could not possibly be supreme, but indispensably subject to the
Will of God; yet nevertheless his Active Obedience was paid down for us, and
was part of the Price; and this will appear if we view it in these four
particulars.

1. As to the Spring of it, 'twas freedom, his humane Nature was necessarily
subject to the Will of God, but it was freely assumed into the Person of God;
Christ as Man was bound to the Law, but as God was not bound to become Man. As
he freely took a Body with its circumscriptive dimensions, so he freely took a
Soul with those legal Obligations, which are as it were the moral
Circumscriptions of it; he freely assumed the Humanity, and with it all
incident Duty.

2. As to the Circumstances of it, 'twas unobliged. Christ was bound by the Law
as Man; but he was not bound to perform it in such a debased manner, for such a
space of Time, in such a place as Earth, unless as our Surety; for he might
have carried up the humane Nature into Heaven in the first instant of its
Assumption.

3. As to the end of it, 'twas for us, it points at the same end with the
humane Nature to which it was incident: As he was made Man for us; to us a Son
is born, Isai. 1. 9. 6. so his Active Obedience was for us. Hence the Apostle
joins both these together; he was made of a woman, made under the Law, and then
superadds as the end common to both, that he might redeem us, Gal. 4. 4, 5.

4. As to the Value of it 'twas infinite; a finite Righteousness may serve for
its single performer, but Christ's Righteousness stamped with his Deity amounts
to an infinite Sum, enough for himself and a World besides. Hence the very same
Righteousness is Christ's, Romans 5. 18. and ours too, 1 Cor. 1. 30. St. Bernard
sweetly expresses it. Domine, memorabor Justitiae tuae solius ipsa Super Cant.
Sermon. 61.
est enim and mea, nempe factus es mihi tu justitia a Deo; nunquid mihi
verendum, ne non una ambobus sufficiat? Non est pallium breve, quod non possit
operire duos; Justitia tua in aeternum, me and te pariter operiet, quia
largiter larga and aeterna Justitia. To sum up all in one word; though Christ
as Man were under the Law, yet his active Obedience performed in an humane
Nature freely assumed, and in a way as to that Nature unobliged perioding in
our Redemption, and elevated into a kind of Infinity by his Deity, was paid
down for us, and was part of the Price.

2. Because Christ's whole Obedience, Active as well as Passive, being
fulfilled for us makes us righteous before God: famous is that place, Romans 5.
19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous. But you will say, the Passive Obedience is only
meant there; but if so, why does the Apostle oppose it to Adam's Actual
Disobedience? and why does he say Obedience in general? and when he says so,
who may pare off ought, and say, it was not all but some? Why does he call it
Christ's righteousness, Ver. 18? and where are his Sufferings alone so styled
in Scripture? or what is so properly such as his Active Obedience? Nay further,
he speaks of such a Righteousness as brings justification of life, Ver. 18. The
Promise of life was, Do this and live, and Christ's Active Obedience fully
answered the terms of it; wherefore Christ's Active Obedience is within this
Text, and jointly with the Passive makes us righteous, and consequently is part
of the Price. But here it will be objected, That if Christ obeyed the Law for
us, so as to make us righteous, then we need not obey it in our own Persons: To
which I answer two things.

1. This Argument presses as much upon those that are for his Passive Obedience
only, as upon those that are for his Active also; for they assert that the
Passive alone purges away all sin, as well of Omission as Commission, and
consequently makes us as Righteous before God, as if we had done all and
omitted nothing; and then by their Principles, what need we obey in our own
persons? But

2. That Christ obeyed for us, and therefore we need not obey, is as vain a
Consequence as to say, Christ died for us, and therefore we should not die. But
the different Ends reconcile all: Christ died that there might be Satisfaction
for Sin as to the Guilt of it, and we die that there may be a Destruction of
Sin as to the Being of it: Also Christ obeyed that our Justification might be
effected, and we obey that our Sanctification may be promoted; Christ obeyed
that we might reign in life, and we obey that we may be more and more meet for
it. Nay, Christ obeyed that we might obey; for one fruit of Redemption was,
that we might be a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. and we
obey that his Obedience may not be in vain as to us; for he is the author of
eternal redemption to them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. Hence it appears that
Christ's Obedience and ours may as well consist together as Justification and
Sanctification, Life and the way to it, Redemption and the fruit thereof.

3. Because the Price of our Redemption is a thing of superexcellent fullness
and superimaginable glory, redeeming Captives in a way completive and
perfective of the Law broken by them. Do we make void the Law by Faith, or by
its Object our Redeemer and Redemption? Nay, we establish the Law, Romans 3. 31.
When Man was in Innocence, the Royal Law sat in Glory commanding upon its
Throne, holding forth in its right hand a Crown of Life in the Promise, and in
its left a Sword of Vengeance in the Threatening: But when Monstrous Sin entered
into the World, the very Throne of the Law seemed to shake, and the Crown in
its right hand to wither, only the Sword was glittering and fiery in the left,
the Minatory part of the Law stood fast captivating and cursing the Sinner; but
the Mandatory and Promissory parts thereof fell a trembling and staggering, as
if their natural and primary End, viz. perfect Obedience and all the ensuing
Bliss were utterly lost. Now Jesus Christ our wonderful Redeemer redeemed us in
such a way as that he established the Law in every respect; by his Active
Obedience he fastened and newpinned the very Throne of the Law, and made the
old Promise to bud again with Life; and in his Passive Obedience the fiery
Sword of God's wrath did awake against him, Zach. 13. 7. and smote and wounded
him for our iniquities; he paid down his humane Nature in doing and suffering,
and what could the Law desire of him more? Thus Jesus Christ became the end,
the fullness, the perfection of the Law, Romans 10. 4. But if the Passive
Obedience of Christ be only the Price, then indeed the Curse or Wrath, which is
in the left hand of the Law, and which comes accidentally by sin, is satisfied:
But where is the primary and natural end of the Law? Where is that perfect
Obedience which is in the right hand and right eye of the Law? You Will say, it is
in the Person of Christ our Redeemer: But how is it there? the Apostle says,
that Christ is the end of the Law to the believer; now if it be there only
personally as for himself, then as to that he is the end of the Law only for
himself; but if it be there also fide jussorially as for us, then it is part of
the Price, and so he is the end of the Law to us also. But you will reply, that
though Christ's Active Obedience be no part of the Price, yet his Passive
suffices; for that takes away Sin and Death from us, and Sin being removed,
Righteousness follows, and Death being removed, Life follows; and so the Law
has its end. I answer; I might deny these consequences, for Adam in Innocence
was free from Sin and Death, yet in that state had neither all the
Righteousness performable, nor all the Life attainable by him. But if I admit,
that upon the remotion of Sin and Death Righteousness and Life do follow, yet
these may follow from Christ's whole Obedience as their total Principle, and
not only from the Passive. If they follow from the Passive only, the Glory of
Redemption is much darkened; for who sees not that the Law is not, nor cannot be
so completely accomplished by the mere Sufferings of Christ, as if over and
besides those he also performed perfect Obedience for us? Who sees not more
Glory shining out when perfect Righteousness is a part of the Price, than if it
be only an effect thereof issuing by consequential resultance from the remotion
of Sin? Wherefore the Messiah is set out to us in the Prophet not only as
making an end of sin, but as bringing in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24.
and in the Evangelist, not only as giving his life, but as fulfilling all
righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15. and in the Apostle, not only as made sin, but as
made righteousness too, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and thus the Law has its perfect
accomplishment by our Redeemer. Wherefore concluding that the humane Nature of
Christ paid down in his Active and Passive Obedience is the entire and integral
price of our Redemption, I pass on to the second Quaere,

2. What manner of Price this is? and this I shall open in three things.

1. It Is a Price Redemptive from Evil. 2. It Is a Price Procurative of Good. 3.
It Is a Price Sufficient for both.
1. It Is a Price Redemptive from Evil, even from all the evils of our
Captivity, viz. the Chains of Sin, the bloody Jailer Satan, and the Prison of
Wrath; our great Redeemer by laying down this price has hroke off our Chains,
vanquished the Jailer, and opened the Prison-doors for us; only here is an
observable difference: for

1. As to the Guilt of Sin and the Wrath of God this Price is redemptive in a
more immediate way by it self.

2. As to the stain of Sin, the power of Sin, and the tyranny of Satan, this
Price is redemptive in a consequential way by procuring the holy Spirit for us.

1. This Price is Redemptive from the Guilt of Sin and Wrath of God; and this
in a more immediate way by it self. Now albeit the entire Price concur herein,
yet because as to this there is a special relucency in some parts thereof, I
shall only insist on five things, viz.

1. Our Sins were laid upon Christ. 2. He suffered the same punishment (for the
main) that was due for these Sins. 3. He suffered it in our stead. 4. Suffering
in our stead, he satisfied God's Vindictive Justice and Minatory Law. 5. These
satisfied, God is reconciled.
1. Our sins were laid upon Christ. Whilst the Chains are upon the Captive,
Captivity is unavoidable; whilst Sin is on the Sinner, Redemption is
impossible; God therefore gave Sin a remove from its proper Ubi, I will remove
iniquity in one day, says he, Zech. 3. 9. that is, in the day of the Messiah,
Ver. 8. But how far will he remove it? The Psalmist tells us, as far as the
East is from the West, Psalm. 103. 12. and so he did, he removed it from us, who
were in occasu Adami, as far as Christ, who is oriens Sol Justitiae; by this
remove all our sins met upon him, as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 53. 6. Never
such a concourse of Sins as here, Sins of all weights, Pence and Talents; Sins
of all magnitudes, Gnats and Camels; Sins of various degrees, Frailties and
Presumptions; Sins of vast distances as far remote in place as the parts and
quarters of the Earth, and in time as the Morning and Evening of the World met
all together upon him; he is the Lamb of God that takes or bears away the sin
of the world, Joh. 1. 29. he says not Sins, but Sin; because all the Sins of
the World were as it were made up into one burden, and so laid upon him. Sins
past were present to him; for there was a (...), a Transmission of them unto
him, Romans 3. 25. there was indeed an (...), a Remission, as to the faithful,
but a (...), a Transmission as to the Surety; Sins future were all one to him
as if already existent, all our Sins met upon him. Hence he cries out, My
iniquities have taken hold upon me, Psalm. 40. 12. My iniquities, a strange word
to drop from the holy one of God; but the Apostle clears it, God made him for
us to be sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. there was no Sin in him by Inhesion, but God made
him Sin by Imputation; not only a Sacrifice for Sin (which yet includes that
imputation) but Sin it self: the double Antithesis in the Text carries it this
way; he was made that Sin he knew not, and that was Sin it self; he was made
that Sin which is opsite to Righteousness, and that was Sin it self. Hence
Luther brings in the Father casting all our Sins on him with these words; Tu
sis Petrus ille negator, Paulus ille persecutor, David Com. in Galat. cap. 3.
ille adulter, peccator ille in paradiso, latro ille in cruce, person a illa
quae fecerit omnium hominum peccata, all our sins were imputed unto him. But
you will say, How can these things be? Can the righteous God, who judges according
to truth, impute Sin to his holy one? I answer; As there are in the Apostle two
distinct Comings of Christ; in the first he bore our sins, in the second he
appears (...), without sin, Heb. 9. 28. So in his first coming he sustained two
distinct persons, his own and ours: as he was in his own person, he was without
sin; but as he was our Surety and sustained our persons, so our Sins were
imputed to him, and imputed to him according to truth, because he was such. The
holy One was righteously made sin, because first he was a Surety for sinners; a
World of Sins was justly cast on the innocent Lamb, because he stood in the
room of a World of sinners. In eadem persona Christi (says Luther)
congrediuntur illa duo, summum and maximum peccatum, and summa and maxima
justitia; this is one of the wonders in Theology. Reason and Philosophy can
show Sin in the sinner, but the sublimer Gospel shows Sin on a spotless Lamb;
here darkness seized upon the Sun; here the abomination of iniquity stood where
it ought not; I say, where it ought not, because upon the holy place; yet
withal where it ought, because of an holy Imputation. God can by no means clear
the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. that is, the guilty remaining such, therefore he first
translated the guilt upon Christ, and then he justifies the ungodly through
him, Romans 4. 5. Oh the glory of the divine Will! Its Purity cannot but hate
Sin, yet its Power removes it; its Justice cannot but punish Sin, yet its Mercy
translates it from the Sinner to the Surety, that it may be condemned there
where it was never committed, even in the flesh of Christ, Romans 8. 3.

2. Our Sins being laid on him, he suffered the same punishment (for the main)
that was due to us for them; for how does the Scripture express the punishment
of Sin? It Is death, Genesis 2. 17. and he died for us; it is the second death, Rev.
20. 14. or death unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. and he suffered deaths, Isai. 53. 9.
not the death of the Body only, but all the deaths in moriendo morieris, as far
as his holy Humanity was capable thereof; it is wrath, Romans 1. 18. and he was
(...), a man set in the stroke of Gods wrath, as the Septuagint has it, Isai.
53. 3. it is a curse, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and he was made a curse, Gal. 3. 13. not
only a ceremonial but a real Curse, even that which he redeems us from. Tu
Christ (says Luther) es peccatum meum and maledictum meum, seu potius ego sum
peccatum tuum and maledictum tuum; it is hell, Psalm. 9. 17. and he descended
thither; though not by a local Motion, yet by an immense Passion, his Soul
traveling under the wrath of God. He began to descend into Hell, when he sweat
drops of Blood, and he descended yet further into it when he cried out, My God,
my God! why have thou forsaken me? There are two Essentials of punishment in
Hell, poena sensus and poena damni, and he suffered both: when the fire of
God's Wrath melted him into a bloody sweat, there was poena sensus; and when
the great Eclipse of God's Favor made him cry out of forsaking, there was
poenadamni. Christ suffered the same punishment (for the main) which we should
have suffered; the chief change was in the Person, the just suffering for the
unjust, the Surety for the Sinner. But you will say, Christ did not suffer the
same punishment, for he neither suffered eternal Death, nor yet the Worm of
Conscience.

As to that of eternal Death I answer by two Distinctions.

1. In eternal Death we must distinguish between the Immensity of the
Sufferings and the Duration; the Immensity is essential to it, but the Duration
is but mor a in Esse and accidental. Christ suffered eternal Death as to the
Immensity of his Sufferings, though not as to the Duration of them; he paid
down the idem, as to Essentials of punishment, and the tantundem as to the
Accidentals; what was wanting in the Duration of his Sufferings, was more than
compensated by the Dignity of his Person: for it was far more for God to suffer
for a moment, than for all Creatures to suffer to Eternity.

2. We must distinguish between punishment as it stands in the Law absolutely,
and punishment as it stands there in relation to a finite Creature, which
cannot at once admit a punishment commensurate to its offense; and so must ever
suffer, because it cannot satisfy to Eternity. Punishment as it stands in the
Law absolutely, is Death; punishment as it stands there in relation to a finite
Creature, is eternal Death: the first was really suffered by Christ, and the
second could not be justly exacted of him; for he paid down the whole sum of
Sufferings all at once, and so swallowed up Death in victory.

As to that of the Worm; I answer, the Worm attends not Sin imputed but Sin
inherent, it is bred out of the putrefaction of Conscience, and that
putrefaction is from the in-being of Sin. Now Christ being withot spot,
suffered punishment not as it follows Sin inherent, but as it follows Sin
imputed; and so he suffered the same punishment (for the main) as was due to us.

3. Christ suffered this punishment in our stead, he died (...), for us, Romans
5. 8. and which is more emphatical, (...), in stead of many, Matthew. 20. 28. the
Particle (...) does sometimes in Scripture signify only the utility or benefit
of another, but (...) properly imports a Subrogation or Substitution of one in
the Room of another; and so Christ as our Surety died in our room or stead.
Hence the Apostle argues thus; If one died for all, (...), then all died, 2
Cor. 5. 15. all died in the death of one, in as much as that one died as the
Surety of all. Hence our Sins were condemned in his flesh, Romans 8. 3. and so
condemned there, that upon Gospel terms they are remitted to us. But unless he
had stood in our room, divine Justice could neither have adjudged him to
punishment, nor yet have admitted us to an absolution from Sin.

4. Suffering thus in our stead, he satisfied both God's vindictive Justice and
minatory Law.

1. He satisfied God's vindictive Justice. God is a righteous God, a God that
loves righteousness and hates iniquity; nay, he so perfectly hates it, that
his pure eyes cannot look upon it; and his righteous hands cannot but punish
it, he will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. not unless his Justice
be satisfied, for he is a righteous judge, 2 Timothy 4. 8. so righteous, that he
cannot but do right, Genesis 18. 25. his judgment is righteous judgment, Romans 3.
8. and every sin must have a righteous recompense, Heb. 2. 2. and no wonder,
for Sin is an horrible Ataxy, and God will not inordinatum dimittere; the
subjection of a rational Creature to its Creator is indispensable. God whilst
God must be above, and the Creature whilst a Creature below; and this
dependence so far as it is broken off by Sin, must be salved up by punishment,
or else God loses his dominion over his Creature. This is that which the
Apostle calls (...), the righteousness of God, Romans 1. 32. and this is so
naturally in him, that the very Heathens knew it by the light of Nature. The
Viper upon Paul's hand made the Barbarians cry out of a (...), Acts 28. 4. Now
what does this vindictive Justice require? Not precisely that the Sinner
himself should be punished, for then Redemption should be impossible; but that
the Sin should be punished, and so it was in Christ; he for our debt was cast
into Prison, and paid every farthing of it. The damned in Hell pay a little and
a little, and can never satisfy, but he paid down the total sum of Sufferings
all at once; they are always striving with God's wrath, but he wrastled with it
and prevailed: Hence in Isai. 49. Ver. 3. he is called Israel a Prince with
God. His Sufferings were so satisfactory to divine Justice, that the pains of
death could not hold him, Acts 2. 24. neither could the Prison of Wrath detain
him, Isai. 53. 8. and all because there was (...), a redemption of
transgressions, Heb. 9. 15. that is, a compensation or satisfaction made to
divine Justice for them. I go to my Father (says he) and ye shall see me no
more, Joh. 16. 10. Justice did not stop him in his passage to Heaven; neither
did his Father send him back again to mend his work. You shall see me no more,
no more bleeding under the burden of Sin, no more paying down sufferings to
divine Justice, for all is discharged; and to assure us of it, God who received
the sum, pawns Heaven and Earth in mortgage that he will forgive our Sins
without any further satisfaction, Jer. 31. 34, 35, 36. By all which it appears
that Justice was fully satisfied.

But here 'twill be objected, That the innocent should suffer for the nocent is
unjust, and that which is such cannot satisfy Justice.

I answer; It Is unjust if the innocent suffer compulsorily, but not if he
suffer freely; it is unjust if the innocent sink under his sufferings, but not
if he be able to bear them; it is unjust if there be no good in his sufferings
commensurate to the evil, but not if the evil be exceeded by the subsequent
good; it is unjust if the innocent stand in no relation to the nocent for whom
he suffers, but not if he stand in relation to him. Suppose a natural relation;
Readiness Sons were hanged up for Readiness sins, 2 Samuel 21. 9. Suppose a political
relation; seventy thousand fall for David's sin, 2 Samuel 24. 15. which makes him
cry out, Lo! I have sinned, but these sheep what have they done? Suppose a
voluntary relation; Sureties must pay for their Principals, and that not only
in Moneymatters but in Capital punishments: thus the (...) engaged life for
life, which the Apostle seems to insinuate in that passage, Peradventure for a
good man some would even dare to die, Romans 5. 7. and why then may not Christ
who by all these ways is conjoined to us, naturally as a Man, legally as a
Surety, and mystically as a Head, justly suffer for us? Especially seeing there
was free Action in his Passion, victorious Strength under his Burden, and the
penal Evil crowned by such a grand Good as Redemption is, why may not he justly
suffer for us? The Scriptures are positive in it, Christ died for the ungodly,
Romans 5. 6: the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. and one for all, 2 Cor. 5.
14. Wherefore if humane Reason will not subscribe, it fights against God
himself.

2. He satisfied the Minatory Law; for this is no other than the voice of
vindictive Justice uttering Death and a Curse against Sinners, and to satisfy
this he died and died an accursed Death in their room. But you will say, though he
died for us, yet the Law is not satisfied, because it requires that the Sinner
himself should die, thou shall die the death, Genesis 2. 17. and cursed is he that
does not all the words of this Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. in which places [he and thou]
relate to the person of the Sinner; and therefore though Vindictive Justice as
in it self might have been satisfied with punishing Sin in another, yet the
Minatory Law (which is the voice of Justice) cannot be satisfied, unless the
punishment fall on the Sinner himself; and the reason is, because in this
Minatory Law the Veracity of God is engaged, which it was not before; now
Justice speaks out, which it did not before, and that which it speaks must be
true. For answer whereunto,

1. Some (as the Learned Grotius) say, that here was Dispensatio Legis, qua
Legis manentis obligatio circa quasdam personas tollitur: But I take it, that
God's Threatenings are indispensably Yea and Amen as well as his Promises; for
albeit God does not dare aliquod jus creaturae in his Threatenings, as he does
in his Promises, yet is he debtor sibi-ipsi in both, and not one jot or tittle
of either can fail, because of his infinite Veracity; God will not call back
his words of threatening, Isai. 31. 2. neither will he himself turn back from
them, Jer. 4. 28. his words stand surely for evil, Jer. 44. 29. That Threatening
that Nineveh should be destroyed, had a tacit Condition in it; which had it
been expressed, the Threatening would have run thus: It shall be destroyed
except it repent; therefore it repenting, there was a remotion of the Judgment,
according to the tenor of the Threatening, but no dispensatio Juris at all.
Wherefore

2. I answer that here God did interpret his Law (...) in an equitable way;
equity is nothing else but (...) a filling up of a general Law by a benign
interpretation in that part which was not precisely determinate. The divine
sanction was, the sinner shall die; but it was not precisely determinate, that
he should die in his own person; for then God's unalterable truth should have
barred out a Surety: neither was it precisely determinate, that he should die
in his Surety; for then the threatening should originally have been a promise,
and a promise unto sin, such as God never made: But the sanction was general,
the sinner shall die, and two interpretations lay before God; the first, that
the sinner shall die in his own person; the latter, that he shall die in his
surety; the first is (...), just severity; the latter is (...) condescending
mercy; in the first there is more of the sound of the law-letter; in the latter
more of the sounding of the Lawgivers bowels; the first is much like the first
delivery of the Law with thundrings and lightnings and devouring fire, Exodus
19. 16, 17, 18. the latter is like the second delivery of it with a
Proclamation of grace and goodness and pardoning mercy for thousands, Exodus 34.
6, 7. Now these two interpretations lying before God, he as the Supreme
Lawgiver in order to redemption interpreted his Law according to a merciful
equity, the sinner shall die, that is, in his surety Christ. Oh the immense
love of the Father and the Son! the Fathers love fills up the Law by a gracious
interpretation, and then the Sons love fulfils it by a perfect satisfaction;
mercy and truth are met together, mercy in a favorable construction of the
Law, and truth in the evident veracity of the Lawgiver; the person of the
sinner may be saved, and yet the truth of the threatening is salved, through
Christ's satisfaction, (...) we are abrogated from the Law, Romans 7. 6. and yet
we do not (...) abrogate the Law, but establish it, Romans 3. 31. because it is
fulfilled in Christ. Neither does this equitable interpretation suppose any
defect in the divine Law, as it does in humane Laws; for humane Laws are made
general for want of providence in men to forsee all particular cases which fall
out; but this Law was made general out of the perfection of providence in God,
that there might be room for a surety to come in and satisfy it. But you will
say, if God interpret the threatening in such an equitable way, the sinner shall
die in his surety, then no sinner is in a state of wrath here, nor can be
condemned in hell hereafter; for both these issue out from the first
interpretation, thou shall die in thine own person, and that is now waved by
the Judge. I answer, that God does not totally and absolutely either wave the
first rigorous interpretation; for the elect are under wrath till they believe
and repent, and the reprobate not believing and repenting are cast into hell,
and both by virtue of the first interpretation; but he waves the first and
makes the second interpretation in order to redemption, and only so far forth
as redemption requires it: Now what does that require? It requires that all
that embrace Christ should be saved from the death in the threatening, and
therefore thus far the first interpretation is waved and the second takes
place; but it requires not, that any person should either be out of a state of
wrath before faith, or be saved without faith, and therefore the equitable
interpretation does not go thus far, and so far as that goes not, the rigorous
interpretation takes place, because pro tanto it is consistent with redemption;
redemption is the end, and the all-wise God measures and proportions out the
equitable interpretation in such a way as serves unto it, and the rigorous
interpretation in such a way as stands with it. In a word, according to this
equitable interprepretation, Christ has so satisfied the threatening, as that
all believers shall be saved from it; yet this satisfaction hinders not, but
that the rigorous interpretation should abide upon unbelievers whilst such; for
whilst such, they embrace not that satisfaction, and therefore are justly
cursed by the Law till they receive the Gospel.

Fifthly, God's vindictive Justice and minatory Law being thus satisfied, he
becomes reconciled. There are two degrees of reconciliation; the first is that
whereby God is ready to receive men into grace and favor if they believe; the
second is that whereby God is actually reconciled to them upon their believing.
The Apostle mentions both these, Col. 1. 20, 21. for first he tells us, ver.
20. That God did reconcile all things to himself by the blood of his Cross, and
then it follows, ver. 21. Yet now has he reconciled you, you O believing
Colossians! All were reconciled in the first degree, and believers in the
second; the first was done all at once upon the Cross, and the second is yet
now a doing, and so will be till the Believers are all come in; therefore the
Apostle says, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.
19. Reconciling, which imports a continued Act, a carrying on the work of
Reconciliation from one degree to another by particular applications. Now both
these degrees of Reconciliation are wrought by the Death of Christ; the first
was wrought by it ipso facto, without it God would have breathed out nothing
but wrath, but through it he is ready to forgive, Psalm. 86. 5. As full of mercy
as he is, he could not forgive in a way opposite either to his Justice, which
in its nature calls for satisfaction for Sin, or to his Truth which in the Law
pronounces death on the Sinner; but Justice and Truth being satisfied by
Christ's death, he is ready to forgive. The mercy-seat was covered with a cloud
of incense, Levit. 16. 13. and the reason there rendered is very remarkable,
lest he that was before it should die. What, die before the Mercy-seat? Yes,
even there, unless the Merits of Christ be as a Cloud round about it. Mercy as
of it self alone would not save us, but every Sinner must have died before it,
had it not been surrounded with the Incense of Christ's Merits. God out of
Christ is a consuming Fire to Sinners, but in Christ he is reconciling them to
himself. The second is wrought by Christ's death as applied by Faith; therefore
it is called propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25. and both these
were typified by the sprinkling of the blood of the Sacrifice under the Law.
That blood was sprinkled on the mercy-seat, Levit. 16. 15. prefiguring the
first degree of Reconciliation by Christ's death in it self; and it was
sprinkled on the people, Exodus 24. 8. prefiguring the second degree of
Reconciliation by Christ's death as applied to us by Faith. But you will say, If
God be first angry, and then reconciled, and reconciled by degrees, there must
be a change in God and his Will, which cannot be admitted.

I answer, that Reconciliation is not an immanent Act but a transient, not so
properly abiding in God, as passing from him upon the Creature: As when the
Scripture says, the Wrath of God at such a time was kindled or arose, it is not
meant that the Will of God was novelly inflamed, but that the flame of wrath
then broke forth in transient effects from thence; so when it says, God is
reconciled, it imports not a cooling alteration in the Will of God, but a
gracious effluxion of Love breaking out from thence. As in punishment wrath
goes out from the Lord against sinners, Number. 16. 46. and is upon them, 2 Chronicles.
29. 8. So in reconciliation Love goes out from the Lord toward Believers and
is upon them; so that the change is not in God but in the Creature.
Proportionably to the nature of Reconciliation as a transient Act, Christ
reconcileth us unto God, not by making a new Will in God, but by doing his
Will; for so he himself says, when he came about the work, Lo! I come to do
thy will O God. God's Will as to this point may be considered under a double
notion; either as naturally pregnant with Vindictive Justice, and decretively
issuing out the Minatory Law, both requiring that Sin (if committed) should be
punished; or else as decreeing within it self the way and manner how this
Justice and Law should be satisfied by a Surety in order to the Redemption of
sinners. Now Christ perfectly fulfilled God's Will in all these respects; in
him our Sins were punished according to the exaction of Justice, and the
equitable interpretation of the Law, and that in such a way as was preordained
by God's Will for our Redemption. This Will being thus satisfied, God is truly
reconciled, not only (as the Socinian would have it) we reconciled to him, but
he to us: and this appears in three things.

1. In that Sin is not objected before God's Will as it would have been, had
not Christ satisfied; it would have been objected before it, as that just cause
for which God might, nay, according to the naturality of his Justice and
veracity of his Law must have punished us Sinners to all Eternity: But now it
is not so objected before it; for albeit there be an intrinsecal and
inseparable desert of wrath in the nature of it, yet now its obligation or
redundancy upon the Sinner appears not, because expiated in the Surety: this
the Apostle calls the reconciling of sin, Heb. 2. 17. Without Christ's death
Sin like a fury would have cried and clamoured for wrath and vengeance to be
poured down on the Sinner, but through his death Sin as one reconciled has
nothing to say against him, but that he may have Life and Salvation on
Gospel-terms.

2. In that the effects of wrath do not issue out from God's Will against the
Sinner as they would have done. God who is infinite Holiness and essential
Rectitude cannot but hate Sin, and in this hatred there is nothing less than a
velle punire; and from thence condign punishment must have poured down upon the
Sinner, if it had not by the Will of God been derived upon the Surety; but
being derived thither, that righteous Will is satisfied, and the merited Wrath
comes not forth against the Sinner, but instead thereof

3. Effects of Love break forth from God's Will toward him; Grace appears to
all men, Tit. 2. 11. to all men in a gracious Reconciliability, and to
Believers in actual Reconciliation; Believers are actually accepted or
ingratiated in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. and so shall all others as soon as they
become Believers. Thus God is truly reconciled, yet without any change in his
Will; only Sin does not cry to that Will against the Sinner, punishment does
not break out of that Will upon him, and Grace beams and sparkles out of that
Will toward him; whilst in all these his Will remains unchangeable. Hence in
Scripture we are rather said to be reconciled to God than God to us; not (as
the Socinian would have it) because we only are reconciled to God, and not God
to us; but because God is reconciled to us in such a way, as is not alterative,
but perfective and completive of his unchangeable Will.

Thus Christ bore our Sins and God's Wrath, in a way so satisfactory to God's
Justice and Law; that thereby God is reconciled to us, and we are redeemed from
Sin and Wrath. But here I am obviated by an Objection.

If there be such a compensatory Price paid for Sin, where is free Remission?
Free Remission cannot stand with plenary Satisfaction; what is fully paid
cannot be at all remitted.

I answer; It cannot, if there be a solution by the Debtor, but it may, if
there be a satisfaction by a Surety; it cannot, if that Surety were of the
Debtors own providing, but it may, if he were of the Creditour's procuring; it
cannot, if the Suretie's payment be irrecusable, but it may, if the Creditor's
acceptance be free; it cannot, if the remission were to the same person who
makes satisfaction, but it may, if one person make satisfaction and another
find remission. And thus it is in this case; our debts were paid to God, but by
a Surety Jesus Christ, and this Surety was of God's own sending, and that his
payment went for ours was of God's own Grace: and hence it comes to pass that
God has full satisfaction, and we free remission, and this without any
repugnancy; for Christ who satisfied had no remission, (...), Romans 8. 32. God
did not spare or bate him a farthing, and we who are remitted make no
satisfaction; all our Tears, Prayers, Sorrows, Services pay not a mite to
divine Justice. Why should corrupt Reason mutter as if Satisfaction and
Remission, which are matches in Scripture, were inconsistencies in Nature? What
says God, Levit. 4. 31. the Priest shall make an atonement, there is
satisfaction, and it shall be forgiven, there is remission? What says the great
Apostle, Romans 3. 24. We are justified freely by his grace, there is remission,
through the redemption that is in Christ, there is satisfaction? Take both in
three words, (...), God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 32. for
Christ's sake, there is satisfaction, has forgiven you, there is remission, and
free remission; for it is not only (...), a dismission or discharge of Sin, but
it is (...), a dismission or discharge of it in a gracious way. In Christ our
Surety there was (...), Romans 3. 25. but toward us there was (...), Tit. 2. 11.
Christ may say, totum exsolvi, and God may say, totum remisi; there was nothing
forgiven to Christ, for he paid all, but there was all forgiven to us, for we
paid nothing.

Thus this Price is Redemptive from the Guilt of Sin and Wrath of God; but this
is not all.

2. This Price is Redemptive from the stain of Sin, the power of Sin and the
tyranny of Satan, and that by procuring the holy Spirit for us; We are saved by
the renewing of the holy Ghost, and that is shed on us through Jesus Christ,
Tit. 3. 5, 6. and where it is shed, there it redeems.

1. From the stain of Sin; Sin is the dross or rust of the Soul, Isai. 1. 22.
but the Spirit refines and purifies from it; Sin is the wrinkle of the old man,
Ephesians. 5. 27. but the Spirit smooths and removes it. Christ came by water and
blood, 1 John 5. 6. and the water sprung out of the blood; the Spirit is that
clean water, Ezekiel. 36. 25. which fetches out the spots and stains of Sin, and
that healing water coming out from the side of the Temple, even the pierced
side of Christ, Ezekiel. 47. 1. which by degrees cures all the Ulcers and
Plague-sores of the heart. The Corinthians were all over mire and dirt, but
they were washed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God, 1
Cor. 6. 11. the Spirit washed them, and washed them in the name of Jesus, that
is, for his Merits sake. The Soul in sinning runs to the Cabul of the Creature,
dirtying and fouling it self; but the Spirit brings it back again to the holy
one, and as it approaches nearer and nearer to him the macula peccati goes off,
and the nitor animae appears.

2. It redeems from the power of Sin. Sin merited Christ's Crucifixion, and
Christ's Crucifixion merited the Crucifixion of Sin; and upon this account out
comes the holy Spirit and nullifies the Law of Sin, batters down the strong
holds of it, plucks up the very Throne of it, and crucifies the old Man with
all his members, by outward restriction nailing his hands and his feet, and by
inward circumcision cutting and piercing into his heart, and from thence
gradually letting out his vital blood, even the love of Sin; hence his motions
wax feeble, his members weak, his natural heat of original lust spent and
exhausted, and his whole body drooping and languishing to his dying day; and
all this by a secret virtue from Christ's death. We are planted together (...),
says the Apostle, Romans 6. 5. he says not (...), in the conformity, but (...),
in the conformation of his death, because his death procured that conformity in
us. Hence Sin does not reign in us as a Prince upon his Throne, but die as a
man upon the Cross; Thanks be unto God who gives us the victory through Jesus
Christ.

3. It redeems from the tyranny of Satan. Christ in his own person spoiled
principalities and powers on the cross, Col. 2. 15. and Christ by his Spirit
spoils them in the hearts of men; Satan has his Palace there, but Christ has
bought him out, and the Spirit will cast him out; Satan would keep on our
chains, but Christ dissolves them, 1 John 3. 8. As he by his Spirit enlightens,
off go the chains of the Mind; as he converts, off go the chains of the Will;
as he spiritualizes, off go the chains of the Affections; and as he sprinkles
his blood upon us, off goes the weighty Guilt of all these: Satan would keep us
within the Prison, but Christ comes with an Habeas Animam, translating us from
the power of darkness into his own kingdom, Col. 1. 13. a Region of Grace and
Light, where Satan the Ruler of Sin and Darkness cannot have the Victory;
because Christ the Wisdom and Power of God fights against Him who is (as I may
so say) the wisdom and power of Sin. Hence he falls as lightning from heaven,
Luke 10. 18. falls and breaks his Serpents head, even his design against poor
souls; the ruin of Souls is a heaven to him, and in falling short of that, he
falls as it were from heaven. The Prince of this world shall be cast out, says
Christ, Joh. 12. 31. and he adds as a reason, If I be lifted up, I will draw
all men unto me, Ver. 32. Lifted up upon the Cross, he purchased the Spirit,
and lifted up into Heaven he sends down the Spirit, which draws men out of
Satan's World into Christ's, where the Gates of Hell can never prevail. The God
of peace bruises Satan underfoot, Romans 16. 20. the Apostle says not, the God
of Mercy or Power shall do it, but the God of Peace; because, unless Peace had
been made through the blood of the Cross, Satan would have kept us in
everlasting Chains. But now Justice being satisfied, the Spirit comes forth
with a Quo jure; first rescuing the Captive-soul, and then treading down Satan
under its feet. Thanks be unto God for this victory also through Jesus Christ.

Thus this Price is redemptive from Evil, but

2. This Price is procurative of Good. Infinity is a boundless Ocean, and may
run over in effects as far as it pleases; infinite Power might have run over
in making millions of Worlds more, and infinite Mercy might have run over in
saving millions of Sinners more. The Price of Redemption has a kind of
Infinity in it; no wonder then, if after remotion of Evils, it run over by its
transcendent excess of Value in the procuration of Good; such was the glorious
redundance and supereffluence of its Merit, that it paid divine Justice to the
last mite, and over and besides made a purchase of three Worlds; I mean the
lower World of Nature, the middle World of Grace, and the upper World of Glory.

1. As to the World of Nature, Christ procured two things.

1. The Standing of it. 2. The Deliverance of it.
1. The Standing of it, and that in a threefold respect.

1. The Standing of it in Being. Sin filled it with so much spiritual stench
and rottenness, that the Power of the holy One would not have endured to have
been there supporting and bearing it up in Being, if the Death of Christ had
not been (...), a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. to perfume and sweeten it;
the World was as it were new founded by the Cross, or else Sin, that
abomination of desolation, would have dashed it down about the Sinners Ears;
Justice (if unsatisfied) would not have spared so much as the Stage whereon Sin
was acted, but hurled it down into its first Nullity. Christ upholdeth all
things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. Before Sins entry they stood merely
by the word of his Power, but since they stand not without the blood of his
Cross. Redemption is the great Buttress of Creation; as it rears up the little
World after its fall, so it keeps up the great World from falling.

2. The Standing of it in Order. When the Prophet describes God's Judgments, he
speaks as if the old Chaos were come again; Lo! the earth was without form and
void, Jer. 4. 23. All the Orders and Harmonies in Nature were at first set by
the Wisdom of God, and afterward cemented by the Blood of God, or else Sin
would have unframed all. By Christ all things consist, Col. 1. 17. not only
subsist in their Beings, but consist in their Orders.

3. The Standing of it in its Usefulness to us. Sin was the blast and
forfeiture, but Christ is the Purchaser and heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. and
in and through him all are as it were new-given to us. We became such wretches
by Sin, that the Earth would not have bore our persons, if Christ had not bore
our iniquities? the Sun in the Firmament would not have lighted the material
World, if the Sun of Righteousness had not appeared in the spiritual; these
lower Heavens would not have spun out a day for us, if Christ had not purchased
the upper ones of Glory; the Blood of Creatures should never have been shed for
the life of our Bodies, if the Blood of God had not been poured out for the
Life of our Souls. Under the Law, before Harvest began the Passover was
killed; at Harvest a Sheaf of the first fruits was brought to the Priest to be
offered to God; and after Harvest there was the Feast of Tabernacles to bless
God for the Fruits of the Earth, which by the Jews was kept with Booths and
Hosannahs. Had not Christ our Passover been sacrificed for us, there would
have been no Harvest of Creature-blessings at all; and now that there is one,
the praise of every Sheaf must be brought to Christ the high priest of good
things, and in and through him offered up to God: therefore there is a
spiritual feast of tabernacles under the Gospel, Zach. 14. 16. Whilst we sit
under the Booths of the Creature, we must sing Hosannahs to the Son of God, who
tabernacled in our flesh, and in it merited all comforts for us. Every bough of
Nature hangs upon his Cross, every crum of Bread swims in his Blood, every
Grape of blessing grows on his Crown of Thorns, and all the sweetness in Nature
streams out of his Vinegar and Gall. A right-born Christian is the best
Philosopher; for he sees the Sun of Righteousness in the Luminaries of Heaven,
the waterings of Christ's Blood in the fruits of the Earth, the Word incarnate
in Creature-nourishment, and the Riches of Christ in all the Riches of Nature.
All are ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

2. Christ by this Price procured the Deliverance of it. God made the House of
the World for Man, and whilst there is Sin in the Inhabitant, the Curse-mark
is on the House; the Heavens wax old as if there were Mothes in them, the Stars
have their malignant Aspects, the Earth has its Thorns and Thistles, and the
whole Creation groans and travels with an universal Vanity; the Sun groans out
his light on the Workers of darkness, the Air groans with Vollies of Oaths and
Blasphemies, and the Earth groans forth its Corn and Wine into the lap of the
Riotous; and as Sin grows heavier, so the Creaturegroans wax louder every day.
But at last in and through Christ, there shall be (...), a restitution of all
things, Acts 3. 21. the Balm of his Blood will perfectly heal all the stabs and
wounds in the Body of Nature; the groaning and traveling Creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of Corruption, Romans 8. 21. there shall be new
heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. and all
the steps and traces of the old Curse shall be razed out of the World.

Thus Christ has purchased the World of Nature; but this (as appears by the
Purchaser's own (...), Matthew. 6. 33.) is not the main bargain, but the casting
in or overplus thereof; therefore

2. Christ by this Price purchased the World of Grace. Grace may be considered
two ways; either as it is in the Map or Charter of the Gospel, or as it is in
the Subject or receptacle of the Heart; and both ways it is Christ's purchase.

1. Grace in the Map or Charter is the Covenant of Grace, comprised in the
Promises, called the Covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. In this Covenant there
are Promises reaching down as low as the World of Nature, and Promises reaching
up as high as the World of Glory; and betwixt these two run the Promises which
water the World of Grace, and these are either Promises of Grace such as those,
I will give an heart to know me, Jer. 24. 7. I will circumcise the heart to
love me, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I will put my laws into their minds and write them in
their hearts, Heb. 8. 10. I will give a new heart and a new spirit; I will take
away the stony heart, and give an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26. or else they
are Promises to Grace, such as those, God will justify the believer, Romans 3.
26. beautify the meek with salvation, Psalm. 149. 4. dwell in a broken heart,
Isai. 57. 15. comfort the mourners, fill the hungry, and be seen of the pure in
heart, Matthew. 5. 4, 6, 8. Now all these Promises are the purchase of Christ,
and the whole Covenant made up of them is the New Testament in his blood, 1
Cor. 11. 25. Without his satisfactory Blood there would have been no room for
Promises, no, not for the least twinkling of a Promise to the sons of men; for
unsatisfied Justice would have hurried all to Hell. All the Promises issue out
to us in and through Christ, the Rivers of Life gushed out of the true Rock,
the Gospel-wine run forth from the true Vine; if God meet us and commune with
us in words of Grace, we must thank the true Propitiatory, or Mercyseat for
every syllable.

2. Grace in the proper Seat or Receptacle of it is Christ's purchase; and this
I shall make out

1. In general; Christ purchased the Spirit of all Grace. There is a double
Oblation of Christ; a personal Oblation on the Cross, and that is Moritum
Spiritus; and a doctrinal Oblation in the Gospel, and that is Ministerium
Spiritus; and so the holy Ghost is shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ,
Tit. 3. 6. Christ ascended up on high that he might fill things, Ephesians. 4. 10.
One would have thought that his descent should rather have done it; but he
ascended up in the glory of his Merits, he carried up all the Purchase-money to
his Fathers house, and from thence the Spirit came pouring down upon men; some
droppings of it were before, but then it was richly poured out; it came down in
cloven fiery tongues and a rushing mighty wind, Acts 2. 2, 3. Tongues to utter
magnalia Dei, and above all, the masterpiece of Redemption, and cloven tongues
to utter them to all Nations in their own Language, and fiery tongues to
enlighten and inflame the Auditors hearts with the knowledge and love of
Christ, and a mighty rushing wind to blow home that fire strongly and
insuperably in a thorough Conversion; and all this was shed forth from Christ,
Ver. 33. Never any Tongue truly preached Christ, but by a secret touch from
him; never any holy fire kindled on the heart, but by a coal from his Altar;
never any gales of Grace on the Soul, but from the breathings of his Spirit:
not one drop of his Blood is spiritless, but full fraught and flowing with the
Spirit of Life.

2. In particular; and so Christ has purchased three things.

1. The Radical Grace of Faith. 2. All other Graces of the Spirit. 3. All the
Crowns of these Graces.
1. Christ has purchased the Grace of Faith; the Apostle is express in it, To
you it is given, (...), for Christ's sake not only to believe on him, but also
to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1. 29. the Apostle evidently points out the
merits of Christ as the spring of Faith, and Faith persevering unto suffering.
And in another place he says, we joy in God through Jesus Christ, (...), by
whom we have now received the atonement, Romans 5. 11. he does not only say, that
by and through him the Atonement was made but that by and through him the
Atonement is received; and what is this receiving of the Atonement but Faith it
self? That therefore is part of Christ's Purchase. These express places might
suffice us; but because the Remonstrants oppose this Truth, I shall propose two
Quaeries unto them.

1. Is not Faith comprised within the Covenant of Grace? Let Us come to the
Touchstone; Is it not written there, I will give an heart to know me, and is
not Faith a justifying knowledge, a sight of the just One, and a beam or
dawning of eternal life? Is it not written there, I will take away the heart of
stone, and is not Unbelief a part of that stone? does it not directly resist
the Blood and Righteousness of Christ? and can there be a worse Stone than
this? Is it not written there, I will give a new heart, and is not Unbelief the
heart and life of the old Man, and Faith of the new? Is it not written there, I
will put my Spirit within you, and is not the Spirit a spirit of faith, and
faith a fruit of the Spirit? is not Unbelief of our Spirit, and Faith of Gods?
Is it not written there, I will circumcise the heart, and is not Unbelief
flesh? God says, there is life in his Son, and the Unbeliever says, No, and
does what in him lies to make God a liar, and can there be any filthier or
rottenner flesh in the old man than this? and unless this be cut off, can there
be a true Circumcision? By all this it clearly appears that Faith is within the
Covenant, and if so, is not the whole Covenant Sanctio a sanguine, the
New Testament in Christ's blood? Is not he the Mediator and purchaser of the
whole? Are not all the Promises Yea and Amen in him? Who dares distinguish and
say, Christ purchased part of the Promises and not all? he purchased notional
knowledge and not justifying, he breaks the stone in the heart, all but that
which opposes his own Blood and Righteousness, the old man is crucified with
Christ, all but his heart and life of Unbelief, the Spirit of Grace flows out
from Christ, all but the Spirit of Faith, the circumcision of Christ, Col. 2.
11. (so called because it is procured by the Merits, and produced by the Spirit
of Christ) cuts off the flesh of the heart, all but that of Unbelief which
upbraids God with a lie; who dares thus tear in sunder the Covenant, mangle the
Promises, dimidiate Christ and divide the Spirit by unscriptural distinctions?
Such shuffling is unworthy of Christians. Wherefore I conclude my first Quaere
thus; Faith is within the Covenant, and the Covenant is Christ's purchase;
therefore Faith is such also.

2. Is not Faith a Grace of the Spirit? It seals to the Gospel, sanctifies the
heart, works by Love, waits by Patience, overcomes the visible World, and
sensibly presentiates the invisible; for shame let it be a Grace, and if so, it
must be Christ's purchase. The Spirit never effected that Grace in fallen Man
which Christ never merited. As every Creature in the World is of God's making,
so every Grace in the Church is of Christ's meriting: He that says, Yonder is
a precious Stone but it is not of God's making, blasphemes the Creator; and he
that says, Yonder is a precious Faith but it is not of Christ's meriting, does
no less to the Redeemer. But further; Is not Faith the Grace of Union with
Christ? Does not Christ dwell in the heart by faith? Is not Faith the
Mother-grace of all? First Faith gives a touch to Christ, and then Love is
enflamed with him, Joy triumphs in him, and Obedience follows him. Where do all
the rivers of living water flow but in the Believers belly, Joh. 7. 38? What
holds all the starry Graces of the Church but (...), the firmament of faith, as
the Apostle calls it, Col. 2. 5? Now will it not grate thine ears, O Christian,
to hear that the Spirit of Holiness is from Christ, but not the Spirit of
Faith; all the starry Graces are Christ's but the Firmament of Faith is our
own; we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ, but not with the
Mother-grace which broods and teems out all the rest, not with the Grace of
Union which lies nearest to Christ eating his flesh and drinking his blood;
that Faith which is nearest to the Merits of Christ in its Union, is furthest
off from them in its Origination. What is this but to darken the Sun of
Righteousness, damm up the Well of Salvation, and trample the Blood of the
Covenant under foot? at which every sober Christian cannot but tremble.
Therefore I conclude my second Quaere thus; Faith is a prime and excellent
Grace, wrought by the Spirit and purchased by the Merits of Christ.

2. Christ has purchased all other Graces; for all Graces are the fruits of
the Spirit, and the Spirit is shed on us through Christ. But in stead of
proving, let me parley with the Saints. Speak, O ye excellent ones, whence came
your lovely Meekness, your undissembled Love, your untired Patience, your holy
Unction, your melting Compassions, your broken Hearts, your repentant Tears,
your Law-engraven Spirits, and all your sweet smelling Perfumes of Grace? Speak
for the Glory of Christ. Methinks I hear them all with one consent cry out,
Thus, O thus it is; all our Meekness came from the Lamb, our Love from the
beloved one, our Patience from the Captain-sufferer, our Unction from the
Christ of God, our Compassions from the bowels of Christ, our broken Hearts
from a broken Christ, our repentant Tears from his bleeding Wounds, our
Law-engravings are the Epistle of Christ, and all our sweetsmelling Graces are
the powders of the merchant, Cant. 3. 6. even of Jesus Christ who bought them
all with his sweetest Blood. The Church is the House of God made up of lively
stones, floored with Humility, roofed with Knowledge, cemented with Charity,
warmed with the fire of Zeal, and filled with the spiritual Glory of heavenly
Graces; but Christ is the chief cornerstone which bears up all: all the
Churches Humility is from Christ's (...) or self-emptying, all our Knowledge
from Christ the Sun of righteousness, all its Charity from the Hyperbole of his
love, all its Zeal is from a coal of his Altar, and all the spiritual Glory
which fills it, comes by the way of the East, Ezekiel. 43. 2. even from Jesus
Christ who is (...), the East or dayspring of all graces, Luke 1. 78.

3. Christ has purchased all the Crowns of these Graces, I mean such as are
set on the Saints head in this life; the Believers shall be justified, but it is
by the righteous Christ; the Meek shall be beautified with Salvation, but it is
because of the Lamb; the broken Heart shall have God dwelling in it, but it is
for the Merits of a broken Christ; the Mourners shall be comforted, but it is by
the consolation in Christ; the Hungry shall be filled, but it is from the
fullness of Christ; the pure in Heart shall see God, but it is through Christ the
brightness of his Glory: all the Crowns of Grace must be cast down at the feet
of Jesus Christ the great Purchaser of them.

Thus Christ has bought the World of Grace; but yet we are not at the top of
the Purchase: For

3. Christ has purchased the World of Glory; that is the nonesuch, the World
of Worlds, to which all Natures Glories are but a shadow, and the Churches
Graces but a Portal; there are Plenitudes of Joy, Crowns of Life, Weights of
Glory, Treasures of Bliss and Oceans of Sweetness, and all of Christ's
purchasing: All the Mansions of Glory are of his preparing; Joh. 14. 2. all the
Wine in Heaven is for his marriage-supper, Revel. 19. 9. his Blood is the Key
to open the holy of holies, Heb. 10. 19. the pure River of Life clear as
Crystal issues out of the throne of God and of the Lamb, even out of Gods Grace
and Christ's Merit, Rev. 22. 1. Christ on the Cross purchased a Heaven for us,
Christ in the Gospel proffers it unto us, and Christ in the heart gives us an
actual hope thereof. Had it not been for Christ, we could never have entered
into such a place as Heaven, where the Walls are Pearls, the Rivers Pleasures,
the Hills Frankincense, the Air Purity, and the Light, Life, Love and all in
all God himself. Now Christ did not only purchase Heaven for us, but purchased
it in a way completive of the Law. The old Promise of the Law was, Do this and
live, and that seemed quite blasted and withered by our sins; but Christ by his
perfect Obedience made it revive and bud again with life. God would not give
eternal life, but upon a Do this; and Christ fulfilled all Righteousness for
us, and by that Righteousness we come to have (...), justification of life,
Romans 5. 18. such a Justification as is crowned with eternal Life.

But you will say, that old Do this required Obedience in our own persons; and
therefore Christ could not fulfill it in our stead, and so purchase life for us.

I answer, that God did here also interpret his Law in an equitable way; the
divine Sanction [Do this] on which Life did depend, was not precisely
determinate that we must do it in our own persons, for then a Sureties
obedience should have been totally excluded; neither was it precisely
determinate that we should do it in our Surety; for there was a Do this in the
state of Innocence where there was no need of a Surety; but the Sanction was
general, Do this, and two interpretations lay before God; the first that it
should be done in our own persons, the second that it should be done in our
Surety; the first a rigorous and literal, the second an equitable and merciful
interpretation. Now these two interpretations lying before God, he as supreme
Lawgiver takes the equitable interpretation; had he taken the rigorous one,
there would have been no room for a Surety, nor life for the Sinner; but in
rich mercy he takes the equitable one, and so through a Surety's Obedience
eternal Life is purchased for us. These two interpretations of the Law seem to
me to be figured out by the double making of the Tables; the Law in the
rigorous interpretation is like the first Tables which were broken: For as the
Law was first written in those Tables, so the rigorous interpretation firstly
rises out of the Letter of the Law; and as those first Tables were broken, so
Sin made such a breach upon the Law, that the Apostle puts a (...) upon it,
Romans 8. 3. it could not give life according to the rigorous interpretation. And
the Law in the equitable interpretation is like the second Tables which were
put into the Ark: for as those Tables were kept inviolate in the Ark, so the
Law was kept inviolate in the equitable interpretation; and as the Mercy-seat
covered the Tables in the Ark, and from the Mercyseat so covering them God
manifested his presence; so Christ, the true (...) or mercy-seat, did by his
perfect Obedience cover the Law all over, and in and through him so covering it
God manifests his presence, not only his back-parts on Earth but his face in
Heaven. Thus by the admirable Wisdom of God Heaven was purchased, and yet the
Law established, the Do this turned upon the Surety, and the promised Life made
good to us Sinners.

But you will object further, If the Law be thus interpreted in an equitable way,
viz. to be done by a Surety, then it is not so much as a Rule of life to us;
for that issues out of the first interpretation, viz. the doing of it in our
own persons.

I answer, that still the Law is a Rule of life to us; and the reason is,
because God does not wave the rigorous and take the equitable interpretation
totally and absolutely, but in order to Redemption, and so far only as
Redemption requires it. Now what does that require? It requires that the
Obedience of a Surety should be admitted for the impletion of the Law; and
therefore thus far the rigorous interpretation is waved, and the equitable
takes place. But it requires not that the redeemed ones should be exempted from
the Law as a Rule; and therefore the equitable interpretation does not go thus
far; and so far as that goes not, the rigorous one takes place; because pro
tanto it is consistent with Redemption. Hence it comes to pass that Christ as
our Surety fulfilled the Law for us, and yet still the Law is a Rule of life to
us; Christ is the end of the Law to the believer, and yet the Believer is
(...), under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 21.

Thus this Price is redemptive from Evil and procurative of Good, but the Crown
of all is yet behind.

3. It is a Price sufficient for both the former. There is a double
Sufficiency, Sufficientia nuda, and Sufficientia ordinata; the first consists
in the intrinsecal value of the thing, the thing in value transcending or at
least equalizing the thing to be redeemed; the second consists in the Will of
the Payer and Receiver, the one intentionally paying and the other
intentionally accepting that thing as a Price of Redemption: the first is that
radical Sufficiency whereby the thing may possibly become a Price; the second
is that formal Sufficiency whereby the thing does actually become a Price. Let
the thing be in it self of never so vast a value, the former without the latter
does not constitute it a Price. Now the glorious price of our Redemption has
both these Sufficiencies in it.

1. It has Sufficientiam nudam; the Active and Passive Obedience of Christ
have intrinsecal value enough to equalize, nay infinitely superexcede all our
Debts, and over and besides to purchase three Worlds for us; and the reason is
because his Deity poured out a kind of Infinity into his Doings and Sufferings.
The Righteousness which he fulfilled was the righteousness of God, Romans 1. 17.
the Blood which he shed was the blood of God, Romans 20. 28. and the Life which
he laid down was, the life of God, 1 John 3. 16. And what nakedness cannot the
Righteousness of God cover? What debts cannot the Blood of God pay for? And
what Worlds cannot the Life of God purchase? Remember, O poor trembling Soul,
remember, he that was pierced for thee was Jehovah, he that was smitten for
thee was the man God's fellow, and he that obeyed for thee was in the form of
God. O what manner of Actions and Passions were those wherein the Lawgiver
stood under his own Law, and the Creator suffered in his own World? How was his
Obedience elevated into Infinity, and transfigured into glory by his Godhead?
What a Mass of sweet smelling Merits must that be into which the Deity it self
transfused Riches and Odours? This may be one reason why Christ is styled the
heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. though he be the Purchaser of all, yet he is
Heir of all; because he received his divine Nature from his Father, and that
divine Nature stamped an infinite value upon the Purchase-money which bought
all. May I shadow it out by an imperfect Similitude: A Son receives vast sums
from his Father, and with them purchases an estate in Lands to himself; that
Son is the Purchaser of those Lands in respect of his own payment of the Money,
and yet in a sense he is Heir to them in respect of his receipt of the Money
from his Father; So the Eternal Son of God is the Purchaser of all, for he paid
down his own Blood and Righteousness as the Price; and yet he is Heir of all,
for that Price had its value from the divine Nature, and that divine Nature was
received from his Father in the Eternal Generation. There is no doubt then (as
long as Christ is God) but that his Obedience has value enough in it self.

2. It has Sufficientiam ordinatam, and this appears

1. By the Will of Christ who paid down the Price.

2. By the Will of God who received it; both their Wills concentre in the work
of Redemption, and the counsel of peace is between them both, Zach. 6. 13.

1. It appears by the Will of Christ: when he paid down his Obedience, what was
his meaning? Surely not a tittle of his Obedience was irrationally done, nor a
drop of his Blood irrationally shed; what then was his meaning in it? Was it
not to dissolve the Chains of Sin, open the Prison of Wrath, and spoil and
triumph over the bloody Jailer Satan? Was it not to procure the standing of the
Body of Nature, the shedding down of the Spirit of Grace, and the opening a
door to Heaven and eternal Life? These were the things on which the divine and
humane Will of Christ were both set: his divine Will was set upon them; for
before the foundations of the World, even in his joyous Eternity with his
Father, his delights were with the sons of men, Prove. 8. 31. and when the World
was up, he appeared to Abraham in a humane shape, and to Moses to usher in a
temporal Redemption; the first as a praeludium to his Incarnation, and the
latter as a praeludium to our Redemption, and both as a demonstration that the
work of Salvation was in his Heart. And afterward in the days of his flesh,
his humane Will never parted from his divine, but in a rape of Love always run
upon Redemption; this he sought for in a long circuit of Obedience, and sought
with a (...) till it was finished; this he sought for in his bloody Agony, and
when his humane Will as Nature shrunk back from the Cup of Wrath, yet the same
Will as Reason kissed and drunk it off to the bottom in order to Redemption;
this he ardently pursued after through Cross-tortures and Soul-travels, and
rather than fail of it, he would for a time be forsaken even of God himself;
and when he cried out, I thirst, his greatest thirst of all was after this, and
could never be quenched till he came to a consummatum est. Thus stood the mind
of Christ in the business.

2. It appears by the Will of God, and that in two things.

1. God decreed this Price to be paid for the ends aforesaid. 2. God accepted
it being paid for the ends aforesaid.
1. God decreed this Price to be paid; Christ did not glorify himself in
making himself an high priest or surety; but he that said unto him, Thou art my
son, this day have I begotten thee, Heb. 5. 5. Christ's Person was begotten out
of the Substance of God, and his Office as it were begotten out of the Will of
God, God eternally ordained him to that Office, 1 Pet. 1. 20. and in the
fullness of time called him to it, Heb. 5. 10. and for more assurance,
superadded his Seal to his Call, Joh. 6. 27. and his Oath to both, Heb. 7. 21.
and all to show forth his immutable purpose touching the same. Christ was
booked down for a Redeemer in the eternal Volumes, and slain above in the
Decree long before he was slain below in time. Infinite Love impregnated the
divine Will with the Decree of Redemption, and that Decree sent forth our
Redeemer, and put a (...) upon his righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15. a (...) upon
the cup of wrath, Joh. 12. 27. and a (...) upon his death and sufferings,
Matthew. 16. 21. and all this that the mystery of Redemption, hid from ages in
the will of God, Col. 1. 26. might come abroad into the World; When the fullness
of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law,
to redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. O what a fair window is
here opened into God's heart! Redemption was decreed, and therefore God sent
forth his Son; the time was decreed, and therefore he sent him forth in the
fullness of time; and the Price was decreed, and therefore he sent him forth
made of a woman, made under the Law, that is, to take a humane Nature, and pay
it down in all Obedience as the Price of our Redemption.

2. As God decreed this Price to be paid, so he accepted it being paid, and
this includes in it two things.

1. That this Price was paid to him. 2. That this Price was accepted by him.
1. This Price was paid to him; Christ offered himself to God, Heb. 9. 14.
Whether we consider this Price as redemptive from evil, or as procurative of
good, both ways it was paid to God; as redemptive from evil it was paid to him
as a righteous Lawgiver and Judge, and as procurative of good it was paid to
him as a great Remunerator and faithful Promiser. God is the Lawgiver against
whose Laws we rebelled, and God is the Judge who for our rebellions against his
Law, (...), shut us all up in prison, Romans 11. 32. there we lay (...), under
the judgment of God, Romans 3. 19. and his wrath abode upon us, Joh. 3. 36.
therefore this Price as redemptive from evil was paid to God as the Lawgiver
and Judge. That Socinian cavil, That if this were a proper Redemption, the
Price should be paid to Sin and Satan, because we are redeemed from them, is
but a mere trifle; for God is the supreme Lawgiver and Judge, he only has the
Keys of Death and Hell; strictly and properly Sinners are Prisoners only to
him, Satan is but as the Jailer or Under-officer, acting under the authority of
this Judge; the Guilt of Sin is but as the Chains or Fetters, binding under the
Justice of this Lawgiver; and who ever read or heard of a Price of Redemption
paid to the Jailer or Fetters? and yet upon the payment thereof the Captive is
delivered from them both. Hence it is that our Savior Christ was both Mercator
and Bellator, Mercator as to God to whom he paid the Price, and Bellator as
against Satan whom he conquered; and both these the Apostle expresses together,
He blotted out the handwriting, nailing it to his cross, and spoiled
Principalities and powers triumphing over them in it, Col. 2. 14, 15. He paid
God the Price and not Satan, he spoiled and triumphed over Satan, and not over
God. Again; as this Price as redemptive from evil was paid to God as a
Lawgiver and Judge, so this Price as procurative of good was paid to God as
the great Remunerator and faithful Promiser. God is a great Remunerator, for he
rewards according to the condecency of his goodness; and a faithful Promiser,
for he will not suffer one jot or tittle of his Promises to fall to the ground;
he engaged himself to Christ, that his blood should be returned in all good
things, he gave him the Promise of a seed, and to raise it up, the Promise of
his Spirit, and to crown it, the Promise of eternal life; he bound himself by
express compact to make him a light to the Gentiles, a covenant to the people,
and salvation to the ends of the earth, Isai. 49. 6, 8. Wherefore this Price as
procurative of good was paid to God as a Remunerator and Promiser.

2. As this Price was paid to God, so it was accepted by him for the ends
aforesaid. Indeed simply and abstractively from his own Decree he was not bound
to accept of this price (though of an immense and infinite value) as for us; I
say, as for us; for he might have stood upon the rigor of the Law, Do this and
live, transgress this and die in thine own person; the Tables of the Law might
never have been put into the Ark, nor covered with a Mercy-seat; but this is
the joy of our Faith, that he has accepted it. When Christ was baptized, there
was a Voice from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, (...), in whom I am
well-pleased, Mat. 3. 17. Duo grata vocabula, silius and dilectus, says an
Ancient, and that sweet word (...) makes up the third. When Christ was
sacrificed, there was a sweet smell to God, Ephesians. 5. 2. God cries out, I have
found a ransom, Joh 33. 24. and Christ, It is finished, Joh. 19. 30. Afterward
when he came into the Grave, off flew the bands of Death, Acts 24. 24. as a
pregnant evidence that Justice was satisfied; he was taken from prison and from
judgment, Isai. 53. 8. because all was paid; God's Power raised him up, and
God's Justice could say nothing against it. And when he was risen from the
dead, he raises up the Faith of his Disciples, Why do thoughts arise in your
hearts? says he, Luke 24. 38. Do you doubt whether I am he who paid down the
Price of Redemption? Behold! my hands and my feet; fossus est saccus, and
manavit pretium orbis, the Sack of my Humanity was broke, and out run the Price
of Redemption. Do you scruple whether that Price were accepted of God or not?
Lo! here are the returns of it, I Will breath the holy Ghost upon you, I Will
betrust the Gospel with you, go preach it to every creature, make the World
know, that Redemption, Remission, Grace, Peace, Sanctity, Salvation are the
returns of my Blood. And afterward just at his parting he blessed them and
ascended up into heaven; he blessed them, to show that the Curse was gone, and
ascended up into heaven to possess the purchase of Glory, and being there, he
sat down at God's right hand; his work was now done, and therefore he sat
down, and his work was now accepted, and therefore he sat down at God's right
hand; there he received gifts for men, and from thence he gave them out again;
he gave out what he received, and received what he purchased. Christ's
Sacrifice was so sweet a favor to God, that the Minister, who preaches it, is
a sweet savor to him, 2 Cor. 2. 15. and the Believer who accepts it is
accepted of him, Ephesians. 1. 6. nay, so far accepted, that he becomes a Priest,
Revel. 1. 6. and his good works pleasing sacrifices, Heb. 13. 16. his prayers
are turned into odours, Revel. 5. 8. and his charity into a sweet smell, Phil.
4. 18. and all this by a perfuming touch from Christ's Merits. In a word; all
the Proclamations of Mercy in the Scripture, all the Pardons of sin in the
Conscience, all the Influences of Grace on the Heart, and all the Openings of
Heaven in the Promises are as so many pregnant proofs unto us, that God
accepted the Price.

Thus having showed what manner of Price this is, viz. redemptive from Evil,
procurative of Good, and sufficient for both, I pass on to the last Question.

3. For whom was this Price paid? and this I shall cleave asunder into two
Quaeries.

1. Whether Christ died for all men? 2. Whether he died equally for all men?
In both which, whilst I name the Death of Christ only according to the usual
language of Divines, I comprehend his whole Obedience Active and Passive,
whereof his Death was the complement and extreme Act.

1. As to the first Quaere, Whether Christ died for all men? I answer
affirmatively, that he did; and here I shall do two things.

1. I shall lay down the Reasons of my Opinion.

2. I shall answer the Objections made against it; and in both it will appear
how far, or in what sense I assert that Christ died for all men.

1. I shall lay down my Reasons for it, and these are drawn

1. From the Will of God as the Fountain of Redemption. 2. From the Covenant of
Grace as the Charter of it, and the Promises comprised therein. 3. From the
Ministers Commission who publish it. 4. From certain blessings which are the
fruits of it. 5. From the Unbelief of men which is the denial of it. 6. From
the fullness and glorious Redundance of Merit in Christ's Death which paid for
it. 7. From the large and general Expressions in Scripture concerning the same.
1. I argue from the Will of God. God's Will of salvation as the fontal Cause
thereof, and Christ's Death as the meritorious Cause thereof are of equal
latitude; God's Will of Salvation does not extend beyond Christ's Death; for
then he should intend to save some extra Christum: Neither does Christ's Death
extend beyond God's Will of Salvation, for then he should die for some whom God
would upon no terms save; but these two are exactly coextensive. Hence it is
observable, that when the Apostle speaks of Christ's Love to the Church, he
speaks also of his giving himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25. and when he says God
will have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. he says withal, Christ gave
himself a ransom for all, Ver. 6. Therefore there cannot be a truer Measure of
the extent of Christ's Death, than God's Will of Salvation, out of which the
same did issue; so far forth as that Will of Salvation extends to all men, so
far forth the Death of Christ does extend to all men. Now then how far does God
will the Salvation of all? Surely thus far, that if they believe they shall be
saved: No Divine can deny it, especially seeing Christ himself has laid it
down so positively, This is the will of him that sent me (says he) that every
one which sees the Son and believes on him may have everlasting life, Joh. 6.
40. Wherefore if God will the Salvation of all men thus far, that if they
believe they shall be saved; then Christ died for all men thus far, that if
they believe they shall be saved. But you will say that Promise, Whosoever
believes shall be saved, is but Voluntas signi and not Voluntas beneplaciti,
which is the adequate Measure of Christ's Death. Unto which I answer; If that
Promise be Voluntas signi, what does it signify? What but God's Will? What
Will but that good pleasure of his, that whosoever believes shall be saved? How
else is the Sign of the true God a true Sign? Whence is that universal
connection betwixt Faith and Salvation? Is it not a plain efflux or product from
the Decree of God? Does not that evidently import a Decree, that whosoever
believes shall be saved? Surely it cannot be a false Sign; wherefore so far
God's Will of Salvation extends to all men, and consequently so far Christ's
Death extends to them.

2. I argue from the Covenant of Grace, and the Promises comprised therein.
Christ is the Mediator of the Covenant, and the Covenant is the New Testament
in his blood; Christ's Death does not extend beyond the Covenant, for then
there should be less in the Charter than in the Purchase; neither does the
Covenant extend beyond Christ's Death, for then there should be more in the
Charter than in the Purchase: but both these run parallel in extent. Therefore
so far forth as the Covenant extends to all men, so far forth the Death of
Christ extends to all men. Now then for the extent of the Covenant; Are not
those Promises [Whosoever believes shall be saved; whosoever will, let him take
of the water of life freely] with the like, a part of the Covenant? and are
they not extensive to all men? Both are as plain as if they were written with a
Sunbeam: Wherefore so far does Christ's Death extend to all men, as the
Covenant in any part thereof does extend unto them. Moreover; these general
Promises undeniably extend to all men, and in that extent are infallibly true;
they are all faithful sayings, and words of truth, and their truth is sealed up
by Christ's Blood; wherefore as these Promises extend to all men, so the Death
of Christ (in which they are founded) does extend to all men. If Christ did no
way die for all men, which way shall the truth of these general Promises be
made out? Whosoever will may take the water of life. What, though Christ never
bought it for him? Whosoever believes, shall be saved. What, though there were
no (...), no Price paid for him? Surely the Gospel knows no Water of Life but
what Christ purchased, nor no way of Salvation but by a (...), or Price paid.
But you will say, that albeit Christ died not for all men, yet are those general
Promises very true, and that because their truth is founded. upon the
Sufficiency of Christ's Death, which has worth enough in it to redeem millions
of Worlds. I answer, there is a double Sufficiency, Sufficientia nuda
consisting in the intrinsecal value of the thing, and Sufficientia ordinata
consisting in the intentional paying and receiving that thing as a Price of
Redemption; the first is that radical Sufficiency, whereby the thing may
possibly become a Price; the second is that formal sufficiency, whereby the
thing does actually become a Price. Let a thing be of never so vast a value in
it self, it is no Price at all, unless it be paid for that end, and being paid,
it is a Price for no more than those only for whom it was so paid; because the
intrinsecal worth how great soever does not constitute it a Price. Hence it is
clear, that if Christ's Death (though of immense value) had been paid for none,
it had been no Price at all; and if it were paid but for some, it was no Price
for the rest for whom it was not paid. These things premised, if Christ no way
died for all men, how can those Promises stand true? All men, if they believe,
shall be saved; saved, but how? Shall they be saved by a (...) or Price of
Redemption? there was none at all paid for them; the immense value of Christ's
death does not make it a Price as to them for whom he died not; or shall they
be saved without a (...) or Price? God's unsatisfied Justice cannot suffer it,
his Minatory Law cannot bear it, neither does the Gospel know any such way of
Salvation; take it either way, the truth of those Promises cannot be
vindicated, unless we say, that Christ died for all men. But you will yet reply,
that albeit Christ died not for all, yet is the Promise true; because Christ's
death is not only sufficient for all in it self, but it was willed by God to be
so. I answer, God willed it to be so, but how? Did he will that it should be
paid for all men, and so be a sufficient Price for them? then Christ died for
all men; or did he will that it should not be paid for all men, but only be
sufficient for them in its intrinsecal value? then still it is no Price at all
as to them, and consequently either they may be saved without a Price, which is
contrary to the Current of the Gospel; or else they cannot be saved at all,
which is contrary to the truth of the Promise. If it be yet further demanded,
To what purpose is it to argue which way Reprobates shall be saved, seeing none
of them ever did or will believe? Let the Apostle answer, What if some did not
believe? Shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect? God forbid;
yea, let God be true, but every man a liar, Romans 3. 3, 4. And again, If we
believe not, yet he abides faithful and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. No
Reprobate ever did or will believe, yet the Promise must be true, and true
antecedently to the Faith or Unbelief of men; true, because it is the Promise
of God, and antecedently true, because else it could not be the Object of
Faith. Wherefore I conclude that Christ died for all men so far, as to found
the truth of the general Promises, which extend to all men.

3. I argue from the Ministers Commission which is, Go, preach the Gospel to
every creature; by virtue of this, they command all men every where to repent,
and to induce them thereunto, they open a door of Hope to them, and to raise up
that Hope, they set forth Jesus Christ evidently before their eyes, as if he
were crucified among them, opening his bleeding Wounds, and through them
showing his naked Heart, and the inward bruises there made by Gods Wrath for
man's Sin; they lift up their voices and cry, Come, O poor sinners! come, for
all things are ready, here is Christ and his redeeming Blood ready, here is an
Act of free Grace and Pardon sealed in that Blood, here is a Heaven of
Reconciliation, and at the end thereof a Heaven of Glory open before you; Come,
O come without delay; Behold! now is the accepted time, the day of salvation,
come, and your Sins shall be blotted out, come and your Souls shall live for
ever; whilst it is called to day, we beseech you, be you reconciled unto God;
why should your immortal Souls, saveable through Christ, be choked with
worldly Thorns, or enchanted with base Lusts, or inhabited by unclean Devils?
Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? And in all this, they bespeak not the Elect
only, but others too; for their Commission reaches to every creature: neither
do they utter their own humane Passions, but pursue their divine Commission;
for in all their pathetical beseechings God himself beseeches, 2 Cor. 5. 28. in
all their loud outcries Wisdom it self cries out, Prove. 8. 1, 4. in all their
earnest expostulations, Christ himself stands at the door and knocks, Rev. 3.
20. in all their holy Doctrines the Kingdom of Heaven comes nigh unto men, Luke
10. 11. and in all their invitations to the Evangelical Feast made up of
Christ's Flesh and Blood, which is meat indeed, and drink indeed, God himself
invites, and bids men, eat and drink for his heart is with them. These things
being so, it necessarily follows that Christ died for all men; because the
Oblation of Christ in the Gospel is founded on his Oblation on the Cross, and
the Ministry of Reconciliation is founded on the Mystery of it. Hence the
Apostle joins both together; God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. And
in another place, Christ gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due
time, 1 Timothy 2. 6. The word of Reconciliation is extensive to all, therefore so
is the work; the Price of Redemption may be testified to all, therefore it was
paid for all, so far as to found that testimony of Jesus which is the spirit of
Prophecy. But if Christ no way died for all men, how came the Ministers
Commission to be so large? They command men to repent that their sins may be
blotted out, but how can their sins be blotted out for whom Christ was not made
sin? They beseech men to be reconciled to God, but how shall they be reconciled
for whom Christ paid no Price at all? They call and cry out to men to come to
Christ that they may have life, but how can they have life for whom Christ was
no Surety in his Death? If then Christ died for all men, the Ministry is a
true Ministry as to all; but if Christ died only for the Elect, what is the
Ministry as to the rest? Those Exhortations, which as to the Elect are real
undissembled offers of Grace, as to the rest seem to be but golden Dreams and
Shadows; those Calls, which as to the Elect are right Ministerial Acts, as to
the rest appear as Extraministerial Blots and Errata's; those Invitations to
the Gospel-feast, which as to the Elect are the cordial wooings and beseechings
of God himself, as to the rest look like the words of mere men speaking at
random and without Commission: for alas! why should they come to that Feast for
whom nothing is prepared? How should they eat and drink for whom the Lamb was
never slain? Wherefore I conclude that Christ died for all men's so far as to
found the truth of the Ministry toward them.

4. I argue from the Blessings purchased by Christ's Death; one great Blessing
is Salvation on Gospel Terms. Lapsed Angels must be damned, but Men, nay, all
Men may be saved on Gospel-terms; there is (...), a common Salvation to them;
and O what a blessing is this, especially to such as live under the Gospel!
there is nothing stands between them and Heaven but their own Will, they will
not come to Christ that they may have life: Oh! what would the damned Spirits
in Hell give for such a door of Hope, as has no other bar but what is in their
own Hearts! how would they sweat and strive with tears and strong cries to
enter in at it! A second Blessing is the Patience of God, which waits upon
Sinners, and by some glimmerings of Mercy leads them to repentance. A third
Blessing is the Dispensation of Gifts; even in the Wilderness of the
Pagan-world there are Moral Virtues, and in the Eden of the Church there are
even in those that perish, some touches of the holy Ghost, tastes of the
heavenly Gift and feelings of the Powers of the World to come, and whence are
these but from the Death of Christ? As David called the water of Bethlehem the
blood of his worthies, so may I call these Blessings the blood of Christ.
Wherefore Christ died so far for all, as to procure some Blessings for them.

5. I argue from the Unbelief of Men, which is wonderfully aggravated in
Scripture: through Jesus Christ there is a real offer of Grace made, but
Unbelief receives it in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1. great Salvation is prepared, (...)
^nbelief neglects it, Heb. 2. 3. Eternal (...) is promised, but Unbelief comes
short of it, Heb. 4. 1. the Kingdom of Heaven comes nigh to men, but Unbelief
draws back from it, Heb. 10. 39. God himself bears witness that there is Life
in his Son, even for all if they believe, but Unbelief says No to it, and does
what it can to make him a liar, 1 John 5. 10. Christ is set forth before our
eyes as the great Expiatory Sacrifice, and evidently set forth as if he were
crucified among us, his Blood runs fresh in the Veins of the Gospel, but
Unbelief recrucifies the Son of God, Heb. 6. 6. tramples his precious blood
under foot, Heb. 10. 29. and does as it were nullify his glorious Sacrifice;
so that as to final Unbelievers (...), there no more remains a sacrifice,
Heb. 10. 26. as to their Salvation, it is as if there were no Sacrifice at all
for them: But if Christ died not for all men, how can these things be? How can
those men receive Grace in vain for whom it was never procured? or neglect
Salvation for whom it was never prepared? How can they fall short of eternal
Rest for whom it was never purchased? or draw back from the Kingdom of Heaven
which never approached unto them? How can there be life in Christ for thos^ for
whom he never died? and if not (...) way does their Unbelief give God the lie?
How can they recrucifie the Son of God for whom he was never crucified? or
trample on that precious Blood which was never shed for them? The Devils, as
full of malice as they are against, Christ, are never said to do it, and why
are men charged with it? I take it, because men have some share in him, and
Devils none at all.

6. I argue from the Death of Christ, which has a superexcellent Redundance of
Merit in it, not only because of its intrinsecal value, but because of the
divine Ordination; there are unsearchable riches in Christ, enough to pay all
men's Debts; there are Pleonasms of Grace in him, (...), Grace superabounded,
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 14. Salvation flows out from him actually upon all
Believers, and by a glorious supereffluence it would run over upon all men if
they did believe: As it was with the Widows litte Pot of Oil, 2 Kings 4. 6. the
Oil did run till all the Vessels were full, and then it staid; the Widow called
for another Vessel, and if she had had many more there, the Oil in the Pot
would have filled them all; Even so (pardon the Comparison) it is with the
immense Sea of Christ's Merits, it actually fills all the Vessels of Faith, and
then it stays as it were for want of Vessels; meanwhile Christ calls and cries
out for more and if all men would come and bring their Vessels to him he would
fill them all; doubtless if all men did believe, all would see the Glory of
God, all would have the Rivers of living water flowing in them, all would feel
spiritual Miracles wrought in their Hearts, by that Christ who sits at the
right hand of Power, and consequently all would find an experimental witness in
themselves that Christ died for them all.

7. I argue from the general and large Expressions in Scripture touching Christ
and his Death; Christ died for all, 2 Cor. 5. 15. for every man, Heb. 2. 9. he
gave himself for the world, Joh. 6. 51. for the whole world, 1 John 2. 2. he is
styled the Savior of the world, 1 John 4. 14. and his Salvation is called a
common salvation, Jude Ver. 3. a salvation prepared before the face of all
people, Luke 2. 31. and flowing forth to the ends of the earth, Isai. 49. 6.
the Gospel of this Salvation is to be preached to all nations, Matthew. 28. 19.
and to every creature, Mark 16. 15. there is (...), grace bringing salvation to
all men, Tit. 2. 11. a door of Hope open to them, because Christ gave himself a
ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 6. I know not what could be more emphatical to point
out the Universality of Redemption? But you will say, all these general
Expressions do but denote genera singulorum, some of all sorts, the World of
the Elect, or the All of Believers.

In answer to which I shall only put two Quaeries.

1. If those general Expressions denote only the World of the Elect, or the All
of Believers, why is it not said in Scripture, that God elected all and every
man, the World and the whole World? in that sense it is as true that God elected
them all, as it is that Christ died for them all; Why then does the holy Spirit
altogether forbear those general Expressions in the matter of Election, which
it uses in the matter of Redemption? Surely it imports thus much unto us, that
Redemption has a larger Sphere than Election; and therefore the Scriptures
contract Election in words of Speciality only, whilst they open and dilate
Redemption in emphatical Generalities.

2. If those general Expressions denote only the World of the Elect or the All
of Believers, why does the Scripture use such very different language in the
same thing? Sometimes Christ is called the savior of the world, and sometimes
the savior of the body; sometimes it is said that Christ died or gave himself
for all, or for the world, and sometimes it is said that he died or gave
himself for the Church or for his sheep. Who can imagine that such words of
universality, and such words of speciality should be of the same latitude? that
one and the same thing should be imported in both? Moreover, the Scripture does
make a signal distinction; when it speaks of his giving himself or dying for
all, it says only that he died for all or gave himself a Ransom for all: But
when it speaks of giving himself for his Church, it says that he sanctified
himself that it might be sanctified through the truth, Joh. 17. 19. and that he
gave himself for it, that he might purisie to himself a peouliar people, Tit.
2. 14. and that he gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it
by the word, and present it to himself a glorious Church without spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Never in all the Scripture is it said that he gave
himself for all, or for the World, that he might sanctify, or cleanse it, or
make it a peculiar People, or glorious Church, which yet might have been truly
said, if the All were no more than the All of Believers, or the World than the
World of the Elect; wherefore to me it seems clear from those various
Expressions and the observable distinctions in them, that the All for whom
Christ died is larger than the All of Believers, and the World for whom Christ
gave himself larger than the World of the Elect.

2. Having laid down my own Reasons, I proceed to answer the Objections made
against this Opinion.

Object. 1. If Christ died for all men, then all would believe, for Christ's
Death procures all Graces, and in particular, Faith; seeing then all men have
not Faith, either Christ did not die for them all, or else he loses part of
his Purchase.

I answer that Christ's Death is procurative of all Graces and particularly of
Faith, so far as it is a Price; and it is a Price so far, as it was paid down
by Christ and accepted by God for that purpose: for in a Price there must be
both Sufficientia nuda consisting in the intrinsecal value of the thing, and
Sufficientia ordinata consisting in the intentional paying and receiving that
thing as a Price. Now Christ's death was paid down by him and accepted by God
as a Price with a double respect. As for all men it was paid and accepted as a
Price, so far forth, as to procure for them a ground for their Faith, viz. that
they might be saved on Gospelterms. And as for the Elect it was further paid
and accepted as a Price; so far as to procure the very Grace of Faith for them.
Thus our Savior Christ (who best knew both upon what Terms he paid down the
price, and upon what Terms his Father received it) opens this mysterious
Dispensation; I came down from heaven (says he) not to do my own will but the
will of him that sent me, Joh. 6. 38. and what was that? As to all men, 'twas
that every one that sees the Son and believes on him may have everlasting
life, Ver. 40. and as to the Elect, 'twas that all those should by faith come
unto him, Ver. 37. and never be lost, Ver. 39. Christ then died for all men,
not so far forth as to procure the Grace of Faith, but so far forth as to
procure Salvation on Gospel-terms for them; therefore, albeit all do not
believe, it follows not either that Christ did not at all die for them, or that
he loses part of his Purchase. Christ's Death is procurative of Faith, not in
reference to all, but to the Elect.

Object. 2. If Christ died for all men, why is not the Gospel revealed to them?
many Pagan Nations have no glimpse of a Christ.

I answer two things.

1. God has not left himself altogether without witness, no, not in the
Paganworld; the invisible Spirit renders himself visible in the Glass of the
World, Romans 1. 20. and as it were palpable in the body of Nature; the very
Heathens may see and feel him in every creature, Acts 17. 27. nay, and in
themselves too, for his Presence is not far off from them, and his candle burns
within them, Prove. 20. 27. and when by this Candle it appears, that there is
Justice in God and Sin in them; yet that they may still seek after him, he lets
out some glimmerings of mercy and placability toward them; the very standing
of the World utters somewhat of this. This Psalmist tells us of a line in the
heaven, Psalm. 19. 4. God in the Creation drew lines of Power and Wisdom over
the Sphere of Nature, but Christ in Redemption struck a line of Mercy quite
through it, and that legible even to the Heathens, forasmuch as they know
(...), the vindictive justice of God, Romans 1. 32. and yet see the World
standing, and not dashed down about the Sinners Ears; they know there is a
(...), a divine vengeance, Acts 28. 4. and yet they are not consumed; they see
Justice as it were winking, Acts 17. 30. judgment slumbring, 2 Pet. 2. 3. and
infinite Patience and Long-suffering waiting and leading them to Repentance,
Romans 2. 4. they have some glimpses of pardoning Mercy; where there is no
pardoning mercy at all, there is no room for repentance: but the Patience of
God is a kind of temporal pardon of the punishment, and that temporal pardon of
the punishment points out that Mercy which can give an absolute pardon of the
Sin, and the true duct and tendency of that Mercy is to lead men to Repentance;
and if there were any man in the Pagan-world who did in truth repent and
convert to God, I make no question at all, but that he should be saved, and
probably not without the express knowledge of Christ indulged to him; for upon
all that fear Gods Name will the Sun of rigteousness arise with healing under
his wings, Mal. 4. 2. Here then is aliquid Evangelii, though not the express
knowledge of Christ.

2. As to the Argument, let us weigh what may be deducted from Christ's death
as universal: If Christ died for all men, it follows from thence that Christ
may be preached to all, but it follows not from thence that Christ shall be
preached to all; it follows that Christ may be preached to all, for he, who was
offered for all on the Cross, may be offered to all in the Gospel; there is no
Pagan in the World to whom Christ may not be offered. And if there were but one
great Ear or Organ of Hearing common to all, how would Christ's Ministers
always be filling it with Gospel? But it follows not that Christ shall be
preached to all; for the Gospel is God's own, and he may do with his own as he
pleases; and Christ who purchased for all the Being of the Gospel as far as
the general Promises go, yet purchased not for all the publication thereof. In
a word; the Pagans have some glimmerings of Gospel, and may be saved on
Gospel-terms, which shows that Christ so far died for them; and that they have
not the express knowledge of Christ, is a deep Abyss much fitter to be adored
than dived into by us.

Object. 3. If Christ died for all men, then he intercedes for all; but he
intercedes only for the Elect, therefore he died for them only.

I answer that Christ does in some sort intercede for all men; and this I shall
clear several ways.

1. From the Nature of Christ's Intercession; that is not a formal Prayer, but
an appearing in the Holy of Holies before the face of God as an Advocate, and
there presenting his Blood and Righteousness in their freshness and endless
life of Merit, with a Will that all the Grace purchased thereby may be
dispensed to the sons of men; therefore Christ even in Glory stands (...), as
one slain, Rev. 5. 6. showing his bleeding Wounds to make Intercession with
God. Hence it follows, that his Intercession (being a kind of celestial
Oblation) perfectly answers to his Oblation on the Cross; he is an Advocate
above, so far as he was a Surety here below; his Blood speaks the very same
things in Heaven as it did on Earth, and his Will stands in the same posture
toward Sinners there as here. Now, how far was Christ a Surety for all? Surely
thus far, that all may be saved if they believe; else either they cannot be
saved at all which is contrary to the truth of the Promise, or they may be
saved without a Surety, which is contrary to the current of the Scriptures. But
if he were so far a Surety for all, then he is so far an Advocate for all; for
he appears an Advocate in Heaven for all those for whom he appeared as a Surety
on the Cross. Hence the Apostle says in general, If any man sin we have an
advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. he says not strictly, if the Elect sin,
but at large, if any man sin, we have an advocate; and as the true groundwork
of this general Advocation, he adds, he is the propitiation for the whole
world, Ver. 2. So far forth as he was a Propitiation for the World, so far
forth he is an Advocate for it. And another Apostle affirms that Christ is a
Mediator between God and men, 1 Timothy 2. 5. he says not betwixt God and his
Church, but betwixt God and men; and the following words give the true reason
of it, Christ gave himself a ransom for all, Ver. 6. he is no less a Mediator
for all, than he was a Ransom for all. Christ's Blood shed on the Cross spoke
thus far for all men that they might have their pardon on Gospel-terms; and
afterward being carried to Heaven it speaks the very same language for them;
for the voice or speech of that Blood is its Merit, and that Merit is of an
indeficient virtue. Hence that Blood cannot be speechless, because it cannot be
meritless; and so far on Earth as it merited for all, so far in Heaven it
speaks and intercedes for all. Moreover, as Christ's Blood speaks the same
things for them in Heaven, as it did on Earth, so Christ's Will in Heaven
stands in the same posture toward them as it did on Earth; wherefore in a sort
he intercedes for all.

2. From the Patience of God which waits on men, even such as at last perish.
If Christ did not stand with the Incense of his sweet smelling Merits between
the living and the dead, between the reprieved Sinners on Earth and the damned
Spirits in Hell, the Patience of God would not wait one moment upon them.

3. From the working of God's Spirit; for as Christ is our Paraclete or
Advocate in heaven, 1 John 2. 1. so the holy Spirit is Gods Para. clete or
Advocate on earth, Joh. 16. 7. Surely if the Advocate in Heaven spoke nothing
for the Non-lect, the Advocate on Earth would not woo them to salvation; if
the Blood of Christ did not at all plead for them, the Spirit of Christ would
give no touches at all upon them, much less such touches as to make them taste
the powers of the World to come.

4. From the liberty of Prayer. Simon Magus (even whilst in the gall of
bitterness) was commanded to pray, Acts 8. 22. but, what without a Mediator? No
surely, that sinful man, who has no Mediator in Heaven, must not presume to
pray on Earth. I see no reason why a man merely mediatorless should have more
lieve to pray than a Devil, who is therefore without hope because without a
Mediator. The Apostle commands men to pray every where, 1 Timothy 2. 8. but a
little before he lays down this as the groundwork, there is one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all,
Ver. 5 and 6. The Mediation of Christ opens the door to Prayer.

Wherefore as to this Objection I answer thus; Christ intercedes for all men in
such sort as he died for them; I say in such sort, for there is a vast
difference between his general Intercession for all, and his special
Intercession for the Elect: For as Christ by his Blood shed on the Cross
merited for all in general that they might be saved on Gospel-terms, and
merited for the Elect in special that they should believe and be saved; so by
the same blood presented in Heaven he intercedes for all that they may be saved
on Gospel-terms, and intercedes for the Elect that they may believe and be
saved. And thus he is the complete Mediator of the Covenant; as the general
Promises extend to all, so answerably he intercedes for all; and as the special
Promises point only at the Elect, so proportionably he intercedes for the Elect.

Object. 4. If Christ died for all men, then he was a Surety for all and
satisfied for the sins of all, and consequently God has a double Satisfaction;
one in Christ the Surety, and another in the persons of the Damned, which is
against the nature of his Justice.

In this Argument are two consequences to be weighed.

1. If Christ died for all, then he was a Surety for all and satisfied for the
sins of all.

2. If Christ so satisfied for the sins of all, then God has a double
Satisfaction, which is against Justice.

As to the first consequence I admit it as a very Truth, that Christ was a
Surety for all, and satisfied for the sins of all; for if all did believe and
repent, the sins of all should be remitted, and remitted they could not be
without a Surety, and a Surety making Satisfaction; therefore such a Surety was
Christ for them all.

As to the second consequence, If Christ satisfied for the sins of all, then
God has a double Satisfaction, and that is against Justice. I shall first
premise some distinctions and then answer.

1. I shall premise three distinctions.

1. Either the first Satisfaction was made to the Creditor or Lawgiver by the
Debtor or Offender himself, or else it was made by a Surety; if it was made by
himself, Justice forbids a second Satisfaction.

2. The first Satisfaction being made by a Surety, was either made by a Surety
of the Debtors or Offenders own procuring, or else by a Surety procured by the
Creditor or Lawgiver; if it was made by a Surety procured by the Debtor or
Offender himself, Justice forbids a second Satisfaction; for it is all one as if
he had satisfied by himself.

3. When a Surety provided by the Creditor or Lawgiver makes the first
Satisfaction, either he makes Satisfaction in such sort, as that the Debtor or
Offender shall be thereby immediately, ipso facto, without any more ado
discharged, or else he makes Satisfaction in such sort, as that the Debtor or
Offender shall be thereby discharged, but upon the performance of some
Conditions and not otherwise; if the Surety make Satisfaction in the former
way, still Justice forbids a second Satisfaction; but if he make Satisfaction
in the latter way, then upon the final nonperformance of those Conditions,
Justice may admit a second Satisfaction. I will illustrate this by two
instances: Suppose a man indebted to another in 1000. l. the Creditor procures
his Son to lay down the money in satisfaction of the Debt, but withal it is
agreed between them, that the Debtor shall be discharged from his Debt, if he
assent to this payment and not otherwise; if then the Debtor dissent, the
Creditor may justly demand of him a second Satisfaction. Again; suppose
multitudes of attainted Traitors be shut up in Prison, and the King procures
his Son to suffer punishment in their stead, but withal the King and his Son
proclaim it as a Law, that none of the Traitors shall be thereby absolved,
unless such as honor and do Homage unto them; if any Traitor refuse to do it,
the King may justly exact a second Satisfaction: and the reason of both is
this, because the Debtor or Traitor not performing the Conditions can have no
benefit by the first Satisfaction, and therefore must be subject to a second,
as if there had been no first at all.

2. These distinctions premised, I answer, Men's Sins are Debts and Rebellions,
and satisfaction for them is due to God as the great Creditor and Lawgiver;
but this Satisfaction was not made by men themselves, but by Jesus Christ as
their Surety, and this Surety was not procured by men, but provided by God
himself; and being provided by God, he did not pay down his satisfactory Blood
in such sort, as that men should be thereby immediately, ipso facto, absolved
from their Debts and Rebellions, but in such sort, as that men may be acquitted
from their Debts and Rebellions if they repent and believe: wherefore if they
do neither, they can have no benefit by Christ's Satisfaction, and by
consequence a second Satisfaction may be justly exacted from them.

Now for the more distinct clearing of this momentous Objection I shall propose
Four things.

1. God out of mere Grace procured Christ to be a Surety for men; and therefore
it was in his power to prescribe the Conditions, upon the performance or
nonperformance whereof men should have or not have benefit by Christ's
Satisfaction.

2. According to this power, God has plainly set down the Conditions in the
Gospel, viz. He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
condemned.

3. These Conditions being thus set down by God himself, no man falling short
of them, can have benefit by Christ's Satisfaction: If men will not receive the
atonement, Romans 5. 11. how can they be at peace? If they will not receive
remission of sins, Acts 10. 43. how can they be pardoned? We are all in a worse
Dungeon than Jeremy's, and if we will not put the cords of Grace under our
Arms, we cannot get out; we are all servants of Sin, and if we say to it, We
love thee, and will not go out free, we must be bored for eternal Slaves.
Christ has opened the Fountain of his Blood, but we must wash in it, Zach. 13.
1. Christ has made a purchase of Souls, but we must believe (...), to the
purchasing of the soul, Heb. 10. 39. not that Faith is part of the
Purchase-money, but that it is the Condition of the Gospel, without which the
glorious Purchase of Christ profits not; if men live and die in Unbelief,
(...), there remains no more sacrifice for them, Heb. 10. 26. Indeed Christ
offered a Sacrifice for them, but (...), the benefit of that Sacrifice does no
more remain unto them; upon their final Unbelief they have no more benefit by
it than if there had been none at all for them: In which sense I understand
that of the Father, Si non credis, non tibi descendit, non tibi passus est
Christus.

4. If final Unbelievers can have no benefit by Christ's Satisfaction, then God
may justly require a second Satisfaction of them, because they cannot plead the
first; and so it is in Law as to them as if there had been no first at all.
Shimei had a pardon from Solomon, but passing over Kidron lost it; and
therefore (notwithstanding the same) was justly put to death for his offense:
Jesus Christ as a Surety made Satisfaction for men, but they through their
final Unbelief lose the benefit of it; and therefore (notwithstanding the same)
God may justly require a second Satisfaction from them. If Shimei had pleaded
his pardon, Solomon would have told him, that is nothing to thee ever since thou
did pass over Kidron; and if Unbelievers should plead Christ's Satisfaction,
God would tell them, that is nothing to you, seeing you have lived and died in
Unbelief.

Object. 5. Millions of men in the World reject Christ, and drop into Hell, and
God eternally foresaw that it would be so; if then Christ died for these, there
seems to be a blot upon the divine Wisdom, a failure in his efficacious Will,
and a loss in the precious Purchase made by Christ.

I answer; It Is true that God eternally foresaw those Rejecters of Christ, and
that Christ in time died for them, nevertheless there is no blot hereby cast on
the divine Wisdom; it is no disparagement to the All-wise God to bestow Means of
Eternal Bliss on such as he eternally foresaw would abuse the same to their own
destruction: Oh! what rare Perfections did he set up in the Angels, and yet he
eternally foresaw a great part of them apostatizing and dropping to Hell; What
an excellent Image of Holiness did he stamp upon Adam? and yet he eternally
foresaw him falling, and breaking all his Glory by the the Fall; what waitings
of Patience, wooings of the Gospel and touches of the holy Spirit does he
dispense to such men as he eternally foresaw would abuse all these? and yet in
all this God's Wisdom suffers not. The very same I may say of Christ's dying
for such as abuse this great blessing; neither is there here any failing in the
efficacious Will of God, for he wills that the Elect shall believe and be
saved, and he wills that the rest shall be saved if they believe, and both
these Wills are accomplished, the first in the Event of Faith and Salvation,
and the latter in the Connection between Faith and Salvation, even as to all
men. God may be said to will the Salvation of men through Christ's Death two
ways; either because he wills that Christ's Death should be a Price infallibly
procuring their Faith and Salvation, or else because he wills that there should
be in Christ's Death an aptness and sufficiency to save them on Gospel-terms:
the former Will points only at the Elect, and is fulfilled in their Grace and
Glory; the latter extends to all men, and is fulfilled in the aptness and
sufficiency of Christ's Death to save them on Gospel-terms; in both God's Will
has its effect. Neither lastly is there any loss in Christ's purchase, for
what did he purchase? As for the Elect, he purchased Faith and Salvation, and
as for the rest, he purchased Salvation on Gospel-terms, in both he has what
he paid for; for the Elect believe and are saved, and the rest may be saved if
they believe: therefore when men by their Unbelief bar themselves of the
benefit of Christ's Death, and make him in that respect cry out, I have
labored in vain, yet he adds, surely my judgment is with the Lord, Isai. 49.
4. as if he had said, For all this never a drop of my Blood is irrationally
shed, for God (with whom my judgment is) knows, that I purchased Salvation for
them on Gospel-terms, although they by their Unbelief deprive themselves of the
benefit of the Purchase. If final Unbelievers should be saved, Christ should
have more than his Purchase, but if they are not saved, he has no less; for he
purchased Salvation for them on Gospel-terms which they do not perform through
their own voluntary Unbelief.

Object. 6. If Christ died for all men, then he loves all with the greatest
degree of Love; for greater love has no man than this that a man lay down his
life for his friends, Joh. 15. 13. and this must needs be the greatest degree
of love, because it draws all other things after it; If God gave his own Son
for us, how shall he not with him freely give us all things, Romans 8. 32? But
Christ does not love all with the greatest degree of love, neither does God
give all things to them; therefore Christ did not die for all.

I confess that Christ does not love all men with the greatest degree of love,
neither does God bestow all blessings on them: wherefore we must examine these
places from whence these Inferences are made. As for the first place, greater
love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends, it
does import one of these two things; either it does import, that he that dies
for his friends has the greatest degree or height of internal love toward
them, or else it imports, that a man's death for his friends is the greatest
external effect and proof of his love: the first cannot be the meaning of the
place; for if it be the greatest and most intense degree of love to die for our
friends, what is it to die for our enemies as Christ did? If it be the height
and top of love to lay down our lives, how can that be done without any love at
all as the Apostle supposes, 1 Cor. 13. 3? The Apostle commands us to lay down
our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3. 16. but when a man does it, he is not to
have the same degree of love toward all the Brethren; for he is to love those
most in whom there is most of God, and to whom he is nearest in Nature. Jesus
Christ laid down his life for all the Elect, yet without doubt his love was
greater to his Apostles than to ordinary Christians; nay, and among the
Apostles, there was one dearly beloved, one who lay in his bosom, Joh. 13. 23.
Wherefore the meaning of the words is not, that he that dies for his friends
has the greatest degree or height of internal love toward them, but that such
a death is the greatest effect and proof of his love. Christ in the 12. Verse
exhorted his Disciples to love one another, and in this 13. Verse he shows what
is the greatest outward evidence of love, viz. to die for our friends. Now
albeit Christ died for all men, and that Death was a great and high proof of
his Love, nothing hinders but that Christ, over and besides his common
Philanthropy to all, may bear a special affection to the Elect; the
Universality of his Death infers not a Parity in his Love. If Jacob had died
for all his Sons, yet he might have loved Joseph and Benjamin above the rest,
and left them some special Legacies: If Christ died for all men, yet he may and
does love his Elect above others, and leave some secret Love Tokens upon their
hearts. As for the second place, If God delivered up his Son for us, how shall
he not with him freely give us all things, Romans 8. 32. the Key to unlock this
Text is the word [Us;] Who are the Us in the Text? Who but the Elect of God?
Ver. 33. who according to Election are effectually called, Ver. 28. and upon
their Callings are justified and glorified, Ver. 30? These are the Us in the
Text; wherefore the plain meaning of it is, not that if God gave his Son for
all men, he would give them all things, but that if God gave his Son for the
Elect, he would give them all things, viz. all things necessary to Salvation;
the Text extends not to all men. But you will say, though the Text extend not to
all men, yet the Argument does: for if the Argument be good, that if God gave
his Son for the Elect, he would give them all things; then the Argument is as
good, that if God gave his Son for all men, he would give them all things. I
answer, that if God's Intention and Love in giving his Son for all were one and
the same toward all, the consequence were undeniable; but seeing God in giving
his Son, had toward the Elect a special Love and Intention to bestow Grace and
Glory on them, and toward the rest but a common Philanthropy and Ordination
that they might be saved on Gospel-terms, hence it is clear, that albeit the
giving of all things to the Elect may be inferred from his giving his Son for
them, yet the giving of all things to all men cannot be inferred from his
giving his Son for them all; because in that gift there was not the same Love
and Intention toward all: Wherefore I conclude that Christ died for all, and
yet neither are all loved with the greatest degree of love, nor yet are all
blessings conferred upon them.

Object. 7. If Christ would not pray for all men, then he died not for all; but
Christ would not pray for all, for he says, I pray for them, I pray not for
the world, Joh. 17. 9.

Answ. This Argument must be formed one of these two ways; either thus, If
Christ prayed not at all for the Non-elect, then he did not at all die for
them; but he prayed not at all for them, Ergo, he died not for them. Now here I
must deny the Minor; for even upon the Cross he prayed for his Crucifiers,
Father forgive them, Luke 23. 34. not that he would have them forgiven though
final Impenitents and Unbelievers, for that would have been against his
Father's purpose and his own purchase, but that he would have them forgiven if
they did believe and repent, which was congruous to both. But suppose there had
been no vocal Prayer of Christ for them, yet surely there was a mental one; for
he could not but desire of God to have all the fruits of his Passion, amongst
which one was, that all men might be saved on Gospel-terms; that grand
Gospel-axiom [whosoever believes shall be saved] was no doubt one of his
desires, for it cost his precious Blood; wherefore the Non-elect were not
totally excluded from his Prayers. Or else the Argument must be formed thus; If
Christ prayed not for the non-elect in that famous Prayer, Joh. 17. then he did
not die for them; but he prayed not for them in that Prayer, therefore he died
not for them. Now here the consequence fails; for what kind of Prayer was that,
Joh. 17? 'Twas a Prayer peculiarly fitted for Apostles and Believers; a Prayer
for their perseverance in Faith, Ver. 11. for their perfection in Unity, Ver.
23. for their growth in Sanctification, Ver. 17. for their abode with him in
Glory, Ver. 24. and in all respects a Prayer which could be congruously prayed
for no other but Believers, Ver. 20. Now that Christ did not pray such a Prayer
for all men as was only proper for Believers, does not conclude, either that he
did not at all pray for them, or that he did not at all die for them. Thus much
in answer to the first Quaere, Whether Christ died for all men? I pass on to
the second.

Quaere 2. Whether Christ died equally for all men? I answer, that albeit
Christ died in some sort for all men, and, by virtue of his Death, all men (if
Believers) should equally be saved; nevertheless Christ did not die equally for
them all, but after a special manner for the Elect, above and beyond all
others; and this I shall demonstrate by several Arguments drawn 1. From the
Will of God. 2. From the Covenant of Grace. 3. From the Issue of Christ. 4.
From the Working of the holy Spirit. 5. From the Blessings purchased. 6. From
the Intercession of Christ. 7. From the Event following upon Christ's Death. 8.
From the special Expressions in Scripture.


1. I argue from the Will of God. Christ's Death is the meritorious Cause of
Salvation, and respects men more or less proportionably as God's Will (which is
the fontal Cause thereof) does more or less respect them: God wills that all
men should be saved if they believe, and proportionably Christ died for them
all; God wills that the Elect should infallibly believe and be saved, and
sutably Christ died for them in a special way; there is a peculiarity in
Christ's Redemption answering to the peculiarity of God's Love. God eternally
resolved with himself that he would have a Church and a peculiar people, and
Christ gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. He gave himself for us that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. If Christ had given himself thus far for
all, all would have been his Church and People. You will say, Unbelief is the
only Obstacle. I answer, that if Christ had given himself for all, that he
might wash them as he washes the Church, and redeem them from all iniquity as
he redeems his peculiar ones, there would have been no such thing as Unbelief
left among men; that Christ, who washes out every spot and wrinkle, would not
have left Unbelief; that Christ, who redeems from all iniquity, would not have
left Unbelief, no, not in any one man's heart; nay, I may truly say, he could
not leave it there, because he could not lose his end, nor shed one drop of his
Blood in vain. There are among men some chosen ones, such as are chosen out
from among men, and chosen out of the World, Joh. 15. 19. and Christ in his
Death had a special eye upon these: Hence, proportionably to their Election,
they are said to be redeemed from among men, Rev. 14. 4. and redeemed out of
every kindred and tongue and people and nation, Rev. 5. 9. Now how is it
possible that all men should be thus* redeemed? Christ's Death as it respects
all men, redeems them (as I may so say) from among Devils, for that it renders
them capable of mercy which Devils are not; but Christ's Death as it respects
the Elect redeems them even from among men, for that it procures Faith for
them, and thereby pulls them out of the unbelieving World; and what is peculiar
Redemption if this be not? But you will say these are said to be redeemed from
among men, not because Christ specially died for them above others; but because
these particularly applied his Death by Faith which others did not. I answer,
that either this Application by Faith was merited by Christ's Death or not; if
so, then Christ redeemed them in a special manner, because by his Death he
impetrated Faith for them, which he did not for all; if not, then they were
redeemed from among men by themselves and their own free Will, and not by
Christ and his Death, which (I tremble to think) puts the lie upon the Church
triumphant, who sing the new Song to the Lamb in these words; Thou wast slain
and have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred and tongue and
people and nation, Rev. 5. 9. How can that Blood of Christ, which merited alike
for all men, redeem one man from another? How can it redeem some from among
men, unless it merit for them that Faith which is the grand distinction between
man and man in the matter of Salvation? Christ (...), purchased the church with
his blood, Acts 20. 28. and purchased it in a special manner: hence (...), a
purchased people, is not a title common to all, but proper to the Church, 1
Pet. 2. 9. God's Children lay scattered up and down the wide World, and Christ
died that he might gather them all together (...), into one, one Faith here and
one Glory hereafter, Joh. 11. 52. If Christ had died so for all, all should
have come into the same Unity. We find in Scripture many signal distinctions
made among men; there are some on whom God will have mercy, and others whom he
will harden, Romans 9. 18. some written in the Lambs book of life, and others
left out of it, Rev. 13. 8. some given unto Christ, Joh. 6. 36. and others ^eft
to themselves; some are Gods own jewels, Mal. 3. 17. and others but as dross.
Now how incredible is it that Jesus Christ (who came to do his Father's Will)
should in his Death respect those whom God will harden, as much as those whom
he will have mercy on; those that are out of the Book of Life, as much as those
that are in it; those that are left to themselves, as much as those that are
given to him, and those that are the dross of the World, as much as God's own
Jewels? Believe it who can, it is a monstrous Opinion, worthy of nothing but
exile from Christians: Seeing God's Will has so distinguished men, it is no
more possible that Christ should die alike for all, than that he should dissent
from his Father's Will, which to do was his great errand in the World. Christ
suffered between two Thieves, a Type of the Elect and Reprobate World; but who
dare say that he had as much respect to the one as to the other?

2. I argue from the Covenant of Grace. Christ is the Mediator of the Covenant,
and the Covenant is the New Testament in his blood; as then the Covenant is
more or less respective of men, so the Mediator's Death is more or less
respective of them. There are in the Covenant two sorts of Promises; the one
general and conditional, such are those, Whosoever believes shall be saved,
Whosoever will, may take of the water of life, If any man come to Christ he
will not cast him out; the other special and absolute, such are those, I will
circumcise thy heart to love me, I will put my fear in their hearts, I will
take away the heart of stone and give an heart of flesh, I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, I will put my Laws in their
mind and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God and they shall
be to me a people; there is a vast difference between these Promises: For

1. The general and conditional Promises are as it were the hands of the
Covenant, pointing out the true way and path leading to Salvation, but the
special and absolute Promises are as it were the Veins of the Covenant,
carrying in them the blood and spirit of life and power to enable us to walk in
that way. Here God himself engages to work all saving Graces in us: Are our
hearts hard? he will roll away the stone from them; do our hearts resist holy
impressions? he will give us hearts of flesh capable thereof; are our hearts void
of God's Law? he will write it there and turn them into the Epistles of Christ,
and for the effectual doing hereof, he will put his Spirit into us, and as a
real proof of it, he will cause us to walk in his ways; and in this Walk Love
shall be the Motive, for he will circumcise the heart to love him, and Fear the
Bridle, for he will put his Fear in the heart never to depart from him; and,
which is the Crown of all, he himself will be a God to us, and we shall be a
people to him in an everlasting Covenant. Stand still O Saints! and adore;
here, lo, here is the ministration of the Spirit indeed, 2 Cor. 3. 8. here are
words which are spirit and life, Joh. 6. 63. here is the supernal Jerusalem the
mother of spiritual freedom, Gal. 4. 26. here is the immortal seed which begets
all the Sons of God, 1 Pet. 1. 23. here is that Vis (...), or formative Virtue
which moulds us into the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. here is the day of God's
power, which makes his people willing to serve him in the beauties of holiness,
Psalm. 110. 3. Happy, yea thrice happy they, who dwell in this Land of Promise
and drink of these Wells of Salvation.

2. The general and conditional Promises are extensive to all men, but the
special and absolute Promises respect the Elect and them only, for they are
fulfilled in them, and them only; had these extended to all, that God (who
cannot lie, nor deny himself) would have fulfilled them in all. You will say,
He would have fulfilled them in all, but that men themselves will not: But what
a strange word is this [they will not]? Will they not, if God give them a Will,
a new heart and a new spirit? Will they not, if God take away the nilling and
resisting Principle, the heart of stone? Will they not, if God write his Laws
in their hearts and inward parts? O what is this, but by an absurd Blasphemy to
change God's Truth into a lie, his Omnipotence into weakness, and his Glory
into the old broken Idol of Creature-freedom? Surely if God (who is Truth and
Power) engage to make a new Heart, the old one cannot hinder it; if he promise
to remove Hardness, Hardness cannot resist it; if he say that he will write the
Law in the Heart, the Heart will not say Nay to his Almighty Fingers. Seeing
then these Promises are not fulfilled in all but in the Elect only, I may
safely affirm that they respect not all but the Elect only. These things being
so, it appears how and in what manner Christ's Death respects men, even more or
less, as the Promises of the Covenant founded on his Blood do more or less
respect them: As the general Promises extend to all men, so the Death of Christ
the Mediator proportionably extends to them all; and as the special Promises
point only at the Elect, so the Death of Christ the Mediator has a peculiar
respect to them. Christ by his Death (over and besides the general Promises)
founded those special Promises for the Elect; hence they come to be (...), sons
of promise, Gal. 4. 28. begotten by it to spiritual life, which others,
standing only under the general Promises, are not. All the saving Graces of the
Elect suting to those special Promises are no other than the fruits of Christ's
Merits; they are renewed with the renewings of the holy Ghost, but that is shed
on them through Jesus Christ; they have the Law written in their hearts, but
that is the Epistle of Christ; their filthy flesh is cut off from their hearts,
that they may love God who is a pure Spirit, but this is the circumcision of
Christ, Col. 2. 11. In a word, all the saving Graces of the Elect are as so
many Legacies of the Newtestament, and the New Testament is founded in his
Blood: Wherefore it is clear from the Covenant of Grace and its special respect
to the Elect, that Christ died in a special and peculiar manner for them.

3. I argue from the Issue of Christ; Christ was to have a Seed, and this I
shall demonstrate three ways.

1. From the Preciousness of his Blood. 2. From the Purpose of his Father. 3.
From the Promise of his Father.
1. From the Preciousness of his Blood. That there should be a Laver made of
God's Blood, and never a Sinner washed in it, that such a vast sum of precious
Merits should be paid down, and never a Captive released by it, is to me no
less than prodigious Blasphemy; every little Grain in Nature does confute it;
if that do but fall into the ground and die, it brings forth much fruit, and
shall the Son of God bleed and die in his assumed Flesh and be fruitless? God
in his waky Providence gives to every little Seed his own body, and shall the
peerless Flower of Heaven sow his Blood and Righteousness and have none at all?
A Cup of cold water given in Charity shall in no wise lose its reward, and can
it be so with the Blood of Christ poured out in a transcendent excess of Love,
and glorified into an infinite Merit by his Deity? When Christ fed the
multitude but with Barleyloaves and small Fishes, nothing was lost, and can all
be lost when he makes a Feast of spiritual Marrow and Fatness, and gives his
Flesh to be meat indeed and his Blood to be drink indeed? Oh! far be the
thought from every Christian

2. From the Father's purpose, which (as the Scriptures hold forth) clearly
was, that his Son should be a King, a Captain, a Shepherd, an Husband, an Head
and a Father: And what is a King without Subjects, a Captain without Soldiers,
a Shepherd without a Flook, an Husband without a Spouse, an Head without a
Body, and a Father without Posterity? Empty Names are below him whose name is
above every name. Wherefore this King must have a Sion a mountain of holiness
to reign in, Psalm. 2. 6. this Captain a Militia, an army with banners to fight
under him, Cant. 6. 4. this Shepherd a flock to hear his voice and follow him,
Joh. 10. 4. this Husband a spouse, a Queen in Gold of Ophir married to him,
Psalm. 45. 9. this Head a body to be animated with his Spirit and filled with
his life, Col. 1. 18. and this Father a numerous issue, begotten and brought
forth into the spiritual World to honor and serve him, Heb. 2. 13.

3. From the Father's Promise, which was in terminis, That he should have a
seed, Isai. 53. 10. a Seed begotten by his Spirit, and by that Generation
bearing his Image, and in that Image serving of him; and to make it sure, God
engages by special Promises to take away the stony Heart, to write the Law
there, to put his holy Spirit into them, and so infallibly to raise up a seed
to him; and for the continuance of this Seed successively, (...) filiabitur
nomen ejus, his name shall be sonned or childed from generation to generation,
Psalm. 72. 17. The special Promises shall be ever budding and blossoming and
bringing forth the fruits of Grace; thus Christ shall see of the travel of his
soul and be satisfied, Isai. 53. 11. and as a sign of this Satisfaction, he
breaks out, Behold I and the Children which God has given me, Heb. 2. 13.
Should he miss but one of his Seed or Children, his Heart would not rest or be
satisfied; for they are in a peculiar manner the travel of his Soul.

But now if Christ died alike or equally for all, what becomes of his precious
Blood? How can the Purpose and Promise of God stand? Which way shall Christ
have a Seed? Shall his Seed be begotten out of Man's Will? No such Generation
ever was there, Joh. 1. 13. It Is not of him that wills, Romans 9. 16. Nothing
less than the holy Spirit, which formed Christ in the Womb, can form him in the
Heart: but shall they be begotten by the holy Spirit? That Spirit does nothing
in the work of Regeneration but what Christ merited in his Passion; every new
Creature which is efficiently begotten by the Spirit, was first meritoriously
begotten by the Death of Christ, or else it would not be the Seed of Christ, at
least not the travel of his Soul. Now Christ did not travel or merit for all
men that they should be begotten again by the holy Ghost; for then either all
would be so begotten, which Experience denies, or else the Merit and Travel of
Christ must be lost, which the preciousness thereof abhorrs: And if Christ did
not merit it for all, then neither did he (if he died alike for all) merit it
for any, and how then shall he have a Seed? His Seed must be begotten by the
Spirit, and the Spirit begets no new Creatures but what Christ merited, and
Christ dying equally for all did not merit such a thing for any, because not
for all. Moreover; when God promised Christ a Seed, either the meaning of that
Promise was, that some men should become his Seed, or that all should be so; if
that some, then Christ died not equally for all; if that all, then all must be
begotten by the Spirit, and renewed after Christ's Image, the Stone must be cut
out of every heart, and the Law written there; for in these things is the very
spirit and life of Regeneration: But seeing these things are not wrought in
all, it appears, that the promised Seed is not all, but some, for whom Christ
merited the very work of Regeneration.

4. I argue from the Working of the holy Spirit. As the holy Spirit eternally
procedes from the Father and the Son in his personal Subsistence, so he goes
forth in time from the Father and the Son in his working in Men. Hence he is
called the Spirit of the Father, and the Spirit of the Son, the Father sends
him, and the Son sends him; and as the holy Spirit works in Men from the Father
and the Son, so he works in them more or less, as the Love of the Father and
the Merits of the Son do more or less respect them. The Father does in some
sort love, and the Son did in some sort die for all men. Hence the holy Spirit
has some workings in the Non-elect. Within the Church many of them taste the
Powers of the World to come; nay, in the Pagan-world the holy Spirit drops some
moral Virtues and Beams of light, from whence have issued many excellent
Sayings, some of which the holy Spirit has so far owned as to quote them in
his own Book: But the Father does in a special manner love, and the Son did in
a special manner die for the Elect. Hence proportionably the holy Spirit works
in them after more glorious strains of Power and Grace; as a Spirit of Grace
and Supplication he melts them into Repentance; as a Spirit of Faith he makes
them catch hold upon Christ for Righteousness and Life; as a Spirit of Wisdom
he unveils their hearts, and makes the Light to shine out of Darkness; as a
Spirit of Liberty he unshackles and unbinds their Wills, and makes them free
indeed in the ways of God, and as a Spirit of Truth and Holiness he leads them
into Truth, and by inward Law-engravings moulds and changes them into it.
Moreover, the holy Spirit, after such glorious workings on them, comes and
dwells in them, and that intimately in the very secrets of their hearts, (...),
I will indwel in them, says he, 2 Cor. 6. 16. there are two [in's] to denote
an intimate inhabitation, as if God could never be near enough to them: As in
Christ Personal, who is the Head, there is God in the flesh by an hypostatical
Union; so in Christ Mystical, which is the Body, there is God in the Flesh by a
gracious Inhabitation; and to show that he is there, he cries Abba Father in
their Devotions; he is a Spirit of Love in their charities, a Spirit of Power
in their infirmities, a Spirit of Comfort in their distresses, and a Spirit of
Glory in their sufferings. Seeing then the holy Spirit (who works in men more
or less according to the Fathers Love and Sons Merits) works in such a special
way in the Elect, it is as clear as if it were written with a Sunbeam, that the
Father loves them and the Son died for them in a special way. Hence we find
these three folded and wrapped up together by the Apostle, Elect according to the
foreknowledge of the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 2. And again, The Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be
with you all, 2 Cor. 13. 14, If the Father's Love and the Son's Blood had
respected all men as much as the Elect, doubtless the holy Spirit (who in
Subsistence procedes and in Operations works from them both) would have
converted all as well as the Elect; why then are not all men actually
converted? Is it because the holy Spirit works not equally in all, or because
the holy Spirit is resisted in some? Is it because the holy Spirit works not
equally in all? I answer, That the Spirit is sent forth from the Father and the
Son, and works exactly according as it is sent; the inward impulsive Cause of
pouring out the Spirit is the Father's Love, and the outward meritorious cause
of it is the Son's Blood: Wherefore if the Father equally love all, and the Son
equally died for all, the Spirit works equally in all; for there can be no
breach in the sacred Trinity. Or is it because the Spirit is resisted in some?
I answer; Their resistance is a grand Obstacle to the work, but if the Spirit
did roll away the Stone, and new-mould the Heart, and work the Will in all, as
he does in the Elect, that Obstacle would at last be removed out of the way.

5. I argue from the Blessings purchased. Christ's Death is more or less
respective of men, as it is more or less procurative of Blessings for them:
Christ purchased a Salvability for all, but over and besides he purchased many
choice Blessings for the Elect, he purchased Repentance for them; for he is a
prince and a savior to give repentance to Israel, Acts 5. 31. He purchased a
room for Repentance even for all men; but he purchased Repentance it self for
his chosen Israel; he purchased Faith for them, Unto you it is given for
Christ's sake to believe in him, Phil. 1. 29. For others he purchased a
groundwork for Faith, but for them he purchased the very Grace of Faith; he
purchased effectual Vocation for them: others have a Call by the Gospel, but
these have a Call by the Gospel coming in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in
much assurance; he purchased Holiness and Sanctification for them. Indeed there
is no man living on the Earth, but (if he did really believe) he should have
the rivers of living water, the Spirit of holiness flowing in his heart, Joh.
7. 38. but the Elect were destined and chosen in Christ to be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4.
and Christ sanctified himself in a special manner for them, that they might be
sanctified (...), in truth, actually and truly, Joh. 17. 19. Lastly, he
purchased Heaven and Glory for them; others may have Heaven upon believing, but
these shall certainly arrive at it, these are the sheep, to which Christ gives
eternal life, Joh. 10. 28. these are the sons, which without fail shall be
brought to Glory, Heb. 2. 10. Now seeing Christ purchased so many Blessings for
the Elect, it is evident he died for them in a special way.

6. I argue from the Intercession of Christ. Christ intercedes for men more or
less proportionably as he more or less respected them in his Death, for his
Death is the foundation of his Intercession; the very same Blood of Christ,
which as shed on Earth made Satisfaction, as presented in Heaven makes
Intercession. Now how far does Christ intercede in Heaven? What does his Blood
speak there? For all men it speaks thus, Father, let them all be saved on
Gospel-terms; but for the Elect it speaks thus, Father, let them have
Repentance; this the Apostle hints out, Him has God exalted with his right
hand to be a prince and a savior to give repentance to Israel, Acts 5. 31.
Isreal's Repentance on Earth comes from Christ exalted in Heaven; for there he
intercedes for it by his Merits, and from thence he works it by his Spirit.
Again it speaks for them thus, Father, let them be made a willing people; this
I gather from the 110. Psalm, where we find Christ sitting at the right hand of
God, Ver. 1. and sitting there he intercedes for us, and from this Session and
Intercession comes forth a willing people, Ver. 3. Here Is the true original of
spiritual willingness; the right Hand of God (which is a right Hand of Power)
works it in our Hearts, and works it at the instance of Christ, who sits and
intercedes there for it. Again, it speaks for them thus, Father, sanctify them
with thy Grace, preserve them with thy Power, and crown them with thy Glory in
Heaven. Thus Christ in his sweet Prayer a little before his bitter Passion,
interceded for them for their Sanctification, Sanctify them through thy truth,
Joh. 17. 17. for their Perseverance, Keep them through thine own name, Ver. 11.
and for their Glory, I will that they be with me where I am to behold my glory,
Ver. 24. And what he spoke for them by his oral Intercession on Earth, that he
speaks for them by his real Intercession in Heaven. Thus Christ does in a
special manner intercede for the Elect, which proves that he died for them in a
special manner; because his Intercession is but the presenting of the Merits of
his Death to his Father in Heaven.

7. I argue from the Event following upon Christ's Death; some men do believe,
when others draw back, and whence comes this distinguishing Faith? either it
comes merely of Man's Free Will, or of God's free Grace; if we say the first,
it is the very mire and dirt of Pelagianism, it is to set up Free Will as an Idol
to cast lots upon Christ's Blood, whether any one person in the World shall be
saved thereby or not: If we say the latter, then God and Christ had a special
eye upon some above others; for God ordained, that Christ should be the grand
Medium to Salvation, and that Faith should be the only way to Christ: If then
he gave Christ for all, and Faith but to some, it is because he did in a
special way intend their Salvation, and consequently Christ (who came to do his
Fathers Will) had in his Death a special respect to them.

8. I argue from the special Expressions in Scripture: As the Death of Christ
is set out there in words of universality, so it is set out there in words of
special peculiarity. Christ died for the elect, Romans 8. 33, 34. died for the
children of God scattered abroad, Joh. 11. 52. gave himself for the Church,
Ephesians. 5. 25. gave himself for a peculiar people, Tit. 2. 14. laid down his life
for the sheep, Joh. 10. 15. sanctified himself for the given ones, Joh. 17. 9.
and 19. purchased the church with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. redeemed a people
from among men, Rev. 14. 4. is a Jesus to his own people, Matthew. 1. 21. and a
savior to his own body, Ephesians. 5. 23. And is there no Emphasis of Love? Are
there no strains of free Grace? Is there no import of singular respect and
affection in all these Expressions? We cannot say so without dispiriting the
Scripture: Experience it self tells us, that all are not Christ's Elect,
Children, Church, peculiar People, Sheep, given Ones, Body, and redeemed Ones
from among men; wherefore when the Scripture says that he died for these, it
imports that he died for them in a peculiar manner. But you will say, These
Scriptures speak rather of the Application of Christ's Death, than the
Impetration; and though the Impetration be equally for all, yet the Application
is proper to Believers only. I answer, that if those Phrases, of dying for the
elect or children of God, giving himself for a church or peculiar People,
laying down his life for his sheep, purchasing the Church with his blood, and
sanctifying himself for the given ones, do not import Impetration, I know not
what can import it. You will reply, that these Expressions import not
Impetration as it is barely and nakedly in it self, but as it has Application
following upon it, and this is the Emphasis of them: But if these Expressions
import Impetration with Application following upon it, whether does that
Application follow upon Impetration as a fruit thereof or not; if so, then
Christ merited that Application for the Elect, and consequently died in a
special manner for them; if not, then there is no Emphasis of special Love and
Grace in all those expressions of his dying, giving himself, sanctifying
himself and laying down his life for them: for there was no Merit in all this
to procure the Application of his Death unto them. But let us further enquire,
what these Elect Children, Church, peculiar People, Sheep, given ones and
redeemed ones from among men were before or without the Purchase made by
Christ; were these Elect called and justified without Christ or not? If so, why
did he die for them? If not, then he died for them that they might be so called
and justified. Were these children meritoriously begotten by Christ's Blood or
not? If so, then that Blood did more for them than for others; if not, then
they were not the Seed of Christ. Was that Church an actual Church before or
without Christ's purchase? or was it a Church in his Intention? If an actual
Church, what need he purchase it? If a Church in intention, then the special
design of his Death was to make it an actual Church. Was that peculiar People
such without the Merit of Christ's Death or not? If so, why did he give himself
for it? If not, then he gave himself for it that it might be such. Were those
Sheep brought into Christ's fold without his Death or not? If so, why did he lay
down his life for them? If not, he laid it down to bring them thither. Were
those given Ones actually sanctified without the virtue of Christ's Sacrifice or
not? If so, then why did he sanctify himself for them? If not, then he
sanctified himself for them, that they might be sanctified. Were those redeemed
from among men redeemed by Christ or not? If so, then he redeemed them in a
special manner; if not, then they are the redeemed ones of their own Free Will.
But let the Texts themselves breath forth their own native strains of Love and
Grace; he so died for the Elect as to effectually call and actually justify
them, Romans 8. 30, 33. he so died for his Children as to gather them together
into one, one Faith on Earth and one fruition in Heaven, Joh. 11. 52. he so
gave himself for the Church, as to make it a glorious Church without spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 25, 27. he so gave himself for his People as to make them his
peculiar ones, Tit. 2. 14. he so laid down his life for his Sheep as to bring
them into his fold, and make them hear his voice, Joh. 10. 15, 16. he so
sanctified himself for the given ones as to sanctify them through the truth,
Joh. 17. 19. he so redeemed his chosen Ones from among men as to make them
first fruits to God and the Lamb, Rev. 14. 4. In all these special Scriptures,
it evidently appears that Christ in his Death had a special respect to his
Elect. Wherefore I will shut up all with that of an Ancient, Etsi Christus pro
omnibus mortuus Ambr. Li. 6. Luc. cap. 7.
est, pro nobis tamen specialiter passus est, quia pro Ecclesia passus est.

CHAP. IX. Of the Work of Conversion.
HAving passed over Redemption, I come to Conversion; there we had Christ
formed in the Womb, here we have him formed in the Heart; there we had Christ
coming in the Flesh and working miracles on men's Bodies, here we have him
coming in the Spirit and working miracles in men's Souls; there we had Christ
pouring forth his Blood and reconciling us to God's Justice, here we have him
pouring forth his Spirit and reconciling us to God's Holiness. Now in my
discourse touching Conversion, I shall reduce all to 3. Quaeries.

1. What is Man's state before Conversion? 2. What is the Nature of the Work? 3.
Who is the Worker thereof?
In the first we shall meet with the extreme Necessity of the work, in the
second with the intrinsecal Excellency thereof, and in the third with the Power
and Grace of the great Agent.

1. What is Man's State before Conversion? I mean Man fallen, for Man standing
needed no Conversion; and this I shall consider two ways.

1. What it is in general in relation to the whole Man? 2. What it is in
particular in relation to the several parts of Man?
1. What it is in general? and this I shall open in two things.

1. It Is a State of Estrangement from God. 2. It Is a State of Enmity against
God.
1. It Is a State of Estrangement from God; a natural Man is estranged from the
womb, Psalm. 58. 3. without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. God is all round about
him in the witnessing Creatures, and yet he is without God in the World; God is
in him in the Lamp of Conscience, and yet he is without God in his Heart, for
there he says, There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. Which way soever God comes forth
to meet him, whether from Mount Sinai in the fiery Law, or from Mount Sion in
Gospel-charms of free Grace, still he flies away from God's presence; and if
God pursue after him, he will say to God in plain Terms, Depart from me, Job. 21.
14. and if any relics of light will not depart, but stay behind in his heart,
he shuts them up in the prison of unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. His Ubi is with
Cain in Nod the Land of wandering and demigration, and with the Prodigal in a
far Country, where he is far off from God, Psalm. 73. 27. and God far off from
him, Prove. 15. 29. and if ever he be saved, he must be brought from far, Isai.
43. 6. Now upon a distinct View this is a deplorable Condition; for

1. A natural Man being estranged from God the Fountain of Life, must needs be
a dead Man, dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1. because alienated from the
Life of God; he is not only as the man in the Gospel, half dead, Luke 10. 30.
(who is there set forth not as a figure of Original Corruption, but as an
Object of Charity, as is very evident by the scope of the Parable, which is
ushered in with that Question, And who is my neighbor, Ver. 29? and at last
closed up with the like, Which of the three was neighbor to him Ver. 36?) but
he is altogether dead in Spirituals; there are no true vital Spirits of Faith
in him, no true motions of Obedience, no pulse of heavenly Affections, no
breath of Spiritual Prayer, no taste of the Gospel-wine and Marrow, no feeling
of all that massy Sin and Wrath which lies upon him; all his Life is a
Death-wandering, all his rest is in the Congregation of the dead, Prove. 21. 16.
Give him all the Statures of natural Excellencies, strew him over with the
flowers of sweetest Morality, and spangle him with the Notions of sublime
Theology, yet still he is but a dead man, his Soul a dead Soul, his Faith a
dead Faith, his Works dead works, and his Hopes and Comfors but as the giving
up of the Ghost. But you will say, Is not Man a living Creature? Has he not a
Reason and relics of Light in it? Has he not a free Will and Seeds of Moral
Virtue in it? And why then do you call him dead? I answer; Man is a living
Creature, alive in Naturals, but dead in Spirituals; he has a Reason, but,
because there is no light of life in it, it is but a dead Reason; his relics
of Light argue no more Spiritual Life in him, than knowledge does in Devils; he
has a free Will, but for want of the freedom indeed, it is only free among the
dead, I mean, to this or that carnal or natural Work, and not to the Will of
God; he has some Seeds of Moral Virtue in him, but alas! these are of too low
an Extraction to be any Particles of spiritual Life. Mere Moral Virtues are by
God's blessing on humane Industry struck as sparks out of natural Principles,
but Spiritual Life is a Fire dropped down from Heaven into the Heart; mere Moral
Virtues descending but from natural Principles never ascend up to God as their
end, but Spiritual Life as it is originally born of God, so it is ultimately
terminated in him. Wherefore a man may be naturally, nay morally alive, and yet
be spiritually dead.

2. A natural Man being estranged from God, who is an infinite Spirit, must
needs be Flesh: Thus God calls the Men of the old World flesh, Genesis 6. 3. thus
our Savior sets out Regeneration by its opposite, That which is born of the
flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit, Joh. 3. 6. As
the Body separate from the Soul is Flesh, such as moulders into Dust, and
putrifies into Worms; so the Soul separate from God is Flesh too, such as turns
into the Dust of earthly things, and rots in those Lusts which breed the
never-dying Worm in Hell; neither is this Flesh only in the lower Rooms of the
Soul, but in the upmost Faculties of Reason and Will. In the Reason there is
the cankred flesh of Errors and Heresies, and in the Will there is the dead
flesh of Impotency, and the proud flesh of Obstinacy against the Will of God.
Hence the Apostle tells us of a (...), a mind of flesh, Col. 2. 18. and of
(...), wills of flesh, Ephesians. 2. 3. And therefore the true Circumcision is in the
heart and in the spirit, Romans 2. 29. even in the highest Faculties and Powers
of the Soul.

3. A natural Man being estranged from God, who is the Beauty of Holiness, must
needs be very impure; he is filthy or stinking, Psalm. 14. 3. an unclean thing,
Joh 14. 4. he lies polluted in his blood, with a Leprosy in his head, and a
Plague in his heart, clothed in filthy rags of Sin, and rolling in the mire and
vomit of Corruption; so great is his filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness,
that he taints whatsoever he touches; his very Prayers are an abomination, and
his Services as dung before God: Neither is this pollution only in the
sensitive Soul but also in the rational, there is filthiness of spirit, 2 Cor.
7. 1. and disilement in the very mind and conscience, Tit. 1. 15. there is no
sound part, but all over wounds and bruises and putrefying sores.

4. A natural Man being estranged from God, who is Jehovah or Beingness, must
needs be a very Nullity in spirituals. If a Creature be separate from the God
of Nature, it is a Nullity in naturals; and if a rational Creature be separate
from the God of Grace, he is a Nullity in spirituals. Sure, if he were any
thing at all, he might speak or think, but he can do neither: As running a
fountain of Words as his tongue is, he cannot say, Jesus is the Lord, 1 Cor.
12. 3. and as swarming a Hive of Thoughts as his Heart is, he cannot think any
thing as of himself, 2 Cor. 3. 5. The great Apostle gives a double account of
himself, an account what he is in himself, I am nothing, says he, 2 Cor. 12.
11. and an account what he is by Grace, by the grace of God I am what I am, 1
Cor. 15. 10. all his nothingness is in and of himself, and all his spiritual
essence is in and of Grace. A mere Natural man is nothing in Spirituals, his
eyes are on that which is not, Prove. 23. 5. his joy is in a thing of naught,
Amos 6. 13. and all the false Gods in his heart are (...) nihilitates,
nothingnesses, Psalm. 96. 5. As they are Creatures in the World, they are
Beings, but as they are Idols in his (...), they are nothing, nothing to make a
God of, and he, who makes them such, is like unto them, even nothing in
Spirituals.

2. It Is a State of Enmity against God; he is not only a Stranger but an enemy
too, Col. 1. 21. nay, which is more, his carnal Mind is enmity against God,
Romans 8. 7. Enmity is irreconcilable, it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be, not unless the Enmity be slain in it; nay, further the
Apostle call the Gentiles (...) haters of God, Romans 1. 30. and Hatred is Enmity
boiled up to the height. Hatred (says the Philosopher) seeks (...), the
Not-being of the thing hated; and such is man's Wickedness that strikes as it
were at the Life and Being of God, it had rather that God should not be, than
that Lusts should be restrained. The Scripture sets out some grand Enemies as
opposing God openly and upon the Stage of the World, and by what they did
openly, we may discern what spirit and mystery of Iniquity is working in every
Natural man's heart secretly; there is in him some of the corrupt flesh of the
old World; somewhat of Pharaoh's spirit, which secretly says, Who is the Lord
that I should obey his voice? Somewhat of the bloody Jew, which is ready to
crucify the Son of God afresh, and trample his precious blood under-foot;
somewhat of the proud Antichrist, the man of sin, which exalts it self above
God, its own Reason above the Wisdom of God, and its own Will above the Will of
God. The very same Venom and Poison of Enmity, which the Grand Enemies of God
pour out openly, privily lurks and works in every Natural Man.

Thus in general, Man's State is Estrangement and Enmity. But to proceed.

2. What is Man's State in particular, in relation to his several parts? Now
here the same Estrangement and Enmity shows forth it self according to the
Nature of each part.

1. As for the Understanding, it is turned away from God, the first and
essential Truth, and so become a Forge of lying Vanities; it is turned away from
God the first and essential Light, and so become a dark place, nay, darkness it
self, Ephesians. 5. 8. and if the light be darkness, how great is that darkness? So
great it is, that a Natural man sets an higher estimate on the Follies of Time
than on the Blessedness of Eternity, and rates the broken Cisterns above the
Fountain of living waters. (...), the souly man, who has nothing but a
rational Soul, the Spirit of a mere man in him, (...), receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 2. 14. One would think that all Truths should be
welcome to a rational Soul, and above all, the Mysteries of Heaven; but he
receives them not. And this the Apostle lays down distinctly; The spirit of
man knows the things of man, because they are within his own Line; but the
things of God are only known by the Spirit of God, because they are above the
Sphere of natural Reason. As the things of Man are above the Sphere of Sense,
so the things of God are above the Sphere of Reason; and yet as if they were
below it, the Natural man counts them foolishness, which evinces an extreme
foolishness in his own heart; he is not a Man, not an understanding Creature in
Spirituals. Agur is a Brute in his own eyes, I have not the understanding of a
man, says he, Prove. 30. 2. The Apostle proving all under sin, asserts that
there is none that understands, Romans 3. 11. Millions of ratinal Creatures in
the World, and yet there is none that understands; and his proof is
invincible, there is none that seeks after God, which sure would be done, if
there were any spark of spiritual Understanding in him. It Is true there may be
a mass of Notions in a man unconverted, but not a dram of spiritual Knowledge.
Seeing he sees not; he sees the things of God in the image or picture of the
Letter, but he sees them not in their liveliness and inward Glory: Just as the
carnal Israelites who saw their Manna and Sacrifices only in the outside, but
saw not Christ in them; or as those false Seekers, of whom Christ says, Ye
seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves
and were filled, Joh. 6. 26. There was a Miracle in those very Loaves, but they
saw only the carnal and grosser part of the Miracle, and not the Glory and
Power of Christ's Deity sparkling out in it. An Unconverted man knows nothing
as he ought to know it; no, not in the midst of his notions, there is no
savouring, tasting or practical Knowledge in him, nothing but a husk, shell or
form of Knowledge, and in the midst thereof a real enmity against the things
known. Whilst the light of Truth shines only in the Notion, he likes it well
enough; but if it waken Conscience, check Lust, press Duty, or any way offer to
assume its Supremacy in his heart or life, he instantly hates it as an enemy.

2. As for the Will, the Principle of Freedom, it is turned from God the primum
liberum, and from his service the vera libertas; and so it is become servum
arbitrium, an arrant Slave, bound in the bonds of iniquity, and (which is the
height of Slavery) it is in love with its Bonds; and (which is the intenseness
and intimateness of that love) when Christ comes to break these Bonds, it is
loath to be made free indeed, the iron is so entered into his soul; the Bondage
is so intimate in the forlorn Will, that it looks on God's service as bondage,
and Sins bondage as freedom: and hence it is dead and lame to God's ways, but
runs and flies in Sins. Again, the natural Will is turned away from God the
holy One, and so it is become desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9. a Fountain of
blood, out of which evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false witness, blasphemies naturally proceed, Matthew. 15. 19. a Forge of
iniquities. (...) All the forming or framing of the heart; every purpose and
desire effigiated there is only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. all is marred upon
the Wheel of man's corrupt Will. Nay further, the natural Will is turned from
God who is Being, and so it is become a Nullity in Spirituals. What God says of
Israel, he mav well say of every Natural man, (...) he has no will to me,
Psalm. 81. 11. the Object of the Will is Good, and yet all the fontal Goodness
in God moves it not. Nay, lastly, there is an Enmity in the Will against God.
Every Natural man, as a part of the corrupt World, lies (...), in the Devil, 1 John 5. 19. and his heart as a hell sets his tongue on fire, James 3. 6. Deum
ipsum (quantum in ipsa est) perimit voluntas propria, says one, clearly, it
would (if it could) abrogate God's Holiness, blindfold his Omniscience, and
chain up his Justice in order to the fruition of its lusts.

3. As for the Affections, there is nothing but monstrous Ataxy in them. Love in
a Natural Man dotes upon abomination, and Hatred breaks out against goodness it
self; Hope hangs upon a broken reed, and Fear starts and trembles at its
fellow-mortal; Joy triumphs in the pleasures of sin, and therein virtually
sports it self with the flames of Hell; and Sorrow which should wait upon Sin
pours out it self over worldly Crosses: all the Affections are out of frame and
place. At first they were born Subjects to the Kingdom of Reason, but the
Rational Faculties (which are the man) rebelling against God in the first Adam,
the Affections (which are the brutal part) mutin and rise up in Arms against
Reason, and by an unnatural violence depose it; and so unman the man. Hence he
becomes (...), as the unreasonable beasts that perish. What Asaph was in his
Envy at the foolish, that is every man in his inordinate Affections; he is
(...) a great beast before God, Psalm. 73. 22. Here Dinah, that is, the
judgment is deflowred by the Son of Chamor, that is, an Ass (as his Name
imports.) A generation of brutish Lusts ravish the Soul. Here are the (...),
the vile Affections, which debase the Immortal Soul to the dust of the Earth.
Here the (...) Dii Stercorei, those dungy Gods of sensual Lusts, carnal
Profits, and worldly Honors ascend up into the heart, and as Gods assume the
throne of it, command the power of it, and by a kind of omnipresence fill the
whole circumference thereof. Here is the troubled sea of passions and
affections, where Satan the great Leviathan raises up the winds and waves of
all inordinate motions, making the heart boil as a pot, and sporting himself in
the sinful tossings thereof.

4. As for the members of the body, they are (...), weapons of unrighteousness,
Romans 6. 13. The Law of Sin issues out its commands in the soul, that speeds
them to the members of the body, and these are ready to put them in execution.

Thus deplorable is man's state before Conversion, which if duly weighed, is
enough to make every one cry out, Oh! what shall I do to be saved? wherefore I
proceed to consider the second Quaere.

2. What is the nature of the Work? And here I shall unfold two things:

1. What are the preparatives to Conversion? 2. What is the work of Conversion
it self?
1. What are the preparatives to Conversion? For as God makes a way to his
anger in punishing, so he makes a way to his Mercy in converting sinners.
First, the fallow-ground of the heart must be broken up, before the Seed of God
be cast into it: first, Moses must hew the Tables of the Heart, and then God
writes the Law upon them. Manasseh will not humble and turn unto the Lord, till
he be in chains. Every natural man is a Manasseh, a forgetter of God (as that
name imports) and will not remember and turn unto the Lord, till the Spirit of
bondage lay him up in chains under deep Convictions of Sin and Wrath. As when
Christ came in the flesh, John Baptist prepared his way by the doctrine of
Repentance: So when Christ is formed in the heart, John, that is, Gods Grace
prepares his way by legal humiliations. Now the preparatory works to Conversion
are these.

1. There is a Conviction of Sin, the Spirit (...) shall convince the world of
sin, Joh. 16. 8. not only of Sin in general, but in particular. The Law as it is
in the Letter only operates little, but as it is in the Spirits hand it is
(...), Romans 7. 9. it comes home to the heart, and gives it a full Charge, as
Nathan to David, Thou art the Man. These are Sins, says the Law, and these
have thou done, says Conscience; and from particular sins, the Spirit leads up
the Sinner to the fountain of blood in his Nature, it shows him a Seminary of
corruption in his own heart, it makes him smell the sink of sin in his
ownbosome; neither is this conviction only rational and notional, but real and
intuitvie. Sin with all its Hosts is as it were mustered and set in order
before his eyes, Psalm. 50. 21. Nay, it takes hold upon him, and he is made to
possess it as his own, which forces him at last to cry out, Guilty, Guilty.

1. There is a Conviction of Wrath. When Satan gave man his first fall, he
instilled this Principle into him, thou shall not surely dye, Genesis 3. 4. No,
though thou eat the (...) thou shall not. On the contrary, when God comes to
recover a Soul out of its Fall, he speaks in the same language as to Abimelech,
Behold thou art but a dead man, Genesis 20. 3. The wages of sin is death; and
because such sins are found in thee, thou have the sentence of death in thy
self. In conviction God sets up a Judgment Seat in the heart; and there after
Law-accusations and Conscience-proofs, the Sinner is sentenced to death, and
after sentence he is drawn into the valley of Achor, or trouble, to be stoned
with the curses of the Law, and scourged with Scorpions of Wrath; he hangs by
the thread of his life over the bottomless gulf of perdition, and out of the
fiery Law Hell does as it were flash in his face.

3. Out of these convictions there arises legal fear. Gods judgments, which
before were far above out of his sight, now approach near unto him; qualms come
over Conscience, and hell-pains begin to seize the Soul: this fear has
torment, a kind of hell in it, and out of this legal fear issues a flood of
legal sorrows for sin, as procurative of wrath; Gods arrows stick fast in the
Soul; and hence men are pricked in heart, Acts 2. 37. and which is more,
wounded in spirit, Prove. 18. 14. and these wounds stink and are corrupt, till
the balm of Christ's blood be poured into them. Such is the weight of these
fears and sorrows, that it presses the Soul into a self-weariness, and by
degrees breaks it all to pieces, that there is scarce left a shard thereof to
take a little fire from the hearth, or water out of the Pit of any
Creaturecomfort.

4. In the midst of these fears and sorrows, some glimmerings and appearances
of mercy in Christ offer themselves to the Soul, and the Soul begins to have
some vellcities and imperfect wouldings after Mercy, anguish and bitterness
make it cry out, Oh! What shall I do to be saved? The scorching flames of Gods
wrath leave a thirst in the heart after the coolings and refrigerations of
pardoning Mercy, and in proportion to these wouldings and velleities, there are
some light touches and tastes of Free Grace, some flashes of joy in the Word,
and Christ the marrow thereof; and yet all this while there is no root of
Spiritual life in the heart. These are the preparatories of Conversion, only we
must not conceive them to be such formal immediate dispositions as infallibly
infer Conversion after them; for such prepared ones, though not far from the
Kingdom of Heaven, may yet possibly never enter into it: neither must we look
on these preparations, though Gods usual method, as necessary on Gods part; for
if he please to use his Prerogative, he can make even dry bones to rattle and
come together again without any previous dispositions. He can say unto men,
even when they are in their blood, Live; and that word, as with child of
Omnipotency, shall instantly bring forth the New Creature.

2. What is the work of Conversion it self? I answer, It Is that inward
Principle of Grace, whereby a man is made able and willing to turn from all
Creatures unto God in Christ. Conversion is a motion of the Soul, and therefore
there must be an inward Principle, called in Scripture a Root; The root of the
matter is in me, says Job, Job 19. 28. Friends, you look upon me as if I were
nothing but leaves of hypocrisy, but the inward Root of Holiness is in me.
Conversion is a supernatural motion, and therefore there must be an inward
Principle of Grace, called by the Apostle, the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. the
Humane Nature cannot elevate it self so high as Conversion, but the Divine
Nature can do it. By this inward Principle of Grace man becomes able, he has
an active posse convertere, and which is more, a velle too, he becomes able and
willing to turn. Conversion is called in Scripture (...) a returning unto God.
Man's Natural state wants a Turn, and Gods Supernatural Grace effects it. Motion
is between two terms; the terminus a quo in conversion is all Creatures.
Creatures as Creatures are the footsteps of Gods Power and Goodness; and so we
must not turn from a worm, but see God in it: but Creatures as they are deifyed
and idolized in the heart become lying vanities and empty nothings, and so in
Conversion we turn from them all. The world without us is a Glass of the Divine
Wisdom and Goodness, and so Conversion gives a sanctified use of it; but the
world within us, the world in the heart is nothing but a lust, 1 John 2. 16.
sitting in the place and Throne of God, I mean, the chief and uppermost seat of
the Soul, and so Conversion casts it out of the heart. The Soul in Conversion
moves toward God as its true center, and therefore must leave all the world
behind its back. The terminus ad quem in Conversion is God. A man before
Conversion walks in an Image, Psalm. 39. 6. he thinks that he moves toward
happiness in this or that Creature, but all the while he is but in an image or
picture of happiness: but in Conversion he moves really to God the Center and
Sabbath of Souls. Lastly, in Conversion there is a turning unto God in Christ.
To turn to God is a most rational Act, for he is the only true end of the Soul;
and to turn to God in Christ is a most Regular Act, for he is the only true way
to that end. The way into the Holy of holies is only through the vail of
Christ's flesh. If we go to God out of Christ, we go to a consuming fire; but if
we go to God in him, we go to a reconciled Father, who is ready to fall upon
our necks, and kiss and welcome us with his Love revealed in the face of Christ.

Now in Conversion there are two instants or moments to be distinctly
considered.

1. The first instant is habitual Conversion, or the habits or vital Principles
of Grace which incline and dispose the Soul to actual Conversion.

2. The second instant is actual Conversion, or the actuation and crowning
issue of those Principles in an actual turn to God.

1. As to the habits or vital Principles of Grace I shall do two things.

1. I shall demonstrate that there are habits or Principles of Grace. 2. I
shall particularly unfold what they are.
1. I shall demonstrate that there are such things. The Remonstrants mince the
business; There is (say they) potentia supernaturalis concessa voluntati ad hoc
ut credere and been Act. Synod. in Art. 3. and 4.
agere possit; but as as for any habitual Grace, they tell us, Scholasticorum
figmentum est, and little qui simul and somel optant infundi omnes illos
habitus, quos actibus crebris comparare nimis laboriosum esse arbitrantur. Now
there is a vast difference between a mere posse convertere, and those Habits or
Principles of Grace which dispose and incline the Soul to actual Conversion. A
mere posse convertere does not include in it any inward disposition or
inclination in the Soul to turn to God, no more than the posse peccare in
innocent Adam did include in it an inward disposition or inclination in the
Soul to depart from God; but the Habits or Principles of Grace do incline and
dispose the Soul to actual Conversion. Again, a mere posse convertere does not
denominate a man gracious no more than the posse peccare in innocent Adam did
denominate him sinful; but the Habits or Principles of Grace do denominate a
man gracious. And the Reason is, a mere posse may be abstract from the Nature
or Essence of the thing into which it is reducible, but the Habit or vital
Principle has something of the Nature or Essence of the thing in it; nay, it
is virtually and seminally the thing it self. A mere posse peccare in Adam
before his Fall did not denominate him sinful, because it had nothing of the
nature of Sin in it; but the Habits and Seeds of Corruption after the Fall did
denominate him very sinful, because they were virtually and seminally all Sin.
A mere posse convertere does not denominate a man gracious, because it is
abstract from the Nature and Essence of the thing; but the Habits or Principles
of Grace do denominate him such, because they were virtually and seminally all
Grace. Now that there are such Habits or Principles of Grace, and not only a
naked Power, I shall thus demonstrate.

1. Out of the Scriptures, which do elegantly and emphatically decypher out
those Habits or Principles to us. Wonderful is the variety of Expressions to
this purpose. These Habits or Principles are called, the new heart and new
spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. the new man, Ephesians. 4. 24. the new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3. 4. the good treasure of the heart,
Matthew. 12. 35. the glory within, Psalm. 45. 13. eternal life abiding in us, 1 John 3. 15. a well of water springing up into everlasting life, Joh. 4. 14. the
teaching and abiding anointing, 1 John 2. 27. the renewing of the holy Ghost,
Tit. 3. 5. the seed of God remaining in us, 1 John 3. 9. the life of God, Ephesians.
4. 18. and, which is the sublimest word of all, the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
And is all this glory of words poured out upon a mere posse; which does not so
much as incline to Conversion? Are not here the noblest and highest
Inclinations set forth unto us? Has not the new heart, which has eternal life
in it, a propensity to Acts of spiritual life? Will not the new creature
renewed by the holy Ghost, and sweetened by the holy Unction have some Odours
and Fragrancies breaking forth from it? Can the hidden man be ever hid, the
good treasure ever sealed, and the glory within ever shut up? Must not the Well
of life break forth, the seed and life of God spring up, and the divine nature
show forth it self? and do not these denominate him gracious in whom they are?
What does a new heart speak him? How does the good treasure enrich him, the
glory within illustrate him, the holy unction perfume him, the life and seed of
God quicken him, the renewing of the holy Ghost alter him, and the divine
nature glorify him? Here are pregnant denominations indeed, but there is not a
tittle of this in a mere posse convertere; wherefore these expressions are of a
nobler emphasis than so. You Will say, it is true, these expressions show forth
habits or principles of Grace, but not such as go before the actual consent of
the will to Gods Call, but such as follow after it, nay, after frequent acts
thereof.

Unto which I shall answer two things:

1. The habits and principles of Grace decyphered in the Scriptures aforesaid,
are there set out as the royal acts of pure Free Grace, and not as pendents
upon man's Will; and for this I shall give two eminent instances, omitting
others; The first is in that famous place, Ezekiel. 36. where God promises a new
heart, ver. 26. and his own spirit, ver. 27. but withal he enters a double
protestation, one before the Promise, Thus says the Lord, I do not this for
your sakes O house of Israel, but for mine own holy names sake, ver. 22. and
another after it, Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known
unto you, be ashamed and confounded for your own ways O house of Israel, ver.
32. What could be more said to exalt God and his Free Grace, and to annihilate
man and his Works? How could the True God enter such protestations, if the
great promise of a new-heart hang in suspense upon man's actual consent? When a
man without the new-heart gives that actual consent, there in something, which
instead of shame and confusion, is worthy to be noted as a matter of Praise and
Glory. But you will say, these protestations respect not the way or order of
working these gracious habits, but exclude man's worth or dignity in the
business. Now albeit God do not give the new-heart for man's consent, yet he may
do it upon or after man's consent. I answer, these protestations show, that
before the new heart there is nothing in man but what is matter of shame and
confusion, and by consequence the actual consent of the Will, which is a matter
of Praise and Glory, cannot so much as in order exist before the new-heart. The
second instance is that, Tit. 3. 5. where the Apostle opens the fountain of
Regeneration; Not by works of Righteousness which we have done, but according
to his Mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the
Holy Ghost. We are saved by washing and renewing, but in what way or method is
this wrought? The Apostle tells us, not by works of Righteousness, but of mere
mercy. Surely if there be any Righteousness in man, it must be in his Will, and
if any work of Righteousness be in the Will, an actual consent to Gods Call
must be such a work. Yet the Apostle asserts that our Regeneration was not by
works of Righteousness but of Gods Mercy. Again, it is observable, that the
Apostle does not say, Not for works of Righteousness, as only excluding the
meritorious dignity thereof, but he says, Not by works of Righteousness, as
denying the very existence thereof in order to Regeneration.

2. If the actual consent of the Will to the Calls of God do indeed precede the
habits or principles of Grace, then what is that which gives an actual consent
to Gods Call? What else but the stony heart, the old Creature, the wisdom of
man, and the humane nature? For the mere posse convertere does not include in
it a heart of flesh, a new Creature, an holy Unction, or divine Nature;
therefore the consent precedent to these Gracious Principles must be given by
the stony heart, old Creature, humane Wisdom and Nature, which is very
incongruous. Let us hear Anselms determination in this case, Voluntas non recte
vult nisi quia recta est: sicut non est acutus visus, quia De Concordia, Cap.
13.
videt acute, sed ideo videt acute quia acutus est; it a voluntas non est
recta, quia vult recte, sed recte vult, quoniam est recta. To the same purpose
is that of our Savior; A corrupt tree (...) cannot bring forth good fruit,
Mat. 7. 18. that is, whilst it is corrupt, it cannot, A corrupt tree may become
a good tree, but whilst it is corrupt it cannot bring forth good fruit; as when
the Apostle says. The carnal mind cannot be subject to Gods Law, Romans 8. 7.
the meaning is, that whilst it is carnal it cannot; and how then can the Will,
whilst it is a corrupt tree, bring forth so precious a fruit as an assent to
Gods Call? How can such a grape of Heaven grow upon the thorns of an
unregenerate heart? You Will say, I must not call the Will a corrupt tree, when
there is a posse convertere supernaturally poured into it; but if that posse do
not denominate it gracious, surely it is as yet but corrupt, and whilst it is
such, it may be so called.

2. I argue from the Glory of free Grace, one of its Crown-jewels is, that it
makes gracious Principles where there were none before; it new creates in
Christ, and so gives Principles of Spiritual being; it quickens the dead, and
so gives Principles of Spiritual Life: thus free Grace is blessed from the
fountain of Israel, from the fontal Principles of the new Creature. But those
which deny gracious Principles, darken free Grace in that which is its prime
luster. But here I shall be asked whether that posse convertere be not such a
Principle? I answer No; a Principle is more than a bare, posse. There was in
Adam in innocence a posse peccare, and yet there was no Principle of sin in
him; after the same manner, there is (say the Remonstrants) a posse convertere
given to fallen man, but this is no Principle of Grace in him. But not to
strive about words, suppose it might be called a Principle, yet what a grand
disparagement to free Grace is it, to say, that there was as much of Principle
in innocent Adam by Nature toward his sinful transgression, as there is in
fallen Man by Grace toward his actual Conversion? Such as deny gracious
habits, and grant only a naked power must say so.

3. I argue from the sweetness of Providence. As it is the Glory of free Grace
that there are gracious Principles made, so it is the sweetness of providence,
that those Principles are made first; and then congruous acts issue from
thence. The only wise God disposes things in the sweetest method. In the body
of Nature first a Sun and then a beam, first a Fountain and then a stream,
first a Root and then a fruit. In the Soul of Man negative faculties precede
acts of life, sensitive acts of sense, and intellectual acts of reason. Hence
those acts issue forth in an easy connaturalness to their Principles. And can
there be less of the beauty of providence in the Spiritual world than in the
natural? Should there not be as sweet an order in the new Creature as in the
old? Ought not supernatural acts to issue forth in as great connaturalness to
their Principles as natural? If so, then there must be habits of Grace to
precede the acts; if not, then those acts, which are above nature in facto
esse, as to their essential excellency, must be below it in fieri, as to their
procedure from causes; nay, it is hardly imaginable, that those acts should at
all come forth into being without gracious Principles. If the Will be not
changed by regenerating Grace, how is it constituted in ordine agentium
supernaturalium? And if not, how can it actually turn to God, seeing that is
actus ordinis supernaturalis? Every one that does righteousness is born of God,
1 John 2. 29. To turn unto God is a prime act of Righteousness; and how then
can it be done before Regeneration? Wherefore the Scripture method is clear;
first a good tree and then good fruit, Mat. 7. 17. first a good treasure in the
heart, and then good things out of it, Mat. 12. 35. first we are created in
Christ, and then we walk in good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. And thus Spiritual acts are
done in the easiness of the new Creature, because in a way connatural to
Spiritual Principles.

4. If there be no habits or principles of Grace, what is that that makes the
grand difference between a godly and an ungodly man? Surely, either it must be
the acts of Faith and other Graces, or else the habits and principles thereof.
It Is not the acts of Faith and other Graces, for two Reasons:

1. Because that which makes the difference must be somewhat permanent; such
was Caleb's other spirit which differenced him from the murmuring Congregation,
Numb. 14. 24. Such was Job's Root which differenced him from the leavy
hypocrite, Job 19. 28. But the acts of Faith and other Graces are transient;
wherefore if these be all the difference, what becomes of a Godly man in his
sleep or frenzy, wherein no such acts are put forth? Does he drop out of the
state of Grace without any apostasy, or continue in it without any
differencing quality? neither is possible; he back-slides not from God, and how
can he be out of the state of Grace? he is but as other men are, and how can he
be in it? It remains therefore that the habits of Grace make the difference;
for by reason of these he is not as other men are, no, not when the Acts of
Grace are suspended, because he has another spirit in him.

2. All men being by Nature ungodly, that which chiefly makes the difference
must denominate a man changed. Now in every change the Terminus is somewhat
permanent; in Alteration it is a permanent Quality, in Augmentation it is a
permanent Quantity, in Generation it is a substantial Form, and in Regeneration
it is a new creature born of the incorruptible seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
The Terminus of this gracious Change is set out in Scripture as a permanent
thing; sometimes it is called light; ye were darkness but now light in the Lord,
Ephesians. 5. 8. sometimes life; this my son was dead and is alive again, Luke 15.
24. sometimes the new man; old things are past away, behold all things are
become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. still it is somewhat parmanent. Hence it appears,
that the Acts of Faith and other Graces (which are transient) do not so
properly denominate a man changed, as improve the Change already made. The wild
Tree is changed by the Graff, and not by the After-fruit; the Natural man is
changed by the ingrafted Word, and not by the fruits of Faith and other Graces,
which naturally grow upon the Root of habitual Grace. That a corrupt Tree is
made good is a great Change; but that a good Tree brings forth good fruit is
altogether connatural.

If there be no Habits or Principles of Grace, how can the Natural man's deadly
Wound, I mean Original Corruption ever be healed? Habitual Corruption cannot be
healed but by habitual Grace, the Plague of the Heart cannot be healed but by
the holy Unction; instead of the old Heart there must be a new one, or else
there is no healing, and without healing how can such a sound Act as Conversion
come forth? It remains therefore, that there are Habits or Principles of Grace.

2. Having proved that there are such Habits or Principles, I come to unfold
what they are; and this I cannot better do, than by showing what they are in
the several Faculties. Wherefore

1. As to the Understanding, there is a Principle of excellent Knowledge; I
say, excellent, not only in respect of the matter of it, being heavenly
Mysteries; but also in respect of the Nature of it, it is too high for a fool;
nay, it is a Story higher than the Knowledge of all the unregenerate Rabbis in
the World: It Is 'not a mere literal Knowledge, a knowing of Christ after the
flesh, but a spiritual, a revealing spiritual things in their spiritual Glory;
it is not a dead Knowledge called by the Apostle (...), a form of knowledge, Romans
2. 20. such as is but a liveless figure or appearance, but it is a lively
Knowledge called by the Wiseman a wellspring of life, Prove. 16. 22. and by our
Savior the light of life, Joh. 8. 12. It Is not a Knowledge without Sense, but
such as has Sense, nay, all the Senses of the inward man in it; it is a seeing
of the just one, Acts 22. 14. a hearing and learning of the Father, Joh. 6. 45.
a smelling and savouring the sweet odours of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 2. 14. a
tasting how good and gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 81. a tactual knowledge, a
spiritual touching and handling of the word of life, 1 John 1. 1. here are
seminally and virtually all those spiritual Senses which discern good and evil.
It Is not a dark and duskish Knowledge, but clear and lightsome; it is seeing
with the veil off and face open, 2 Cor. 3. 16, 18. it is the day dawning and the
day star arising in the heart, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Here God shines into the heart,
and things are seen eye to eye, as the expression is, Isai. 52. 8. that is, in
a clear evidence of the truth. It Is not a Knowledge at a distance and afar off,
as Dives saw Abraham, and as every natural man sees the things of Faith, but a
near and intimate Knowledge. It Is wisdom in the hidden parts, Psalm. 51. 6. it is
wisdom entering into the heart, Prove. 2. 10. it is a reason delivered over to the
power of holy truths, Romans 6. 17. it is (...), the word engrafted or
innaturalized in the mind, Jam. 1. 21. Hereby the Truth approaches and
presentiates it self to the Soul in so clear and near a manner as that it works
a firm assent and persuasion thereof, and that upon the divine Authority
shining and sparkling out in the same. This Principle says Amen to all the
Truths in Scripture; by it we come to know truths in our selves, Heb. 10. 34.
and to carry the witness thereof within us, 1 John 5. 10. As Jesus Christ is
the Amen, the faithful and true witness who sealed the Truths of the Gospel
outwardly by his Blood, so the holy Unction dropping down fom Christ is an
Amen, a faithful and true witness sealing up those Truths inwardly in the
heart. And this clear and near Knowledge, as it assures and persuades a man of
those Truths, is Faith in the Understanding; for this sets to its seal that God
is true in them, 1 John 3. 33. It Is not a mere notional Knowledge floating in
the Brain, vaunting in the Tongue or flourishing in a leavy Profession; but
it is a practical Knowledge influxive into the Will, inflammative to the
Affections, and directive to the whole Life. This is that Principle of
excellent Knowledge whereby the Soul is enabled to see God as the only supreme
End, Christ as the only true Way, and Sin as the only great Obstacle thereunto.

2. As to the Will there is a Principle of Holiness and Rectitude, such as
makes the Heart pure and right, such as sets the Will into a right frame and
posture in a threefold Respect.

1. In reference to the true End of Man. 2. In reference to the right Means. 3.
In reference to the grand Obstacle.
1. It sets the Will into a right posture in reference to Man's true End. Man's
true End is God alone; for he is fontal Goodness, Allness of Perfections; the
primum amabile, and ultimus finis, the great Alpha and Omega of Spirits,
perfectly able to still all the desires, and fill all the crannies thereof. Now
this rectifying Principle in the Will, as respective to this supreme End, shows
forth it self three ways.

1. In that it is a desiring Principle. Desire is the firstborn of the Will,
the first opening of the rational Appetite, and this Principle sanctifies it
and sets it apart for God as its supreme End; it enclines and disposes the Will
to pant and thirst after God, to faint and cry out for him, to enquire and seek
after him with all the heart. Before the Will Cain-like did go out from the
Lord's presence, but now David-like it desires to dwell in his house and behold
his beauty. Before the Will lay dead in the Grave of Creature-deadness, but now
it has the life of God in it quickening it to holy breathings after him: before
there was such a gravedo liberi arbitrii, such Talents of Carnality upon the
Will, that it could in no wise lift up it self, but lay among the pots and
embraced dunghils; but now it has the wings of a Dove to elevate it self to
God. Here is the first resurrection of the Will; here are the (...), ascensions
in the heart, as the Septuagint has it, Psalm. 84. 5. The nature of this
Principle is to ascend up to God and leave all the World behind its back. As
the Principle of persuading Knowledge is Faith in the Understanding, so this
desiring Principle is Love in the Will in its primordial propensities; there is
spiritual Life in primoradio, in its first Light, and here is spiritual life in
primo ardore, in its first heat.

2. In that it is a purposing Principle, such as inclines and disposes the Soul
to pitch by a serious determination upon God as its only happiness, and to
cleave unto him with purpose of heart, Act. 11. 23. This renders a man a true
spiritual Levite, who (as his name imports) is joined to the Lord and become
one spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6. 17. And as the firstborn were dedicated to God,
and afterward the Levites; so the desiring Principle first dedicates the
Desires the firstborn of the Will to God, and then this purposing Principle
makes a man a spiritual Levite consecrated to God by a holy Conjunction with
him. This is that Key of David or Love (as David imports) which opens the
everlasting doors of the Will that the king of glory may come in, Psalm. 24. 7.
This is that sweet voice of David or Love which upon mature deliberation is
ready to break out, Whom have I in heaven but thee? whom on earth besides thee?
Psalm. 73. 25. In Heaven there are glorious Angels, and on Earth multitudes of
good Creatures, but none of them all are my end or happiness; none, none but
God alone. Were Heaven and Earth emptied of all their Furniture, still I should
have my end as long as I have my God, who fills them both with his presence;
whilst he is with me there can be no such thing as Emptiness, for he is all in
all, waving all the World, I pitch upon him alone as my only end. I can truly
say to the Covetous, God is my gold, Job 22. 25. to the Ambitious, God is my
glory, Psalm. 3. 3. to the Voluptuous, God is my delight, Isai. 58. 14. to the
Soldier, God is my buckler and high tower, Psalm. 18. 2. to the Mariner, God is
my broad rivers and streams, Isai. 33. 21. to the Potentates and Emperors of
the World, God is my crown and diadem, Isai. 28. 5. and to those who with Esau
have enough of the World, Jacob-like, I have all, Genesis 33. 11. all in one, even
in God alone. Such Resolutions as these are the proper Issues of this purposing
Principle, this makes the Will free indeed; before it was free in Naturals, but
now in Spirituals, which is freedom indeed. When the Will fixes it self upon
the Creature as its End, it is in straits in a house of bondage. Take the World
in its own place, it is a spacious Looking-glass of God's Power and Goodness,
but take it as a man's End and Happiness, it is too strait and narrow for the
immortal Spirit to breathe in. Hence carnal Men even in the fullness of
sufficiency are yet instraits, Job 20. 22. but when the Will through this
purposing Principle fixes it self upon God as its End, it is free indeed. The
Rabbis call God (...) Place, and a large one he is; no less than an Infinity
and Immensity of Goodness, such as no desire or out-going of the Will can ever
pass thorough. Here there is Room enough for an immortal Spirit, Goodness
enough to satiate the rational Appetite for ever. Now as the desiring Principle
is Love in the Will in its first Plantation; so this purposing Principle is
Love further rooted and grounded in the same Faculty.

3. In that it is a resting Principle, such as enclines and disposes the Will
to a double rest in God.

1. To a Rest of Innitence. 2. To a Rest of Complacence.
1. To a Rest of Innitence; it inclines the Will to lean and roll it self upon
God, and to set its faith and hope in him: hereby the Heart has an access unto
God, and casts and ventures it self upon him for all its happiness, as being
fully resolved in it self to be happy only in him. And this is no other than
Faith in the Will considered ut in ultimo termino, in God its only
resting place. We which believe (says the Apostle) do enter into rest, Heb. 4.
3. Faith makes a man cease from himself and enter into rest by a fiducial
repose on God's Allsufficiency.

2. To a Rest of Complacency; it enclines the Will to delight in the Almighty,
Isai. 58. 14. and count him its exceeding joy, Psalm. 43. 4. Hereby the Soul
dwells at ease, or lodges in goodness (as the Original has it) Psalm. 25. 13.
hereby it lies down in the bosom of bliss and has peace for its tabernacle,
Job 5. 24. God was the Levites inheritance, Deuteronomy. 18. 2. As the purposing
Principle makes a man a spiritual Levite, so the resting Principle gives a man
an inheritance in God; and this is Love in its triumph and joy inheriting all
things in Gods Mercy and glorious All Sufficiency.

2. This Principle of Rectitude or Holiness sets the Will right in reference to
the true Means. The true Means is Jesus Christ the Mediator; the only way into
the Holy of Holies is through the Veil of his flesh. We are in a treble
Incapacity of returning unto God our ultimate End: We are in the Darkness of
Sin and see not the right path thither, and as to this, Christ is the way, as a
Prophet teaching us by his Spirit and Word: We are in the Guiltiness of Sin and
dare not approach thither, and as to this, Christ is the way, as a Priest
offering up his Blood and Righteousness for us: We are in the Impotency and
Enmity of Sin, and cannot, will not of our selves return thither, and as to
this, Christ is the way as a King, subduing and ruling us by his gracious
Scepter; God has sealed Christ to all these Offices for this very end to bring
us home to himself. Now this Principle sets the Will right in reference to
Christ in all his Offices.

1. Take him as a Prophet, this Principle sets the Heart right in a threefold
respect.

1. It Is a Principle of humble Teachableness. God (who is the Soul's Center)
dwelling in Light unapproachable, and Christ (who is in the Father's bosom)
being the great revealer of him, this Principle enclines the Will to hearken to
Christ; the ear is opened or revealed to hear the great Prophet in all things.
There is a (...), or readiness of mind to let in every beam of Light and catch
at every drop of Truth which falls from Christ. Before Man was a Wolf and a
Lion for brutish untractableness, but now a little child may lead him, Isai.
11. 6. even the least truth or message from Christ; he will not be unruly or
break away from it for a World, but meekness and humility make him as a little
Child ruleable by every word of Christ.

2. It Is a Principle of Faith, ready to receive Christ in the name of a
Prophet. Christ does no sooner usher in a Truth into the Soul, but this
Principle clasps about it with fiducial embraces, and says, This is a beam from
the Sun of righteousness, this is a message from the Angel of the Covenant,
sent on purpose to setch me away to God. Hereby the Soul is disposed to believe
Christ's Words, and receive his Testimony.

3. It Is a Principle of Love, ready to embrace Christ as the Angel of God's
face or presence, and kiss the Son as revealing holy secrets from the Fathers
bosom. This Principle hangs upon Christ's myrrh-dropping lips, and when he
speaks, it catches up his words as the words of eternal life; every Truth is
received in Love as from Christ's hand, and above all, Christ himself is very
precious, because he is the brightness of glory.

2. Take him as a Priest, this Principle sets the Heart right toward him.
Under the Law the Levites were given to the Priest; under the Gospel those who
are spiritual Levites, are given to Christ the High Priest. Now the Principle
(whereby they are given to Christ as a Priest) is double.

1. It Is a Principle of Faith enclining the Soul to wash in the Laver of
Christ's Blood, and wrap up it self in the Robe of his Righteousness. This is
called in Scripture trusting in Christ's name, Matthew. 12. 21. faith in his
blood, Romans 3. 25. receiving the atonement, Romans 5. 11. and receiving the gift
of righteousness, Romans 5. 17. When a Soul comes up out of the wilderness of Sin
to return to God, all the way it leans upon Jesus Christ, Cant. 8. 5.

2. It Is a Principle of Love enclining the Soul to love Jesus Christ as its
Priest. When once there are Faith-glances in the Understanding at Christ
crucified, and Faith-rollings in the Will upon him, the holy Fire (called a
vehement Flame, or, as it is in the Original, the Flame of God, Cant. 8. 6.)
kindles upon the heart and makes it burn with true love to Christ: Oh! says the
Soul, this is he who made the Robe of Righteousness for me, and how much love
was there in every thread of it? This is he who drunk off the Cup of trembling
for me, and how much wrath did my sins squeez into it? When on Earth he bore my
sins upon the Cross, and now in Heaven he bears my name upon his heart; his
Person is all desires, his Blood all preciousness, his Righteousness all glory,
his Love all heights and depths and breadths surpassing knowledge, and who can
choose but love him? There is no high Priest or Sacrifice but himself, no Balm
or healing but in his Wounds, no Intercessor above but his Blood and
Righteousness, no Beauty or Glory in all the visible World like that in his
Cross, and how can the heart refuse his Espousals? This is a Principle of sweet
closure with Christ; this makes the Soul breathe after, nay approach to Christ,
and when it has a being in him, such is the holy aspiration of this Principle,
that still it desires to be more perfectly and intimately in him; no embraces
near enough, there is too much distance in every union: When the Soul is brother
and sister and mother to him, still 'twould be nearer, nothing less than one
spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. and when it is so in some measure, still it presses hard
after more oneness with him: Oh! that the Veil of darkness were quite off! that
the remnants of separating Corruption were quite out! Oh! for more gales of
Faith and Prayer to blow up this holy Fire! for more effusions of the holy
Unction to feed and inflame it! Thus this Principle is hiatus Voluntatis, the
opening or thirsty gaping of the Will for more and more of Christ, and all that
it may dwell in God who is Love it self.

3. Take him as a King, this Principle sets the Heart right toward him. Hence
a man becomes (...), in a fit posture toward the kingdom of God, Luke 9. 62.
and that in a threefold respect.

1. This Principle is a Principle of Faith: God made Christ a King, and Faith
owns him as such; God gave him all the power in heaven and earth, and Faith
gives him all the power in the upper and lower Faculties of the Soul. This
Principle rests upon him as a King, able to put all his enemies under his feet:
Are there strong holds of Sin in us? this Principle rests on him as the power
of God to cast them down: Are there Armies of temptations round about us? this
Principle rests on him as the Captain of salvation to scatter them. As soon as
this Principle is in the Soul, the Soul is no longer where it was, but
translated into the kingdom of Christ, Col. 1. 13. Before it was in a region of
Darkness, but now in a place of mavelous Light; its native soil was spiritual
Sodom and Egypt, where Sin is a Law, but now it is in the Dominions of Christ,
where the Law of the Spirit frees from the Law of sin: and because, after the
Law or Reign of Sin is broken, the remnants or relics of Corruption are still
in us, therefore this Principle does in a wonderful manner rest upon Christ for
a more thorough purging out thereof.

2. This Principle is a Principle of Love, disposing the Soul to love Christ as
a Melchisedek, a king of righteousness, and to kiss his scepter as a scepter of
righteousness. This Principle desires and delights above all places to dwell in
Immanuels land, and by a holy acquiescence under his Law, it sits down (as it
were) in the kingdom of God. Hence the Heart is willing that Christ should
reign over it, and that all his Enemies should be made his footstool, even
those that dwell in its own bosom; if he come and search for darling Lusts
there, this Principle will open every fold, and unlock every secret place of
the Heart to discover them: If he come and slay them with the Sword of his
mouth, this Principle will be consenting to their death, and pray, So let all
thine enemies perish, O Lord, even all the remainders of Corruption lying in my
Heart.

3. This Principle is a Principle of Obedience; and this is no other but the
two former Principles of Faith and Love conspiring together to do the Will of
Christ. Christ is at the right hand of God, and the Soul by Faith and Love is
at the right hand of Christ, Psalm. 45. 9. ready to hear and do all his
pleasure, Ver. 10. Faith has two Eyes, and whilst one is upon the
propitiatory Cross, the other is upon the holy Crown of Jesus. Love has two
Hands, and whilst one is thrust into his side and bleeding Wounds, the other
is busy in keeping his righteous Laws and Commands. No sooner does a Command
drop down from him, but Faith catches it up; Oh! says Faith, this comes from
the King of Kings and must be done; and this great King (says Love) obeyed for
me even to the Cross, and how can I do less than obey him? His commandments are
all right, his yoke easy, his service freedom, and his love constraining.

3. This Principle sets the Will into a right Frame in respect of that great
Obstacle, Sin. Sin separates between God and the Soul, but this Principle
separates between the Soul and Sin; and this in three respects.

1. As it is a Principle of Evangelical Sorrow. Sin is contracted with pleasure
and must be dissolved with sorrow, and this dissolution will not be kindly,
unless the Sorrow be Evangelical; Legal Sorrow is a preparative to Conversion,
but Evangelical is an essential ingredient in it; in Legal sorrow the Heart
breaks under the Fears of Hell and Death, but in Evangelical it thaws under the
Beams of free Grace; it melts for the exceeding sinfulness of Sin, it bleeds
over the bleeding Wounds of Christ, it grieves at the grievings of the holy
Spirit, it blushes and shames it self for the stains cast upon Gods Glory, and
it is offended and full fraught with displicency at its many and great offenses
of the divine Majesty. This is (...), sorrow according to God, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
Sorrow for Sin as Sin, such as God would have. This turns the sweet morsels of
Sin into bitter herbs, and the pleasant streams of lust into blood; hereby Sin
is in some degree loosened out of the Heart.

2. As it is a Principle of hatred enclining the Will to hate every false way.
The Scripture sets out Sin as a very odious thing, it is the poison of asps,
Romans 3. 13. the dogs vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22. a menstruous cloth, Isai. 30. 22.
(...), the superfluity or excrement of all evil, Jam. 1. 21. enmity to God,
Romans 8. 7. the abominable thing which God hates, Jer. 44. 4. and that with
great hatred, Hos. 9. 7. Now the Heart (when this Principle is in it) hates and
abhorrs the taste of this poison, the smell of this vomit, the touch of this
menstruous cloth, the sight or appearance of this filthy excrement, the thought
of this enmity to God, and the very presence of this abominable thing; this
hatred is the very life and spirit of Repentance: As the love of Sin is the
vinculum unionis or vital spirit whereby the Soul and Sin are intimately united
together, so the hatred of Sin is the solutio vinculi, or the extinction of
that vital spirit, whereby the Soul and Sin are separated one from another.

3. As it is a Principle of actual Reformation or forsaking of Sin; and this is
no other than the two former Principles of Sorrow and Hatred conspiring
together to make away with Sin. Sorrow nails the old Man with all his members
upon the Cross there to die in pains and agonies, and Hatred pierces into his
very Heart and lets out his vital Blood, I mean, the love of Sin, that he may
be sure to die and not revive again; where these two are, a man suffers in the
flesh and ceases from sin, 1 Pet. 4. 1. he cannot (...), commit sin, 1 John 3.
9. not so as he did before. Sorrow forbids it to be the joy of his way, and
Hatred forbids it to be the love of his Heart, and both cast it out as an
unclean thing, causing God's departure from the Soul.

3. As to the Affections, there is a Principle which tunes and harmonizes them,
and that in a threefold respect.

1. It Is a Principle reductive of the Affections to the Rule of Reason. God in
Creation made Man a Lord over Brutes, and anointed Reason to reign over the
Affections; but as soon as Man rebelled against God, all within him and without
him was hurled into confusion: Without, the brute Beasts rebelled against his
person; and within, the brutish Lusts rebelled against his Reason; but when
converting Grace reduces Man into order again, then the beasts of the field are
at peace with him, Joh 5. 23. and the Affections of the Heart throw down their
arms and confess their homage to the Kingdom of Reason. This Principle makes a
man able to rule over his own spirit, Prove. 16. 32. and say with Authority to
one Affection, Go and it goes, and to another, come, and it comes. It Is true,
Moral Virtue does in its way subject the Affections to Reason, but this
supernatural Principle does it in a more excellent manner; there the Subjection
is to Reason as the supreme Faculty of the Soul, but here it is to it as the
candle of the Lord* even for his sake who lighted it up for the guidance of the
blind Faculties; there it is to Reason as a natural Light, but here it is to it
as supernaturally illuminated. The holy Spirit makes the Truths of the Gospel
to become the Law of the mind, and this Law of the mind rules over the
Affections; the Affections are the (...), the Woman-part in us, the head of
this woman is the Man or Reason, and the head of this Man is Christ and his
holy unction.

2. It Is a Principle moderative of the Affections as to the things of the
World. Before Conversion the Earth has its Throne in the Heart, but this
Principle shakes the earth out of her place; before, the Affections are as
Sails spread open to the gales of the World, but this Principle contracts and
folds them up lest the spirit of the World should fill them: Earthly things are
(...), the smallest things of all, 1 Cor. 6. 2. and (where this Principle is) a
very small portion of them will suffice, Agur's dimensum, Daniels pulse, our
Saviors daily bread, Paul's food and raiment, Luther's Herring, any thing with
the word of blessing will serve the turn; when there is little or nothing
without, still there is an (...), a self-sufficiency of holy content within;
and when there is a concourse or affluence of all outward blessings, this
Principle is as Balast to keep the Heart from drowning and overwhelming it self
therein; there is such an holy allay upon the Soul, that in the lowest ebbs of
adversity it possesses all things in its God, and in the highest tides of
prosperity it will not be possessed by any thing in the World: Alas! says the
Soul, all this is but thick clay, and why should I lade my Eagle-affections
with it? All this is but (...), much fancy, and why should an immortal Soul be
set upon it? The whole World is but (...), a figure or shadow, and that Time
(which invelopes it) is but (...), time contracted, and contracted into a
(...), for so the Apostle calls the world (...), the now world, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Wherefore a shadow of Affections is big enough for a figure, and the shortest
glance of the Heart long enough for a (...), a transient and momentany thing
which perishes with the very using. The World in Scripture is set out as a
nullity, a thing that is not, Prove. 23. 5. and this Principle deals with it as
such; it makes a man rejoice as if he rejoiced not, and buy as if he possessed
not: the Affections, like translated Enoch, are not found here below, because
God has translated them.

3. It Is a Principle inflammative of the Affections toward God and the things
of God; before, the Affections run down to the World as their Center, but this
Principle turns the stream of the Soul upward toward God; now Love, which is
the Key of the heart, opens and unlocks it unto God; Desire, which is Love in
motion, goes out in holy breathings and thirstings after him; and if he stay
away from the Soul, Hope, which is Love in expectation, looks and waits for his
approaches to the Soul; and when he does approach thither, Delight, which is
Love in rest or acquiescence, joys and keeps sabbath in his presence; and lest
this Sabbath should be broken, Fear, which is the Soul's Sentinel, watches
against Sin as the great makebate and incendiary; and when Sin offers to enter
the Soul, Hatred, which is the Soul's Guard, shuts the doors against it with an
holy displicency and antipathy; and if it do enter there, Anger, which is the
Soul's Sword, strikes at it with indignation, and Sorrow, which is the Soul's
Issue, vents and lets out the corrupt blood and humors out of it; and (which
is the heat and height of all) Zeal sets the Soul on fire and makes it burn
(...), in that which is good, for the Glory of God who is the supreme Good, and
against the commission of Sin which is the supreme Evil. Thus the whole (...)
trade or converse of the Affections is in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. This Principle
sets the Heart upon God above all; it may and does love Creatures as the Prints
of his Power and Goodness, Ordinances as the Conduit-pipes of his Grace and
Spirit, and Saints as the lively Pictures and Resemblances of his Holiness, but
it sets the Heart upon God above all. This Principle is a Fire dropped down from
Heaven into the Heart to consume the dross of Corruption, and inflame the
Affections toward God; it is a touch from Christ risen and sitting in Glory to
raise up the Affections out of the Tombs and Graves of earthly Vanities, and to
quicken and inspire them with the life of God, that God may be all in all
therein.

2. Having showed what Conversion is in the first instant, I proceed to the
second; In the first instant the Lamps of Grace are made, in the second they
are lighted up; in the first instant the new Creature is begotten of God in all
its parts and proportions, in the second it is born into the spiritual World;
in the first instant the Tree of Righteousness is planted, in the second it
buds and blossoms and brings forth precious fruit; there is an actuation of
gracious Principles, an actual turning of the Soul to God. The Understanding
does actually see God as the supreme End, Christ as the true Way, and Sin as
the great Obstacle. The Will, as to God the supreme End, does actually breathe
after him in holy desires, fix on him by serious purposes and rest in him
fiducially and complacentially for all happiness. As to Christ, the true way,
it does actually embrace and receive him as a Prophet for Guidance and
Instruction, as a Priest for Satisfaction and Intercession, and as a King in
the Government of his Spirit and Word. And as to Sin, the great Obstacle, it
does actually surround it with Sorrow, fight against it with Hatred, and
overcome it by a real Reformation. The Affections do actually bow down under
Reasons Scepter, come off from the World's Breasts, and ascend up in holy
Flames toward God; and under this sanctified and actually returning Soul, the
members of the Body become (...), weapons of righteousness, actually performing
and executing the commands thereof. Thus all the Habits and Principles of Grace
are actuated, and all the Powers and Faculties of Man are actually returned
unto God. Now this actual Conversion comes into Being three ways.

1. As from the inward vital Principles of Grace; there is a divine Life and
Vigor in them putting forth the Soul to Acts congruous and connatural
thereunto; the divine nature will be showing forth it self, the well of living
water will be springing up, the seed of God will be shooting forth, the kingdom
of heaven, though but as a grain of Mustard Seed, will at last become a Tree.
When there is a Principle of right Knowledge in the Understanding, it is a
wellspring of life, Prove. 16. 22. and the wise (who have it) shall understand,
Dan. 12 10. When there is a Principle of Rectitude in the Will, integrity will
guide it and direct its way, Prove. 11. 3, 5. the (...) the rectitudes or
rightnesses will love Jesus Christ, Cant. 1. 4. that is, such hearts as have
right Principles in them will assuredly love him, for the Bias of those
Principles draws to it; converting Israel will cast forth his roots, Hos. 14.
5. the root of Faith casts forth it self in actual believing, the root of Love
in actual loving; The root of the righteous yields its fruit, Prove. 12. 12.
The very Nature of these Principles is to dispose the Soul to actual
Conversion. Even moral Virtues dispose to moral Acts, how much more do
supernatural Principles dispose to spiritual Acts? Moral Habits are of our own
house, but supernatural Principles are of a higher Extraction, coming down from
Heaven and styled the virtues of God, 1 Pet. 2. 9. therefore there must needs
be more Virtue and Vigor in them than in moral Habits, which come forth out of
Principles of Reason and are the Virtues of Men.

2. Actual Conversion comes into Being, as from the assistant and auxiliary
Grace of God. When the Apostle gives account of himself as to the Principles of
Grace, he says, By the grace of God I am that I am; all his spiritual Essence
was from free Grace: When he gives an account of himself as to the exercise of
Grace, he says, I labored, yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me,
1 Cor. 15. 10. auxiliary Grace (which was with him) moved the Principles of
Grace (which made up his spiritual Essence) into actual exercise. The new
Creature can no more do ought of it self than the old: As natural Agents live
and move in the God of Nature, so spiritual Agents live and move in the God of
Grace. Wherefore, that there may be actual Conversion indeed, there is help
from the holy One, a quickening virtue from God, Psalm. 119. 37. a stirring up
and fluttering over the nest of gracious Principles, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. a supply of
the Spirit, Phil. 1. 19. and grace with our Spirit Philem. Ver. 25. nay, in a
sober sense, Immanuel, God with us, (...) the Lord with us to incline our
hearts to him, 1 Kings 8. 57, 58. God himself is as dew to Israel, and then the
roots of Grace cast forth themselves, Hos. 14. 5. God blows and breathes upon
his garden by auxiliary Grace, and then the spices thereof flow out in the
actual exercise of Grace, Cant. 4. 16.

3. Actual Conversion comes into Being as from the Soul it self. Timothy must
(...), stir or blow up his grace, 2 Timothy 1. 6. auxiliary Grace stirs and blows
up the Principles of Grace, the Principles of Grace stir and blow up the Soul,
and the Soul, by virtue of those Principles and Assistances, stirs and blows up
it self unto actual Conversion. Anima (as a Learned Man has it) prius act a
agit, and prius mota movet, and prius a Deo conversa convertit se ad Deum.
Hence in Scripture Conversion is styled man's act, he believes to
righteousness, Romans 10. 10. he returns to the Lord with all his heart, 1 Samuel
7. 3. he gives himself unto the Lord, 2. Cor. 8. 5. he obeys to the form of
Gospel-doctrine, Romans 6. 17. still it is man's act: Where we may note a
remarkable difference between habitual and actual Conversion; in the production
of actual Conversion Man is active, but in the production of gracious
Principles he is passive. We read in Scripture of men believing and repenting,
but we never read of any man who made himself a new heart and a new spirit;
these are of God's make only, but being made, the man (in whom they are)
through auxiliary Grace does actually turn to God.

Having showed what Conversion is in the first and second instant thereof, I
pass on to the next and last Quaere, viz.

3. Who is the Worker of Conversion? and this I shall cleave asunder into three
Questions.

1. Whether God be not the Author of Conversion? 2. After what manner it is
wrought? 3. Whether God's Will be not always accomplished therein?
1. Whether God be not the Author of it? And to this Scripture and Reason
answer in the affirmative.

1. Scripture asserts it; there Conversion is painted out under various
Notions. With reference to our old Corruption, it is called a new heart; with
reference to the Seed of the Word, it is a generation; with reference to our
natural Birth, it is a regeneration; with reference to the Law in the Letter,
it is the Law in the heart; with reference to the World, it is a heavenly call
out of it; with reference to Satan, it is a translation out of his kingdom; with
reference to Christ, it is a coming to him by faith; with reference to God, it is
a returning or conversion to him; with reference to our death in Sins, it is a
resurrection, a quickening of the dead; with reference to our nullity in
Spirituals, it is a creation or a new creature. The Scripture phrases it many
ways, but still it sets forth God as the supreme Author of it: Be it a new
Heart, God is the giver of it, Ezekiel. 36. 26. be it a Generation or
Regeneration, God is the father of it, Jam. 1. 18. be it the Law in the heart,
God is the writer of it, Heb. 8. 10. be it a Call out of the World, God is the
caller, 2 Timothy 1. 9. be it a Translation out of Satan's Kingdom, God is the
translator, Col. 1. 13. be it a coming to Christ, God is the drawer, Joh. 6.
44. be it a turning or returning to God, God is the converter; to him the
Church prays, Turn us, O Lord, and we shall be turned, Lam. 5. 21. be it a
Resurrection, God is the quickner, Ephesians. 2. 5. be it a new Creation, God is the
creator and we are (...), his workmanship created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10.
Every way God is the Author of Conversion; even in Actual Conversion, whilst
the Act is Man's, the Grace is God's; for he works the Will and the Deed.

2. Reason evinces this, and that 3 ways.

1. Creature-weakness needs it, Man cannot convert himself; the Natural man
(...), receives not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. nay, (...), he cannot be
subject to God's Law, Romans 8. 7. as to God (...) he wants a heart, Prove. 9. 4.
a Stone he has, which resists God's Will, but a heart he has not to obey the
same. His Will is tota cupiditas, a Lust rather than a Will, no wonder if he
cannot by his own power convert himself. Conversion is a thing above the Sphere
of lapsed Nature, nay, beyond the line of Angels; Man's Heart is so dark, that
those stars of light cannot irradiate it, and so cold, that those flames of
love cannot warm it; there is such an Ironsinew in it, as the heavenly hosts
(which excel in strength) cannot bow, but must leave it to the Arms of the
Almighty, and when he does it, they joy over the Convert as a wonder of Power
and Grace.

2. The Excellency of the Work calls for it. The Body of Nature is a rare
piece, but the Soul of Man is of a nobler value, and in the Soul, converting
Grace (which is but an Accident) is worth more than the Soul it self, it is the
Soul's Rectitude, it is glory within, it is the precious hidden man of the heart,
it is the very image of God, it is Christ formed in us, it is anima in centro, the
Soul centred in God, joined unto him, and after a wonderful manner becoming one
spirit with him, it is Faith in the true one, Love in the essential Love, a mind
light in the Lord, and a Will at liberty in the Will of the primum liberum, and
who can be Author thereof but God alone? God made all things ab Angelo usque ad
vermiculum, from the Angel in Heaven to the Worm on Earth, but in Conversion he
makes a poor Worm angelize: God must be owned in every Atom of Nature, how much
more in the great Work of Grace? This is one of the (...), the wonderful works
of God, Acts, 2. 11. St. Austin tells a Story of one, who was seduced at first
but to deny God's Tract. in Joh^^.
Creatorship in the Fly, afterward came to deny it in the Bird, and then in
the Beast, and at last in Man: But if any one should proceed so far as to deny
him in Conversion, it would be more prodigious Blasphemy than all the rest.
Saving Grace is a ray or sparkle of the Deity, a thing merely (...), according
to God, Ephesians. 4. 24. there is more of God to be seen in it than in all the World
of Creatures besides, and by consequence to deny him in that is more than to
deny him in all the rest.

3. The Almightiness of Grace can only effect it. As the Scripture sets out
Conversion as a great Work, so it sets out an almighty Grace as the Cause
thereof. He that believes, acording to some Scriptures, that in the work of
Conversion there is a resurrection of the soul from the dead, a transformation
of a stony heart into flesh, and a Creation of a new heart and new spirit, must
also believe, according to other Scriptures, that in the production of that
Work there is put forth a divine power, excellency of power, and exceeding
greatness of power, such as raised up Christ from the dead. In Conversion there
is not only a light shining round about the Sinner, but a light shining into
him; not only a waking of a sleepy Will, but a quickening of a dead one; not
only a proposal of divine Objects, but an infusion of divine Principles:
therefore the Grace effecting it must be almighty. That in the Prophet [I will
put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27.]
is as much a word of Power as the Fiat which made the World; that in the Gospel
[the hour comes and now is when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live, Joh. 5. 25.] sounds out as great an
efficacy as that other, Lazarus come forth; nothing less than almighty Power
can effect it.

2. After what manner is it wrought? Our Savior sets out the Mystery of
Regeneration by the Wind, the wind blows where it lists, and thou hear
the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes;
so is every one that is born of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 8. In Regeneration the
Spirit blows with such a sound as breaks the Stone in the Heart, and with such
lively gales as quicken the dead Soul, but the manner of this Work is in a
great measure secret and incomprehensible by us. If we know not how the Bones
grow in the Womb, how much less how Christ is formed in the Heart. No man
perfectly knows the least Atom or Dust in Nature, how much less the grand
Mystery of Grace? Here then we must proceed with great modesty and sobriety,
keeping as close as may be to the line and level of Scripture. Now here I shall
make a threefold Enquiry.

1. Whether the Word of God be the Means or Instrument of Conversion? 2.
Whether the Will of Man be converted by the Intervention of the enlightened
Understanding? 3. Whether the Work of Conversion be wrought in an irresistible
way?
1. Whether the Word be the Means or Instrument of Conversion? And here I shall
endeavor two things.

1. I will prove that it is so. 2. I will enquire how far or in what sense it
may be called so?
1. I shall prove that it is so, and that by three Arguments.

1. Plain Scripture asserts it. 2. Successive Experience shows it. 3. The
Analogy between the Principles of the new Creature and the Properties of the
Word induces it.
1. Plain Scripture asserts it. Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word
of God, Romans 10. 17. the holy scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation,
2 Timothy 3. 15. the Law is perfect converting the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. the Gospel
is the power of God to salvation to the believer, Romans 1. 16. and for the
Unbeliever who accounts it foolishness and weakness, the Apostle assures us
that the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is
stronger than men, 1 Cor. 1. 25. so much wiser as to out-reason their carnal
Understanding, and so much stronger as to out-wrestle their carnal Wills and
Affections. The Gospel it is Ministerium Spiritus, the ministration of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. the Golden Pipe, through which the Oil of Grace is emptied
out into men's Hearts, and the great Organ, through which the holy Ghost
breathes spiritual Life into them; it is the seed of the new creature, we are
begotten by the word of truth, Jam. 1. 18. born again not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for ever, 1
Pet. 1. 23. it is the white horse upon which Christ rides conquering and to
conquer, Rev. 6. 2. Conversion is a Conquest over the Minds and Wills of Men,
and for the obtaining thereof, Christ rides (...) upon the word of truth, Psalm.
45. 5. and because there be high things and strong holds in men's Hearts, the
Word is as a mighty Engine in his hands to cast down those heights and holds
and captivate every thought to himself, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The Apostle taking
notice of the work of Faith, labor of Love and patience of Hope in the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 1. 3. gives us a clear account whence those choice
Graces came, the fontal Cause of them was Election, Ver. 4. and the
instrumental the Gospel, Ver. 5. For (says he) our Gospel came unto you not in
word only, but in power and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance. In a
word: All the Current of Scripture seals up this Truth.

2. Successive Experience shows it. St. Peter at once caught 3000. Souls in the
Net of the Gospel, Acts 2. 41. St. Paul came to the Romans (...), in the
fullness of the evangelical blessing, Romans 15. 29. the Corinthians were his
seal, 1 Cor. 9. 2. and the Thessalonians his joy and crown, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. In
all Ages of the Church, God's Ministers have had a proof of Christ speaking in
them, and God's People have felt the Word to be Spirit and Life to them; in all
places where God's Name has been recorded, his blessing has been afforded;
where the Seed of the Word has been sown, new Creatures more or less have
sprung up out of it. Were there a general Assembly of the Firstborn, what
stories would they tell us about the power of the Word? One would say, Hell
flashed in my face out of such a Threatening; another, Heaven opened to me in
such a Promise; a third, the Beauty of Holiness appeared to me in such a
Precept: every one in the Language of his own Experience would speak forth the
wonders of the Word. How many have been forced by the power of it to fall down,
and worship, and say, God is in it of a truth? How many have experimentally
felt it, pointing out their darling Lust, plucking again and again at the
Iron-sinew in their Wills, lifting and thrusting hard at the World in their
Hearts, and at last carrying away their Souls in a fiery Chariot of holy
Affections toward God in Christ? The common sense of Christians bears witness
to the Efficacy of it.

3. The Analogy between the Principles of the new Creature and the Properties
of the Word induces it. If we compare the Understanding of the new Creature
with the Word; there is a Principle of excellent knowledge, and here is the
word of truth, Ephesians. 1. 13. there is a lively and spiritual Knowledge, and here
are lively oracles, Act. 7. 38. and words which are spirit and life, Joh. 6.
63. there is a near and intimate knowledge, and here is a word quick and
powerful, piercing into the very soul and spirit, Heb. 4. 12. there is a divine
Faith or persuasion, and here are faithful sayings worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 4. 9. there is a clear Vision, an open-fac'd Knowledge, and here is a
clear Revelation, a pure glass reflecting the Glory of God upon the heart, 2
Cor. 3. 18. there is a practical Knowledge, and here is a doctrine according to
godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 3. Again, if we compare the Will of the new Creature with
the Word; there are holy Desires breathing after, and holy Resolutions fixing
upon God as the ultimate End, and here are the goads and the nails, Eccl. 12.
11. which stir up those Desires, and fasten those Resolutions in the Heart;
there is Freedom indeed, spiritual Liberty in the ways of God, and here is
freemaking truth, Joh. 8. 32. and a law of liberty, Jam. 1. 25. there is a
fiducial and complacential rest in God, and here are (...), words of faith to
lean upon, 1 Timothy 4. 6. and (...) words of delight to take pleasure in, Eccles.
12. 10. there is a closing with Christ in all his Offices, as Prophet, Priest
and King, and here is this Prophet speaking to us, this Priest dying and as it
were crucified before our eyes, and this King upon his Throne with a Scepter of
Righteousness in his hand; there is a sorrow for, and hatred of Sin, and here
is that which pricks us at the heart, and shows us Sin as an abominable thing.
If we compare the Affections of the new Creature with the Word; there is a
reduction of the Affections unto Reason, and here is Reason in its height and
pureness; there the World has but a very low place, and here it has but a
very mean character; there the Affections are inflamed toward God, and here is
the holy Fire which makes our hearts burn within us toward him. Every way
there is a wonderful Analogy between the Principles of the New Creature and the
Properties of the Word, which plainly speaks forth the aptness and congrulty of
the Word to be a Means or Instrument of Conversion.

2. How far or in what sense may the Word be called a Means or Instrument
thereof? In answer whereunto I shall first lay down two things as common
Concessions, and then come to the main Quaere.

The two Concessions are these.

1. That the Word is a Means or Instrument of the Preparatives to Conversion;
it is as a fire and a hammer, Jer. 23. 29. When the holy Ghost blows in this
Fire upon the Conscience, every Sin looks like a Spark of Hell; when the
Almighty Arms set home this hammer, it breaks the rocky Heart all to pieces. No
sooner does the Commandment come home to the Heart, but sin revives and the
sinner dies, Romans 7. 9. the Sin, which before lay as dead in the sleepy
Conscience, now lives and gnaws upon the Heart, as if the neverdying Worm were
there; the sinner, who before was alive in his own Self-righteousness and
Self-sufficiency, now is a dead man, one who has the sentence of death in
himself, and feels as it were the pangs of Hell in Conscience.

2. That the Word is a Means or Instrument to reduce the Principles of Grace
into actual Conversion. When God stirs up and flutters over the Nest of
gracious Principles, it is by the wings of the Spirit and Word; when the Spices
of the Garden flow out, it is from the North and South wind, the Spirit blowing
in Threatenings or Promises. That which makes the Roots of Graces cast forth
themselves into Acts, is the Dew of auxiliary Grace, and that Dew falls with
the Manna of the Word. That Grace with our Spirit, which stirs up the
Principles of Grace into exercise, comes in the clothing or investiture of some
holy Truth or other. Hence the Apostle counts it one of his Masterpieces,
(...), to stir up pure minds by his Epistles, 2. Pet. 3. 1.

These two Concessions being laid down, the main Quaere is touching the
production of gracious Principles, Whether as to that, the Word may not be an
Instrument in God's Hand? Many learned Divines speak of the Word as operating
only morally and objectively. Mr. Pemble distinguishes thus; Instruments are
either cooperative or passive, and the Word must be one of the two; cooperative
it is not, moving or working on the Soul by any inward force of it self, it is
therefore in it self a passive instrument working only per modum objecti; now
no Object whatsoever has any power per se to work any thing on the Organ, but
is only an occasion of working. And a little after, he says thus, I cannot
better express the manner how the holy Ghost uses the Word in the work of
Sanctification, than by a similitude; Christ meeting a dead Coarse in the City
of Nain, touches the Bier and utters these words, Young man, I say unto thee,
arise; but could these words do any thing to raise him? No, 'twas Christ's
invisible power that quickened the dead, not his words which only declared what
he meant to do by his power: So in this matter of Conversion, Christ bids us
believe and repent, but these Commands work nothing of themselves, but take
effect by the only power of God working upon the Heart. Thus that learned man.
But methinks this is too low; the Word of it self operates morally and
objectively, and shall it do no more as clothed and accompanied by the holy
Spirit? Surely the Scripture-strains touching the Words Efficacy are so high,
that it cannot be nudum signum, no not as to the production of gracious
Principles; St. James is express, of his own will begat he us, (...), with the
word of truth, Jam. 1. 18. and St. Paul is more emphatical; In Christ Jesus. I
have begotten you (...), by or through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. it is not
(...), according to the Gospel, but (...), by or through the Gospel, as
pointing out the Instrumentality of it in the Generation of the new Creature.
And St. Peter is yet in a higher strain; We are born again not of corruptible
seed but of incorruptible, (...), by the word of God which lives and abides
for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. where, besides the emphatical (...), the Word is styled
no less than the incorruptible Seed; not only a Sampler externally showing the
figures and lineaments of the new Creature, but a seed too springing up into,
and for ever living in the new Creature. Faith (which is the new Creatures
Head) is (...), by or out of hearing the word, Romans 10. 17. and so are all
those sanctifying Graces, which as it were make up the new Creatures Body: For
thus our Savior prays; Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth,
Joh. 17. 17. and thus he practices too, he sanctifies and cleanses his Church
by the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. Surely those Scriptures which are able (...), to make
wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. must do somewhat as to the Principles of
Knowledge in the Understanding; that Law, which is (...) converting or
restoring the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. must do somewhat as to the Principles of Grace
in the Will; that Word, which is (...), able to save the soul, Jam. 1. 21. must
also be able to sanctify it, because without holiness there is no seeing of
God; that Doctrine, which is (...), healing doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 10. must
operate somewhat as to the Principles of Grace which heal the deadly wound of
Original Corruption. The converted Corinthians were Christ's Epistle, and the
Apostle's too, written by the holy Spirit, and ministered by the Apostle also, 2
Cor. 3. 2, 3. The Apostle's weapons were mighty through God to captivate every
thought to Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. which could not be if they were not also
mighty through God to set up Christ's Throne in the heart. These Scriptures
constrain me to believe, that the Word does operate in the production of
gracious Principles, only not as it is alone or separate from the holy Spirit,
for so it operates only morally and objectively; but as it is clothed in the
power and virtue of the Spirit, for so it becomes spirit and life to the Soul.
As for the Similitude used by Mr. Pemble, I conceive that the raising of the
young man from a natural Death, and the raising of a sinner from a spiritual
Death are not every way parallel: For in that there was no capacity at all in
the naturally dead to receive the words of Christ, in this there is a passive
capacity in the spiritually dead to take in the Word of God as from a divine
Impression; in that the words of Christ entered not at all into the naturally
dead, in this the Word of God enters into the spiritually dead, even intimately
into his very heart; in that the words of Christ were transient and passed
away, in this the Word of God though it may pass away as to its sounds and
syllables, yet as to its substance it lives and abides for ever in the new
Creature: Wherefore (these differences considered) I conclude, That Christ's
words were only declarative in that Resurrection, but God's Word is operative
also in this. The manner how God works gracious Principles in and by his Word
as an Instrument, is a Secret which I dare not pry into; only for a little more
illustration of the Words Efficacy in the production of gracious Principles,
there are two Instants or Moments to be distinctly considered.

1. The first Instant or Moment is that wherein there is a close Application
and intimate Inning of the Word in the Heart; in common Auditors the Word is
upon the Heart, but here it is in it; in temporary Believers the Word is in
some degree in the heart, but here it is in it intimately. This close
Application is excellently set out in Scripture; it is a nail fastened, Eccles.
12. 11. it is a word engrafted, Jam. 1. 21. it is instruction sealed, Joh 33. 16.
it is the Law put and written in the heart, Heb. 8. 10. it is wisdom entering into
the heart, Prove. 2. 10. it is the Apostles (...), or entrance into his auditors,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 1. it is the word having a place in us, Joh. 8. 37. and such a place
as to root in our hearts; thus Joh says of himself (...) the root of the word
is found in me, Joh 19. 28. and this Root is such as will abide in us and
become the incorruptible seed of the new Creature. This close Application is a
glorious work of God, and the Word is not altogether passive therein, but in
the hand of the Spirit it is quick and powerful, as a sharp Sword piercing and
cutting its way into the heart, Heb. 4. 12. and as a mighty Engine casting down
imaginations and high things there, 2 Cor. 10. 5. that it self may have a place
and Throne in the same.

2. The second Instant or Moment is that wherein God in and by the Word, so
intimately inned in the Heart, does produce the Principles of Grace there; in
the first Moment the indwelling Word makes the Heart a spiritual Bethlehem, a
House of Bread, in the second Christ is spiritually born there; in the first
Moment the incorruptible Seed is sown in the Heart, in the second it springs up
into a new Creature. The Scripture seems to me to hold out this Method very
clearly, the engrafted word is able to save the soul, Jam. 1. 21. the Word
saves the Soul, but not merely as outwardly expressed, but as inwardly
engrafted. Faith comes by hearing the word, Romans 10. 17. but is that a mere
outward hearing? No surely, there is a hearing of the Father and so a coming to
Christ, Joh. 6. 45. There is the powerful and intimate demonstration of the
Spirit, and so faith stands in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. that is to
say, in that power of God (which intimately demonstrates and closely applies
the Word unto the Heart) as its true Cause and Foundation. When the Apostle
speaks of the Thessalonians Faith and Love, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. he there opens the
causes thereof, viz. the fontal Cause God's Election, Ver. 4. and the
instrumental Cause the Gospel, Ver. 5. but how could the Gospel be an
Instrument? The Apostle tells us, that it came to them not in word only, but in
power and in the holy Ghost; it was strongly and sweetly set home upon the
Heart, and from that Impress came Faith and Love. The Wise Man would have the
Word kept in the midst of the heart, and his Reason is, because it is life,
Prove. 4. 21, 22. The Word in the Ear only is but a transient (...), but the
Word in the midst of the Heart is Spirit and Life. Job proves the truth of his
Grace thus, The root of the word is in me, Joh 19. 28. The Word as shining on
the Head lights up Notions, but as rooted in the Heart springs up in Graces.
St. John tells the Young Men that they are strong, and for a ^eason adds this,
the word of God abides in them, 1 John 2. 14. St. Paul first speaks of his
(...), or entrance into his auditors, and then of their turn to the living and
true God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. The entrance of the word into the Understanding gives
light, Psalm. 119. 130. and when it passes from the Understanding to the Will,
it is spiritually a word upon the wheels, and inwardly becomes free-making
truth, Joh. 8. 32. ennobling the Will with true Liberty in the ways of God.
Epaphras was in an Agony of Prayer for the Colossians, that they might be
filled in all the will of God, Col. 4. 12. the more filling with God's Will,
the more true Liberty in ours. St. Peter clearly asserts, that we are born
again of the incorruptible seed of the word, 1 Pet. 1. 23. In which words his
plain meaning is, that the Word being intimately sown in the Heart, does under
the warming influences of the ho^^ spirit spring up into the new Creature; and
to make this the plainer, he adds, that the word lives and abides for ever,
speaking (as I take it) not of the Words living and abiding in it self, but of
its living and abiding in the new Creature: As it is with natural Seed or Grain
sown, the Husk or outward part passes away, but the lively or substantial part
springs up into the Stalk, Blade and Ear; so it is with the Seed of the Word,
the letters and syllables, the noise and sound of words pass away, but the
lively and substantial Truth springs up into the new Creature, and in it lives
and abides for ever. God made two great Promises of Regeneration, the one, That
he would write the Law in the heart, and the other, That he would give a new
heart, and the latter he fulfils by the former.

In these two Instants, distinguishable at least in Nature, does God by his
Word bring forth the Principles of Grace. Now here I would conclude this point,
but that I am obviated by two Objections.

The one absolutely against the Words Instrumentality.

The other against the Method proposed in the two Instants.

1. Object. That against the Words Instrumentality is this; The Production of
gracious Principles is a Creation, and in Creation there can be no Instrument
at all, and therefore the Word cannot be an Instrument in that Production.

In answer to which Objection founded on Philosophical Principles, I think it
were enough to say with the Psalmist, Thy testimonies are wonderful, Psalm. 119.
129. or with the convicted man, God is in it of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25. or with
the Apostle, The foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God
is stronger than men, 1 Cor. 1. 25. The Scriptures asserting this
Instrumentality, what if this Philosophical Objection could not be answered,
must therefore the holy Oracle be rejected? What if Reason cannot comprehend
it, must therefore Faith renounce it? How much better is that old Gloss, Taceat
Mulier in Ecclesia, Let Reason be silent in the Church. But for some
satisfaction, I shall offer four things to your consideration.

1. Consider who is the principal Agent, who but the Almighty? and if he will
appear in the word (as the Expression is, Acts 26. 16.) what may not be done by
it? The Apostle was but an earthen vessel, yet a Minister of the quickening
Spirit, because God (...), made him sufficient to be such a one, 2 Cor. 3. 6.
If he make the Word sufficient to regenerate, who can gainsay it?

2. Consider what the Instrument is, it is the Word of God; the two grand Truths
therein are the Law and Gospel, and what are these in their eternal Idea? The
Law is an (...) or eternal Off-shining from the divine Will as Righteous, and
the Gospel is an (...) or eternal Off-shining from the divine Will as gracious,
and what are they in their external Revelation? The Scripture is (...),
breathed out from the very mind and heart of God, and therefore cannot be less
than a lively Picture or Image of the divine Will: Wherefore that such a Word,
as is the Image of the divine Will, should instrumentally produce the new
Creature, which is the Image of the divine Nature, seems to me rather congruous
than impossible.

3. Consider what the Principles of Grace are, they are not Substances, but
Accidents, depending upon their Subject in esse and operari, and may more
properly be said to be increated than created; now if there could be no
Instrument in the Creation of Substances, yet why may not there be one in the
Increation of Accidents?

4. Consider what a kind of Creation the production of gracious Principles is:
Is it every way pure Creation? How then is it Generation? how Resurrection?
Pure Creation can be neither of these: You Will say, it is Generation and
Resurrection but metaphorically only; very well; if it be but so, the Metaphor
must be founded on some true likeness or analogy between these and the
production of gracious Principles, which is altogether unimaginable in a pure
Creation. It remains therefore that the production of gracious Principles is
styled all these in Scripture, partly to import the excellency of the work,
such as cannot be fully expressed by any single one of these, and partly to
hint out the nature of the work, such as has in it somewhat analogous to every
one of these: Wherefore I take it to be thus, it is a Creation, because a real
production of gracious Principles by Almighty Power, it is a Generation, because
of the immortal Seed of the Word, and it is a Resurrection, because a man
spiritually dead is raised up to divine life: Now if there could be no
Instrument in a pure Creation, yet may there be one in the production of
gracious Principles, because that is not purely Creation, though there be a
creating power put forth therein.

2. Object. The other Objection is against the Method proposed in the two
Instants, viz. That first in Nature the Word is put into the Heart, and then
the Principles of Grace are produced, which is contrary to that, the natural
man receives not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and contrary to that, the
word did not profit them not being mixed with faith, Heb. 4. 2. and also
contrary to the scope of that Parable, where the Seed of the Word only
fructifies in a good and honest heart, Luke 8. 15. for according to the Method
of the two Instants, the Natural man does receive the things of God, the Word
does profit before it is mixed with Faith, and the Seed does fructify in a
Heart not good or honest.

In answer whereunto, I conceive that the Method proposed in the two Instants
does not contradict any of these Scriptures. As for the first place, The
natural man receives not the things of God, I answer that the Things or Truths
of God may be received in the Heart two ways; either passively by way of
Impression from the holy Spirit, or actually by way of actual discerning them
in the Understanding, and embracing them in the Will: the former is a reception
of them according to the obediential Capacity of the Heart, the latter a
reception of them according to the spiritual Faculty thereof: the former does
at least in Nature go before the Principles of Grace, in order to their
Production; the latter does follow after the Principles of Grace, as the fruit
thereof. The former is that which is done in the first Instant abovementioned,
the latter is that which is spoken of by the Apostle in the Text abovenamed;
for there he says, that the natural man receives not the things of God,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, where
evidently he speaks of such a receiving as is an actual knowing and spiritual
discerning of the things of God: Wherefore according to the Apostle, this
active receiving does presuppose the Principles of Grace already in Being; but
the other passive receiving (of which the Apostle there speaks not) does only
presuppose an obediential Capacity in the Soul. There is a double obediential
Capacity in the Soul to receive the Truths of God as by way of Impression; the
ultimate and radical Capacity is the Rationality of the Soul, and the next and
immediate Capacity is that Softness of Heart which is wrought in the
preparatory work of Conversion. The Soul as rational is capable to receive an
impression of Truths from God, and as softened it is yet further disposed
thereunto. This is that obediential Capacity which is required in the Method of
the two Instants, and which the Apostle in that place does not so much as touch
upon.

As for the second place, the word did not profit them, not being mixed with
faith; I answer, that the Word may be considered under a double Notion, either
as it is operative of Faith, or as it is promissive of Rest to Believers: Take
it as operative of Faith, and so it profits not being mixed with Faith,
otherwise faith could not come by hearing, as the Apostle asserts, Romans 10. 17.
but take it as promissive of Rest to Believers, and so it does not profit not
being mixed with Faith; that is, Faith (which is the Condition of the Promise)
not being performed, the eternal Rest (which is the thing promised) cannot
belong to them: and this is clearly the Apostle's meaning; for having spoken of
a promise of rest, Heb. 4. Ver. 1. he adds Ver. 2. the word (that is, the
Promise of Rest spoken of before) did not profit them not being mixed with
faith, that is, the promised Rest was of no effect to them because they were
Unbelievers; and in this sense the words no way oppose the Method in the two
Instants.

As for the Parable where it is said that the Seed of the Word fructifies in
the good and honest heart, I answer, that the Seed of the Word may be said to
fructify two ways, either internally in the production of inward Graces, or
externally in the production of outward good Works: Now our Saviors scope in
this parable, at least in the latter part thereof, touching the good Ground,
was to show how the Word did fructify in the production of outward good Works;
this is clear, because it is such a fructification as presupposes a good and
honest heart: so that our Savior does not here deny the Words fructification
in the production of Graces, but assert the Words fructification in the
production of good works. Nay, in the former part of the Parable touching the
three sorts of bad Ground, laying down the impediments of the Words
fructification, and those impediments being in themselves impediments to all
kind of fructification, as well that which is in the Production of Graces, as
that which is in the production of good Works; he seems by way of implication
to hint out the Words fructification in the production of Graces, according to
the Method of the two Instants; for he says, that the word did not fructify
in the stony ground, because they had no root, Luke 8. 13. intimating that the
Word must first root, before it can fructify at all: So that if we might
gather out of this Parable the whole Method of the Words fructification, it
seems to be thus; first, the Word must be notionally understood, which was
wanting in him by the way-side; then it must be inwardly rooted, which was
wanting in the stony Ground; then it must cast the choking World out of the
heart, which was wanting in the thorny Ground; then it makes the Heart a good
and honest Heart; and lastly, it makes that good and honest Heart fructify in
all outward good Works: Wherefore this Parable is so far from contradicting,
that it seems rather to illustrate the Method proposed in the two Instants
abovesaid.

Having passed the first Quaere, I proceed to the second.

2. Quaere, Whether the Will of Man be converted by the Intervention of the
enlightened Understanding?

In answer to which I shall lay down two Positions.

1. That the Will of Man does infallibly and necessarily follow the practical
Understanding.

2. That the Will of Man does so in the matter of Conversion.

But that there may be a clear Foundation, I shall first lay down some
differences between theoretical Knowledge and practical as to the Truths and
Things of God. And

1. These differ Subjective; not as if these were not both in the same
Understanding, but that their way of inhesion there is different. Theoretical
Knowledge is in the Understanding but superficially, a flash and away, a light
taste, such as was in those Apostates, Heb. 6. 5. a word sown but unrooted,
such as that in the stony ground, Matthew. 13. 21. but practical Knowledge is
deeply radicated in the Understanding; it is truth in the hidden parts, wisdom
entering into the soul, and a word sinking down into the heart, and (which is a
second difference springing out of the former) theoretical Knowledge, being but
superficial, has much of doubtings and fluctuations; it sees and sees not, it
is a dark and half vision, a persuasion (...), in a little, as the expression
is, Acts 26. 28. but practical Knowledge being deeply radicated has much of
certainty and assurance in it; it is instruction sealed, a vision unveiled and
with open face: a man need not say, Who shall ascend into heaven? or who shall
descend into the deep? the word is in the heart in such a sensible
Presentiality as makes a thorough persuasion of the truth thereof.

2. These differ Objective. Theoretical Knowledge represents things as good or
evil only in the general, but practical Knowledge represents this or that as
good or evil in its individuality and as clothed with all its circumstances.
In Herod's theoretical Knowledge 'twas evil to kill John Baptist, but in his
practical Judgment, with the circumstance of his Oath, 'twas good in his eyes
to do so. The theoretical Knowledge in the stony Ground pronounces the Word to
be good, but the practical Judgment sentences it evil with Persecution. But to
carry on the difference a little further: Theoretical Knowledge, representing
things as good or evil only in the general, speaks little or nothing to
Practice, but practical Knowledge representing this or that as good or evil in
its individual circumstances speaks absolutely and with a kind of Authority;
this must be done, and that must not be done: When it says, This must be done,
it is promotive of the duty; They that know thy name will trust in thee, Psalm.
9. 10. and by the same Reason will do other duties required by thee: When it
says, That must not be done, it is preventive of Sin; If they had known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. that is, a
practical Knowledge would effectually have impeded that sin, and by the same
reason will it impede other sins; both ways it has a great influence into
Practice.

3. These differ essentially. Theoretical Knowledge is in some sense but
knowledge falsely so called, because it knows not the things of God as they are
proposed to be known; those things are proposed to be known not as mere
Notions, but as practical things, to be above all other things chosen, loved,
embraced and practiced: Wherefore a theoretical Knowledge, knowing them
notionally only, even whilst it is materially true, has a secret lie in it,
because it judges of them theoretically only, of which it should judge
practically. Thus the Apostle, He that says I know him, and keeps not his
commandments is a liar and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2. 4. not in him as
it should be; for in the midst of all his puffing Knowledge, he knows nothing
as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. because not in a practical way; but practical
Knowledge is a true Knowledge, it knows the things of God as they are proposed
to be known, that is, not as mere Notions, but as things to be practically
improved in heart and life; it knows them as it ought to know them. And out of
this difference arises a second: Theoretical Knowledge being but a false
Knowledge is but a weak and dead thing, able to put forth no vital or spiritual
Action: Just as a flash of Lightning in the night, it makes all the way plain,
but before one step can be taken, all is in darkness; such a vanishing vapor
is mere Notion, which puffs the Head but penetrates not into the Heart. But
practical Knowledge, being a true Knowledge, has strength and life in it, it
puts forth vital and spiritual Actions. Hence our Savior calls it no less than
eternal life, Joh. 17. 3. it forges out the blood and vital Spirits of the new
Creature, strengthens him with spiritual Bones and Sinews, and sets him in
Motion toward the Crown of Life in Heaven.

These differences premised, I proceed to prove the two Positions laid down.

1. The first was this, That Man's Will does infallibly and necessarily follow
the practical Understanding, and this I shall endeavor to make out,

1. From God's Ordination, in which there are two things to be considered.

1. God never made the Will of Man to stand alone. 2. God never made it to go
alone: both which may yet be, if it follow not the practical Understanding.
1. God never made the Will of Man to stand alone, but he would have it depend
upon the Understanding: As he made the Sensitive Appetite to depend upon the
Senses, so he made the Will to depend upon the Understanding. Hence the Will,
which is in it self but caeca Potentia, a blind Power, in its dependence is
(...), a rational Appetite. ^^. Rhet. Li. 1. cap. 10.
If the Will do not depend upon the Understanding, where does it stand but upon
the Base of its own Independency? You Will say, No, not so, for still it is under
the guidance of Providence. I answer, That Providence, which rules all things
in a sweet Congruity to their Natures, rules the Will, not as a Brute but as a
rational Appetite; and how that can be without its dependence on the
Understanding I know not.

2. God never made it to go alone; it is in it self but a blind Power, and God
never made the blind to go alone. Even in Brutes there is Sense to light the
appetite, much more in Man Understanding to light the Will. Hence the
Understanding is called (...), the leading or ruling Faculty, and lucerna
Domini, the candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. without it the Will is all in the
dark. If the Will can go alone in any Acts, surely it must be in Acts of Sin,
which have much of darkness in them; but even there, whilst the holy Law of
God is violated, the Dictates of the corrupt Understanding are observed: If the
Will can go alone in any Acts of Sin, surely it must be above all in such Acts
as are most against Knowledge; but even there, whilst theoretical Knowledge is
opposed, the practical Judgment is fulfilled. Hence such presumptuous sinners
as rebel against the light, are yet said to walk in their own counsels, Psalm.
81. 12. because they follow their practical Judgment; and to err in their
hearts, Psalm. 95. 10. because that practical Judgment which they follow is
corrupt and erroneous; and to make them Idols according to their own
understanding, Hos. 13. 2. because first the Understanding frames the Idol, and
then the Will falls down and worshippeth.

2. I argue from the Will it self, which may be considered two ways, either as
it is in it self, or as it is in dependence upon the Understanding.

1. As it is in it self, and so it is an Appetite; its Object is Good real or
at least apparent, (for malum, qua malum, non est appetibile) and that Good
must be proposed by the Understanding, for that is instead of Eyes to the Will.
Suppose then that the Understanding do show forth to the Will such a thing as
good pro hic and nunc, and that so good, that it is immediately to be embraced,
and cannot without a present evil be neglected, no not for a moment; if in this
Case the Will may refuse this Object, it may appetere malum sub ratione mali,
that is, appetere non appetibile, and in so doing it may cease to be, what it
essentially is, an Appetite.

2. As it is in dependence upon the Understanding, and so it is a rational
Appetite, and (which results from thence) it is a free Appetite; the root of
its Freedom is in the Understanding. Why has a Will a liberty of Spontaneity
to some Objects, but because the Understanding represents them as good pro hic
and nunc? Why a liberty of Contradiction to other Objects, but because the
Understanding looks on them as matters of little or no moment? One would think
so odious and detestable a thing as Sin, could not be chosen by the Will; but
the erring Understanding gilds and glosses it over with a show of Good. One
would think, such glorious and all-desirable Objects as are in the Gospel could
not be refused by the Will, but the blind Understanding sees little or no worth
at all in them. But now if the practical Judgment propose a thing as Good, and
the Will reject it, it is no longer a rational Appetite but a Brute; neither is
it any longer free, but cut off and in statu separato from the Root and
Fountain of its Liberty; neither is its Act a free Act, but belluinus impetus,
a brutish violence, for it has no Understanding at all at the root and bottom
of it, no more than the Act of a Beast has. What then shall we say? Can the
Will cease to be a rational and free Appetite? Or may it be rational and free
without an Understanding? Neither of these can be: Wherefore it remains that it
must follow the practical Judgment, and so continue free and rational.

3. I argue from the Effect, which shows much of harmony between the Posture of
the Understanding and the Posture of the Will. Is the Understanding
determinate? So is the Will: Hence if the Understanding represent a thing as
good, the Will embraces it as such, if as a greater good, it embraces it the
more, if as a summum bonum, it embraces it summo conatu. On the other hand, if
the Understanding represent a thing as evil, the Will starts back from it; if
as a greater evil, it flies yet further from it; if as malum maximum, it can
never fly far enough from it. Is the Understanding pendulous? So is the Will
too: Hence if the Understanding represent a thing as a matter indifferent,
having little or nothing of moment in it, one way or other, the Will does not
infallibly will it as it does the good, nor nill it as it does the evil, but in
a pendulous way it hangs off and plays on, because the Understanding does not
pronounce it good or evil, but only indifferent. The Will observes every motion
of the practical Judgment; if that say, Yonder is such a good, the Will cleaves
to it as Ruth to Naomi; if that say, There is such an evil, the Will flies from
it as Moses from the Serpent; if that say, Such a thing is indifferent, the
Will stands as the King of Babylon, at the parting of the way, Ezekiel. 21. 21. it
may will or not will; for there is an aequilibrium in the Will answering the
aequilibrium in the Understanding.

4. I argue from the consequent Absurdity: If the Will do not follow the
practical Judgment, then although the practical Judgment be never so right, yet
may the Will transgress, and by consequence a man may be a sinner and no fool,
which is impossible. In Scripture Sin is (...) an aberration, Isai. 5. 18.
(...), a missing of the mark, 1 John 3. 4. (...), an ignorance, Heb. 9. 7.
(...), an error, Romans 1. 27. error in heart, Heb. 3. 10. and error of way,
James 5. 20. and (which is the fullest expression of all) folly, foolishness
and madness, Eccl. 7. 25. as if all words were too little to express the folly
thereof: Also sinners are straglers or wanderers, Isai. 53. 6. (...), without
mind, Tit. 3. 3. simple ones such as want heart, Prove. 9. 4. (...),
unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. fools, nay madmen, Acts 26. 11. nay, as if
there were nothing of Man in them, (...), brute heasts, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Even in
the first Sin of Man the Apostle tells us, that the woman (...), being
deceived, was in the transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14. First there was an Error, a
false End in her mind, and then the forbidden fruit was embraced by her Will.
But now after all this, if the practical Judgment be right set, and yet the
Will may turn away unto Sin, then that which is impossible in Scripture may be
possible in Nature; there may be a Sinner and no Fool, Sin and no Folly,
Wandering without Error, missing the Mark without any false End, Transgression
and nothing of Deception in it, a Man and a Brute coupled together in the same
Act, the Understanding playing the Man in its right directions, and the Will
playing the Brute in its irrational aversation: All which Absurdities are
unavoidable by such as assert, that the Will does not follow the practical
Judgment.

2. Posit. Leaving the first Position, I proceed to the second, viz. That the
Will of Man does infallibly follow the practical Understanding in the matter of
Conversion.

And here again I might reinforce the former Arguments with an Emphasis: If the
Will cannot stand alone and upon the bottom of its own independency in other
matters, much less can it do so in Conversion, to which the working and drawing
of Almighty Grace is requisite: If in other matters the Will cannot go alone
without the Torch of Reason, surely in Conversion it cannot go alone without
the Torch of supernatural Illumination. If the Will by deserting a lesser good
propoposed by the Understanding do appetere malum sub ratione mali, then the
Will by deserting God proposed as the summum bonum by the Understanding does
appetere summum malum so; if the Will by rejecting an inferior Good proposed
by the practical Judgment must become brutish and irrational, how much more
brutish and irrational must it become by rejecting the summum bonum so
proposed? If the Will may be determined by the Understanding as to a lesser
Good, nay, as to a false lying Good, as in the Case of Sin, how much rather may
it be so determined as to the summum bonum? If by the Wills turning away from
the Understanding right set, there may be Sin in the Will, and no Folly in the
Understanding, which is impossible; then by such turning away there may be no
Charity in the Will, and yet true Faith in the Understanding, which is also
impossible. But pretermi^ting these, I come more closely to the Thesis, that
is, That the Will does follow the Understanding in the business of Conversion.
Now whereas the Conversion of the Will is double; either it is the production
of gracious Principles in the Will, or it is the actual Conversion of the Will:
in the first the Will is Passive, in the other Active. The Wills following the
Understanding is double also; as to the Principles of Grace in the Will, the
Understanding is as the Channel through which those Principles are infused into
the Will; as to the actual Conversion of the Will, the Understanding is as a
potent Perswader inducing the Will unto actual Conversion. In the first the
Will follows the Understanding passively only and by way of reception of
Principles; in the second the Will follows the Understanding Actively and by
way of free Actuation of those Principles.

I shall speak somewhat to both these.

1. As to the Principles of Grace in the Will, the Understanding is as the
Channel through which those Principles are transfused into the Will. God does
not infuse the Principles of Grace into the Will (...), but he puts in his hand
by the hole of the door, and so the churches bowels are moved for him, Cant. 5.
4. he puts in his Grace at the Understanding, and so the Will and Affections
are turned to him; he purifies the heart by faith, Acts 15. 9. that is, through
Faith in the Understanding he influences Holiness into the Will, and this
Holiness is called by the Apostle holiness of truth, Ephesians. 4. 24. not only
because it is a real Holiness, but especially because it is wrought through the
Truth, first entering in at the Understanding, and so passing on to the Will:
and that this is the Apostle's meaning appears, because he opposes holiness of
truth, in the 24. Verse, to the lusts of deceit in the 22. Verse. As those are
lusts of deceit, because the lusting Will follows upon the erring
Understanding, so this is holiness of truth, because the holy Will follows upon
the true Understanding. The practical Knowledge of God is styled eternal life,
Joh. 17. 3. and a wellspring of life, Prove. 16. 22. and the reason is, because
through it all quickening Graces do as a River of Life flow into the Will. Above
all that of the Apostle is most pregnant, Beholding as in a glass the glory of
God, we are changed into the same image from glory to glory as by the spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The Glory of God is reflected from Christ upon the
Gospel, and from the Gospel upon the Understanding, and from the Understanding
upon the Will, and so we are changed into his glorious Image. In Man's first
Transgression Death entered in at the Windows of the Mind, and so got into the
secret Closet of the Heart, and in Man's first Conversion Life comes in at the
Mind and so passes down into the Will. All the Grace that a man has (says Dr.
Preston) passes in through the Understanding; and if it were not so, how could
the Word be an Instrument of the Wills Regeneration? There is no passage for it
into the Will but through the Understanding. In Regeneration the Law is writ in
the heart, and how can that be but through the Understanding? The appetitive
Faculty is naturally crooked, and if ever it be made right, it must be through
the apprehensive Faculty: all the things of Godliness are given (...), through
the knowledge of God, 2 Pet. 1. 3. that is the great Channel by which all Grace
passes into the Will.

2. As to the actual Conversion of the Will, the Understanding is as a potent
Perswader effectually inducing the Will thereunto. There are three principal
things in the Wills actual Conversion, viz. a turning to God as its supreme
End, an embracing Christ as the only Way, and a rejection of Sin as the great
Obstacle; and in all these the Will does follow the Understanding.

1. The Will does follow the Understanding in its turn to God as the supreme
End, and this appears diverse ways.

1. The Scriptures clear it to us; there we find in conjunction bethinking and
turning, 2 Chronicles. 6. 37. remembering and turning, Psalm. 22. 27. considering and
turning, Ezekiel. 18. 28. understanding and turning, Mat. 13. 15. and opening the
eyes and turning, Act. 26. 18. in all which places the Understanding goes
before, and the Will follows after. There we find Conversion to be a thing
wrought by Persuasion, God shall persuade Japheth, Genesis 9. 27. by Inshining,
God has shined in our hearts, 2 Cor. 4. 6. by Teaching, they shall be all
taught of God, Joh. 6. 45. by Anointing, you have an unction from the holy one,
1 John 2. 20. and by coming to a man's self, Luke 15. 17. first the Prodigal
came to himself, and then he returned to his Father: the import of all which is
plainly thus much, That God does actually draw home the Will unto himself
through the Understanding; Thy people (says the Psalmist) shall be willing in
the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness, from the womb of the morning
thou have the dew of thy youth, Psalm. 110. 3. here are a willing People like
the Dew for multitude, but whence are they? Whence, but from the womb of the
morning? The morning of supernatural Illumination is the Womb out of which they
issue: As long as there is no morning in men, as the Expression is, Isai. 8.
20. there is no Will at all to God; but as soon as the day dawns in their
hearts, out comes a willing People as Dew from the morning.

2. The Nature of the Will holds forth thus much: The Will naturally wills
Blessedness or the ultimate End in general, because it is a Good perfective and
expletive of the Soul, but the Will does not naturally fix on this or that
thing as its blessedness or ultimate End in particular. One Man fixes on Mammon
as his chief Good, another makes his Belly his God, a third is all for the
Pride of Life; whence is the Will thus determined? Either it must be determined
by it self, or else by the Understanding; not by it self, for it is a blind
Faculty, and cannot of it self judge any thing to be a chief Good, much less can
it fix it self on it as such; wherefore it must be determined by the
Understanding. One Man chooses Mammon to be his chief Good, because (as the
Psalmist has it) his inward thought is, that his house shall continue for
ever, Psalm. 49. 11. that is lasting happiness, says his carnal Understanding.
Another makes his Belly his God, because his inward thought is, Eat, drink, and
be merry, Luke 12. 19. there is nothing better, says his brutish
Understanding. A third is all for the Pride of Life, because his inward thought
is, to be a Lucifer in Self-excellencies, that is the top of Bliss, says his
soaring Understanding. In every one of these, first the Understanding makes the
Idol, and then the Will does fall down and worship. Now if the Will may be
determined by the Understanding to such false Beatitudes as these, how much
more may it be determined by the Understanding to God who is the true
blessedness?

3. This appears from the Excellency of that practical Understanding which
draws the Will unto actual Conversion. It Is an excellent Understanding for the
Object of it; being in the Mount of Transfiguration it shows forth unto the
Will, not Creatures, Chips of Being, in the shell of Time, but a Jehovah of
Self-beingness, a God of Allsufficiency dwelling in Eternity; not Streams of
Life or Goodness in the Creature-channel, but a Fountain of living waters, an
Ocean of immense Goodness, such as cannot be sailed over by Faith or Vision;
not golden or pearly Mountains, but an infinite Mass of free Grace,
unsearchable riches of Mercy, such as cannot be ^old over to all Eternity; not
shadows or little portions of Being, but the (...), Revel. 1. 4. the true I am,
the (...), or the all things, 1 Cor. 15. 28. in whom are all the rich Mines of
universal Blessedness; and (which is the sweetness of all) it shows forth this
God not as reserving himself only to himself, but as freely offering himself to
poor worms. Oh my Soul! stand still and adore the opening of his Bowels and
Self-motion of his Grace; this Jehovah of Self-beingness and All Sufficiency
will make over himself to thee, this Fountain of Life and Goodness will flow
out to thee, this rich Mass of Grace and Mercy will portion thee, this I am and
ever-blessed All is an inheritance for thee, and in inheriting him thou may
after a wonderful manner inherit all things. This is the infinite Excellency of
the Object; but after what manner does the Understanding show it forth unto the
Will? Surely, though as much below his worth as finite is below infinite, yet
in an excellent way; the Understanding shows forth God unto the Will not in a
dead or literal manner, but with spiritual liveliness and (as I may so say) in
sparkles of Glory; for it is eternal life, and Heaven it self dawns in it, not
darkly or at a distance, but clearly and closely; the day star is up in the
heart, and God approaches near unto the Will, his goodness passes before it,
and leaves some holy touches and savours thereupon; not in a weak and
languishing manner, but powerfully and effectually. The Apostle joins the
demonstration of the Spirit and power together, 1 Cor. 2. 4. There is such a
Demonstration of the Spirit in the Understanding as cannot be denied, and from
thence such a Power upon the Will as cannot be frustrated, not notionally only
but practically; it seriously presses in upon the Will. Here, O rational
Appetite! here is a God indeed; his Grace free, his Mercy Self-moving; take him
and thou have all, lose him and thou have nothing: Now, Oh! now is the accepted
time, the day of Salvation; in his Favor there is Life, in his Wrath nothing
but Death: If he bless thee, none can curse, if he curse thee none can bless;
now or never turn and live. After this manner does it practically press in upon
the Will. Now when the Understanding holds forth such an excellent Object in
such an excellent manner unto the Will, already principled with Grace, how can
it choose but actually close in with it? Such a Knowledge being really actuated,
can the Will turn aside to other Objects for its happiness? The simple one may
turn away, Prove. 1. 32. but shall a man of understanding do so? A deceived
heart may turn aside, Isai. 44. 20. but shall the wise in heart do so? A heart
of unbelief may depart from the living God, Heb. 3. 12. but shall a man of
precious faith do so? But whither can he turn? What, to the Riches of the
World? It Is but dross to the unsearchable Riches of Christ, says the
Understanding: What, to Honors? It Is but a blast to the true Honor which
comes of God only, says the Understanding: What, to Pleasures? These are
muddy Puddles to the pure Rivers of Pleasure above, says the Understanding.
This Understanding does as it were blast all the World, crucify the Universe,
and by a prospect of Faith see the Heavens on fire, the Earth burnt up, and the
Elements melting with fervent heat, and can the Will fall in love with the Dust
and Cinders of it? Surely it will not. But if the Will cannot turn aside to
such false Beatitudes, yet may it not suspend its Act as to the true? Suspend!
what from its own blessedness verily, thoroughly believed? What from God the
all in all plainly, powerfully demonstrated to be such? And what for just
nothing, for a sic volo? Can it be so brutishly free at so dear a rate as to be
eternally miserable? Will it hang off from perfect Blessedness? or can it do
so, and the summu^ malu^ not fall into its embraces? And may a Will renewed
with the holy Ghost, and right set by gracious Principles do thus? Surely it
cannot, They that know thy name will trust in thee, Psalm. 9. 10. and (which
follows upon Trust) will love thee, and (which streams from Love) will obey
thee, and (which is the Crown of Obedience) will resign up themselves to thee
for all their happiness. Where such an excellent Understanding goes before,
there the Will does infallibly follow after, even in actual Conversion unto God
as its supreme End.

2. The Will does follow the Understanding in its embracing of Christ as the
only way, and this appears

1. From several Sciptures. To know JesusChrist is eternal life, Joh. 17. 3. it
quickens the Will to embrace him. Christ told the Woman, If thou had known
the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou
would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water, Joh. 4.
10. A true Knowledge of Christ would have inflamed her desires after him, and
those desires would have breathed out prayers for the living Water. Our Savior
quotes that in the Prophets [And they shall be all taught of God] and and what
follows upon that teaching? Every man therefore (says he) that has heard and
learned of the Father comes unto me, Joh. 6. 45. True Knowledge makes a man
come to Christ, and that without fail, for it is so in every man that hears and
learns of the Father, not in one or two, but in every man, and how does
Knowledge do this? How, but by glorifying Christ unto the Will? The Spirit
(says Christ) shall glorify me; how so? He shall take of mine and shall show
unto you, Joh. 16. 14, 15. the holy Spirit takes Christ and shows him after a
wonderful manner, it glorifies him in the Understanding, and through the
Understanding it glorifies him before the Will, and so the Will is sweetly and
strongly drawn unto him.

2. From the Will it self. If the Will be determined by the Understanding, unto
God as its ultimate End, then is it also determined by the Understanding, unto
Christ as the only way thereunto. Indeed if the Understanding did propose an
End, and withal two distinct ways of equal tendency thereunto, then the Will
might be free to either of those ways: But when the Understanding proposes God
as the End, and Christ as the only Way to that End, then the Will must
infallibly close in with Christ; it must, or lose its End or Blessedness; it
must, or the summu^ malu^ will fall into its arms. When the Understanding tells
the Will in good earnest, there is no other way but one, there is no other Name
under Heaven but Jesus only, the Will is sweetly constrained into his embraces.

3. From the Understanding which shows forth Christ to be the perfect Way
suitable to all our wants in our passage to God the true End. Thou would come
to God but for the weight of Sin and Wrath, Lo, here is an High Priest with
Expiating Blood; thou would come to God but thou know not the way thither,
here is a Prophet with words of Light and Life; thou would come to God but for
the pressure of thy reigning Lusts, here is a King with a Scepter of
Righteousness to subdue them; thou would come to God but for want of a
gracious Heart, here is a Treasury of all Grace and Holiness. The Understanding
still points at Christ; Art thou in darkness? he is a sun of righteousness; Art
thou in death? he is the resurrection and the life; Art thou a withered branch?
he is a root of fatness and sweetness; Art thou a lost and halfdamned Creature?
he is a Savior able to save to the uttermost. This Understanding glorifies
Christ in all his Offices, sings the sing of the Lamb, and cries him up for
altogether precious; this is the Window or Lattess at which his all-fair Person
looks in upon the Will, the Conduit through which the sweet Ointment of his
Name is poured out unto the Will, and the Crucifix which shows forth his bloody
Passion in lively colors before the Will. This Understanding practically
presses the Will to embrace him; O my Soul! now hear and live; take him and
everlasting Mercy meets thee, leave him and devouring Justice overtakes thee;
catch hold on this Prince of Life, or die for ever; look up to this Brightness
of Glory, or be in utter Darkness; wash in his Blood, or bleed in eternal
Flames; put on his righteousness, or be naked to all Eternity; there is no way
into the Holy of Holies, but through the Veil of his Flesh; enter, and thou
have an ever-blessed God to make thee happy neglect, and thou have a righteous
God to make thee for ever miserable. When Christ through the Understanding thus
pours out his precious Name as an Ointment unto the Will, how can it choose but
love him? When through this hole of the door he thus drops in his
sweet smelling Truths upon the Will, how can it choose but rise and open to him?
If it do not, whither will it turn? What, to the Creatures? they are all
Blackamoors to this all-lovely Jesus; What, to repentant Tears? those want
washing in his Blood; What, to its good Works and Righteousness? they are but a
filthy Rag. There is such a (...), such a transcendent Excellency in the
Knowledge of Christ, that it makes all other things but as dung before the
Will, Phil. 3. 8. Hence the Will has no whither else to turn: But if it turn
no whither else, may it not suspend its Act as to Christ? Suspend! what from
the only way to Blessedness evidently pointed out? What from him who is all
desires really believed to be such? Can it thus wave Happiness and embrace mere
nothing in the room thereof? and can it do thus when a right-set Understanding
is really actuated, and it self truly principled with Grace? Surely it cannot
be. No sooner did Christ see the budding Graces of his Church, but his soul
made him like the chariots of Amminadib, Cant. 6. 11, 12. and no sooner do
Christians see the lovely Excellencies of Christ, but they will become an
Amminadib, a willing people, and their Wills as so many swift Chariots to
convey them unto him. Thus the Will follows the Understanding in its embraces
of Christ as the Way.

3. The Will follows the Understanding in its rejection of Sin as the great
Obstacle, and this also appears

1. From several Scriptures; there we find on the one hand that Folly is the
root of the Commission of Sin, The foolishness of man perverteth his way, Prove.
19. 3. Why does the Atheist say in his heart, there is no God? Because he is a
fool, Psalm. 14. 1. Why do the Mammonists boast and trust in their uncertain
Riches? Because their way is their folly, Psalm. 49. 13. Why does the blind
Idolater fall down to the Stock of a Tree? Because a deceived heart has turned
him aside, Isai. 44. 19, 20. Why did the rebellious Israelites grieve their
good God forty years together? Because they did err in their hearts, Psalm. 95.
10. On the other hand, there we find that true Wisdom or Understanding is the
root of the rejection of Sin, To depart from evil is understanding, Job 28. 28.
the pollutions of the world are escaped through the knowledge of Christ, 2 Pet.
2. 20. through thy precepts (says David) I get understanding, what then?
therefore I hate every false way, Psalm. 119. 104. and again, I esteem all thy
precepts to be right, and what follows? I hate every false way, Ver. 128.
First, there was a right Judgment in his Understanding, and thence issued an
hatred of Sin in his Will. For all the Wolves and the Leopards, yet (says God)
they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; why so? Because the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Isai. 11. 9. that saving
Knowledge should turn them into Lambs and little Children, and make them leave
off their barbarous and inhumane cruelty. Hence Repentance (which includes in
it an hatred and rejection of Sin) is styled (...), a transmentation or
postmentation; because when a man comes to himself in a right Understanding, he
hates and rejects Sin.

2. From the Will it self: If that follow the Understanding in turning to God
as its supreme End, and in embracing of Christ as the only way, then by
necessary consequence it must needs follow the Understanding in the rejection
of Sin as the great Obstacle; for if it follow not here also, it must wave its
supreme End and the Way thither, it must resolve upon a Happiness without God
and Christ. If the Understanding say to the Will, There is no other Cloud
betwixt thee and the Father of Lights, no other distance betwixt thee and the
Fountain of living Waters, none but Sin alone, surely the Will must bid it be
gone for ever.

3. From the Understanding which so represents Sin, as that the Will does turn
away from it, and this it does three ways.

1. The Understanding does represent Sin as a grand evil; it sets it forth as
an Ataxy in man, Rebellion against God, Spears and Nails to Jesus Christ,
Quench-coal to the Spirit of Grace, Blur and Stain to the Soul, groaning
Burden on the back of the whole Creation, Venom and perfect Quintessence of
all evils, a thing of such monstrous deformities, as if it did appear in its
own prodigious shape, would not be touched upon by Man, and how can the Will
being a rational Appetite dote upon such a thing? Surely upon it as such it
cannot; wherefore Sin (that it may be welcome to the Will) covers it self with
Figleaves as Adam, it veils its face like Tamar, it paints and tires like
Jezabel, it disguises and feigns it self to be another like Jeroboam's Wife, it
courts and flatters to steal away hearts like Absalom, it comes like Agrippa
and Bernice with great pomp in fancy of some apparent goodness; offering it
self to our Savior it wrapped up it self in all the glories of the World, nay,
in the Mantle of Scripture and Angelical protection; coming to Adam, it held
forth an Apple, and promised no less than a Godhead; ever it has a lie and a
cheat in it. Hence it is called a false way, Psalm. 119. 104. and (...) the work
of a lie, Prove. 11. 18. there is in it (...), a slight, as in cogging Dice,
Ephesians. 4. 14. it makes every sinner believe that he shall have the cast of
happiness, but coggs away his Soul. This is that deceitfulness of sin, by which
it insinuates it self into the Will; but this right Understanding has a
counter-work, it unleaves and unveils Sin, it unpaints and undresses it, it
plucks off it false appearances and disguises, it disrobes it of all its pomps
and fancy, it discovers the lie and cheat in it, and makes it appear in its own
ugly hue and shameful nakedness; Achan's Sin was wrapped up in a Baby lonish
Garment, but unclothe it, and it was an accursed thing; Readiness Sin was covered
over with Sacrifices, but unveil it, and 'twas witchcraft-like rebellion; Judas
his Sin about the precious Ointment was painted over with Charity, but unpaint
it and 'twas arrant thievery; Paul's Sin wore a Cloak of Zeal, but undress it,
and 'twas bloody persecution. This right Understanding plucks the lie out of
Sins mouth, and the paint off from its face, and all the Robes of apparent
Goodness off from its back; and so constrains it to go naked before the Will,
and thereby it appears what it is, (...), sinning sin, Romans 7. 13. (...) the
evil of evils, Hos. 10. 15. altogether evil, and nothing but evil; and now how
can the Will embrace it as good? How can it choose but reject it as evil? Now,
if ever, shall Sin be crucified. Male-factors were first stripped and then
crucified: Sin in its Attire is a King in its Robes sitting on the Heart as a
Throne; but Sin stripped naked by the Understanding is a Malefactor ready for the
Cross, and there the Will will surely nail it; the yoke shall be destroyed
because of the anointing, says the Prophet, Isai. 10. 27. Sin is a Yoke upon
the Will fastened there by a lie, an appearance of some false Good, but the
Anointing (which is truth, 1 John 2. 27.) reveals the lie, and then off comes
the yoke. Does Sin profer a World? This Anointing is an inward Ecclesiastes
crying out, All is vanity; Does it profer Honors or Riches or Pleasures? What
for a Soul, a Christ, a God? No cheat like that, says the Anointing; Does it
promise Happiness? You do but flatter and lie, says the Anoining, you have
nothing but Death and Hell to bestow. Christ was manifested, (...) that he
might dissolve the works of the devil, that is, sins in men, 1 John 3. 8. and
he dissolves them by this Anointing. Sin is in union with the Will, because Sin
is in composition with some seeming Good; break the composition between Sin and
the seeming Good, and you dissolve the union between Sin and the Will. The
worldly Man's Will is in union with his Sin, because his Sin is in composition
with the World; break the composition by a right Understanding, make him indeed
see that the World is but (...), a figure or fashion, and Riches but a thing
that is not; dissolve the World by Faith, and instantly the Sin will drop out
of his Will, for Sin as mere Sin will not down with the Will. If therefore the
compound of apparent Goodness be once broken by the Understanding, the Will
must needs cast it out as altogether evil, because it is an Object capable of
its embraces.

2. The Understanding does represent Sin as the Devils Work. Should the Devil
visibly appear, and offer to the Covetous his Bags, or to the Drunkard his
Cups, surely they would hardly take them at his hands. Wherefore Satan
transforms himself into many shapes, and puts on Changes of Raiment that he may
act invisible. But on the other hand, Christ (...), spoils, or more properly,
unclothes him, Col. 2. 15. he spoiled him meritoriously on the Cross, and
unclothes him efficaciously in the Hearts of Men. Christ was so quick of
understanding, that he found out Satan even in Peter's tender indulgence, and
Christ gives such a true Understanding unto the Heart, that it sees Satan
lurking in every Sin: Oh! says the true Understanding, there is a bloody Devil
in all thy Malice, a blasphemous Devil in all thy Profaneness, a lying Devil
in all thy Hypocrisies, a proud Devil in all thy Self-excellencies, a Devil in
the Swine in all thy Sensualities, and in every Sin Satan stands at thy right
hand, Now when the Devil thus appears in Sin, surely the Will must needs turn
away from it.

3. The Understanding does represent Sin as the only Obstacle of Happiness. The
Understanding views the all-blessed God with his infinite Bowels, and the
all-precious Jesus with his infinite Merits; it lets in some Glimpses of Glory,
and takes as it were a Prospect of Eternity; it travels over the Land of
Promise, and tastes the Milk and Honey of free Grace flowing there; and after
all this it cries out, Oh! my Soul, nothing can hinder thee from all these but
Sin, nor Sin neither, unless indulged; this is the only Gulf between thee and
thy God, the only Distance between thee and thy sweet Jesus, the only Bar to
the Heaven of Glory, and the only Flaw in thy title to the Land of Promise.
When the Understanding shows Sin to be such indeed, surely the Will cannot but
reject it.

Thus the Will follows the Understanding, in turning to God the supreme End, in
embracing Christ the only Way, and in rejecting Sin the great Obstacle, which
are the three grand things in actual Conversion.

Now here I would have closed up this Point, but that there are two main
Objections to be solved.

Object. 1. This Thesis of the Wills following the Understanding takes away the
necessity of gracious Principles in the Will.

Object. 2. This Thesis overturns the Liberty of the Will.

1. This Thesis takes away the necessity of gracious Principles in the Will;
what need of any there, seeing the Will is so good a follower?

As to this I shall answer two things.

1. This Thesis is so far from taking away the necessity of gracious Principles
in the Will, that it discovers the way how those gracious Principles come to be
wrought there. It Is in this Case between the Understanding and those gracious
Principles, as it is between the beams of Light and the accompanying Heat: As
Heat comes down from the Sun into the lower World in the Vehicle of natural
Light, so Holiness comes down from the Sun of Righteousness into the Will in
the Vehicle of supernatural Light. When the Day dawns in the Heart, the Heart
waxes warm with spiritual Life; Give me understanding, says David, and I shall
keep thy Law; yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart, Psalm. 119. 34. Why is
he so earnest for Understanding? Is the Understanding all? May not the Will
hang back for all that? No, Give me Understanding and I shall keep thy Law;
yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart: that will set all my Soul in a right
posture toward the Law of God.

2. Notwithstanding this Thesis, there is yet a treble Necessity of gracious
Principles in the Will; for

1. God calls for them. 2. The Will it self stands in need of them. 3. The
Perfection of the new Creature cannot stand without them.
1. God calls for them; above all things he calls for a heart, a pure heart,
such as works out the mixtures of Corruption; a right heart, such as lies level
to the Rule of Righteousness; this he desires, he desires truth in the inward
parts, Psalm. 51. 6. this he delights in, he has pleasure in uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. where this is found, he passes by many infirmities; I have eaten
(says Christ) my honeycomb with my honey, Wax and all, Wax and all, Cant. 5.
1. Infirmities do not hinder acceptance; but where this is wanting, he sets a
black mark upon men, even whilst they do that which is materially good.
Amaziah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. there is a black mark set upon him for want of
Integrity. But now without gracious Principles in the Heart, how can the Heart
be right or pure? which way can God's Call be answered, or his Desire or
Delight attained?

2. The Will it self stands in need of them. The Will of fallen Man what is it
but a very Shoal of inordinate Affections, a Womb of evil Concupiscence? Here
is the (...), the conceiving lust, Jam. 1. 15. that which teems out a
generation of wickednesses: Here is an Abyss, a bottomless Pit of evils, such
as smoaks and vomits up all manner of Abominations. Every carnal Heart has in
it a plague of Rotterness which is still starting from God, and an Iron-sinew
of Rebellion which is still contradicting God; and how can this Hell of Lust in
the Will ever be quenched but by the clean water? How can this deadly wound of
Corruption there ever be healed but by gracious Principles?

3. The Perfection of the new Creature cannot stand without them. The new
Creature is a new men, all over new, new in its Desires as well as in its
Intellectuals; it is a perfect man in Christ, perfect in all its parts; it has
a Heart as well as a Head. Should the Will want gracious Principles, the new
Creature must want a Heart, the old Heart will not serve the turn; the new Man
is but half a Man without a new heart. There was put into the Breast Plate of
Judgment the Urim and the Thummim, that is, Lights and Perfections, both were
in it or else it had not been perfect: The full substance of this Type was only
in Christ, who was full of all Grace and Truth; but there is a measure of it in
every true Christian, who puts on the breast plate of faith and love, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 8. Faith is a kind of Urim in his Understanding, and Love a kind of Thummim
in his Will; and both together make up his complete Breast Plate. But if there
were no gracious Principles in his Will, he should have an Urim without a
Thummim, Light in the Mind without Integrity in the Heart; and by consequence
he could be but one half of a Christian.

Object. 2. This Thesis overturns the Liberty of the Will; for if the Will be
determined by the Understanding, how is it free? and if free, how determined?

I answer; There are three things, which well weighed give a perfect Solution
to this Objection.

1. This Objection carries in it a great Absurdity. 2. This Objection stands
upon a false Notion of Liberty. 3. This Objection vanishes by the true stating
of Liberty.
1. This Objection carries in it a great Absurdity: If the Will being
determined by the Understanding lose its Freedom, then it loses its Freedom by
an adhesion to the Root of its Freedom; and it cannot be free, unless it can
turn Brute, which is a great Absurdity. You Will say, Is this so absurd? Does not
the Will turn Brute in closing with sensual Lusts? and does not the Scripture
call men Beasts upon that account? I answer, that the Will in closing with its
sensual Lusts is brutish as to the Matter of its choice, but not as to the
Manner of it, because it has an humane Unstanding (though corrupt) going
before it; but if it can turn away from the Understanding, it can turn Brute
even as to the Manner of its Acting: for then its Act has no Understanding at
all at the bottom of it, no more than the Act of a Beast, which is very absurd
in a rational Appetite.

2. This Objection stands upon a false Notion of Liberty, viz. That the Liberty
of the Will does essentially consist in an (...) or (...), in an aequilibrium
or indeterminate Indifferency, whereby it may will or not will a thing; for
why, according to this Objection, is the Will not free? Why, but because it is
determined? And why is it not free, if determined? Because its Freedom does
consist essentially in such an aequilibrium, as cannot stand with any
determination but what is merely from it self. Now that this is a false Notion
of Liberty does appear many ways: For

3. If Liberty do essentially consist in such an Indifferency, then what shall
we say to Jesus Christ on Earth? Had not he as Man all the Essentials of
Liberty? Was not all his Obedience perfectly free? and yet did not his humane
Will indeclinably follow his divine? Was there a posse peccare in that spotless
Lamb? Could that humane Nature (conceived by the holy Ghost, and inseparably
united to the Godhead) could that also transgress? Surely, it could not. I do
nothing of my self, faith Christ, Joh. 8. 28. nay, (...), I can do nothing of
my self, Joh. 5. 30. nothing; in such perfect dependence was his humane Will
upon his divine, not the shadow of an aequilibrium there, and yet the substance
of perfect Liberty.

2. If Liberty do essentially consist in such an Indifferency, what say we to
the blessed Saints in Heaven? Have not they all the essentials of Liberty? Are
those Spirits made perfect in every thing else but that? Is that the thing that
is wanting in Heaven? No surely; glorious Liberty cannot but be there, and yet
what of an (...); There God is All in all, and the Saints cannot take off their
Eyes from him for ever; his Will is perfectly triumphant over theirs, and their
Will is perfectly determined by his, so determined, as not to glance aside from
it to all Eternity: And yet in this Determination Liberty is not destroyed but
perfected, the Will is not in straits or bonds, but in a Sabbath of Rest and
Joy. Here Is nothing of an aequilibrium; that kind of Liberty is so magnified on
Earth, that it shall never be glorified in Heaven; and if it be not glorified
there, sure it is no Essential here.

3. If Liberty do essentially consist in such an indifferency, then how shall
the divine Prescience be salved? God knows all the free Acts of men, even the
Thoughts afar off, from the high Tower of his Eternity: But if the Will be in
aequilibrio, its Acts (before they come into Being) must be mere Contingencies,
and without any determinate Verity at all in them, and how then are they
knowable as Certainties? to know Contingencies as Certainties, is to err and
not to know.

4. If Liberty do essentially consist in such an Indifferency, then what
becomes of divine Providence? Providence has a Kingdom over men's Hearts. We
find in Scripture God touching the heart, 1 Samuel 10. 26. stirring up the heart,
2 Chronicles. 36. 22. opening the heart, Acts 16. 14. enclining the heart, 1 Kings
8. 58. and turning the heart whithersoever he will, Prove. 21. 1. And after all
this, is the Will in aequilibrio? If not, where is the supposed Liberty? If so,
where is the divine Providence? All its touching, stirring, opening, enclining
and turning the Heart signifies little or nothing. Infinite Wisdom and Power
seem to have posed themselves in making such a Creature as they cannot govern,
or at least not govern without destroying its faculties; the infinite Spirit
has then nothing to rule over but the brutal World, and the rational is lost
out of his Dominions; Men must subsist like Creatures, and yet may act as Gods;
their Being is within the Realm of Providence, and their Acting without it. In
a word; when we read of God over all, we must ever except the rational
Creature. Wherefore that is no true Notion of Liberty, which is so opposite to
the Sccptre of divine Providence.

5. I shall add but one thing more. Every Man is born under a Futurition of all
the Acts which he will produce, or else those Acts should be present in Time
which never were future, which is impossible; and every Futurition implies in
it a necessity of Immutability, or else that which is future might cease to be
such without coming into actual Being, which is impossible: Hence it appears,
that humane Liberty does well consist with a necessity of Immutability; nay, it
cannot stand without: Take away all Necessity, and you take away all
Futurition; take away all Futurition, and you take away all the free Acts of
the Creature; for those free Acts could not be Acts, much less free Acts, in
time, unless they were future before; and future they could not be without such
a Necessity: Therefore liberum and necessarium may, nay, must stand together;
and if so, the Will may be determined by the Understanding, and yet be free
without an aequilibrium, and by consequence, an aequilibrium is not essential
to its Liberty. This false Notion of Liberty maintained upholds the Objection,
but dissolved breaks the same in pieces.

3. This Objection vanishes quite away by the true stating of Liberty. Liberty
is double; Ethical as to that which may be done de jure, and Physical as to
that which may be done de facto. God is perfectly free both ways; Ethically,
because under no Law but the Perfection of his own Nature, and Physically,
because Almighty. Man is not Ethically free, because under a Law; nor yet
altogether Physically free, for some things he cannot do, if he never so much
will the doing thereof, because they are not within his power. Libertas (as the
learned Camero has it) est facultas faciendi quod libet, or more largely,
facultas qua quis tantum possit quantum velit, tantumque velit quantum esse
volendum judicavit; It is that Faculty in Man, whereby within his own Sphere he
can do as much as he wills, and will as much as in his Understanding he judges
fit to be willed. Now that this is a right Definition of humane Liberty does
appear three ways.

1. It Is bottomed upon Scripture. 2. It Is commensurate to the Nature of the
thing. 3. It Is proportionable to both the Acts of the Will.
1. It Is bottomed upon Scripture. In Scripture there are various Expressions
touching Liberty, congruous to the several parts of this Definition. In the
Definition Liberty is a faculty of doing, and in Scripture it is a having a
thing in our power, Acts 5. 4. or in the power of our hand, Genesis 31. 29. In the
Definition it is a faculty of doing as much as we will, and in Scripture it is a
doing according to our will, Dan. 11. 36. or all that is in our heart, 2 Samuel
7. 3. In the Definition it is a power of willing as much as in our Understanding
we judge fit to be willed, and in Scripture it is doing what is right in our own
eyes, Judge. 17. 6. or what seems good and meet unto us, Jer. 26. 14. Thus all
the Definition is founded on Scripture.

2. This Definition is commensurate to the Nature of Liberty. What is Liberty
in Man in the full compass of it, but that whereby he becomes (...), Lord of
his own act, and such he truly is, when within his own line he can do as much
as he will, and will as much as in his Understanding is fit to be willed. When
the Scripture paints out that glorious (...), or supreme Liberty in God, what
does it say, but that he works all things according to the counsel of his own
will, Ephesians. 1. 11. and does what he pleases in heaven and earth, Psalm. 135. 6.
Wherefore if a man can work according to the counsel of his Will, and do what
he pleases within his own Sphere, he must needs be truly free, and so much is
allowed by this Definition.

3. This Definition is proportionable to both the Acts of the Will. There is
Actus imperatus, an Act commanded by the Will, such as Speaking or Walking, or
the like; there is Actus elicitus, an Act produced in the Will, such is the Act
of willing. Now quoad Actum imperatum, the Definition says, that a Man can do
as much as he wills; and quoad Actum elicitum, it says, that he can will as
much as he judges fit to be willed. These two Acts must be carefully
distinguished, for the Will is not alike free in both: As to the imperate Act,
the Will is the Mistress and Commandress of that, that procedes from it per
modum imperii, and it is truly said to be done quia volumus; but as to the
elicite Act, the Will is not properly the Mistress or Commandress of that, that
procedes not from it per modum imperii; for then it should be Actus imperatus
rather than elicitus; neither can we be said truly to will quia volumus, for so
the same Act of willing should be the Cause of it self: Wherefore the Liberty
of the Will, as to the Act of willing, does not consist in a Self-motion, for
the Will does not move it self. To which purpose I shall quote two testimonies,
one out of Camero, Nulla mera potentia semetipsam propellit in actum; quicquid
enim ejusmodi est, id in actu esse necesse est. Voluntas autem (id est, volendi
facultas) mera potentia est; ergo non potest semetipsam excitare ad agendum: Si
enim hoc facit, facit per aliquem actum; at quod est in mera potentia, illud
non agit. And again; Non potest dici quae sit Voluntatis seipsam determinantis
actio; non est volitio ipsa, est enim volitio ipse terminus; ergo non ipsa
determinatio. Another out of the French Divines in their Theses Salmurienses;
Nulla potentia sesemet educit in actum; Sensus moventur a rebus sensibilibus,
Phantasia a phantasmatibus, Intellect us ab object is intellectualibus,
locomotiva a Voluntate, voluntas quipote a seipsa? And indeed, if the Will do
move it self to the Act of Willing, then (because it cannot move it self, as
quiescent) it must move it self by some Act, and what is that Act but an Act of
willing? Therefore by an Act of willing it moves it self to an Act of Willing,
which is very absurd. Wherefore the Will is free in the Act of willing, not in
respect of its Self-motion, but in respect of its lubency and spontaneity; what
it wills, it does incoactively will according to the dictate of the
Understanding. Now this being the true Nature of Liberty, the determination of
the Will by the Understanding does not overthrow it; for (notwithstanding this
determination) Man is free still, because he can, within his own Sphere, do as
much as he wills, and will as much as he judges fit to be willed. His Will is
free, because in its imperate Acts it commands what it pleases, and in its
elicite Acts, it wills what it wills spontaneously, according to the dictate of
the Understanding; therefore the determination of the Will by the Understanding
does not at all destroy the Nature of Liberty.

Thus passing over the second Quaere, I proceed to the third.

Quaere 3. Whether the Work of Conversion be wrought in an irresistible way?

I am for the Affirmative in a right sense. A work may be said to be done
irresistibly two ways; either when there is no resistance at all: thus the
Apostle says, ye have killed the just, and he does not resist you, Jam. 5. 6.
that is, not resist at all; or else when there is no such resistance as to
impede the work; thus they were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit of
Stephen, Acts 6. 10. there is an irresistibility; but what without any
resistance at all? No, they disputed against him with might and main, but
because their disputes could not impede his work in propagating the Gospel,
therefore it is said, that they were not able to resist him. Thus when I say
that Conversion is wrought in an irresistible way, I mean not, that there is no
resistance at all, for even in the Regenerate there is flesh lusting against
the spirit, the old Man and the new strugle in the same Faculties, like Esau
and Jacob in the same Womb; but I mean, that there is no such resistance as to
impede the Work of Conversion. In meekness (says the Apostle) instructing
those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. here is a resistance, but for all that the work will be done, if
God give repentance: He went on (says the Prophet) frowardly in the way of his
heart, but what says God? I have seen his ways and will heal him, Isai. 57.
17, 18. here was a great resistance, but for all that God will heal him. God
works Conversion in such an insuperable way, that (notwithstanding all the
opposition made thereunto) it does infallibly come to pass. Now this I shall
endeavor to demonstrate first in general, and then in particular with respect
to the two Instants of Conversion.

1. I shall demonstrate it in general, and that by these Arguments taken

1. From God's Election. He has chosen some before the foundation of the
World, chosen them to holiness as the Way, Ephesians. 1. 4. and chosen them to
salvation as the End, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. But if Conversion be not wrought in an
insuperable way, how does the foundation of God stand sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19? How
is that golden Chain kept entire, Whom he did predestinate, them he called,
whom he called, them he justified and glorified, Romans 8. 30? Were not these
called ones (who have Predestination going before them, and Justification and
Glorification coming after them) called in an insuperable way? If not, the
Chain cannot hold together. The Apostle makes a plain difference between men;
he opposes those of the election of grace to the (...), who were blinded, Romans
11. 7. and those on whom God will have mercy, to those whom he hardens, Romans 9.
18. But if Conversion be not irresistibly wrought, this difference falls to the
ground; those of the Election may be blinded, and those on whom God has mercy
may be hardened as well as others: For my part I should as soon believe that a
little Child may put up his finger and roll about the Spheres, as that the Will
of Man may stay or turn aside the Influences of electing Grace.

2. From Christ's Redemption. If we consider the preciousness of his Blood,
surely he must have a Body; every little Seed in Nature has a Body given to
it, and the Son of God sowing his Blood and Life cannot want one: If we
consider the Promise of God, surely he must have a seed, Isai. 53. 10. and what
else is the Fullness of the Gentiles and the Conversion of the Jews, but this
promised Seed? But if Grace be not wrought in an insuperable way, Christ might
sow his Blood and Life in a wonderful Passion, and yet have no Body springing
out of it; nay, God might engage himself in the Promise of a Seed, and yet
nothing at all come of it; if the Grace of God be resistible, lieve must be
asked of Man's will, that Christ's Blood may be fruitful, and God's Promise
Faithful.

3. From the Spirit's Work. The three glorious Persons in the sacred Trinity
show forth themselves in three glorious Works; the Father has a special Shine
in Creation, the Son in Redemption, and the holy Spirit in Sanctification. In
the first Work we have God in the World, in the second God in the Flesh, and in
the third God in the Heart or Spirit. When God came forth in Creation, Oh! what
an Heaven and Earth full of admirable Creatures and Harmonies issued forth?
When God came in the Flesh, what out-breakings of Glory were there? What
sparklings of the Deity in Miracles upon the Bodies of Men? The blind received
their sight, the lame walked, the lepers were cleansed, the deaf did hear, the
dead were raised, and the Devils were ejected with power: And when God comes in
the Heart or Spirit, what planting of a new heaven and a new earth? How much of
Glory and spiritual Miracle breaks forth in the Souls of Men? Even here also
the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf
hear, the dead are raised, and the devil is cast out with power. The very same
Miracles which Christ in the flesh did do on the Bodies of Men in a visible
manner, the very same does Christ in the Spirit do on the Souls of Men in a
spiritual way. This is the proper Work of the Spirit to sanctify Men's Hearts;
the Spirit does not appear any where in all the World so much as in a true
Saint: Look into a godly Man's Understanding, there is the Spirit of Revelation;
look into his Will, there is the Spirit of Holiness; look into his Affections,
there is the Spirit of Love and Joy; look into hs Conscience, there is the Spirit
of Consolation; look into his Prayers, there is the Spirit of Supplication; look
into his Conversation, there is the Spirit of Meekness and all Righteousness.
Thus the holy Spirit shows forth its Glory, and flows in Men as rivers of
living water, and this Glory and Out-flowing is so precious, that before it
came in Esse, according to the rich Measures of Gospel Grace, it is said of the
eternal Spirit, (...), the holy Spirit was not yet, Joh. 7. 39. as if the
Spirits flowing in Men were a kind of second Being to it. But now after all
this, if Conversion be not wrought in an insuperable way, the holy Spirit may
be barred out of every Heart, and then how shall his work be done? Where shall
his Glory and spiritual Miracles appear? The Father has a World to appear in,
the Son has Flesh to tabernacle in, but possibly the holy Spirit can get never
an Heart to inhabit in, never a Temple to fill with his Glory; the holy Spirit
would tabernacle with Men, but what if the Iron-sinew in the Will will not come
out? What if the Stone in the heart will not break? Then the holy Spirit is
robbed of his Glory. But is this so strange a thing (will you say?) What says
holy Stephen? Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you do
always resist the holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye, Acts 7. 51. To
which I answer, That the Spirit may be said to be resisted two ways; either as
it is in the external Ministry, or as it comes in the internal Operations: It
may be said to be resisted in the external Ministry; He that despises you,
despises me, says Christ, Luke 10. 16. He that despises, despises not man
but God, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. When therefore it is said, that they
resisted the holy Ghost, the meaning is not that they resisted him as to his
internal Operations, but that they resisted him as to the external Ministry:
This appears by the Context, for they resisted him as their fathers did, ver.
51. and how was that? The next Verse tells us, Which of the Prophets have not
your fathers persecuted, Ver. 52? Their resistance of the Spirit was in
persecution of the Prophets. But you will say, Might they not also resist him as
to his internal Operations? I answer; so much does not appear in the Text; but
however the internal Operations of the Spirit are twofold; some are for the
production of common Graces, some for the production of saving Graces, such as
the new Heart and new Spirit. Now if the holy Ghost may be resisted as to the
former Operations, yet it cannot as to the latter; for in these it takes away
the heart of Stone, the resisting Principle, and gives an Heart of Flesh
capable of divine Impressions.

4. God does insuperably remove the Obstacles of Conversion. What, is thy Mind
dark, nay, darkness it self? God can command the light out of darkness and
shine into the heart, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Is thine Ear deaf? He can say Ephatha to it,
and seal instruction, Job 33. 16. Is thy Heart hard and stony.? He can take
away the stony heart, and in the room of it give an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.
26. Is thy Heart barred and shut up against God? He can open it as well as
Lydia's, Acts 16. 14. he opens and none can shut, Rev. 3. 7. Does thy Will hang
back? He can draw thee, Joh. 6. 44. and reveal such day of power upon thy heart
as shall make thee truly willing, Psalm. 110. 3. Do thou go on frowardly in
the way of thy heart? Yet he can see thy way and heal thee, Isai. 57. 17, 18.
Do thou oppose the precious Gospel? Yet peradventure he will give thee
repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Whatever the Obstacle be, he can remove it, he can
cast down (...), every height in the heart, 2 Cor. 10. 5. and then what
Obstacles can remain? Now if God do insuperably remove the Obstacles of
Conversion, then he does insuperably produce the Work of Conversion.

5. If God do not work Conversion in an insuperable way, then what does he
produce toward it but a mere posse convertere? According to the Remonstrants
Doctrine, he does not infuse Habits or vital Principles of Grace, neither will
they in plain direct terms assert, that he does produce actual Conversion; what
then does he produce toward it but a mere posse convertere? and is not a posse
peccare from him also? Voluntatem (say the Remonstrants) comitatur Act.
Synodal. Art. 3 and 4.
proprietas inseparabilis, quam libertatem vocamus, a qua Voluntas dicitur esse
potentia, quae positis omnibus praerequisitis ad agendum necessariis, potest
velle and nolle, ant velle and non velle. And again: Semper and in omni statu
hujus vitae (ubi legislatio, praemiorum promissio, poenarum interminatio,
hortationes, preces and similia locum habent) voluit Deus libertatem Voluntati
adesse, qua objectu^ ab intellectu monstratu^ velle potest and nolle, aut velle
and non velle. Surely if the Nature and inseparable Property of the Will be
such, and such by the Will of God, then according to the Remonstrants Doctrine,
a posse peccare is from God as the Author of Nature, as well as a posse
convertere is from him as the Author of Grace; and by consequence it follows,
that he does act as far toward Transgression, as toward Conversion. No, by no
means, will you say, it cannot be; for God by his Commands, Promises and the
Spirit's Motions does promote Conversion, but by his Prohibitions, Threatenings
and the Spirit's Counter-motions does beat back Transgression. Very well: these
things show that God's Actings touching Conversion and Transgression are not
the same as to the Manner, nevertheless they still remain the same as to the
Terminus or product: For after all the Commands, Promises and Motions toward
Conversion, still the Terminus or Product is but a posse convertere; and
notwithstanding all the Prohibitions, Threatenings and Motions against
Transgression, still there is the Terminus or Product of a posse peccare, and
by consequence he acts as far toward Transgression as toward Conversion. Will
you yet reply, that God gives a posse convertere, and without this, Man could
not convert, and when he does actually convert, God concurrs thereunto. I
answer, that according to the Remonstrants Doctrine, God gives a posse peccare
also, and without this, Man could not sin; and when he does actually sin, God
concurrs to the material Act thereof, and where then is the Difference? By the
Doctrine of resistible Grace God seems to act as far toward Transgression as
toward Conversion.

6. If God do not work Conversion in an insuperable way, then he works it in a
dependent way, putting Man's Will in aequilibrio, as it were in an eaven
Balance, that it may turn or not turn to God ad placitum. Now that this last
is none of God's Method clearly appears, because God (as beseems his infinite
Wisdom) works Conversion in such a way, as is most depressive of the Creature,
and exaltative of himself; the Man (whom he indeed converts) does lick the
Dust; the fountain of Blood in his Nature is broken up, and the superfluity of
Naughtiness in his Life set in order before him; he falls down in
self-abhorrencies, and cannot deny but that he is a Beast in his sensual Sins,
and a Devil in his spiritual; he perceives his spiritual Poverty to be extreme;
so many thousand Talents owing to divine Justice, and nothing at all to pay; a
shameful nakedness in his Soul, and not a rag of Righteousness to cover it; as
a wretched half-damned Creature down he goes to the brink of Hell, and from
thence be has a prospect of Heaven; down he goes into the Abyss of his own
Nullity, and from thence has some glimpses of Christ's Allness. His first
breath of spiritual Life is a groaning under the weight of Sin: Oh! the
intimate love of Sin, says he, 'twill never out unless my heart be broken all
to pieces; Oh! the obdurate Stone in my Heart, it cannot be mollified but by
Almighty Grace; Oh! my dead Heart, nothing can quicken it but a resurrection;
Oh! my nothingness in Spirituals, there must be a creation, or I shall never be
any thing; Oh! the miserable down-cast, when I fell from God into my self, I
can never get up again unless I be unhinged and unselved, unless the Spirit
lift me up out of my own Iness and Egoity; Oh! that I were once out of my own
carnal Reason, and in the light of life, that I were once out of mine own
rebellious Will, and in the will of God; if ever I live, it is not I but Christ
in me, if ever I labor, it is not I but Grace in me; I can write an [I] upon
nothing but my sins; if ever I be true to God, it is the holy anointing; if ever
I be willing, it is the day of God's power. Oh! the Cross-bars in my perverse
Heart, none can shoot them back but the Almighty fingers; Oh! the Plague of
Apostasy in my lying Heart, nothing can heal it but the holy unction; if God
do not write his Law in my heart, there will be nothing but wickedness there;
if he do not let down some holy Fire into my Affections, there will be nothing
but Earth there. Flesh is Grass, and God Glory; Man nothing, and Grace all;
God's Mercy is all, and the Willer or Runner nothing; God's Increase is all,
and the Planter or Waterer nothing. Thus in Conversion all glorying is cut off,
and pride stained; God as a God is very high upon his Throne-of free Grace, and
Man as Man very low upon the Dunghill of his own baseness: The little ones
enter into the Land of Promise, the poor are evangelized, the dry Wilderness
gapes for distillations of Grace, the poor weeping soul (which bears the
precious seed of Self-nothingness, and mourns after a supply from free Grace
alone) shall be sure of the sheaf of comfort at last. But now if God in working
Conversion does only put the Will in aequilibrio, whether it will turn or not,
then the Method is quite another thing: Lie not, O Man, upon thy face, shake
off the dust of Creature-weakness, talk no more of thy poverty and
wretchedness, cry not out for a Resurrection or Creation, trouble not the
Almighty Spirit and Grace, all is in thine own power already; will, and live for
ever in the sweat of thine own improvements, nill, and all the power of Grace
cannot change thee; will, and take the Crown of thy self-differencing Glory,
^^ll, and all the breathings and inspirations of the holy Spirit must fly away
from the Birth and from the Womb. Adam left thee in the common Mass, God gives
thee the common Grace; but thou, O Man, must make thy self differ from others
by a right use of that Grace which they neglect. Beatae vitae firmamentum est
sibi fidere; trust in thy own heart, thy way is in thy self; thy Will is the
great Umpire, whether thou will be God's or not: After all the swasions of
Precepts and Promises, after creating and quickening Grace has done its utmost,
after the living Spirit has tried to write the Law in thee; shall all this be
something or nothing? Shall the new Creature come forth or not? Which shall
abide in thy Heart, Law or Lust? Thou thy self must determine the business; God
made the Heart and all the Wheels therein, but the Motion is thine own; Christ
has all the power in Heaven and Earth, but the actual Turn is in thine own
hand alone. Thus according to this Doctrine, Man is exalted and God is abased;
free Will has the Throne, and free Grace waits upon her. Man in his first
Transgression would have been a God in his Understanding, and now in his
Conversion he becomes one in his Will, turning the Scale of Grace one way or
other as he pleases.

2. Having proved in general that God works Conversion in an insuperable way, I
proceed to prove it in particular with respect to the two Instants of
Conversion.

1. As to the first Instant, God works the Habits or Principles of Grace in an
insuperable way; and to make this appear,

1. Let us compare them with the Remonstrants posse convertere. They (because
they would own somewhat more than mere moral Grace in Regeneration) tell us,
potentiam credendi ante omnia conferri dicimus per irresistibilem gratiam. Now
if the posse convertere be wrought in an insuperable way, why should not the
Habits or Principles of Grace be so wrought, how is the Wills Liberty impeached
by the one more than by the other? Which way can the Will resist the infusion
of the one more than of the other? I know no difference between them as to
these things: Wherefore (supposing what I have proved before, that there are
such Habits of Grace) it follows that they are wrought in an insuperable way.

2. There is in Man's Soul an obediential Capacity to receive the Habits or
Principles of Grace; there is a Capacity, and therefore God (who fills all
things) can fill it; there is an obediential Capacity, and therefore God, when
ever he fills it, fills it in an insuperable way: for this obediential Capacity
is no other than that, whereby the Soul, as to the receiving of gracious
Principles, stands in obedience to God's power, and as it stands in obedience
to God's power, it cannot resist. To have an Obediential Capacity and not stand
in obedience to God's power, is one Contradiction, and to stand in obedience to
Gods power and yet to resist, is another: Wherefore the Soul receiving gracious
Principles from God in its obediential Capacity, receives them in such a way as
excludes resistance. Add hereunto, that if the infusion of gracious Principles
can be hindered, then it must be hindered either by the habitual pravity of the
Soul, or by the sinful Act of the Will; but neither of these can do it: not the
habitual pravity of the Soul, for then it should hinder always and in all
persons; for it is in all, and whilst it is there, it hinders, and whilst it
hinders, it cannot be removed, because there is no other way of removing it but
by those gracious Principles, and by consequence there should be no Capacity at
all in the Soul to receive gracious Principles; nor yet can the sinful Act of
the Will hinder it, for the Will does not receive gracious Principles by its
Act, and those which it does not receive by its Act, it cannot refuse by its
Act; but it receives them in its obediential Capacity, and therefore in an
insuperable way.

3. The Covenant of Grace evidences this to us. I shall instance in two famous
places; the one is that, A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I
put within you, I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give
you an heart of flesh; I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk
in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. The other is that, I will put my Laws in
their inward parts, and write them in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people, Jer. 31. 33. These Promises do most signally set forth
the production of gracious Principles; here is the Principles themselves, a new
heart and a new spirit; here is the principal efficient of them, the holy Spirit
of God; here is a remotion of the Obstacles unto them, the taking away the heart
of stone; here is the next immediate Capacity of receiving them, an heart of
flesh; here is the way or manner of producing them, a writing the Law in the
heart; here is the effectual fruitfulness of them, a causing to walk in God's
statutes; and here is the crown or glory of all, God will be their God and they
his people. Now when there is a Worker such as the Almighty Spirit, a Remotion
of the Obstacles such as the Stone of hardness, an immediate Capacity such as
an Heart of flesh, a way of Working such as the intimate Impression of Truth, a
Fruit proceeding such as Obedience to God's Statutes, and a Crown of all such as
an Interest in God; How can the Grace be less than insuperable? You will say,
These Promises were not made to the Gentiles, but to the Jews, and not to any
singular persons among them, but to the whole Nation. I answer; These Promises
extend not only to the Jews but to the Gentiles; for these are Promises of
Grace founded in Christ, and in Christ Jew and Gentile are all one, Gal. 3. 28.
so one, that the Gentiles are of the same body and partakers of the promise,
Ephesians. 3. 6. Indeed before the middle Wall of Partition was broken down, they
were strangers from the covenant of promise; but that being gone, they are
fellow-heirs partaking of the root and fatness of the Olive. Neither do these
Promises extend to all the Nation of the Jews, but to the true Israel, the
elect People of God, whether they be Jews or Gentiles; for in them only are
these Promises fulfilled: Had these been made to all the Jews, the true God
would have fulfilled them in every Jew. You will say, No, God's Truth does not
exact such a performance, for he promised to do these things not absolutely but
conditionally, so as men did not resist the operations of his Grace. I answer;
If God only promise these things shall be done, so as men do not resist, then
these Promises run thus; If thy stony Heart do not resist, I will give thee an
Heart of Flesh; if thy old Heart do not resist, I will give thee a new one; if
thy own spirit do not resist, I will give thee my Spirit; and if the Law of Sin
do not resist, I will give my Laws into thy Heart. Which Interpretation does
utterly evacuate the Glory and Power of these Promises; for to be sure that
Stone, that old Heart, that Spirit of our own, that Law of Sin in us, will
(what it can) resist the operations of Grace. You will say, God gives unto Man
a posse convertere, a supernatural Faculty whereby he is able to turn unto God:
Now God promises to do these things, not so as men in their mere Naturals do
not resist, but so as men furnished with that supernatural power do not resist.
I answer; two things overthrow this Interpretation.

1. In the Text it self there is not a tittle of such a Condition of
Non-resistency, nor of such a supernatural Power of Conversion; nay on the
contrary, in stead of the Condition of Non-resistency, it speaks of a stony
heart (which is a Principle of Resistency) to be removed; instead of a
supernatural power of Conversion, it implies an old heart) which is powerless
in the things of God) to be made new.

2. If God promise to do these things so as men, furnished with supernatural
power of Conversion, do not resist, then there is such a supernatural power in
men before these things be wrought in them, that is, before there be a new or
soft Heart, whilst the Heart is old and stony, there is such a supernatural
power in them; which assertion is, as I take it,

1. Against Scripture; that divides all men into two ranks, they are clean or
unclean, new creatures or old, spiritual men born of the spirit, or natural men
born of the flesh; but this Assertion ushers in a middle sort of men such as
hang by a posse convertere between Nature and Grace; with the natural man they
have an old stony Heart, and with the spiritual man they have a new
supernatural Power; in the frame of their Heart they are no better than
natural, and in their supernatural Power they are little less than spiritual.

2. It Is against Reason. All Powers in the rational Soul flow out of Life; the
Power of knowing and embracing natural good things flows out of the natural
Life of the Soul, and the power of believing and receiving spiritual good
things flows out of the supernatural Life of the Soul; but this Assertion
supposes a supernatural Power of Conversion without any vital Root; nothing of
a new Heart or Spirit, and yet a supernatural Power of Conversion: Wherefore
rejecting these Interpretations I conclude, that those Promises import the
production of gracious Principles in an insuperable way.

4. The Production of gracious Principles is in Scripture set out in such
glorious titles as do import insuperable Grace, it is a creation, Ephesians. 2. 10.
it is a generation, Jam. 1. 18. it is a resurrection, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. it is a
traction, Joh. 6. 44. it is an opening of the heart, Act. 16. 14. it is a
translation into Christ's kingdom, Col. 1. 13. Now if this be not insuperable
Grace, then there may be a Creation on God's part, and no new Creature on man's;
a Generation on Gods part, and no Child of Grace on man's; a Resurrection on
Gods part, and nothing quickened on man's; a Traction on Gods part, and nothing
coming on man's; an Opening on Gods part, and all shut on man's; and a
Translation on God's part, and no Remove at all on man's; and why then should
such stately names of Power be set on the head of resistible Grace? You Will say,
all these are but Metaphors; very well, but Metaphors are Metaphors, that is,
they carry in them some image or resemblance of the things themselves, but
there is not the least shadow of likeness or similitude between these things
and resistible Grace. What shadow of Creation in that which a Creature may
frustrate? What of Generation in that which produces nothing at all? What of
Resurrection when the dead need not rise? What of Traction when there is no
coming upon it? What of Opening when there is a Heart still shut up? What of
Translation when there is no remove by it? Take away the infallible Efficacy of
Grace, and it can be none of all these, no, not so much as metaphorically,
because it has no print of likeness thereunto.

5. The Scripture does not only set out Conversion under the Glory of
Metaphors, but in plain terms it styles it a Work of Power; the Gospel comes in
power and in the holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. and in the demonstration of the
Spirit and power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. there is Power in it, nay, excellency of power,
2 Cor. 4. 7. nay, (...), exceeding greatness of power, and (...), the working
of the might of power, such as raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.
19, 20. The entire words runs thus; What is the exceeding greatness of his
power toward us who believe according to the working of his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead: the Apostle here
does not only denote Gods Power toward Believers, but also Gods Power in
making them such. As there is exceeding greatness of power toward Believers,
so those Believers did believe according to the working of his mighty power
such as raised up Christ from the dead. Every way a Believer in fieri and in
facto esse is surrounded with Power and excellent greatness of Power; Oh! what
rare Eloquence? what high strains are here? Too much and too high in all reason
for resistible Grace: If the weakness of God be stronger than Man, surely the
Power of God in its might and excellency put forth for the production of
gracious Principles cannot be resisted and overcome by him.

6. The Heart which has gracious Principles in it is God's Tabernacle, and all
God's Tabernacles have been built in a sure way, such as cannot fail of the
Effect. God (besides the natural Tabernacle of his Eternity) has in his
condescending Grace been pleased to have three Tabernacles built for him; first
he had a worldly tabernacle or sanctuary, Heb. 9. 1. and then (...), he
tabernacled in our flesh, Joh. 1. 14. and last of all, he has a tabernacle in
the Hearts of men, a sanctuary, (...) in the midst of them, that is, in the
midst of their Hearts, Ezekiel. 37. 26. the Heart, which has gracious Principles
in it, is God's Tabernacle: Hence God says, (...), I will indwell in them, 2
Cor. 6. 16. Now God himself undertook that all these Tabernacles should be
built: As for the first, God took care to have it made exactly to a Pin; as for
the second, God engaged that a Virgin should conceive and bring forth Immanuel;
as for the third, God binds himself in a Promise to raise up the tabernacle of
David, Amos 9. 11. that is, to convert the Gentiles; for so it is interpreted,
Acts 15. 14, 15, 16. New Creatures are the tabernacle of David; there is David
the Man after God's own Heart; there Christ, the true David, dwells in the
Heart by Faith and Love. Again, God says, I will set my sanctuary in the midst
of them, Ezekiel. 37. 26. that is, I will by my sanctifying Grace turn their
Hearts into an holy place for my own habitation. Moreover, all the Tabernaoles
of God have been made in a sure way, because they have been made through the
overshadowing presence of the holy Spirit. As for the first, the Master-workman
of it was Bezaleel, a man (as his name imports) in the shadow of God, filled
full of the Spirit of God, in all wisdom for the doing of the work. As for the
second, there is a Bezaleel too, the holy Ghost comes upon, and the power of
the highest overshadows the blessed Virgin, and so the holy thing, the pure
flesh of Christ, was formed in her Womb, Luke 1. 35. And as for the third;
there Bezaleel again; they that dwell (...) in his shadow shall return, Hos.
14. 7. the holy Ghost comes upon the Soul, and the power of free Grace
overshadows it, and and so Christ or the holy thing is formed therein. What is
said of the Apostles as to their sacred Function, The holy Ghost came upon
them, Acts 1. 8. the same is true of all true Christians as to their spiritual
Generation: Thus whilst Peter spoke, the holy Ghost fell on them, Acts 10. 44.
by his Grace making them an habitation of God. Lo, I come, and I will dwell in
the midst of thee, Zach. 2. 10. he comes by his Spirit; and makes their Hearts
a Sanctuary for himself: Thus this Tabernacle is built in a sure way, because
pitched by God himself; but now if all the Operations of Grace be resistible,
what becomes of this Tabernacle? God may raise and raise by all the Operations
of his Grace, and yet the Tabernacle not go up; the holy Ghost may overshadow
men's Souls, and yet no Christ be formed in them; a holy place in men's Hearts
may be sought for the Lord, and none at all found. All these precious Promises
of condescending Grace may fall to the ground. You will say, What remedy for
all this? God will not dwell in men whether they will or not: Very true; but if
Almighty Power connot make men willing, what can do it? Christ received gifts
for men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among
them, Psalm. 68. 18. Observe, it is for the rebellious also; not that God does
dwell in them as such, but that by his gifts of Grace he turns rebellious
Hearts into gracious, and so comes and dwells in them as his own Tabernacle.
Wherefore I conclude that God works the Principles of Grace in an insuperable
way.

2. As to the second Instant of Conversion, God works actual Conversion also in
an insuperable way; so that sooner or later it always takes effect. And this
will appear

1. From the Vitality of gracious Principles as backed with auxiliary Grace;
there is a divine Vigor in these Principles, these are a Well of living water
ready to spring up, a Seed of God ready to shoot forth, and a Beam of the
divine Nature ready to sparkle out; wherefore when auxiliary Grace stirs up
this Well of living water, bedews this Seed of God, and blows up this Beam of
the divine Nature, it is no wonder at all, that actual Conversion should
infallibly follow. Auxiliary Grace stirs up the Principles of Grace, these stir
up the Soul, and that by virtue of both the former stirs up it self unto actual
Conversion; and so actual Conversion comes forth into Being.

2. From the Insuperability of Grace in the Illumination of the Understanding.
God does enlighten the Understanding in an irresistible way, he shines into the
heart, he puts wisdom into the hidden parts, who teaches like him, Job 36. 22?
He teaches with a strong hand, Isai. 8. 11. He teaches in the demonstration of
the Spirit and power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. A Demonstration is such a thing as cannot be
resisted by the mind of Man; and of all Demonstrations, the demonstration of
the Spirit is most invincible. Now if the Understanding be irresistibly
enlightened, then the Will (as I have before proved) does infallibly follow it;
they that know God's name will trust in it; the (...) will come to Jesus
Christ; truth, if but rightly known, will make us free; true Wisdom dwells with
prudence, and practically leads in the way of Righteousness; it is a Suada to
the Will, and draws it home to God in actual Conversion.

3. From those Scriptures which set forth God as the Author of actual
Conversion. He gives (...), the actual believing, Phil. 1. 29. he grants
repentance unto life, Acts 11. 18. he works (...), the very act of willing,
Phil. 2. 13. he causes to walk in his statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27. In every true
Convert there is more than a mere Man, the grace of God is to be seen in him,
Acts 11. 23. there is God in converting Paul, Gal. 1. 24. In the Temple of the
new Creature every thing speaks of his glory, every holy breath in the Will
must praise the Lord as its Author: If God did not work the very Act of
Willing, then (which I tremble to utter) all the Prayers made to him for
converting Grace are but God-mockeries; all the Praises offered up to him for
the same are but false Hallelujahs; then they which glorified God in converting
Paul, glorified but an Idol of their own Fancy; they which glorified God in the
repenting Gentiles, Acts 11. 18. offered but a blind Sacrifice. When we pray,
that God's kingdom should come into our hearts, we do not mean that God should
put our Wills in aequilibrio, but our Wills should be subdued under God's. When
David and his People offered willingly unto God, he falls into a kind of
Ecstasy; Who am I, and what is my people, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14? And, Thine, O Lord,
is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, Ver. 11. even
the victory over hearts; and, All things are of thee, Ver. 14. not only our
Gold and Silver, not only our Hearts and Wills, but our very actual Willingness
also. You will say, All this is true; God works the very Act of Willing, but
not insuperably, but so as men do not resist the Work of Grace. But what is the
meaning of this? God works the Will, so as men do not resist; not to resist is
to obey: Wherefore the plain meaning is, God works the Act of Willing, so as
men do will, which is very absurd; Because it makes the very same Act of
Willing to be the Condition of it self. Again; What is it for God to work the
Act of Willing, so as men do not resist, but to work it in a way of dependence
upon Man's Will? and what is that but to contradict the Apostle, who says,
that God works the Act of willing, (...), of his own good pleasure; if he do it
of his own good pleasure, surely not in a way of dependence upon Man's Will,
but in a glorious insuperable manner.

4. From those Scriptures whose truth is so founded upon insuperable Grace,
that it cannot stand without it. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.
18. Turn us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, Lam. 5. 21. If Man's
actual Turn do not infallibly follow upon God's turning Grace, what truth is
there in these [Ands] which couple both together? Other sheep I must bring,
(says Christ) and they shall hear my voice, Joh. 10. 16. and, which agrees
with it, The salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will hear it,
Acts 28. 28. What Connection is there betwixt Christ's bringing and Man's
hearing, or betwixt Salvation sent and Man's hearing without insuperable Grace?
Again; God says, I will put my Spirit within you and you shall live, Ezekiel. 37.
14. and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,
Ezekiel. 36. 27. What necessity of Life or Obedience in them, if the holy Spirit
be given in a resistible way? Again; God says to Christ, Thou shall call a
nation, and nations shall run unto thee, Isai. 55. 5. and the Church prays,
Draw me, we will run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. Where Is the truth of these
Propositions, if God's calling and drawing do not infer Man's running? Again
David prays, Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it
unto the end; give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, Psalm. 119. 33,
34. Where Is the consequence of David's Obedience upon God's Teaching, if Grace
be superable? Moreover, God says, I will be as dew to Israel, he shall grow as
the lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, his branches shall spread, and
his beauty shall be as the olive tree, Hos. 14. 5, 6. Here Is Israel very
florid, but that which secures all is insuperable Grace; nothing could hinder
their spiritual prosperity, who had God for their dew; I say, nothing, not
Lusts; for Ephraim shall say, What have I to do with Idols, Ver. 8? not
backslidings, for God says, I will heal their backslidings, Ver. 4. not
barrenness, for God tells them, from me is thy fruit found, Ver. 8. not
deadness, for they shall revive as the corn and grow as the vine, Ver. 7. But
if the Work of Grace may be frustrated, then there is no certain root for all
this holy fruit to stand upon.

5. From those Scriptures which set forth actual Conversion as a Work of Power,
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110. 3. God fulfils
the work of faith with power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. the Principle of Faith is
incomplete without its Act, but God by his powerful Grace actuates it in us.
When our Savior Christ told his Disciples, that it was easier for a camel to
go through a needles eye, than for a rich man to enter into Gods kingdom, they
cried out with amazement, Who then can be saved? but our Savior unties the
knot thus; The things that are unpossible with men, are possible with God, Luke
18. 24, 25, 26, 27. God by the power of his Grace can fetch off the World, the
Camels bunch, from the Heart, and so make it pass as it were through the
needles eye into the Kingdom of God. But now the assertors of resistible Grace
may turn the words thus; The things which according to the ordinary working of
Grace are impossible with God, are possible with Men; that crowning Work of
actual Conversion, which is too hard and heavy for God's free Grace is absolved
and dispatched out of hand by Man's free Will. In the Parable of the lost
Sheep, we find God going after it until he find it, and then laying it upon his
shoulders, Luke 15. 4, 5. He goes after it in the Means of Grace, he finds it
by the intimate Inshinings of his Spirit, and he lays it upon the shoulders of
his power, that he may bring it home to himself in actual Conversion. But now
if Grace be resistible, the Almighty Shoulders are only put under man's Will to
bear it up in aequilibrio, to see whether it will go home to God or not; it may
be it will, it may be it will not: Gods Power does but attend on Man's Will as
the Umpire of all.

6. From those Scriptures which show forth actual Conversion as a Conquest.
Thanks be to God (says the Apostle) (...), that triumphs us in Christ, 2
Cor. 2. 14. that is, that subdues us to the Gospel, and makes us Instruments of
his Grace to subdue others thereunto. Christ rides upon his white horse, the
Word of Truth, (...), conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2. he leads captivity
captive, Psalm. 68. 18. those men, which were Captives to Sin and Satan before,
now become Captives to his Spirit and Grace, and as Captives (...), he
translates them into his own kingdom, Col. 1. 13. he carries them away out of
the native Soil of their Corruption, into the land of uprightness; and (which
further shows the Insuperability of this Conquest) he binds the strong man and
spoils his goods, Matthew. 12. 29. he casts down (...), every height, and
captivates (...), every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. and
that this may be surely effected, there are weapons (...), mighty to God, Ver.
4. to accomplish his Will in that behalf, he circumcises, or (as the Septuagint
has it) (...), he purges the heart round about, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. He baptises it
with the holy Ghost and fire, Matthew. 3. 11. Fire-like he purges out the dross,
and converts the Heart into his own Nature in a glorious way; he causes men to
walk in his statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27. Oh! what words of Power? What Triumphs of
free Grace are these? Here Is the day of Gods power; here is the Jerusalem above,
the mother of true freedom. Neither is there any Shipwreck of humane Liberty in
all this, for God can change the unwilling Will into a willing Will; or else
(which is durus sermo) he, that made free Will, cannot have mercy upon it; he,
that made the Horologe of the Heart and all its pins, cannot move the Wheels.
But if God work Conversion in a resistible way, then free Grace must lose its
triumph, and free Will must take the Crown; free Grace works only a posse
convertere, and free Will completes it in an actual Conversion; free Grace may
set the Will in aequilibrio, and that is all, but free Will must do the
business, and that in a self-glorying way, not in the humble posture of the
Apostle, (...), looking off from our selves to Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith, Heb. 12. 2. but in the proud posture of the Pharisee, (...),
standing to himself, Luke 18. 11. Free Grace must not act or move the Will unto
actual Conversion; for all Action or Motion of the Will, so far as it is Action
or Motion, is a determination thereof, and a determination from Grace cannot
(according to the Remonstrants Doctrine) consist with the Liberty of the Will:
wherefore free Grace having set the Will in aequilibrio must act or move no
further, but leave it to move and determine it self in actual Conversion, that
is, in plain Terms, give up the Crown and Glory of all unto it. But how absurd
is this? God says, No flesh shall glory in it self, and shall Man's Will vaunt
it thus? God says, (...), I have left or reserved so many to my self, Romans 11.
4. and shall free Will say so? Christ's Manhood did not anoint it self, and
shall free Will turn it self? God by his Grace begins to build a Tabernacle for
the Spirit, he begins in the Understanding by Illumination, in the Affections
by holy Motions, and in the Will by a posse convertere; and is he not able to
finish the Work by an actual Conversion? All Nations (says the Prophet) are
but as a dust of the balance to him, Isai. 40. 15. and by the same reason, all
their Wills are but as the dust of the balance to his Will; and shall this
small Dust turn the Scales in the weighty business of Conversion? Nay, shall it
do so, after creating, regenerating, quickening, captivating, conquering,
translating, renewing, drawing, powerfully working Grace has done its utmost?
Surely it cannot be: Wherefore I conclude, That God works actual Conversion in
an insuperable way.

Having thus debated the Manner of Conversion, I proceed to the last thing
proposed, viz.

Quaere 3. Whether the Will of God touching Conversion be always accomplished
therein?

For answer whereunto, I must first lay down a Distinction as a Foundation. God
may be said to will the Conversion of men two ways; either by such a will as is
effective and determinative of the Event, or by such a Will as is only virtual
and ordinative of the Means tending thereunto: Both parts of this distinction
are bottomed upon Scripture.

1. God wills the Conversion of some by such a Will as is effective and
determinative of the Event. There are some chosen to holiness, Ephesians. 1. 4.
called (...), according to purpose, Romans 8. 28. predestined to be conformed
to Christ's image, Ver. 29. begotten of God's own will to be first fruits to
him, Jam. 1. 18. and within that election of Grace which does ever obtein, Romans
11. 5, 7. Touching these the Will of God is effective and determinative of the
Event, in these Conversion is wrought after an irresistible and insuperable
manner.

2. God wills the Conversion of others by such a Will as is only virtual and
ordinative of the Means tending thereunto. Thus God would have healed Israel,
Hos. 7. 1. Thus God wills the turning of the wicked, who yet dies in his sin,
Ezekiel. 33. 11. because the true tendency of the Means is to heal and turn them.
Thus the Apostle asserts, that God will have all men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. In which place, as I take it, the
word [All] extends further than to the Elect; for those words of the Apostle
are laid down as a ground of that Exhortation to pray for all men, Ver. 1. and
that Exhortation to Prayer extends further than to the Elect: wherefore the
[All] whom God would have to be saved, being parallel and coextensive to the
[All] whom we are to pray for, must also extend beyond the Elect. Wherefore I
conceive that the latter part of the words, viz. [and to come to the knowledge
of the truth] is a Key to the former, viz. [That God would have all to be
saved.] God would have all to be saved, so far, as he would have all to come to
the knowledge of the Truth, and he would have all to come to the knowledge of
the Truth, so far, as he wills Means of Knowledge unto them; for the true end
and tendency of the Means (and that from the Will of God ordaining the same
thereunto) is that men might be turned and saved; Wherefore in respect of that
Ordination God may be truly said by a kind of virtual and ordinative Will to
will the turning and Salvation of all men. This I shall explain

1. With reference to those in the Bosom of the Church. 2. With reference to
those out of it.
1. God by a virtual or ordinative Will does will the Turning and Salvation of
all Men within the Bosom of the Church; for they have Jesus Christ set before
their Eyes, and what was the true End of Christ's coming, but to turn every one
from his iniquities, Acts 3. 26? They have the Gospel preached unto them; there
we have God spreading out his hands all the day, standing and knocking at the
door of the heart, crying out with redoubled Calls, Turn ye, turn ye, why will
ye die? Wooing and beseeching men, be ye reconciled unto me; making his
salvation bringing grace appear unto all men, even to the Non-elect themselves,
and causing the kingdom of God to come nigh unto men, even to such as for the
rejection thereof have the dust of their city wiped off against them; and what
is the meaning of all this, if God no way will their Conversion? Take away
God's ordinative Will, and then God (as to the Non-elect) spreads out his hands
of Mercy that he may shut them; knocks, that he may be barred out; cries and
beseeches, that he may not be heard; makes his Grace appear and Kingdom come
nigh, that it may be rejected, and not received: All which is to evacuate
Scripture and put a lie upon the offers of Grace. Neither will it salve the
business, to say, there is a Voluntas signi in all this; for what is Voluntas
signi, if it be not signum Voluntatis? If it be only an outward Sign or
Appearance, and there be no Counterpane or Prototype thereof within the divine
Will, how is it a true Sign? Which way could it be breathed out from God's
Heart? When God makes his great Gospel-supper, and says, Come, for all things
are ready, he is not, he cannot be like him with the evil eye, who says, Eat
and drink, but his heart is not with thee, Prove. 23. 6, 7. No, God's Heart goes
along with every Offer of Grace; he never calls but in a serious manner: And
therefore unbelieving and impenitent Persons are in Scripture said, not only to
reject the Means; but to receive the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1. to
reject the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7. 30. and to make God a
liar 1 John 5. 10. as if he meant not really in the Offers of his Son Jesus
Christ. When God threatened the Jews with his Judgments, they belied the Lord,
and said, it is not he, Jer. 5. 12. and when God offers men Grace in the
Gospel, they by their Unbelief belie the Lord and say, It is not he; it is but
only the Minister or outward Sign, God's Heart or Mind is not in it. Under such
weighty words as these does the Scripture set out the rejection of means,
because of God's ordinative Will' that God who will one day mock at the
rejecters of his call, Prove. 1. 26. does not now mock them in the Grace of his
Call; the true end of his Call is their Conversion, and that that end is not
attained, the only Reason lies within themselves in their own corrupt
unbelieving Hearts. Moreover it is worthy of our consideration, that those
Scriptures (which the Remonstrants urge to prove that all the Operations of
Grace, even those in the very Elect who actually turn unto God, are resistible)
do signally set forth this ordinative Will of God: As first they urge that
Matthew. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and
ye would not: Here, say they, is resistible Grace. Very well; but what Grace
does the Text speak of? It speaks only of the Grace afforded to those Jews
which were never gathered or converted thereby, but not a tittle of the Grace
afforded to those Jews which were thereby actually gathered or converted; and
how then can it prove, that this latter Grace (of which it speaks not at all)
was resistible? If it prove this Grace resistible, it can be upon no other
ground but this only, That the Grace afforded to the Jews which were not
gathered, and the Grace afforded to the Jews which were gathered was one and
the same: but how can that be made good? Can that Text assert an equality of
Grace to both sorts of Jews, which speaks only of the Grace afforded to one of
them, viz. to the ungathered ones? It Is impossible: But if it be not the Truth
of the Text, is there yet any Truth in the thing? Had all the Jews equal Grace
with the Jews given to Christ, with the Jews drawn by the Father, with the Jews
chosen out of the world? It Is incredible. The Remonstrants allow that God does
irresistibly enlighten the Understanding, excite the Affections, and infuse a
posse convertere into the Will; but was it thus with all the Jews? Were the
blind leaders of the blind thus enlightened? Were the malicious scorners thus
affected? Were those which could not believe, Joh. 12. 39. endued with a posse
convertere? It cannot be. Wherefore this Text speaking only of the Grace given
to the ungathered Jews, proves not the Grace given to the other Jews to be
resistible, but it genuinely proves a Will in God to gather them all under his
wings of Grace; I say, a Will in God, for it cannot be interpreted of Christ's
humane Will; for the gathering willed was not only a gathering by Christ's
Ministry, but by the Mission of Prophets before his Incarnation, to which
Christ's humane Will could not extend, because not then in being: Wherefore
this Will is God's ordinative Will, imported in the Ministry of Christ and the
Prophets, the proper end and tendency whereof was to gather them into the bosom
of his Grace. This Calvin in his Commentaries upon this place calls, mirum and
incomparabile amoris documentum; and withal adds, significat nunquam proponi
nobis Dei verbum, quin ipse materna dulcedine gremium suum nobis aperiat.
Again, they urge that Isai. 65. 2. I have spread out my hands all the day unto
a rebellious people; but this place speaks only of the Grace afforded to the
Rebellious, and therefore it proves not that the Grace afforded to the Elect
was resistible. Neither is it imaginable, that the same measure of Grace is
signified in this expansion of God's hand, as in the revelation of his arm,
Isai. 53. 1. The Apostle quoteth this place, Romans 10. 21. yet withal asserts,
that there was a remnant according to the election of Grace, Romans 11. 5. not a
remnant according to the better improvement of the same Grace, but a remnant
according to the election of Grace; such as pure Grace had reserved to it self,
by those special Operations which were not vouchsafed to the blinded ones, Ver.
7. God's stretching out his hands is all one with his call, Prove. 1. 24. but
all men are not called after the ^^me rate as the called according to purpose:
Wherefore this place proves not, that the workings of Grace as to the Elect are
resistible; but that the Offers of Grace as to the Non-elect are serious, God
in the Means really spreading out his Arms of Grace unto them. Again; they urge
that of our Savior, These things I say that you might be saved, Joh. 5. 34.
which words were spoken to them, which would not come to Christ, Ver. 40. but
that the holy Spirit spoke as inwardly and powerfully to them, as to the Elect
who hear and learn of the Father, what Chemistry can extract it out of this
Text? or from what other Scripture can it be demonstrated? God commands the
light to shine out of darkness in some hearts, 2 Cor. 4. 6. but does he so in
all? Whence then are those blinded ones, Ver. 4? If there be any such, where is
the Remonstrants Equality of Grace? Where, when they say, that Illumination is
wrought irresistibly? These things cannot consist together. Wherefore our
Saviors words show not forth the weakness or superableness of Grace as to the
Elect, but the true End and Scope of Christ's Preaching as to the Non-elect;
what he spoke to them was in order to their Salvation. Again; they urge that,
The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being
not baptized of him, that is, of John, Luke 7. 30. Here, (say they) is their
Thesis in terminis: But this place is so far from proving that the internal
Grace vouchsafed to the Elect is resistible, that from hence it cannot be
proved, that these Rejecters had any workings of internal Grace at all in them:
For internal Grace runs in the Veins of Ordinances, and the Ordinance here
spoken of was John's Baptism, and that these Rejecters would not partake of at
all; for so says the Text, They were not baptized of him, and then which way
should they come by internal Grace? could they have it quite out of God's Way?
No, surely, there is little or rather no reason to imagine that these Rejecters
so far scorning God's Ordinance, as not so much as outwardly to be made
partakers thereof, should yet have the workings of internal Grace in them. But
suppose they had some internal Working, must it needs be the baptism of the
holy Ghost and fire, such intimate and powerful working as is in the Elect? Not
a tittle of this appears in the Text: wherefore this place proves not that the
working of Grace in the Elect is resistible, but it signally shows forth the
nature of divine Ordinances. Every Ordinance is an Ordinance from the Will of
God; it is an Appointment dropped down from Heaven; it is divinely destinated
(...), for edification and not for destruction; it is the Place where God
records his Name; it is the Way where God would be met withal; it is the Oracle
where God would be heard; it is a kind of Tabernacle of witness where God
attesteth the Riches of his Grace. John's Baptism was not a mere external Sign
or Shadow, but imported God's ordinative Counsel to bring men to Repentance;
'twas (...), to repentance, as its proper End, Matthew. 3. 11. Gospel-preaching
is not a mere sound or voice of Words, but it imports Gods ordinative Counsel
to turn men unto himself. Hence every true Minister is said to stand in Gods
counsel, and for this very End, to turn them from the evil of their doings,
Jer. 23. 22. Every Ordinance speaks an ordinative Counsel for some spiritual
End, a serious Ordination for the good of Souls. Oh! that every one would think
so indeed, how surely would they find that God is in it of a truth; whosoever
comes to an Ordinance so thinking, justifies Gods Institution and meets his
Benediction; but he who comes and thinks otherwise, does by that very thought
forsake the ordinance of his God, and reject his counsel, though not in so high
and gross a manner as the Pharisees and Lawyers did, who would not so much as
outwardly partake of John's Baptism. Again; they urge that, What could have
been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore when I
looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? Isai.
5. 4. Here (say they) were omnia adhibita, not a tantillum gratiae wanting;
here seems to be the ultimus conatus, the utmost Acting of Grace, even equal to
those Operations of Grace which were in the Converts of the Jewish Church, and
that upon a double account; First because God says, What could be done more?
Secondly, because God had done so much that he expected the grapes of Holiness
and Obedience from them; and yet after all this they brought forth wild Grapes:
Hence the Remonstrants conclude, that Conversion is wrought in a resistible
way. I answer; those which will take the true measure of the Grace set forth in
this Text, must first consider to whom this Grace was afforded; 'twas to the
Jewish Church in common, even to every member thereof: this granted, as it
cannot be denied, I proceed to answer, first as to that expression, What could
have been done more? Either the meaning of it is, what could have been done
more in a way of internal Grace, or else it is, what could have been done more
in a way of external Means; the first cannot be the meaning, that God could do
no more in a way of internal Grace; if God had said so in that sense, the
Jewish Church might have aptly answered, Lord! could thou not write the Law
in every Heart? Could thou not make a new heart in every one of us? O how
many unregenerate Souls are there found in me! But if not that, Lord! could
thou not at least have inwardly enlightened every one? Could thou not have
given him some inward dispositions to Conversion? O how many ignorant Souls are
there, which call evil good and good evil, and put darkness for light and light
for darkness, Isai. 5. 20! these are not so much as inwardly enlightened: O! how
many Atheists are there which jear and scoff at the Threatenings of God, saying,
Let him hasten his work that we may see it, let the counsel of the holy One
draw nigh, that we may know it, Ver. 9. These are so far from any dispositions
to Conversion, that they scarce have the sense of a Deity in them. Lord! thou,
who did plant me a Vineyard or visible Church, could have planted saving
Graces in every Heart; thou, who did gather out the stones of public
annoyance out of me, could have took away the privy stone of hardness out of
every Heart; doubtless thou art Almighty and therefore thou can do it; thou
art True, and therefore thou will do it, if thou have said it. Hence it
appears, that that Expression [What could have been done more?] relates not to
internal Grace, but external means: it is as if God had said, O Israel! I have
planted thee in a Canaan, I have set thee my only visible Church in the world,
I have manured thee by my Prophets, I have betrusted thee with the lively
Oracles of my Law, I have fenced thee in with my waky providence and
protection; What Nation is there so great, who has me so nigh unto them, who
has judgments and statutes so righteous? What National or Church-privilege is
there yet behind? What could have been done more for a Church under the legal
Pedagogy and before the Messiah's coming in the flesh? This I take to be the
proper meaning of the words. Secondly, as to God's expectation, neither does
that imply that there were omnia adhibita; for when God came and sought fruit
on the Fig Tree, the seeking there was as much as the expecting here, and yet
there were not omnia adhibita, no, not as to external Means; for after his
seeking, he dug about it and dunged it, that it might be fruitful, Luke 13.
6, 7, 8, 9. Now by all this it appears, that that Parable of the Vineyard
proves, not that the internal Grace afforded to those Jews which were thereby
converted was resistible; but it proves that the proper End and Tendency of the
Means afforded to the Jewish Church, was that they might bring forth good
fruits to God, and in respect of that Ordination God is said to expect those
good fruits from them.

2. God by a virtual or ordinative Will does will the Turning and Salvation
even of the very Pagans. According to that Will, God would (as I have before
laid down) be seen in every creature, sought and felt in every place, witnessed
in every shower and fruitful season, feared in the sea-bounding sand, humbled
under in every abasing providence, and turned to in every judgment. This the
very Philistines saw by the Light of Nature; Give Glory to God (say they)
peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, 1 Samuel 6. 5. Also the
Ninevites Counsel was, to Cry mightily to God and turn from their evil ways,
who can tell (say they) if God will turn and repent, Jonah 3. 8, 9. In a word;
the meaning of all God's Works is that men should fear before him, Eccles. 3.
14. The goodness and patience of God leads them to repentance, Romans 2. 4. Hence
the Apostle tells us, The Lord is long-suffering to us ward, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Mirus
hic erga humanum genus amor (says Calvin on the place) quod omnes vult esse
salvos, and ultro pereuntes in salutem colligere paratus est. God in indulging
his Patience and Longsuffering to men, does virtually will their Repentance and
Salvation. I know some interpret this place otherwise: God is long-suffering to
us, that is, the (...), in the former Verse, not willing that any (viz. of us)
should perish, but that all (viz. of us) should come to Repentance. But I
conceive that there is no Necessity at all that the Text should be so
straightened, nor yet Congruity for Long-suffering toward the beloved, that they
(who have already repented) should come to Repentance: Neither does this answer
the Scope of the place, which asserts, that God is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, upon this ground, because of
his long-suffering; and his Longsuffering extends to all, and in that extent
its true End and Scope is to lead them to repentance and salvation. Wherefore
the meaning is, God is long-suffering to us, not to us beloved only, but to us
men, not willing our Perdition but Repentance: The true Duct and Tendency of
his Longsuffering is to lead men to repentance and salvation; and therefore in
willing that Long-suffering, he does virtually and ordinatively will their
Repentance and Salvation.

Having thus at large laid down this Distinction with its parts, my Answer to
the Quaere proposed is this; God's Will of Conversion, as effective and
determinative of the Event, is accomplished in the actual Conversion of all the
Elect by insuperable Grace; and God's Will of Conversion, as virtual and
ordinative of Means, is accomplished in this, That there is a serious
Exhibition of the Means in order to Conversion, as their proper End, and that
that End (but for Man's voluntary Corruption) would be thereby attained, even
in all.

FINIS.

