PRECIOUS FAITH CONSIDERED In its Nature, Working, and Growth.

By Edward Polhill of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill at the Atlas in Cornhil near the
Royal Exchange, 1675.

To the CHRISTIAN Reader.
HE that with serious eyes looks on that dreadful spectacle, lapsed Angels
lying in Chains of Darkness for ever, and that for one Sin, may very well stand
and wonder at the Salvation of Men; in which worms are as it were Angelized,
and little lumps of corrupted dust are first refined by Grace, and then
transfigured into Glory. The pure Origin of this great Work is no other than
the Divine Grace and Love, which have so fairly pourtraied and limmed out
themselves upon every piece of it, that all the Saints above and below may read
the Characters thereof; and have reason to cry out, Grace, Grace. Indeed Heaven
and Earth too should ring with the Praises of it, and Eternity it self will be
short enough to behold and admire it in. To compass this Glorious design the
Son of God left his Fathers Bosom, and appeared in our Flesh, to make a Robe
for us of his own Righteousness, and a Laver for us in his own Blood. Our
Nature in him is now in Heaven, and his Spirit is descended to impress his
Image on us, thereby to make us meet for that Blessed Region, to secure all to
us. Heaven has let down a great Charter in the precious Gospel, in which we
have a Map of Glory, and Eternal Life set before us; to elevate our Souls,
which are sparks of Immortality, out of the dust and rubbish of the Fall, and
to set them aspiring after the true Pleasures and Beatitudes which are above.
That we may not mistake our way, or faint in it, the holy Spirit has in the
Gospel drawn many lines of Holiness and Comfort: There are pure Precepts to
chalk out the Way to Heaven, and sweet Promises to cordial us therein; and to
give us some Tastes of Heaven before we come there. The great condition of this
Salvation which streams down out of the fountain of Grace through the Blood of
Christ into the Evangelical Promises, is no other than Faith. This is the
Aurora of Glory, Heaven and Eternal Life dawn in it; This is the Hypostasis of
Things hoped for. It presentiates the Celestial Paradise, and in some sort sets
the Believer by the rivers of Pleasures which are there: This receives all from
Grace, and ascribes all to it, prompting the Believer to confess touching his
Spiritual Being and Working, By the Grace of God I am what I am, and by the
Grace of God I do what I do. This unites to Christ, wraps up it self in his
Righteousness, feasts on his precious Body and Blood unto Life Eternal, and
surrenders up Heart and Life to the blessed duct of his Spirit and Word.
Walking on in holy Precepts it drinks Comfort out of Promises, following hard
after Holiness it meets with Peace, such as passes understanding; overcoming
earth with all its Troops of vanity, it ascends and takes Heaven by violence;
and renting off the dark veil of Time, it looks into Eternity, and aspires
after that Blissmaking Vision, which is the true Center of it. Where this Grace
is, there the Gospel is not in word only, but in power: The Truth stands not
merely without in the letter, but is entertained within, and springs up in the
Heart as a seed of Immortal Happiness. The Divine Excellencies of this noble
Grace have drawn out my Thoughts in the ensuing Discourse now offered to
public view. The Errata's and Infirmities in it beg the Readers kind
Indulgence: And the holy Truths therein call for a Practical Improvement. If
but any Mite may get into the Treasury, if any thing thereby may redound to the
Glory of God, or profit of Men, it is enough; and a sufficient recompense for
him, who is

A Lover of Truth, Edw. Polhill.

PRECIOUS FAITH.
CHAP. I.
Some general acceptions of the word Faith in Scripture, premised. Precious
Faith described, and considered in the general nature of it, as it is a grace
of the Holy Spirit.

THE word [Faith] has many acceptions in Scripture, among which I shall touch
upon some.

Sometimes it imports the Gospel or object of Faith; thus St. Paul preached the
faith, Gal. 1.23. that is, the Gospel, which is worthy to be so called, because
it is the great Engine, which lets down Gods faith to men, and catches up men's
faith to God.

Sometimes it imports a dogmatical or historical Faith, which is an assent to
the word of God as true and infallible: thus the very devils believe a God, and
(which is more then many sinful worms do) they tremble, Jam. 2.19.

Sometimes it imports a temporary Faith, which is but a dogmatical faith,
budding and blossoming with some tastes and joys in the things of God: thus the
stony ground received the word with joy, Mat. 13.20.

Sometimes it imports a miraculous Faith, which by a special instinct gives
such a touch upon the power of God, as to produce wonderful effects in nature;
a grain of this is enough to remove mountains, Mat. 17.20.

Sometimes it imports saving Faith, called by the Apostle precious Faith, 2
Pet. 1.1.

Omitting the rest, I shall fix my Discourse upon this, and that upon a double
account.

First, This precious faith virtually includes the rest. In Faith in the first
notion, there is only the Gospel or object standing alone by it self, but in
this faith the act and the object are in sweet conjunction; the soul is
Gospellized, and the Gospel, which outwardly runs in the letter, is inwardly
glorified in the believers heart. In dogmatical faith there is an assent to the
truths of God, and so there is in precious faith, but in a more eminent manner;
the first embracing the Gospel only in its naked truth, and history is but a
dead and a cold notion, but the second embracing the same in its goodness and
spiritual mystery, carries life and warmth in it: temporary faith has some
joys in the things of God, but precious faith has the same in a more excellent
way; the former is but a flash and away, a flower without a root, the Gospel is
not radicated in him, but lies as it were upon the surface of his heart: Jesus
Christ is not entirely received by him, but by parcels only; hence a little
storm of persecution blows off all the blossoms of his joy, but the latter is a
thing of a higher excellency and permanency. In the true believer the Gospel is
intimately rooted, and Christ impartially received, even cross and all: Hence
such an one can joy in tribultions, and under afflictions wait for
consolations. Miraculous faith can work wonders, and so can precious too: the
first works wonders in the body of nature, by a touch upon Almighty power, and
the second works wonders in the souls of men, by a touch upon Almighty grace. A
grain of this can remove spiritual mountains, mountains of guiltiness off from
the Conscience, mountains of hardness off from the Will, and mountains of
earthiness off from the Affections: outward miracles in the Churches infancy
followed believers for a while, Mark 16.17. but inward miracles are ever found
in them; and no wonder, for the exceeding greatness of Gods power is unto them
that believe, Ephesians. 1.19.

Secondly, This precious faith does complete the noblest instinct in man; I
mean, that natural pulse which he has after happiness. All men would be happy,
but none ever hit upon it till faith came. The Pagans by natural light have
some knowledge of God, the supreme good, but the only access to him is by
faith. The Philosophers, whose profession was the study of wisdom, and whose
lamp of reason burned brighter then others, were no better then the blind
Sodomites, unable to find the door of happiness. De civitat. Dei. l. 19. c. 1.
Hence, as St. Austin relates out of Varro, the Philosophers might be divided
into two hundred eighty eight Sects about the chief good, which faith can
indubitably immediately point at. Some Philosophers placed man's happiness in
pleasures, which yet are but the sad transformations of men into bruits. Some
in honors, which yet are but great servitudes, which made the Noble Charles
the fifth weep over his Son, upon whose shoulders, at his retire out of the
world, he left the burden of a Crown. Some in riches, which yet are but thorns
choking that precious seed of the word, which would grow up (if embraced) into
life eternal. Others, which were better marks-men, in moral virtues, yet even
these (as a learned man observes) are but circa res humanas, their sphere is
but humane converse; and they do not (as faith) elevate the soul into a
conjunction with God, which is the only true happiness. When the Apostle in his
Catalogue of graces (which minister an entrance into the everlasting kingdom)
puts in temperance and patience, 2 Pet. 1.6. he speaks of them as Graces, not
as mere moral virtues, but as Christianized by Faith, which in that place is
set in the van. But waving the Pagan world, let us come to the Christian. There
the way of life is clearly manifested; yet none, void of faith, ever trod a
right step in it, nay, nor spiritually discerned it, unto them that are without
all things are in parables, Mark 4.11. to the unbeliever, though never so great
a Scholar, Christ and grace and heaven are but as it were in parables. The
Kohathites (whose name, as a learned man observes, is derived from stupidity)
carried the holy things covered, and so do all the unregenerate Rabbis in the
Church, till faith waken them out of the stupor of the fall: they discern not
spiritually the beatitude objectively exposed to view in the Gospel, till faith
draw off the vail from their hearts, but as soon as that is done, the way into
the holy of Holies is manifest, and passable, and so the (...) instinct after
happiness receives a compleature. Now this precious faith, being precious in
the least minim of it, may be considered either in its first and lowest
measure, or in its fruits and glorious progresses. In its first and lowest
measure, it is the very condition of the Gospel, and puts a man by virtue
thereof into a state of salvation; whosoever believes, even with the least
degree of precious faith, shall be saved. I shall therefore first treat of it
according to the lowest measure, which has salvation entailed on it, and then
proceed to the progresses and fruits thereof; and according to the lowest
measure, it may be thus described. Precious Faith is a grace of the holy
Spirit, whereby the heart supernaturally illuminated, does so believe the
testimony of God in the sacred Scriptures, as in a way of trust or dependence
to resign and yield up it self unto Jesus Christ as Mediator, and in and
through him unto God, according to his word. In general, it is a grace of the
holy Spirit: in special, there is in it, first a supernatural illumination,
which is as the womb of the morning, in which this child of light is conceived,
and then (which is the firstborn of that light) there is a belief of the
testimony of God: and lastly (which makes up the total sum of this grace) there
is a dependant yielding or resignation of the soul unto the Mediator, and
through him to God, according to the word. I shall in order treat of all these,
and so unsold the description at large.

The first thing is, in general faith is a grace of the holy Spirit. The
famous St. Austin once let drop a strange word: It is said (says he) God
works all in all, but not, he believes all in all; therefore, that we
believe, is our own, but that we work good, it is Gods, who gives the holy
Spirit to believers; but the good man soon called it back again, Aug. Retract.
l. 1. c. 23.
Profec^o non dicerem, truly I should not have said it, if I had then known
faith to be the gift of God. The Pelagians of old understood by grace only,
their own freewill, and the Gospel-doctrine; hence that impious saying of
theirs refuted by St. Austin, a Deo habemus, quod homines sumus, a nobis ipsis,
quod justi sumus: faith with them was but the issue of their own free will, and
it is no other with the Socinians. Peccatum originis (says the Racovian
Catechism) nullum p^orsus est, quare nec liberum arbitrium vitiare potuit,
there was not so much as a bruise of free will in the fall; we have a free
power of our own to believe, but what says the Scripture? Unto you (...) it is
gratuitously given to believe, Phil. 1.29. and faith is called the Spirit of
Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. because it is not from our own spirit; and in express
terms, the grace of God, Acts 11.23. it lodges in man's heart, as a beam of that
eternal grace which is in Gods: and to make this clear I shall offer three
things.

First, This precious faith is a thing above the natural faculty of man. There
is in man a natural faith or believing faculty, and the very Phiosophers would
call for it from their Scholars; but as it is in the fall of a house, not this
or that beam falls, but all comes down at once: so it was in the fall of man,
not this or that natural faculty fell, but all together, and among the rest,
the believing faculty fell also: hence as it lies in the dust and rubbish of
the fall, it centers in the creature, and without the elevation of grace, it
can in no wise lift up it self to God and Christ. We are begotten again to a
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.3.
Observe, there must be a touch from Christ in glory, or else there will be no
elevation; Christ must first apprehend us, Phil. 3.12. or else our believing
faculty is but as a dead hand, unable to apprehend him.

Secondly, This precious faith is a thing above moral virtue. There is a v^st
difference between moral virtues and spiritual graces: the seeds of moral
virtues are found in lapsed nature, but of spiritual graces there are none at
all in it, nothing but a naked capacity. Moral virtues do from those natural
seeds bud and spring forth into being under the common influence of the spirit,
but spiritual graces, not being seeded in nature, are mere infusions or
creations; the seed of God must drop down from heaven into the heart, or else
these cannot exist: hence the Apostle in contradistinction to the virtues of
men calls them the virtues of God, 1 Pet. 2.9. such a thing is faith, of a
nobler extraction then all the moral virtues in the world.

Thirdly, This precious Faith advances both our natural faculties and our moral
virtues. It advances our natural faculties, and so shows it self what it is:
grace is nature elevated above it self, a reason with an heavenly light in it,
a will with an holy law in it, and affections as it were upon the wings of
Angels, soaring into the upper world. After such sort does faith elevate the
humane faculties: when faith comes, God shines into the heart, and then the
Reason, which before had a cloud on it, sparkles out as a pearl in the
Sunbeams; the day star is up in the heart and whilst others live by
candlelight, the believer has the Sun; then the will which lay in its lusts as
a slave in its chains, is set upon the wheel and made free indeed; then the
affections, which conversed among the tombs of the creatures, are no longer
here, but are risen with Christ to seek the things above. Moreover it advances
moral virtues also, it grafts them upon a nobler stock, they are no longer mere
blossoms of reason, but fruits of the spirit. Josephus relating the patience of
the Maccabees under the torments of the bloody Antiochus, cries up, Reason,
Reason, as if that were the rock upon which they stood; but sure, he speaks
below them, a greater then reason was there, even faith, as the Apostle
asserts, Heb. 11.35. a higher spirit then their own acted in their patience,
and elevated it above mere morality. Again, mere moral virtues, issuing merely
out of our own reason, are apt to breed a moth of pride and vain
self-reflection: here we find the Moralist crowing after a strange rate, Beatae
vitae causa and firmamentum est, sibi sidere, turpe est Deos fatigare, Sense.
Epist. 31.
quid votis apus est? fac te felicem, exurge and te dignum singe Deo, as if he
would have no other happiness but what was of his own making; but when Faith
comes, off go the plumes of pride, and humility is as a vail over all the moral
virtues. I live in temperance and justice (says the believing Moralist) yet
not I, but Christ lives in me. Add hereunto mere moral virtues in their
intention, rise no higher then their own level of humanity; but when faith
comes, there is a pearl in the head, a pure intention in each of them toward
the glory of God: he that before was temperate to himself, just to others, and
patient to necessity, is now all these to God; Feci Deo, is the Motto of every
moral act. To conclude, what sweet and strong motives Faith adds unto moral
virtues, may appear in the famous instance of Justus Lipsius, Melch. Adam. Vit.
Philosoph.
that great humanist and admirer of Morality, who in his last sickness, being
told by one present, that he might now fetch much comfort from the Stoical
Philosophers, made this answer, Illa sunt vana, Domine Jesu, da mihi patientiam
Christianam, those are but vain things, Lord Jesus, give me a Christian
patience. Thus much touching Faith in general.

CHAP. II.
Of the special nature of Faith, and here of Spiritual Illumination, the first
ingredient therein. What it is, with the necessity thereof unto Faith,
demonstrated.

THE next thing is to consider Faith in its special nature; and here the first
thing in order, is supernatural illumination: touching which, I shall first
show what that is, and then demonstrate the necessity of it to Faith. And
first, what it is, it is God shining into the heart, and lighting our candle,
to make us discern divine things in a spiritual way. It is an illumination
above nature subjectively, and not objectively only; it is a thing above reason
and all its improvements made upon external objects; reason may be taken in a
double posture, either sitting with the glass of the creatures before it, and
so it is merely the light of nature, or else sitting with the glass of the
Scriptures before it, and so it is a notional knowledge of Divinity; but this
supernatural light is above reason in both these postures: First, take reason
with the creature-glass before it, and this supernatural light is much above
it. And here I might show, how much the Scripture-glass excells that of the
creature: the divine words there outshine the Sun, outweigh the earth,
out-vye all the treasures, and out-relish all the sweetnesses in nature. God is
more glorious in the Scripture-robes, then in all the visible world: his
chariot in the word is statelier then that in the clouds. Evangelical light is
a richer garment upon him then mere natural; in the creature there is but a
print or footstep of God, but in the Scripture there is his very image and
resemblance. Also, which is a consequent on the former, this supernatural
light, having the purer glass, is of a far greater latitude then mere reason:
it spreads it self into many mysteries, which never entered into natural reason,
but were hid from ages in the divine mind, it takes a view of those rare
Evangelical pearls which were never dug out of reasons mine, but dropped down
from heaven unto the sons of men: But, because the comparison of these two
lights as to their outward glasses and latitudes is not so pertinent, I shall
compare them as to their inward natures, and only in such things as both of
them extend unto, and a vast difference will appear between them.

First, Reason is a far lower light then that of Faith: in natural light Reason
is the very faculty, but in supernatural it is but a capacity: God must shine
into the heart, there must be light upon light, supernatural upon natural, or
else there is no faith. David prays, open or (as the original has it) reveal
thou mine eyes, Psalm. 119.18. There is in faith, a revelation of eyes, and not
of objects only; the Apostle speaks of being renewed in the very spirit of the
mind, Ephesians. 4.23. the rational spirit is the candle of the Lord, but unless it
be new lighted, it is too dim since the fall to believe the things of God.

Secondly, Reason is a far weaker light then that of Faith. It is a light
shining in darkness, and after all its glimmerings, it leaves but a foolish
heart and vain imaginations, Romans 1.21. it is as a little spark (...) an ocean
of reigning corruptions, and these keep the heart from taking fire with the
love of those excellencies which are known by nature. The Gentiles knew God,
but they did not like to have him in their knowledge, Romans 1.28. millions of
unruly lusts, like the sons of Belial about Lots house, beset this natural
light, and keep it as it were in prison; thus the Apostle, they withheld it in
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. and it is too weak to break out of this prison, and
show it self practically: I shall give some instances hereof. All Nations in
all climates and through all ages, have conspired together to confess a Deity:
Conscience within bears witness to him, and so do all the creatures without
also; one would wonder therefore that ever Idolatry should get footing in the
world, but what says the Apostle, they changed the truth of God into a lie,
and the glory of the incorruptible one into a corruptible image, Romans 1.23.25.
there were store of abominable idols among them; no doubt natural light gave
its secret vote for God, but it was but the vote of a poor prisoner altogether
insignificant, it was not strong enough to make them own God in his own world.
Again, reason and nature say, that God must be worshipped with the heart, and
that a pure heart, pura mente colendus, was the old verse, in suo cuique
consecrandus est pectore, said Seneca. God has not (...), a more proper place
upon earth then a pure heart, says Hierocles; O divine saying, next door to
that of our Savior, blessed are the pur^ in heart, for they shall see God. But
after all this, can this natural light work a dram of true sanctity or holiness
in the heart? No, the very Schoolmen themselves (who ever give nature her due
with an overplus) will not say so, only they say, facienti quod in se est, Deus
revelabit Christum and largietur gratiam. Well, if this hypothesis (which I am
not now to dispute) were true, can there be an instance given among all the
Pagans from the morning of the world till this day, of any one man who by the
right use of ^^turals arrived at true grace? If so, what will become of that in
the Apostle? Who has called us with an holy calling; not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. If not, O what a
poor weak light is this of nature? and how long and universally a prisoner has
it been? indeed true sanctity or holiness is never found without humility, but
touching that, there is no footstep nor shadow of commendation in all the Pagan
writers, says the learned Amyraldus, it is not so much as a virtue among them:
on the contrary (...), greatness of soul is reckoned among Aristotle's virtues.
Well then might Erasmus his Sancte Socrates have been spared. Notable is that
of St. Bernard, Epist. 190.
some (says he) whilst they go about to make Plato a Christian, prove
themselves heathens. Again, because possibly the light of reason may be weakest
in the concerns of Religion, I shall instance in other things. Does not nature
and reason plead for all things of common honesty and humanity, and yet in the
Laws of Lycurgus, which were of high renown, and commended even by the Oracle
of Apollo, and which (as Plutarch relates) Lycurgus took singular pleasure to
see put in ure, even as God rejoiced to see the world move and turn about: I
say in these there are such obscenities and inhumanities as would put any one
to the blush to see them in story; what else are the dancing of maids naked,
and throwing weak children into a pit of water, spoken of by Plutarch? well
might the Lacedaemonians have spared the Temple and Sacrifices to their
Lawgiver, unless he had been truer to the Law of Nature. Again, is not
self-preservation an intimate and natural impress in the heart of man? it is
not scripta sed nata Lex, said the Orator; and yet this engraven Law was not
strong enough, no not in a grave and noble Cato, to keep him from murdering
himself, and tearing out his own bowels; and over this unnatural act Seneca
sounds a triumph, as being a noble and heroical contempt of death it self,
that, that sword of his, which was yet pure from the blood of others, might let
out his own; but hear the censure of St. Austin, De Civit. Dei. l. 19. c. 4.
Vtrum obsecro Cato ille patientia an impatientia se peremit? non enim haec
fecisset, nisi victoriam Caesaris impatienter tulisset, and in another place,
non erat honestas turpia praecavens, L 1. c. 23.
sed infirmitas adversa non sustinens, it was but a proud impatience, and
miserable trampling upon the Law of Nature: Moreover the light of reason does
really produce many moral virtues; and yet in these wherein its greatest
strength lies, it is too weak to elevate any one of them to the glory of the
great Creator; Contra Jul. Pelag. l. 4. c. 3.
therefore, as St. Austin has observed, the whole body of Pagan virtues, for
want of a single eye at that great end, is full of darkness. Thus much of the
weakness of reason: on the other side, the light of faith has a great deal of
strength in it; this will not, cannot, be commonly imprisoned, it is an holy
unction, and at last will be uppermost, it is a mighty Engine whereby the h^ly
Spirit lifts the heart up into belief and resignation; a thing of high birth
and great activity, being born of God and overcoming the world, 1 John 5.4. and
because the light of reason was not able to bear up the interest of God among
men, this supernatural light came to do it. In the primitive Church, whilst
this shined clear, there were no such things as outward Idols or Images,
afterward, upon the declension thereof, those things crept in by degrees,
first into banners and then into Churches, and there, first for instruction
only, and afterward for adoration; yet nevertheless this holy spark showed it
self in some, as in Epiphanius his cutting the vail, and Serenus his breaking
the Images, and diverse others abhorrency of Idolatry; and what this
supernatural light does in Churches against outward Idols, that it does in
hearts against inward: it will allow no Idol to stand in the secret place, not
an Ashteroth of riches, not a Venus of pleasure, not a Baal, a ruling lording
lust in the heart, every indulged lust stands upon the unilluminated and
unresigned will; and, after Faith has purified the heart, it must give way for
God to set up his Throne there: that pure heart which the Philosophers talk of
at random, as a Geographer of a terra incognita, faith plainly discovers, and
practically operates. Those dishonesties and inhumanities which reason could
not keep out of Laws, faith casts away from private Christians, as the common
mire and dirt of a wicked world: those moral virtues which reason could not
elevate to the Creators glory, faith spiritualizes by a pure intention toward
it.

Thirdly, The light, of reason is at a greater distance from God then that of
Faith, and so does not see him so clearly in the works of creation and
providence as that does. And first for creation, though it be a clear glass of
the eternal power and Godhead, yet the Philosophers, as so many Babel-builders,
are miserably confounded in their language about it. Thales fetches all things
out of water, as if that were the universal fountain. Anaximenes out of air, as
if by the rarefaction and condensation thereof all were produced. Hippasus and
Heraclitus held, that all things came out of a primitive fire or light, which
by its death or extinction generated all. Democritus and Epicurus affirmed,
that the world was made by chance, a lucky concourse of atoms framed it as it
is. Pythagoras would have all things generated out of numbers, and the harmony
thereof. Aristotle, the Prince of Peripateticks, asserted the world to be
eternal. Plato attributed eternity only to the matter; and before him
Anaxagoras was the first, who added a mind to matter, saying, Omnia simul
erant, deinde accessit men's, eaque composuit. O dark and confused Labyrinth of
opinions! How or which way shall a man extricate himself without faith? By
faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, Heb. 11.3.
If Faith do but open its eyes upon the first Chapter of Genesis, the Creation,
which before was dark as the Chaos, is all clear as the light. The believer
sees God in every creature, not only in the great Regions of Heaven and Earth,
but also in the least Atoms or particles of nature. I am, is discovered
wherever there is any thing of Being: And as for Providence, reason has not
been much clearer among the Philosophers touching it, then touching creation.
Aristotle holding the world to be eternally from God by emanation^ as light
from the Sun, must also hold its continuance to be in the same manner, and
without any voluntary act, such as Providence is. God (says he) is the first
Mover, he moves the heavens and those other bodies subalternately; so God is
the universal cause, and all the wheels in nature move under him; only
contingent things, which are not within the chain of natural causality, seem
according to Aristotle not to be administered by God. Epicurus, who makes the
world to consist of a fortuitous concourse of infinite petit Atoms, owns no
Providence at all: God will not break his rest and serene tranquillity with any
mundane affairs, and indeed in reason a world made by chance must be so
governed. The Stoics in stead of Providence brought in a Fate, or absolute
necessity, resulting out of a series or connection of causes, and binding God
himself as well as other things. Plutarch relating how Timoleon was strangely
delivered from two murderers, instead of acknowledging a Providence, wonders at
the artifice of Fortune. Nay, mere reason is apt to vilify the great works of
God: thus some said that Moses, in stead of dividing the Sea, did but take the
advantage of a low Tide to carry the Israelites over the washes, when it was
low water. But when the light of faith comes, the hand of God is seen in every
thing, not only in the great moments of nature, but even in the fall of
sparrows and numbering of hairs. Thus far of Reason with the Creature-glass
before it, but to go on.

Secondly, Take reason with the Scripture-glass before it, and this
supernatural light is yet above it. And here I must first admit what reason
under the influence of a common blessing can do; and then show, how much
supernatural light does transcend it. Reason under the influence of a common
blessing may attain a rich furniture of humane learning, and so perusing the
holy Scriptures, may understand them by Tongues critically, and by
School Divinity distinctly, and by Logic in the consequences and connexions,
and by History in some Prophetical parts, and by Rhetoric in the tropes and
figures, and by Comments in the abstruse and difficult places; and consequently
it may gather in a great notion of Divinity, much larger in the extent and
latitude thereof then the knowledge of many true believers. Yet after all this
notional knowledge attained, there is in the meanest true believer an higher
and diviner light, a thing above mere reason and notion; and this I shall
demonstrate several ways.

First, The light of reason with all its acquired notions is not a light as yet
congruous to the things of God, which are spiritually discerned only by a
supernatural light. To make out this, it will be worth our while to consider
that famous place, 1 Cor. 2. where the Apostle clearly distinguishing two sorts
of men, the natural man and the spiritual; and two sorts of spirits, the spirit
of man making the natural man, and the spirit of God making the spiritual man;
and two sorts of objects, the things of man, which are the line of knowledge to
the natural man endued with an humane spirit, and the things of God, which are
the line of knowledge to the spiritual man endued with the spirit of God;
Positively lays down this Thesis, the natural man (...), the soully man, or the
man that has only a rational soul, receives not (...), as a full vessel is
not capable of the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, ver. 14.
In this Thesis the Apostle by the (...), or soully man, does not mean a sensual
man, who has defloured his reason with sensual indulgences, for then he would
not have distinguished between the natural man and the spiritual, but between
the sensual man and the rational; neither would he have distinguished between
the spirit of man and the spirit of God, but between the spirit of man or
reason drowned in sensual pleasures, and the spirit of man or reason keeping
its station and just authority over the sensual appetite; neither does the
Apostle here mean a natural or rational man sitting in Pagan darkness, without
the Gospel, for he says, the natural man receives not the things of God,
which imports an offer of the Gospel to him, and he receives them not, because
they are foolishness to him: which they could not be, if altogether unknown;
and (says he) he cannot know them, why? not because they are not externally
propounded (which is the Pagans case) but because they are spiritually
discerned: But the Apostle here means by the natural or soully man, a man of
reason, and that never forfeited by sensual lusts, and a man of reason with the
Gospel set before him; and so his conclusion is this, A man of reason with the
Gospel before him, cannot receive or know the things of God. But you will say,
if this be so, how can a man of reason with the Gospel before him, arrive at so
great a notion of Divinity, as is before admitted? I answer, the key to open
this is in the Text, the natural man cannot know the things of God, because
they are spiritually discerned. A man by reason and its furniture of learning
may in the perusal of the holy Scriptures gather up a world of notions, and so
know the things of God notionally; but he knows them not spiritually, and by
consequence not congruously to their spiritual nature. For the opening of this,
we must consider, that there is in the holy Scriptures something humane, or
which may be inventoried among the things of man, as the letters and words made
up of them, and sentences made up of words; not as if these were not dictated
exactly by God himself, but that they are common to humane and profane Authors:
I mean not for the divineness of the matter, but for the phrases and forms of
speech. And there is in them something Divine, or which must be computed among
the things of God, as the mysteries and spiritual things themselves, which are
represented by those words and phrases. I may illustrate this distinction
farther by that of our Savior, If I have told you earthly things, and you
believe them not, how shall you believe, if I tell you of heavenly things, Joh.
3.12. I pray, what earthly things did our Savior tell them? was not he there
preaching on that divine Theme of Regeneration? Very true, but Christ spoke to
them of Regeneration under the shadow of a birth and a wind, and not according
to the heavenly and spiritual nature thereof in it self. Thus the words and
phrases in Scripture, being of common use, are as it were humane types and
shadows, but the mysteries and spiritual things themselves are altogether
divine. Now to apply this distinction, reason improved, reaching to the things
of man as its proper line, may know the words and sentences in Scripture, and
so gather up a great notion of Divinity: But, unless enlightened by the holy
Spirit, which searches the things of God, it goes not beyond its own line, it
knows not spiritual things spiritually. Reason without the light of faith, Take
it in a Jew at a Sacrifice, and it saw the type only, and not Christ in it.
Take it in a Christian at the holy Supper, and it sees only the outward
elements, and discerns not the Lords body. Take it in the greatest Rabbi
sitting with the Scriptures before him, and it sees them only in the shell or
letter, and not in the mystery. And no wonder, for even in common Sciences it
may be so; a man may construe and know the Grammar of a principle in Euclide,
and yet be ignorant of the Mathematical sense of it; much more in divine truths
may a man be spiritually ignorant, who knows a great deal literally. Therefore
all Scholars may do well in their studies to do as Zuinglius did, who having
arrived at Arts and Tongues, yet in the reading of the holy Scriptures, looked
up to heaven. As for the great Doctor the holy Spirit, when he comes in
supernatural illumination, then we know the things of God, not by our own
spirit but Gods, the very same spirit which breaths in the Scriptures, shines
in the heart. Hence spiritual things are discerned spiritually, by a light
congruous to their nature; the spirit glorifies and shows forth Christ, as the
expression is, John 16.14. Holy truths are as it were transfigured and shown
forth in glory, which before were seen but in the flesh or weakness of the
Letter; the Deity sparkles out in the beauty and spiritual luster of
Scripture-mysteries, which before only appeared in the humanity of words and
phrases. Now heaven opens, and free grace passes before us, the secret of the
Lord is with us, and we are of his Privy Council. This is the first and
fundadamental difference, Reason with all its acquired notions is not a light
congruous to spiritual things, but the light of Faith is: Out of this all the
other are derived.

Secondly, Mere Reason digging in the Letter of Scripture, arrives but at
notions and shadows of knowledge, and though these be as the sands on the sea
shore, they are but a form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. but when the light of faith
comes, there is sound wisdom, Prove. 3.21. or, as the original word is, essence;
a thing which can no more be made up of mere notions, then a body can of
shadows. Faith is the substance or subsistence of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
Without it, notions and literal knowledge have no hypostasis in the heart; the
spiritual world is as it were lost; God and Christ and Heaven, are but notions:
But as soon as faith comes and makes the daybreak in the heart, the spiritual
world subsists afresh. God is God, and Christ is Christ, and Heaven is Heaven
to the soul, all of them are reallized by faith; there is a good treasure in
the heart, far more substantial then Arts and Tongues and School-notions can
make.

Thirdly, Reason with its notions arrives but at a knowledge falsely so called,
for it knows not the things of God as they are proposed to be known; those
things are proposed to be known not as mere notions, but as practical things:
to be in the first place chosen, loved, embraced and practiced, but it knows
them only notionally and not practically. That knowledge, whilst materially
true, has a secret lie in it; thus the Apostle, He that says, I know him, and
keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John
2.4. It Is not in him in a practical way, so as to balance the will and
affections with the excellency of the things known; but as soon as faith comes,
those things are known as they are proposed to be known, as practical things to
be improved in heart and life. The supernatural light digests truths into blood
and spirits, and turns mysteries into godliness. It knows Law and Gospel in
their true tendency, which is holiness; not to be holy is to blast and profane
the meaning of both.

Fourthly, The mere notional knowledge acquired by reason has no spiritual
life or sense in it, it has no life in it; mere notions are but a dead faith,
but faith is a living notion. In an unbeliever the notions are all dead,
affording no pulse of holy affections, or motion of true obedience, they are
all buried in a grave of corruption and covered in the dust of earthly things:
But as soon as faith comes, there is a resurrection in the soul, the notions
before dead now wake out of the dust, and rise in life and power, every truth
lives in the heart, and springs up into the new creature. This supernatural
knowledge is a wellspring of life, Prove. 16.22. and all the vital acts of grace
stream from thence. Nay, as our Savior tells us, it is life eternal, John
17.3. heaven does dawn and appear in it. Mere notional knowledge has no
spiritual sense in it; the unregenerate man with all his notions, lies as a man
in a Lethargy, never feeling the weight of sin and wrath, though heavier then
rocks and mountains; nor indeed savouring the sweetness of Christ and grace,
though infinitely out-relishing all the things in nature. But as soon as faith
comes, there are all the senses of the inward man, a seeing the sun of
righteousness, an hearing the sweet charms of Gospel Grace, a smelling the
odours of Christ, and the holy unction, a tasting how good and gracious the
Lord is, and a touching and handling the word of life. The Learned Anatomists
curiously pry into the head to find out the commune Sensorium, where all the
species and images of sensible things meet together. In the spiritual man faith
is an universal sense, taking in all the species and images of heavenly things
into the heart. The learned Junius with all his notions, coming into a poor
Country man's house, and hearing him discourse warmly and feelingly of Christ,
immediately thought that Religion was more then a notion; and thereupon
reflecting on himself, was turned unto God, and no doubt sound by experience,
that faith was much fuller of life and sense then mere notion.

Fifthly, The mere notional knowledge gathered in by reason puffs up, as if
some of the Serpents poison were in it, it blows up the heart into proud
reflexes. Bonaventure to keep his mind from swelling, used to sweep rooms and
wash vessels. I suppose it was, lest his School-notions should swell and make a
tumor in his heart. But the light of faith is an humbling thing. If it enter in
within the vail, and see God on his Throne, it cries out as the Prophet Isaiah,
Woe is me, I am undone. If it fly up to Sinai, and sense the thunders and
lightnings of the fiery Law, it puts the soul into a trembling sit. If it go a
pilgrimage to Calvary, and there take a view of Christ crucified, it is greatly
abasive, bowing the heart down under the conscience of sin. If it look inwardly
into the heart, and there see the silthy and nasty corruptions in every corner,
it will far more humble then Bonaventures sweeping and washing. And the reason
of this difference is, mere notions are but the progeny and issue of our own
reason, and therefore we are apt to be fond and fall a cockling of them. But
supernatural light comes from above, and is ushered in with a kind of majesty,
and therefore humbles and makes us fall down and say, God is in it of a truth.

Sixthly, The merely notional knowledge is but superficial, a flash and away, a
light taste, such as was in those Apostates, Heb. 6.5. a word sown but unrooted,
such as that in the stony ground, Mat. 13.21. But the light of faith is another
thing, it is truth in the hidden parts, Psalm. 51.6. wisdom entering into the
heart, Prove. 2.10. and a word ingrafted or innaturalized in the mind, Jam.
1.21. As an appendix to this difference, I may add another; mere notions, being
but superficial things floating in the brain, do not so establish the heart in
Religion, as that supernatural light which intimately mixes it self with the
heart. Hence many Princes and Grandees of the Letter have been sick with
intellectual bottles, and shamefully reeled up and down in Articles of Faith.
Some stumbling in the mire of gross Pelagianism, and others rolling in the
ditch of foul Socinianism; with them Christ's Deity is but somnium Athanasii,
and original sin but Augustini sigmentum, such horrid spuing from learned
mouths has been made on the glory of Religion. And no wonder, for the
notionalist wants that love of the truth, which is an antidote against errors,
and that pure conscience, which is the Cabinet of Divine mysteries. On the
other hand, supernatural light is a more establishing thing: the Apostle calls
it (...), the firmament of faith, Col. 2.5. all the heavenly truths are there
as so many fixed stars in their Orb. Gerson relates this story, A man vexed
with doubts in Articles of Faith, at last came to such a certainty in them,
that he no more doubted of them then of his own life; and this he had (says
he) Non ex ratione aut demonstratione, sed ex humiliatione ac admirabili quadam
Dei illuminatione a montibus aeternis. All grace, because divine, has an
establishing property, and among the rest, so has the light of faith, because
it comes from the eternal mountains.

Seventhly, Mere notions are very apt to fume up into niceties and vain
curiosities. A famous instance of this we have in the Schoolmen, whose books
are the spiders house, made of cobwebs and fine subtleties, and those spun up
into the Palace of the celestial King, and there fastened upon the ineffables of
God and the sacred Trinity, as if these might be wrapped up in the quiddities
of reason and Philosophy; insomuch as a learned Divine, startled at this
audacious vanity, says, he reads the Schoolmen about such things, as he hears
men swear or take Gods name in vain, even seldom, unwillingly, and with horror.
And the learned Capito, who professed Scholastical Divinity, was soon weary
thereof, because there is subtilitatis multum, utilitatis parum, found therein.
But supernatural light does not vapor upwards into niceties and curious
questions, but influence downwards into the will and affections. It brings the
day of power into the heart, and makes a willing people, the holy unction drops
from the head to the heart, and sets all on a flame with love to God and Christ
and heavenly things: wisdom speaks excellent things, Prove. 8.6. or, as the
original is, it speaks princes or princely things, holy things are such in
themselves. But when they are taken in by faith, they have a mighty power in
the soul: Gods command to Abraham, entering by faith, wrought down into his
will, and he offered up his Isaac. Gods warning to Noah, entering by faith,
wrought down into his fear, and he prepared an Ark. The word works effectually
in them that believe, filling the inward man with holy affections, and the
outward with holy fruits. I shall conclude this difference with an excellent
simily of a worthy Divine; A child and a man come into a corn field together,
the child falls in love with the blue and red weeds, but the man is for the
solid corn: a man of mere notions falls in love with curiosities, and fine
speculations, but a man of supernatural light is for the spiritual and
practical truths in Scripture; these are the corn his soul must live upon,
whilst the other are but gaieties, and for a show.

Thus far I have spoken, what this supernatural light is. I shall now proceed
to show that it is requisite to faith: and this will appear in the particulars
following.

First, Unless a man know that God is, he cannot believe; how can he rest on
the testimony of him, whom he knows not, to have a being? This proposition,
Deus est, is according to Aquinas, the preamble of faith: Nay, in the Apostle,
it is the first fundamental faith, He that comes to God, must believe that he
is, Heb. 11.6. But you will say, What need supernatural light for this? Nature
and Reason make this known; and indeed they do so, but so weakly, as not to
raise up any one faculty in fallen man unto God his Creator. Never did natural
light so show a God, as to raise up his love out of this vain world, nor as to
raise up his faith out of creature-confidences unto God. Wherefore this first
principle must be seen by a supernatural light, which is indeed a middle kind
of light, between the light of glory above, and the light of nature below: It
sees the invisible one, not as the blessed Saints see him in the heavenly
vision, nor as the mere Naturalists see him by the glimmerings of reason, but
in a middle way of gracious illumination. This our Savior calls eternal life,
Joh. 17.3. heaven dawns in it, and nature is illustrated by it.

Secondly, As the first step of knowledge in order to faith, is Deus est; so
the second is, Deus verax, God is true, yea truth it self, and the first
archetypal truth, his testimony is infallible, and all his words Yea and Amen.
Unless this be known, a man cannot believe him as a God; the believer sets to
his seal that God is true. And, if he did not know it, his seal would be to a
blank: and though natural light reveal the truth and veracity of God; yet, as I
said before, weakly, and therefore supernatural is required.

Thirdly, The third step of knowledge in or^^r to faith, is Deus dixit, seu
revelavit, God has spoken or revealed himself in the Scriptures. These are the
very words and testimony of God himself. If a man do know that God is, and is
true, yet unless he know that God has spoken in the word, that there is his
very testimony, he cannot believe. Should we ask a man, why do you believe that
Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world? it would be no rational answer for
him to say, I believe it, because God is true: No, though God be the first
infinite truth, yet unless he speak and testify so much, it cannot be believed
upon his testimony or authority, the only satisfactory answer is this, I
believe it, because God, who is true, has spoken and revealed it. It is
necessary to faith, to know the holy Scriptures to be the word and testimony of
God; that God speaks and reveals himself in them, and this cannot be known
without supernatural light. To explain which, I shall lay down two things.

First, There are in the holy Scriptures certain (...) or internal marks,
whereby it may be known, that the Scriptures are the word and testimony of God.

Secondly, These (...) or internal marks cannot be known without supernatural
light.

First, There are in the holy Scriptures certain marks or characters whereby
they reveal themselves to be the very word of God, even as the Sun manifests it
self by its own light. There is a Majesty in the style; what book or writing
ever run in such a strain, as thus says the Lord? where before it was there
ever any universal Law made unto all mankind, Kings and beggars without
distinction? who ever before commanded obedience upon pain of eternal torments
in another world, or allured obedience with promises of everlasting glory
there? The fiery Law carries an awe with it, as if the thunders and lightnings
of Sinai were not yet over: And in the Gospel the kingdom of heaven approaches
and opens it self to believers, as it were in sparkles of glory. Again, there
is a treasure of Divine mysteries, touching the sacred Trinity. Nature is mute,
but Scripture speaks out; Reason is but a little child, and cannot pass this
infinite Abyss, unless Faith in the word take him upon his back and carry him
over. Touching that Incarnation of the Son of God, never any natural man
dreamed, or so much as started a thought of it; but in Scripture this and all
the train of mysteries in our Redemption break forth in their glory. That book,
which has such and the like mysteries, infinitely transcending all the
thoughts and reasons of man, does by them show that it came out of the bosom of
God himself. Again, there is an unparalled purity in it, such as is no where
else to be found. This Sun has no spots in it, this Diamond has no flaws in
it, there is nothing terrene or carnal in this heavenly piece, as long as it
has stood in the world: not a dust or a dreg can be found therein, neither
ever did or will it license the least of erratas in man: In its pure
spiritualness, it casts a chain upon the very thoughts and first motions of
sin, and traces up sin to the black nest of corruption in lapsed nature; it
calls for a pure heart, made from heaven in regeneration and new creation, and
the noblest births of Reason and Morality will not serve the turn. Such things
as these are not so much as named in the writings of the worlds Sophies. Plato
and Aristotle never arrived at such notions. Moreover, it has a wonderful
efficacy on the hearts of men; it looks into the inmost closet and retiring
room of the heart; and, like Christ, it comes and stands in the midst of it:
when all the doors are shut by obstinacy and unbelief, it awakens and alarums
the sleeping sinner, and makes such impressions and deep wounds in the
conscience, that it plainly appears no less then the arm of God was in it. It
Evangelizes the heart, and turns it into its own nature, that it may be a
Temple for that spirit which breaths in the Gospel. It comforts the heart, and
fills it with joy unspeakable and full of glory. That place Romans 1.17. was to
Luther porta Paradisi, the door of Paradise; and that 1 Timothy 1.15. was a sea of
sweetness to holy Bilney: such activities as these are above the sphere of
nature, and speak no less then the divine extraction thereof. Lastly, to name
no more, the very plot and design of the Scriptures is transcendently divine;
all the holy lines run into that central divinity, that God is to be exalted,
and man debased. Oh! what manner of self-denial does it call for? how does it
labor to un-selve, and as it were un-man us, that God may be all in all? There
Reason, as fair a Jewel as it is must vail its beauty in an acknowledgment of
its own folly, and yield up it self to be new lighted from heaven. The Will, as
free an Empress as it is, must lay by its Crown in a confession of its
spiritual slavery, and yield up it self to be made free by grace. The Man must
be no longer a man in himself, but a man in Christ, clothed in a better
righteousness, and acted by a higher spirit then his own. And how does it open
the glory, and blazon the arms of God? how admirably does it set him forth in
all his Attributes? his eternity is the rock of ages, his immutability an
invariable and inconvertible Sun, his righteousness like the great mountains,
his decrees and judgments a mighty deep, his mercy a glory, a mass of riches
never to be told over, his holiness as the pure unmixed light, his justice as
the devouring unquenchable fire; In a word, there all the glory of his
Attributes pass before the believers eye: such a book as this must needs be
divine.

Secondly, These marks or characters in Scripture cannot be known without
supernatural light. Mere reason receives them not; like the child Samuel, it
hears a voice, a sound of words, but it knows not that it is the Lord: insomuch
that some have slighted the Scriptures. Politianus said, that he never spent
time to less purpose then in reading them; and Julian, that there was as good
stuff in Pindars Odes as in David's Psalms. Had they known the word or testimony
of God in them, they would not have crucified them by their wretched
blasphemies: But when the light of Faith comes, the Scripture appears not in
letters and words only, but in the divine and heavenly characters, and by these
it bears witness to it self, that it is the word of God. There is a double
cause of Faith, an effective cause and an objective: the effective cause is the
holy spirit inlightning the understanding and moving the will; and the
objective is the Scripture it self, by its own innate light and Majesty
revealing its divinity to the enlightened soul. Tertullian having this holy
light in him, adored the fullness of Scripture. St. Austin seems to be taken
to admiration with the purity of it, as not admitting so much as an officious
lyc. Wheresoever the supernatural light comes, the Scripture manifests it self
to be divine.

Fourthly, The fourth step of knowledge in order to Faith, is Deus revelavit
Evangelium, God has revealed a Gospel, a way of salvation and eternal
happiness. Faith (as I shall show hereafter) is not a mere belief of the divine
testimony, but a dependant resignation to God and Christ; and to this
resignation no man arrives, unless he first see an overtopping superlative
excellency in the Gospel, outbidding the world and all the lusts thereof; and
verily believe that there and there only is the way of life and happiness: And
thus to see and believe is beyond the line of reason and all its acquired
notions. The natural man in the midst of all his notions carries a false
balance in his heart, which makes as if every trifling vanity did outweigh
God and Christ and heavenly things and whilst the balance is thus, he cannot
resign: and thus it will be till supernatural light come, then and not till
then does the balance turn by a right estimate of the Gospel and the promises
thereof. The spirit inlightning, and not humane reason, takes the things of
Christ, and shows them forth in their glory, Joh. 16.14. And in this way God
works the heart to resignation.

CHAP. III.
Of the second part of Precious Faith, the belief of the Testimony of God in
the Scriptures: What manner of belief it is, and the consequents of it, in
order to an holy self-resignation.

THUS far of the first thing in Faith, supernatural illumination. I now proceed
to the second, A belief of the testimony of God in the Scriptures: and here I
need use no words to prove this belief an ingredient in Faith, for faith in the
Grammatical notion of it, is nothing else but a belief of a Testimony; and,
being applied to God, it is a belief of his Testimony in Scripture. Only I
shall open two things; first, what manner of belief of the divine testimony in
Scriptures this is: and then, what the consequents of it are in order to
resignation.

First, What manner of belief this is. And this I shall explain in these
particulars.

First, This belief is divine, and congruous to the divine testimony. Such as
the testimony is, such must be the ratio credendi: the Scriptures being a
divine testimony, must be believed for themselves, because of the divine
authority stamped upon them. Thus the Thessalonians received the word, not as
the word of man, but, as it is in truth, the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. they
lodged the divine truth in a divine faith, which was a suitable entertainment.
Humana omnia dicta testibus egent, Dei autem sermo ipse sibi test is est, says
Salvian, humane words want witness, but divine carry their own testimony in
themselves. To believe the Scriptures because God speaks in them, is a divine
faith, but to believe them upon any other account, is below their divine
authority, and but an humane faith. For example, to believe the Scriptures for
the saying of the woman, for the Churches testimony, is but an humane faith,
for it stands on no higher fulciment then an humane testimony, and therefore
can be but an humane faith. Here the subtle Jesuit would help out the Papist
at a dead lift: that faith (says he) which is resolved into the Churches
authority is neque pure divina, neque pure humana, sed quasi media inferioris
cujusdam ordinis; but what says the learned Pemble to him, Just so men use to
speak when they cannot tell what to say; It is Quasi, and Aliquomodo, and
Alicujus generis, it is somewhat, if they could tell what, thus he. It Is
undoubtedly clear, that that faith which calls any man Master on earth, and
centers on an humane testimony, such as that of the Church, made up of men,
must needs be, can be no other then humane. Indeed the Churches testimony may
be inter motiva fidei, but (if the faith be divine) it cannot be inter formales
rations sidei. A man in the dark labyrinth of nature may be led out by the
Churches lamp, but when he is out, he sees the Sun by its own light, he
believes the Scriptures for their own divinity, though per ministerium
Ecclesiae, yet not propter authoritatem Ecclesiae. Divine faith has its Master
in heaven, and its record on high.

Secondly, Which follows on the other, this belief is a firm and stable thing,
because built on the divine authority of Scripture; we believe and are sure,
says Peter, Joh. 6.69. Nothing on earth can so ascertain things unto us, as
faith in the divine testimony. Julian the Apostate glorying in the Pagan
learning, jeered at the Christians, because all their wisdom was but in that
one word Credo, I believe: but divine faith for all his profane taunt, has
more firmness and real certainty in it then all the Sciences in the world; for
it sees things in lumine veritatis primae, in the light of the first truth, and
sits even in the infallible chair; so that non potest subesse falsum, a lie
cannot sit under it, and glues the heart to the truth in that manner, Eonav. l.
3 disi. 23. quest. 4.
that (as the Schoolman has it) true believers, nec per argumenta, nec per
tormenta, nec per blandimenta inclinari possunt, ut veritatem saltem ore tenus
negent, nothing could turn them away from the truth. So strong a thing is
faith, when it is set upon the rock, the testimony of God; but if it have an
humane bottom only, such as the Churches authority, it is weak and wavering,
more like a fluctuating opinion then a faith. Durandus asserts, that Science is
more certain than faith, and to that strong objection, that the divine
authority by which we believe, is more certain then any humane reason by which
we know; he answers thus, Divina autoritas, propter quam credimus, licet sit
certissima in se, non tamen nobis, qualiter enim certi simus, L. 3. did. 23.
quest. 7.
quod Deus dicat ea quae credimus, non nisi quia sic tenet Ecclesia? Observe,
how this great Scholar abates the certainty of faith, because he takes up the
divinity of Scriptures upon trust from the saying of the Church; those who
build their faith purely on the divine word, speak after another rate. Junius
reading the first chapter of St. John, cried out in a kind of amazement,
Divinitatem argumenti and authoritatem sentio: and Reverend Calvin, putting the
question how we shall be persuaded that the Scriptures did flow forth from God;
answers as roundly as a man does touching that which is obvious and before his
senses, Instit. l. 1. c. 7.
perinde est (says he) ac si quis roget, unde discemus lucem discernere a
tenebris, the Scripture reveals it self as the light does, and to the pure eye
of faith it appears divine from its own innate excellency, and so establishes
the heart in its holy truth. To conclude this point, faith is a stable and firm
thing; but, by the estimates and lives of men, there seems to be but a very
little of it in the world. Did men, as they profess, firmly believe the
Scriptures, could they vilify the commands of the great God as they do? The
injunctions of earthly Princes are not served so. Would they slight that
wonderful charter of grace and glory in the Gospel? a Patent of petty dignities
and possessions here below will be highly valued by them: durst they sin as
they do, in the face of hell and wrath flashing out of the divine threatenings?
a Princes sword or Gibbet would cast them into a fit of trembling. O how soon
would the things of God cast the balance in the heart, and outweigh all the
world, if the Scriptures were indeed believed: but there being in men only
levis opinatio, a light opinion rather then a solid faith touching the same,
there necessarily ensues a monstrous disproportion between their faith and
their life.

Thirdly, This belief must be explicit as to the fundamentals of Religion. A
mere implicit faith, as to believe in the lump, that all things contained in
the holy Scriptures are true, will not serve the turn. In Coloss. 2. v. 2.
Non est divina sed belluina fides, quae nuliam habet conceptionem five
comprehensionem illarum rerum, quae creduntur, says the excellent Davenant. A
mere implicit faith without understanding is a brutish thing; an explicit
faith as to fundamentals is required: this will appear by these ensuing
considerations.

First, A mere implicit faith, if at any time might have passed for current,
in the days before Christ's Incarnation, whilst religion was wrapped up in vails
and shadows; but even then faith in holy men was explicit according to the
measure of divine light imparted unto them: all along they looked to the
Messiah, the promised seed, and probably in an obscure manner to his future
sufferings. Whilst Adam was in Innocence, there was no promise of a Messiah,
no footstep of a sacrifice; but as soon as man was fallen, out came that first
Gospel, the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, Genesis 3.15. and
sacrifices were set up: without doubt not without Gods appointment, for God had
respect to Abels sacrifice; which, had it been a piece of will worship, could
not have been, and Abol offered it up by faith, Heb. 11.4. which, without a
divine word, moves not in the least measure. These sacrifices were as it were
visible Commentaries on that first Gospel, and types of a suffering Messiah.
And if so and so by Gods own institution, it is not at all probable that God
should hide the sacred meaning thereof totally from the faith of the first
believers. Adam then, as I conceive, by the eyes of Faith saw the Messiah in
that first Gospel, and withal some glimmering of his sufferings in the
sacrifices: And if he saw it, no doubt he did preach and reveal it to others,
Schola saerif. Disp. 4
and probably (as Franzius conceives) in a solemn manner at the sacrifices.
Abel (says the Apostle) by faith offered up a sacrifice to God, not only by
such a faith as did it in obedience to Gods command, but by such a faith, as
through his own sacrifice did pierce to the antitype, the great sacrifice of
the Messiah. De satisfact. Christi l. 1. sect. 5.
Thus the learned Essenius, cum sacrificia Veteris Testamenti fuerint typi
sacrificii Christi, ea sides intelligenda est, qua sacrificium illud refertur
ad suum antitypum, such a faith was proper to his sacrifice. In Noah's sacrifice
the Lord smelled a sweet savor, or a savor of rest, such as did (says one of
the Rabbis) make him ab ira sua quiescere, rest from his anger, Genesis 8.21. and
therefore surely there was more in it then mere beasts and fowls. Noah's faith
fetched in him, who was to give himself an offering and sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor. Abraham saw Christ's day, that is, his coming and
suffering in the flesh, John 8.56. a very great sight at that distance: and no
doubt the faithful Seer did not conceal it, but tell his children and servants
thereof for the glory of the Messiah: his joy was too great to hold it in
privately to himself, and his zeal too hot to hide so much of heavenly glory.
Under the Levitical Law the Israelites were to lay their hands on the head of
the sacrifice, as it were to disburden themselves of sin, and lay it off upon
the sacrifice; and by the offering up thereof, they were to make an atonement
or expiation. The unbelievers among them understood the outward rite of the
sacrifice; and did the faithful ones see no more in it? Could or did they
imagine that a poor silly beast could stand under the weight of sin, or that
the blood of bulls or goats could take it away? No surely, their faith looked
through the outward sacrifice to the Messiah for atonement and reconciliation.
In David the Evangelical day broke out more clearly; O how much of Christ is
there in the 110th Psalm? there is his kingdom and eternal priesthood; there is
his passion in drinking of the brook in the way; there is his ascension in
lifting up the head; there is his intercession in sitting at Gods right hand;
there is his Church Catholic, a willing people, made so by the power of his
grace. This was Symbolum Davidicum, David's Creed (as a learned man has it)
reaching in a manner as far as ours: Moreover, the Saints of old by their faith
kenned a resurrection and life eternal. Jobs faith looked through worms and
dust to the vision of God, Job 19.26. Abraham's faith traveled beyond Canaan
unto the heavenly city and country, Heb. 11.10. David is in a rapture at the
full joys and right hand pleasures with God, Psalm. 16.11. When Cain talked with
Abel his brother, Genesis 4.8. the Hebrew text sets not down what he said, but it
has an extraordinary pawse, implying further matter; the Jerusalem Targum
says, Cain asserted that there was no judgment, no judge, no world to come, no
rewards of evil or good; but believing Abel said there were all these, and then
his brother slew him: It seems the first fall out was about the future world.
Wisdom causes her lovers to inherit substance, Quid est (...)? nisi futurum
saeculum.
or essence (as the original word imports) Prove. 8.21. and this substance or
essence is (as some Jews affirm) no other then eternal life in the world to
come. Now to make my inference from all this; If faith were in a measure
explicit in those early Saints, who had but the twilight of the holy types,
and cock-crowing of the Prophets; how much more should it be so in us, who live
in the noonday of the Gospel, and as it were directly under the Sun of
righteousness, in such a Church State, wherein the least is greater then John
Baptist, we should expand and spread abroad the fails of our faith to take in
the larger gales and effusions of the holy spirit.

Secondly, Faith, unless explicit, cannot arrive at those ends for which it is
ordained; viz. to raise up the heart to a reliance on the free grace of God in
Christ, to inslame the heart with the love of God and holy things, to sanctify
the heart through the truth, and to overcome the world with its lusts: A mere
implicit faith cannot reach these, it cannot raise the heart up to a reliance
on Gods grace in Christ: to that reliance is prerequired not only a belief that
God is true in the Scriptures in general, but also a belief that God is true in
the precious promises in special: We are like Jacob, not believing in the
mercies of God till we see the chariots, the gracious promises, which he has
sent down from heaven to carry up our faith to himself. They that know thy
name, will put their trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. they and they only. Neither can
it inflame the heart with the love of God and holy things: light and heat ever
go together: Implicit faith is a dark and cold thing, affording no spiritual
warmth at all; he that has no more, is but a Nabal, a fool in religion, and
his heart as dead and cold as a stone within him, till the love of God in the
explicit notion of it shine into the soul; it will not, like the disciples at
Emmaus, burn within us with love to God and his ways: neither can it sanctify
the heart through the truth, the word did not profit them not being mixed or
tempered with faith says the Apostle, Heb. 4.2. Where there is only an
implicit faith, the word lies upon the heart all in a lump, whole and
undigested, affording no blood or spirits of sanctity to the soul: it is
explicit faith only which breaks the truth in the heart, and mixes and tempers
every holy particle therewith, from whence the soul comes to be changed and
assimulated into the truth, receiving a divine likeness from it, according to
the measure of its faith, more or less digesting the same truth in the heart;
neither can it lastly overcome the world and the lusts thereof, this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, says the Apostle, 1 John
5.4. And this Faith does, by putting a right estimate of things into the heart:
whereby it manifestly appears, that heavenly things do infinitely outweigh
earthly in themselves, and should do so in the minds of men. A man of a mere
implicit faith, is a man without a balance or judgment, he knows not how to
estimate or weigh the excellent things of God, and therefore is ever poized
down by the world and the lusts thereof. It is the explicit faith only which
is in the soul as the balance of the Sanctuary, rightly determining the true
weight of things, and thereby giving heavenly things the victory above earthly
in the heart. Oh! where this is, what a feather, a vanity, a nothing is the
world? what in it can weigh against God, or Christ, or the exceeding eternal
weight of glory? surely nothing; wherefore the followers of faith become
conquerors of the world.

Fourthly, This belief must be total and absolute, without any salvoes or
limitations. The Gospel must captivate (...), all the intellect, or every
thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. The Reason must not go at
large or random, but be kept in safe custody under the Gospel and the divine
mysteries thereof; it is not to be trusted to, never since the fall put an
enmity into it against God. The Socinians believe the Scriptures only so far
forth as they are congruous to reason; thus Socinus professes, that if this
proposition (that Jesus Christ satisfied God for our sins) were once and again
extant in the sacred monuments, yet non ideirco, he would not therefore believe
the thing to be so as we ordinarily conceive of it: And another lays down this
for a rule, Nihil credi potest, quod a ratione capi and intelligi nequeat, that
cannot be believed by faith, which cannot be comprehended by reason. It seems
they will trust God no further then they can see him, and depend more on their
blear-eyed reason, then the divine oracle. Touching this Socinian faith, I
shall endeavor to show, first the inrationality of it, and then the nullity.

First, The Irrationality of it will evidently appear, if we distinguish
between the two states of reason, before the fall of man, and since. Reason
before the fall was a pure and virgin light without any spot in it, afterward
it was destoured and overshadowed with the fall, and by that means all that is
in the mind of man in his lapsed estate is not reason, the blinds and dark
shades there are not so, but only that which is the relic of the pure
primitive light, and congruous thereunto, the blemish in the eye is not the
light, the rust in the gold is not the pure metal, neither is all that is in
lapsed reason to be reckoned reason. If then in this case we would know what is
rational, we must consider what reason, so far as it is pure and right, does
dictate to us in this point: and what is that, but that God as the first
unerrable truth, must be believed in his words for himself, and above all other
things, even above reason it self? Ronand. l. 3. did. 23.
Justum est (says the Schoolman) ut intellecius noster ita captivetur, and
subjacoat summae veritati, sicut affectus noster debet subjacere summae
bonitati, nec potest esse anima recta nisi intellectus sum, veritati propter
se, and super omnia assentiat, and affectus summae bonitati adhaereat: It Is
just and purely rational, as to love the supreme goodness, so to assent to the
supreme truth for it self and above all; that is, without any salvocs or
exceptions at all; the authority being infallible, the belief should in all
reason be absolute. Reason says, that God should be believed as a God, one that
cannot lie, no more then cease to be; and if as a God, then for himself and
above all. That in the Socinian, which adds a salvo to his belief of the holy
Scriptures, is not his reason, but the rust and proud flesh and spiritual
corruption of it; and to believe such stuff before the truth of God, and make
it the allay and supreme ruler of our faith, is desperately and monstrously
irrational. How this rust grew upon our reason at first, is evident in the fall
of man, the Serpent creeps in upon the woman, with an yea, has God said? Genesis
3.1. his plot was to weaken the authority of Gods word, and when she began to
waver about it, and diminish the peremptory threatening of death, with a least
ye dye, v. 3. her reason began to corrupt and become dreggy, which, while pure,
could not but assert the truth and veracity of God. Hence the Apostle speaking
to the Corinthian Church as a chaste virgin espoused to Christ, adds this
caution, least as the Serpent beguiled Eve, so your minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. and 3. ver. That is, take
heed of falling off from the pure doctrine of the Gospel, the head of every man
is Christ, so much adherence and subjection as reason has unto him and his
holy truth, so much chastity and virginity it has; Virginitae mentis est
integrasides. Aust. in Joh.
but as soon as it elapes, it becomes an adulteress, and should not be suffered
to speak in holy things. Morcover, the irrationality of it will further appear,
if we consider that the sphere of reason and the sphere of revelation are two
distinct things. The sphere of reason is filled with natural notions, the
elements of man's spirit; but the sphere of revelation is filled with
supernatural truths, the dictates of God; Reason, so far as it is reason, is a
divine spark, a petty Prince in its own dominions; but when it leaves these,
and passes over into the supernatural region, and there, instead of sitting
down at Gods seet to be taught and enlightened, assumes the magisterial chair,
and falls a judging divine mysteries, it is no longer reason, but a fool and a
brute, and speaks as simply in matters of Religion, as a beast, if it could
speak would do in matters of reason. Thus when our Savior discoursed Nicodemus
about regeneration, reason prattled after a strange rate, How can a man be born
when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be born?
So soolishly and absurdly does carnal reason carry it self in supernatural
things. To make this more plain, let us compare the weakness of reason with the
sublimity of holy mysteries, and then the fallibility of reason with the
certainty of them.

First, Let us compare the weakness of reason with the sublimity of holy
Mysteries. Reason, having a bruise in the fall, is weak even in its own sphere:
With how much toil does it creep from letters to words, and from words to Arts
and Sciences? And when it is there, how little does it know? Can it span the
heavens, or measure the vast backside thereof, or number those golden letters,
the stars therein, or understand the Sun, which to have done, Eudoxus would
willingly have been burnt up by it, or in one of its beams: tell what light is,
touching which there are no less then seven opinions in one of the Schoolmen,
which verifies the old saying, Non constat ex lumine naturae quid sit natura
luminis? To come lower, can it enter into the treasures of the snow, or ride a
circuit with the winds, or take a rational turn with the flux and reflux of the
sea, or tell how the massy earth hangs upon nothing, or unkennel an occult
quality and draw it out to an open view, or unriddle a loadstone; in which a
late Philosopher would have the atoms of both Poles to meet and incorporate?
Nay, in a common stone, can it dive into the form or nature thereof, dic mihi,
quid est lapiditas, said a Learned man; can it strip the meanest creature of
the investing accidents, and look upon the pure naked essence thereof? can it
comprehend a drop or a dust, in which (says the profound Bradwardine) there
are infinite figures and numbers, De Causa Dei. l. 1. c. 1. pars 32.
and consequently infinite Geometrical and Arithmetical conclusions, following
one another in order, and having a mutual dependence between themselves, such
as no Philosophers can ever reach unto, because being capable only of finite
conclusions, they leave behind them infinite unknown? Or, if it look about its
own mansion house, the brain, can it tell where the cells of memory, or the
playhouse of fancy, or the shop of the animal spirits are situate, or whether
all these live together in a family? thousands of such things there are, which
may make every one cry out with Socrates, Hoc unum scio, quod nihil scio. And
shall such a weakling as this, dunced and posed in every atome within its own
sphere, usurp the crown, and rule over sacred mysteries, and pure revelations,
which come out of the bosom of God, to be the wonder of Angels and faith of
men, and are in a transcendent excess infinitely above and beyond the capacity
of both of them? shall it take up the ocean in a little shell, measure the
sacred Trinity in its shallow understanding: And, if it will not lie in so
narrow a room, cast it away as no article of Faith, as a thing inter
impossibilia mentis, not consistent with reason? shall its dim eyes pry into
the Ark, I mean, into that great mystery, God in the flesh; and there, because
it cannot see how two such natures as mortal and immortal, temporal and
eternal, mutable and immutable can come together into one person, throw it
away, as Smalcius does, with this, rationi sanae repugnat, it is repugnant to
right reason? When reason thus exalts it self in the things of God, it sinks
below it self into brutish irrationality.

Secondly, Let us compare the fallibility of Reason, with the infallibility of
Scripture. When the Papists lift up the Pope as supreme judge in matters of
Religion, it is a sufficient answer to tell them, the first Clement held the
Platonical community of all things, even of wives. Marcellinus sacrificed to
Idols. Liberius subscribed to Arianism. Innocent the first taught that little
ones could not be saved without the Eucharist. Vigilius was an Eutychian.
Honorius a Monothelite. Hildebrand a brand of hell, and impiously diabolical.
John the 23th was accused in the Council of Constance of this opinion, That the
souls of men dye with their bodies, even as the souls of brutes; and should
such be judges in matters of Religion? When the Socinian, by subjecting
articles of Faith unto Reason, makes not one, but as many Popes as men, we need
say no more to him, but humanum est errare, reason is a fallible thing. The
Philosophers were the Patriarchs of heretics; Platonical Philosophy in the
Fathers, and Aristotelical in the Schoolmen, has much debased the truths of
God, says a great Divine. All the errors and heresies which have swarmed
abroad in all ages, have been the progeny of corrupt Reason: upon this the
devil begets all the black monstrous opinions which crawl within doors in the
Church, or without in the Pagan world. And should such a thing as this come and
sit in judgment on the pure words of God, which are surer then the voice of
Angels, and stand faster then the pillars of heaven and earth, which in so many
successions of Ages never contracted the least speck of falsehood, or shed a
leaf in the fall of the least tittle or iota thereof? Surely, when reason thus
forgets it self and its own fallibility, it degrades it self and becomes
unreasonable. Thus far of the irrationality of the Socinian faith. But,

Secondly, The nullity of it is considerable, it is a nullity in its
foundation, and at last it proves a nullity in the consequence. It is a nullity
in its foundation; the Socinian believes the Scriptures not as a divine
testimony, but as congruous to reason, and so trusts not in God, but in himself
and his own heart. Thus Socinus expresses himself, Non generalem comprobandi
rationem quaerimus, quod eam, qui dixit, ejusmodi esse appareat, ut nulla in re
mentiri posset, sed singularem quandam, qua id nominatim, quod comprobandum
est, per causas and effecia propria ita se babere demonstratur, adeo ut non
modo quia Deum ipsum dixisse appareat, id verum esse constet, sed etiam quia
verum esse appareat, id Deum dixisse nobis certo persuadeamus. Qaomodo poterat
clarius prodere (...) suam, says a Learned man? how could he more clearly
betray his infidelity? he would not have us only believe a thing true, because
God says so, but believe also that God says so, because it appears true to our
own reason, where this is the foundation, faith is a mere nullity, and that
which is a nullity in the foundation, at last proves a nullity in the
consequence. Reason, corrupting it self in its own pride, casts away the found
principles of the Gospel, and these being gone putrifies in abominable errors,
like Herod assuming a Deity to himself, it is spiritually smitten of God, and
eaten up of worms: I mean, those errors which are but the putrefactions of
reason. How do the Socinians Paganize in worshipping a creature, a Christ whom
they deny to be God; Mahometize in denying the sacred Trinity; Judaize in
standing for an interpreting Messiah only, and not a satisfying one; Manicheize
in undervaluing the old Testament; Arianize in denying the Deity of Christ;
Pelagianize in denying original sin; Anabaptize in denying baptism to infants?
how do some of them Divelaze in horrid blasphemies, calling the sacred Trinity
tricipitem Cerberum; and to those who assert Jesus Christ to be Gods son;
asking, An Deus habuit uxorem? Whether God had a wise? and such like hellish
stuff, in which much of the devil appears. After all this fearful shipwiack of
faith, what remains? too too little to denominate them Christians. Ignatius
called the Ebionites, because they denied Christ's Deity, men-worshippers; the
antiont Church styled the Samosatenians upon the same account God-killers; and
a great Divine passed this censure on the Socinians, that they were a company
of baptized Turks: indeed their corrupted reason dissolves their faith into
little or nothing.

Fifthly, This belief must be such as owns the holy Scriptures for the rule of
faith; To the Law and to the testimony, says the Prophet, If they speak not
according to this word, it is because, here is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. As
soon as the morning of faith breaks in the heart, the word is owned as the
rule. Enthusiasts going often from the Scriptures, take the spirit for their
rule. Swenckfield was altogether for the spirit and the internal word, and
little or nothing at all for the external. Henry Nicholas boasting of the holy
anointing, looked on the Scripture as a literal fleshly elementish thing. John
Valdesso says, that Christians may at first serve themselves with Scripture as
an Alphabet, but afterward leaving it to beginners, they attend to their
proper Master the spirit of God: Others say, the Scripture is but a dead
letter, a thing of paper and ink, and we must not try the living by the dead,
the holy spirit by the Scripture. Such as these, bragging of their own
revelations, call all other Christians Vocalists and Literalists, because of
their adherence to the Scriptures. Mr. Saltmarsh makes three spears of
administration, the Law or mere letter, the Gospel which has duty and grace in
it, and the spirit, the pure spirit, which is the third heaven, higher then
Scriptures and ordinances. The Weigelians talk of a seculum Spiritus Sancti, in
which there shall be higher dispensations then before, and we shall be wiser
then Apostles. The Quakers make the light within, that is, as I take it,
natural conscience the standard of all their actings. All these, though clothed
in various words, agree together to crucify the Scriptures, as if they had
somewhat more noble. Unto them I shall offer some considerations.

First, The Apostles direction is, Try the spirits whether they are of God, 1 John 4.1. in the original (...), try them, as Goldsmiths try metals by the
touchstone, or by the fire, or as Magistrates question offenders, or examine
those that stand for an office, use all manner of ways to find out whether the
spirits be right or not: upon this as a sufficient warrant, I shall put some
interrogatories to the Enthusiast.

Thou say the spirit of God is in thy heart, and is it not in the Scriptures
too? and wherever it is, is it not congruous and harmonious to it self? And
what does it say in the Scripture? does it not say, that the Scripture is the
rule? To the Law and to the testimony, says the Prophet, Isa. 8.20. the Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure,
making wise the simple, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.7. The Scripture is able
to make us wise to salvation, and perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.15. and 17. Nay, such a rule it is, that
nothing must be added to it, nor diminished from it, Dent. 4.2. no not by an
Angel. If an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel to you, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1.8. And can the spirit in the heart contradict the spirit in
the Scripture? can it be contrary to it self, and depart from its own oracles?
no surely, defectible creatures may be off and on, yea and nay in their words,
but the holy spirit cannot be so. The war between Constantius and Magnentius
was looked upon as very portentous, because therein first cross was carried
against cross, and Christians engaged against Fellow Christians; but that the
holy spirit should make war upon it self, is a portentous contradiction; which,
if allowed, would leave no being to Gods veracity, nor standing unto man's
faith: But as portentous as it is, the Enthusiast must maintain it, unless he
will confess that the spirit in him, which denies the Scripture to be the rule,
is not of God.

Again, thou say thou have the revelation of the holy spirit, but how or in
what manner does it reveal it self in thee? I suppose thou do not pretend to
a Revelation made by visions or dreams or audible voices, as it was wont to be
of old, but to a revelation intellectual; and that is double, the one
extraordinary in Prophets and Apostles, the other ordinary in all true
believers. In the first revelation made to Prophets and Apostles, the holy
spirit did immediately infuse the species intelligibiles into their minds, and
thereby did internally speak, and in a proper sense reveal things unto them.
What we translate the beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea, Hos. 1.2. is
in the original the beginning of the speech of Jehovah in Hosea, pointing out
an internal locution to the Prophet. In the second revelation made to
believers, there is no such thing as in the first, no immediate infusion of
species, no internal voice or locution, saying this or that is so, and
therefore no revelation properly so called; but the holy spirit does enlighten
their minds to make them capable, and then they hear what the holy spirit in
the Scriptures speaks unto them: thus S. Paul on the behalf of the Ephesians
prays for the spirit of wisdom and revelation, not that they might have
extraordinary inspirations, but that the eyes of their understanding might be
enlightened, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. To know the witness of God in the Gospel, the holy
spirit does not speak to their enlightened understandings immediately, but in
and by the Scripture-medium, which is as it were Epistola Dei, Gods letter unto
man. In the first revelation to the Prophets and Apostles, the holy spirit did
so totally and in such an extraordinary way govern them in their speaking and
writing, that therein there was nibil suum, nothing of their own, not only the
matter, but quaevis vocula, every little word was of God: hence S. Peter says,
that they were (...) moved or carried upon the wings of the spirit above humane
frailty, 2 Pet. 1.21. In the second revelation to believers, the holy spirit is
as an holy anointing to their minds, and thereby puts them into a capacity to
hear what God speaks in the Scripture, but it does not so totally carry and
rule them, as to make their words purely divine and free from all mixture of
their own. The first revelation to the Prophets and Apostles, being purely
immediate and extraordinary, makes authentical Scripture. The second revelation
to believers, being but ordinary, does not make Scripture, but only capacitate
their minds to take in the manifestations of the spirit therein. These things
premised, I must renew my question: Say, O Enthusiast! what is thy revelation?
is it a pure immediate internal locution? is it extraordinary and carried by
the spirit above all humane frailty? may it be added to the Canon and become
Scripture? I suppose thou can not, dare not say so; but if thou do, read
and tremble at the sealing up of the Canon, Rev. 22.18. If any man shall add
unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues written in this book, and
if any man shall take away from them, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, and out of the holy city. These words are as a flaming sword at
the end of the Bible, to keep thee from presuming to put any thing thereunto:
Say then modestly, is not thy revelation ordinary? did not the holy spirit come
to thee in the chariot of the Scripture? and why then do thou slight and
undervalue it? why do thou call it a dead letter, a fleshly elementith
thing, and the like? God has spoken once, yea, twice, (if I may so allude)
once in the Old Testament, and again in the New, expect not to hear his voice
or spirit any where else but there; if thou do, thou put a cheat upon
thy self, and instead of a revelation, embracest a mere fancy.

Again, the spirit is in thy heart, and the spirit is in the Scripture, but
where is the greatest measure of it? say in good earnest, is there a greater
measure of the spirit in thy heart then in the Scripture? then thou can
unriddle all the (...), the difficult knots in Scripture; thou can dive down
into that divine abyss, and fetch up all the holy mysteries there; thy holiness
can hold measure with the length and breadth of the pure spiritual Law; thy
faith runs parallel with all the promises, and can tell over all that infinite
Mass of free grace which is couched therein: the hellish root of bitterness
once in thy nature, is quite eradicated, and not a string of concupiscence left
behind; thou can say, I have no sin, and which is the wonder, thy heart does
not deceive thee in saying so; there are no shades or dark spots in thy mind,
no cracks or flaws at all in thy obedience, no (...), nothing lacking in thy
faith or other graces: All in thy heart and life is as right as the rule, and
as pure as the Crystal streams in the Gospel. If there be a greater measure of
the spirit in thy heart then in the Scripture, thus it is with thee: but I hope
thou art not so utterly void of the spirit and conscience, as to fall into so
proud a dream of thy estate. If thou say thou art clean, that very word
pollutes thee, quisquis se inculpatum dixerit, aut superbus aut stultus est,
whosoever says so, is either a fool or a proud man. Say then, as the truth is,
there is a greater, incomparably greater measure of the spirit in the
Scripture, then in thy heart; and then tell me, what is fittest to be the rule,
that which is perfect, or that which is imperfect, that greater measure of the
spirit in the Scripture, or that lesser, far lesser measure of the spirit in
thy heart; common sense will tell thee it belongs to the Scripture.

Moreover, the spirit is in thy heart, and the spirit is in the Scripture, but
where is it plainest and most obvious? where can it be most easily discerned to
be the very spirit of God indeed? all that is in the Scripture is indubitably
of the holy spirit, but all that is in thy heart is not so; it may be it is
from thy own spirit, what thou did suppose to have been from Gods: nay it may
be it is from Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light. The Disciples
would have called for fire from heaven as Elias, but Christ tells them, ye know
not of what spirit ye are, Luke 9.55. as if he had said, you think this motion
came from an extraordinary spirit, such as was in Elias, but alas, it is but
from your own spirit, nay from the gall and bitterness of it, that which you
take for zeal, is indeed but revenge. When upon our Saviors discourse of his
sufferings Peter said, be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee,
no doubt he thought himself right in the thing, but our Savior calls him Satan
for it, Mat. 16.23. his meaning was pious, and as he might think, from the same
holy spirit which a little before inspired him to make a glorious confession of
Christ; but alas, the devil acted secretly therein. Of what I find in
Scripture, I can immediately and without any more ado pronounce that it is the
very voice of the holy spirit, but of what I find in my own heart I cannot do
so. First, the light must be divided from the darkness, Gods spirit must be
distinguished from man's and Satan's. And how such a piece of spiritual Chemistry
should be done without the Scripture, I cannot imagine: There may be three
different spirits in my heart, and unless I reduce them in a way of trial to
the one pure spirit in the Scripture, I may be easily cheated by my heart:
wherefore the Scripture, in which the characters of the spirit are more plain
and legible then in my own heart, must needs be the rule.

Once more let me ask thee O Enthusiast, who criest up the spirit, the spirit
above Scripture, do thou seek the spirit aright, or follow him faithfully? I
fear thou do neither. Thou do not seek the spirit aright, because not in
his own way, which now is not in visions and immediate revelations, but in the
Scripture. Thou would have the spirit, but wilt not stay upon the mountains
of the Prophets and Apostles for him. Thou do like Joseph and Mary, they
sought Christ among their kindred and acquaintance, when he was in the Temple.
Thou seek the spirit among thy own fancies and imaginations, when he is in
the Scripture, My spirit and my words shall not depart out of thy mouth, says
God, Isa. 59.21. Observe, the spirit and the word are by Gods own ordinance in
a sweet conjunction together, he that sunders them loses both of them. For a
man to wave the Scripture and seek the spirit, is as if he should forsake the
beams, and search after the Sun in some place where it shines not. The French
Kings use to be crowned at Reims, because there is the sacred oil, which (as
they say) came down from heaven. If thou would be crowned with heavenly
wisdom, be in the Scriptures, there and there only is the holy Unction which
will teach thee all things. Neither do thou follow the spirit as thou
ought: the spirit, if followed in his own way, will lead thee into all
truth, but if thou will follow the spirit in an extra-scriptural way, thou
do not follow it indeed, but thy own fancy, and whilst thou seem to soar
above Scripture, thou art like to fall far below it, into the ditch of error
and wickedness. In no better place have thy predecessors been, after all their
high-flying imaginations. Montanus that early Enthusiast called himself the
Paraclete, and magnified the writings of his two Prophetesses above the sacred
Gospel. The Messaliani thought they could corporeally see the sacred Trinity,
and dance upon devils, and receive the holy spirit in a visible way? Oh
Satanical illusion! John of Leydens visions teemed out Poligamy and a bloody
Rebellion. Into what wild assertions did Swenckfield and Henry Nicholas come by
their Enthusiastical spirit, the first saying, that the Gospel is the Essence
of God; nay, faith in the heart is so. The other blasphemously alleging, That
the believer is Godded with God, and the spirit of love is God incarnate? How
did Valdesso run into Familism and Antinomianism? And what else did Saltmarsh,
in his book called Sparkles of Glory; making as if Christ were but a mystical
sigurative man, and God in the flesh were only God in his Saints? Oh mystery of
iniquity! whither will not this extra-scriptural spirit go? what errors will it
not broach? what sacred foundations of truth will it not demolish? how little
Gospel or divine rule will it leave to Christians? Leave it then O Enthusiast,
or else thou can not follow the spirit of truth. Thus much by way of question
to the Enthusiasts.

Secondly, I shall in a word say somewhat to their Allegations: they say, That
the Scriptures are but the Christians Alphabet, and for beginners only. But let
us remember, the spirit which is in believers in an ordinary way, was in the
Penmen of Scripture in an extraordinary; I was in the spirit, says St. John,
Rev. 1.10. he says not, the spirit was in me, but I was in the spirit, as a
vessel in the sea, every way surrounded and overruled by it. And who can
believe that the spirit in its ordinary way should exceed it self in its
extraordinary; that in believers it should utter high mysteries, which in
Prophets and Apostles gave out only an Alphabet? If it be no more, I dare say,
no man, no not the most perfect Disciple of God on earth ever thoroughly
understood his Alphabet, no man's knowledge ever dived into the bottom of
Scripture, no man's holiness was ever parallel to its precepts, nor no man's
faith ever traced the unsearchable riches of grace there unto the uttermost,
and shall we say, it is only an Alphabet for beginners? Is it not the wisdom of
God in a mystery? is it not able to make the man of God perfect? has St. Paul
milk only and not strong meat? was St. Peter to seed the lambs only, and not to
feed them into sheep, and when they were such? does St. John write only to the
little children, and not to the young men and fathers also? He writes to them
all, plainly showing, that no man, of what stature soever in grace, did ever
outgrow the Scripture.

Again they say, the Scriptures are but a dead letter, and we must not try the
living by the dead. The holy Martyr Stephen long since styled them lively
oracles, Act. 7.38. and if they are now but a dead letter, who has murdered
them? who so much as the Enthusiast? who goes about to separate the spirit from
them. If the Law come to a man in the convincing spirit, and slay him with his
own guilt, and set his conscience on fire with some tastes of hell, he may with
the Apostle call it a killing letter, but he will hardly call it a dead one. If
the Gospel come to him in the converting spirit, and open the glories of
free grace, and bring in a new creation into his heart, he must confess, that
it is the very savor of life unto life, and the power and arm of God to
salvation; and as the first life of grace is breathed through it into the dead
sinner, so all the after-gales of the spirit come from it upon the new
creature: Wherefore, whilst the spirit is in the word, it cannot be a dead
letter; and where the spirit is in the heart, it will not be called so. The
Enthusiast for all his swelling words of vanity, by calling the Scripture a
dead letter, proves only the deadness of his own heart; and the true believer,
who owns the Scripture for his rule, does not try the living by the dead, but
the lesser measure of the spirit in his heart, by the greater measure of it in
the word.

Again, they say there is a seculum spiritus sancti, an administration of
all-spirit, which is much above all Scriptures and Ordinances; but that there
should be such a Church State on earth is a vain dream. There are two
manifestations of God unto men, the one dark and through the glass of
ordinances, the other by pure and immediate vision, as it were face to face.
There are two states of believers, the one a state of weak and imperfect
graces, the other a state of perfect holiness and purity. There are also two
places, the one is earth, a vale of tears and death; the other is heaven, a
region of all blessedness and life eternal. The manifestation by ordinances is
congruous to weak graces, and such a place as earth. The manifestation by pure
vision is congruous to perfect holiness, and such a place as heaven. Thus has
the wisdom of God ordered things. Methinks the Enthusiast should blush to say
that he is above Scriptures and Ordinances here. What? above the glass, and yet
below the bliss-making vision; above the channels and methods of grace, and yet
below a state of perfection; above the heavenly mediums, and yet on earth? Oh
strange imagination! What says our Savior? Go, teach and baptize, lo I am
with you always to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19, 20. Ordinances run
parallel with this world, and the state which is above them, is only in the
next. What says St. Paul? Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Pastors, are all for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. Ordinances must continue as long as weaknesses and imperfections, and
cannot be spared till the top-stone of holiness and perfection be laid in
heaven. What says St. John, speaking of the heavenly City? And I saw no Temple
therein, Rev. 21.22. No Temple, no Ordinances, is only for heaven, earth must
always want and have them. O my soul, enter not into their secret, which cry
up the spirit, and despise prophesyings; be thou where Gods honor dwells; in
the Temple of Ordinances thou may see his power and glory.

Lastly, the Quakers talk altogether of the light within; which, being as they
say, common to all men, can be no other then natural conscience: this is the
candle of the Lord, and much magnified by Heathen Philosophers; this is every
man's Demon, says one: nay, it is the God in us, says another. And it is so
in such a sense as Moses was a God to Pharaoh, preaching the will of God to
him; and for non-obedience, urging him with dreadful plagues: For it
magisterially dictates the will of God, even in the Monarchs of the world; and
in case they rebel, it has inward stings and scorpions for them. Quid aliud
voces animam quam Deum in humano corpore hospitantem, says Seneca. Were a
Quaker to English it, he would go near to do it thus, The light within is God
manifest in the flesh, for in plain terms he will call it Christ, as if the
candle could become a Sun of Righteousness. In the mean time the devil has a
fetch, under the praises of inward light, to explode the Scriptures: But we
must remember, that Conscience which is above man, is yet below God; and though
it be a light and a rule, yet it must truckle under the greater light and rule
in the Scriptures. Take conscience before conversion, it is clouded and
overshadowed with the Fall, dark and blind in spiritual things; and shall the
blind lead the blind, till both fall into the ditch? must it not go and be
new-lighted at the Scripture? Take heed unto the word as unto a light shining
in a dark place, says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19. The heart of man is but a dark
place, till the divine word shine into it; it is intoxicated with the love of
sin, and by it, as the devils Opium, it sleeps at the top of the mast, in the
ocean of lowdangers, and must it not be rouzed up? ought not the silver trumpet
of the word to be sounded in its ears, to prevent an eternal sleep, and awaken
it unto righteousness? should it not go and wash in the pure streams of
free grace, and redeeming blood in the Gospel? it may be it is infected with
errors, and by these Satan has taken sanctuary in the intellectual tower, and
utters his own dictates as from God; and must it be left in such a case? should
not Satan and all his lying wares be cast out by the word and spirit? but
because conscience is now at the worst, take it after conversion, are there
then no relics of darkness which call for more light? are there no fits of
spiritual drowsiness, which need fresh alarums? are there no dregs of
corruption, which want a new purgation? are there no spots of error, which
ought to be wiped out? he that presumes a freedom from these, has great reason
to doubt whether there be any such thing as conversion found in him; and he
that confesses them, has as great reason to run to the Scripture to have them
rectified: But because the Quaker dreams of perfection, I will go higher.
Suppose a man absolutely perfect, every wheel in his soul in right motion, and
his conscience a pure Crystal without any flaw in it, yet must the man be
under God, and his conscience under the word; for his very perfection stands in
that subjection, and is forfeited as soon as it departs from it. Conscience is
a rule, but a subordinate one, it binds and looses, but in the power and
authority of the word; take away that, and conscience is no more conscience,
the inward Eccleiastes is silenced, and has nothing to say. My conscience
bears witness in the holy Ghost, says the Apostle, Romans 9.1. Observe, it
bears witness in the holy Ghost; Spiritu Sancto duce ac moderatore, says
Beza on the place. Conscience is no supreme thing, the holy Spirit must command
and moderate in it, if not in an immediate way, as in Prophets and Apostles,
yet in and by the sacred Scriptures as in ordinary Christians. To conclude with
that of an ancient, Scripturis non loquentibus, quis loquetur? the Scripture
being silent, none can speak, no not conscience it self in a regular way;
wherefore our supreme rule must be sought no where else but there.

Thus far I have treated touching what manner of belief of Scripture this must
be. But to proceed on.

Secondly, What are the consequents of this belief in order to that
resignation, which is the last thing in faith? I answer, the holy spirit having
lodged such a belief of Scripture in the heart, does reflect and turn the
Scriptural light inwards, and manage it in order to resignation, by so me such
steps as these following.

First, It strikes in the holy light in that manner, as to work a clear
conviction of sin, and this conviction is manifold.

First, There is a conviction of sin in its kinds, Actual and Original. I name
Actual first, as being most obvious and first in the discovery. There is a
conviction of Actual sin; the believed Law comes home to the heart, and gives
it a charge as Nathan to David, thou art the man, these and those things are
sins against the great God, says the holy Law, and so and so thou have done,
says the awakened conscience. God (who before had sowed and sealed up his
iniquities in a bag, as the phrase is, Job 14.17.) now opens the bag, and pours
out a vast sum of guilts, and exactly tells over all the smothered light, and
abused love, and spirit-quenchings, and sorfeited creatures, and buried
talents, and broken promises, and horrible presumptions, in all amounting to
wonderful arrearages, and at last enforcing the poor sinner to cry out, Guilty,
Guilty. And after this follows a conviction of Original sin: The sinner traces
up his sins to the impure fountain, and follows every lust home to the black
nest in the heart; there, there is the root of bitterness, the seed-plot and
spawn of all iniquity. Indeed in every actual sin we may, if we have our
spiritual senses about us, hear the sound of its Masters feet, even of the
reigning corruption within; in every act of rebellion we may cry out of the
Pharaoh within, which says who is the Lord? in every act of unbelief we may
complain of the Jew in the heart, which will not receive Christ; we may taste
Adams apple in every sensual sin, and perceive his imaginary Godhead in every
spiritual self-excellency; in our lives we have many sins, but all in our
heart; there is a stench in vicious actions, but the filthy sink of all is
within. After some such way as this does God fill our faces with shame, that we
may seek him and resign.

Secondly, There is a conviction of sin in its guilt: The sinner comes to see
that whilst he is in his sin, he is but a condemned man; and sin, unless
pardoned, will chain him to hell and eternal wrath. God seems to speak to him,
as once to Abimelech, behold thou art but a dead man, thou catest and drinkest
and sleep, but all the while under wrath; thou art jolly abroad among the
creatures, but fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest hangs over thy head.
God makes the sinner know where he is, as the Syrians, when their eyes were
opened, saw themselves in the midst of Samaria; so he, when his mind is
enlightened, sees himself at the brink of hell and death; without such a sense
of wrath, man is too proud to resign: he is naturally a Manasseh, a forgetter
of God, and will not turn till he be in chains. Laish-like, he sits quiet and
secure, till Dan the judgment come; hell must drive him to heaven or else he
will never come there; the fiery Law must melt him, or else he will never run
into the Gospel-mould.

Thirdly, There is a conviction of the filthiness of sin; the soul in every
turn from God loses its light, and in every turn to the creature, gathers soil
and pollution; the sinner will never resign up himself to be washed in the
Evangelical laver, unless he first seo sin, as it is, mire and dirt, and
superfluity of naughtiness, and find his precious soul lying in a sordid
manner, in a sink of pleasure, or a cave of covetousness, or some other lust,
which is as an unclean place miserably defiling it, whilst it abides therein.

Fourthly, There is a conviction of the power of sin; sin is a Baal, a Lording
tyrant, and the sinner a vassal to it; in sensual sins he drudges in Sodom and
Egypt, and in spiritual he is carried away to Babylon: the sinner is as a
captive in his chains, and (which is the great wonder) a willing captive, the
iron is entered into his soul, the chain is in his very will the Principle of
freedom, a vassal he is, and loves to be so. The more freely he sins, the more
is his slavery, the more imperiously he sins, the more is his weakness: thus
the Prophet, how weak is thy heart, seeing thou do the work of an imperiou
whorish woman? Ezekiel. 16.30. unless God make men in some measure feel the power
of sin, and go as David over Olivet, weeping, because of the Absoloms, the
rebellious lusts, which come out of their own bowels and make war upon heaven,
they will not resign and take up the yoke of Christ as they ought.

Secondly, Upon such a conviction of sin, ensue great straits and humiliations
of soul. When the poor sinner sees things as they are, an host of sins round
about the soul, nay and within it, an hell flashing out of the guilt thereof, a
defiling filthiness in it, such as makes him ashamed to lift up his soul to
God, and withal, such bonds and fetters therein, as he cannot break by his own
power, then he becomes a Magor-missabib, terror round about, his heart more or
less bleeds in tears, and travels in pangs of conscience, and breaks under a
damning Law, and droops and swoons away in fits of self-confusion and
self-desparation, and at last is ready to cry out Oh sin! Oh wrath! what shall
I do? whither go? can I fly from the Omnipresent, grapple with the Almighty, or
stand before the holy One? all is impossible: can I endure an hell, abide a
never-dying worm, or dwell with consuming fire? it is intolerable. May my time
be unravelled, my sins undone, or my self unborn, it cannot be. Oh! sinful
forlorn creature that I am, woe woe unto me for ever. Such straits as these make
way for resignation; all the sons of God come out of Egypt, out of the straits
of sin, and pass through a wilderness of wants and extremities toward the Land
of promise; the valley of Achor, trouble and perplexity for the accursed thing,
is a door of hope; husks and hunger make the Prodigal come to himself and his
father.

Thirdly, Upon this humiliation and strait of soul, there ensues a
deliberation, a standing (as the King of Babylon did, Ezekiel. 21.21.) at the
parting of the way, to make a true enquiry. Lo! says the afflicted soul in a
self-parley, here is the way of life, and there of death, this is the way
everlasting, and that is the way of time; If you live after the flesh, you must
dye, but if you mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live, if you sow unto
the flesh, you must reap corruption, if unto the spirit, life everlasting. O my
soul! be not deceived; God and sin, Christ and Belial, heaven and hell, cannot
mix together. Say then, O my soul, what will thou have? the mess of pottage, or
the birthright, the pleasures of sin, or those at Gods right hand, the worlds
trinity of lusts, or communion with the blessed Trinity in heaven? Thus the
soul sits down and casts up the cost; sin on and burn in hell for ever, turn to
God and shine in eternal glory, spare thy lusts and damn thy soul, slay thy
lusts and save it. Oh! what a fearful cheat is sin? it proffers a profit or a
pleasure, and asks a soul; it holds out a moment or two, and would have
eternity in pawn for it; it tickles the sense, and stabs the conscience; it
courts and flatters like the strange woman, and leads down to hell and death.
Such deliberations as these make way for resignation; an indeliberate
resignation is but a flash and away, but a deliberate one is fit to endure.

Fourthly, After all this the holy spirit does so far press in the holy light,
as to work a denial of a man's self and his lusts in some measure. I say, in
some measure, for without some measure of selfdenial, a man will never resign
up himself to God and Christ. Thus our Savior, If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, Mat. 16.24. first deny himself, and then go to Christ:
and again, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
first be weary of sin, and then go to Christ; no man can serve two Masters, he
that will follow Christ, must do as Peter and Andrew did, leave his nets, all
the entangling lusts of his heart, and so follow him. Whilst a man sits at the
receipt of custom, driving on a trade of sin, he cannot follow him. First, he
must with Matthew rise up from thence, and then he may follow him. Also I say in
some measure, for the selfdenial before precious faith, must be distinguished
from the self-denial after it: self-denial before faith is wrought in us by the
holy spirit, making impressions and darting in light into the heart in a
transient way: self-denial after faith is wrought in us by the holy spirit,
dwelling in the heart by faith, and acting therein as an abiding principle of
all grace. Before faith, it is in a far lesser measure and degree, after faith
it grows up to a full stature: before faith it does in some sort cast off the
sovereignty of sin, the soul no longer chooses to live under its dominion, but
looking upon it as cruel bondage, casts off its allegiance: after faith it
strikes at the very life of sin, in the work of mortification. What is said of
the beasts in Daniel, their dominion was taken away, and yet their lives were
prolonged, Dan. 7.12. the same may be said of sin, first it loses its crown and
then its life. The holy spirit in the first measure of self-denial, does as it
were dethrone sin in order to resignation; and in the after-measure thereof, it
mortifies and nails it to the cross, there to dye and expire. Now this measure
of self-denial, which precedes resignation, stands in diverse things.

First, There is a denial of a man's reason. Reason, as the candle of the Lord
is not to be denied; but reason, as it is a false light, as it pleads for Baal,
the lording lust of the soul, as it plays the serpent, seducing from holy
truths, as it sows pillows under presumptuous sinning, as it laughs at holiness
and divine mysteries above its comprehension, is surely to be denied. We must
become fools, that we may be wise, put out our lamp, that it may be lighted by
the spirit, and crucify our why's and wherefores, that we may believe the
Gospel. Abraham having Gods promise for a seed, considered not, Romans 4.19. and
staggered not, or (as in the original) discerned not, v. 20. he did not play
the critic upon the dead body and dead womb, he laid by his discretion, that
he might give glory to God by believing.

Secondly, There is a denial of a man's will. This is the forbidden fruit, and
womb of concupiscence, unless this be renounced, there is no hope of
resignation; our own will is a thing of Belial, and unless subdued by grace,
will not take Christ's yoke: it is an inward Antichrist, and unless consumed by
the divine spirit and brightness, will exalt it self above the will of God.
Saul must have a light from heaven, and a fall to the earth, and a fit of
trembling, or else he will not resign, and say, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? Act. 9.6. the will must be un-selved, and the man become as a little child,
without any will of his own, or else there can be no resignation.

Thirdly, There is a denial of a man's carnal affections. These are the camels
which cannot go thorough the needles eye, the weights and plummets which press
down the soul from God; unless these be cast off, there can be no resignation;
our Savior is positive in it, how can ye believe which receive honor one of
another? Joh. 5.44. A soul breathed into vainglorious air, or drowned in
sensual pleasures, or laden with the thick clay of the world, cannot resign; he
that will offer up himself to God, must leave the world behind his back, his
affections must be gathered in from earth, and Angel-like, ascend in the flame
of faith; the vail of time must be put by, and an entry made upon eternity.

Fourthly, There is a denial of a man's own power. Proud persons, puffed up in
their fleshly mind, vainly dream that their Reason can span all mysteries, and
their Will teem out all graces, no temptations are too strong for them, nor
duties too weighty. Alas! these are so far from resignation, that they are not
come to illumination, through prodigious blindness they are strong in their
impotency, rich in their poverty, free in their chains, and something in their
nothingness. And what should they go to God for? as yet they are not so much as
in the way thither; but let the man put off his false ornaments, and lay by his
proud plumes, and sensibly feel a carnal mind, and a spiritual Law, a weak
heart, and strong corruptions; let him groan and cry out of the blind eyes
which cannot unscale, the iron sinewed Will which cannot bow, the false heart
which cannot go true, and the fallen nature, which cannot reach so high as an
holy thought. Let him be weak in his impotency, till God set up Jachin and Boaz
in his heart; poor in his poverty, till he have a share in Christ's riches; a
captive in his chains, till God break them off and bid him go free; and nothing
in his nothingness, that creating grace may pass upon him, and God be all in
all. This is the way to resignation, such is Gods method to bring light out of
darkness, perfect power in weakness, and call things that are not, as if they
were.

Fifthly, There is a denial of a man's own righteousness. Every man naturally
would be a selfjustifier, as the Apostle says, Romans 10.3. he would (...)
establish, or make to stand his own righteousness, though it be but a dead
carcass, he would set it upon its legs; though but a breathless image, he would
have it stand alone; and the reason is, because he would be justified by
somewhat within, he would not go out for a righteousness: But alas, all this
while he does not, cannot, resign; thus the Apostle in that place, going about
to establish their own righteousness, they submitted not themselves to the
righteousness of God. A man, whilst upon his own bottom, will not surrender;
but take him up into Moriah, into the vision of God, and show him the purity of
Gods nature, and the sinfulness of his own; carry him to Sinai, and let him see
the necessity of a perfect righteousness, and the impossibility of an inherent
one in himself; pluck away his fig leaves of false righteousness, and open his
eyes upon his own nakedness and poverty: this is the true way to resignation.

Thus far of the second thing in faith; what manner of belief of Scripture this
is, and how in the consequents of it the holy spirit strikes in the holy light
upon the heart, and by certain steps brings it to the very borders of
resignation: which is the third and last thing in faith now to be opened.

CHAP. IV.
Of the third and last thing in Faith, an holy thorough dependant
Self-resignation to the terms of the Gospel; What it is, to whom and to what it
is made, and for what purposes: with the adjuncts and properties of it.

THE third and last thing in Precious Faith, is a dependant yielding or
resignation of the soul unto Jesus Christ the Mediator, and through him unto
God, according to his word. This is the vital and essential act of faith, as
faith is the condition of the Gospel. Touching it, I shall first explain what
this resignation is; and then offer my reasons, why the vitality and essential
nature of Faith does consist therein.

First, I must explain what this resignation is in general: It is no other then
a surrender of the soul to God according to theterms of the Covenant. God has
chalked out in the word a method of salvation, and man resigns up his soul to
God in his own way. God says to man, if ever thou art saved it must be through
the Mediator Jesus Christ, his blood must wash out thy sins, his righteousness
must answer the Law for thee. Content, says the soul, I resign up my self to
the Mediator, I lean my self upon his blood and righteousness for pardon and
acceptance with thee. Among Anselms interrogatories to be proposed unto men
lying, in extremis at the point of death, one which the Minister offers to the
sick man is, do thou believe that thou can not be saved but by Christ's
death, unto which when the sick man answers, yea, I so believe, the Minister is
appointed to speak to him thus, Age, dum superest in te anima, in hac sola
morte siduciam tuam constitue, in nulla alia re siduciam babe, buic morti te
totum commit, bac sola te totum contege, totum immisee, totum involve;
Whilst there is any breath in thee, place all thy considence in his death, and
in nothing else, commit thy whole self to it, cover and intermingle, and
involve thy whole self in it; this conference I have set down, because it does
emphatically express this act of resignation. God says further, my Christ must
not, cannot, be divided, if he save thee as a Priest, he must teach thee as a
Prophet, and rule over thee as a King, for I have made him all these. Content,
says the soul, his blood is not, cannot be spiritless; I give up my self to
his holy spirit to be taught and ruled: I desire to say with Baldassar the
German Divine, Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, and submittemus illi, sexcenta si
nobis essent colla; Let the word of the Lord Christ come, let it come teaching
and ruling, and I desire to submit to it, even six hundred necks, if he had so
many. God says further, my Christ is a crucified one, and you cannot, must not
divide him from the cross. No says the soul, I will take him cross and all. I
would fain say as the noble Ignatius, veniant crux, ignis, ossium
confractiones, modo Christum habeam, let the cross, and the fire, and the
broken bones come, so I may but have Christ, I hope nothing shall separate me
from his love. God says again, through this Christ thou must in all thy wants
cast thy self upon me for a supply. I cannot (says the soul) bear up my own
weight in this respect, I would fain lay all upon thee; my guilt upon thy
mercy, my unworthiness upon thy free grace, my folly upon thy wisdom, and my
weakness upon thy almighty power; if thou do not help me, the barn-floor and
wine press of the creature cannot do it; if thou fail me, I am confounded and
expect to be miserable. Moreover says God, in all thy addresses unto me, thou
must look to thy warrant, and see whether Scripture will bear thee out in it or
not. The Scripture (says the soul) is the Great Charter, above sealed by
infinite veracity, and below by faith; this, this is the sacred rule I desire
to go by in all my resignations: After some such manner as this does the
believing soul surrender up it self. But for the more clear opening of this
resignation, I shall consider three things.

First, Unto whom or what this resignation is made?

Secondly, For what things or purposes it is made?

Thirdly, What are the Adjuncts and properties thereof?

First, Unto whom or what this resignation is made? I answer, it is made unto
Jesus Christ the Mediator, unto God the whole sacred Trinity, and unto the
Word: unto Christ as the Mediator and grand medium of salvation; unto God as
the Center and ultimate object of Faith; and unto the Word, as the warrant,
rule, and way, in, by, and according to which faith must proceed.

First, This resignation is made to Christ as the Mediator and grand medium of
salvation. I begin with this first, because Faith cannot go to God immediately,
but to the Mediator first, and so to God. Thus the Scripture says, through him
we have access to the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. by him we come unto God, Heb. 7.25.
and which is more express, by him we believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. If we will go
to our heavenly Father, we must first put on our elder brothers robes, we must
cloth our faith and resignation in the resignations of Christ, and so appear
before God; we must put our faith into the hand of a Mediator, and from thence
it will ascend up before the divine Majesty. Take away the Mediator, and God is
a consuming sire, no says, no prayer, can approach unto him: If the cloud of
incense do not cover the Mercy-seat, Aaron will dye before it, Lev. 16.13.
unless the Mediators merits had been as a cloud of incense about God, the
sinner, though in the lowest posture of resignation, must have died before the
Father of mercies. First then, there is a resignation unto Christ as the
Mediator and grand medium of salvation: For the understanding whereof, two
things are considerable.

First, That Jesus Christ is by Gods ordination sealed to be a Mediator. There
is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.5. Christ, as God-man, stood up between an offended God, and offending
man, and acts as a Mediator in all his offices: As a Priest he acts with God to
pacify his wrath, and purchase grace and glory for men; and as a Prophet and a
King he acts with men, to declare unto them the Will of God, and rule over them
by his spirit and word; Thus the livine daysman lays his hand upon both, God
above, and man below, to bring them together in a mutual reconciliation.

Secondly, That this resignation to Christ as Mediator, is in a way congruous
to all his offices: Look as God above sealed him to be a Mediator by his
ordination, so man below seals as it were the counter-part by his resignation:
The believer yields up himself to Christ as a Priest, by a recumbency on his
merits and sweet smelling sacrifice. This in Scripture is called, says in his
blood, Romans 3.25. he yields up himself to Christ as a Prophet, by an humble
teachableness; this is called, a hearing of the Prophet, Act. 3.22. and he
yields up himself to Christ as a King, by an holy subjection; and this is
called, receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6. Thus this resignation, as a
key to the wards of the lock, suits and hits Christ in every office. What is
merit in Christ, is fiducialness in faith; What is instruction in Christ, is
docibleness in faith; What is royalty in Christ, is obedientialness in faith.

Secondly, This resignation is made unto God, even the whole sacred Trinity, as
the center and ultimate object of faith, I say, the whole sacred Trinity. For
though Christ, as God-man, the Mediator, be only the grand medium, by and
through which faith makes its approaches to God, yet Christ as God is not the
ultimate object of faith; I say, the whole sacred Trinity, as the center and
ultimate object of faith: For nothing is or can be the formal reason or
terminating object of faith, but the Deity or divine nature only; whose infinite
excellency and perfection does naturally merit the same; whose infallible
truth, rich mercy, matchless power, and unsearchable wisdom, calls for faith to
come and repose in its bosom; there and there only can it ultimately rest and
keep Sabbath: this the Scripture expresses emphatically by trusting in Jehovah,
the rock of ages, and center of faith. Thus then it is, faith first goes to
Christ the Mediator, and then in and through him it advances unto God. The
Apostle is express in it, who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from
the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet.
1.21. Faith in Christ's blood, is says in the way, the new and living way,
consecrated through the vail of his flesh; but faith in God, is faith in the
ultimate end and center. Moreover, that faith may arrive at him, he comes as it
were out of his unapproachable light, and manifests himself in Attributes; he
lets down his veracity, grace, wisdom, power, holiness, and sovereignty, as so
many beams of his glory for our faith to lean upon, and as it were to climb up
by unto himself. They that know thy name will trust in thee, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 9.10. the knowledge of Attributes is a staff to our weak faith
in its walk to him.

Thirdly, This resignation is made unto the werd as the warrant, rule, and way,
in, by, and according to which faith does proceed. These things are written,
that you might believe, Joh. 20.31. As for the choice blessings which faith
waits for from God and Christ, the promises are the warrant. As for the
obediential subjection to God and Christ, the commands are the rule. As for the
teachings of the Spirit, the whole word is the way, in which believers looks
for the same. If faith look up, the word is the perspective; if it work, the
word is the line and plummet; if it consult, here is the oracle; if it weigh
things, here is the balance: Faith is never warrantless. There is transgressing
without cause, but never believing. Faith resigns to the Mediator, and through
him to God, but the commission for both is in the word.

Thus far of the first thing, unto whom or what this resignation is made. But
to go on.

Secondly, For what things or purposes is it made? I answer, It is made for
very great things and ends. In opening of which, I shall to each of them
accommodate the former distinction of resignation, as to the Mediator, as to
God, and as to the Word. That the nature of this resignation may the more fully
appear, the precious things and ends for which it is made, are as follows.

First, The soul is resigned to be instructed in all the ways of God. And this
resignation, that I may keep to the prae-appointed method, is made

First, To Jesus Christ the Mediator, and as to him, first faith Disciples the
soul to him, and then yields it up to him to be taught.

First, It Disciples the soul to Christ; before faith a man is as a Wolf or a
Lion for brutish untractableness; but after it, a little child may lead him,
even the least truth in the word, and he will not break from it: his ear is
opened, and his mind in a readiness for instruction. Now this Faith does two
ways.

First, It does it by revealing the excellency of Christ as a Prophet. Oh! says
faith, this is the only Rabbie, the Angel of Gods face, the wonderful
counseliar, lying in his bosom and knowing all his secrets; his mouth is most
sweet, he speaks hony-combs of grace, and breaths beams of light, and utters
sparkles of glory; nothing but mysteries and rectitudes and words of eternal
life ever came from him, and (to make these come home to thee) he is an inward
Ecclesiastes, one who can unlock thy secrets, and come into the midst of thee,
and there express himself in words of life and power, and all the while his
Majesty shall not swallow thee up. He speaks through an humane nature and vail
of flesh, in rare condescension and compassion toward thy weakness. Whilst
faith is in the high praises of this great Prophet, the heart cannot choose but
be upon the wheels ready to run to him, and say, speak Lord, for thy servant
hears.

Secondly, It does it by humbling and softning the heart. Before faith a man is
in the ruff of pride, and there is no speaking to him; his heart is as a stone
or Adamant, and beats off holy truths: but after it, the man becomes as a
little child, and Christ may say any thing to him, his stony heart is turned
into flesh, and so made ready for God to be manifested in it. Faith does so
meeken the heart, that it will sit down at Christ's feet, and hear him, even in
his hardest Lectures. Let Christ talk of racks, and bloody persecutions for the
Gospel, and the believer will be ready to get up the cross on his back. Let
Christ preach of high and transcendent mysteries, such as reason cannot fathom,
and the believer will subscribe in silence, what ever reason mutter against it.

Secondly, Faith having discipled the soul, yields it up to Christ to be
taught: And because now he does not teach in person, as once in the days of his
flesh, faith yields up the soul to him to be taught by his spirit. The
discipled believer loves to stand as Adam, in the wind of the day, in the gales
of the holy spirit. And this will appear in two-things.

First, Faith waits upon the Spirit in the Means, and when the spirit comes in
holy motions, it welcomes him into the soul. Faith waits upon the Spirit in the
Means, there it cries out, as Elisha at Jordan, where is the God of Elijah?
here is the mantle, but where is the God? here are the Scriptures, but where is
the Spirit that endited them, to make holy impressions and seal divine truths
upon the heart? here are the ordinances, but oh! for the moving of the waters,
awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon the garden that the spices
may flow out. And when the spirit comes in holy motions, faith opens the
everlasting doors, and welcoms him in, as Laban did Abraham's servant, come in
thou blessed of the Lord; stand not only without in the Scripture-letter, come
in, thou that come in the name of the Lord. Take the throne of my heart, and
bid the world go down and sit at thy footstool. Take the keys of the soul, and
unlock every faculty, set up thy lamps in every dark corner, and discover the
accursed things there: Speak, O heavenly Rabbi, speak in words of life and
power, and show me the path of life and righteousness.

Secondly, Faith is very chary and loath to lose the teaching spirit. Like the
Spouse in the Canticles, it holds him and and will not let him go, Cant. 3.4.
This is to the believer as the apple of his eye, he would not have a dust of
earth fall into to lest it grieve and weep out some of the holy light, and as
the fire in the Temple, it must not go out, if there be but a live coal or
single spark it must be brown up into a flame. Holy motions are very precious
to the believer, as it were beams of heaven, better in Faiths account then the
great Sun which quickens the animal world; and like so many good Angels sent
from God to give the soul a visit: rather then these should be violated and
abused, faith will offer all its worldly comforts, as Lot his daughters, to be
defloured. If the holy spirit depart, faith writes scabbed upon all other
things, and the believer becomes as a dead man, unable to breath in prayer, or
walk in holiness, or live or have a being in the spiritual world. The Sun is
down, and it is night with him; the dew is off, and his fleece dry; the gales
are wanting, and he is at a stand in his voyage to heaven. Thus faith yields up
the soul to be taught by the spirit.

Secondly, In and through Christ the Mediator, faith yields up the soul to God
to be taught by the spirit. I say, in and through Christ the Mediator: Without
a Mediator God will not speak to a sinful creature, unless out of the fire, in
words of wrath, like those at the last day, Go, thou cursed one. If he speak
and commune with us in words of peace and salvation, it must be from the
mercy-seat, that is, through Christ, who is called Gods (...) or propitiatory,
Romans 3.25. Hence Christ is called the wisdom of God, because through him that
wisdom does manifest it self; and as God speaks, so faith hears and resigns,
both are in and through the Mediator. I say, in and through the Mediator, faith
yields up the soul to God to be taught by the spirit, the very same teaching
spirit; as it was procured by the Mediator, so it is given out by God.
Therefore faith, for the teaching thereof, resigns up the soul as to the
Mediator the procurer, so to God the donor of it: And in this resignation faith
climbs up to him by that noble Attribute of his infinite wisdom. Are there
transcendent mysteries in Scripture? Faith will resign and cry out with Zophar,
Oh! that God would speak and show me the secrets of wisdom. Whilst the
Scripture is in its hands, it sighs and looks up for the key to unlock and show
forth this and that truth in its spiritual glory, or at least in some such
beams of it as it is capable of; the Original Languages will not serve its
turn, without the Original Author; nor the Learned Commentators, without the
great Interpreter: that only wise God who endited the Scripture, can illustrate
the heart; and whilst the believer reads the one, he waits for the other. Is
there a practical case dubious and perplexed, like an intricate Labyrinth or
way-less wilderness? and when the believer goes about to put all circumstances
into the balance, does he tremble and demurr like Origin at the Idol-incense,
and cannot be satisfied? In such a case Faith runs, and Esra-like hangs upon
God for a right way; the All-wise can make a way in the wilderness, and guide
thee with his eye, says Faith: one cast or glance from his wisdom will
disintricate thy doubts, and make thy way plain before thee. Does the outward
world grow stormy and tempestuous? is the sky of the times overclouded with
troubles and dangers? faith stands in the posture of Jehoshaphat, we know not
what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. we know not, but thou
know how to deliver; there is nothing but confusion below, but all is clear
and serene in thy wise counsels; there is no one way or method of deliverance
in our reason, but there are insinite millions of ways and methods with thee.
Such a faith as this made Luther in the troubles of the Church cry out, That it
was far otherwise concluded in heaven, then at Norimberg; and in the blackest
tempest inspirits the believer to do, as the Mariners in the Acts, cast anchor,
and wish for the day, roll himself on the wise God, and wait for the dawning of
comfort from him.

Thirdly, Faith yields up the soul for instruction unto the word. And here are
three things considerable.

First, Faith resigns to the word, as a warrant for both the former
resignations. If you ask a believer why he presumes so far, as to go to Christ
and God for the teachings of the spirit, his answer will be this; I find in the
word diverse promises, that we shall be taught of God, that the spirit shall
lead us into all truth, that there is an holy anointing dropping from Christ,
which teaches all things. And all these promises are very true, the
counterpanes of Gods heart, and exactly congruous to the grace there; God
speaks in them, and without complement he speaks as he means, therefore I
resign up my soul unto Christ and God for instruction; teach me good judgment
and knowledge, for I have believed thy commandments, says David, Psalm.
119.66. where by commandments, some Divines understand all the word, including
in it Promises as well as Commands: however the believer has a warrant to
pray, teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have believed thy promises of
instruction.

Secondly, Faith resigns to the word, as a rich mine and treasury of knowledge,
there are precious ous mysteries, such as have the divine wisdom flowing in
them. Them Hungarians have a tradition, that their golden Crown dropped down from
heaven; to be sure the mysteries in Scripture did so, they are pure
Revelations, come down from God to be as golden Crowns on the head of Faith.
The window of the Ark was (as some Rabbis say) a precious stone, which gave
light to all the creatures; and indeed the Original, which we translate window,
Genesis 6.16. imports a splendour or clear light. Understanding is our window, but
the Scripture mysteries make it a window of pearl. Humane learning is but
painted glass, but these make windows of agates, such as are in the taught of
God, Isa. 54.12, 13. These are riches of understanding, pearls and intellectual
rubies, fit to be laid up in the very middle and Center of the heart. There the
holy precepts and precious promises, beauties of holiness and glories of grace
lie open to the embraces of Faith. There the invisible God, whose dwelling is
in light unapproachable, and whose pure glory our eyes cannot look on, may be
seen in the reflex, in the Scripture image and condescension. In a word, so
rich are the veins of knowledge there, that faith, as a day-labourer, is ever
digging therein, to draw out a stock of holy understanding from it.

Thirdly, Faith resigns to the word, as the only way in which a man may be
taught of God: All men are ambitious of so grand a privilege. The very
Gentiles in the puddle of their filthy Idolatries, thought themselves taught of
God in their Oracles. The Mahometans think themselves more sure of it in their
Alcoran, at which (say they) the devils themselves rejoiced, and turned to God;
no question they rejoyed at such a bundle of lies and blasphemies, but that
they turned to God is a wild delusion. The Jews boast themselves no less in
their Oral Law, which (say they) God delivered over to Moses, and Moses to
Joshua, and Joshua to the Elders, and they to the Prophets, and they to the
Sanhedrim, and they at last to writing in the Talmud; calling it, lux illa
magna, that great light, which yet is but a dark labyrinth of errors and
horrible falsities. The Papists run to their traditions and unwritten verities
as Divine, and so bring in a load of fopperies and vain superstitions. The
Enthusiasts cry up the spirit in an extra-scriptural way, and so turn aside
from the main principles of Religion. In such false ways do men lose themselves
and the Divine teaching, whilst the believer knows where to sind it, even in
the Scriptures; in reading them, he sits at Christ's feet, and every where looks
for Maschil, instruction from God. In them is the Oracle, the Vrim and Thummim,
by which God answers him; here he opens his heart, and spreads abroad all his
sails to take in the gales of the holy spirit, and be filled in all the will of
God, Col. 4.12. (...), filled with it as the sails are with the wind; Whilst
the Eunuch was reading the Prophet Esaias, the spirit joined Philip to his
chariot, Act. 8.29. Whilst the believer has his being in the Scriptures, the
spirit joins himself to his heart, and by the infusion of holy light, makes him
go on rejoicing in the way of knowledge. Here and only here does he wait to be
taught of God; such is and, since the sealing up of the Canon, ever has been,
the way of knowledge. And what of extraordinary dispensation has been since,
has either directly turned men to their Bibles, Confess. l. 8. c. 12. Melch.
Adam in vita Zuinglii.
as the voice to St. Austin, toll, lege, toll, lege, pointing him to the
Scripture; or else has quoted or ratified some Scripture-truth. Thus when it
was objected to Zuinglius, that the word [ est] in Scripture-parables may be
taken for [ significat] but not in verbis coenae, in the Sacramental phrases,
and his thoughts were busy about it, an answer was suggested to him in a
dream, a monitor (...) telling him, Quin ignare, respondes ei, quod in Exodo
legitur, est enim phase, hoc est, transitus Domini, in which there is nothing
extra-scriptural, but a Scripture-instance given for that which before was a
Scripture-truth; the Scripture is the only place where we can look for Divine
teaching. To conclude, that of the Father is remarkable, qui sacra non utitur
Scriptura, sed ascendit aliunde, non concessa via, fur est, he that goes not
into knowledge by Scripture, is a thief, the believer keeps the divine road.

Thus far of the first thing, resignation for instruction in the ways of God.

Secondly, Faith resigns up the soul to be pardoned and justisied before God;
unto justification and pardon there are three things prae-required.

First, An act of free grace in God. All men are naturally sinners, and as
such, Gods holiness cannot but hate them, Gods justice cannot but punish them;
wherefore free grace stepped in and found out a way, how God, who cannot
justify the ungodliness, might yet justify the ungodly, Romans 4.5. and that in
a way of compliance both with his holiness and justice; with his holiness,
providing a perfect righteousness; and with his justice, providing a perfect
satisfaction for them in a surety: hence the Apostle says, we are justified
freely by his grace, Romans 3.24. Freely, by his grace; he uses two words, the
more plainly and emphatically to decipher out to us the pure fountain of love
and grace, out of which pardon and justification issue forth to poor sinners.

Secondly, There must be a perfect righteousness fully answering the holy Law.
God cannot deny himself, he cannot deny his holiness, so as to justify us
without a righteousness, therefore there must be one; he cannot deny his truth,
so as to account that a righteousness which is none, therefore it must be
perfect, fully answering the Law; all-fair without any spot in it, all-pure
without any mixture in it, all-perfect without and defect in it, such a thing
as is not to be found in any mere man. The Jews (as it seems by Josephus)
thought a mere outward righteousness enough; but alas, what is this without a
pure heart? The Popish Doctors look upon inherent graces as our very
righteousness in justification: indeed these (because the denomination is a
meliore part) denominate men righteous, but they are but inchoate and
imperfect, and therefore are short of that perfect and absolute righteousness
requisite to justification. They denominate men righteous, but they do it but
in their own weak degree, and not in full proportion to the holy Law; a
gracious man is not all grace, there is flesh as well as spirit, dross as well
as gold, water as well as wine in him; his mind is not all Light his will is
not all love, his affections are not all harmony; what of grace he has is but
in part, and if this be his righteousness, he can be justified but in part, or
rather not at all. Neither can our good works, no not those which flow from
grace, ever be our righteousness in justification. Those are good as they flow
from the pure fountain of the spirit, but as they proceed from us (in whom
there is much of the old Adara) they smell of the cask and soil in the channel,
and contract a great deal of dross from the indwelling sin: Hence they are so
far from justifying us, that they themselves need a justification. Hence holy
Nehemiah prays that his good works may be remembered, with a spare me O Lord,
according to the greatness of thy mercy, Neh, 13.22. Neither will it suffice to
justification, if our good works are more then our evil. The Papists fable that
Henry the second Emperor was weighed in the balance, to see whether he were
worthy of heaven or hell; his good works were put into one scale, his evil into
the other, and these were like to out weigh and sink him to hell, but that St.
Lawrence put in the Chalice by the Emperor given him, and so made the scale of
good works preponderate. O vain tale! nothing weighs with God in the point of
justification but a complete rightcousness, and that can no where be found but
in Christ alone; he and he only fulfilled all righteousness, and therefore he
is called by the Apostle (...), the end of the Law for righteousness to the
believer, Romans 10.4. the Law has its total sum and perfect compleature in him.

Thirdly, There must be an expiation of sin, or else there can be no
justification. The very Gentiles themselves, stung with the conscience of sin
and vengeance, had their expiatory and lustratory Sacrifices. The ancient lews,
being Gods people, had their offerings and sacrifices for sin, to make an
Atonement according to the Levitical Law. The latter Jews, though they reject
the sacrifice of the Messiah; yet that they might not be wholly without an
expiation, offer a cock for sin, because the word [ Gebher] in Hebrew signifies
a man, and in the Talmud a cock; hence they say, Gebher, that is, the man
sins, and Gebher, that is, the cock suffers. If the Prophet Isaias in the
53. chapter, had used the word ( Gebher) the Rabbis (says a Learned man)
would have turned the man into a cock; but there it is not Gebher, but Ish, a
man of sorrows: But these expiations not availing, God has provided an
expiation in the death of his son. Without shedding of blood there is no
remission, says the Apostle, Heb. 9.22. and because creature-blood could not
do it, the blood of God was shed to redeem us from sin; Jesus Christ, who is
God-man, offered up himself through the eternal spirit, to purge our
consciences from dead works: he paid the utmost farthing to Divine justice, and
has left nothing at all to pay for the believing finner. The Gentile
sacrifices were no expiations at all, being indeed sacrifices to devils and not
to God; nay, in their own account they did not expiate in all cases. Hence when
the Emperor Constantine was haunted with the innocent blood he had shed, the
Gentile Flamius could tell him of no expiation. But the blood of Christ is a
true and universal expiation, cleansing from sin and all sin, 1 John 1.7. The
Levitical sacrifices, though of Divine Institution, were but types and shadows,
making nothing perfect. But a crucified Christ is the sum and substance of
them, really atoning what those did but typically. The Rabbinical cock is a
strange vanity, in which we may stand and wonder at the Jewish blindness; but
what their vain Gebher could not do, that our Ish the man of sorrows, upon whom
all our iniquities met, has done indeed: he was wounded for our iniquities,
his soul was an offering for sin, his life a ^^nsom for many, his blood was
shed for the remission of sins, he paid that he never took, he made (...)
through the blood of his cross; in him God is (...) and reconciled.

These things being premised, I say the soul by Faith does resign up it self
for pardon and justification. And, that I may observe my first method, this
resignation is made

First, To Jesus Christ the Mediator. The believer, conscious to his own
spiritual poverty, does as the poor man in the Psalm, commit himself, or as the
Original is, leave himself on the Lord, Psalm. 10.14. In stead of a perfect
righteousness, he has rags of weakness and imperfection, but he leaves
himself upon the perfect righteousness of Christ, as a thing fully answering
every jot and tittle of the Law. Indeed some great Rabbis cry out upon
imputative righteousness as a thing impossible, calling it putative, a mere
imagination, Luthers spectrum, the pleasing dream of simple Christians; but in
sober sadness the dream is on their own side. If imputative righteousness be
impossible, how can we stand before the righteous Law, dooming and cursing the
least defect or non-continuance in all things? Imputative righteousness is
impossible, and inherent is imperfect, and how can we stand? if we stand, the
righteousness of God must be upon us, Romans 3.22. Christ must be the end of the
Law for righteousness unto us, Romans 10.4. and how can this be without an
imputation? Again, if imputed righteousness be impossible, what is imputed sin?
If that be so too, how was Christ made sin, or an offering for it? to what
purpose was his blood and sufferings? what becomes of redemption, and all the
train of blessings waiting thereon? what to those Masters of Reason is but a
fancy, a spectrum or dream, that to the believer is the very thing he would be
found in before God, Phil. 3.9. Apollodorus offered Socrates a precious garment
to dye in. Imputed righteousness is the blessed robe which the believer would
live, and dye, and rise in, unto the judgment seat at the last day. Upon this
he will venture his soul, against all the demands of perfect obedience in the
Law. Moreover, instead of satisfying Justice for his debts, he has just
nothing of his own to pay, but he leaves himself upon the blood and rich merits
of Christ; his sins are massy burdens, too weighty for all the Angels in
heaven to stand under, but he unloads all upon the Lamb of God, who bore away
the sin of the world: his debts to God amount to a vast sum, but he ventures
upon the great surety, who paid the utmost farthing, and had a total discharge
in his resurrection, and now is in heaven to see the scores crossed in Gods
book, and the bonds of guilt cancelled and thrown down into conscience. If the
avenging Law pursue him, he slies to Christ as a City of refuge, and there
hides himself in the clefts of the rock, in the bleeding wounds of his
Redeemer: here is faiths anchorhold, here he ventures his soul against all the
curses of the Law. Deny himself to be a sinner, that he cannot, for his
conscience is a thousand witnesses: oppose the cursing Law, that he dares not,
for it is backed by an infinite justice; but he ventures all upon the merit and
satisfaction of Christ: though in the night of desertion he may lie in a
piteous condition, as the Levites Concubine, forced, and as it were dead with
legal terrors; yet still his hand like hers, will be upon the threshold, upon
Christ the door of salvation, till free grace dawn and break in upon him:
without this resignation the soul can have no peace. Gardener himself, being
ready to dye, was willing to hear of a justification in the blood of Christ,
nothing else could expiate the guilt of sin.

Secondly, In and through the Mediator, this resignation is made unto God; It
is God that justifies. God as supreme Lawgiver; the believer wraps up himself
in the blood and righteousness of Christ, and so yields up himself unto God to
be pardoned and justified. And in this resignation, the great attribute he
leans on, is Gods grace: God is gracious, nay he has riches of grace, such as
no unworthiness of ours can exhaust; he has glory of grace, such as no
sinfulness can eclipse; he can abundantly pardon, or as it is in the Original,
multiply to pardon, Isa. 55. 7. His grace can multiply pardons, as his power
can creatures. Here is the beautiful gate, where the believer lies for an alms
of pardoning mercy: here he ventures himself upon God, speaking like Benhadads
servants, I hear that the God of heaven is a merciful God, I will put on my
ropes and sackcloth, and away to him, it may be I may catch a word of grace
from him, and live for ever; or arguing like the poor Lepers, if I sit here in
my sins, I dye eternally; if it go unto the world, there is a famine of gace,
let me fall into the arms of a good God, if he kill me, I thall bat dye, but if
he save me, I shall live for ever; after such a manner does he cast himself
upon mercy. This act of faith is very precious, it touches God as it were in
his bowels, and sets them a sounding and melting into distillations of savor.
As soon as the prodigal son returned and cast himself on his fathers mercy, his
father runs and kisses him; and the ring, and the best robe, and the satted
calf, are all little enough for him, Luke 15. And as it is very precious, so it
is very safe. De Jusif^^^. l. 5. c. 7.
Beliarmtne himself, after many disputations about justification does yet
conclude, tutiss. mum est, ^^duciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere, it is most safe to put all our confidence in the sole
mercy and bounty of God.

Thirdly, This resignation is made to the Word, as the warrant for both the
former resignations. Ask a believer why he resigns to Jesus Christ for pardon
and justification, his answer will be, I find in the word that Christ has
fulsilled all righteousness, hoar our iniquities, made an end of sin, and
reconciled us to God by his cross, therefore I resign to him. Ask him again,
why he resigns to God for it, his answer will be, I find in the word that God
is decy phered in blessed titles, as gracious, merciful, abundant in goodness,
and ready to forgive; and that the grace in his heart slows down to us in
promises of pardon, blotting out iniquity, and casting sin behind his back into
the depth of the sea, therefore I resign. Parley with him further, and he will
tell you, that over and besides Gods infallible word, he has his oath. As to
Christ the atoning Priest, God has sworn, thou art a Priest for ever, Psalm.
110.4. And as to his own grace and favor, he has sworn, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel.
33.11. and in swearing, God (...) interposes himself, as the word is, Heb.
6.17. pawns his life and essence upon it, to make the thing wholly irrepealable
and immutable, and thereby to raise up strong and invincible consolation in us,
and therefore I resign.

Thus far of the second thing, resignation for pardon and justification.

Thirdly, Faith resigns up the soul to be sanctified. Sanctification stands in
two things, mortification of sin, and vivification of the soul, and for both
these faith yields up the soul. And to observe the promised order;

First, This resignation is made to Jesus Christ the Mediator. And first
touching Mortification, the believer yields his soul to Christ in a threesold
respect.

First, He yields up his soul to Christ as the grand samplar of mortification.
What Christ suffered in his pure flesh by way of expiation, that must we suffer
in our corrupt flesh by way of mortification. His body was nailed to the cross
till the soul separated from it; and the body of sin must be so nailed, till
the soul, the will, and love, and delight of sin depart. He was free in laying
down his life and blood, and so must we be in laying down the life and blood of
the old Adam: It Is true, the flesh relucts and says, as Christ's humane nature,
Oh! let this cup. pass from me, but the spirit is willing, and cries out,
Father, thy w^ll be done, even in the death of my darling lusts. Christ died a
violent death, and sin must not dy^ a natural one. If it dye alone or of it
self, it is no sacrifice, it must be cropped in the flower, and stabbed at the
heart, and dye of its wounds; the violence done to God and Christ and the
Spirit must be upon it, till it give up the ghost. Christ died a tormenting
death, in pains and agonies, and we must dye so to sin, we must suffer in the
flesh, 1 Pet. 4.1. bleeding under sin, and being sorrowful to the death of it.
Christ died a lingering death, and so does sin, it does not dye all at once, but
languishes by little and little; the believer dies daily to sin. The Colossians
were dead C^l. 3.3. and yet says the Apostle, mortisie your members, v. 8.
Mortification must be upon mortification, because sin is long a dying: the
genius of faith is, to have sin crucified as Christ was, following his steps,
as much as may be.

Secondly, He yields up his soul to Christ as the meritorious cause of
mortification. Christ's death merited sins; hence faith glories in the cross of
Christ, as in that whereby the world is crucified to the believer, and he to
the world, Gal. 6.14. there it would hang up every lust as an accursed thing.
Faith lies at the bleeding wounds of Christ, watching for the breathings of
that spirit, which can mortisie the deeds of the body, waiting for that mind of
Christ which can make us suffer in the fiesh, that we may cease from sin.
Christ was crucified, and the believer would have the old man crucified
together, he would dye with him as the graft does with the stock. There is a
Popish fable, that the angry Adriatic Sea was becalmed by one of the nails of
Christ's cross cast into it; the moral is true: the troubled sea of lust in our
heart cannot be subdued but by the application of Christ death; the winds and
waves there obey no other voice but that of Christ crucified, he yields up his
soul to Christ as the royal worker of mortification. When he sees his lusts as
so many rebels rising up in arrns, he flies to his sovereign Christ for a power
to subdue them: the high things and strong holds appearing in his
understanding, make him cry out, Treason, Treason, the Jebusite is in the tower
of David; the fleshly wisdom has got into the understanding, O thou wisdom of
God captivate and cast it down. The Pagan lusts and Gentile-wills showing
themselves in the heart, force him to break forth like the Psalmist, O God, the
heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy temple they have desiled, cast
them out O thou mighty Savior, that my soul may be a sanctuary for thy self.
When the battle is set before and behind, corruptions surrounding and
encompassing him, his eyes are upon his Lord sitting above at the right hand of
power, till his enemies be made his footstool.

And as the believer yields up his foul to Christ for mortification of sin, so
also for vivisication of the soul. And this in the very same respects.

First, He yields up his soul to Christ as the grand pattern of vivisication;
the parallel is the Apostles own, Like as Christ was raised up from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans
6.4. Look what was done in the flesh of Christ in his corporeal resurrection,
that is done in the spirits of Christians in the spiritual resurrection: there
the stone was rolled away from the sepulcher, here from the heart; there the
flesh of Christ was raised up by an Almighty power, called by the Apostle, the
glory of the Father; here the soul of the believer is raised up by the same
power, as appears Ephesians. 1.19, 20. there after the corporceal resurrection,
Christ appeared in humane lineaments; here after the spiritual resurrection,
the Christian appears in divine graces: the genius of faith is to assimilate
the Christian to Christ risen.

Secondly, He yields up his soul to Christ as the meritorious cause of
vivisication. Christ merited all graces for us, says does not dare to go
immediately to God, no not for holiness it self, but it goes and sucks at the
breasts of Christ's humanity, well knowing that all graces are from the spirit,
and the way of the spirit is by the blood, as Tagmon Archbishop of Magdenburg
took the last breath of his dying Master Wolfgang by applying mouth to mouth;
so faith applies its mouth as it were to the wounds of a dying Christ, from
thence to receive the spirit of all grace; that love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance, as so many rivers
of living water, may flow in the heart, to make glad the habitation of God
therein, that the holy spirit may be as it were the soul of the soul, breathing
in the believers prayers, and shining on his Bible, and melting in his charity,
and impowering in his infirmity, and honey-dropping in his converses, and being
a Shechinah, a presence and a glory in all his ways.

Thirdly, He yields up his soul to Christ as the Royal Donor of all quickening
graces. Christ as a Priest merited all graces, but as a King he gives them out
unto us, him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior
to give repentance, Act. 5.31. and so to give all other graces. A melting heart
is but a word of power from him at Gods right hand, an heavenly heart but a
touch from him sitting in heaven, every piece of holiness is a beam of glory
from him; meekness, and mercy, and obedience, and patience, are as so many
pearls dropping from his crown; all the sheddings of the holy spirit slow from
him who is exalted above, he ascended up that he might fill all things, Ephesians.
4.10. that is, all the spiritual world of believers with grace. Faith therefore
looks up for the sweet illapses of the spirit, and waits for graces as so many
golden apples dropping down from that tree of life which stands in the upper
Paradise of God.

Secondly, In and through the Mediator this resignation is made unto God, it is
God that sanctisieth. God as the supreme fountain of grace; and in this
resignation faith climbs up to him partly by the Attribute of free grace, cast
thy burden upon the Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 55. 22. or as the Original
imports, omnia donabilia tua, all that thou would have given thee, whatever
thy want be, mortifying grace, or quickening grace, faith has an art to cast
and unload all upon free grace: there being a famine of grace in lapsed nature,
faith brings out the empty vessel, the soul void of self-worthiness, and sets
it under one ordinance or other, waiting upon God till he rain down
righteousness upon the soul. This is the rain of liberalities, as the Original
is, Psalm. 68.9. this faith waits for without money or price of its own, because
God is love, and grace free, and partly by the Attribute of Almighty power: sin
is strong, but not infinitely; the Almighty, who subdues all things to himself,
can easily subdue it. The heart is a dead womb, and not able to teem out the
least particle of grace, but the Almighty can quicken the dead, and raise up a
divine seed therein. The fingers which made an Heaven and an Earth, can make a
new heart and a new spirit: Faith takes hold on the power of God, for the
working sanctification in the heart.

Thirdly, This resignation is made to the word, and that upon a double account.
It is made to the word as the warrant of both the former resignations, and made
to the word as the engine in Gods hand for the working of sanctification; it is
made to the word as the warrant of both the former resignations. The word is
full of promises of mortifying and quickening grace, and these promises stream
out to us from the pure fountain of free grace, through the bleeding wounds of
the Mediator, and are all Yea and Amen. Hence faith resigns to God and Christ
for all sanctifying grace. It is also made to the word as the engine in Gods
hand for the working of sanctification. The word is a mighty weapon, able
through Gods power to cast down the heights and strong holds of sin; and an
immortal seed, able through Gods grace to quicken the heart, and spring up into
the new creature. Faith therefore resigns to it, that the heart may be
sanctified through the truth.

Thus far of the third thing, resignation for sanctification.

Fourthly, Faith resigns up the soul to be ruled as to its actings, I say, as
to its actings. That I may clearly distinguish it from the but now mentioned
sanctification, which consists in inward principles of grace. And still to
press in my old steps.

First, This resignation is made to Jesus Christ the Mediator. Faith translates
the soul into the kingdom of Christ, and loves to live no where else; the world
in its eyes is but a house of bondage, but it loves to live in Christ's
dominions. Where holiness is, there is the King of Saints, where meekness and
patience, there is the throne of the Lamb; where righteousness, there is his
Scepter; where Gods will prevails, there he sits in Power and Majesty; at the
last day sense will discover this great King Jesus coming in the clouds, in
power and glory. But faith sees him here coming in state in every holy command,
and riding as it were on the wings of the wind in every motion of the holy
spirit. The posture of faith herein is like that of the Israelies, when the
pillar of cloud and fire went before them, then they journied, otherwise they
staid in their place; when the spirit and word of Christ goes before the
believer, faith follows after, else it will not stir a foot out of its place;
it is really in the believers heart, to be ruled by Christ in all things. Take
him in holy ordinances, these, says faith, are the throne of Christ here
below, in these he fits at the right hand of power; here the believer waits to
see the power and the glory, as the man with the withered hand, in stretching
it forth, waited for a power to restore it, and as the blind man in his going
and washing in Siloam, waited for a power to recover his sight: so the believer
in every ordinance waits for the power of Christ, if he break the rocky heart,
and melt it into the divine will, the believer cries out the Lord reigns;
here is the day of power indeed. Take him in the works of his calling, and
there he is ruled by Christ; one would think the servant were only toiling and
drudging in his servile employments, but if he be a believer, he is serving the
Lord Christ, Col. 3.24. and by a divine praerogative above other men's, his
deeds are wrought in God: such was the posture of pious Musculus in the
town-ditch, as well as in the Pulpit. Faith is such an engine as brings down
the kingdom of Christ (though not of this world) into the meanest trades, the
believer acting therein, as Peter let down his net, at the command of Christ,
and therein, as in his calling, abiding with God, which is more then the
unbeliever does under divine ordinances: nay, take him even in natural actions,
the believer (when himself) cats, and drinks, and sees, and hears, and speaks,
and sleeps, and wakes, and walks after another rate then other men, doing all
under the Law of Christ; that is a knife at his throat, a covering to his eyes,
a stopper to his cars, a bridle on his lips, when he sleeps, that keeps him,
when he waketh, that talks with him, when he walks, that leads him; the
kingdom of heaven, which is not meat or drink or any such thing, is by faith
brought down into all these. The genius of faith is to be ruled by Christ in
all things.

Secondly, This resignation in and through the Mediator, is made to God, I say,
in and through the Mediator; because without him, we can expect to be ruled by
God in no other way then by the iron rod of his power and justice, dashing us
in pieces to all eternity; but in and through him, the believer may and does
yield up himself to God to be ruled. And here he makes use of two Attributes,
Gods sovereignty, and Gods holiness; God is the supreme Lord, and must be
obeyed; he is the holy one, and must be sanctified in each command: the beams
of his majesty and holiness sparkle out, and these faith takes in to melt the
heart into a compliance with the divine will. Plato being asked by one of his
Scholars, how long his precepts were to be obeyed, answered, Donec in terris
apparuerit sacratior aliquis, qui sontem veritatis aperiat, the believer
desires to be ruled by God, because an higher and holier cannot come.

Thirdly, This resignation is made to the word. Ask a believer how he knows
himself to be where he would be, in the dominions of God and Christ, his answer
will be, I know it by the command in the word, and in the command his faith
eyes two things, the truth of the command and the sovereignty; his faith eyes
the truth of it, the command is true, as coming from God himself, and being the
very counterpane of the holiness in his heart; This is the will of God even
your sanctification, says St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. Gods will is in himself, but
the command is the counterpane of it, thy word is true from the beginning,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 109.160. or as the Original is, the head of thy word
is truth, the body of the command in Scripture answers to the head of it in the
holy will of God. Faith looks on the command as issuing out of the very heart
of God, and exactly agreeing thereunto, and upon this account resign to it, as
to the good and acceptable will of God. Again, his faith eyes the sovereignty
of it; naturally we would be Gods to our selves, and set up our wills as
supreme, and therefore we make war upon God and his Law: But when faith comes,
God is God, and the Law a royal Law, and all the commands in Power and Majesty,
by them (says David) is thy sorvant warned, or as it is in the Hebrew,
illustrated, Psalm. 19.11. the command to the believer is, as if a light shone
from heaven, and a voice came from the excellent glory, saying, Do this or
that. Gods will rides in triumph, and man's falls to the earth, as not able to
stand before the Lord: The voice of a superior, if perceived, puts an awe upon
the inferior nature, so does the voice of man upon beasts, so does the voice of
Angels upon men, and (which is the greatest awe because from the highest
nature) so does the voice of God upon the believer. After this manner does
faith yield up the soul to the command, and in it to God and Christ.

Thus far of the fourth thing, resignation for a holy government.

Fifthly, Faith resigns up the soul for the gracious, reward of eternal life.
And here to keep the old Method.

First, This resignation is made to Jesus Christ the Mediator. Faith cannot be
satisfied with earth, that is but the Paradise of sense; no, nor with present
graces, these are but the pawns and earnest-pennies of eternal life, faith
aspires after heaven. Oh! let me go over, and see the good Land, where the
Mountains are all spices, the Rivers pleasures, the Mountains are all spices,
the Rivers pleasures, the Air pure holiness, the Eternal light God himself,
says faith, and for a title thereunto, faith yields up the soul to Christ, who
as a Priest has merited heaven for us, and as a King is able to give it out to
us. The Plebeian (says Epictetus) looks for his gain from things without; the
Philosopher looks for it from himself; but (which is a strain higher) the
Believer looks for his reward from Christ. Evagrius the Philosopher gave (as
the story goes) three hundred pounds to Synesius for the poor, to be repaid him
by Christ in another world: the believer does all at the same rate, hears, and
reads, and prays, and gives alms, and all to be paid in another world. Worldly
men wonder at his hot pursuits after grace and holiness, but he knows what
these will go for in another world; that is the reason he follows hard after
them, but in the pursuit still his eyes are upon Christ as the great purchasor
and play master.

Secondly, This resignation in and through the Mediator is made to God. It is
he that glorifieth, eternal life is Gods gift, our heavenly Fathers mere
pleasure; faith therefore yields up the soul to him for it, and herein it
climbs up to him by his free grace, the pure river of life flows out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. out of the regnant grace of God and
merit of Christ as out of a fountain, the believer expects no eternal life but
what issues out from thence. Thus the Reverend Soknius on his death bed
expressed himself, Pendeo totus a Dei miserieordia, I wholly depend on Gods
mercy.

Thirdly, This resignation is made to the Word. There is the promise of eternal
life extant, and there the way to eternal life is chalked out, there is the
promise of eternal life mapped out, a mercy above all the sphere of nature:
Hence the ancient believers were as pilgrims here, Heb. 11.13. as if the world
were too little for them, they were altogether for the heavenly country, which
faith sees at a distance in the promise: There also the way to eternal life is
chalked out, the world passes away, but he that does the will of God abides
for ever, 1 John 2.17. Riches and pleasures are but the way of time, but
holiness and righteousness are the way everlasting, Psalm. 139.24. the good acts
may pass, but their record is in heaven; the good men must dye, but the
holiness shall never see corruption; the repentant tears which fall to the
earth, are bottled with God; the charity which seems lost as bread cast on the
waters, will come to hand again. Polycrates, when he cast his ring into the
sea, little thought to have met it again in his fish; but the believer doing
good works, expects to meet them again in another world, sowing to the spirit,
he looks for a crop in eternal life. Dorcas may leave her coats and garments
behind her, but the charity will follow her into another world; the
commandment is eternal life, says our Savior, Joh. 12.50. the very way to
it. The believer obeying, may in some sense say as dying Pollio, jam ingredior
in vitam aeternam, now I am entering into eternal life, into that which will
survive the world and live in glory. Faith resigns to the word, not only as it
is the charter of eternal life in the promise, but as it is the director to it
in the command.

Thus far of the second thing, for what things and purposes this resignation is
made. But to proceed to the third thing.

Thirdly, What are the Adjuncts and Properties of this resignation? Unto which
I shall answer in the following particulars.

First, This resignation is made in the way of God. Believers wait upon God for
very great things: Since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides these, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him, says the Prophet, Isa. 64.4. But
where do they wait for these great things, where but in Gods own way? Thus it
follows, those that remember thee in thy ways, v. 5. Look in what way or method
God gives out a mercy, in the same way or method does faith wait to receive it.
Would a man have a pardon, faith waits for it in Gods way; free grace as
immense a sea as it is in God, does not flow out every way upon sinners, but
through the bleeding wounds of Christ. We are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, Romans 3.24.
Mark, free grace issues out through redemption, and in that way faith waits for
it: Thus St. Peter, We believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
we shall be saved, Act. 15.11. he calls the grace of God the grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ, as being merited by him. The believer waits for pardoning mercy,
but it must be the mercy of David, coming through the Messiah the true David.
Whether God might not per potentiam suam absolutam, remit sin without a
satisfaction, is a question may be spared; Gods will is declared, the Scripture
is definitive, there is no other name given among men, but the name of Jesus,
no other remission but through his blood: the glory of the Lord, that is, his
free grace, comes into the Temple of the Church by the way of the East, Ezekiel.
43.2. that is, through Jesus Christ, who is (...), the East, Luke 1.78. toward
which the true believer bows down himself for all grace. The Socinians grace,
such as is supposed to issue forth without the satisfaction of Christ, is not
indeed the grace of God, but a fancy, an Idol of their own heart, He that
abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God, says S. John, 2 John v.
9. therefore such an one must not be received, or saluted with God speed, v.
10. Let the Socinian, who abides not in the doctrine of a redeeming and
satisfying Christ, cry up free grace, and that (as he thinks) in the purest and
highest strains, without all money and price, even without that of the
Mediator. After all this he has not God or free grace in the right notion of
it, the true believer dares not entertain such a grace, or say (...) to it,
lest he should bless an Idol, and rejoice in a thing of naught; such a grace is
a mere stranger to Scripture, and therefore faith, whose skill is only in that
Dialect, cannot own it, though humane reason speak never so fair for it. Again,
would a believer have mortification? he would have it in Gods way, he seeks it
not Macedonius-like, by standing in a ditch all the day, nor as the
Palestine-monks, by lying as dead unburied men on the earth, nor with the
Papists, by Pilgrimages and outward pennances, nor with the Flageliantes, in
their scourging and bloody whipping their own bodies. No, this is not Gods way,
in all this Pageantry of mortification, they are at hostility with nature
rather then with sin, and in shooting all their arrows at the body, they miss
the mark, the chief seat of sin in the heart: Nesciunt superstitiosi (says a
Learned man) Deum amare immutationem cordium, non dilaniationem corporum,
superstitious men know not that God loves changing of hearts rather then
renting of bodies: the true believer seeks mortification in and by Jesus
Christ, our old man is crucified with him, Romans 6.6. As long as we are in the
old Adam, sin will be lively, but as soon as we are in Christ the wisdom and
power of God, sin, which is the weakness and folly of man, dies in us. The
believer seeks after the spirit of Christ, as after that which can lay our
lusts a steep in godly sorrow, and nail them to the cross of Christ, and let
out their vital blood, even the inward love thereof. Moreover, a believer would
have instruction and teaching, but he would have it in Gods way. The Papists
say, that Images are Laymens books, and whilst the Bible is to the unlearned
a sealed letter, these are Letters Patents, open to all men, he that runs may
read God as it were in great Capital letters. Gregory the Great, though he
condemned their adoration, yet he allowed their presence in Churches, tanquam
essent memoracula and rudium literae; but alas! can the dumb Idol speak? or if
it could, can a teacher of lies instruct? may that be our memorial which has
made many forget God? Did God ever license the printing of such Laymens books?
and if it have not his Imprimatur by an institution, how can we expect his
benediction? surely this is none of Gods way; faith says, the image of God is
in the word, and the only crucifix in the Gospel. The Enthusiasts would be
taught in an immediate and extraordinary way, but the believer goes to the
word, there is the School where he would be taught of God, there are the gates
and door-posts where he would hear wisdom speak.

Secondly, This resignation is made to its entice object, and not by
piecemeal. As to God the ultimate object, the believer would not pick and
choose among his Attributes, but is for them all, he would not have a God all of
grace, but such as he is, an holy one and a just, who will be sanctified even
in our approaches to touch his golden Scepter. The believer, whilst he casts
himself upon Gods grace, would be assimulated to his holiness, when he catches
hold on mercy, withal he trembles at divine justice, as he waits for the
smilings of Gods face, so he walks as in his presence; all places to the
believer are Bethels and Peniels, full of God, and too dreadful to sin in. If
any man go about by his faith to single out grace from among the other
Attributes, and suck that honicomb of infinite sweetness by it self alone, he
does not believe but presume, like those in the Prophet, The heads thereof
judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord, Mic. 3.11. O vain
presumption! for them standing upon such unholy ground, to lean upon the Lord,
is an utter impossibility. A traitor who strikes off his Sovereigns Crown, or
with Hacket stabs at his image, does not, cannot, at that time cast himself on
his Grace or Royal favor: A sinner, whilst by his sinful rebellions he
strikes at the Sovereignty or stabs at the holiness of God, does not, cannot,
lean upon his free grace. St. John has determined the case, If we say that we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth, 1 John 1.6. Let such an one cry up free grace, free grace, never so much, he does
but trust in a lie, there is no such grace as he dreams of, none but what comes
from the holy one as the giver of it, none but what teaches the receiver a
lesson of holiness. Again, as to Jesus Christ the Mediator, the believer is for
All Christ, not only for him as a meriting and atoning Priest, but for him as a
teaching Prophet, and ruling Lord also. Whilst he wraps up himself in the pure
robes of Christ's righteousness, at the same instant his ear is open to
discipline, and his heart unfolds the everlasting doors to let in the King of
glory; he puts the Crown upon his head, and sets him upon the throne of the
heart, singing blessing, honor, power, glory, to the Lamb for ever. That
Christ who is in glory in heaven at the right hand of Majesty, comes to be in
glory in the heart by the resignations of faith. Thus he himself faith, the
spirit shall glorify me, Joh. 16.14. that is, by working faith in the heart,
as the Father glorifies him above, so the spirit, and under that faith,
glorify him below. If any man go about by his faith to pick out the merits and
righteousness of Christ for salvation, without a respect to his teaching and
ruling offices, he mangles and tears in pieces Christ, as much as in him lies,
renting of Jesus from Christ, nay and Jesus in twain, whom he admits only to
save him from the guilt of sin and not from the power and love of it,
separating the blood of his Savior from the water, and his merits from the
spirit, which are and ever must be in conjunction; such an half and divided
Christ as this is, is not the Christ of God, but a Christ of his own fancy, one
that will save him in his sins, and justify him in his ungodliness; he that
believes in such a Christ, does at once miserably cheat his own soul, and as
much as in him lies, profanely trample on the blood of Christ, as if it were
shed on purpose that sinful men might have the reins laid down on their necks
to riot in their cursed lusts with all impunity. Moreover, as to the word of
God, the believer is for all of it, he is not only for cordials, and pots of
Manna, and distillations of grace in the promises, but for precepts also, his
meat and his drink is to do the will of his Father in heaven; whilst his eyes
are on the Land of promise, his feet are in the Land of uprightness.
Antinomians boast themselves to be above the Law, and as free as if they were
in heaven, and that their sins are but seeming sins, sins to sense and to the
world outwardly, but no sins to faith and before God who sees no sin in them.
But alas! these are but swelling words of vanity, to be above the Law is
Antichrist-like to be above God himself, whose Majesty and holiness break forth
in it; and if sins be but seeming sins, the Law is but a seeming Law, and God
(whose authority and sanctity shine forth in it) is but a seeming God: Promises
and Precepts run together in the Scripture, and must be taken together into the
heart by faith. Promises are effluxes out of Gods grace, and faith takes them
in by recumbency; Precepts are effluxes out of Gods holiness, and faith takes
them in by obediential subjection, both must continue and be owned by faith, as
long as there are grace and holiness in God. The true believer neither with the
Antinomian picks out the promises from the precepts, nor yet with the Hypocrite
does he pick out only such commands as do not cross his beloved lusts, as the
Papists have razed out the second Commandment in some of their Catechisms,
because of their outward images, so the Hypocrite razes out the displeasing
Commandments in his practice, because of the Idol-lusts in his heart; but the
true believer, as David, is for all the wills of God, without any salvoes,
because without any indulged lusts.

Thirdly, This resignation is made purely upon a Scriptural warrant. There may
be hay and stubble in the believer, but there is none in his faith; which, so
far as it is faith, stands only upon holy ground. All faiths assents stand upon
Scripture-propositions, all its affiances upon Scripture-promises, and all its
obedience upon Scripture-precepts: What Balaam said by an overruling
providence, that says the believer by the instinct of faith, I cannot go
beyond the word of the Lord to do less or more, Number. 22.18. he would not as to
doctrinals be wise above what is written, nor as to worship be religious above
what is written, nor as to mercies and comforts be an expectant above what is
written. He would not as to doctrinals be wise above what is written: when the
Lutherans and Papists met at Ratisbon, the Papists would first dispute about
the Canon of Faith, the Lutherans replied, that the Scriptures were the only
rule, at which the Papists cried out, that it was very unequal to tie them to
one kind of weapon only, but faith is content with Scriptural doctrines only.
There is one Mediator in Scripture, and faith dares not multiply them; there is
one Scripture purgatory in Christ's blood, and faith will not invent another;
there is one propitiatory sacrifice offered up once for all upon the Cross, and
faith will not seek after any more. All the points in Popery are but so many
additions to the word, and upon that account insignificant to faith. The first
error in the first sin was an addition to the word, the woman saying, ye shall
not touch it, Genesis 3.3. whereas Gods word only was, ye shall not eat of it,
Genesis 2.17. and the first and primordial error which has ushered in all the
Romish doctrines into the Church, has been the very same thing; and because
they are additions, faith cannot own them, no not faith in a Papist: opinion
may own them, but faith cannot, for it is but the souls Echo to the voice of
God in Scripture, and where there is no voice, there can be no return; humane
doctrines found not at all to faith, Scripture is all. Bishop Fisher a little
before his suffering lighting on that one sweet passage, this is life eternal
to know thee and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. brake out into these words, here is
learning enough for me: the believer, who has the whole Scripture before him,
may well say, here is doctrine enough for me, faith will not turn vagrant and
lie about at humane doors for doctrines, there is enough in the word. Again,
the believer would not as to worship be religious above what is written; that
of the Schoolmen, cultus est a natura, modus a lege, virtus a gratia, worship
is from nature, the manner from the Law, the power from grace, is very
excellent. The very light of nature says, God is to be worshipped, but faith
goes to the word for the manner, and to free grace for the power. God in the
second Commandment forbids graven Images, not as false objects of worship,
which are forbidden in the first Commadement, but as false means and manner of
worship, and under graven Images, as being the chiefest and groffest kind of
false worship. God does forbid all other false worship humanely devised, such
as these were: hence true faith looks on all humanely devised worships as so
many graven Images, a kind of Teraphim, expressing, though not as they did, an
humane shape, yet an humane devise and invention, things void of God, without
institution and without benediction. That of the Prophet, who has required
this at your hand, Isa. 1.12. falls like thunder on all the imagery of humane
inventions, dashing them to pieces in a moment. Quintinus the Libertine, being
present at a solemn Mass with a Cardinal, boasted that he saw the glory of God.
I suppose according to his loose principles of being under no outward Law, he
would have said as much if he had been among Pagans at their Idolatrous
worship; but the true believer looks for that glory only in the Sanctuary of
Divine Institutions, there and there only God records his Name, and commands
the blessing, even life for evermore. Moreover the believer as to mercies and
comforts would not be an expectant above what is written. It Is said of Moses
that he died according to the word of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 38.5. or (as the Original
may be read) he died upon the mouth of the Lord; the believer loves to live and
dye upon Gods mouth in the promises, there watching for the sweet words of
grace dropping from him: he walks among the Promises, as the Physician among
his herbs, and by a divine instinct knows this is good for such a condition,
and that for another; and when he comes to that promise, I will be thy God, he
says, this is the universal Medicine, and good for all things, as infinite a
sea as Gods grace is, as vast a treasure as Christ's merits, the believer cannot
tell how to climb up to these, unless he have somewhat of a promise to set his
faith upon; if there be but an half-promise, faith will ascend up by it: when
God says, seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be you shall be hid in the
day of the Lords anger, Zeph. 2.3. faith will hang upon a may be, but where
there is nothing at all of a promise, faith does not, cannot tell how to
approach for the unpromised thing. The Perfectionists fay, that sinless
perfection is attainable in this life; Joseph is yet alive, perfection of life,
figured by Joseph, may be found, so thinks a Learned Doctor, My yoke is easy,
said Christ, and from thence Bellarmine concludes, Legem Dei possibilem esse
renatis imo and facilem observatu; but alas these are but dreams and not acts
of faith. Its true, the believer groaning under the burden of sin, wishes
nothing more then sinless perfection, he works, he walks, he prays, he weeps,
he runs, he strives, but after all he may not believe sinless perfection
attainable here; not but that the grace of God in Christ is sufficient to
effect it, but there is no channel for such a grace to run in, no promise in
all the word to bottom such a persuasion upon: there is a promise for the
subduing of iniquity, but not for the annihilating it, a promise that sin shall
not reign in us, but none that it shall not be; therefore the believer would
not seek for that in himself, which is only found in Christ, nor for that on
earth which is reserved for heaven; that mercy or comfort which is not let down
in the promise, faith does not expect or look for. Trubern a German Divine on
his deathbed, seeking comfort, spoke thus, textum, textum volo, let me have the
text, the text, well knowing that comfort streams out in the promises; the
believer is ever for one promise or other, to give advantage to his faith in
its ascension to God for mercy and comfort.

Fourthly, This resignation is a voluntary act. It has been disputed between
Romanists and Protestants, where the seat of faith is, whether in the
Understanding only, or in the Will also; the Apostle clearly determines it,
with the heart man believes, Romans 10.10. the heart includes both faculties,
ad esse fidei virtutis concurrit actus rationis simul and voluntatis, quod been
innuit Apostolus in ipsa notifieatione fidei, cum dicit fidem esse substantiam
rerum sperandarum, argumentum non apparentium, tangens quod est in ea
cognitionis, and quod est assectionis, says Bonaventure, the assent of faith
is in the Understanding, but the resignation is in the Will, credere est
consentire, consensio autem volentis est, says St. Austin. We read in
Scripture of faith unfeigned, and sincerity is in the Will, of the obedience of
faith, and obedience is in the Will, of leaning, rolling, resting, casting our
selves upon God, and all these are in the Will; all the resignations which the
believer makes, are acts of his Will; if he resign to the Promises, and through
them to the meriting Mediator, and through him to the free grace of God, this
recumbency or fiducialness is in his Will; if he resign to the commands, and
through them to the kingdom of the Mediator, and through him to the holiness of
God, this obediential frame is in his Will; if he resign for instruction to the
Word, and through it to the great Prophet, and through him to the wisdom of
God; this docibleness, this tender holy flesh is in his Will; he would have
salvation coming in a way of grace, and grace flowing through the Mediator
Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ for a teacher and ruler as well as for a
Savior, and all this is his choice. It Is not a mere velleity or effluvium of a
light desire, like that of Balaam, let me dye the death of the righteous, but
an act of his Will; it is not a mood or hot sit of devotion, such as falls on
men under warming and awakening ordinances, but a deliberate act, it is not a
constraint or piece of servility, such as men usually have in sick and dying
hours, when they are rolling off from this world, and upon the brink of
eternity, with a prospect of heaven and hell before them, but it is a true and
a free will, cordially and freely offering up the soul to the terms and methods
of salvation in the Gospel.

Fifthly, This resignation is made in Humility. The believer, like his father
Abraham, is called to Gods foot, there to lie in the lowest posture of a sinful
creature, in an humble docibleness he lies at the foot of Gods wisdom, waiting
as they that watch for the morning, till the holy irradiations make the day
dawn, and the day star arise in the heart; in an obediential frame he lies at
the foot of Gods holiness, crying out like Paul struck down to the earth, Lord,
what will thou have me to do? and in a fiducial recumbency he lies at the foot
of Gods grace, as a forlorn beggar, full of fores and extremities, waiting if
free grace will take him in, and, like the good Samaritane, bind up his wounds,
pouring in the oil and wine of mercy into his heart. The men among the
Israelites could not enter into the Land of promise, but the little ones did
so, the mystery is the Christians, though the history be theirs: the men among
us, such as can few sig-leaves together and cloth themselves, such as can feed
themselves at home, and keep house upon their own reason, such as are Lords of
their own actions, coming and going ad placitum, these do not believe, nor
enter into the promises of the Gospel, but the little ones, who cannot dress
themselves, but as free grace swadles and wraps them up in Christ's
righteousness, nor feed themselves, unless free grace pluck out the breast and
milk out instruction, nor rule themselves, or go alone, but as free grace takes
them by the hand and leads them in holy ways, these are they that believe and
enter into rest: hence our Savior says, Except ye become as little children,
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.3. The proud man will
not suffer grace to reign in or over him, but the believer is as a little child
ruleable by all the will of God, humbly submitting to all the methods of
salvation in the Gospel.

To shut up this discourse about the Adjuncts of faith, I shall only add a
caution or two. When I say that all true believers do thus resign, I mean not
that all have the same formal notions or expressions, but the same faith and
resignation for the substance of it; the root of the matter is in the weakest
of them, though not the same verdure of notions or expressions, the substance
or holy seed of true resignation may be latent in a bruised reed or smoking
flax, in a poor spirit, or the pulse of a desire, I have read of a Noble person
in Spain, who being, as was supposed, absolutely dead, Melch Adanum (...)
Vesal^^
was diffected, and upon the opening of his breast, they found to their great
amazement his heart beating; some weak believers may seem totally dead, in whom
yet before God, to whom all things are naked and open, as in an Anatomy, there
is found a vital pulse of faith secretly working. God (says a Reverend Divine)
brings not scales to weigh, but a touchstone to try our graces. If there be
but the least dram of gold, but the least smoke or weik in the socket (as the
expression is Matthew. 12.20.) God accepts it; neither do I mean that this
resignation is acted perpetually, but with many sad pauses and interruptions,
which happen partly by the blasts of Satan's temptations, making the believer
walk like Peter upon the water, now a good step, and then ready to sink when
the wind grows boisterous, till his faith buoy him up again, with a Lord, save
me, partly by the allurements and entanglements of the world, which are to him
as the stone and the string were to Anselms bird, now up in ascensions of soul
to God and Christ, and then down again to the earth and earthly things, and
partly from the indwelling sin which make him live, as his Savior did on
earth, a mere conflicting life, Christ endured the contradiction of sinners,
and he the contradiction of sins; the indwelling corruption makes his soul,
like a palsy hand with contrary motions, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief,
whilst faith moves forward, unbelief draws back; after he has in a princely
manner wrestled with God, he goes off Jacob-like halting in one infirmity or
other.

CHAP. V.
Reasons proving the Essential nature of Faith, as the condition of the Gospel,
to consist in an holy thorough dependant Self-resignation.

THUS far of the nature of this Resignation, as to its Objects, Ends and
Adjuncts.

It remains that I lay down my reasons, why I place the vitality and essential
nature of faith, as it is the condition of the Gospel, in such a resignation as
is before described. And for this,

First, That precious faith, which is the Evangelical condition, is more then a
bare naked assent to the Gospel Truth, and less then an assurance of love and
pardon from God, wherefore it must needs be some middle thing between both,
such as Resignation is. I shall endeavor to make good both propositions.

First, Precious faith is more then a bare naked assent to the Gospel Truth.
This will be clear by the ensuing considerations.

First, A naked assent is but credere Deo, a believing Scriptural axioms to be
true; but precious faith is a far nobler thing, and therefore very emphatically
painted out in Scripture; in the Old Testament it is credere in Deum, a
believing in Jehovah, Genesis 15.6. importing a fiducial act, it is a trusting in
the Lord, Psalm. 2.12. where the Hebrew word imports a flying for refuge, a
running under the wings of free grace as chickens do under the hen; it is a
leaning upon God, Isa. 50.10. as not able to stand alone without a recumbency
on mercy; it is a rolling our selves upon God, Psalm. 37.5. as weary and without
rest till we come to lodge in goodness; in the New Testament, it is (...), a
believing into Christ, very frequent in the Gospel of St. John, a phrase wholly
the holy spirits, never found in any Greek Author, a bare assenter may believe
about Christ, but the true believer believes into Christ, so as to be in near
union with him; it is a putting on of Christ, Romans 13.14. the believer strips
himself of his lusts, nay and of his own righteousness, to be invested with
Christ; it is a receiving of Christ, Joh. 1.12. all Christ, merit and spirit,
cross and crown together, it is a faith which has its being in God as its
ultimate center, 1 Pet. 1.21. Scripture is but a medium, the ultimate object is
God himself: All which imports of precious faith are much above the sphere of a
mere assent.

Secondly, Precious faith is the very condition of the Gospel. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. but a naked assent is
not such; that is required not only in the Gospel, but in the moral Law too;
and found not only in godly, but wicked men, nay, and in devils themselves, who
believe and tremble. It is true some Scriptures seem to lay much upon assent;
thus we find, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved, Romans 10.9. And, whosoever believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God, 1 John 5.1. And, these things are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing you might have life
through his name, Joh. 20.31. But these places import not as if a naked assent
were the sull condition of Gospel Grace, for then a man might be saved in his
sins, a man in arms against his maker might stand; Gods grace might embrace him
whom his holiness abhors, and Christ might sive him who will not have him reign
over him; light might be in communion with darkness, and Christ might have
concord with Belial; all which are impossibles in themselves, and
incompossibles with the design of the Gospel: but they intend such an assent as
is in conjunction with a true resignation of the heart to the terms of the
Gospel. Cord credere, quad Deus eum excitaverit, est non mode assentiri
historiae de excitato Jesu, sed and cert^^ cordis siducist beneficial mortis
and resurrectionis Christi amplecti, says Reverend Parent on Romans 10.9.
whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ (namely, with such a faith as is
accompanied with all that which belongs to a true faith) is born of God, so
the Dutch Annotators on 1 John 5.1. intelligendum est de side non qualicunque
sed actuosa, says Grotius on Joh. 20.31. The Learned Bishop Downame says,
Covenant of Grace. P. 91.
that assent is the very condition required in the promise of the Gospel, but
what an one is it? a true, willing, lively, effectual assent, such an one as by
which we receive Christ, not only in our judgments, but in our hearts and
wills, acknowledging him for our Savior, and resting on him for salvation:
Such an assent as this is no other then precious faith, but a naked assent is
much below it.

Thirdly, Precious faith does unite us unto Christ, and gives us a being in
him: A believer from the first instant of faith is no longer in himself or the
old Adam, but a man in Christ; hence the same royal robe of righteousness which
Christ has upon himself, covers him also, which renders faith exceeding
precious. George Prince of Anhalt was upon this account much delighted with
this similitude, As the ring is highly prized for the diamond in it, so faith
justifies us for the pearl of price, the Son of God, whom it apprehends; the
believer is found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9. Hence also the
very same spirit of holiness which is upon Christ in heaven above measure,
falls down upon the believer according to measure; a piece of bread is a poor
imnimate thing in it salt, but when by digestion it comes into the body and is
transubstantiated into flesh, there is an humane spirit in it; a man before
faith is an earthly carnal thing, but as soon as by faith he becomes a member
of Christ, a piece as it were of his flesh and of his bones, he has another
spirit in him, even the same with Christ; Christ above and he below, and the
same spirit in both: a great mystery, such as a naked assent cannot reach unto:
he that has no more is but a glass eye, or wooden leg in the body of Christ,
or rather he is not at all in it, but outwardly tied to it by a name and form
of knowledge, without any part in the righteousness or spirit of Christ.

Fourthly, By virtue of its union with Christ, Precious faith bears many
excellent fruits, it ushers in a spiritual life into the soul; that of the
Prophet, the just shall live by his faith, thrice quoted by St. Paul in the New
Testament, is exemplisied in every believer; but he that has but a naked
assent, though with a goodly structure of Evangclical truths standing upon it,
is but a dead man, and his notions, like the Egyptian Pyramides, are but
monuments for the dead. Again, it brings down pardon of sin into the soul.
whosoever believes in him (that is, in Christ) shall receive remission of
sins, Acts 10.43. but a naked assent leaves a man as fast in the (...) of guilt
as ever before. Moreover, it purifies, the heart, and quenches the fiery darts
of Satan, it carries out the dust and rubbish out of the heart, and makes it a
sanctuary or holy place for God, and if Satan come and let fly his temptations,
it beats them off from the soul. Thus Bucer when in his sickness he was
admonished to arm himself against Satan, answered, in Christo sum, nihil habeo
cum diabolo commune, I am in Christ, and have nothing in common with Satan; but
where there is only a naked assent, the holy truths going no further then the
Understanding, the Will is left in the mire and pollution of its lusts, and is
ready, as soon as the tempter comes, to join with his seducing proffers.

Thus far of the first proposition, that faith is more then a naked assent.

Secondly, The second proposition is, That faith is less then an assurance of
love and pardon from God; only we must first distinguish between faith in the
root and faith in the flower; between faith in the lowest stature, and faith in
its full-grown perfections. That assurance which the infant faith cannot reach,
the fullgrown faith may arrive at; which I suppose was the reason that those
prime Reformers Luther and Calvin, and after them Beza and Zanchy, with many
others, did define faith by a plerophory or full persuasion of Gods love, they
being themselves in the joys of faith, drew its picture not according to the
infant model, but the perfect lineaments thereof, as they found them in
themselves, so they held them out to the world. Again, we must distinguish
between seminal assurance and actual; an infant faith has seminal assurance,
light is sown for the righteous, Psalm. 97.11. but the crop of comfort does not
immediately spring up, the weakest believer is heir to all the joys of heaven,
only he does not presently know his title, he has not ordinarily actual
assurance at the very first; I say, not ordinarily, for we must not limit the
holy one, who by his royal prerogative may let in the sweet sense of his love
in the first instant of believing. These distinctions premised, the meaning of
the proposition is, That faith in its lowest measure, which is the condition of
the Gospel, does not essentially include assurance. And this I shall manifest
by the ensuing considerations.

First, All true believers have not assurance. Scripture and experience
manifest it; there are Lambs which are gathered into the arms and laid in the
bosom of free grace, yet know not where they are. There are little ones, babes
in Christ, which can only hang upon the breast, and are not grown up into the
reflections and joys of faith; the poor in spirit, the mourners, the hungry and
thirsty after righteousness, mentioned in the fifth chapter of Matthew, are all
of them true believers, blessed ones, and heirs of the promises, and yet all of
them are without any glimpse of assurance; the poor in spirit, all in rags of
unworthiness and selfnothingness, as if he had no title to the kingdom; the
mourners weeping and desolate, like Hagar in the wilderness with her bottle
spent, as if there were no Well of comfort near them; the hungry and thirsty,
like men in a famine, drooping and fainting away in fits of soul-emptiness, as
if there were no such thing as hidden Manna for them. It is very observable in
the Canticles, that Christ takes notice of the tender grape just at its first
appearing; the very first opening or budding forth of faith is welcome to him;
if the wine be but in the cluster, if there be but faith in desire, Christ
says, destroy it not, the blessing of Abraham is in it, out of this little
grain of mustard seed heaven will grow, in this smoking slax there is a divine
spark, though the smoke of doubts and temptations muffle it up in obscurity, it
will break out at last into slames of love and joy; in the infant-believers
assurance is not to be expected, because of their primordial weakness; and in
well-grown believers it may be suspended, because of Gods infinite sovereignty
in the dispensing thereof as he pleases. Cruciger on his deathbed prayed
thus, Invoco te Domine languida and imbecilla side, sed side tamen, Lord, I
call upon thee with a weak and languishing faith, but yet with a faith. Pious
Justus Jonas, who was present with Luther at his death, and took as it were his
last breath into his bosom, was in his own sickness sainting and cold-hearted,
till a servant of his rubbed him up with some comforts out of the Gospel, Holy
Bayn says of himself, I thank God, sustentation in Christ I have, and some
little strength, suavities spiritual I taste not any: even the choice servants
of God may walk in darkness and see little or no light, their light may be like
that in the Prophet, Zach. 14.6. neither clear nor dark, they may live in
crepusculo in a kind of twilight, in a mixture of light and darkness.

Secondly, Faith goes before justification, but assurance follows after it.
Faith goes before justification. Scripture is express in it, by him all that
believe are justified, Acts 13.39. with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10.10. the righteousness of God is upon all them that
believe, Romans 3.22. we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be
justified, Galat. 2.16. might justification go before faith, it were possible
that a man might be saved in his sins, a child of wrath might be in the arms of
divine love, a captive of Satan might be a son of God, a man out of Christ
might be justified in him; all which are impossible, but assurance follows
after justification, justification is necessarily presupposed to assurance; for
to believe my sins forgiven, that they may be forgiven is absurd; to believe my
sins forgiven before they be forgiven, is false; to believe my sins forgiven
because I believe so, is vain and foolish. Remission must first he, before it
can be manifested to be, it must first be granted out of the Court of heaven,
before there can be any true Copy of it in conscience, unless we allow a
distinction between a faith of resignation before, and a faith of assurance
after justification, we cannot possibly deal with the Romanists. Bellarmine
speaking of that special faith whereby a man believes himself just before God
in and through Christ, puts this Quaere; De notis Ecclesiae. l. 4. c. 11.
Cum incipio credere me esse justum, vel sum justus, vel injustus, si justus,
non justificor per fidem banc, quia ista fides posterior mea justitia, si
injustus, ista fides est falsa, when I begin to believe my self just, am I just
or unjust, if just, I am not justified by this faith which is after my
righteousness, if unjust, this faith is false; neither is there any imaginable
way to dissolve this knot regularly, without such a distinction between faith
as antecedent to justification, and faith as consequent.

Thirdly, Faith justifies us in foro Dei, before God, assurance justifies us
in foro conscientiae, in our feeling, and declaratively only. Faith justifies
us before God; all those expressions in St. Paul touching justification by
faith, are meant of a justification before God. I shall name but one or two,
that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, is evident; for, the
just shall live by faith, Gal. 3.11. the justification before God, here denied
to the Law, is attributed to faith. And again, a man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 2.16. He does not say,
faith declares a man justified, for that even the excluded works may do, but
says justifies: Faith?uts on Christ and his righteousness, assurance only
bears witness that the wedding garment is on: Faith waits at the footstool of
free grace to have a pardon sealed in heaven, assurance copies it out and
proclaims it in conscience; unless we admit this distinction, we open the
floodgates to Antinomianism.

Fourthly, Faith is a permanent thing, an immortal seed which never dies, it is
built upon the rock of ages, and cannot be moved, it hangs upon an infallible
word, the least jot or tittle thereof cannot fall to the ground, it is fed with
an everlasting spring, the holy spirit being in the believer as a well of water
springing up to eternal life, but assurance is transient; now the believer has
nothing but wine and honycombs of grace, and a little after he has a cup of
gall and wormwood; now a sheet full of celestial joys and comforts is let down
to him, and then all is taken up into heaven again: he is much like Joseph,
sometimes in the coat of many colors, in the visible badges of his fathers
love, and anon stripped and cast into the pit; like poor Heman, free among the
dead, and laid in darkness, he is a spiritual Heliotrope, who is all day in
heavenly amors, wheeling and turning about to the light of Gods countenance,
and anon, when night approaches, contracts his leaves and hangs down his head,
till there be another Sun; it the effence of faith be in assurance, the
believer stands, as it were upon a sea of glass, in a very lubricous condition,
it is well with him whilst he has the light of Gods countenance, whilst Gods
spirit bears witness to his, that he is a child of God; but what if God
withdraw and retire as it were into his unapproachable light? what if the
crannies of the heart be all shut up, so that neither the sunny beams of Gods
favor, nor yet the starry graces in the heart can appear? what if the
arch-enemy Satan come with those instruments of death, the threatenings, and
rake in the old wounds of sin, and join the darkness of temptation to the
darkness of corruption in the believer, to cause, if it were possible, utter
darkness? must he be an Apostate, a castaway, a man fallen from grace? God
forbid. St. Bernard, speaking of the manifestation of Gods love, cries out,
Rara hora, brovis mora, O si durasset! it is a rare hour, but a short stay, Oh
that it would continue with me! the believers standing is not in it, but in his
union with Christ; this was notably exemplified to us in Christ, when he cried
out, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me, Math. 27.46. the hypostatical
union was not dissolved, but the present vision subtracted; in like manner the
believer, the man in Christ, when in desertions and temptations, has a sure
conjunction with Christ, even whilst there is a suspension of comforts; unless
we own this distinction, we cannot maintain the doctrine of perseverance
against the Remonstrants.

Fifthly, Faith is the firstborn of all graces, and leads the van to all the
rest, it is the mother-grace, and as it were teems out all other graces; and no
wonder, for it unites us to Christ, out of whose fullness we receive grace for
grace, and into whose image we are changed from glory to glory as by the spirit
of the Lord, but assurance follows after faith and all other graces. This will
be evident, if we consider the manner how assurance is produced; it is not an
Enthusiasm, a voice, an internal locution, speaking to the heart some such
words as these, thou art in Gods favor, or thy sins are forgiven, or thou art
a son of God; no, it is in another way, the holy spirit does so irradiate the
heart in its reflections, and all the precious graces lodging there, that it
plainly appears, that the grace of God is there of a truth; as it was with the
blind man in the Gospel, when his eyes were opened he could look abroad in the
world and say, here is the earth, and there is the sea, and yonder is the Sun,
Moon and Stars, sensibly pointing from one creature to another: so it is with
the believer, when he is irradiated by the holy spirit, he can look into his
own heart and experimentally say, this is the precious faith, and that is the
love in incorruption, and the other is the meekness of wisdom, and so go over
all the parts of the new creature formed within him, or at least over such, or
so many of them as may assure him that he is in a state of grace. This is the
way of assurance, first there is a constellation of faith and other graces in
the heart, then these graces irradiated by the holy spirit send forth a kind of
splendour, which the soul reflecting on it self, taking up, it comes to attain
assurance, well knowing that such and such things accompany salvation, and
import no less then a Divine favor; notable is that of St. Paul, in whom after
ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. Mark,
after ye believed; first there must be faith, and the train of graces attend
thereon, and then comes the seal of the spirit of promise, the same spirit
which endited the promises in the word, comes and seals them on the heart;
whereas in the word there are such promises made to faith and love and
holiness, the irradiating spirit plainly discovers that faith and that love and
that holiness to be indeed in the heart, and so seals up the promises to the
believer in particular, as if it had expressly said, this or that promise
belongs to thee. Hence the believer so sealed may say of the promises, as
Origin did of those Scriptures which did much affect him, haec est Scriptura
mea, this promise is mine, and that promise is mine; nay, all the Land of
promise, as much as I can set my foot on, is mine own. There are three seals to
the promises, first God seals them for true in the blood of his own Son, in
whom all of them are Yea and Amen; then man seals them for true by faith, he
that believes, sets to his seal that God is true; and then again God seals
them for true to the believer in particular by his irradiating spirit. Faith
then goes before all other graces, but assurance comes after them, as being no
other then the clear evidence of their true existence in the soul. Unless we
allow this distinction, we gratify the Enthusiasts, who declaim against all
marks of grace as legal things, and sandy foundations.

Sixthly, Faith stands upon the word of God purely, totally and entirely. In
point of expectation, it will not look without a word of promise; in point of
obedience, it will not stir a foot without a word of command; in point of
doctrine, it will not lend an ear without a word of instruction. Hence Reverend
Calvin says, Inst. l. 3. c. 2.
Perpetuam esse fidei revelationem cum verbo, nec magis ab eo posse divelli,
quam radios a Sole, unde oriuntur. Faith has a perpetual relation to the word,
and can no more be sundred from it then the beams from the Sun, from whom they
arise, should it be sundred from it, it would lose its nature, and cease to be
faith; but assurance does not stand so purely, totally and entirely upon the
word: this is also manifest by the manner of attaining assurance, that is not
made axiomatically in an Enthusiastical way, as if there were an inward voice,
saying, thou art justified, but discoursively, and after some such manner as in
this practical Syllogism, Whosoever believes, his sins are forgiven, but I
believe, Ergo, my sins are forgiven. Here the conclusion, which imports
assurance in it, stands upon two propositions; the Major is merely grounded
upon the word, but the Minor stands upon spiritual sense and experience caused
by the holy spirit irradiating the soul in its reflections upon its own estate;
therefore assurance which is comprised in the conclusion, does not stand so
merely upon the word as faith does: Thus the Learned Pemble, speaking of that
Syllogism, says, the major is of faith, the minor of sense and experience. And
the conclusion of both, but chiefly of faith, as it follows on the premises by
infallible argumentation; and partly of sense, as it is founded on the inward
experience of Gods grace working upon our souls. What the doctrine of Faith is,
is to be sought in Bibles, but whether there be a particular act of faith or
not, such as is comprised in the minor, Com. R m. 8. cap.
must be looked for in the heart. Fides non creditur, sed habetur and sentitur
in cord, says Learned Pareus, Faith is not believed, but had and felt in the
heart. Actus reflexivus in ipsam fidem, quo credo me credere, non est ipsa
fides, sed potius sensus fidei, Loc. Com. 689.
says Maccovius, The reflexive act, whereby I know that I believe, is not
properly faith, but the sense of it. But you will say, if the minor stands upon
sense and experience, how can the conclusion, which imports assurance, be de
fide? And Bellarmine argues thus. D. justificat l. 3. c. 8.
Nothing can be certain with a certainty of faith, unless it be contained in
the word of God, upon which if it lean not, it is not faith, but that such or
such a man is justified in particular, is not contained in the word, neither
can it be deduced from thence; for then I must argue thus, the word says, All
that truly turn to God shall find mercy, but I do truly turn to him, therefore
I am sure of mercy, in which the minor is not in the word. By the way we may
observe what an excellent foundation the Jesuit lays for his disputation,
Fides non est, nisi verbi divini auctoritate nitatur, that is not faith, which
is not bottomed on the authority of the divine word. Oh rare! if this were
believed, what would become of Popery? What of all the hay and stubble of their
vain Traditions? Why do they play the wily Gibeonites with their old bottles
and clowted shoes, obtruding their unwritten verities and moldy customs upon
the Church of God? I can be assured of no Religion, which is not founded on
Scripture. But for answer, The certainty of the Doctrine of Faith, which
respects the whole Church, is to be found in the Scripture; but the certainty
of an act of Faith, which is in a particular man, is to be found in the heart
by spiritual sense and experience; and so in Bellarmines minor, the certainty
of my turning to God stands not upon the word, but upon spiritual sense and
experience; yet nevertheless the conclusion, which imports assurance, is de
fide; for every conclusion is so, which stands upon one proposition contained
in Scripture, and upon another gathered from sense or experience, as the case
is in all such practical Syllogisms: yet withal, as I said at first, the
conclusion does not stand so entirely on Scripture as a direct act of faith
does.

Seventhly, Faith is more purely faith then assurance is. In faith we look off
from our selves; thus the Apostle, (...), looking off from our selves unto
Jesus Christ, Hebr. 12.2. but in assurance we look into our selves, by
reflecting on our own estate. Whilst faith goes out of self, and hangs upon
free grace in one promise or other; assurance is at home, telling over its
riches, and faring delitiously every day in the love of God: in faith there is
nothing but mere dependence, but in assurance there is a mixture of sense. If a
poor man in his rags and extremities leave himself upon God for daily bread, as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things in the promise, his faith is more
purely faith then the rich man's is, who has creaturecomforts flowing about him
and running in at every sense. If one poor in spirit, in the midst of his wants
and spiritual necessitles cast himself upon free grace; it is more mere faith
then for one to sit under assurance with pots of Manna and spiritual flagons
round about him. When Jacob heard the report of a living Joseph, and put
himself upon the chariots sent for him, it was nothing but mere belief, but
when he saw Joseph's face, his eyes were witnesses of the thing: when a man that
walks in darkness and sees no light, will yet hang on the report of a Jesus,
and put himself upon the chariot of the promises, it is nothing else but pure
faith; but when he comes to see the light of Gods face, and in it a piece of
the heavenly vision, it is not all faith, but faith and sight together.

Thus far of the second proposition, that faith is less then assurance: In
which phrase I intend not a comparison between them in point of dignity, but
only that precious faith, such as is the condition of the Gospel, may really be
where the garland of assurance is not superadded; as a King is really a King
before his Coronation, so faith is really faith before it be crowned with the
sense of Gods love.

These two propositions made good, I come at last to gather up my first reason:
Faith is more then a naked assent to the Gospel, and less then an assurance of
love and pardon from God; therefore it must needs be some middle thing between
both, such as resignation is. Let us put another practical Syllogism;

Whosoever believes, shall be saved. But I believe. Ergo, I shall be saved.
the major proposition is the object of assent, the conclusion is an act of
assurance, but the minor or middle proposition is an act of faith or
resignation: Resignation includes assent, and, which is more, it yields up the
soul to the terms of the Gospel, but it does not immediately arrive at
assurance, as it was with Jacob, when he heard his mothers counsel touching the
blessing; between his assent to the counsel, and his audible hearing the
blessing pronounced on him, there was a putting on the garments of his elder
brother; so it is with the believer, when his heavenly Father offers him the
Evangelical blessing, between his assent and his assurance of the blessing,
there is a putting on the robe of Christ's rightcousness: a mere assentor has
as it were but the sight of his eyes, in looking on the rich treasures of the
Gospel; a young believer has a real title thereunto; and a man of assmance
over and above his title, is able to bring his evidences and read them to his
comfort.

Secondly, That faith consists in resignation, will appear from the way which
God uses in the working of faith. God works it in a way of persuasion, God
shall persuade Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27.
that is, in the Church of God, where the true Shem, the name of Godis. When God
comes with his Almighty Oratory and speaks to the heart, persuading, dwell not
O man any lorger at home, in thy will or righteousness, come into Shem, into my
Name, into my mercy by a true recumbence, into my holiness by a cordial
obedientialness, and by the sweet strains of free grace the man is charmed into
a surrender of himself unto the Divine call, then there is says indeed. Hence
believers in Scripture are called persuaded ones; And some of them believed,
Act. 17.4. in the Original it is, (...)
And some of them were persuaded; and on the contrary, unbelievers are called
the unperswadeable ones, ver. 5. (...) (...)
such as will not suffer themselves to be persuaded. Faith is called
persuasion, (...)
a yielding to the true Suada, the spirit and wisdom of God, none ever spoke or
taught like him; and unbelief is called an unperswadethleness or contumacy,
(...)
it contradicts and blasphemes at the sweet compellations of free grace, if not
outwardly, as those wretches, Act. 18. 6. yet inwardly, for it gives God the
lie, 1 John 5.10. Again, God works it in the evidence and demonstration of the
spirit; thus the Apostle says, His preaching was in the demonstration of the
spirit and power, 1 Cor. 2.4. and then, as a sweet fruit thereof, follows faith
standing in the power of God in the very next verse; when the spirit comes in
its divine Logic, and demonstratively points out, this is the true Jesus, that
is the very Gospel, and here is the only way of salvation, and the pure light
and evidence presses in so far upon the man, that, like one under a clear
demonstration, he is out-reasoned, and cannot say nay to it, but yields and
delivers up himself to the Gospel, to be molded and cast into the holy figure
thereof, then there is true faith wrought in him. Hence faith is sometimes set
out by silence in Scripture, truly my soul waits on God, Psalm. 62.1. or as it
is in the Hebrew, my soul is silent to God; when the truth comes in the clear
evidence and demonstration of the spirit, the soul is silent, let God say what
he will, the soul contradicts not, but keeps an holy silence, scaling and
subscribing to the truth and goodness of God in every thing. Moreover, God
works it in the power of spiritual arms, casting down strong holds, and
captivating thoughts to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. when God comes
to the heart, which naturally is as a strong City, full of forts and towers of
pride, and by unbelief barred and fast locked up against all holy truths, and
lays a close spiritual siege to it, and shuts it up under sin and wrath, and
makes inward batteries upon the forts and towers thereof, and the trumpet of
the word sounds louder and louder in conscience, till the cursed walls fall
down, and the everlasting gates be opened to the Lord of glory, and the heart
surrender up it self with all its thoughts, as a willing prisoner to those
Gospel Truths which before it imprisoned in unrighteousness, then there is
precious faith indeed; the heart, which before was shut up, now opens it self
to the truth, as we see in Lydia, Acts 16.14. When the Genoese vanquished the
Venetians in a sea-sight, and took the Island of Chioggia, the Venetian Senate
sent them a blank Charter, bidding them write down their own conditions, and
they would accept thereof; when God by his word and spirit makes a conquest on
the heart, and it yields up it self as a blank for him to write all his wills
and pleasures in, then there is true faith wrought in the soul.

Thirdly, That faith stands in resignation, will appear from the titles given
unto faith in Scripture. It Is a leaning or rolling upon God, Cant. 8.5. Psalm.
37.5. which are postures of resignation; the believer does not stand upon his
own bottom, nor bear up his own weight, but lays all upon God. It Is a
committing ones self to God, 2 Timothy 1.12. which is an act of resignation; a
believer pawns his soul to God, and as a pawn he leaves it upon God, as the
expression is, Psalm. 10.14. well knowing that it cannot be in a surer hand, as
it were going out of the possession of himself, that he may be altogether in
the custody of God. It Is a submitting to the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.
which is the resignation of a subject to his Prince; a believer casts off his
own righteousness as rags, and will be under no other righteousness but
Christ's. It Is a casting our burden on the Lord, Psalm. 55. a believer finds sins
and wants too weighty for him to bear, and he throws off all upon God, who is
able to pardon and supply him. In the Old Testament we have it called a
trusting in God, and in the New a believing in Christ; a believer is not, as
Adam, his own trustee, he has not his estate in his own hands, but all in a
way of dependence upon God. Moreover, it is called a giving ones self unto the
Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. a resigning up the property a man has in himself, that
Christ may be all in all: A believer as to his being is not a man in himself,
but a man in Christ; as to his living, it is not he that lives, but Christ in
him; and as to his working, it is not he that labors, but the grace of God
with him; and to name but one more, it is a resting on God, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. a
believer is not at rest in himself, or the creature, but under perpetual
tossings and fluctuations, till he come to lay himself steadfastly upon God, as
the Center of souls, and Sabbath of eternal rest.

Fourthly, That faith stands in resignation, may appear from the obstacles of
faith. Look what of sin is an obstacle to resignation, is also an obstacle to
faith, and what of sin may consist with resignation, may also consist with
faith. For the clear understanding whereof, I must first premise some
distinctions; there is original sin and actual, there is actual sin known and
unknown, there is actual sin of mere infirmity and incursion, and actual sin
which has will and deliberation in it; there is actual sin in one single act,
and actual sin in a series and succession of acts. These distinctions premised,
I shall lay down this point in diverse propositions.

First, The mere in-being of original sin does not impede resignation, and
consequently it does not impede faith: whatever the actual outflowings of it
may do while the orisice of lust is open, the mere in-being of it does not
impede, is is an inmate in the heart; when the first work of faith is wrought
there, only God by his Almighty grace does suspend and bridle it that it does
not put forth, but lie hid in its own root: Thus say our famous Divines in the
Synod of Dort, touching conversion; Divina haec actio non laedit voluntatis
libertatem, neque tamen extirpat radicitus vitiosam resistendi possibilitatem,
quamvis enim Deus in ipso regenerationis opere adeo potenter in voluntatem
agat, ut actualiter resistendi potentia proxima pro illo tempore suspendatur,
remotam tamen and in actu prima positam resistendi potentiam ne tum funditus
extirpat, sed in sua amara radice delitescere permittit. God lays the precious
foundation of faith and the new creature, as it were in mighty waters, in the
very same heart in which there is a fountain of sin; only he does as those that
build upon great Rivers do, put back the fountain to make room for the heavenly
structure, which is set up in the heart in a very wonderful way, as the stones
were in Jordan, corruptions, as the waters of that river, standing on an heap
on this side, and as it were cut off on that, whilst free grace is a doing the
great work. On the other side, the indulgence of original sin does impede
resignation, and by consequence faith: A man that foothes up the old man and
earthly members, and upon the view of his heart returns omnia been, all is well
as it is, the heart is good enough, cannot, whilst such, believe; and why? to
believe is to resign, and why or how should he resign to Christ for grace, who
feels no want? such an one really poor but opinionatively rich, turns off all
the rich offers of grace, as Esau did Jacobs present, I have enough, and goes
away empty from all the treasures of Christ.

Secondly, All unknown actual sins are not obstacles to resignation, and so are
not obstacles to faith. Who can understand his errors? Psalm. 19.12. who so
knowing as to know his intellectual errors? It has been observed by some
Papists, that there are above 200 errors in the Commentaries of Cardinal
Cajetan, Dr. Reynolds de libr. Apoc.
in the Master of the sentences, whom the Papists extol as more worth then one
hundred Luthers, two hundred Melanctons, three hundred Bullingers, four hundred
Martyrs, five hundred Calvin's, they have yet noted more then twenty erroneous
Articles, unto which they add this, hic Magister non tenetur; who so holy as to
understand his practical errors? no man ever searched the gulf of corruption in
his own heart to the bottom, no man ever fully measured the breadth of the pure
Law; there are in the best relics of self-love which cover a multitude of
sins, blinds of custom, which hinder the sight of sin; what with carnal profits
which blow dust into our eyes, and what with carnal pleasures, which, because
brutish and bestial, hinder reflection; there is a great deal of sin unseen to
us, which is plain to the pure eyes of God. On the other side, where unknown
sins are obstacles to resignation, they are also obstacles to faith; of which I
shall give some instances. Some unknown sins are therefore unknown because they
arise out of an Abyss of darkness, out of a gross ignorance of fundamentals in
the heart, and so in respect of their origin are inconsistent with faith,
whose origin is light, such ignorant ones cannot resign; sin to them, because
unknown, is no burden; holiness to them, because unknown, is no beauty; Christ
and grace to them, because unknown, are no attractives; and how can they
resign? resign recumbentially they cannot, for they know not the promises;
resign obedientially they cannot, for they know not the precepts; resign in an
humble docibleness they cannot, for they know not so much as their want of
knowledge. Again, some sins, though unknown, carry in the matter of them a
direct repugnancy to resignation and so to faith. For instance, every man has
some natural Popery in his heart, he would be justified by a righteousness of
his own. The Jews being asked, whether they believed to be saved by Christ's
righteousness, made this answer, every fox must pay his own skin to the flayer,
every man must stand upon his own righteousness; he that does thus, need not,
cannot resign to Christ's righteousness: he need not, for why should he go out
of doors for a righteousness which he has within in his own heart; and he
cannot, for justification by our own righteousness and justification by Christ's
are contraries, and so are a dependence on our own righteousness for
justification, and a dependence on Christ's for it. Hence the Jews, when they
went about, though ignorantly, to establish their own righteousness, could not
believe, they submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God, says the
Apostle, Romans 10.3. their own unresigned righteousness kept them from
believing, as being in the very matter of it contrary thereunto. Moreover, some
sins, which may not be known for fins in the matter of them, may yet be
darlings, Delilahs, and as the Hebrew word imports, exhausters, such as drain
out the very marrow of the heart; I mean, the prime love, choice desire, and
supreme delight thereof. These in respect of their intimate conjunction with
the soul are bars to resignation, and so to faith. How can ye believe which
receive honor one of another? says our Savior, Job. 5.44. their darling
vainglory made their believing impossible: After the same manner all lawful
things, when once they are set up as Idols in the heart, and the love and the
joy dance before them, are obstacles to faith; thus we find, They would not
come to the marriage-supper of the Gospel; and why? their darling farms and
merchandise kept them away, Math. 22.5. Haec vincula, hae catenae quae carnales
constringunt; these are the bonds and the chains which keep men from
resignation, and the more dangerously, because they lie invisible and hid among
the stust of our lawful things. Christ and earthly things (says a Great
Divine) come often in competition, in every unjust gain, Christ and a bribe; in
every oath, Christ and a blasphemy; in every sinful fashion, Christ and a rag
or excrement; in every piece of vainglory, Christ and a blast; in every
intemperance, Christ and a vomit: whatever the thing be in it self, lawful or
sinful, as soon as it becomes the Idol of the heart, it proves an obstacle to
faith.

Thirdly, All known actual sins are not absolute bars to resignation, and so
not to faith: there are peccata quotidianae incursionis, sins of mere
infirmity, such as are not the proper formal issues of deliberation, but the
inevitable effluviums of humane frailty; these may be in a man, and may be
known to be in him, and yet through grace he may resign, notwithstanding these
black moats slying round about him, his faith may look up to the mercy-seat; on
the other side, known actual sin issuing out of deliberation, if it be but in
one single act, does, whilst it is acting, put a bar to resignation, and so
to faith, for that single act is rebellion, and how can a man, whilst he is
knowingly in arms against God, resign? it is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Samuel
15.25. and how can a man, who is virtually in covenant with the devil, enter
into terms with God? that faith is not truly recumbential, which is not also
obediential, neither does it, can it, indeed lean upon Gods grace, whilst his
holiness is rejected. And if such known deliberate sin in one single act put a
bar to faith, much more will it do so when it is in a course and series of
successive rebellions. Thus St. John says, whosoever sins, that is, makes a
trade and runs a course of known sin, has not seen him, that is, Jesus Christ,
who was manifested to take away sin, 1 John 3.6. such an one, though never so
full of Scriptural notions, never yet saw a crucified Christ by faith, never
yet looked upon the right mercy-seat, never yet set foot on the precious
promises of the Gospel; Christ and Belial cannot be in concord, for Christ is a
holy Christ, a Christ upon his throne, and the trader in sin is a man of
Belial, a man (as the Hebrew word imports) absque jugo, who casts off the holy
yoke from his heart and life.

Fifthly, That faith stands in resignation, may appear from the act of
resignation made by faith. Faith in Enoch resigned up his life, and in a
spiritual sense every believer is by faith translated; Enoch-like he is not in
the lower world, but so far as he believes, taken up by God and conversing in
heaven. Faith in Abraham resigned up his only one, his Isaac, and every
believer, every child of Abraham treads in the same steps of faith, going up
into Moriah into the vision of God, and there offering up the only one of the
heart, the darling love and joy there. Faith in Moses resigned up Egypt, and in
that resigned up all the world, for in doing thereof his eye was not on some
other part of the visible world, but on the invisible God; and in every
believer faith takes the world and casts it behind his back as dung and dross
for the excellency of Christ, regard not your stuff, says faith, all the Land
of promise, a heaven of glory is before you: wonderful are the surrenders which
faith makes in the believer, it surrenders up his understanding to
superrational mysteries. Mere reason goes no farther then its own sphere of
natural notions, but the line of faith runs as far as supernatural mysteries,
such as the lingua lutea, the clay tongue of man cannot utter, such as lippus
oculus, the weak eye of reason cannot see. Again, it surrenders up his will to
super-moral self-denials. The Moralists self-denial is but the artifice of his
reason, but the believers is a very great mystery. The Moralist denies only the
beast, the brutish lusts in his sensitive affections, but the believer denies
the more fine and spiritual fins in the Will it self. The Moralists design is
only to advance the Empire of Reason over the lower faculties, but the
believers is to advance God and his holy Will over himself, and all that is in
him. Moreover, it surrenders up his affections to super-sensual joys and
pleasures: The Sensualist is for the Paradise of sense, but the believer for
the Paradise of God: The Sensualist swills in brutish pleasures, and sports
himself with the volatile joys of the flesh, but the believer is upon the wing
after the joys of the spirit, and the pure rivers of pleasure above. In a
word, faith is virtually all the resignations which are in intellectual
humiliations, inward mortifications, and outward martyrdomes. In intellectual
humiliations, faith makes reason, though a Queen in her own dominions, come
down and sit at the foot of revelation. In inward mortifications, faith makes
the regnant lust come off from the throne of the heart, and bids the believer,
as Joshua his Captains, put his feet on the neck of his lust. In outward
martyrdomes, faith has empowred men to kiss the stake, and embrace the flames,
and cry out, as the blessed Martyr did, welcome sweet cross of Christ; and
which is the crown of all the rest, in all these resignations faith ventures
all upon the bare word of God, and desires no better security then that for all
its expectations.

Sixthly, That faith stands in resignation, may appear from the scope of
Religion. It is the very center of all Divinity, and grand axiom therein, that
the creature is to be abased and God exalted, no flesh must glory in it self,
but in the Lord, all pride must be stained, and boasting cut off, that God may
be all in all, and the creature nothing. Now nothing is, nor can be more
accommodate to this Central Divinity, then faith, considered under the notion
of resignation; which I shall show in the following particulars.

First, This does exceedingly abase the creature. Resignation is the lowest
posture of a creature, and so the fittest to take in all those graces which the
Gospel has entailed on believers. Would you have adoption from God? leave
thine own kindred and thy fathers house, stand not upon thy birthright or
parentage, which in a child of wrath, such as thou art by nature, is as base
and low as hell it self; go forth to Christ the natural son of God, that thou
may be an adopted one. Would you have pardon and justification? stay not at
home in thine own righteousness and repentant tears, these will not be
habitable, when God comes in the pure glory of his justice and holiness, go out
and put on the glorious righteousness of Christ, go out and lie down at the
door of the pardon-office. I, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own sake, says God, Isa. 43.25. Would you have sanctifying graces? thine
own Will cannot teem them out, thine own power cannot form them. Albertus
Magnus the Philosopher, spent fifty years in making the Statue of a man so, as
that with Engines it could speak articulately, but when all was done, it was
but a poor dead thing. Should thou live the age of Methuselah, and all the
while in the artifice of thy reason, and power of thy will, labor to forge out
true holinss, it would be at last but an umbra, a dead shadow of grace, though
it might speak fairly in the way of notions and gifts, yet it would be without
the heavenly life and vitality; thou must therefore yield up thy self to Jesus
Christ, that his spirit may come upon thee, and form the new creature in thee;
the sum of all is this, put off thy ornaments, that God may know what to do
unto thee, yield, resign, be in the lowest posture of a creature, that all the
Evangelical graces may be thine own.

Secondly, This does highly exalt God, and that in several respects.

First, It exalts the mercy of God. Now it appears that mercy in its proposals
of salvation comes down to the very lowest terms; it will adopt, justify, and
sanctify an yielding sinner, and how can it possibly go lower? should he adopt
such as will not suffer him to draw his picture upon their hearts? when Thomas
Arundel was for his Martial merits made Earl of the Empire, Queen Elizabeth
said, that her sheep should not be stamped alieno stigmate, with another man's
mark; as long as men will keep the worlds and Satan's mark upon them, God cannot
tell how to call them sons; can he justify the ungodly? to justify the
ungodly repenting and resigning is his infinite grace, but to justify them
hardening and rebelling is impossible to his holiness, should be count them pure
with the wicked balances, Mic. 6.11. every unresigned sinner has a wicked
balance in his heart, which makes as if a little sinful pleasure did outweigh
God himself, and can he justify such wicked ones? should the sanctifying
spirit with all its train of graces, come and dwell in the unclean stable of
indulged lusts? Christ the holy one of God was in his admirable humility in a
stable of beasts, but in a stable of indulged lusts he cannot be; he dwells in
the heart by faith, that is, in the resigning heart, and it cannot be
otherwise: Mercy it self, if it comport with the justice and holiness of God,
cannot make lower terms then to save the yielding sinner.

Secondly, It exalts the wisdom of God. He has so admirably contrived the way
of salvation, that mercy shall stoop to the lowest terms, and the creature take
it in the lowest posture, that so mercy might sit in majesty, and save in
state: Princes use in their acts of mercy to give an allay of Majesty, such as
may stand with their honor. Solomon will pardon Adonijah, but he must be a
worthy man, or as the Original is, a son of virtue, 1 Kings 1.52. King Henry
the fourth of France would have freely pardoned Birone, but then he must make
an ingenious confession of the treason, which he neglecting to do in time, lost
his head. The great God gives out mercy to poor sinners, but they must take it
upon the knee, in a bending and resigning posture, such as is congruous to so
infinite a Majesty; they must be put into self-emptying and self-annihilating
thoughts, as Moses into the clift of the rock, while the glory of free grace
passes before them.

Thirdly, It exalts the veracity of God. The believer resigns up his soul,
himself, his happiness, his all upon the mere word of God, giving him the glory
of his truth in every tittle. What Peter said to Christ, when he bad him let
down his net, Master we have toiled all night and have taken nothing, yet at
thy word I will let down the net, Luke 5.5. that says the believer unto God,
Lord, I am toiling in the dark, under sin and wrath, but at thy word I will
cast my self upon free grace; I am laboring under spiritual wants and
necessities, but at thy word I will repair to the great treasures of grace in
Christ, still the hangs upon a word: its true, he resigns up himself to Christ
and free grace, but his warrant for doing so is a mere word; how does he know
that the infinite Ocean of mercy, whose effluxes are free, will flow out to
sinful men? how does he know that the Son of God was incarnate and suffered on
a cross for them? why, the word is nigh him, manifesting these heavenly
mysteries unto his heart; still he hangs upon a word, that, if we make a true
search, lies at the very bottom of all his faith, as the foundation thereof.

Fourthly, It exalts the justice of God. Many great Rabbis have been caught by
the head in the Controversal thickets, whilst they have disputed about Gods
justice in the condemning impotent men. Not to enter into the briers; there
seems to be much in this, that God condemns none for bare impotency, but for
height and pride and contumacy in that estate. Christ's question to the impotent
man is very remarkable, will thou be made whole, Joh. 5.6. O thou impoten man,
if thou art sensibly weak in thy impotency, poor in thy poverty, and low in thy
low estate, surely creating grace is passing upon thee; but if thou art strong
in thy impotency, rich in thy poverty, and high in thy low estate, thy
condemnation is just; because in the pride of thy heart thou will not yield to
be saved on the terms of the Gospel. Spondand. Annal. Eccles. Anno 491.
Zeno the Eastern Emperor, being in a fit of the Falling Sickness, taken for
dead, was buried alive, and when he cried out lamentably to be taken up but
into a Monastery, his wife Ariadne would not suffer it. If the poor sinner
lying in his spiritual grave, mourn and groan under his impotency,

CHAP. VI.
Precious Faith confiuered in the fruits and glorious progresses of it; and
here first, of the Divine Sagacities of Faith.

THUS far I have treated of Precious Faith, in its first and lowest measure, as
it is the condition of the Gospel, consisting of supernatural illumination, a
belief of the Divine Testimony, and a dependant resignation to the terms of the
Gospel. Now I come to consider the fruits and glorious progresses of faith.
Faith is like Rebecca, the Mother of thousands. That blessing of Abraham, in
blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee, falls down
upon all the seed of believers; their faith is blessed with a fair progeny of
graces and comforts, only these are not born all at once, for though adoption
and justification immediately ensue upon faith, comforts and statures of graces
do not do so, but come forth into being gradually, in some sooner, in some
later, as grace is actuated and as God is pleased to dispense them: wherefore
what I shall lay down touching the fruits of faith, I intend not as universally
applicable to all believers at the very first, and before a progress made in
grace, justification and adoption are found in every believer, nay, and some
measures of sanctification, but higher degrees of grace and manifestations of
Divine Love are not so; neither do I mean critically to time, when each holy
fruit buds forth but only to explain the things themselves.

And here I shall first begin with the sagacities of Faith. There has been a
great stir in the world about wisdom; Philosophers have hunted after it; the
Jews have vainly cried up themselves, nos sapientes, we are the wise men, say
they; but in truth the only Sage under the Sun is the believer. Upon Gods own
survey it was found, that there is none that understands, Romans 3.11. none but
the believer only, his knowledge is divine, all Arts and Sciences are but toys
to it, which occasioned the worthy Pitiscus to say, that he played in
Mathematics with his rule and compass, but he sweat in Divinity; his design is
the wisest, he seeks a crown, a kingdom of glory: the Primitive Christians were
wont to talk so much of the kingdom, the kingdom, that the Pagan Emperors grew
jealous of them; but alas, their aims were much higher, in comparison whereof
earthly Monarchs do but play at push-pin about Crowns of dust, and spend their
time like Domitian in catching flies; the believer leaving the world behind his
back, pitches upon heaven, and God, the heaven of heaven, in him to enjoy
mirrors of truths, Sabbaths of love, rivers of pleasures, and plenitudes of joy
and bliss for ever; and what wiser design can enter into man's heart? surely
none, as the last day will demonstrate, when it shall put an eternal blush on
all other designs. And as his end is the wisest, so his way to it is the
surest, he goes to it by Jesus Christ, whose merit as a golden key unlocks the
doors of bliss to the believer, and whose spirit attires him with all graces to
make him fit to enter in, and all this is not a fancy, a fools Paradise, but a
truth, a real thing, founded on that infallible word, which stands faster then
the pillars of heaven and earth. But to unfold the sagacities of faith more
fully, I shall consider them with relation to several objects.

As to God, the believer sees the invisible one, and that after another rate
then mere Naturalists and Notionalists do, he has more then a bare notion, he
has the mystery of God in his heart, as the phrase is, Col. 2.2. he that has
but the mere notion sees him afar off, and knows not how to sanctify such a
Majesty in his heart, no more then Cardinal Perron did, who first in an
excellent Oration before the French King proved there there was a God, and then
being much applauded by the Auditory, offered the next day to prove the
contrary, but he that has the mystery, sees him near at hand, and so prepares
a room for him in his heart; a fear for his Majesty, a love for his goodness, a
faith for his truth and mercy, a joy for his salvation, putting each affection
into a posture suitable to some one or other of his Divine Attributes: he that
has but a notion of Gods Omnipresence, can sport with his sins, as if there
were no God in the place, but he that has the mystery of it, Abraham-like,
walks before God, on to his faces, as the Original is, Gen, 17.1. every where
there is a face of God appearing, to deter him from sin, and excite him to
holiness; he that has but a notion of Gods grace, has no favor, no relish of
the sweetness thereof; which I suppose makes the converse of some great
Scholars as dry and sapless as Cardinal Pools Sermon about the Pall; but he
that has the mystery of it, tastes how gracious the Lord is, and is ravished,
as if heaven opened, and some drops from the rivers of pleasure there, were let
down upon his heart; he that has but a notion of Gods justice, can sit in his
lusts before the sparks of his own kindling, and be no more afraid at the
threatenings in Scripture, then Jehojakim was at the burning of the roll, Jer.
36.24. one lust or other consumes all the roll of Divine threatenings, but he
that has the mystery of it cannot do so; to him hell flames out in every
threatening, he trembles at the word, and says, O my soul, be not deceived, if
thou live after the flesh, thou will dye, if thou sow unto the flesh, thou must
reap corruption. He that has but a notion of Gods power, can despise Gods hand
in small crosses, just as the proud Greeks, who when Callipolis was lost, said
the Turks had taken but a bottle of wine; but he that has the mystery of it
dares not do so, well knowing that the lightest afflictions come from Shaddai,
the Almighty, and if need be, he can strike harder; he that has but a notion
of Gods All Sufficiency, has his affections scattered up and down the earth,
as the poor Israelites were over Egypt for straw, to gather, if it were
possible, a happiness from the flowers of the creature; but he that has the
mystery of it, knows how by a compendious wisdom to have all in God; roll over
all worlds, the world of thoughts wishes and desires in the heart, the world of
riches honors and pleasures in nature, the world of pardons graces and
comforts in Saints, the world of joy glory and beatitudes in heaven; and after
all this, the believer can tell you, all these are to be found in God, habet
omnia, quihabet habentem omnid, after this manner the secret of the Lord is
with the believer.

As to Jesus Christ, the believer has the mystery of him in his heart. A man
may have a notion of God manifest in the flesh, but unless he have an heart of
flesh, an yielding resigning heart for God to manifest his spirit and graces
in, that the heart may in some measure be made answerable to the spirit and
graces in Christ, he wants the mystery of it. St. John, speaking of love,
says, which thing is true in him and in you, 1 John 2.8. Why so? because,
says he, the darkness is past, and the true light now shines; a man may tell
the story of the meekness, humility, holiness, obedience, charity, patience it
Christ; but if the true light do not shine in him by faith, if these graces be
not true in Christ: and in him, he has not the mystery thereof; the spies
coming back from Canaan, brought not only a bare report of the good Land, but
clusters of grapes also; he that has the mystery of Christ, has not only a
mere notion of the full treasures of grace in him, but clusters of graces from
thence as so many real proofs thereof; the Apostle Paul does notably decipher
this sagacity, that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death, Phil 3.10.
If a man has only a notion of Christ crucified and Christ risen, we may
character him as Erasmus did the Monastery he was in there is nihil Christi,
nothing of Christ crucisied, where lusts are living and reigning, nothing of
Christ risen, where the soul is dead in trespasses and sins; he only knows the
fellowship of Christ's sufferings, who hangs up his earthly members on the cross
to dye and expire; the only knows the power of Christ's resurrection, who has
felt the same Almighty power which raised up Christ, quickening his soul to a
heavenly life: this is the mystery, the so learning of Christ, as the
expression is, Ephesians. 4.20. learning him so, as to put off the old man with his
corrupt lusts, and to put on the new man in true holiness, and so, as to be
found in him, and count all dross and dung for him: It deeply concerns all
Christians, nay, the greatest Clerks to understand this (so) which without
faith no man does, as being void of Christ and his spirit.

As to inherent grace, the believer knows it to be an excellent thing, an
accident more worth then the substance of the soul it self, and yet withal he
knows it to be a creature, and in it self defectible, he knows it to be an
excellent thing excellent in its supernatural parentage, a thing not born of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, an holy thing formed
by the overshadowing of the blessed spirit, a beam of grace from the eternal
grace in the heart of God, excellent again as it is the souls lostre, knowledge
its glass, humility its vail, obedience its golden ear-ring, love the chain of
its neck, righteousness its fine linen, every grace its inward glory and
beauty, elevating natural faculties above their own pitch, into a state
congruous for communion with God, above all, excellent as it represents God
himself; in every creature there is a print or footstep of God, but in grace
there is his very image and resemblance. a believer can see more of God in an
holy beam, then in the great Sun, in a little of heaven, then in all the earth,
intal poor meek spirit, then in all the Nimrods and mighty Potentates of the
world; and yet after all this, the believer sees grace to be but a creature,
and in it self defectible without a spiritual concourse from heaven, should God
bid him stand alone, he would be in an agony, and pray as) Annas Burgus did at
his Martyrdom, Deus mi, ne me derelinquas, ne ego te derelinquam, my God,
forsake me not, lest I forsake thee. Should God offer him all the Angels in
heaven to guard his little spark of grace in being, he would tremble and say,
not so Lord, let me be kept by thine Almighty power unto salvation, that is the
only keeper I desire; he dares not say, my mountain is strong, now I am full,
now I am rich, now I reign as a King by my self; were he full of grace, it
would be but as a room is of light, no sooner could he shut the windows, and
possess it in a selfsubsistence, but he would be in the dark, and experiment
every beam to hang upon the Sun of righteousness; were he rich in grace, it
would be but as a Merchant is in his trade, if the rich returns from heaven
should fail, he would soon spend all his stock, and like a son of Adam, turn
bankrupt; were he a spiritual King ruling over his lusts, he would and must
confess himself under the kingdom of Christ, and to hold all his power from
thence, or else Mean, Mean, his kingdom is numbered, and divided among lusts and
devils. St. Paul says, I live, but immediately he calls it back again, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. well knowing that all his grace had its
being from the true Immanuel, Jesus Christ, and its continuance from the
continual influxes of his spirit, which are in a sober sense a kind of
Immanuel, God with us, strengthening graces where they are weak, quickening
where they are dead, upholding where they are falling, and by an incessant
spiration influencing Being into them, that they may not vanish into nothing.

As to the opposite, sin, the believer sees more of the sinfulness of sin, and
yet more of the holy God about it then others do. He sees more of the
sinfulness of sin then others. Next to Christ, who weighed sin upon the cross,
he of all men knows best how to weigh it; the natural man may put in the breach
of the Law into the scale, but he puts in all the bloody aggravations, the
suffocated light, and abused love, the quenchings of the spirit, and the
rejections of Christ, the broken vows and lying promises of obedience, the
stabs of conscience, and warning pieces of wrath, the measures of delight and
obstinacy in sin, and the heaps of guilt in reiterated sinning, no man makes
sin so sinful as he; the pure light of faith being up in the heart, every
scarlet thread in the contexture thereof becomes visible; and yet after all
this, the believer sees more of the holy God about it then others do, and that
whether he look on the sins of others, or his own. As to other men's, we have
many examples in Scripture; the messengers that came to Job, spoke of the
Sabeans and Chaldeans oppression, but the Lord has taken away, says holy Job,
Job 1.21. when Shimei cursed David, Abishai looks no further then Shimei, why
should this dead dog curse my Lord the King? says he, but what says heavenly
David, the Lord has said unto him, curse David, 2 Samuel 16.9, 10. In the
crucifying of Christ, carnal men looked only at the instruments, such as Pilate
and the Jews were, but the Saints saw Gods hand and Gods counsel in it, Acts
4.28. As to his own sins, there is a famous instance in the Churches complaint,
O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our heart from
thy fear? Isa. 63.17. What? were they not sensible that the error and hardness
were their own? yes doubtless, they were more sensible then others, as appears
by their mourning and longing for the Lords return, yet they cry out, why have
thou made us to err? and why have thou hardened us? the believer when he looks
upon providence and sin, has a spiritual sagacity to determine the matter. God
is holy, while man is unclean; God wise, while man foolish; God merciful, while
man cruel: the light is Gods, and the darkness man's; the order Gods, and the
ataxy man's; the justice Gods, and the unrighteousness man's. As to Satan, the
believer knows him by the word more truly then all the Magitians in the world;
when Satan shows himself in Magical apparitions, he does but mock the sense and
delude the mind, but when God shows him forth in the word, he appears in his
proper colors and true likeness; the believer knows him to be of very great
power, a ruler of darkness, a Prince, nay a God of this world, one that can do
great things without in the elements, and within in the passions, a mighty
Leviathan, who can make the heart boil as a pot and foam out its own shame, and
withal he knows that this roaring Lion is in a chain, and cannot go beyond his
commission. Again, the believer knows him to be an old serpent full of methods
and devises, turning every stone, waiting upon every occasion, complying with
every temper, and putting on every shape; in his temptations, now in the dress
and pomp of earthly things, and then in Samuels Mantle, transforming himself
into an Angel of light; sometimes carrying men up into the mountain of the
world, and glorifying vanity before them; and sometimes setting them on a
pinnacle of the Temple, to cast them down by the pride of their own duties; now
speaking in the Language of Nature, Master spare thy self, and anon in the
Language of Scripture, it is written thus and thus, and all that he may devour,
or, as it is in the Original, drink up, 1 Pet. 5.8. souls, as if he lived upon
spirits, and no blood would serve him but that of souls: And withal the
believer knows, that the Allwise God can wrap up Satan in his own nets, and
countermine him in every plot, he can awaken us out of the snare, and make us
see the methods and subtle postures of the devil, how he would charm us into
presumption, or roar us into despair; how he stands at our right hand in holy
duties, and at our left in earthly employments; what a murderer he is in
stifling holy motions, and what a liar in his false joys and promises: Thus
the believer knows more of Satan and his hellish depths then others do.

As to things past, the believer has a holy sagacity to make a good
improvement of them, which is most evident in his appropriating
Scripture-histories to himself, in such or such a state (says he) God dealt so
or so in a way of mercy or justice, and if I come into that state, I shall have
the same measure, because God is ever the same, and his mercy and justice have
the same aspects toward men as heretofore; the believer appropriates good
states and good consequents: see in what way the goodness of God followed such
a man, in the very same way will it be with me, says faith; if I can strive
and wrestle with God in prayer, I am in Jacobs state, and shall be a prince
with God; the effectual fervent prayer. of the righteous man avails much,
James 5.16. if I am in Joshuaes state, fighting against lusts the true
Canaanites, God will never never leave me nor forsake me, that was a particular
promise made to Joshua, yet is by the Apostle accommodated to believers, as
being in his state, Heb. 13.5. If a man suffer for the true God and his
worship, he is in the fiery furnace, and the son of God is with him to comfort
and support him, if he have a good conscience made so by the blood and spirit
of Christ, he is in the Ark, and shall never drown in the common perdition, 1
Pet. 3.20, 21. there is a cloud of witnesses, in which faith observes
righteousness going before, and mercy following after. Again, the believer
appropriates bad states and bad consequents, see in what way Gods wrath brake
out against such a man, in the same way will it break out against me, says
faith; if I am murmuring and unbelieving, I am in the Israelites state, and
without repentance I shall dye in the wilderness and never enter into rest; if
I wallow in the mire of gross and sensual sins, I am in Sodom and Egypt, and
may expect their line of plagues and eternal fire: if I love the wages of
righteousness, I am in Balaams way, and may look for his end; if I sleep in my
indulged lust, I am in Delilahs lap, and like to lose my own strength and Gods
presence; these are our types or figures, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10.6.
in which we have a lively image and pourtraiture of punishments for sin, and
from thence may by faith divine, that if such sins goes before, such wrath will
follow after.

As to the present world, which is checkered with good and evil things, and
has in it, as the Ark had of old, a rod and a pot of Manna, the believer has
a greater sagacity then others. As to the good things of the world, no man sees
so much of their excellency, and withal no man sees so much of their vanity as
the believer does; take the world in its own place and station, and thus it is
a rare monument of the eternal power and Godhead, the invisible spirit renders
himself visible, and as it were palpable in it, every being in nature shows
forth the Being of Beings, every beam of light points to the Father of lights,
every drop of goodness leads to the great Ocean, every harmony among the
creatures tells of an infinite Artificer: this is the sense of the creation,
which faith understands better then learning. Philosophers and great
Naturalists may see more of the creature then the believer, but the believer
sees more of God in it then they; they gaze most on the fine letters and
characters in nature, but he best knows the sense of all, which is God. On the
other side, take the world into the heart, and there exalt it as the supreme
good of man, and thus it is a lie, a fancy, a dream, a shadow, my, a very
nothing; after all its goodly promises, it is but a lie; after all its
spreading pomp and glory, it is but much fancy, it casts men into dreams and
appearances of happiness in this and that creature, but as soon as faith
awakens them, it is known to be but a dream, the day breaking in the heart, all
the shadows flee away, it looks like somewhat of substance, but it is as all
other Idols are, a mere nothing, nothing to make a God of, nothing as separate
from its Creator, just as letters without sense, and beams without a Sun,
perfect vanity, which (as a Learned man has it) is in its true Idea made up of
nothing as the matter, and a lie as the form thereof. A carnal man gazes upon
riches, and forgets the thorn; clothes himself with the creature, and forgets
the moth; drinks of the cup of pleasures, as if there were no poison in it, and
sits under the gourd of worldly things as if there were no worm at the root;
but the believer sees a vanity in the fairest prospects of the world, before
the rust appears visibly in the gold, faith sees it there; before the great
Doomsday dashes down the world actually, faith does it mentally, making it as
inconsiderable a nothing to man's happiness, as it will sensibly appear at last,
when the whole shall be wrapped up in a winding sheet of flames. Again, though
the carnal man dote more on creature comforts then the believer, yet the
believer pries more curiously about them then he; the carnal man is all for the
bulk, but the believer not so much for that, searches into the title, he would
very fain have what he has in Jesus Christ, and in the good will of God. Since
sin blasted and forfeited the world, he dares not claim any thing upon mere
creation, but all in and through Christ and free grace, all are yours, and you
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22. there is his title; the carnal man
looks on the world as a mountain of prey, and scrambles for as much of it as he
can, but the believer would have every grain come through Joseph's hands, and
all his bread and wine set forth by the true Melchisedeck, the King of
righteousness; nay, such is his holy curiosity, that he is jealous of the least
adherent guilt, which others never mind; the oppressing Merchant boasts and
smooths up himself, yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance, in all
my labors there is no iniquity, Hos. 12.7, 8. but let faith come in, and then
the stone cries out of the wall, and the rust of the gold and silver witnesses
against him. There were in Saxony (as Thuanus relates) two sordid inhumane
wretches, who for filthy lucre engrossed a great quantity of corn, and
afterward opening their barn-doors to transport it, the corn flew up into
their eyes, driving them into horrid astonishment and desperation: should the
believer oppress, it would fly in the face of conscience, and the curse of God
would seize upon him; upon which account he is very curious about his estate,
to keep the moth of guilt from it. As to the evil things of the world, such as
crosses and afflictions, whilst others pore only on the outward evil lying
before the senses, the believer looks upward to God the supreme Moderator,
being richly content with crosses, as long as God governs the world. A story
there is of a godly but sickly woman, who when an Angel came to her from God,
proffering her as from him health in one hand, and sickness in the other, fell
a weeping, that God should put her to her choice, and not himself choose for
her; such is the genius of faith, which would not choose for it self, but refer
all to God, kissing every cross as a piece of his government who rules the
world. Again, the believer looks inward to sin, as the black fountain from
whence all miseries issue forth in the world, well knowing that all Physical
evils are but the pay of Moral; whilst others cry out of the plagues, he
complains of the sins: Pharaoh cries out perii, but David peccavi, Against
thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51.4. and there is great reason for it,
because sin is the fontal evil, which powers out all other evils, and puts a
desperate sting and venom into them. Moreover, the believer looks forward to
the issue of affliction, it is enough to others to come out of it, but he would
come out of it as the Israelites did out of Egypt, with spinitual jewels and
earrings; whilst they tell over their outward losses, he computes his inward
gains. Oh! says he, what has God wrought by this cross? did not faith roll
out as pure gold out of a furnace? has not the fire dissolved some bands of
corruption? how much of the rusty world has been filed off from the heart?
has not the rod it self budded and blossomed with the peaceable fruits of
righteousness? what experiments have been made of the love and faithfulness of
God in the affliction? which of the Promises came in to me, and milked out its
comforts in my heart? how warm were the heavenly affections within, when the
frost lay upon outward comforts? such enquiries as these does the believer make
after the holy fruit of afflictions.

As to things future and distant, the believer has a notable sagacity; the men
of this world are wrapped up in the vail of time, and see not so far as futurity
and eternity; but as soon as faith comes, it rents off the vail, and gives a
fair prospect into another world: if all the intermediate moments between this
and the last day were cut off, doomsday were actually upon us, faith can in a
spiritual way put back all the middle time, and makes us see things as they
will be, the heavens on fire, the elements melting with fervent heat, the last
trumpet sounding, the dead rising out of the dust and gathering to the grand
Tribunal, faith is the presentiality of all these. Job looks through the worms
and dust upon a resurrection, my Redeemer lives, says he, Job 19.25. though I
dye, my Redeemer lives, and will fetch me up again; if there were an Engine
made which could pull away all the intermediate bodies between us and the
heaven of heavens, we might look into Paradise; faith does the same thing
spiritually, it puts by the world and time, and lies at the door of heaven and
eternity. Thus the Apostle, we look not at the things temporal, but at the
eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. he puts by all temporal things, which as the lower
heavens hold back the face of Gods throne, and so he looks into eternity. There
is a story of an Oxford Monk, who by his skill in Magic conveyed himself into
the Northern Regions, and there took a view of the Pole: the believer by the
art of faith does much more, in conveying himself out of this world, and taking
a view of eternity; in the promises he sees heaven opening, and letting down
some sparkles of glory; in the threatenings he sees hell flaming, and some of
the fire unquenchable breaking out, heaven and hell are no longer notions but
sensations; in the raptures and joys of faith he has been caught up into
Paradise, and there drunk of the wine of Angels, in convictions and deep
humiliations he has been as it were at Gods bar, and hanging over the
bottomless pit.

As to seeming contradictions, the believer has a rare dexterity to enucleate
them. Touching which I shall give some instances. God commanded Abraham, offer
up thy son, thine only son Isaac, to offer up a son was a seeming contradiction
to nature, to offer up an Isaac, a son of promise, was a seeming contradiction
to Gods truth, who before had said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, but
faith unlocks all these difficulties, God is able to raise him up from the
dead, says Abraham, and from thence he received him in a figure, Heb. 11.19. a
parallel to this we may find in all true believers, the children of Abraham;
God calls upon them, mortify the deeds of the body, and ye shall live;
mortify and live is a seeming contradiction, to offer up our only ones, our
wills, our loves, our joys, to be slain, looks like a piece of unnaturalness;
but what says faith? it is no such matter, offer up your only ones, your
wills, your loves, your joys, unto God, and you shall receive them again from
the dead, raised up in the incorruption of the new creature, that which was
sown a natural will, natural love, and natural joy, shall be raised up a
spiritual will, spiritual love, and spiritual joy, your souls before dead in
sins, shall have the life of God in them, this is the first resurrection; such
things as these nature laughs at as strange paradoxes, but faith embraces as
rare mysteries. Again, Christ says, take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is
easy and my burden is light, Math. 11.29, 30. what is Christ's yoke but the
Commandments? and are these portable by any mere man? so say the Romanists
from this very place, but the mistake is so gross that the communis sensus of
Christians runs against it; faith can unriddle it another way, the impossibles
of the Law, the sinless perfection unattainable by us were fulfilled by Christ,
the heavy end of the Law, the dreadful curse unavoidable by us was born by
Christ, the Covenant of grace is satisfied with uprightness in the ways of
God, which is easy to a renewed man: its true, while there is only the
pressure of a Law without, and nothing but a natural heart of enmity within,
the ways of God are irksom and tedious, which occasioned a Divine to say, that
a man might take a carnal man, tie him to a table, and kill him with praying
and preaching; but it is far otherwise with the believer, who serves God not in
the oldness of the letter, but in the newness of the spirit, who has a Law
within answering to the Law without, and a spirit within prompting the same in
the heart, which the spirit in the command does outwardly dictate. Prayer is
but the breathing of the new creature, holy desires its pulse, holiness its
element, obedience its common walk, alms but the opening of its hands,
contemplation but the lifting up of its eyes, all natural and easy, because
from inward principles of life and grace: My yoke is easy, is durus sermo, an
hard saying to every man but to the believer, who does all sweetly and in the
easiness of the new creature. Moreover, to give another instance, work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who works in you both to
will and to do of his good pleasure, says the Apostle, Phil. 2.12, 13. what
strange language is here? work, and yet God works all, and all of his mere
pleasure; how can these things be? if God work all, there seems to be no place
left for virtue or vice, rewards or punishments, because man can do nothing of
himself. O what sweats have Learned brains been thrown into, whilst they have
labored to tune free grace and free will into harmony? what craggy thorny
Volumes of mere speculation have they put forth de concordia liberi arbitrii
and gratiae? and after all is done, the believer understands it best of any
man; his life of faith is a plain practical solution thereof, for he acts and
moves, but under the first Agent and Mover; he works, but under the
Master-workman; he is free, but under the free-making spirit; he spreads his
sails, and withal looks up for the holy gales; he labors and sows precious
seed, and at the same time waits for the spiritual dews and sunbeams; he has
graces in him, but lays all under that spirit that created them, that that
spirit may touch upon his charity and draw out his soul in alms, and touch upon
his devotion, and pour out his soul in prayer, and touch upon every grace, and
make the spices thereof flow out; still he waits for the touches of the spirit.
Moral virtues, like the fabled cymbal of St. Telian, may seem to ring alone by
their own self-power and self-confidence, but spiritual graces, like David's
harp, must be awakened by divine influences; as it was in Christ on earth, the
Humanity always ministered to the Divinity, so it is with the believer, so far
as his faith acts, all his faculties and graccs are but as it were so many
gardens, aerie rooms, and working-houses for the holy spirit to walk, breath,
and work its pleasure in. Hence the believer is said in Scripture to walk in
the spirit, pray in the spirit, live in the spirit, doing all under the conduct
thereof: after some such sort as this does the believer work out his salvation
with fear and trembling, in a way of humility and holy dependence upon God, who
works to will and to do of his own good pleasure. We have an eminent instance
of this in holy David, see how he hangs upon God in the 119 Psalm. thou have
commanded us to keep thy precepts, but O that my ways were directed to do so,
ver. 4, 5. I will keep thy statutes, but O forsake me not utterly, ver. 8. with
my whole heart have I sought thee, but O let me not wander from thy
commandments, ver. 10. I will run the way of thy commandments, but do thou
enlarge my heart, ver. 32. I love thy precepts, but quicken me O Lord according
to thy loving kindness, ver. 159. I have chosen thy precepts, O let thine hand
help me, ver. 173. how working is David, and how depending? how sweetly do man's
obedience and Gods influence accord together? this a believer practically
understands, and none but he: whilst others labor to fathom it by
speculation, the mystery is too deep for them, but the believer has it
practically and in experience every day.

As to spiritual extractions, the believer is very sagacious. Chemists by
racking and torturing of nature, have forced her to a confession of many
secrets and choice mysteries, which made Paracelsus so triumph over Galen,
vaunting proudly, that the least hair of his head had more learning then all
the Universities besides. The believer is the best of Chemists, no extractions
are like those of faith, he extracts heaven out of earth; could a man extract
gold out of base metals, it would be but earth out of earth, purer out of
grosser; but the believer extracts heaven out of earth. As Jacob saw more then
mere Esau, he saw Gods face in Esaus, so the believer sees more then the mere
creature-comfort, he sees the goodness of God in it, which is the sweetness of
all. Carnal men are content with the bulk and gross matter of an earthly
blessing, but the believer draws out the spirits and quintescence thereof; that
is, the love of God, without which oil and wine and corn, and all other earthly
things are but a caput mortuum, a piece of dross and dead mattor in his eyes;
earthly things are transient and perishing in themselves, but he has an art to
melt them down by charity into a fixed condition, though he cannot say, his
house, yet he can, his charity shall continue for ever. Silver and gold will
not go in speeie, in the upper world, but he knows how by the poor, which are
Christ's bankers, to return them thither for everlasting habitations, given in
exchange by free grace.

Again, he extracts good out of evil. Carnal men see nothing in affliction but
a lump of sorrow, but the believer knows that there is a blessing in it, the
sharpness of it may let out his corruption, the suddenness of it may alarm his
spiritual watch, the bitterness of it may wean him from the breast of the
creature, the weight of it may try the back of his faith and patience; it is no
longer mere trouble, but made out into fans to unchaff him of his vanity, into
furnaces to resine his golden graces, into moulds to cast him into the image of
a meek suffering Christ, into spiritual wings to elevate the soul in devotions
and heavenly affections toward the everlasting rest which is above: much of
the love and faithfulness; of God is to be seen in it, which made Munster sick
of the pestilence, to show the ulcers and plague-tokens on his arm ut armillas
and preciosas Christi gemmas, as the bracelets and rich jewels of Christ; such
noble extractions can faith make out of sore afflictions, as if they were the
only love tokens to feal up a son of God; according to that old saying, Qui
excipitur a numero flagellatorum, excipitur a numero siliorum.

Again, he extracts strength out of weakness. Satan's shocks and the fluxes of
inward corruption may make him weak and ready to perish, but his faith tells
him that the power of God, which can do all things, is perfected in weakness,
and the weakness of man under which he groans, is a capacity for that power to
show forth it self in; when our power is gone, there is room for Gods, when
there is no might, he increases strength, as it was in Christ, the weakness,
the humane flesh was anointed with the divinity; so it is in the believer, the
weakness, the humane frailty is anointed with the power of grace; when he is
weak in himself, then he is strong in God; when weak in the flesh, then strong
in the spirit. The Psalmist has some Psalms upon Machalath, that is, upon
instruments Musical, say some, but upon infirmity, say others; the believer is
able to glory and make Music over his weaknesses, because his faith can fetch
down the power of God upon him, wait on the Lord and he shall strengthen thine
heart, Psalm. 27.14. as faith goes up, so power comes down; hence the believer
out of weakness is made strong, as the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 11.34.

Again, he extracts grace out of unworthiness, well knowing that the way of
grace is to move it self into act from our unworthiness; a notable instance
whereof we have, Hos. 2.13, 14. she went after her lovers, and forgate me,
says the Lord, therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her; as if he had said, she is
idolatrous, therefore behold, I will be gracious. Oh what a stupendous
therefore is here? deservedly is it followed with a behold, a note of
admiration: So wonderful it is, that some Learned men among the Papists, not
understanding how such a connection could possibly be, have thought that it
referrs not to that which immediately went before, but to some precedent words
about the beginning of the Chapter; a parallel place to this we have, Isa.
57.17, 18. he went on frowardly in the way of his heart, I have seen his ways
and will heal him. Oh! what strange grace is here? one would have thought he
would have said, he went on frowardly, I have seen his ways, and will damn
him, but it is, I have seen his ways, and will heal him. Some Jewish
Commentators gloss it thus, I have seen his repenting ways and will heal him.
I suppose not understanding how grace should immediately follow upon
perverseness, but the believer knows that this is the method of grace, and
therefore by an holy art presses for it even from his own unworthiness, Our
Savior Christ calls the Canaanitish woman, crying out for mercy, no better
then dog, Math. 15.26. a word of reproach, such as the proud Jews put on all
the Gentiles, such as made the Saracens revolt from the Emperor Heraclius his
army, and set up for themselves, under their Captain Mahomet; but see how
admirably her faith gathers upon him, and even from that word presses for
mercy, truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters
table, ver. 27. ipsum Dominum in verbis capit, she takes the Lord in his own
words, says Ferus, proving her title to the crumbs from her being a dog: Holy
David prays, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, Psalm. 25.11. a
strange argument for pardon, for it is great, such as no malefactor would use
to an earthly Prince, but the holy man knows that it will pass with God, who
loves to make grace superabound there, where sin has abounded.

Again, he extracts hope out of despair. When he is ready to faint and swoon
away in cold fits of spiritual deadness, faith revives and points him to the
fountain of life, which runs over in quickening graces upon the whole Church;
and if he scruple his access to that fountain, faith tells him, that the Well
is open to all comers, whosoever will may take of the water of life freely,
whosoever has the bucket of faith may draw out of it; and if he yet reply,
true, whosoever will may do so; but oh! I want a will, I want an heart for God
and Christ and heavenly things, faith is able, if awakened, both to tell him,
that these are living groans, and withal to drop some Scripture cordial into
his heart, such as that is Prove. 9. where Christ, the wisdom of God, builds his
house, the Church, kills his beasts, mingles his wine, furnishes his table,
that is, provides all heavenly blessings, sends out his virgins, his holy
ministers, and after all invites the simple, and him that wants
understanding, to eat, of his bread and drink of his wine, in the Original it
is, him that wants heart. Oh! if thou sensibly want an heart for spiritual
things, here thou art particularly called to the Gospel seast, where Christ's
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood wine indeed, able to make thee live for
ever.

Again, he extracts joy out of sorrow. The Apostle Paul rejoiced over the godly
sorrow of the Corinthians, because they received no damage in it, 2 Cor. 7.9.
when faith looks over all the tears and groans of the believer, it says there
is no damage in these, these tears are bottled in heaven, the holy spirit
breaths in those groans, he that goes forth and weepeth bearing precious seed,
shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Psalm.
126.6. Oh! says faith, observe the word, doubtless tears and sorrows in a
godly sort are a sure sign that the harvest of joy and comfort is nigh at hand,
one may see the crop in the seed sown. When the Emperor Julian banished
Athanasius, he said, Nubecula est, and cito transibit, it is but a little
cloud, and will soon be over; when the night of darkness and discomfort is upon
the soul, faith is able to say, it is but a short night of sorrow, joys come in
the morning, Psalm. 30.5. and for that morning, I will trust the sun of
righteousness, O how soon can he make it day in the soul.

Moreover, he extracts wisdom out of folly. There is not, there cannot be any
thing in all the world so foolish as sin, and yet out of this he picks up
wisdom, hereby he comes to know more of his own heart. There is a Mohammedan
fable, that the heart of Mahomet, being a child, was cut open, and a black
grain, called the devils portion, taken out of the midst thereof. A believers
sins make rents and holes in his heart, and through these the inward core and
blackness thereof becomes visible. Good Hezekiah by his fall comes to know what
was in his heart. Peter denying his Master, comes to understand the desperate
deceitfulness of his own heart, which cheated him against his own resolutions,
into so horrible an iniquity; every actual sin is to the believer a sad
Commentary on his inward corruption. Again, hereby he comes to understand
free grace better then before, that God should melt as man hardens, heal as man
falls and bruises himself afiesh, drop pardons as man does sins, return the
holy spirit as man grieves it away, lengthen out patience as man abuses it, use
lavers as fast as man runs into pollutions, evidently argues riches of immense
superabounding grace toward sinners. Moreover, hereby he comes to know the
necessity of a continual dependence on God, considering the heats and colds of
his heart, the ups and downs of his life, and the interchangeable actings of
Hetis and spirit, he plainly perceives that he falls of himself and stands from
God, dies of his own spirit, and lives from Gods, sins of his own, and repents,
believes, obeyes, of mere grace, and so understands the necessity of depending
on God; praying continually with the devout Psalmist, Hold up my gomgs in thy
paths, that my footsteps slip not. Psalm. 17.5.

Lastly, to name no more, he extracts all out of nothing. Thus the Apostle, as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. all things in God,
who is all in all. Zuichemus gave Erasmus a ring, which, when it was unfolded,
represented a mundane sphere, with Astrological notes engraven upon it, telling
him withal, that now he might wear the whole world on his finger: the conjugal
ring, whereby the soul is married to God in Christ by faith, has this posie, I
will be thy God, which, if it be unfolded, is a sphere of all things; the
believer need not ask with Peter, what shall we have? Math. 19.27. for he has
all in God. It is storied of the Laudanum of Paracelsus, that it was almost
good in all cases; but however that might fail, faith well understands that all
things may be made out of an interest in God the universal good; hence it can
rationally part with all for him, because it knows, that there be fathers and
mothers, and brothers and sisters, and children, and houses, and lands, and
infinitely more in God.

CHAP. VII.
Of the second holy fruit of Faith in Justification, its growth upon Faith as a
fruit thereof; with the manner, continuance, perfection, and various
excellencies of the same.

THUS much for the first fruit of faith, being the spiritual sagacities
thereof; whereby it appears, that the believer is the only wise man, who has
eyes in his head, whilst all the rest of the world, be they what they will in
notional knowledge, walk on in darkness.

The second holy fruit of faith is Justification, which is a very great
blessing, so great that in Luthers phrase it is articulus stantis and cadentis
Ecclesiae; and in Chemnitius, arx and propugnaculum religionis Christianae, a
blessing that is pregnant with many more; which occasioned a good Divine to
say, sin committed is every judgment radically, and pardon of sin is every
mercy radically, you may cut out any blessing or comfort out of it; particular
mercies are but pardon of sin specificated and individuated, brought into this
or that mercy; of all blessings you may say, this is pardon of sin, and that is
pardon of sin. Touching this precious fruit of faith, I shall endeavor to show
these things.

First, That it grows upon faith as a fruit.

Secondly, The manner how it grows there.

Thirdly, The continuance of it.

Fourthly, The perfection of it.

Fifthly, The various excellencies of it.

First, This holy fruit grows upon faith; in the very instant of believing a
man is justified before God. The Antinomians indeed makes as if it came forth
much sooner, even as early as eternity it self, as if it were an immanent
eternal act in God. But the error of this opinion may be easily made appear:
For,

First, An immanent act abides in God, and does not, as the transient, make any
change at all in the creature; but in justification there is a great change
made in man, though not a Physical one, such as is made in sanctification, yet
as moral and a relative one: the sins which before cried at heaven gates for
vengeance, are now cast into the depths of the sea; the soul, which was at the
brink of hell, is now in the suburbs of heaven; the pure beams of grace
breaking forth upon it, the prison garments of guilt are changed, and the
righteousness of God is upon the believer, the blood of the Lamb is upon his
conscience, and the damning destroying Law passes over him. Again, an immanent
act in God is the same with Gods essence, and not as the transient, the same
with the effect produced. Gods willing is but the divine essence, with an
habitude to such an object; his decrees are himself decreeing, otherwise the
simplicity of his nature would be overthrown: such an immanent act is the
decree of justification, but justification it self is an effect in time, else
Gods judicial act may be exercised about a non-existing creature, a non ens may
be justified, a man that is not may be made righteous, fin may be remitted
before it is committed, absolution may anticipate guilt, and righteousness Law,
all which are things hard to be swallowed. If any thing in justification look
like an immanent act, it is either Gods complacential love, or the imputation
of righteousness; but that neither of these are such, is clear in Scripture,
which expresses the same as things future, he that loves me shall be loved of
my father, says our Savior, Joh. 14.21. righteousness shall be imputed to us,
if we believe, Romans 4.24. a shall be cannot be put upon an immanent act,
futurity cannot be found in eternity.

Secondly, If justification were an immanent eternal act, what means a
Mediator? God and man were at one before; would the Lord of all be made under
his own Law, to bring in righteousness into an already righteous world? would
he shed his precious blood on a cross to purge away sins eternally forgiven?
was his sweet smelling sacrifice to atone a reconciled God? did he pay down so
great a sum of merits to purchase a freedom for such as were freeborn long
before? does he still intercede with God to save those from wrath, who before
were secure from it by an eternal justification? this opinion seems to make
void the whole satisfaction of Jesus Christ; what the Apostle said of the Law,
if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21. the
same may be said here, if righteousness come any other way then by the death of
Christ, if it come by an immanent eternal act, then Christ is dead in vain.

Thirdly, No man can be at once in two contrary states, in a state of wrath,
and in a state of love too: every man, whilst an unbeliever, is in a state of
wrath, the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36. God is angry with him every
day, Psalm. 7.11. and whilst he is in a state of wrath, he cannot be in a state
of love. Joseph, whilst he was in prison in his old clothes, was not in change
of raiment in Pharaohs Court. St. Paul, reckoning up a black Catalogue of sins,
barring men from inheriting the kingdom of God, says of the unconverted
Corinthians, such were some of you, 1 Cor. 6.11. as yet they were in the chains
of sin and wrath, and immediately after speaking of them as converted, he
says, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God; then the prisoners were become favorites
in the Court of heaven, and stood in their robes of grace and righteousness:
then and not before, as evidently appears by the words, were and are, relating
to two distinct states in two distinct times, they were not, could not be in
both states at once, but if justification be eternal, a man may be at once in
contrary states, as an unbeliever he may be under wrath, and yet as a justified
one under love. I know a man under wrath may be under a love of benevolence,
which is the purpose of God to bestow grace and glory, but he cannot at the
same time be under a love of complacence, which is directly contrary to a state
of wrath, nevertheless eternal justification makes a man capable of both at
once.

Fourthly, Justification and sanctification are inseparable companions, no more
to be sundred then the merits and spirit of Christ which are the respective
causes thereof: where grace pardons, there it heals, where Christ is made
righteousness, there he is made sanctification, for he cannot be divided and
taken by piecemeal, but if justification be an eternal act, then these twins
of grace may be parted, an unconverted man may be justified, because that is
from eternity, and withal unsanctified, because unconverted; in which case he
must needs be in a strange posture, at once under two contrary reigns of grace
and sin; partly in Christ, as justified by his blood, and partly out of Christ,
as void of his spirit; the light of Gods countenance shines upon him, and yet
within he wears the image of Satan, a blessed one he must needs be, because his
iniquity is forgiven, and an anathema too, because no lover of Jesus Christ; he
is a justified and accepted man, and yet a man in his sins, all which absurd
consequences are unavoidable, if justification be an eternal act.

Thus much may suffice to discover the error of this opinion, only there are
two Quaeres which must be answered.

First, The first Quaere is this, If justification be not an eternal immanent
act, is not there a change in God? God displicentially hates all the workers of
iniquity, and such are all men before conversion; if therefore before
conversion he hate, and after it he love them, is there not a change in him? I
answer, no, there is none. God, such is his infinite sanctity, cannot but
complacentially love righteousness, and displicentially hate iniquity: love and
hatred are not in God, as sin and righteousness are in man, in man sin and
righteousness succeed one the other, but in God love and hatred are eternal and
simultaneous; the change therefore, which is where the succession is, and not
where the eternal sameness is, is in man only, and not in God; the man, who was
in a state of sin, and so the object of Gods displicential hatred, is now in a
state of righteousness, and so the object of Gods complacential love; thus the
Apostle, you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked
works, yet now has he reconciled, Col. 1.21. All the change was in the
Colossians, none in God, the Lord loves the righteous, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 146.8. as soon as a man becomes righteous, the divine complacence does
embrace him, which it did not, could not before, because there was no suitable
object.

Secondly, The second Quaere is this, If justification be not an immanent
eternal act, what is the transient act by which God justifies a believer in
this life?

Unto this much is not spoken among Divines, some speak of a sentence before
the Angels, as if God did declare before them who is righteous; but this I
think is altogether unscriptural: others speak of a sentence in conscience, but
this is but the manifestation of justification. Let us first distinguish of
justification, and then answer. There is a double justification, constitutive
justification, whereby God makes us just in this life; sentential
justification, whereby God pronounces us just at death and judgment.
Constitutive justification is the foundation of sentential, for the true God
will not pronounce us just unless we are such, and sentential justification is
the compleature of constitutive: For here there is sententia judicis crowning
us as righteous; the Quaere then being touching constitutive justification in
this life, I conceive with worthy Mr. Baxter, that God justifies a believer by
the moral agency of the Gospel, by which as by his Grand Charter and Law of
grace, he does make over Christ and his righteousness to the believer, neither
need this seem strange, every humane instrument does, moraliter agere. A
Princes pardon conveys an impunity, a Charter an estate, a Law a title or
right, a Testament a Legacy, and shall not the Gospel do as much to believers?
God does constitutive justify the believer by making him righteous, and makes
him righteous by making over to him the righteousness of Christ, and that he
makes over by the Gospel, which is his Pardon, Charter, Law and Testament of
grace, conveying the same upon believing: no sooner does a man believe, but the
conditional promise becomes absolute. As the old Covenant running, do this and
live, would have justified upon perfect obedience, so the New running, believe
and be saved, does justify upon believing, as man sinning is condemned by the
Law of works, so man believing is justified by the Law of grace. Hence the
Gospel is called, the ministration of righteousness as the Law is of
condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.9. the power of God to salvation to the believer, Romans
1.16. quia nos per Evangelium justisicat Deus, because God justifies us by the
Gospel, as Reverend Calvin has it on the 17th. verse, Virga virtutis, A rod of
strength, Psalm 110.2. that is, in the Justification of men, says the excellent
Dr. Reynolds; and the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus making us free
from the law of sin and death; as many Divines interpret that place, Romans 8.2.
Upon which Pareus does observe, Liberatio a condemnatione legis, Deo, Christo,
Evangelio tribuitur, Deo ut Authori, Christo ut Mediatori, Evangelio ut Organo:
Freedom from the coudemnation of the Law is attributed to God as the Author, to
Christ as the Mediator, to the Gospel as the Instrument. God makes over Christ
and his righteousness unto the Believer by the Gospel, as by his Charter and
Law of grace. This is the transient act, by which God does justify us in this
life.

Having thus removed the Antinomian Error out of the way, I shall resume my
first Proposition, That Justification is an holy fruit growing upon Faith; in
the very instant of believing a man is justified; this does appear several
ways.

First, In Justification there must be a matter or foundation; a Righteousness,
and a perfect one, such as answers the law which man is under. The Law demands
of us two things; perfect Obedience, due from us as rational Creatures, and
penal Suffering, due from us as sinful Creatures. The first Gods holiness
presses for in the Command, and the last Gods Justice calls for in the
Threatening. The Believer, who has nothing in himself, has enough in Christ to
answer both. Christ fulfilled all the righteousness of the Command, and so
satisfied Gods Holiness. Christ bore the curse of the Threatening, and so
satisfied Gods Justice. Hence he is the end of the Law to the Believer, Romans
10.4. as if the Apostle had said, Whatever the Law can ask, the total sum of it
is in Christ, and from him redounding upon the Believer as a member of his
body. It was a lamentable moan which Joannes Seneca made upon his Deathbed;
Mel. Adam. in vitis Jureconsul. Germanorum.
In vita nostra habuimus (said he) qui pro nobis chorum frequentarent, qui pro
nobis agros colerent, qui pro nobis Missas celebrarent and horas canonicas
orarent; sed ubi nunc unum reperiemus, qui pro nobis in Gehennam descendat: In
this life we have those that will go to the Quire for us, and plow for us, and
say Mass and pray canonically for us; but where is there one that will go to
Hell for us? But the Believer (blessed man that he is) need not say who will go
to Hell for me? Christ was made a Curse for him, neither need he ask, Who will
fulfill perfect obedience for me? Christ has done every jot and tittle thereof.
The Believer is a man in Christ, and so stands in the pure robes, woven all of
Love and Holiness, by his Savior; unless the Law can find a spot or a false
thread in these, he will be, must be recius in Curia; if the Law offer to hale
him down to hell, he will do as Tamar, when brought forth to be burnt, show
forth the Bracelets and the Signet, the precious blood and merits of Christ,
which God cannot but own, as the price of Redemption and Salvation.

Secondly, In justification there must be a Justifier. It is God that
justifies, and whom does he justify but the Believer in Jesus? unto him he
makes over Christ and his righteousness; unto him he seals an actual pardon and
remission; his sins are covered, never to appear more in their ugly hue;
blotted out, never to be read more in their bloody characters; cast into the
depths of the Sea, and who can fetch them up again? sought for and not found,
and who can charge them afresh upon the Believer? St. Paul would have the debts
of Onesimus put upon his account, Philem. v. 18. The Believers sins do not
stand, as they did at first, upon his score, but upon Christ's, who came to make
an end of them. When the swarms of Flies were upon the Egyptians and not upon
the Israelites, the Text says, God made a division; or, as it is in the
original, A redemption between them, Exodus 8.23. That swarms of Guilt sly
about Unbelievers, and none about Believers, it is because the redemption is
between them, on the one hand neglected, and on the other applied: We are
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
Rom 3.24. The Believer is, as I may say, a part or portion of Christ, wrapped
up in his Righteousness, and washed in his Blood; an Object all-fair and lovely
in the eyes of God, and accepted in the Beloved.

Thirdly, Justification relates to the Law, which is norma judicii, the rule of
Judgment. A Believer has wherewithal to answer both Laws; as to the law of
Works, he has Christ's Righteousness answering the demands of it; as to the law
of Grace, he has Faith answering the terms of it. Do this and live is answered
by Christ's Righteousness; Believe and be saved is answered by Faith. Christus
est impletio legis, spiritus est impletio Evangelii. Christ by his pure
Obedience fulfilled the Law, the Spirit by working Faith fulfils the Gospel. If
the Believer be charged before God that he is a finner, he can plead the
Righteousness of Christ, as a full discharge to the Law. If he be charged, that
he is an Unbeliever, he can plead his faith as the condition of the Gospel. If
he be further charged, that his very Faith is imperfect, he can again plead the
Righteousness of Christ against those imperfections. His imperfect Faith
intitles him to the perfect Righteousness of Christ; and that perfect
righteousness removes the imperfections of his says. Oh! happy Believer, whom
God himself may search once and again by either Law, and find nothing of
condemnation in him. If the Law come to him, it finds Christ the end and
perfection of all holiness there: If the Gospel come, it finds Faith its own
demand and condition there; wherefore less than righteous he cannot be. Thus
much touching the first thing, that this holy fruit grows upon Faith.

Secondly, The next thing is the manner how it grows there; How we are said to
be justified by Faith; unto which I shall Answer first Negatively, and then
Affirmatively.

First, Negatively: Faith does not justify by its own intrinsecal value and
and dignity. There is nothing in it commensurate to so great a blessing;
nothing in it to measure with the pure Law; nothing in it to pay off divine
Justice; nothing in it to weigh against the guilt of Sin; nothing in it to
purchase the favor of God; nothing in it to cover a Soul withal; no, nor the
nakedness of its own imperfections. It is a poor self-emptying,
self-annihilating thing, which lives upon Alms, and goes up and down in the
Gospel from one door of the Promises to another to beg a Spiritual livelihood:
all that it has is in a way of Receiving. It receives the atonement, receives
the gift of righteousness, receives the spirit of Grace, receives remission of
sins; but gives none of them out of its own. Hence it is well observed by
Divines, that the Scripture never says, Faith justifies in an active sense;
but always, we are justified by Faith in a passive sense, because it receives
all from Christ. This humble Grace, whose posture is to fall down and worship
before the thrones of Free Grace and of the Lamb: will not turn Free Grace off
the throne, nor like Zimri, slay its Master Jesus Christ in his merits and
imputed righteousness, that it may reign in his room. Again, Faith does not
justify as coming in the room of that perfect righteousness which we owe unto
the Law, for God is true, and judges according to truth; he does not, cannot
do as the unjust Steward, who for an hundred measures of oil bid write fifty,
but he accounts of things as they are. Faith, which is but a piece of
righteousness, and that very imperfect, will not go with him for a complete
universal righteousness, but only for what it is; neither will it salve the
matter to say, as the Socinians use to do, That Faith, though it be not in it
self a perfect righteousness, is yet reckoned as such per gratiosam Dei
acceptilationem, by the condescending grace of God; for in God, in whom there
is perfect Unity, one Attribute does not interfere with another. Free Grace
will not justle out truth, by accepting a partial righteousness for a total,
which indeed it is not; neither does a divine Attribute ever clash against its
own design. Free Grace will not so accept faith, as to frustrate its own design
in the Mediator Jesus Christ; which, as appears in Scripture, was, that Christ
should be made our righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. that we might be the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. that his blood may cleanse us from
all sin, 1 John 1.7. that his obedience might make many righteous, Kom. 5.19.
but what need all this if Faith be accepted for a complete righteousness? what
room for Christ's righteousness, as long as Faiths will suffice? You will say
perhaps, that Christ by his merits has purchased this of God, that faith
should be accepted for a perfect righteousness; but if that be so, then Christ
died not properly for Persons, but for Graces: Christ's righteousness was not to
cloth poor souls in, but to advance faith above it self. Faith is become our
immediate, material righteousness, and Christ only a remote cause of it. The
Lord Christ walks a foot as a mere servant to Faith, and the servant Faith
rides in his Masters robes as if it were the very matter of our righteousness;
all which is to subvert the Gospel. True Faith will confess, as John did, I am
not the Christ; I never was crucified for you; I never fulfilled all
righteousness for you; I am but the Echo to the Gospel Grace; I do but prepare
a way in the heart for Christ and his righteousness, to receive all praise and
glory there.

Secondly, Affirmatively, And here Divines generally express themselves thus,
That we are justified by faith as an instrument receiving Christ and his
righteousness. Thus Reverend Calvin calls faith, Just. 1.3. cap. 11.
Instrumentum justitiae percipiendae: The instrument of receiving the
righteousness of Christ offered in the Gospel. Exam. Conc. Trident. 163.
Chemnitius styles it, Manus nostra, qua recipimus ea quae in Evangelio
offeruntur: Our hand whereby we take the alms offered in the Promise. Musculus
calls it, Loci Com. de Justificut.
Medium quo gratiam justificationis in Christo apprehendimus: a Medium by which
we lay hold on the grace of Justification in Christ. Faith is the eye which
looks up to the Mercy-seat, the hand which puts on the robe of Christ's
obedience, the ring which has the Pearl of infinite price in it. Hence we are
said in Scripture to be justified by faith and through faith, as it is the
means whereby we receive Christ and his righteousness. And a late Divine speaks
of a double instrument in Justification; on Gods part the Gospel is an
instrument, and on man's, Faith: the Gospel is manus offerentis, the hand
offering, and Faith manus accipientis, the hand receiving Christ and his
righteousness. And before him Calvin has this passage, Comment. on Romans chapter 3.
Vt justificemur causa efficiens est misericordia Dei, Christus materia, verbum
cum side instrumentum: In Justification the efficient cause is Gods mercy,
Christ the matter, the Word with Faith the instrument. Thus the generality of
Divines conclude that we are justified by faith as an instrument; nevertheless
some others express themselves thus, That we are justified by faith as (...)
condition of the Gospel. Thus the profestors of Saumiar in France; Fide
justificamu. non tanquam part aliqua justitiae, These Salm. de Justif.
sed tanquam condition foederis gratiae: We are justified by faith, not as it
is a part of righteousness, but as it is the condition of the Covenant of
Grace. Thus Learned Mr. Woodbridge, Method of Grace, 101.
To believe is a formal, vital act of the Soul in genere physico; but the use
of it in justification is, to qualify us passively, that we may be morally and
orderly capable of being justified by God. Or though physically it be an act,
yet morally it is but a passive condition, by which we are made capable of
being justified according to the order and constitution of God. Thus worthy Mr.
Baxter, Right to Christ and life being a moral effect, Confess. of faith, 295.
and conveyed by a moral cause and way; that is, by a law of Grace, or
conditional promise, or gift: therefore the formal reason of faiths interest in
our justification is, as it is the condition of that promise by us performed;
and its essence or physical act, the acceptance of Christ and Life, commonly
called its instrumentality; though it be the reason why it was chosen and
preferred to this office of being the condition of the promise, yet is it but
its aptitude to the office, and so the remote, and, as it were, material reason
of its interest in our justification, and not the formal Reason.

Touching this matter I shall offer my thoughts in these Propositions:

First, Faith is not strictly and properly the instrument of Justification:
were it so, a man might justify and forgive himself. For, as Dr. Ames well
observes, as Sacraments are properly Gods instruments, Bellarm. Enter. Tom. 4.
lib. 5.
so Faith is properly man's. Deus nos baptizat and pascit, non nosmetipsi; nos
credimus in Christum, non Deus: God baptizes and feeds us, not we our selves;
we believe in Christ, not God. If then Faith, which is properly man's
instrument, be properly the instrument of Justification, a Believer does no
less than justify himself, which is harsh doctrine to me. Again, When we are
said to be justified by Faith, I suppose the Scripture does not intend the
transient act, but the permanent habit; and if so, I cannot conceive how that
can be properly, strictly an Instrument. Instrumenti causalitas est in usu and
applicatione; when it is not in use and act, it ceases to be an instrument. The
habit of faith is an habit still, even when its act ceases; but when its act
ceases, what has it of instrumentality.

Secondly, Faith, though not properly, may yet in some sense be called an
Instrument, because it has a peculiar aptitude and receptivity to accept of
the free-gift made in the Gospel. Hence we are said by it to receive Jesus
Christ, Col. 2.6. to receive the atonement, Romans 5.11. to receive the gift of
righteousness, Romans 5.17. to receive forgiveness of sins, Acts 26.18. It has a
choice capacity to take in Christ with all his benefits.

Thirdly, The proper formal reason, why we are justified by Faith, is, because
it is the condition of the Gospel, on which God, the Great Donor, gives out
Christ with all his blessings. We are not justified by faith, as for any reason
intrinsecal, or in the nature of it, but as it does inright and instate us into
Christ and his righteousness; and how is that done? the old Law-rule must be
remembered, Voluntas donatoris observetur: the Donors Will is the best guide;
and what is that in this case? Clearly in the Gospel Christ and his
righteousness are given upon the condition of faith. Bellarmine asserting, that
it did not please God to give justification upon the condition of faith alone:
Dr. Ames answers him, Bell. Everum, Tom. 4. lib. 5.
Vel maxim placuit boc Deo: It pleased him altogether. We must take as God
gives. God in the great charter gives out Christ and his righteousness, upon
the condition of faith: Faith therefore instates and inrights us into these as
it is the condition of that grant. And by consequence we are justified by it as
such, as when a Prince grants a pardon, upon condition the Traitor take it from
him with his own hands; his taking it gives impunity, not because of the
organical apprehensiveness in the hand, but because it is the modus donationis,
the pardon runs upon those terms. So, when God grants justification upon
condition of believing, we are justified by faith; not because of its
intrinsecal receptivity or apprehensiveness, but because that faith, which
stands in the Gospel as the condition of justification, is found in the heart.

Thus much touching the manner, how this holy fruit grows upon Faith.

Thirdly, The next thing considerable is the continuance of this holy fruit.
Justification is a flower of Paradise which never dies; once justified, and
ever justified. The righteousness of God, which is put upon the Believer, is
never taken off again. The pardon, which is sealed in the Court of heaven, is
never reversed. The cloud of Guiltiness, once scattered, never gathers
together. The sins cast into the depth of Sea, never come up more. Camb. Eliz.
p. 384.
When the Jesuit Chreicion, taken at Sea, tore and threw overboard certain
papers of dangerous consequence, the torn pieces were by the wind blown back
again into the Ship, and afterward artificially put together, discovered the
Popish design then on foot: but when God casts our sins into the depth of the
Sea, all the breath of the infernal Spirits can never blow them up again, they
shall be remembered no more. All things in Justification concur to make this
good. Free Grace, which is the first mover in it, is a fountain ever flowing,
and a Sun which knows no going down. The Righteousness of Christ, which is the
matter of it, is a robe which can never wear out. The Gospel, which is the
Charter of it, is a grant never out of date. Faith, which is the Medium to it,
will, under the divine influences stirring up the nest of gracious principles,
bud and blossom forth in fresh acts, and when the acts cease, it abides in the
root, kept alive by the eternal Spirit breathed from the endless life of Merit
in Christ: All which make the righteous man an everlasting foundation; only
here is a Quaere to be resolved.

Do not Believers fall into sin? and does not sin make a breach upon
Justification? and if so, how does it continue?

I Answer, The sins of Believers are either sins of mere infirmity, and daily
incursion, or sins of gross enormity, and conscience-wasting; such as David's
Murder and Adultery, and Peter's denial of his Master: the first sort of these
through the rich grace of the Gospel are pardoned, as I may so say, of course,
and so make no breach at all upon justification: De peccate mortals and veniali.
Non excludunt fideles a favore Dei, and a spe regni coelestis: They exclude
not Believers from the favor of God, nor from the hope of the heavenly
kingdom, says that eminent Divine Robert Baronius. God, such is his infinite
mercy, does not impute these to them. Hence he bears witness of David, That he
did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any
thing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter
of Uriah, 1 Kings 15.5. Infirmities are not reckoned; the matter of Uriah is
the only exception: The latter sort of sins in Believers are gross enormous
ones; touching these our famous Divines at the Synod of Dort say, that these
are not pardoned to the Believer, till he per excitatam fidem and poenitentiam
veniam impenetraverit: obtain remission by a renewed act of faith and
repentance. His universal justification is not frustrated, and yet, till he
renew his faith and repentance, his particular sin is not pardoned; his right
to the Kingdom of heaven is not taken away, but only his aptitude. Just as the
Leper, who whilst his leprosy was on him had a right to his house, but not a
fitness till his purgation. The seeds of faith and repentance are in him, but
they must be stirred up into fresh acts. Wells of Salvation, page 184.
Dr. Spurstowe says, that a Believer under such sin may not immediately lay
hold on the promise of Forgiveness, until he first renew his repentance; till
then to lay hold on the Promises, is not faith but presumption. Faith always
proceeds according to Gods method, and that is, to give out pardon upon
repentance. God first hears Ephraim bemoaning himself, and then remembers him
with mercy, Jer. 31.18. Treatise of Justification.
Mr. Burgess conceives, That a Believer under such a sin, without renewed
repentance, is under an actual guilt obliging him to eternal wrath: neither can
he say, My God, and My Christ. For mine own part, I conceive that such gross
sins, being the plain merits of eternal wrath, do stab the Believer at the very
heart, and leave an hellish sting upon the Conscience. They lie as a dog at the
door, ready to tear out his throat, and do, as it were, thrust off his Soul
from Christ and Grace. They very much weaken the habits of faith, and other
graces, so that these languish and are ready to die. Such dismal effects as
these made David roar all the day, and cry out of broken bones; and Peter go
out and weep bitterly, judging and condemning himself for his soul denial of
Christ, (...), Mark 14.72. which we translate, he thought thereon and wept; but
others render it, obvelavit se, he covered his head and wept: As a condemned
Malefactor he veiled his face in the sense of that sin which deserved no less
than eternal death. Such sins make Believers in their return to their Father,
acknowledge, as the Prodigal did, that they are unworthy to be called the Sons
of God. Nevertheless such gross sins of Believers are, as I take it, pardoned
as soon as committed, even before actual faith and repentance renewed; I say
before actual faith, for the habit of falth is still in the believer; I say,
before repentance renewed afterward, for the believer in the very commission
of a known sin has a kind of repentance; there is some renisus voluntatis; the
regenerate part opposes it, the spirit lusts against the flesh. Cum peccant,
ea tantum part qua non sunt regeniti peccant, secundum vero interiorem partem
nolunt, detestantur peccatum, ergo non plena voluntatate peccant: Epist. page
114.
thus Learned Zanchy. My grounds, why such gross sins of believers are pardoned
before the subsequent acts of Faith and Repentance, are these:

First, The concessions of the abovenamed worthy Divines induce me to it. They
say, the Believer, notwithstanding such sins, is still in a state of
justification; and I see not, how the guilt of one sin unpardoned, which
obliges him to eternal wrath, can possibly consist with a justified state.
Justificatio nullum locum relinquit condemnationi: They say, he has a right to
the kingdom of heaven, and I cannot imagine how an obnoxiousness to wrath
resulting from one unpardoned sin can simul and semel, stand with a right to
heaven: They say, the holy seed of regeneration abides in him still, and I
believe regeneration and condemnation cannot be together.

Secondly, The Scripture-expressions are very pregnant: The Believer,
notwithstanding such sins, is a believer still; and whilst such shall not come
into condemnation, Joh. 5.24. He is a man in Christ, and to such there is no
condemnation, Romans 8.1. Neither do the subsequent words hinder, who walk not
after the flesh; for those, as I conceive, intend not a step or a partionlar
act of sin, but a walk and general trade of it, such as never is found in a
believer; there is no condemnation to such. The Apostle says not, Disp. Theol.
de perseverantia.
that there is nihil condemnabile; but there is, nulla condemnatio, says
Spanhemius. He says not, there is nothing damnable in the believer, for sin in
it self is always such; but there is no condemnation, for the pardon keeps the
guilt from redounding upon the person; because he is a member of Christ, the
believer notwithstanding such sins, is a Son still; and if a son, then an heir,
Romans 8.17. and if a son, then abiding in the house for ever, Joh. 8.35. He has
still a Well of water in him springing up to life everlasting, Joh. 4.14. And
where the spirit of Christ is such a Well, there the Blood of Christ is a laver
cleansing away all sin.

Thirdly, It is considerable what the Scripture means, when it says, that we
are justified by faith; does it mean the act of faith, or the habit? if the
act, there seem to be as many intercisions in justification, as there are
cessations in the act of faith; upon which account I suppose that the vinculum
unionis, the bond of Union whereby the Believer is knit unto Christ, is not a
transient thing, such as the act of faith is, but a permanent one, such as the
habit; if then the habit be the thing, that abides in the believer,
notwithstanding his sin.

Fourthly, It is to me very momentous, that though sins of infirmity and
enormity differ in proportion as much as Gnats and Camels, yet the least of
them deserves condemnation as well as the greatest, and the greatest of them
may have pardon in the very same way as the least. There are not in the Gospel
two distinct ways appointed for pardon; one way for the pardon of infirmities,
and another way for the pardon of gross sins: but there is one undivided way of
faith and repentance appointed for both. Which being so, it follows, that if
the believers gross sins be not forgiven till after actual faith and
repentance, then neither are his infirmities forgiven till then; and by
consequence the believer cannot continue justified no not for a minute; the
multitudes of infirmities, which are ever swarming in him, would put him into a
state of death every moment. Nay, as worthy Mr. Wall has well observed, in
ictu mortis, None but Christ, page 322.
in the very last stroke of death he may perish, unless the last operation of
his spirit be actual faith and repentance. These things persuade me, that the
gross sins of believers are at least in some sense pardoned before their fresh
acts of faith, and repentance; touching which Divines speak variously. Mr.
Baxter says, That Believers as soon as they sin have an imperfect pardon,
though not plenary. Lect. 113. on the 51. Psalm.
Mr. Hildersham says, They have a pardon upon record in heaven; but not the
comfort of it, till by faith and repentance they sue it out, and be able to
show and plead it in the Court of their own Conscience. Mr. Buroughs says,
When any Soul is taken into Christ, Expos en Hos. p. 611.
it has not only all the sins it has committed pardoned, but there is a
pardon laid in for all sins to come: there is no instant of time wherein it can
be said, that the Believer is under condemnation. What is the aptest
expression, I shall not contend, but I conceive such sins in believers are in
some sort pardoned before their fresh acts of faith and repentance. Neither
does this open a gap to licentiousness, for it concerns only Believers, whom
the stings of Conscience, celipses of Gods face, languors of inward graces, and
foul blots upon their Evidences to heaven, will under the influences of the
Spirit press to fresh acts of says and repentance, as to duties very necessary
and incumbent upon them.

Thus much of the continuance of this holy fruit.

Fourthly, The fourth thing considerable is the perfection of it: This holy
fruit is never fully ripe till the day of Judgment. Repent that your sins may
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord, says St. Peter, Acts 3.19. The day of Judgment is to a believer a
time of refreshing: then there will be no more scorches from the fiery Law, no
more stings from the old Serpent, no more guilt inflaming the Conscience, no
more frowns from the holy God; but a pure, sweet refrigeration breathed out
from his gracious presence. Caspar Olevian, in his last sickness, M^^ch. A^um
in vita ejus.
was in ineffable joys, so that he seemed to be in prato elegantissimo rore
perfusus coelesti: in a most sweet meadow, with an heavenly dew distilling down
upon him. Such reviving refrigerations believers have sometimes here; much more
transcendent will their divine refreshments be at the last day. The top-stone
of Justification shall be then laid on to make it complete, as may appear by
the ensuing Considerations.

First, Here the Believer is justified privately by the Gospel, but then he
shall be justified openly by the solemn sentence of God before all the World;
here he has the white-stone of Absolution given in secret, but then it shall
be brought forth to view, glittering in all the orient colors of Free Grace.
It was a great honor done to Mordecai, to be arraied in Royal apparel, and to
have it proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King
delights to honor. But oh! what glory will be upon the Believer at that day;
when he shall stand in the glorious rightcousness of Christ, and hear it
proclaimed before Men and Angels, This is a righteous man, when Christ shall
confess him before his Father and the holy Angels, to be a piece of himself, of
his flesh and of his bones? As it was with the Sons of Jesse passing before
Samuel; Eliab came and was refused, Abinadab came and was resused; and so
others; at last David came, and the Lord said, Arise, anoint him, for this is
he, 1 Samuel 16th. Chapter: So it will be with the Sons of men, at the great day
of Judgment. The great Potentate may come and be rejected as a vile person; the
rich Dives may come and be put away as dross; the Learned Rabbi may come, and
be turned off as a fool, only when the Believer comes, God will say, This is
he; this must reign in glory for ever. This is a Justification before God after
a most signal manner.

Secondly, Here the Believer stands justified, but in the midst of briers and
thorns; remaining Corruptions vex and tear his righteous soul from day to day.
He is in the Land of Promise, but the Canaanite is not quite driven out; the
relics of Sin inmates in the same heart with grace, like the Liers in wait
for Samson, are ready to make an assault upon him. Hence the Jewish Doctors
say, That God calls no man Saint, or Holy, till he be dead and in the grave;
because, (...) the concupiscential frame is not quite out of him before death,
but at that day there shall be nihil damnabile remaining in him. Sin shall be
no more: no more tumors of Pride; no more boilings up of Concupiscence; no more
spots or wrinckles, or dark shades of Infirmity; nothing but pure, spotless
Holiness. Insomuch that Divines say, that from henceforth our Justification
shall be in another way than by imputed Righteousness; because having perfect
inherent Righteousness in our selves we shall need no covering. If the Apostle
say of a Believer, that, (...), he is justified from his sins, in respect of
Sanctification begun, Romans 6.7. how much more will it be true when Sin shall be
no more.

Thirdly, Here the Believer is Justified, but the dust of mortality hangs about
him. It may be there is a Stone ready to drop into the Bladder, or an
Imposthume ready to break in the Head; Mors latet in mediis abdita viseeribus,
in one part of the body or other Death is preparing his arrow upon the string,
to shoot man down from the perch of this life into the grave. But at that day
there shall be nihil corruptibile; Death shall be no more; Diseases, which use
to sound an alarm to it, shall be utterly removed; Tears, which are Natures
pay to Sorrows, shall be all wiped off; the corruptible shall put on
incorruption; Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life. This is a day of
redemption indeed.

Fourthly, Here the Believer is Justified, but his comfort is not always the
same. Now the light of Gods Countenance breaks out like a clear Sun upon him,
and anon there is a sad eclipse leaving him in darkness; one day a banquet of
heavenly Comforts is let down into his heart, and another all is drawn up into
heaven again. His Evidences may be blurred; Satan may hold up his pardoned
Sins, as it were, in their old guilt; the Arrows of God may stick fast in him,
and bring qualms and sick-fits upon his Conscience: But at that day his
Comforts shall be unvariable; a nightless Day, and a cloudless Horizon; an
eternal feast upon God and all things in him; his Evidences all clear; and,
after but this once showing forth, an everlasting possession of the expected
Happiness. The Accuser, Satan, shall be struck dumb at the blessed sentence of
pardon and acceptance pronounced by God before Men and Angels. God shall never
frown or wound him any more, but wrap him up in the arms of endless love and
joy. This will be a day of refreshing indeed.

Thus much of the perfection of this holy fruit.

Fifthly, The last thing is the excellency of it. God himself writes upon the
Justified, (...), the Blessed one: Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered, Pal. 32.1. or, as the original, Blessednesses
is he: there is not one single Happiness, but a cluster of Beatitudes in this
estate. Some of these I shall gather off from this Vine.

First, The Justified person has God for his God: these two, I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and, I will be their God; stand in
conjunction in the Covenant of Grace, Hebr. 8.10, and 12 verses. God (say the
Jewish Rabbis) has the key of the Womb, the key of the Grave, the key of the
Rain, and the key of the Heart; all that is in the Creation is at his dispose.
The Justified man has, as I may say, a key into God himself. He may unlock
infinite Treasures, and say, These everlasting Arms, which bear up the World,
are mine for protection: These All-seeing Eyes, which guide every wheel in
Nature, are mine for direction: Those immense Bowels, which cover all the
Creation, embrace and sold me up in special Love: Those two all-comprizing
words, My God, are in truth utterable by none but such as he is. God is called,
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Cujus omnes gentes sunt, quasi trium
hominum Deus esset, says St. Austine: as if the Great Lord of all things were
appropriated to those three Men. Such honor have all Justified ones: God is
their own, and to make this sure, they have bonds and bills under Gods own
hand; they can in one Promise show a title to his Power, and in another to his
Mercy, and in a third to his Wisdom; and in that, I will be their God. They can
lay a just claim to all that is in him, which, what it amounts unto, is more
than the tongue of Men and Angels can express.

Secondly, The Justified person has Christ for his own. When the covetous King
of Egypt built an house for his great Treasures, the cunning Architect left a
loose Stone in the building, that so he might have free access thereinto. What
entrance he had by craft into the Egyptian Treasures, that Justified persons
have by a fair grant into all the unsearchable riches of Christ, Merit, Spirit,
Life, Death, Righteousness, Redemption, Fullness, Glory, all that is in Christ
is their own. If his Righteousness can stand before God, so will they. If his
Blood can wash away sin, they shall be without spot or wrinckle at the Great
day: If his glorious over-measure of the Spirit cannot fail, no more will their
supplies of Grace: If he ascended up into Heaven, it was to prepare a place for
them: If he make Intercession above, they must have access to the Throne of
Grace: If he sit at the Right Hand of Power and Majesty, all their enemies must
be made their footstool. Oh! infinite enjoyment; Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither can it enter into man's heart, what the total sum of this is.

Thirdly, The Justified man has a rare privilege in his Holy duties. He has
assistance from, access unto, and acceptance with the great God in these. He
has assistance from him. Whilst he stands offering up holy Services, fire
comes down from heaven upon the Sacrifice. The Holy Spirit inflames his heart
toward God; opening it in Hearing, melting it in Alms, and pouring it out in
Prayer: So that in some sense he offers up his Duties, as Christ did himself,
through the eternal Spirit, enlivening and impowering him thereunto. His voyage
to Heaven lies through a tract of various Duties; but it never fares with him
in these, as it did with Sir Hugh Willoughby, in his Voyage to Moscovy, in
which he was by extreme Frosts frozen to death. The warm influences of Grace
keep him from freezing in this divine enterprise. His heart, which seeks the
Lord in his ways, shall live; and to make it sure, our Savior says expressly,
because I live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.19. His life is hid with Christ. As
long as Christ the Head is alive above, the Members below shall never fail of
quickening grace in their addresses to God. Again, he has access unto God in
them: A man under guilt cannot approach unto God, no more than fallen Origin,
casting his eye upon that of the Psalmist, What but thou to do to declare my
Word? could tell how to Preach; but the Justified man may draw near unto him,
because his heart is sprinkled from an evil Conscience. The guilt, which would
have made him shie of God, is done away in Christ's blood. Whilst others are but
in the outward Court, in the opus operatum, the work done, he may enter into
the Holy of Holies, into communion with God; the Holy Spirit conducts him
thither through the vail of Christ's flesh. Moreover, which is the crown of all,
he has acceptance with God. God had respect to Abel, and to his offering, Genesis
4.4. such a respect as to bear witness to his righteousness by some visible
sign, as fire from heaven consuming the Sacrifice. The justified man is in his
measure as Daniel, a man of Desires, and as the Blessed Virgin, graced or
highly favored. His Prayers make melody in heaven; his Alms are the savor of
a sweet-smell; he does not lose so much as a cup of cold water, nor shut a door
of sense against an approaching Temptation in vain. There is a
well-pleasingness in all his Services, as being ushered forth from the heart
into the hand of the Mediator, and there richly perfuned for the Father;
though, as they lie in our hearts, there be much smoke and mixture of weakness
in them, yet as they are in the hand of Christ, they are glorified duties,
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, The Justified man has more of the sweetness of life, and its
outward Comforts, than others. He has more of the sweetness of life than
others. The Jewish Doctors treating about the estimation of Persons, mentioned
Levit. 27. say, That if a man be adjudged to death for his transgression, he is
not to be valued, because he is but a dead man, and there is no valuation of
the dead. An unpardoned man is dead while he lives, and as our Savior says,
condemned already, Joh. 3.18. His life, save only as it is a space for
repentance, and so for pardon, must be rated at little or nothing. Bajazet, the
Great Emperor, valued not his life at all, when he was carried up and down in
an Iron-cage: and what is a man's life, when he walks up and down in chains of
sin and wrath? but as soon as the pardon comes, he lives indeed. His life, as
little a vapor as it is in it self, glitters as a Jewel in the Sun, being
irradiated with that precious favor of God, which is better than it self:
Moreover, he has more of the sweetness of outward Comforts than others. The
unpardoned man may have Corn, and Wine, and all other Blessings flowing round
about him; but if his eyes be open, he can take no more pleasure in them than
Damocles did at the Tyrants table, spread with all Royal dainties, whilst the
Sword with the point downward, hung over his head by an hair only: If he tastes
sweetness in them, it is an act of mere blindness and irrationality; because he
sees not the arrow of Gods wrath, which is upon the string, and ready in a
moment to shoot him down to the lowest hell. Do but open his eyes upon the
handwriting of Guilt, which is on the wall of Conscience, and all his crackling
Joys are in a moment turned into fits of trembling and astonishment; but as
soon as the Pardon comes every thing relishes with him. Moses, pronouncing a
blessing on Joseph thus, Blessed of the Lord be his Land; for the precious
things of beaven, for the dew, and for the deep that comes beneath, and for
the precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious things put
forth by the Moon, and for the chief things of the ancient Mountains, and for
the precious things of the lasting Hills, and for the precious things of the
Earth, and the fullness thereof, adds this as the crown of all, and for the
good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, Deuteronomy. 33.13, 14, 15, and 16 verses.
The favor of God pours a sweetness into all outward things: Then may he eat,
and drink, and enjoy all his labors; for the light of Gods Providence, and the
light of his Countenance are met in conjunction.

Fifthly, The Justified man has less evil in Asslictions than others. The
unjustified man carries a double load; one of assliction, and another of
unpardoned guilt, which lies as a talent of lead on the Conscience, and makes
the Cross lie heavy as a burden on a sore-back: But the Justified man has
only the single Cross, which the spirit of a man may bear. The Stoics could
shoulder-up their reason against it; Nos dicimus omnia ista, quae gemitus
mugitusque exprimunt, levia esse: We say, Epist. 13.
all these things, which extort cries and groans, are but light, said Seneca.
And what then may the Believer say, who has a serene Conscience, made so by
the pure beams of Divine favor? Feri, Domine, feri clementer; ego paratus sum,
quia a peecatis absolutus: Strike, Lord, strike; I am ready, because I am
absolved from my sins, said Luther; when he was in fear of an Apoplexy. The
pardon of sin wonderfully alleviated the Cross. Again, the unjustified man is a
poor helpless Creature: Trouble comes, and there is no deliverer; he falls
alone, and there is not a reconciled God to help him up; God walks contrary to
him: or, as the original may be read, He walks at all adventures with him,
Levit. 26.24. Peradventure he will deliver him, peradventure not: But the
Justified man, being in Christ the true Immanuel, is sure to have God with him;
God with him in the fire, and God with him in the water; whatever the Cross be,
the Almighty Father puts under the everlasting arms; the Eternal Son walks with
him in the midst of the Furnace; the Holy Spirit drops in heavenly cordials
upon his heart; as it was with Christ, when he hung upon the Cross, and drunk
up the bitterest cup of wrath. The Divinity never left the Humanity, no not
when he cried out of forsaking: So is it with the Believer, the man in Christ;
when Troubles come like Jobs Messengers, one upon the neck of another, God
never leaves nor forsakes him, which is a cordial high enough to make any
adversity more eligible than all prosperity. Hence some good men have been
loath to leave their Prisons, for fear of parting with those inward joys,
which had turned them into a paradise.

Sixthly, The Justified man knows how to die, and go to judgment. He knows how
to die, which is a lesson too hard for any other but such as himself. The
Stoic may seem to vapor over death, as a thing of nothing; but whilst he
does so, it is but a piece of blind rashness, never considering the vast gulf
of Eternity which is then to be shot, in the Christian World, where that Gulf
is better known. Many great Rabbis and Sophies are nonplust at the approach of
death. The great Cardinal Richelieu, a little before his end would have a play,
called Europe triumphante to be acted, though he was not able to be a
spectator; it seems his Soul, hanging about the mud walls, as loath to go off
that stage where he had acted so many wise parts, knew not how to apply it self
to that grand affair of death approaching. Only the justified man knows how to
resign, and bespeak his parting Soul as Monica did, Volemus in coelum: Let us
fly to heaven; or with Hilarion, Egredere anima mea, egredere, quid times?
quid dubitas? Go out my Soul, go out; what do thou sear or doubt? And all
this upon sure grounds. His sin is pardoned; his death unstung; heaven-gates
stand open for him; a convoy of Angels are ready to conduct his Soul into
Abraham's bosom. So little tremendous is death to such an one, that Zuinglius
being mortally wounded cried out, Ecquid hoc infortunii? Is this any
misfortune? the Body only was slain, the Soul was untouched, and but a little
the sooner let out into glory. Again, The justified man knows how to go to
Judgment. When the Earl Montgomery was brought before the great Court at Paris,
he ingeniously confessed, That, as many great Armies as he had seen without
fear, yet he could not but tremble at the presence of those grave Judges. At
the Great day, when the last Trump shall sound, and the dead rise out of the
dust, and Jesus Christ shall come with all his glorious Angels to judge the
World, there will be generally nothing but pale faces, and trembling hearts,
and lamentable outcries to the Rocks and Mountains, to fall upon them, and
cover them from the presence of the Judge: Only the Justified man may lift up
his head with joy, because his redemption draws nigh. Jesus Christ the Judge is
his Head and Advocate, and will not, cannot condemn the Believer, being a piece
of himself, standing in his image and righteousness. Sin and Satan have nothing
at all to say against him. The Law cannot object the breach of the least jot or
tittle; he comes to the Judgment, only to be absolved before Men and Angels,
and after an Enge of praise, to enter into the joy of his Lord; which is an
happiness beyond all expression.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Adoption the third fruit of Faith; the peculiar Privilege of sound
Believers. The Excellency thereof demonstrated under several Considerations.

THus far of the second fruit of Faith being Justification.

The next fruit thereof is Adoption: Justification and Adoption are
twin-Graces, brought forth by Faith at once; only in order of nature,

Justification goes first, and then follows Adoption, as presupposing the
other; hence the new name is said to be written in the white stone, Rev. 2.17.
Alexander the Great Conqueror of the World, was by the flattering Oracle
saluted as a Son of Jupiter; but the Believer, who overcomes the World in a
more noble Spiritual way, is by the true Oracle styled a Son of God; As many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. The
Believer in the instant of believing is no longer a mere Son of Adam, but a Son
of God; he is in unity with the natural Son of God, and so becomes an Adopted
one. The Human nature is in the natural Son by Hypostatical union, and so is
taken into the natural Sonship; and the Believer is in him by a Mystical union,
and so becomes a Son by Adoption: Neither is this a mere empty title, He is
born not of blood, in a way of carnal Generation, not of the will of the flesh,
in a way of Concupiscence; not of the will of man, in the way of Moral Virtues
and Excellencies; but he is born of God, he is one of the seed-Royal of Heaven,
the blood of God runs in his Conscience, a Divine Spirit breaths in him; Christ
is formed in his heart, and that in the very same manner as he was in the Womb;
that is, by the overshadowing power of the Holy Ghost. Nay further, as Aquinas
observes, Tertia pars Quest. 23. Art. 2.
Filiatio Adoptiva est quaedam similitudo filiationis aeternae; Adoptive
Sonship is a shadow of the eternal one. The natural Son is the (...), or
brightness of his Father; and in the Adopted there is a splendour of Grace
resembling God in a measure: The natural Son was begotten from Eternity, and is
still a begetting; and in the Adopted the holy thing is begotten: And yet in
respect of the successive supplies of Grace afforded for its preservation, it
is as it were still a begetting; hence the Adopted Son, as well as the Natural,
abides for ever, Joh. 8.35. The Natural Son is the image of Gods Nature, and
the Adopted the image of his Will; Of his own will begat he us with the word of
truth, Jam. 1.18.

The Excellencies of this Privilege are unutterable: I shall express them only
in some Considerations.

First, Adoption is a very glorious thing; it redounds to the glory of
Free Grace, and puts a luster upon the Believer; it redounds to the glory of
Free Grace: Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the Sons of God, 1 John 3.1. That the indefectible God, who
has a Son of his own lying in his bosom as an eternal joy, should Adopt; that
the great Creator, who as such has all possible right to his Creature, should
Adopt; that the Immortal One, to whom by reason of his Immortality there can be
no succession, should yet Adopt; that such a Majesty as he is should Adopt such
as we are, worms and sinful dust, and Adopt us to such an Inheritance as Heaven
is; and by putting a new nature into us, make us meet for the same, is
stupendous and wonderful beyond expression. Such Considerations as these made
the great School-man Durandus (as Medina relates) affirm, That God did not
Adopt properly, but Secundum Translationem, in a Metaphorical way. But to pass
that, these things signally demonstrate, that Divine Adoption is full of rich
Grace, and in a transcendent manner above Humane. Moreover, Adoption puts a
luster upon the Believer, such as is not to be found upon the Princes and
Potentates of the Earth. Par. Medulla hist.
The proud Sultan Achmet used in his Letters to arrogate these high Titles to
himself; I Achmet head of Prophets, Emperor of Emperors, Lord of Europe,
Asia, and Africa, Lord of the White, Black, and Red Seas, subjoining a long
Enumeration of all the Provinces under him: But to be a Son of God is
incomparably more than all these. All that train of Titles whereby Potentates
spread out their Glory, is fumus seculi, the smoke of this lower World, and
glitters only in the eyes of flesh and blood; but Adoption is radius Caeli, a
ray of Heavenly Glory, and makes the Believer shine to the eyes of Angels; who,
as they rejoice over a repenting Sinner, cannot but wonder to see such an one
transfigured into a Son of God: Nay, Adoption puts such a glory upon the
Believer as was not upon Adam in Paradise. Adam was a Son of God only by
Creation, but the Believer is one by Mystical Union and Communion with Christ
the Natural Son; hence Christ calls him Brother, Heb. 2.11. a Compellation not
used to Angels; and he is one of the firstborn, Heb. 12.23. a title in an
eminent way given to Christ.

Secondly, Adoption carries with it an excellent spirit of Prayer; Because ye
are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying,
Abba father, Gal. 4.6. This praying Spirit is the breath of the New Creature,
and as much excels all mere modes and gifts of Prayer, as a pair of natural
Lungs does artificial ones; others may pray artificially, and as it were
mechanically, but the Adopted man prays naturally; without this Spirit all
words and expressions in Prayer are but poor low things; like the Vrim and
Thummim made under the second Temple, by which the Jews could not tell how to
ask counsel of God, because the holy Spirit was not present with it: In the
Adopted that Spirit makes the Prayer issue forth with life and power; when the
Blood and Merits of Christ plead above, and the holy Spirit makes intercession
in the heart for the same blessings, there is such a Harmony, that the Almighty
sloops and bows down his car to it. Thus the sweet Singer, In waiting I waited
for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and beard my cry, Psalm. 40.1. God
himself enclines and stoops down at the Prayer of Faith. Vacula Pater, that
little word, Father, spoken in the heart is more than all the Eloquence of
Cicero and Demosthenes, Com. in Gal. cap. 4.
says Luther: No sooner does the Child of Grace cry, but God says, Here am I,
Isa. 58.9. as if he were always at hand to answer the request.

Thirdly, Adoption ushers in an Heavenly freedom; whilst the Law is only
without in the letter, and the terrors of Sinai flash in the Conscience, the
man with his old heart of enmity, drudges in the ways of God, and brings forth
all his Duties as the Bondwoman did her Son, in the power of nature, in a
dead, carnal servile manner: Moses with the cords of Hell and Death drags the
outward man to this and that Duty; but old Adam with his lusts, reigning
within, holds back the love and the joy, and the delight from the work: all
renders to bondage, till Adoption come, and spirit him for holy things: Because
ye are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal.
4.6. The same Spirit which led the Humane Nature of Christ into all Sinless
Obedience, leads the Adopted into a true willingness to all the Ways of God,
that Spirit engraves a Law within answering the outward one, and inspires such
a Divine Love, as casts out the Bond woman and her Son, I mean the servile
fears, and services; the Will is set upon the wheels of Faith and Love, and the
Duties are brought forth in the power of Grace, and of the Promise; that
Promise, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,
Ezekiel. 36.27. is sweetly experimented in every act of Obedience; this glorious
and almost Angelical freedom grows upon Adoption, and no where else; no will of
man ever seemed out such a thing; should any man go about to strike it out of
his own power, it would fare with him as it did with the person reported of by
one of the Jewish Rabbis, who in the night lighted his Candle, and it went
out, lighted it again and again, and still it went out; at last weary of such
vain labors, he resolved with himself to wait for the Sun. Such an one may
strike and strike again to fetch such a liberty out of his own will; but at
last the Conclusion must be, If the Son make us free, we shall be free indeed,
Joh. 8.36. and, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17.

Fourthly, Adoption brings us into sweet Communion with God; thus the Apostle.
I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, who can
express it? In the Sons of God there is an Ark with the Tables of the Law in
it, and a Sanctuary with the Shechinah, or Divine Majestly in it; Gods gracious
presence is Spiritual shewbread, and his Love burns upon the heart, as the
fire that came down from Heaven upon the Altar; when they are sacrificing in
holy Duties, God does wonderfully by his quickening, and elevating influences;
and when they are suffering in the briers and flames of affliction, God is in
the Bush supporting and preserving them; if Conscience breaths sweetness and
peace, God is in the still voice; if their Graces be set forth, God is a
supping with them; nay, if there be but a poor spirit and weak desires, God
will sup with these; the holy light and integrity in their heart is a kind of
Vrim and Thummim to direct them, and the Heavenly motions and inspirations are
as it were a Bath Kol, a voice from Heaven for their instruction; in a word,
all the appearances of God in the worldly Sanctuary, and outward Symbols of
Glory under the Old Testament, are spiritually accomplished under the New in
the Adopted, who are an habitation of God through the Spirit.

Fifthly, Adoption assures protection and provision; Israel, Gods own People,
had a Pillar of Cloud, and a Pillar of Fire to defend them, and these Pillars
are still in the Church, though not always visible: God has said it, That he
will create upon her a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night, upon all the glory shall be a defense, Isa. 4.5. Rather than his
Adopted ones, who carry his Glory about them, shall want a defense he will put
forth an act of Creation: Israel when in the Wilderness, had Bread from Heaven,
and Water out of the Rock; and to the upright, God says, Their Bread shall be
given them, and their Waters shall be sure, Isa. 33.16. Rather than fail, He
will make rivers in the desert, to give drink to his People, Isa. 43.20. When
there is a pinch in the Kingdom of Nature, his own Family and Household shall be
provided for; The young Linons may lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek
the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.10. That Distich, Est Deus in
coelo, qui providus omnia curat,
Credentes nusquam deseruisse potest;


Was a Cordial to Musculus in his streights. Faith fears no Famine, neither
shall the Adopted feel any.

Sixthly, Adoption carries with it Perseverance; Once a Son of God by Adoption
and ever so. One of the Jewish Doctors Commenting on that excellent passage,
With thee is the fountain of life, in thy light shall we see light, Psalm. 36.
says, That the Israelites were made free by Moses, and then brought into
bondage again, and made free by Barak and diverse others, and yet brought into
bondage again; at last they shall be saved by the Lord their God with an
eternal Salvation; that is, by the Messiah. If mere notions make us free, we
shall be in bondage again; if Church Priviledges make us free, we shall be in
bondage again; but if Adopting Grace make us free, we shall ever be so: God
has said, nay, sworn to Jesus Christ, His seed (and such are all the Adopted)
shall endure for ever, and his throne (part whereof is in their hearts) as the
Sun before me, Psalm. 89.36. and to make them endure, the holy Spirit is in them
a well of water springing up to everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. and to secure the
abode of the Spirit with them, Christ is a Priest after the power of an endless
life, Heb. 7.16. Nay, though they break his statutes, and thereby bring the rod
upon their backs, yet God has promised, Not to take away his loving kindness,
nor suffer his faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89.33. Upon such unshaken
foundations do the Sons of God stand.

Seventhly, Adoption makes them heirs of Heaven; Though they may lie among the
pots, and in the eyes of the World be the refuse and offscouring of all
things, yet are they heirs of Glory; thus the Apostle, If children, then heirs,
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. That Glory which Christ
has purchased, shall they be brought into; that Heavenly Inheritance, which is
sealed without in the Promise, is inwardly assured to them by the Seal of the
Spirit; which by holy impresses marks them out for Heaven, and is a sure
earnest in their hearts, that the whole sum of glory shall be paid to them
above: each of them may say as Quirinus Reuterus did on his Deathbed, Ego sum
vitae filius, I am a child of life.

Thus much for the third fruit of Faith being Adoption.

CHAP. IX.
Of Sanctification the fourth fruit of Faith, and here of Mortification the
first part thereof; the influence of Precious Faith therein.

THe next fruit of Faith is Sanctification, which makes the Soul meet for
Heaven; Justification and Adoption give a title to that blessed Inheritance,
but Sanctification makes ready for it. No sooner does a man believe, but the
rivers of living water, the sanctifying Spirit with its Graces slow in the
heart; and the reason is evident, Faith is the Souls Union with Christ, who
has the Spirit above measure in trust, to pour it out upon every part of his
Mystical Body; in this day of Espousals the water is turned into wine, Nature
elevated into Grace. There are, as I have before noted, two parts of
Sanctification, Mortification and Vivification. I shall speak to both as fruits
of Faith.

First, Mortification is a fruit of Faith, indeed none but a Believer is in a
posture to reach it. Could a man which yet never falls out, improve his Reason
and Will to the utmost, he could not truly mortify Sin: Reason and Will
improved might in some measure triumph over the gross inordinations in the
lower faculties, but they would ever spare the corruptions in themselves as
their own flesh; like politic Princes, who keep down mutinies among the common
People, but lay the reins down to their own personal vices: It would fare with
such an one, as it does with frozen waters, which though broken in one place,
will freez in another; should he break and dissolve his sensual Sins, he would
freez in spiritual; and if his eyes were open, he would see that it is
desperate pride and presumption to attempt Mortification in any other way than
that of Faith, which brings a general thaw upon the heart, melting it into a
compliance with the Divine Pleasure, and tracing the method of the Gospel,
derives a power and spirit from Christ for the work. Mortification must be done
through the Spirit, Romans 8.13. and none has that but the Believer; it slows
from an implantation into the death of Christ, and none is so but he; Faith
purifies the heart, and without it there can be no such thing as Mortification.
God does not command Mortification immediately, but in its own place, first
Faith, and then Mortification; Mortify therefore your members which are upon
the earth, says the Apostle, Col. 3.5. Therefore, wherefore? Because you are
risen with Christ; because your life is hid with Christ; therefore mortify;
None but Believers, who are in Union with Christ, are capable to do it. When in
Popery all sorts are driven to this work, as the poor Indians are to Baptism;
they do but set up a Faithless, Christless Image of Mortification in Penances
and Satisfactions, void of the true spirit and principle requisite thereunto.

In the pursuit of this Point I shall first speak to the Mortification of
Original Sin; this is to lay the axe to the root, and cast salt into the
fountain; without which to go about to mortisie this or that particular lust,
is as great a vanity, as for a man by outward applications to heal up a fore or
ulcer in the body, without correcting the inward somes of peccant and corrupt
humors, which bore those holes in the flesh and fill them with putrefaction.
This is one choice work of Faith. Others may spend all upon Physicians and
Humane remedies; but the Believer gives such a touch upon a Crucified Christ,
as in a good measure to stanch the bloody issue running down his nature. In
this excellent work Faith proceeds on this wise;

First, Faith gives a man a just sense of Original Sin; Which, if the World be
searched with Candles, can be found nowhere but among the Believers: To search
for it in the Pagan World, is to no purpose; indeed Plato says, That the Soul
has broken her wings, and creeps basely upon these lower things. The
Pythagoreans taught, That Souls having offended God, were turned into Bodies as
into so many Prisons, there to look out of the grates of Sense. Trismegistus
asserts, That man fell from Heavenly Contemplations into the sphere of
Elements, and so became a bondslave to his Body. Hierocles confesses, That man
is carried downward, and fallen from the happy Region, of his own motion
inclined to evil, and averse from good. In such passages as these there seem to
be some glimmerings and dark resemblances of Original Sin: But alas, poor
Souls, they were sar from a just sense thereof; they did not understand the
depth and venom of this wound, but thought there was Medicamentum in latere,
enough in the (...), the self-power of the Soul, which Justin Martyr at his
Conversion brought out of Plato's School into Christianity, to heal it self.
Aristotle makes Man's Happiness to be the Operation of the Rational Soul
according to Virtue; and that Virtue he ranks among the (...), the things in
our own power. Seneca tells us, It Is a foolish thing to wish for a good Soul,
which without lifting thy hands to Heaven, thou may have of thy self;
whatsoever may make thee good, tecum est, intus est, it is with thee, and in
thee. Hierocles says, The Will is (...), mistress of it self, and can make it
self better or worse: Or, as he speaks in another place, it can make the man a
beast or a God. In a word, all the remedy they prescribe is but that which
Epictetus says, made Socrates to be so virtuous as he was, Obedience to
Reason. They never so much as dreamed of any such thing as Regeneration, but
thought they could do their own work themselves; neither did they understand
the breadth and length of this natural wound, they thought it was only in the
lower saculties of the Soul, Reason and Will being free and pure; hence they
generally cry out against the Body as a Prison, and the Senses as fetters and
manacles to the Immortal Spirit. Theophrast was wont to say, That the Soul paid
a dear rent for her dwelling in the Body, considering how much it suffered at
the Bodies hand. The Stoics declaim against the Passions, as the sicknesses
and languors of the Soul; all the load is laid upon (...), the common people of
the Soul, (as some call the Passions), as if the Princes, Reason and Will, were
free, never considering the Spiritual wickednesses which are among them.
Neither could it be expected, that they should know the latitude of Sin, seeing
they had not the pure Law, but only some fragments of it in their hearts, by
which they could no more discern the proportions of Sin, than a man can
understand features by the broken pieces of a Picture.

Leaving the Pagans, let us search among the Jews, a People to whom the Divine
Oracles were committed, there the Believers had a true sense of Original Sin;
David senses it, in primo ardore, in the first warmth of Natural Conception,
Psalm. 51.5. But such among them as wanted Faith, wanted a sense thereof. Indeed
they had the Law, but the veil being on their hearts, they understood it only
as prohibiting manum, non animum, the outward act, not the Will; and, Non
concupisces, Thou shall not covet; was rather taken tor a Moral sentence, than
a Divine precept among them. This was the opinion of the Jewish Masters about
our Saviors time, when Rabbinical Learning was at the height in the Schools of
Hillel and Shammai; St. Paul a man brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, whom the
Jews accounted the honor of the Law, while he was in his Pharifaism knew not
concupiscence to be Sin, Romans 7.7. And they that understood the Law no better,
could understand but little of Original Sin. Their Circumcision was a memento
of it, and so they understood it, casting the Praeputium thereby cut off into
the dust, as a morsel to feed the old Serpent withal. But alas, they were
uncircumcised in heart, and upon that account reckoned up among Egyptians.
Edomites, Ammonites, and Moabites, uncircumcised in flesh, Jer. 9.29. The
Jewish Rabbis speak of the (...) the evil figment in man's heart, as an
implacable enemy. One man (say they) walks with another but one hour, and they
become friends, but this evil figment is born with man, and grows up with him
all his days, and yet if it find an opportunity, will after 20, 30, 40, 50, 60,
70, 80 years, precipitate and cast him down headlong. But they make it a very
small matter at first. At first (say they) it is weak as a woman, afterward
strong as a man; at first it is as a small ahread, afterward as the cable of a
Ship; at first it is as a Viator, at last as a Lord. And withal they made it
subject to the power of man's free will. Concupiscence (say they) would fain
ruin thee, but thou may, if thou will, rule over it, Genesis 4. And whosoever
obeys the good figment, that is, his own reason, shall be delivered from the
evil one. They cried up Reason and Will, and understood little of Original Sin;
Hence Regeneration, the necessity whereof may be naturally deduced from a right
knowledge of that Sin, was so unintelligible to them. Nicodemus, a Master in
Israel, and one of the Judges in the great Sanhedrin, was startled at our
Saviors. Doctrine, Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.5. That of being born of water, possibly
he might understand, because the Jews did imitate their Proselytes, by washing
or Baptism, and then counted them as newborn and regenerate, as Learned men
have observed. But that of being born of the Spirit, he was totally ignorant
of, which he could not have been had he had a true sense of Original Sin;
which, where it is, makes the Doctrine of Regeneration obvious, but looking on
that Sin as no great matter, and corrigible by man's own Reason and Will, he
stood as it were at a maze at our Saviors words, as if there had been no
promise at all of a new heart, and a new spirit made in the Old Testament.

Leaving the Jews, let us enquire among Christians for a true sense of Original
Sin; here we must not expect it among Pelagians or Socinians, who deny the
thing, as if the figment of the heart were but the figment of the brain:
peccatum originis nullum prorsus est, says the Racovian Catechism: Sine vitio
nascimur, says Pelagius, placing Infants in the same state as Adam was before
his Fall; neither must we look for it among those Popish Doctors, who mince and
extenuate this Sin, Intensive majus est peccatum actuale quam originale, says
Aquinas: It is, Omnium peccatorum minimum, says another. Hence many of them
assert, That it is not properly Sin; neither may I find it among those
Protestant Doctors, who though they use the word Grace, yet attribute much to
the Reason and Will of man. That famous place, Joh. 3, of being born of the
Spirit, is taken by a learned man for an undertaking the Law of Christ, an
entering on a new pure Spiritual life; as if Regeneration were Man's act. The
fallen man (says another) is not wholly destitute of power, but as the man in
the Parable half-dead. Sin is not so unruly, but that Cain, if he will do well,
may master it; the desire of Sin shall be subject to him, says God. When a Man
came to Delphos with a live-Bird under his Cloak, and asked the Oracle, Whether
he should bring forth a dead thing or living? intending to put a trick upon it:
Answer was made to him, In te est stulte: Fool, it is in thy power to do which
thou will. So say such Doctors. The Gospel is proposed to Men, and to embrace
it is in their own power; it is Gods part to call, but Man's to be elect or not;
that is, to be sincere Believers or not. These Men to me understand little of
Original Sin. Pretermitting them, I come to those who have a right notion of
Sin and Grace, but are void of true Faith: These with all the Balms and sweet
Odours of Truth which lie about their Heads, are yet Spiritually dead at Heart,
and feel not their Wounds; they are as yet contented with their old Heart, and
with case carry a sink of Sin in their bosom: Oh how much unfelt, unbewailed
blindness, hardness, enmity, unbelief, earthiness is there in them! All which
fetch never a groan from them. It is somewhat strange that believing Abraham,
when God made him so fair a promise of an Isaac, should yet let out his
thoughts so much upon Ishmael, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee! But it
is very natural for unregenerate men, even when the Promise of a new heart lies
fair before them in the Scripture, to acquiesce in the old frame, as much of
Hell and Death as they carry about with them. All Is well and in peace; but when
Faith comes, Original Sin is selt to the quick; God shines from Sinai, the Law
is up in the heart in its pure Spirituality, and all the foul corners there,
which before lay in the dark, discover themselves in their ugly hue; the Spirit
of Life enters into the Man, and the Wounds and Ulcers, which, whilst he was
Spiritually dead, broke not his rest, breath out anguish in every part, and
make him cry out, (...), Oh wretched man that I am! Romans 7.24. Oh, this blind,
rebellious, unbelieving, earthly Heart of mine! who shall deliver me from it!
That corruption should be universal all over the Soul, like the Plagues of
Egypt, all over the Land, That the dead should be in every faculty, the lusts
everywhere croaking, even in the Kings Chamber, in the noble faculties of
Reason and Will, and all the streams of the Heart, the Thoughts, Wishes,
Resolves, Choices, Desires, and Delights there, should be smitten and turned
into bloody Iniquity, is an amazing consideration; That a Rational Creature,
with an Immortal spark in his bosom, whose natural instinct is after Happiness,
should yet without a new Creation, not be able so much as by a holy thought to
aspire after the great unspeakable blessedness in the Gospel, or to give a
serious look toward the pure undefiled Religion leading thither; and after he
is new made by Grace, that yet there should be a black sountain within ready to
flow out at every sense, taint every work, and derive a damp, a deadness, a
wretched indisposedness upon all his holy things, is an astonishing thought;
That the holiest Man on Earth, who mourns and sighs over the horrible
Wickednesses abroad, should be forced to lament at home; and say, there is
aliquid intus, somewhat in my own heart answering to all these, were I but
dimissus libero arbitrio, left to my own self, I might fall into Jonabs pet
against the Great God; or roll in David's Adultery and Blood; or, Peter-like,
deny my Lord, and do it cursing and damning of my self, as the Original
imports; or turn a Julian, a total final Apostate, and art up my bloody
blasphemies against Heaven at my dying hour; is wonderfully prodigious. ous.
Such Sentiments as these has the Believer of Original Sin, which make him go
groaning under the gravedo thereof, as an intolerable burden; this Gemitus
sanctorum, as St. Austin calls it, is the first step of this fundamental
Mortification.

Secondly, Faith ushers into the Soul a stock of gracious Principles, which
conflict against the innate corruption, and labor to drive it out, as the
Israelites did the Canaanites, by little and little; there is even in
unregenerate Men, a conflict between Reason and the Sensitive Affections.
Arist. Eth, lib. 1. c. 13.
Reason (says the Philosopher) calls (...), to the best things; but the
Affections repugn and refist; the Soul is, as it were Paralytick, whilst
Reason would move one way to the right hand, Affection moves contrary to the
left: Aliudque cupido, men's aliud suadet. Hence the Syllogism of an incontinent
man has (as the Schoolmen observe out of Aristotle) four Propositions, Aquin.
pr. secund. Medina.
viz. two universal ones; one whereof is from Reason, That Fornication is not
to be committed; another from Passion, that Pleasure is to be pursued; and
Passion binds Reason, That it do not subsume and conclude under the first: And
whilst it remains so, the Man subsumes and concludes under the second. Epist.
56.
Seneca tells us Silentium regionis, is nothing, Si affectus fremunt; Reason
must compose things, or else a^^ will be in tumult in the Soul. In this natura
conflict, Reason, if improved, to maintain it own grandeur and royalty, may by
its Edict hush the tumults and mutinies in the Affections, and prevent many
shames and turpitudes of Sensuality; but alas, there is nothing of true
Mortification in all this, no, not in the Affections themselves, which are not
inwardly changed, but only, as the Horse and Mule, held in with the rational
bit or bridle; much less in the Reason, in which there is a great deal of
vanity, dark ignorance, proud curiosity, fleshly wisdom, vain philosophy,
humane folly, and perverse contradiction; in all which, Reason will rather
indulge than crucify it self; but Faith ushers in another manner of Conflict.
In the Natural Conflict Reason is General, and manages the War; and as the
Reason is, so is the strength in Battle, but Humane only: In the Spiritual
Conflict, there is a greater than Reason, even Supernatural Grace; which being
of Divine extraction, has in it self a power more than Humane to oppose
corruption; and which yet makes it stronger, it has continual Auxiliaries from
the Holy Spirit, which is always standing at the right hand of Grace, as Satan
is of Corruption, to back and strengthen it. In the Natural Conflict the fight
is in a Logical and Argumentative way only; and Reason being corrupt, like a
cunning Sophister, turns about and stands ever and anon on the same side with
Sin; but in the Spiritual Conflict, there can be no such compliances, the War
is laid in nature, Grace in its very nature carries an enmity against
corruption, and irreconcilably, interminably opposes it, as long as Grace is
Grace, and Sin Sin. In the Natural Conflict Reason fights but ex part, only
against the gross, carnal, sensual lusts, which stain Humanity; in the mean
time the pride, perverseness, and desperate contradiction, which dwell in the
upper faculties, are altogether untouched. The Moralist stands upon bis own
bottom, full of self-power and self-righteousness; and because he has by his
Reason conceived and brought forth some Moral Virtues, Free Grace and its
progeny, born after the Spirit, are despised in his eyes; than which temper,
there is nothing more diametrically opposite to the Gospel, which would have
Men come in to Jesus Christ weary, heavy laden, hungry, thirsty, poor in
spirit; lost in themselves, and sensibly wanting all things: But in the
Spiritual Conflict, the War is universal, Grace sights against all Sin, not
only against the gross carnal lusts which have more of the beast in them, but
against the fine Spiritual ones, which have more of the Devil; nor only against
those open Sins which face the World, but against those secret ones which lie
hid in the Heart. So opposite it is, that as in the War against the Canaanites,
it would destroy every thing that breaths. Sin in the first motions and
titillations thereof, in the Natural Conflict, the fight is between distinct
faculties, Reason and Passion, and so is at a distance, and as it were by
missile arms; but in the Spiritual Conflict, the fight is close and immediate,
there is something of Grace in every faculty to encounter the corruption there.
In the Understanding there is an Heavenly Wisdom which counterplots the
Earthly, as Hushai did. Ahithophel, whilst the one designs for Absalom, the
rebellious lust in the Heart, the other stands up for the Kingdom of Christ,
the true David. In the Will there is an holy Principle which ballinces the
corrupt, and is as a counter-byass to the Heart, drawing it off from the false
beatitudes to the true. In the Affections there is a Divine spark, which makes
them aspire and elevate toward Heavenly things, whilst the earthly part clogs
and presses them downwards. In a word, Grace is spread all over the Soul, as
the Israelites were over Canaan, to drive out the old inhabitant, the
corruption in every faculty. In the Natural Conflict, Man walks in his own
Circle, the only desigu is for the, Kingdom of Reason; and which is the common
blast upon Morality, nothing is done in ordine ad Deum. In the Spiritual
Conflict, the aim is all for God and Christ, that their Throne may be in the
Heart, and all their enemies there, may be made their footstool. Thus Grace,
ushered into the Soul by Faith, does by little and little work out and
extirpate Sin; as the day breaks upon the Heart, darkness goes off; as Holiness
flows in, Corruption departs; the more of Heaven is there, the less of Earth.

Thirdly, Faith discovers the great evil of Original Sin, and so raises up an
hatred against it, and hatred is a murderer, and would, if it could, annihilate
its opposite; Faith shows it to be an All-evil, a Mother of abominations. Some
particular Sins are such monsters in Morality, that when viewed only in the
light of Nature, they appear very odious; such was the cruelty of Nero,
Effeminacy of Sardanapalus, and the like; much more odious, when inspected by
the light of Faith, must that appear which is All-sin in one, a (...), or
universal Seminary of iniquity. Anthony holding Caesar's bloody Coat up to the
People, moved them against the Conspirators; Faith holding up the Murders,
Adulteries, Blasphemies, Villainies in the World, unto the Believers eyes, stirs
his Heart against the venomous root of all these. Faith shows it to be an
universal evil, all over the Soul, breaking forth like the boyls of Egypt, upon
man and upon beast, upon the intellective and sensitive faculties, and all over
the Believers duties; lying as the locusts there upon every herb and green
thing, upon the verdure and glory of every good work; it is a blemish in the
Believers eye, a plague in his Heart, an ataxy in his Affections, a damp on his
Prayers, a cooler to his Charity and Zeal, and a dead fly in all the precious
Ointment of his duties and good works. Faith shows it to be an utter enemy to
God, Antichrist-like, opposing every appearance of him in the Heart, quenching
every good motion, trampling on every holy beam, slighting at the two great
periods of Mankind, Heaven and Hell; and jeering at that holiness and iniquity
which lead thither: Faith shows it to be an evil always present; the Believer
shakes himself, and it adhers; flys, and it encompasses; mortifies, and it
lives; prays, weeps, sweats, and fights, and yet the Canaanite is in the land;
like a living man chained to a dead, he carries about his own loathsomness, a
body of death all his days; this cleaves to him as the blackness to the
Ethiopian, and as the fretting spreading Leprofie to the house; after all his
washing and scraping of himself, it will yet be in him, till death dissolve him
into dust: Such representations as these made by Faith, fill the Believer with
shame and self-abhorrency, and raise up in him an irreconcilable hatred
against it.

Fourthly, Faith, so far as it is acted, though it make not a total riddance of
it, does yet imprison it, that it cannot go at large and riot in scandalous
Sins. No, nor steal out in an evil thought, but it will be arrested in its
passage to the Will for a consent; as it was Gods caution, beware that there be
not a thought in thy Belial-heart against Charity, Deuteronomy. 15.9. So it is Faiths
endeavor to stop corruption even in a thought; the flesh is still a lusting,
and would have one piece of forbidden fruit or other in its mouth; but Faith
opposes, and would, if it could, leave nothing of it to breath in the Believer:
This is that the Scripture calls, The crucifying of the old man; Faith arraigns
the old man as the Arch-malefactor in the World, condemns him as worthy to die;
strips him of his veils and false coverings, and by holy restraints nails him
to the Cross, that unless in a slumber of Faith, he cannot move or stir
himself, but dies away by little and little. As the light of Nature, being
imprisoned in unrighteousness, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.18, is every day
exhausted and weakened; so the corruption of Nature being thus restrained by
Faith, gradually loses its life and vigor. Martinus Polonus tells of a terrible
Dragon at Rome, who killed many daily with his poisonous breath, but was at
last shut up with Brazen gates through the Prayers of Sylvester Bishop there.
Were this Fable true, Faith does a nobler work in restraining the inward
Serpent of corruption, whose deadly poison has spread it self over all Men,
and is eternally fatal to all but Believers.

To conclude; In all this, Faith applies it self to a Crucified Christ, from
thence it fetches its pattern: As the pure flesh of Christ, upon which, as an
expiatory Sacrifice, the Sin of the World was laid, suffered on the Cross; so
the corrupt flesh of Man, unto which, as the universal Seminary, the Sin of the
World may be justly imputed, must suffer also: Hence Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4.1.
From the suffering of Christ in the flesh, exhorts Believers to suffer in their
corrupt flesh, ceasing from Sin, and from thence it derives a spirit for the
work. Christ offered himself through the eternal Spirit on the Cross; and the
Believer through the Spirit of Christ, offers up his corrupt self to be
crucified. Hence St. Paul, Romans 6.6. says, Our old man is crucified with him;
that is, by a secret virtue drawn from his Cross.

Thus far of this Fundamental Mortification; I now come to particular Sins,
which are but the foul issues of Original, breaking forth in this or that, as
temper, education, place, custom, or other accidents give vent thereunto; these
also does Faith mortify, and that in some such way as this.

First, Faith does restrain the outward acts of Sin; there may be many
restraints in which yet there is nothing of Mortification; one Sin may restrain
another, Vitia inter se contraria pugnant; in which case Satan casts out Satan,
a predominant lust its opposite. The fiery Law with its threats may meet a man
in his perverse way, as the Angel with his drawn Sword did Balaam, and turn him
back from committing the act; nevertheless the unchanged Heart hankers and
inwardly mourns after it, as Phaltiel did after Michal, when she was forced
away from him; and which is a better restraint, because merely from an in ward
principle, Moral Virtue may hold him back from it, as it did Abimelech from
Sarah; yet this restraint is but partial, only from outward Sins of shame, and
withal selfish, aiming at no higher thing than repute and self-excellency: But
Faith restrains upon higher and nobler Motives, speaking to the temptation as
Joseph to his Mistress, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
May I break his Law, which is more than the Interdicts of all the Princes and
Potentates of the World? or stain his glory, which is more precious than the
light of the Sun, Moon and Stars? or trample on that precious Blood, which paid
my ransom from Hell and Death? or grieve away that Spirit which is the life of
all my Graces and Comforts? or pollute this Heart, which may be a Temple or
Tabernacle for the Holy One to dwell in? or run my self again into the pangs of
the New Birth, and forget the wormwood and gall of my old Sins, and eclypse the
light of Gods Countenance toward me, and lie down in the dismal borders of
Hell and Death? How can I do it? Such a restraint as this, is a degree of
Mortification; Sin begins to die, when such chains and manacles as these are
cast upon it.

Secondly, Faith does not only restrain the outward acts of Sin, but strikes at
the life of it; that is, the love thereof; and to this end Faith clearly
demonstrates, that Sin is not eligible, or an object fit for an Humane Will;
Sin shows it self as eligible many ways, but Faith destroys all those
eligibilities. Take Sin as mere Sin in the abstract, and so it is evil and only
evil; and as the Schools generally determine, Sub ratione mali, it is not, it
cannot be eligible at all; and yet even in the notion of mere Sin, it becomes
eligible, Sub ratione convenientiae, as it is congruous to the corrupt Heart of
Man. The Socinian and Pelagian Errors are welcome merely as Parasites to the
pride of Reason and Will. In Sins of Omission, the very neglect gratifies Man's
aversness from good; in Sins of Commission, the very violation of the Law
complies with his enmity thereunto. Saint Austin in his Confessions, Lib. 2:
cap. 4.
says, That he stole Apples, that he might, Frui non re ipsa, sed furto; that
he was, Gratis malus, and amavit defectum suum; casting away the Apples, he
feasted on the iniquity; or if he took any of them into his mouth, Condimentum
facinus erat, Sin was the only fawce thereof. Man drinks in iniquity like
water; the very sinfulness is connatural. This eligibility before Faith must
needs be very strong: for to Man in the pride and self-flattery of Nature,
nothing is sweeter or dearer, than to walk in the way of his Heart, as absolute
unaccountable Lord of all his Actions; but when Faith comes, then it clearly
appears, that the corrupt Heart, into which Sin insinuates by congruity, is too
vile a thing to be gratified; it steals away from holy Duties, plays false
after fair promises, hatches treason and rebellion against God, and like a
common Strumpet prostitutes it self to every temptation that passes by; to
gratify it, is to feed a disease, or vicious humor, satisfy a grave or gulf
of inordinate desires; put the darling Soul into the mouth of Satan, and
desperately leap into the bottomless pit: that corruption to which Sin is so
grateful, is an accursed thing, destinated by the Gospel to be crucified and
slain without mercy; and those relics of it, which after the greatest
mortifications remain, are to be mourned and groaned under as the heaviest
burden in the world. What the Jewish fringes did typifie, that the Christians
Faith operates, in keeping men from seeking after their own heart; but to go
on, take sin not as mere sin, but in the dress of some apparent good; let it be
(...), a well-circumstanced Sin, as a learned man takes that place, Heb. 12.1,
flowing in riches, or rolling in sensual pleasures, or holding forth Crowns and
Scepters, and all Mundane glory; nay, if it were possible, let it invest it
self with a Creation, all the lower World cannot make it eligible to Faith. Set
down a World, if Faith substract but a God or a Soul, what will remain but
infinite damage? those treasures, which glitter so much to dark sense, are to
Faith but poor rusty moth-eaten things; that which is substance to the World,
is to Faith but a shadow, an apparition, a thing that is not, a mark too low
for an Immortal Soul to fly at: These things at present and in the Now-World
seem something; but if Faith look through the World unto the universal
conflagration, and beyond it to the World to come, what will they signify? Are
they able to survive those last flames, or purchase any thing in the World to
come? Surely just nothing; except only so much thereof as is exchanged thither
in Charity and good Works: to Faith the whole inventory of them is but a great
cheat; the Riches are not the true ones; the Gold is not that tried in the
fire; the Land does not lie in the Country which Faith seeks after; there is
nothing in them to feed or cloth, or enrich the inward man; and to hazard a God
or a Soul for them, must needs be an infinite loss. And what are the pleasures
of this World to Faith? In carnal Sins, they are but the titillations of sense,
in which the Rational faculties, were they not Spiritually incarnate and become
flesh, would have no touch of delight: In Spiritual Sins, they are but the
false gusts of a vitiated Reason and Will, which if made right by Faith, find
no congruity but in what is true and good, neither of which can be in a Sin: In
both, momentany as they are, they perish in the using, and die in the embraces;
like the dead Son of the Emperor Basilius Macedo, who being Magically
presented to his Father as alive, after a few touches and doting glances,
disappeared; so they go off, only they leave a sting and a worm behind them in
Conscience; and the poor Voluptary, without repentance, must lie down in
eternal sorrow, a thought whereof is enough to imbitter all their sweetness:
And are Mundane glories any better in Faiths account? Honor is but a blast, a
little popular air; Monarchies have their periods; History gives us a prospect
of their vanity; and much more Faith, which translates the Soul into the
everlasting Kingdom, and from thence looks on the Empires of the World as the
chaff of the Summer-floor, rolling away with the wind of time. To a man up
among the Stars, the whole Earth would be but as a small thing, and such are
Crowns and Scepters to one conversing in Heaven; in the midst of them a man may
want true greatness; the Worlds Epiphanes may be but a vile person, a slave to
his lusts, which is the greatest servitude; at death he may, like Adrian, moan
over his little Soul, and at Judgment cry out to the rocks and mountains to
fall upon him, and cover him from the presence of the Lord. But to proceed, and
take Sin in another dress; let it come as a worldly Savior, entertain it, and
you shall be delivered from losses, reproaches, racks, persecuting flames, and
cruel deaths; it will not yet be eligible. Faith in the love of its espousals,
and upon the first contract received a whole Christ, Cross and all, and so
virtually and in purpose has already swallowed down all persecutions which go
along with the Gospel; and when the actual trial comes, Faith will not escape
by iniquity, which is an evil transcendently greater than all the rest, and
whilst it outwardly, temporally saves, inwardly, eternally destroys: To Faith
there is no loss like that of a Soul, no reproach like Sins turpitude; no racks
like those in Conscience; no flames or deaths like those in Hell: Which made
those tormented Worthies not accept deliverance, Heb. 11.35. Sin is mere Sin,
totally, perfectly evil; but suffering for the Gospel is not mere suffering: In
temporal losses, there may be eternal gain; in reproaches, a spirit of glory;
in outward racks, inward joys. In the Burning-bush God may dwell; and death may
open a door to life everlasting. Hence come the famous Triumphs of Martyrs; the
Apostle rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ, Act.
5.41: In the Original it is, (...), That they were honored to be dishonored
for Christ. Others have styled their Prisons a Paradise; and their Iron-Chains
a goodly Neck-kercher; and at last have kissed the Stake, and thanked the
Executioner, accounting Suffering the only eligible thing in the World. Thus
Faith destroys all Sins eligibilities; and in so doing, as the Apostle speaks,
overcomes the World, which is the purest of Victories. The great ones, who
captivated the World outwardly and martially, were themselves captivated by it,
in one lust or other, Not unlike Amaziah, who subdued the Edomites, and was
himself taken with their gods: But Faith, which overcomes inwardly and
Spiritually, subdues the lusts themselves.

Further, yet Faith does not only strike at the love of Sin, by destroying its
eligibilities, but by surrendering the Heart to a better Object; whilst the
love and joy, and delight is in Sin, it lives as a body with a spirit in it;
but when these are surrendered up to God and Christ, and Heavenly things, it
becomes inanimate as a dead Carcass. This was notably deciphered in Christ
crucified, the grand pattern of our Mortification; he was not only stripped and
nailed, but commending his Spirit to God be gave up the Ghost. Answerably in
Mortification Sin is not only stripped of its eligibilities, and nailed by
restraints, but it dies away in the surrenders of Faith; by which the Soul
Enoch-like is translated into Heaven, and its affections are not here below to
animate Sin. Were this surrender in perfection, Sin could not so much as be, as
is evident in Christ's Humane Nature, upon which no spot could fall, because it
ever was in perfect surrender to his Father. And proportionably, where it is
but in truth only Sin is a-dying; because the love and joy, whilst in the
raptures and triumphs of Faith, afford no quickening thereunto: hence the
Apostle exhorts, Walk in the spirit, in the elevations of Faith and other
Graces, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. Sin shall
grow heartless, and be able to do little or nothing. Here we see how the dear
intimate lusts come to die; they cease to be dear as Faith turns the stream of
the Heart; and give up the Ghost, as the love and the joy go out to God. It was
Luthers method in Reformation, that first the Images were to be removed out of
the minds of Men, and then all would suceed; and it is Faiths method in
Mortification, by holy surrenders to sever the Heart from its lusts, and so do
the work. Moreover Faith casts out the love of Sin by conversing in the holy
Word; after which the Soul becomes pure and shining like Moses face after he
had been with God; conversing with the Law, it sees a rectitude and pure
splendour; and then to love Sin is to embrace crookedness and hellish darkness;
and withal it sees wrath and vengeance threatened against transgressors: and
then to love Sin is to take death and hell into our bosom. Conversing with the
Gospel, it has such a fair prospect of Grace and Christ, as renders Sin the
most ungrateful and unnatural thing in the World: Shall God give up his Son,
his eternal joy to die upon a cross; and a man, a worm, spare a lust, a brat of
his corrupt Heart? Shall Christ pour out his Blood and very Soul to expiate
Sin, and a Believer, a redeemed one, fall in love with the Crucifier? Shall the
holy Spirit come down and dwell in Man as his Temple; and he, who is so
honored, embrace that which is the only offense and grievance to such a guest?
Or shall the Kingdom of Heaven come down and offer it self; and that, which is
the only bar and obstacle, be received? Surely a Believer with his eyes open
will not do so; the more of converse he has with the Word, the less of the
love of Sin. As Sense, when it lies brooding on the Creature, inflames the love
of Sin: So Faith, when it dwells on the Word, abates it; that Concupiscence
which at first crept in upon Eve in a slumber of Faith, while Sense was doting
on the fruit, must be driven out again by Faith, fixing on the Word, and
soating above sensible things.

Thus far how Faith strikes at the love of Sin.

Thirdly, Faith mortifies Sin by watching against all the occasions and
inducements thereof. The Jews were not to name the Idol-gods; the Nazarite was
to abstain from the very husk of the grape. Valentinian could not bear a little
drop of Julians holy water, accidentally sprinkled on his garment without
detestation. The Children of Samosatane would not play with their Ball after
the Ass of the Heretical Bishop Lucius had trod on it, but burnt it in the
Marketplace as unclean. Faith is nice and curious, it will not go in with such
a dissembler, nor come nigh the door of such an Harlot as Sin is; knowing that
the Soul may soon be cheated and adulterated thereby. Apprehensions of danger
make men watch; and to Faith there is no danger like that of Sin: If the good
man of the house had known when the thief would come, he would have watched,
says our Savior, Mat. 24.43. Faith knows Sin to be a thief, and a murderer to
the Soul; and therefore sets guards within and without, that it may not creep
in by the ports of Sense, nor rise up out of the deep of the Heart. Within
there is a watch over the Thoughts, and without over the sensible Objects. And
if a snare appear, Faith cries out, as the suffering Martyr did, when a Box
with a Pardon in it was set before him, Away with it, as you love my Soul.
During this watch Sin pines and famishes away as in a Spiritual siege; the
common commerce between the Thoughts and the Objects fails, and with it those
provisions which use to be made for the flesh. Hence our Savior would have his
Disciples, To watch and pray that they might not enter into temptation:
Temptations will offer themselves, but the watching Believer will not enter
into them by a consent.

Fourthly, Faith mortifies Sin by those actings of Grace which it puts forth in
the Believer. As Sin the more it is acted makes the fuller blot on the Soul; so
Grace, the more it is acted leaves the purer tincture there: You have purified
your Souls in obeying the truth, says St. Peter, 1 Epist. 1.22. Every act of
Grace or Obedience does in its measure purify from Sin. The righteous holds on
his way, and so grows stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. The exercise of Grace
renders the inner man more strong and able to drive out Corruption; especially
when that Grace is acted, which besides its purifying, strengthening nature in
common with other Graces, is contrary to the Sin which is to be mortified; and
so proper and apt to expel it, as one contrary does another. Hence Daniel
counsels Nebuchadnezzar to break off his sins by righteousness and mercy, Dan.
4.27: his Sins being Oppression and Cruelty, nothing was apter than
Righteousness and Mercy to break them off. And our Savior when his Disciples
were fainting in the storm, calls for their Faith: And when aspiring after the
Primacy, sets a little child before them, as an emblem of Humility. Dying-
Sardis he puts upon strengthening the things which remain; and Nentral Laodicea
upon Zeal, to give her a fresh warmth in Religion. Still the advice runs upon
the contrary Grace; the more that is actuated, the more it roots and spreads in
the Soul, and the less room and place is left there for the contrary Sin: Which
I suppose was the reason why the Presbyter Sulpitius Severus, being guilty of
too much Loquacity, ever after kept silence; Spondan. Annal.
Vt peccatum, quod loquendo contraxerat, tacendo emendaret, as the Historian
expresses it. It Is a Precept of the Philosophers, Arist. Eth. lib. 2. c. 9.
To observe what Vice we are most propense to, and then to bend our selves to
the contrary extreme, that we might come to the Virtue in the middle. Faith,
though it dares not touch upon one contrary Sin to cure another, would cast
them both out by acting the contrary Grace.

Lastly, Faith mortifies Sin in a way of dependence upon the Power and Spirit
of God in and through Jesus Christ. In the Covenant of Works, in which there
was no Mediator, Man stood on his own bottom, and had all his stock in his own
hands: But in the Covenant of Grace the Believer stands in the Power of God;
and though he have a little Grace in himself, the main stock is above in a
surer hand; his life is hid with Christ in God; there is the great treasure out
of which Faith fetches supplies of the Spirit for every good work; hence in
Scripture he is said, To love, live, pray, walk, mortify in the spirit: If ye
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13.
He says, through the Spirit, because there is no other way of mortifying Sin;
he that goes about this work in his own Power is but in a dream, he knows
nothing of the life of Faith; as appears by that Antithesis which the Prophet
makes between the Soul lifted up, and the life of Faith, Hab. 2.4. Such an one
holds not the head Jesus Christ, no more than the worshippers of Angels spoken
of, Col. 2.18, 19. Whatever he may do theoretically, he does it not
practically; whilst his fleshly mind presumes, that he can move about such a
work, though the Head in Heaven stir not, his Mortification must needs be weak
and powerless; because without Christ the wisdom and power of God, he goes out
against his lusts, as Samson did against the Philistines, with his hair off;
or, as the Israelites did against the Canaanites when the Lord was not among
them, Numb. 14.32, instead of success he meets with that curse and blast, which
lights upon all Christlless persons and actions: The most charitable Prayer
that can be made for him is that of the Psalmist, Fill their faces with shame,
that they may seek thy name, O Lord, Psalm. 83.16. St. Austin long struggled in
his own strength against his Corruptions, and all in vain; at last a voice told
him, In te stas and non stas: Thou fallest, O Austin, by standing in thy self.
True Faith goes about this work in the Power and Spirit of Christ; as under the
Old Testament, when Faith subdued outward Kingdoms, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
11.33, it was by the Spirit; the Spirit clothed upon Gideon, and he smote a
mighty Host of Midianites. The Spirit came upon Samson, and he slew heaps upon
heaps of the Philistines. So under the New, when Faith subdues the inward
Kingdom of Sin, it is by the Spirit strengthening the Believer to overcome it;
the reign of Sin is broken, because he is under Grace. Here we see how old
strong customary Sins, such as are a second nature in Men, come to be subdued;
it would be an hard, nay almost impossible thing for a Moralist to unravel such
a Sin, merely by contrary acts, and those acts done by his own power, and that
power emasculated by a long tract of Sin: But Faith draws down an Almighty
Power and Spirit to the work; that hyperbole of Power which raised up Christ
from the dead, is toward the Believer, Ephesians. 1.19. That Spirit of life which
is in Christ, makes him free from the law of sin and death, Romans 8.2, The bands
of Sin can no more hold him than those of Death could Christ, when the glory of
the Father came to raise him up. In doing this great work Faith goes by these
steps; first, Faith lays down this as a foundation, That there is Power enough
in God to subdue Sin, or else he should not be an Infinite God; and that Sin is
capable of being subdued, or else it would be an Infinite Monster. That Power
which can dry up the Sea, or shake the Earth out of her place, or raise up the
Dead out of the dust, or annihilate the World in a moment, must be able to
subdue Sin. In the Prophet it is but the turn of his hand, I will turn my hand
upon thee, and purely purge away they dross, says God, Isa. 1.25. And which
comes nearer to us, Faith is sure, that this Power does not stand off at a
distance in the unapproachable Deity; but is made over to Christ, coming in the
flesh, He was anointed with the Holy Ghost and Power. The fullness of the
Godhead dwelt in him bodily. And going up to Heaven, he sat down at the right
hand of Power, all things being put under his feet. And which yet is nearer,
this Power is made over to Christ as trustee and treaurer for his Church; his
Unction is to run down upon all Believers: The fullness of the Godhead dwelt in
him, that they might be filled with it. He sits at the right hand of Power,
that his enemies, among which Sin is a chief one, may be made his footstool:
All things are put under him, that he might be Head over all to the Church,
letting down his vital influences and motions to it; his great design is, to
make an end of Sin, and to dissolve the works of the Devil. And now nothing
remains to draw down this Power to the Believer, but the acting of Faith; as
Faith goes up, Power comes down; all things are possible to the Believer, he
can do all through Christ strengthening him: It is but to look and be saved,
believe and be established, wait and renew strength; hand upon Jesus Christ,
and he who was Immanuel, God with us in his Incarnation, will be Immanuel, God
with us in such sufficient Grace as shall give us the victory over Sin; the
success is as sure as the Spirit and Power of God can make it. When Christ was
on Earth never any one came to him for bodily Cure, with a Faith that he was
able to do it, but it was done for him. Now that he is in Heaven at the right
hand of Power, such as go in Faith for Spiritual Cures cannot miscarry. What
though the bloody issue of Sin have been long a-running? a touch upon Christ
will heal. What if thou have lay'n rotting in thy Corruptions many years?
believe and thou shall see the glory of God raising thee up; a dependence on
the Power and Spirit of Christ cannot fail of a victory over Sin. So vast is
the difference between the state of Adam in Innocence, and the state of
Believers in Christ; in him one Sin drove out a great stock of pure immaculate
Grace in a moment, in them a little spark of Grace drives out a world of Sin;
because their Grace, which Adams did not, depends on the Power and Spirit of
Christ for the victory. This is a most noble and purely Evangelical act of
Faith, in which Man is abased in a continual dependence, and God exalted in a
continual supply of Grace. However, some Divines, falsely so called, have
laughed at the dependence of Faith as an idle lolling upon Christ; it is yet
the only way in which the Spirit and Power of God communicates to our
necessities, and does far more in the Christians life than any thing else: Only
we must remember, that this dependence is in the use of means; the Believer
hears, reads, meditates, prays, works, and in all depends upon the Spirit to
render them effectual.

CHAP. X.
Of Spiritual Vivification, the second Part. Of Sanctification, the influence
of Faith therein.

THus far of Mortification as a fruit of Faith. I now proceed to Vivification,
being the other part of Sanctification. In which the holy Spirit comes down
with its Divine Graces into the Soul, and quickens it to a Spiritual Life.
These Graces may be considered eitheir in their production into being, or in
their actual exercise; and both ways they are fruits of Faith. As to their
production into being, Divines differ about the order; some Divines, as Mr.
Pemble, conceive, That all Graces are infused at once, coming into us as light
does into the air, or as the Soul did into the body of Lazarus, not piecemeal
or by degrees, but all at once and together. Other set down this order,
Vocation which works Faith and Repentance, is in order of nature before
Justification, and Justification before Sanctification. Bishop Downham
distinguishes between our Spiritual conception of the incorruptible seed, and
our new birth in which Christ is formed in us in all his Graces; the former is
done in our Vocation, and the latter in our Sanctification. I conceive that
Faith, at least in order of Nature, is first, and then all other Graces follow
upon it. The Ancient Fathers, as Bishop Downham has observed, speak to the
same purpose: In Clemens Alexandrinus, Faith is called (...), the first
inclination to Salvation: In the so-called Ignatius Epistles, it is (...), the
beginning of life; as it were the Punctum Saliens in the New Creature, in which
the first motion and course of Spiritual life begins. Vita sancta a fide sumit
initium, says Fulgentius. And Fides prima datur, ex qua extera impotrantur,
says St. Augustine: All other Graces are the fruits of Faith, not as if Faith
did produce them radically or fontally out of it self, or its own virtue; but
that it unites to Christ, and so derives the Spirit with its Graces unto the
Believer. That Faith is, at least in nature, before other Graces, will appear
very probable upon diverse Congruities:

First, It is congruous to the Majesty of God: He acts like himself, dispences
Grace to the Creature in its lowest posture of resignation: Heaven is my
throne, Earth my footstool, says he; but as over-looking all this World, To
this man will I look that is poor and of a contrite spirit, Isa. 66.1, 2; To
this man, there he sets a nobler creation than this outward one. When Faith
makes a man poor and contrite, sensibly lying in his own Nothingness and
Unworthiness, then creating Grace comes upon him. We may see this as in a glass
in the Homane Nature of Christ: That which had no natural Subsistence of its
own but subsisted in the Eternal Word; that had the Spirit poured out upon it
above measure. When a man has no Moral subsistence of his own; his very
Hypostasis being a resignation; when his subsistence is in the Word of God
according to that of the Apostle, (...), Have thy being in these things, 1 Timothy
4.15. Then the holy Spirit comes down and dwells in him.

Secondly, It is congruous to Christ the Head: Union goes before Communion;
first, Faith unites us to Christ, and then all Graces flow from him: hence
Faith is called the Churches neck, Cant. 4.4. knitting to Christ the Head, and
from thence deriving all Spiritual life into the body of Believers. This also
is set before us in Christ's Humane Nature, which had first, at least in nature,
the Grace of Union, and then that of Unction; He that is in Christ is a new
Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. made so by his being in Christ; He that has the Son,
has life, 1 John 5.12. Has it by having the Son. Indeed Faith and Repentance
go before our Union with Christ, as being of necessity thereunto; but all other
Graces follow after it, as most naturally flowing from Christ the Head, of
whose fullness all Believers receive Grace for Grace.

Thirdly, It is congruous to the way of the Spirit set forth in the Gospel: The
Spirit moves on the Soul to bring forth Faith and Repentance, but it dwells
nowhere but in the Believer; Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians.
3.17. There he has perpetuum domicilium, (...), Vide Bez. and Zanch.
as the Greek word imports; He that believes on me, says our Savior, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water, Joh. 7.38. And what these rivers
are, the next verse tells us, This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive. Faith brings in the very fountain of Grace with
all its streams into the Heart; The Holy Ghost is given to them that obey him,
Act. 5.32; (...), to them that hear him, in the Gospel-command; that is, to
them that believe; so Beza and Calvin expound it, and so the Syriack has it.
The Holy Ghost works before to produce Faith and Repentance; but it is not
given to dwell in men until they believe.

Fourthly, It is congruous to the order which is between Faith, Justification
and Sanctification. Faith is in order before Justification, the Scripture is
express in it; The righteousness of God is upon them that believe, Romans 3.22.
All that believe are justified, Act. 13.39. And we have believed that we might
be justified, Gal. 2.16. And Justification is in order before Sanctification: I
suppose the Holy Spirit with its Graces will not dwell in an unreconciled Soul.
Under the Law in cleansing the Leper, first the Priest put the blood on him,
and then the holy oil upon the place, where the blood was, Levit. 14.14, and
17. The Believer first in order has the atoning Blood put on him, and then the
holy Unction of the Spirit. According to this order Faith is first of all; But
if Faith and all other Graces are infused at once and together, then either
they are infused before Justification, and so Sanctification is before
Justification; or else after it, and so Justification is before Faith.

Fifthly, This way there will be a congruity between the old Creatiowand the
new. In the old, Light was the firstborn of the Creation, and then the other
parts of the World were made; in the new, the first thing is the light of
Faith, and then follow those Graces which make up the New Creature; Beholding
as in a glass the glory of God, we are changed into his image, 2 Cor. 3.16.
First the eye of Faith is opened, and then the Image of God drawn on the Soul;
this congruity is the rather to be minded, because the Apostle, speaking of the
Creation of Faith, does it with an allusion to the Creation of Light. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 4.6. As if he had said; Light in the old Creation, and Faith in the new
answer one to another.

Sixthly, This way there will be a congruity between Christ formed in the womb,
and Christ formed in the beart. The blessed Virgin first believed, and then
Christ was formed in her Womb: Concetio Christi facta fuit, simul ac Maria in
verba Angeli consentiens dixit; Ecce ancilla Domini, De Incarnat. lib. 2.
Quest. 7.
siat mihi secundum verbum tuum, Luke 1.38. says Zanchy. No sooner did she say
an Amen of Faith to the Promise, but Christ was conceived in her; therefore
after her Faith, the Angel immediately departed from her, as having his errand
already dispatched: answerably the Christian first believes, and then Christ is
formed in him in all those sanctifying Graces which make up the holy Image of
Christ. The Apostles expressing those Graces under the notion of forming Christ
in us, Gal. 4.19. seems to hint out this Congruity.

Seventhly, This way there will be a Congruity between the being of these
Graces, and the acting of them; whilst both proceed from Faith depending upon
Christ the head of Grace. The Believers life is in Scripture called a life of
Faith; not as if there were not Love, Meekness, Obedience, Patience, with all
the other Graces in him, but because Faith is the grand principle which moves
every one of them. Faith works by love, says the Apostle, Gal. 5.6. and so
it works by Meekness, Obedience, Patience, and all other Graces, being as it
were blood and spirits running in every part of the New Creature. All Graces
are set a working by Faith, and if they also receive their being through it,
there is a Congruity between their being and working.

Upon these Congruities I take it, that Faith is first in order, and then other
Graces.

As to the actual exercise of Graces, It is Faith which sets them all a
working. To this purpose it is observable, That all the worthy acts of Grace
mentioned in the 11th. Chapter to the Hebrews, are there ascribed to Faith: so
is Abels excellent Sacrifice. Enochs walking with God, Noah's holy fear of the
deluge, Abraham's obedience in leaving his Country, Moses 's self-denial as to
the Egyptian Court, The valor of some Worthies in subduing Kingdoms; and the
patience of others in suffering torments for the truth. The reason of which is,
because Faith is the first mover, which sets all other Graces a-moving, the
General under whose conduct all Graces come forth in their courses, therefore
the honor of all is devolved upon it. Now, how Faith sets other Graces
a-working, I shall first show in a general way common to all of them, and then
more particularly with respect to some special Graces. In general Faith sets
other Graces in motion by such ways as these.

First, It looks on the Command which in Scripture calls for these Graces, as
the very Will of God: And so presses for Obedience many ways; as first from the
Divine Authority of it, In the word of a King there is power, much more in the
word of a God, when known to be such. In the Council of Triburia a fancy
touching an Episile come from Heaven made impression in some of them. Had it
been really known to be so indeed, the impression would have been deeper. At
the sound of the Command Faith knows, that it is the Lord, that the voice is
from the excellent glory; and in that Authority presses to Obedience. But this
is not all, besides Gods Authority, it urges from his Love. It is (says Faith)
the voice of thy beloved, thy dear Father in Heaven, who has cast his cords
and bands of Love round about thee to draw thee to himself; and then the Heart
must needs feel constraints and holy inflammations to Obedience, and be like
St. Peter, who, when he knew it was the Lord, girt himself, and made toward
him. Gods Love has dropped sweetness into the Command, and made all easy.
Moreover, to make the stronger impulse on the Believer, Faith demonstrates,
That the Command is just, and right, and good; that holy Love and Patience, and
other Graces of the first Table are pure rectitudes wherein Man stands in his
true posture toward God, his Goodness or Providence, or some other thing in
him: And also that Justice and Temperance, and Charity are rectitudes wherein
he stands in a true posture toward others, or himself for Gods sake. And a
Command so known moves so strongly toward Obedience, that a man, who would pay
his debts to God, or his Neighbor, or himself, cannot, must not repugn.

Secondly, Faith looks not only upon the letter of the Command, but upon the
life of Christ. Where all Graces are set forth in lively and orient colors,
really and practically exemplified to our view. Precepts possibly may have more
of notion in them, but Examples have more of vivacity to attract the heart to
imitation: above all the Example of Christ must be cogent to Believers, he went
up and down doing of good; every step one odor of Grace or other brake from
him; Subjection to Parents or Magistrates, or Zeal toward God in purging the
Temple, or Humility in washing his Disciples feet, or Meekness under malicious
accusations and blasphemies; or melting bowels, upon all occasions dropping
Cures on the bodies, and Heavenly Truths on the Souls of Men; or admirable
patience under great sorrows; and at last upon a tormenting Cross, where he
drunk the bitter cup of wrath up to the bottom; and over and above all the
rest, sweet Love and Obedience run through them all, with a pure intention to
his Fathers Will and Glory: And Oh! what a Samplar of Grace is here? and how
strongly can Faith press for an imitation! what? shall I not tread in such pure
steps, my Savior being before? Of whom shall I learn if not of my Redeemer?
Did he sweat and bleed, and die on a Cross for me, and shall I not follow him?
Can I rest on his Merits and precious Obedience, and wave his holy Pattern? Was
he to fulfill all Righteousness, and I none at all? If I abide in him, must I
not walk as he walked? If I know the truth as it is in Jesus, must not those
very Graces, which were true in him, be true in me also? Why does the Spirit
come and work those Graces in my Heart, but that they should be actuated? Unto
what was I created in Christ, if not to good works? I find nothing but vanity
in my self and my own ways, and shall I not walk in Christ and his holy Graces?
If I follow him fully, shall I not see the Heavenly Canaan at last, and there
receive a Crown of Life? Such a Pattern so pressed on a Believer must needs be
a strong motive to the exercise of Grace. The Apostle would have us run our
race, looking unto Jesus, Heb. 12.1, and 2. Fancy, as Naturalists tell us, has
done strange things; a Woman much looking on a beautiful Picture brought forth
her Child very like it, as Galen relates, to be sure: Faith looking unto Jesus
brings forth his Image in the Heart and Life.

Thirdly, Faith holds out the Promises as incentives to the work: The Believer
is an Isaac, a Child of Promise; the new Creature with its Graces is born of
the Covenant, and ever after lives upon it. Every Grace has some Promise or
other to feed on. Love has God dwelling with it; Fear has his secret;
Meekness his Salvation; Patience a crop of Comforts; and all of them have an
entail of Eternal Life. And when Graces are acted there is a Promise of
increase, To him that has, that is, uses Grace, more shall be given, more of
the same Grace; his Talent shall be doubled, his Path shines more and more to
the perfect day in Heaven; and withal more of the Divine Indwelling, Secret,
Salvation, and Comfort promised; and at last more of Glory. Thus St. Peter
speaking of diverse Graces, says, That if they be and abound in us, we shall
have an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.8, and 11. Every
Grace has an entrance into it, and abounding Grace an abundant entrance; and
all these Promises are sure in themselves, sealed by Gods Veracity, and Christ's
Blood, and sure to the Believer, being realized by Faith; and therefore must
needs be very attractive to Obedience. Faith in a mere Command will make a Man
follow God, though like Abraham he know not whither he go. Much more impulsive
is Faith in a Promise, when he knows in so following he is going into an
abundance of Grace and Glory. The lying Promises of Sin received into a carnal
fancy will draw out Corruption into act, as we see in Men, who are drawn into
Sins carnal and spiritual, much as their Father Adam was, by some Apple of
Sensual happiness, or appearance of Self-excellency; how much more attractive
must the precious true Promises of God be, when entertained by Faith? at the
sight of these the Believer, as old Jacob, at the sight of the Chariots,
revives and puts himself forth in the exercise of Grace, that he may inherit
the Promises, and the vast treasures of good in them.

Fourthly, Faith observes Seasons and Providence, and stirs up Graces suitable
thereunto. Insidels smother the greatest Works of God; some have said, That
Sodom happened to sire as standing on a Sulphurous soil. Others, that Moses
did but take the advantage of a low-tide to carry the Israelites over the
Washes. Nay, in the Jewish Church, the Pharisees and Sadducees, though great
Rabbis, could not, because without Faith, discern the Signs of that glorious
time, wherein the Messiah showed himself on Earth in such excellent Doctrines
and Miracles. But Faith where it is, understands the language of Providence,
and calls for suitable Graces: under a storm of Judgments it calls for the
mourning Graces of Repentance and Humiliation, lamenting after the Lord; under
a Sun of Prosperity it awakens the Psaltery and Harp, Praise and holy joy in
God the Fountain of all. When Iniquity abounds, it is for David's rivers of
tears to weep over it. When Gods Name or Worship, or Truth are at the Stake, it
blows up the fire of Zeal; as we see in Paul's Paroxism at Athens, Epiphanius
his renting the Veil, and Athanasius's ardent adherence to the Truth against an
Arrian World. As the Poor appear, Charity must come forth and scatter Alms. As
Injuries and Reproaches fly abroad, Meekness must show it self, and rather than
revenge, turn the other cheek. In Asslictions Patience must have her perfect
work. And in Desertions there must be an humble waiting on him that hides his
face. As God comes forth in this or that Providence, so Faith meets him in this
or that Grace. Every Grace is one time or other called out by a Providence; and
every Providence has some Grace to answer it.

Fifthly, Faith actuates Graces in a way of dependence on the Spirit of Christ:
This is instar omnium; Commands, Patterns, Promises, Providence, are
ineffectual without it. The New Creature moves not but by influence from the
Head; the holy Spirit must first stir up the nest of gracious Principles, and
then Love and Joy, and all other Graces show forth themselves. As the Humane
Nature of Christ never acted in a separate way, but did all in Union with the
Divine: So the Believers Graces do nothing apart, but all in Union with Christ.
Those who think that gracious Powers or Principles may go alone and act
themselves, know not the life of Faith; in which all Graces hang upon Christ as
beams upon the Sun. The Milevitan Council pronounces an Auathema on those that
deny the Adjutorium gratiae, which works to will and to do. And the Arausican
speaking of that Adjutorium. says, Quoties bona agimus, Deus in nobis atque
nobiscum, ut operemur, operatur. When we do good, God works our works in us and
with us. What the life of Faith is, St. Paul excellently describes, I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, says he, Gal. 2.20. And again, I labor, yet
not I, but the grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Faith is ever in dependence,
leaning on its Beloved, and breathing after the holy Spirit, that the gales
thereof may make the spicy Graces flow out; and upon this dependence the Spirit
comes down in auxiliary Grace, and there is an effectual working in every part
of the New Creature; Love in the Spirit, as it is called, Col. 1.8, and Joy in
Spirit, and every other Grace in the Spirit, badding and blossoming, and
filling the face of the life with holy fruits. Only it must be remembered, that
this Dependence is in Gods way, where Christ is experimentally Immanuel, God
with us; to stir up all holy Graces into act.

Thus Faith actuates Graces in a general way common to them all. I now proceed
to show how Faith actuates this or that Grace in particular. And that I may not
be too prolix in running over all Graces, I shall single some choice ones out
instead of all.

First, I shall begin with the Grace of Love. This is the great Command, the
sum of the Law, a Divine Union with God, a bond of perfection among Men, a holy
fire kindled by the Holy Ghost in the Heart, and the sweetness and easiness of
every good Duty. This Grace whether it respect God or Christ, or our Neighbor,
is actuated by Faith.

As touching our Love to God, it is so actuated. The very light of Nature
reveals a God, an excellent perfect Being, or the Being of Beings; whose Love,
as the Philosopher said, is the principle and knot of the World, and so cannot
but raise up a kind of Love toward him; the Will being necessarily in some sort
affected with such an Excellency, though seen but by a glimmering light. Not
that this Love is a Grace, or a Love in sincerity, or a Love sicut oportet, as
an ancient Council speaks, or indeed in Scripture sense any love at all;
because it loves not God above all, it must needs be inordinate, there being
the same ataxy in loving God below the Creature, as in loving the Creature
above God; But that there is a kind of Love, such as that dark light can raise
up in fallen man. But when the light of Faith comes, it raises up the Grace of
Love toward God, and ever after moves it into act by the pure discoveries of
him, which it lets into the Heart from Scripture. He is (says Faith) an
immense infinite Goodness; Creatures are but drops of Being lying in the shell
of Time, but he is the Ocean of all Perfections. They may be good for this or
that in particular according to their finite kinds and spheres, but he is
(...), the All-things, as the Aposile calls him, 1 Cor. 15.28. And withal he is
Love it self, as another Apostle has it, 1 John 4.16. Not shutting up his
Allness in unapproachable Glory, but letting it out to Believers. His Love,
though he ever had perfect Blessedness in himself, would yet pour out it self
in making a world of good Creatures; and after Man's fall in giving his only Son
to take hold of our nature, and in it to bring us back again to himself, that
he might be our God, and make over his Allness to us; and all this in pure
Grace, without any Money or Merit on our part, and in rich Mercy toward worms
and forlorn Sinners; and to assure it to us, a Gospel is let down from Heaven
full of great and precious Promises; such as are the very counterpanes of that
Grace and Mercy which flow in his Heart toward Sinners. Under such musings of
Faith, Oh how the holy fire of Love kindles? What high rates and estimates are
set upon him? How is the Heart inflamed toward Union, to be one spirit with
him? What Complacencies and Sabbaths of rest does it find in him? What little
things are Worlds and Creatures? What an All is He, and an Heaven his Love?
What tastes are there of his Goodness and surrenders to his Will and Glory? Our
Love goes after him, as his is by Faith let in upon the Heart.

Moreover, Faith excites the Love of him by every act which it sets about; in
its recumbencies it enamours the Heart, that he should give us leave to lean on
his Grace, and in so doing bear up our weakness with Promises, and sweetly
answer us in Pardons and suitable Graces; in its Obedience it is very
ravishing, that he should chalk out such pure ways for us, and take us by the
hand and teach us to go, and at last crown our faultring Obedience with Eternal
Life. Ordinances, which to Unbelief are but dry things, are to Faith the lovely
Chariots of the Spirit; Creatures, which are Idols to carnal sense, are to
Faith fair mirrors of the infinite Goodness and Beauty in the Creator. Which
way soever Faith turns it self, it meets with something or other inflammative
of our Love toward him, who is everywhere, and all in all.

As touching our Love to Christ, it is actuated in the same manner. A mere
notion of Christ raises up some Love toward him; as we see in those
Temporaries, who receive the word with joy, Mat. 13.20, which though it be but
fructus horarius, hints out a kind of Love. Such a story as that of Codrus the
Athenian King's dying for his Country could not but affect his Subjects; much
more must the History of Christ dying for a World do so. Only this Love to
Christ raised up by mere Evangelical notion, as the Love to God raised up by
natural, is not right, nor elevated to a Divine pitch, till Faith come and show
him forth by a light more congruous than all literal knowledge; and then there
is, as the Church after an elegant description concludes, Totus desideria, all
loves or desires, Cant. 5.16. Every thing in him is attractive; What a person
is the Eternal Word, the brightness of the Fathers glory? What an Union,
Immanuel, God and Man in one? Heaven and Earth admirably blended together, as a
pledge that God would be at one with us? What a robe is his Righteousness made
as broad as the Law, and woven all of Love from the top to the bottom? What a
Laver his Blood able to expiate a world of Sins, and save a world of Sinners?
What a treasure is his Fullness, where the Spirit is in overmeasure, and all its
Graces in redundance running over into the vessels of Faith, and filling all
its capacities? Who, that has eyes of Faith, would not love him? To ask why we
should love him, is as the Philosopher told him who demanded, Why Beauty was so
taking? (...), a blind man's question; nothing but blind unbelief can hold us
from his Embraces. Whatever posture Faith be in, whether contemplating him in
the Mount, or leaning on the bosom of his Grace, or hiding in his Wounds, or
sitting at his feet for Wisdom, or lying under his Scepter for power against
Sin; still it stirs up an holy Love to him. It finds his Blood in every Pardon;
his Spirit in every Grace; his Wine-cellar in every Ordinance; his Seal in
every Promise; and his Purchase in every Creature. No wonder if St. Paul count
all things dung and dross for him. And St. Austin cry out, Sero te amavi
Domine, Lord, 'twas late e're I loved thee. True Faith would have none but
Christ loving him, as St. Bernard used to say, Plus quam mea, meos, me; More
than all my goods, my friends, my self: And as another holy Man did, weeping
that it can love Christ no more.

As touching our Love to our Neighbor, it is also actuated by Faith. Reason
and Humanity raise up a Love toward Man; the Barbarians kindly received St.
Paul and his Shipwracked Company, Act. 28.2. Titus Vespasian was called Amor
and deliciae humani generis; the Love and delight of Mankind: Suffering none to
go away sad from his Presence. Nay Herod himself in a Famine turned all his
Plate and rich Household Stuff into Money, therewith to fetch Corn out of Egypt
for the necessities of the People. Only this Love for want of Supernatural
rectitude squints at Vainglory, or moves upon some other selfish Principles;
or at best rises up out of a simpathy of the common nature. True Love toward
our Neighbor, such as issues out of Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5, is propter
Deum, for Gods sake: And as the Schoolmen say, There is but one root or habit
of Love, whereby we love God and our Neighbor, because God as he is supreme
Goodness is the formal reason of Love to our Neighbor; He only being to be
loved for himself, and others but the material Objects of Love to be loved for
him; hence also damned or irrational Creatures are not properly the Objects of
Love, because not capable of Union with God in bliss. Unto this true Love Faith
presses by some such Divine motives as these; is not Love a Command? nay, the
sum of the second Table and must it not be obeyed? Can we wait for Promises,
and not observe Commands? Or may we have the Love of the first Table without
that of the second? Has not God loved us in an incomparable unparalleld way,
and shall we not love our Brother? Shall infinite bowels open, and finite ones
be shut? If any shut them, how dwells the love of God in him? says the
Apostle, 1 John 3.17. A touch, a sense of his Love let in by Faith will make
ours flow out toward our Neighbor. Such a sweet pressure of it was on Mr.
Fox, That he never denied any that asked for Jesus sake. A Believer acting as a
Believer cannot be hard to his Neighbor, or say, Go and come again, as long as
the Mercy-seat is open: And what is thy Neighbor? is he not thine own flesh?
Nay, does he not in a sense bear Gods Image; and is he not capable of eternal
Blessedness? And who that has a hope of singing Hosanna's in Heaven would not
love such an one? And will not God be glorified thereby? Graces show forth more
of God than Creatures, and Love more than all the rest, because he is Love it
self. The Primitive Christians told the World whose they were, by their one
heart and one soul, Terrull. Apol.
Act. 4.32. And afterward their Love was pointed at by the very Pagans, saying,
Vide ut invicem se diligant, See how they love one another. And do we know what
and how great a thing may be in acts of Love? Some entertaining strangers have
entertained Angels, Heb. 13.2. But possibly we may do more, we may feed or
cloth or visit Christ in his poor members, and in the other World be repaid all
again with usury. From such Divine Motives as these Faith actuates Love to our
Neighbor; but this is not all, Faith actuates it in a regular and congruous
way according to relations and propinquities; giving out a Love of delight to
the Saints, as having most of God in them; a Love of mercy to the poor, as
being Christ's Treasurers; a love of reverence to Parents, by whom we received
our being; a Love of provision to Children, who are our selves multiplied; and
a Love of benevolence to all; not excluding enemies; to love enemies, is, (as
one says) inter mirabilia legis, one of the wonders of the Law; and yet Faith
in the Gospel Grace will reach it. Hence it is observable, that when our
Savior bids his Disciples to forgive even such as trespass against them seven
times in a day; They reply in a Prayer, Lord, increase our faith, Luke 17.5.
because Faith will move Love into act even in the difficult duty of forgiving
others.

Another Grace actuated by Faith is holy Fear of God; the very light of Nature
revealing some glimmerings of his Greatness and Justice raises up a Fear of
him: The Barbarians seeing the Viper on St. Paul's hand cried out of a (...), a
revenging justice; as if he had been a murderer, Act. 28.4. Pythagoras begins
his Golden Verses with Veneration of the Gods. Among all Nations there has
been a (...), a fearing of God. The ancient Gauls out of reverence to their
gods would not touch the consecrated Gold lying in their Temples. Upon the same
account there were among many Ethnicks, Nudipedalia sacra, barefooted
devotions. Only this Fear was in it self but servile, and further corrupted by
false opinions of the Deity, and hence sprung all that (...), worship or
superstition which was among the Heathens: The progeny of their ancient
Demons, their Charms and Exorcisms, their Festivals and Purifications, their
Lustrations and human inhuman Sacrifices, and all their strange Rites and
Ceremonies of Adoration, whereby they endeavored to flatter and compound with
their gods, and guilty Consciences. This servile Fear is further advanced when
to the light of Nature is superadded that of the pure Law, which flashes in
upon the Conscience and sets it on sire with reslections upon guilt, and
expectations of wrath thereupon; but it is servile still, and chiefly looks at
punishment. A man in such a state may forbear an act of Sin, but he is corrupt
within, adbue vivit in eo peecandi voluntas, the love of Sin is in him still,
as an Ancient has it; His heart says to his Sin as the Emperor Bassimus did
to his beautiful Mother in Law, Quam vellem, si liceret; Oh that there were no
Law against it, or punishment to follow after it: He may do good, but not well;
Intus reus est, and in animo non facit; he is guilty within, and in mind does
it not, as St. Austin says; there wants that love of righteousness, out of
which true Obedience issues; but where Faith is, there is castus timor, a pure
filial fear of God, such as reverences his Majesty as supreme, and sears Sin as
the greatest evil; and withal punishment in its due place, though not
principally or in a servile way; and among punishments, chiefly that of loss
and separation from God as a greater evil than the rest. And as Faith sees the
invisible one more or less, so this holy Fear is more or less moved into act.
Of old the appearances of God in outward Symbols of glory struck an a we upon
men; the high Thrones with its train made Isaiah cry out as an undone man, Isa.
6. the voice out of the whirlwind caused Job to abhor himself in dust and
ashes, Job 42.6. The bright thining man turned Daniel's comeliness into
corruption, Dan. 10.8. And what those outward appearances did in a sensible
way, that Faith which is an inward Vision of God, does in a Spiritual; looking
on him by Faith, a dread falls on us from every Attribute or Work of his. His
glorious Majesty makes us go and hide our selves in the dust of our own
vileness and nothingness. His pure Holiness comparatively turns us and all our
comely Graces into rottenness. His dreadful Justice sounds so loud in the
threatening, that we cannot but tremble at every word of it. Nay his very
goodness and tender bowels lying all about us make us afraid to trample thereon
by finning; even those in Nature do so, much more those richer ones in Grace.
His very rain calls for out fear, Jer. 5.24. And what do those dews of the
Spirit which are not common as the other? His bounding the Sea does so, Jer.
5.22. and what does his bounding corruption, which else would drown Soul and
all in perdition? Oh how tremendous is our life! our Bodies living on the Blood
of Creatures, and our Souls on the Blood of God; our natural being lying in the
arms of that Power which bears up the World, and our Spiritual in the arms of
that Grace which saves it; Earth flowing round about us with Blessings, and
Heaven it self coming down in Promises, and carrying back our Hopes thither.
Who in such Visions of Faith would not fear the Lord and his goodness? Who
would not tremble at Sins indignity and ingratitude? After such mercies as
these should we again transgress against him? If we wax wanton under Goodness,
how soon may Sovereignty come down and recover all from us as forfeited! Heaven
may shut up it self, and the dews of the Spirit cease, our Graces may all droop
and wither, and our Hearts grow hard and stony; one lust or other may carry us
into captivity, and our little remnant of Grace and Life may cry out as the
Church does, O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our
hearts from thy fear? return for thy servants sake, Isa. 63.17. After all our
wantonness we shall be glad to come to holy Fear again; Sovereignty will make
us fear him in every thing: such a fight of him by Faith as this makes him
practically to us (...) the fear, as he is called, Psalm. 76.11. Moreover Faith
moves this Fear into act by showing the great evil of Sin: Sense looks on penal
evils which press on the outward man, but Faith on Sin as the greatest of
evils, it being an opposite to God, a blot to the Soul, a blast to the World, a
forfeiture of Heaven, and fuel for the flames of Hell; a thing not to be done,
Pro quantiscunque bonis lucrandis, aut pro quantiscunque malis pracavendis; for
the gaining never so great a good, or for the avoiding never so great an evil,
as Bradwardine speaks. Hence St. Austin said, That a man must not tell a lie to
save a world. And Henry Flander being a Prisoner for the Protestant Religion,
would not say, That his Wife was his Whore, no, not to save his life offered to
him on those terms. Now Fear being a kind of flight from evil, the greater the
evil is, the greater is the flight; and when an evil is the greatest of evils,
such as Sin appears to Faith, the flight from it is as from Hell it self; and
more if possible, according to the saying of Anselm, That if Sin were set
before him on the one band, and Hell on the other, he would rather leap into
Hell than fall into Sin.

Another Grace actuated by Faith, is Zeal, which is an intense Love, or a
mixture of Love and Anger, or rather the heat and boiling up of all the
affections in the concerns of God and his Glory: This is a coal from the Altar,
which warms Hearts and Lives, and sparkles out in every Grace and Duty; without
it all is in spirituali gelicidio, cold and frozen, as in a Sunless World.
Indeed without Faith Zeal is blind, as in the Jew, who in his heat for the Law
opposes the Gospel and true Righteousness; Or it runs out upon Humane things as
in the Papist, who cries up Traditions as a second Oracle; or it moves upon
selfish Principles, as in the Pharisees, who did all theatrically to be seen of
men. But when Faith comes, Zeal is according to the Word as its Rule, and for
Divine things as the worthiest Object; and out of a pure intention to Gods
Glory as the supreme end. Faith brings us into Communion with God, and makes us
one spirit with him; and hence it comes to pass, that those things which are
dear to him are so to us; and those injuries which move his jealousy above,
stir up our Zeal here below. To Faith Gods name is nomen Majestativum, holy,
reverend, fearful, glorious, precious, a name above every name, and therefore
cannot be profaned; but Zeal will break forth, the reproaches cast on it fall
more heavily on the Believer than those on himself or his near relations; Nay
they press harder on him, than if he should hear one railing at Princes or
Angels. Maris the blind Bishop of Chalcedon, being brought into the presence of
the blasphemous Emperor Julian, fell severely on him as upon an enemy of God;
and when Julian told him, That he was blind, and his Galilean God would not
cure him: Maris gave thanks to God, who had taken away his eyes, that he might
not look on so wicked a wretch as Julian. Such a Zeal does Faith put forth for
Gods name. In like manner the Worship of God is to Faith, his Homage, honor on
Earth, Crown of glory, Sanctuary of Presence, a thing too precious and pure to
be allayed with Humane mixtures; if this be corrupted, our Zeal must needs
kindle at it, and so much the more, because his facred jealousy hangs more
over his Worship than over any thing else in all the World. To the other
Commandments we find this annexed, I am the Lord, Lev. 19; but to the second, I
am a jealeus God, Exodus 20.5. Hence Moses at the light of the Calf forgets his
Meekness, and in a holy Passion brake the holy Tables. In the
Constantinopolitan Council held about the year of our Lord 754, how hot were
the Bishops against Images as a mere Pagan custom! and when they were cast
down, how triumphant was the Peoples Zeal crying out, Hodie salus mundo, now is
salvation come to the world! In the fifth Council of Carthage they would have
the very relics of Idolatry totally blotted out. Nay, Leo Bishop of Rome,
when the Manichees Worshipped the Sun, forbade the Christians to worship
toward the East, that they might have nothing common with them. Such a Zeal
does Faith stir up for the Worship of God, and no less for the Truth of God:
this is a precious jewel, a secret out of the Fathers bosom, a beam come down
from Heaven to light us thither; if this be subverted, Zeal will stand up and
vindicate it. Secundus when he was commanded to deliver up his Bibles to be
burnt, answered, Christianus sum and non traditor. In the first General
Councils how earnest were the Fathers for the Faith? they would not exchange a
letter or syllable of it: The Arrian (...), will not pass instead of (...); nor
the Nestorian (...), applied to Christ as man, instead of (...), applied to the
blessed Virgin. With what an heroical and gallant spirit did Luther cleave to
the Evangelical Truth? Pia est and sancta hac in re nostra pertinacia; in this
ours is a pious and holy obstinacy, says he. Such a Zeal for truth does Faith
ralse up. In sum Faith has a single eye at Gods Glory; and so endears all
things tending thereunto, that upon the least violation thereof Zeal will be
ready to break forth in that behalf. Moreover, Faith gives a further advance
thereunto by looking on the unparallelled Love of God. O what a Zeal has he
for our Salvation! Has he not writ our poor names in the book of Life, and
shall we neglect his glorious one? Has not he sent his own Son in the flesh to
be the great Ordinance of our Salvation, and to fill all the under-Ordinances
with his Spirit and Grace, and shall we not be zealous in and for his Worship?
Are not his holy Truths the day star in our bearts, seeds of the New Creature,
and Cordials of rich Comfort, and shall we not earnestly contend for them? Will
he not glorify us to all eternity above, and shall we not glorify him in our
little span of time here below? Whilst Faith is thus musing, the fire of Zeal
must needs kindle in our Hearts.

Another Grace actuated by Faith is Meekness; which is as cool in our own cause
as Zeal is hot in Gods. This is the great Moderatrix of Anger, that it breaks
not out Preter squum and bonum, not unjustly for a light occasion; as that
Pope's did, who raged upon the missing a cold Peacock; and blasphemously added
If God was so angry for an Apple, he might justly be so for a Peacock: Nor upon
a just cause excessively; as it did in that great Conqueror Stephen King of
Poland, who was so angry with the Rigenses about the Gregorian Calendar. that
he sell into Epileptical sus and died. Natural Meekness is a beautiful thing,
and so is Moral, but neither is a Grace: Natural being but the result of a
sweet temper of Body, and Moral but the improvement of Reason; neither levels
so high as Gods Glory. In Natural we do but comply with our Temperament, and in
Moral but sacrifice to our Reason: But the Grace of Meekness is a portion of
that Dovelike Spirit which rested upon Christ, and aims at his Glory whose
Goodness is resembled thereby. Hence it is observable, that where the Meekness
is only Natural or Moral, Men will be angerless and sintully meek even when
Gods Glory lies at the Stake, their Meekness being as opposite to holy Zeal, as
to rash Anger; but where the Grace of Meekness is, Men in their own concerns
glorify God by a cool converse, and in Gods call for Zeal to vindicate his
Glory. To promote this Grace Faith does many things; as first, it looks at the
infinite Long-sufferance of God; O what does he bear from Men! His Laws are
violated, Blessings abused, Name blasphemed, Glory stained, and all by his own
Creatures, and in his own World, and day after day, year after year, nay, one
age after another, and yet the axle-tree of his Patience breaks not under it;
(...)
a look at this will much meeken us. Excellent Melincton under great Calumnies
was still of a cool spirit and when his Enemies said, That they would not leave
him a footstep in Germany; all hi^ reply was, That he should have one in Heaven
And what made him so meek we may gather from his own words, Nullum hominem
tantum sustinere malorum, quantum contumeliarum Deus; No man bears so many
evils as God does contumelies. And if we will be followers of God we must be
meek; and as a further motive hereunto, Faith looks unto Christ, in whom
Meekness is exemplified in our own Nature, that we may not say, flesh and blood
cannot be so, under reproaches, injuries contradictions, bloody sufferings. He
was as a lamb, not opening his mouth, when he was reviled be reviled not again,
when he suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23. And the Believer must follow
him, and the rather because he has a spirit of Meekness from him to do so.
Such a spirit showed it self in Beza who, when in a Dispute about the
Eucharist, the Jesuits called him and his Colleagues Foxes and Serpents, only
replied, Nos non magis credimns quam Transubstantiationem; We believe it as
much as we do Transubstantiation. Again, this Grace is much advanced by
Reslections: without Faith a man is a stranger at home, and knows every thing
better than his own Heart, as St. Bernard faith of Petrus Abailardus, He knew
every thing better than himself; but where Faith is, there is the true (...),
then a Man looks in wardly into his own Heart, and there finds such a black
nest of Corruptions, that upon reproaches and injuries ostered he is ready to
commune with himself and say, Are not such Sins with me, even with me, at least
seminally, if not actually? Have not I done worse to God, and may I not do so
to Men? Aut sumus aut fuimus aut possumus esse quod hic est; such Reflections
wonderfully meeken us. Hence St. Bernard says, That he never saw another man
sin, but he was jealous of his own Heart: Ille heri, and tu hodie, and ego
cras, he did it yesterday, and thou to day, and I to morrow. St. Paul exhorts
the Galatians in the Plural number to restore the lapsed in the spirit of
Meekness, and adds the reason in the singular, considering thy self, Gal. 6.1.
He changes the number, as the Judicious Interpreter observes, That every one in
particular may deseend into himself, and there find an Argument for Meekness
toward others. Moreover Faith promotes this Grace by viewing the Promises made
thereunto, which are as large as heart can wish: Would we have the things of
the World? The meek shall inherit the earth; and to sweeten it, They shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace, Psalm. 37.11. Would we have the
things of God? The meek shall be beautified with salvation, Psalm. 149.4. And
all the good tidings in the Gospel are to be preached to them, Isa. 61.1. For
the true Way, They have God to teach them, and guide them in judgment. Psalm.
25.9. And for a pure Comfort, They shall have joy in the Lord, and be every day
increasing it, Isa. 29.19. Their meek and quiet spirit makes them beautiful in
the eyes of God and Man; so rich a jewel proves them to be the elect of God,
Col. 3.12. Such Promises as these are able to meeken us under any Injuries.
Cicero saying, Justitiae primum munus est, ut ne cui noceat; and adding as a
salvo, nisi lacessitus, Lactantius cried out, O quam simplicem sententiam
duorum verborum adjectione corrupit! What a dainty sentence did he spoil with
those two words! A Believer fixing his eyes on the Promises will not let go his
Meekness; no, not for all the provocations in the World; the loss of such a
Jewel would be more to him than all other sufferings.

Another Grace actuated by Faith is Obedience: Two things in the Spouse did
ravish the heart of Christ, her single eye of Faith, and the neck-chain of
Obedience, Cant. 4.9. Obedience, as Samuel said, is better than Sacrisice: And
as Luther, More eligible than doing Miracles. Faith, receiving Christ the Lord,
is in it self Virtual Obedience to the Commands of God, and as an effect it
produces actual. To this end it believes the Commands to be as they are;
looking on the stamps of Majesty, Purity; Equity, Righteousness therein, it
falls down and confesses, that God is there of a truth; this and that is the
very Will of God, and must be done, primo intuitu, without dispute, and by all
persons even the greatest on Earth. Princes here are Subjects: Constantine and
Theodosius, though Emperors, styled themselves Vassals of Christ. Zedekiab the
King should have humbled himself before Jeremy the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 36.12.
Nay, the Kingdom of God, which is in every Command must be humbly received,
though coming in the hand of a child or a servant, as a good Divine notes.
Here all men, and all in men, even the Princely powers of Reason and Will, with
all the progeny of Thoughts and Affections must bow down before God: A famous
instance of which we have in the Noble Andelot in France, who being questioned
for a Protestant by his Sovereign Henry the second, bravely professed, That his
Body, Estate, and Dignity was in his Majesty's power, but his Soul was only
subject to God. From such a Supreme Authority in the Command Faith presses
strongly to Obedience; and for a sweet Principle thereunto, it draws a free
Spirit from Christ. Faith translates us into the Kingdom of Christ, and there
by a singular Privilege above other Kingdom, all the Subjects are ready to do
the Commands of their Lord. Faith converses much about the Wounds and precious
Sacrifice of Christ, and there the free Spirit dwells, as the free bird in the
Altar, Ps. 84.3. And being received by Faith, brings forth a numerous
offspring in acts of Obedience. Faith makes us parts and pieces of Christ, and
so we are anointed with the Holy Ghost in some measure; as his Humane Nature
was in a transcendent way. Faith dwells in the holy Truth, and that makes us
free indeed. Whilst Precepts give the Rule, Promises afford the Power; such a
Promise as that, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27. being
mixed with Faith will empower us to all Obedience. Hence the Service of God
becomes a freedom, and Obedience easy and natural moving upon the wheels of
Love, and wings of the Spirit, which must needs be a very strong incentive to
Obedience; and the rather because Faith ensures the acceptance thereof. Were we
to obey under the Covenant of Works, which will bate nothing of pure sinless
Perfection, our Obedience might be bootless and heartless; because every act of
it would vanish and come to nothing by the adherent Corruption; which made
Calvin say, That if a man did cull out the most excellent work of all his life,
he would find some corrupt flesh or other in it. And St. Austin, Vae vite
landabili, Woe to a laudable life without mercy: But we are to obey under the
Covenant of Grace, whence Sincerity is accepted, and frailty covered. God gives
a Tostimonial of Righteousness to Noah, not withstanding his Infirmities; and
of Perfectness to Asa, notwithstanding the high Places. Uprightness passes for
absolute Perfection, and the main of the Heart for all of it; insomuch that it
is said of Josiah, That he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all
his soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, 2 King.
23.25. his Sincerity was taken as if all had been fulfilled; Retract. lib. 1.
c. 19.
according to that of St. Austin, Omnia mandata facta deputantur, quando
quicquid non sit ignoscitur. There are Pardons ready sealed in Heaven for
Believers Insirmities; God forgives what is ours in a duty, and accepts what is
his own. Our Duties are taken into the hand of Christ the Mediator, and there
perfumed with his sweet Merits; and though as they are in our hands they have
dross and soil in them, yet as they are in his they are glorified Duties, and
as sweet Odours to God. And upon such terms as these who would not obey? Every
act of Obedience shall be accepted; and the light of Gods Countenance will
irradiate our Duties. And to give a further advance to this Grace, Faith looks
within the Veil to the great recompense in Heaven; there are Crowns of Life,
rivers of Pleasures, and plenitudes of Joy for ever; there holy Souls see all
Truths in their Original, drink all Good out of the Fountain, and have God for
their All in All; and all this is the reward of our poor imperfect Obedience.
And as such is outwardly secured in the Promises, and inwardly realized by
Faith, and therefore must needs move the Believer strongly to Obedience; no
wonder if he burn in Devotions, or melt in Charity, or labor in other acts of
Obedience, all these being but a sowing to the Spirit, will come up in a crop
of Eternal Life; his Prayers will be turned into Hallelujahs, his Alms repaid
in Everlasting Love, and all his good Works, which follow him into another
World, shall be woven into a Crown of Immortality. And upon such an account who
would not obey and live in perpetual resignation; as he did, who (as the story
goes) always concluded his Prayers thus, Domine, quid me vis facere; Lord, what
will thou have me to do? And lived in such holy joys, as if he had been in
Heaven already?

Another Grace actuated by Faith, is Patience. This is Meekness toward God, as
Meekness is Patience toward Man, and respects Gods Disposing Will as
Obedience does his Commanding: This is a Subjection to God, a Possession of our
Selves, and an Admiration to Others. Hence the Constancy of Annas Burgus a
Senator of Paris, suffering for the Protestant Cause, made many curious to know
what Religion that was for which he so patiently endured death. To promote this
Grace, Faith in the first place looks up to God as sitting at the stern and
ruling all; every Affliction is a piece of his Government; to murmur against it
is rebellion: in such a case nothing becomes us so much as with Aaron to hold
our peace; or if we open our lips to do it with Job, Blessing the name of the
great Giver and Taker. Is he not the Lord, and may he not do as he will in his
own World, and among his own Creatures? Should not all flesh be silent before
him? None but himself may or can be Rector of the World, and yet in every act
of Impatience we aspire and virtutually would be such our selves: and is he not
Insinitely wise and just in all that he does? Every Wheel has an eye in it,
and every Cross its just proportion, and to think that it might have been
better is to blaspheme Providence. This made that holy Man Mr. Dod in his
Sickness after extreme sits of pain say to his Servant, O think well of God for
it, for it is most justly and wisely done whatsoever he does. And is he not
gracious and mercisul, and does not Mercy rejoice against Judgment? The measire
of Grace (as the Jewish Rabbis say) is ever larger than the measure of
Judgment, for one Cross we have many Blessings. And shall we receive good, much
good at his hand, and not a little evil? If we have his Heavenly Graces, how
much may we bate of Earth and its Comforts? If Sin, the greatest burden of all
be taken off in a Pardon, may we not easily bear the lesser ones? Thus Mr.
Greenham told his Son in Law, complaining of his Crosses, When Affliction lies
heavy, Sin lies light: If guilt press not, any thing may be born, nay, is not
he gracious and merciful in the very Affliction? Does he not support with one
hand, whilst he smites with another? St. Paul glories in his Infirmites, That
the power of Christ may rest upon him, 2 Cor. 12.9. And the Noble Potamenia
being threatened to be cast into a Vessel of burning Pitch, begged, Spond.
Annal. Ann. 310.
That she might not be cast in all at once, but piecemeal, that they might see
how much Patience the unknown Christ had given unto her; and does he not make
all work together for good? What are the issues of Affliction to Believers, but
the purgation of Sins, trials of Grace, peaceable fruits of Righteousness, and
inward joys and experiences of Gods Goodness? Let Faith but cast up the
reckoning, and it will appear, That he afflict us in Love and Faithfulness, and
therefore it must needs be well taken; the wounds of such a Friend being better
than the kisses of the enemy-World. Again, to advance this Grace, Faith makes a
right judgment of Afflictions; to Sense these are grievous, but to Faith fit
and congruous. The World in which the Believer lives, is a stage of Sin, and
therefore fit to be a place of sorrow; how calm soever it was before Sin
entered, it is now a troubled Sea, an Ocean of Evils, as Antoninus calls an
Empire: Storms and tossing waves are proper in it, and to be expected by every
Passenger; as much a Paradise as it was before, it is now a Wilderness, thorns
and thistles of trouble grow naturally in it, and give many a scratch and sting
to the poor Pilgrim in his way to Heaven. The Believer himself as a Man is born
to trouble, and altogether vanity, all-Adam is all-Abel, or vanity, as it is
Psalm. 39.5. He comes into the World weeping, and very fitly, because by his Sin
he has set the whole Creation a groaning until now: and as a Believer he lives
as a lilly among thorns, so is his person in the World among wicked ones, which
are as pricking briars on every side, and so is the Grace in his heart among
the relics of Corruption, which are as thorns in the flesh: And whilst Sin
is within, it is congrnous that trouble should be without; nay, more than
congrnous, it is necessary upon many accounts. Affliction is purgative of Sin;
it may be the Believers Heart may wax proud, and the tumor must be lanced, or
light, and the vanity must be fanned away; it may be hard, and the furnace must
melt it; or drowsy, and the rod must awaken it. One ill humor or other is
ready to grow upon us; and O felices tribulos tribulationum! Oh happy thorns of
Affliction, which let them out! It Medicine be necessary, so is Affliction,
which is Spiritual Physic for our peceant Humors. Affliction is the way which
Christ has sanctified by going in it himself to the Throne of Glory; and
Believers must follow him whithersoever he goes. Innocence it self suffering,
lumps of dust and sin cannot but do so. He drinking up the full cup of Wrath,
well may we take a few drops of it; especially seeing our sufferings are
sweetened by his; and his Heaven will be ours at last, where the light momentany
sufferings shall be remunerated with an eternal weight of hyperbolical Glory.
Luther says of himself, That looking on the Susserings of Christ, he counted
his own as nothing. And St. Bernard makes Christ, Et speculum Patiendi and
pretium Patientis, both a glass of Patience, and a reward of the Patient. Now
we are tossing and toyling at Sea, but the port of Bliss is within ken, and
anon we shall be there: In the interim we may tasie Heaven in the Joys of the
holy Spirit, which sheds abroad the Love of God in our Hearts, and so gives us
Praemium ante praemium, a lesser Heaven before a greater. Saint Paul says,
(...), I superabound or overflow in joy in all our tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4.
Philip Lantgrave of Hesse being asked, How he could endure his long tedious
Imprisonment under the Emperor Charles the fifth? professed, Se Divinas
Martyrum Consolationes sensisse; That be felt the Divine Consolations of
Martyrs. The gracious Presence of God is able to sweeten Prisons, Eghten
Chains, and make fire and water paffable to Believers. Such things as these
well digelled by Faith will make us keep a holy silence under all the Will of
God.

Not to name any more Particulars, I shall conclude this Point touching the
actuating of Graces with one Observation more.

Faith connects all Graces together as links in a Chain, and so by actuating
one advances all in some measure. The Schoolmen do many of them allow a
Connection of all Moral Virtues in Prudence, and yet commonly affirm, That Faith
may be without Charity: As if Spiritual Graces were not so well united as Moral
Virtues. But the truth is, true Faith is never without Charity; true Faith
makes us sons of God, Joh. 1.12. but without Charity we are spurious and
Children of the Devil. By true Faith Christ dwells in the heart, Ephesians. 3.17.
and where he dwells, Charity cannot be absent; true Faith purisies the heart,
Act. 15.9. and without Charity there can be no Purity. True Faith rests on the
mere Grace of God in Christ, and that must needs in flame the Heart toward
him, Tamum amamus quantum credimus. Hence Aquinas himself confesses, That
though Faith and Hope may be without Charity, yet without Charity they are not
properly Virtues. And Durandus says, Credere in Deum non est praecise actus
fidei, sid actus fidei and charitatis simul; To believe in God is not precisely
an act of Faith, but of Faith and Charity together. So Inseparable are these
two Graces. But leaving the Schoolmen, I shall proceed. Faith connects all
Graces together in a triple way; it connects them in the fontal cause, the boly
Spirit, which it receives; all Graces are from the Spirit, and the Spirit is
received by Faith; hence rivers of living water flow in the Believers heart,
Joh. 7.38. that is, All Graces flow there as waters from a fountain; it
connects them in the Rule, the Command of God, which it universally respects.
It is observed by Divines, That the five last Commands in Deuteronomy. 5. run thus,
Thou shall not kill, and thou shall not commit Adultery, and thou shall not
Steal, and thou shall not bear false Witness, and thou shall not Govet. The
word, And, points out to us, that all the Commands are coupled together by God,
like the Curtains of the Tabernacle; all are as it were one body, and Faith
has a respect to every one of them, and in every one owns the same stamp of
Divine Authority. He that said, Love thy God, said also, Love thy Neighbor: He
that said, Be Zealous, said also, Be Meek, and Patient, and Obedient, and
abundant in all Grace. It connects them also in the end, the Glory of God,
which it looks at in all things; all Graces tend to that Glory, and Faith is
the single eye which guides them all thither. Bonum opus intentio facit, Enarr.
in Psalm. 31. in Pras.
intentionem sides dirigis, says St. Austin: Faith knows what that is wherein
God would be glorisied. All Graces being thus connected in Faith, which is a
kind of (...), or firmament, (as the word is Col. 2.5.) to them all; it comes
to pass, that Faith in actuating any one Grace, gives a strength and further
growth to every other Grace. Thus it is in Graces respecting distinct Tables,
the more we act our Love to God, the more will be our Love to our Neighbor:
this, though belonging to the second Table, flows ex font pietatis, out of
that fountain of Piety, which respects the first. Thus it is in those Graces
which are seemingly contrary, as in Zeal and Meekness; the more we act our Zeal
for God, the more will be our Meekness toward Men. Hence in the Primitive
Christians, who were so hot for Christianity, was found a very meek Spirit; and
the reason is, because a Man cannot truly actuate one Grace, but he will have
more of that Spirit, which is fontally all Grace; and graciously multiplies
Talents in the use of them: Neither can he truly obey one Command, but it will
render his Heart more Obediential and ready to obey others also, as being
enjoined by the same Authority: nor can he in one thing look at Gods Glory, but
it will in some measure incline him to seek it in other things also; and so the
New Creature grows in every part, and his Path shines more and more to the
perfect day in Heaven.

CHAP. XI.
Precious Faith considered in the Crowns and Statures thereof. The Divine
Experiences of Faith, as it Experiments the Divinity of Scripture in the
Precepts, Promises, Threatenings and Supernatural Truths thereof: Concerning the
Blessed Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, Jesus Christ the
Mcdiator, and the Efficacy of Grace.

HAVing treated of Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, which are Fruits
of Faith, and are more or less in all Believers; I now proceed to some other,
which are The Crowns and Statures of Faith, and to be found not in all
Believers, at least not at first; but in such as have made a good progress in
Grace. Faith, have made a good progress in Grace. Faith, having obtained the
Holy Spirit with all its Graces, does now go on like The Baptized Eunuch,
rejoicing in the ways of God, glorying in Free Grace, triumphing in Jesus
Christ, warring against Corruptions, actuating Holy Graces, bowing down under
the Commands of Heaven, sucking the Sweet-Breasts of the Promises, and waiting
for the Heavenly Dews and Distillations of the Spirit; and in this holy
Progress gathers up many choice Experiments more worth than a World. All
learned Men are for Experiments, and every one would cry, (...), I have found
it: the Sages of the Law are for tried Cases, which have been sub judice; the
Physician sets a probatum est on approved Medicines; the Anatomists hunts after
the arcana of Nature by Dissection of Bodies, and the Chemist by Dissolution
thereof. Experience is procreatrix Artium, the very Parent of Arts, whose
universal Precepts are collected by an induction of particulars; but there are
no Experiments like those of Faith. Dr. Dees Spirits made as if they would
reveal great Mysteries to him, such as they called the Cabbala of Nature, the
Numbers of the World, the linea Spiritus Sancti, the Mirabilia Dei, and the
Nova terra bringing forth without Tillage, but all these were but Dreams and
Impostures; and so I suppose are many things in Chemistry, like Helmonts
Alkahest, wonderful, if true: But the Experiments of Faith are great Realities,
and withal Divine, as much above those in the Sphere of Nature as Souls are
above Bodies, and Heaven is above Earth. God in the Prophet calls on his People
to baing in the Tithes for his House, and so by their Obedience to prove him,
If he would not open the windows of Heaven, and pour out a blessing, that there
should not be room enough to receive it, Mal. 3.10. When Faith goes on in a
Tract of Obedience proving of God, Heaven opens in wonderful Experiences of
him, the Manna of holy Truth is then tasted, the Hony-combs of Free Grace drop
upon the Heart, Promises are realized and exemplified in Providence; Divine
Helps and Salvations come down and call for Eben-Ezers to be set up for them;
and Discoveries of heavenly things in their certainty and excellency are in a
manner made, as if a Man could look into the Holy of Holies, and see God Face
to Face. Some such Experiences I suppose the learned Rivet had in his last
Sickness, in which he said of himself, In these ten days I have made a greater
progress in Divinity, than in all my Life; but leaving Generals I shall come to
Particulars.

One great Experiment of Faith is touching the Truths of God, a Believer in his
holy Progress comes (...), unto all riches of the full assurance of
understanding, as the Apostle speaks, Call. 2.2. At the first he has a Stock of
Divine Knowledge, but after Experience Riches, and all Riches of it; at the
first he has a true persuasion of the things of God, but after Experience a
Plerophory or full persuasion thereof. Here I shall Instance in that one
Fundamental Comprehensive Truth, which is pregnant with all other, viz. that
the holy Scriptures are the very Word of God, and so to be embraced by all
Christians: The Papists say, That the Authority of the Scriptures depends, at
least quoad nos, on the Definition of the Church, and that upon that account
chiefly it is to be beloved by us. By the Church they mean the Church of
Pastors, and those gathered in a Council to desine the Canon of Scripture.
Saint Paul speaks of a Church which is The Pillar and Ground of the Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. But, as our learned Whitaker has observed, That is not the Church
of Pastors but of Believers; and in truth the Word of Life is more purely held
forth in the Lives and Experiences of Believers, than in the Gifts of Pastors.
This Thesis some of their Grandees have prosecuted even to Blasphemy, saying,
That without the Judgment of the Church they would give no more credit to
Matthew than to Livy, and value the Scriptures much as they do Esops Fables.
That this Opinion is false is as clear as the Light: true Faith is a pure
infusion, which hangs on the irradiating Spirit as a Beam on the Sun, and in
Scripture sees, with the credenda, the reason of believing in the Divine
Authority stamped thercon. The Ministry used about it may be Man's, but the
Authority on which it leans must be Gods, Theol. Not. Tit. 209.
Tota causa, tota radix, totum fundamentum credendi verbis Dei debet esse, quia
ipse dicit, says Raimundus De Sabunde. Unless we believe God for himself our
Faith is not Divine; if the Fulciment of it be humane, it is such it self.
Saint Paul would not have Our Faith stand in the wisdom of men, Comment. in
Mich. 7.
1 Cor. 2.5. Saint Jerome says, In homine spes vana, vera in Deo est; and a
little after, Nolite credere in ducibus, non in Episcopo, non in Presbytero,
non in Diacono, non in qualibet hominum dignitate. If Believers believe the
Scriptures upon the Authority of Pastors, Pastors believe them upon their own;
Or if they say, that they have the Testimony of the Spirit, all Believers may
say the same, and thereby believe as well as themselves, and without their
Authority. The Thessalonians Received the Word as the Word of God without
asking the Judgment of the Church, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. The Bercans Received it with
all readiness, and instead of consulting the Church, Searched the Scriptures,
Acts 17.11. The true Church cannot be known but by the Scriptures. De Uni^^^
Feel ca^^ 3. and ^^.
Thus Saint Austin writing against the Donatists says, Sunt certe libri
Dominici, quorum Autoritati utrique consentimus, utrique credimus, ibi queramus
Eccl siam, ibi discutiamus cansam: And again, Ecclesiam suam demonstrent si
possunt non in sermonibus and rumoribus Afrorum, non in Conciliis Episcoporum,
non in literis disputatorum, non in signis and prodigiis fallacibus, sed in
preseript^ legis, in Prophetarum praedactis, in Psalmorum cantibus, in ipsius
Pastoris vocibus, in Evangelistarum praedicationibus and laboribus, hoc est, in
omnibus Canonicis Sanctorum Librorum Autoritatibus. And if I must know the
Church by the Scripture, I must in all reason own the Scripture before I own
the Church or its Decisions. The Church may bear witness to the Scripture, but
in a subordinate Ministerial way: The supreme adequate witness thereof is only
that Spirit, which outwardly indicted it in the letter, and inwardly imprints it
on the Heart. The Church may bear witness to the Scripture, but it can add no
Authority to it. If the Church has Authority to define the Canon, it must have
it from Scripture, and then the Scripture must have Authority even quoad nos
before that Definition; unless they will absurdly distinguish and say, That the
Scripture-Authority before the Definition, is only as to Pastors, and not as to
Believers till after it. All the Churches Authority is from Scripture, and How
can the derivative Authority add to the Primitive? The Scripture is Principium
scientificum, and therefore to be received by its light without a quare, or
reason why it is so; the Scripture is a Foundation to the Church, Ephesians. 2.20.
and such a one that the Church is no further a Church than as it is built
thereon; and How can the Church be a Foundation to the Scripture? The Scripture
is a Law to the Church, every Soul must be under it; and How can the
Subject-Church give Authority to the Law which it Self is under? The Judgment
of the Church has been variable: in the Council of Carthage under Cyprian, it
was Decreed that those, which were baptized by Heretics returning to the
Church, should be rebaptized, the one Baptisin being only in the Church, and
none without it, Vbi Ecclesia non est, Baptisma non est. Afterward, the first
Council of Carthage (called the First, not as if it had been first in time, but
as omitting the first Cyprianical Council as antiquated) enacted that Baptism
made in the name of the Sacred Trinity should not be reiterated, all crying
out, Absit, against reiteration. In the seventh General Council of
Constantinople the 338 Bishops cried down Images might and main, Quomodo Dei
matrem, quam obumbravit plenitudo Deitatis, vulgaris Gentilium ars pingere
audet? non fas est Christianis, qui spem Resurrectionis babent, demonum
culturae consuetudinibus uti; flagitium est, as Gregorius Theologus said, Fidem
habere in coloribus non in cord. Quis gloriam and splendorem Christi effigiare
posset mortuis coloriius? said Eusebius Pamphili, in his Letter to the Empress
Constantia. One would have thought that the broken Images would never have been
set together again; but within less than half a Century comes the second
Council of Nice, and there the 350 Bishops bring in Images again under the
wings of the old Cherubims, and set them up upon Jacobs Pillar, and back them
with Fathers and Miracles. They throw out Anathema's against the Iconoclasts,
and reject with a Curse the Books of Eusebius as a Man delivered over in
reprobum sensum. And are well persuaded that Angels are Corporeal, and may be
pictured. A little after, and within the same half-Century comes the Council of
Francford halting between both the former, speaking half in the Language of
Ashdod, and half in the pure Language, allowing Images, but denying any Worship
to them. And as touching the Canon, it will afterward appear, how the Council
of Laodicea differs about that from the third Council of Carthage; and how the
fixth Council of Constantinople in confirming them both varies from it self.
The Judgment of the Church has been subject to Error; the famous Council of
Nice had two lapses in it: in the twelfth Canon it forbids Christians, (...),
to return to their Military Employment; and in the Ninteenth, it commands
Rebaptization of such as were Baptized by Heretics. The Emperor Zeno being
expulsed, the Tyrant Basiliscus by the persuasion of Timotheus Aelurus wrote
Letter in condemnation of the General Council of Chalcedon; unto which as
impious as they were, no less than five hundred Bishops subscribed at the
Tyrants Command. And touching the Canon, if the Council of Laodicea be right in
it, that of Carthage is not so; and consequently that of Constantinople, which
takes in both, must needs be in an Error. These things premised; Can the
unvariable and infallible Scripture hang upon a variable and errable Authority
such as Man's is? May all the precious Promises of Life and Salvation be
precarious and pendent on an Humane Arbitrium? Tertullian in his Apology
speaking of that old Decree among the Romans, that no God should be consecrated
without the approbation of the Senate, says, Apud nos de humano arbitratu
divinitas pensitatur, nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit. If the
Authority of Scripture depend on the Church, then we may say, Nisi homini
Scriptura placuerit, Scriptura non erit; and by consequence all the Faith of
the Saints must be pendulous and hanging on uncertainties. If the Churches
desinition be so momentous to Scripture, let us see what the Church has done
in it; Has it collected the Canonical Books into a body? It Is probable Ezra
collected the Books of the Old Testament into a body, and so think many of the
ancient Fathers. And I suppose St. John collected the Books of the New
Testament together; for he lived after all the other Apostles, even unto the
time of Trajan; that by his vigilance the Canon of the New Testament might be
kept pure and unadulterate. When after St. Paul's death there was a Book called,
Periodus Paul's and Teclae, spread abroad under the Name and Title of Paul; St.
John discovered it to be spurious, insomuch that the Author of it confessed
that he did it amore Pauli. And I believe what was done in this collection of
the Canon was not done by an ordinary Spirit, but by a Prophetical Spirit in
Ezra, and an Apostolical one in St. John. In the mean time it appears not to
have been done by an act of the Church: but leaving this particular, When and
how did the Church define the Canon? Such a momentous thing should have been
done by the Primo-primitive Church, in the first Century, whilst the Church of
Christ was a pure Virgin, as Egesippus said. Lib. 3. Did. 21. Quest. 1.
Thus the School-man Durandus lays it down, Hoc quod dictum est de approbatione
Scripturae per Ecclesiam, intelligitur solum de Ecclesia, que fuit tempore
Apostolorum, qui suerunt repleti Spiritu sancto: No Church so fit to do it as
that which had so much of the holy Spirit; but nothing was done in it in that
Age. The so called Canons of the Apostles (which in the 85th. Canon take in
three Books of Macchabees into the old Canon, and the Constitutions and
Epistles of Clement into the new,) are clearly adulterate; these condemn second
Marriages, deprive not a Clergyman of communion for Fornication or Perjury, or
Thest, and speak of Altars, Oblations, Vessels, of Gold and Silver sanctified,
Cantors and Lectors, and many other suchlike altogether unknown in those
Apostolical times. About these Canons Mire inter se digladiantur Pontisicii,
says one. Gelasius in a Roman Synod of seventy Bishops, declares them
Apocryphal, in toto; Bellarmine rejects all but the first fifty, and I think
all the Romanists cast away the 85th. Canon touching the Scripture as
Supposititious. The first Virgin-Century doing nothing in this grand matter;
one might have looked for it in the second or third; but there is no foot-step
of it. In the fourth Century about the year 320 came the famous Council of
Nice, and then it might have been expected, as the aptest foundation for their
Orthodox Conclusions against Arrius, and withal for a stated Rule against all
future Heresies; but there is a failure also, nothing was done in it. And into
what Heart can it enter, that in all those 320 years there was no Canon, no
Authority of Scripture, no foundation for the Primitive Christians to fix their
Faith upon? In those days Paganism was strong, and Persecutions hot, and Divine
Cordials necessary; and yet the Scripture for want of the Churches Definition,
was not of Authority as to the Christians then living; I say, according to the
Popish Thesis it was not. But to go on: Afterward about the year of our Lord
368 came the Council of Laodicea, which in the 59th. Canon orders, That no
Books should be read in the Church but the Canonical ones of the Old and New
Testament; and enumerates as Canonical such as are received in the Reformed
Church, only omitting the Apocalypse: And now had not that Omission been, and
had this Council been a General one, the work had been done. But afterward in
this very Century about the year 398, the third Council of Carthage in its
47th. Canon reckons up as Canonical, Tobit, Judith, two Books of Macchabees,
and five Books of Solomon, accounting Wisdom and Ecclesiastious to be two of
them. In this Council St. Austin was present, who yet in his Book de Civitate
Dei, Lib. 17. cap. 20, says, That Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus in the judgment of
the more learned were not Solomens, and were chiefly received in the Western
Church; it seems the Eastern received them not. In the end of the next Century
about the year 494. Gelasius Bishop of Rome with seventy Bishops enumerates the
same Books as Canonical which are reckoned so in the Council of Carthage, save
only that he omits the Book of Nehemiah, and names but one of the Macchabees.
These particular Provincial Councils being of incompetent Authority to desine
the Canon for the Universal Church, and withal variant, nay repugnant among
themselves. Whither must we go but to a General Council? but Oh how late very
late does that come? How long will the Authority of Scripture and Faith of
Christians be suspended? and to how little satisfaction will this desinition
be? About the year 682 was the sixth General Council of Constantinople in
Trullo, and as to this Point, what did it? It consirmed the Canons of the
Apostles, the Council of Laodicea, and the Council of Carthage; which three in
this Point being totally inconsistent each with other, every one by the leave
of these Fathers who confirmed them all, may choose what Canonical Books he will
have, whether those in the Canons of the Apostles, or those in the Council of
Laodicea, or those in that of Carthage; and what pitiful incertainties are
here? And now it is to little purpose to fly over many Centuries more till we
come to the Councils of Florence and Trent, these are late ones; and as our
Learned Whitaker says, Non legitima Christianorum Concilia, sed Tyrannica
Antichristi Conventicula, ad oppugnandam Evangehi veritatem instituta; and thus
it appears even Historically that the Authority of Scripture depends not on the
Church. But waving this Popish Thesis, in which I have by the way made this
long, Digression: I proceed to the matter in hand.

True Faith being a beam or irradiation from the holy Spirit, discovers, That
the Scriptures in general are the Word of God; and which is to the Point in
hand, in its holy progress it arrives at an experimental knowledge thereof;
Peter Martyr wishes men to read the Bible seriously; and adds, Male sit mihi
(ita enim in tanta causa jurare ausim) nisi tandem capiantur, sentient denique
quantum divina haec ab humanis distent. Erasmus says, Expertus sum in meipso;
That there is little good in cursory reading it; do it duly and you shall find
the Divine efficacy. That a Progressive Faith may attain an Experimental
knowledge, that the Scriptures are of God, will appear by the ensuing
Considerations.

One noble piece of Scripture is the Moral Law; upon every apex of it hangs a
mountain of Sense, say the Rabbis; every jot or tittle of it stands faster
than Heaven and Earth, says our Savior, Mat. 5.18. This is the Summary of all
Duties; all the Moral Precepts in Scripture are but as so many Commentaries on
it. That this is of God, Faith experiments several ways:

First, Faith experiments it by the impresses and holy inclinations in the
Believers heart, answering, truly though not persectly, to the Law. A
Progressive Believer finds by reflection, That the Law is written in his heart;
That his Heart is the very Epistle of Christ written by the holy Spirit: And
withal he knows, that it was not always so; Time was, when there were no such
characters or holy inclinations there, his Heart was worse than a mere empty
Table: And hence he surely gathers, that those characters or imprinted
propensities are the writing of God himself; and so comes experimentally to
know the Epistle of God in Scripture by that in his Heart, and the outward
literal Edition of the Law by the inward Spiritual one, which is a counterpane
thereof, and answers thereunto as the stamp to the Seal, or one Tally to
another. The mutual agreement between them once discerned is a practical proof,
that both are of God, and written by one and the same holy hand. But you will
say, there needs no Faith to make this experiment; the very Gentiles have the
Law written in their Heart, their natural implanted Principles comprize both
Tables; the first in that they tell us, that there is a God to be worshipped
and reverenced; The second in that they tell us, That we must do as we would be
done to; which Alexander Severus much delighted in. Unto which I answer, That
there is a vast disserence between the natural Writing the Law in the Heart,
and the gracious; The first is a relic or broken fragment of the Divine
Image; its only or at least chief seat is in the Understanding, and there it
stands in the dark in an abyss of black Ignorance; and in the mean while there
is an hellish enmity in the carnal will against the Law of God. But the other
is a pure perfect thing which stands in both faculties, being as an holy lamp
in the Understanding, and as a Divine inclination in the will to do the
Commends of God. Hence it appears, That there is not that soundation for this
experiment in the Natural Inscription of the Law, as in the Gracious; the
Natural being to the Gracious but as a little glimmering is to splendour; or as
the broken pieces of a Picture are to the entire Image. It is with a Believer
in this case as it was with Bezalceel; the Word of God came forth for making
the Tabernacle, but Bezaleel had a fractical proof of it in the spirit of
Wisdom given him for the work: Or as it was with Saul, the Word came forth
touching the Kingdom, but Saul had a Practical proof of it in the spirit of
Government vouchsafed unto him. And so it is with the Believer; The Divine Law
is experimented in the spirit of obedience, and each particular Command is
proved by some inward aptness answering thereunto. A notable instance of this
Inscription we have in Maius the German Divine, who in his extreme sickness,
having Consolatory Scriptures recited to him, bravely answered, Tace, tace,
omnia cordi meo insixa tenco; hold your peace, I have all in my heart: Promises
I suppose he meant; and without dispute the Precepts were there also.

Secondly, Faith experiments it by the Divine Presence helping and comforting
the Believer in acts of Obedience. The Rabbis say, That if two sit together
conserring of the Law, the Shechimah is among them. And without doubt if but
one single Believer be not a talking merely of the Law, but a doing of it, the
Divine Presence is with him. Thus the Prophet to Asa, The Lord is with you,
whilst you be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Thus our Savior, If a man love him and
keep his words, the Father and the Son will come and make their abode with such
a one, Joh. 14.23. Such an one has a Temple and Shechinah in his Heart; God
will be there helping and comforting of him in his well-doing. The Church prays
for help from the Sanctuary, Psalm. 20.2. because that was a Symbol of Gods
Presence: And the obeying Believer cannot want help, because he has a
Sanctuary within him. The way of the Lord is strength to him, and waiting in it
he renews strength, and mounts up by Auxiliary Grace as upon Eagles-wings.
Whilst he is a doing the will of God strength comes in, as it did to the
Levites that bare the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 15.26. and with strength holy comfort also;
in keeping the Commands he has great reward, inward peace, and joy
unspeakable; some of the oil of Joy which is upon Christ the great Doer of Gods
Will, drops down on the Believer in his sincere Obedience. As all upright ones
do, he dwells in Gods Presence, as if he were in the borders of Heaven already;
the light of Gods Countenance irradiates his Duties. When therefore the
Believer reflects on himself, and considers, what a dry Land rebellion dwells
in, and what rivers of Peace and Joy water Obedience; how weak and foolish his
heart was in doing his own will, and how help and strength came upon him in
doing Gods; he comes experimentally to know the Command to be of God, whose
Presence gave him such comforts and assistances therein: The good hand of God
upon him is a proof that the way is right; the Peace growing on his work shows
the righteousness of it. When in Elijahs time the question was, whether God or
Baal should be God, the fire coming down from Heaven on the Sacrifice made the
People fall down and confess, The Lord he is the God, the Lord he is the God, 1
King. 18.39. answerably when the Believer in the doing of Gods Commands, feels
the illapses of the holy Spirit inflaming and comforting his Heart, he sweetly
experiences that God is in the Command of a truth.

Thirdly, Faith experiments it in that the hope of Heaven is enlarged and
heightened in the doing of Gods will. The more a Believer does it, the livelier
is his Faith; the warmer his love, the stronger his other Graces; the meeter
his Soul for Heaven, and the richer his entrance thereunto, 2 Pet. 1.11. He
shall not go to Heaven poorly or with a seant wind, but with full gales and
rich Plerophories; by successive acts of Obedience his Hope rises higher and
higher, and so gives an experimental proof, That the Command is the very will
of God, and way to Glory; otherwise Hope would not grow and flourish in it, but
flag and wither; as it uses to do in us, when we pursue our own ways. The
Apostle would have men diligent in good works, (...), to the full assurance of
hope, Heb. 6.11. Vt plenissime in animis vestris spes confirmetur, faith Beza.
Immediately after the giving the Law God adds these words, Where ever I record
my name, there will I come and bless you, Exodus 20.24. a blessing attends his
Service. If God bless Obedience with an assurance of Hope, which is a
fore-taste of Heaven, and presage of Glory; it is a full proof that his name is
recorded in the Command. When a Believer walking therein comes to assurance,
and so to be within ken of Heaven, he is sure that the way is right.

Another excellent part of Scripture stands in the Promises: These are the
Pearls of the Gospel, breasts of Consolation, and wells of Salvation, flowing
out to Believers in temporal, spiritual, and eternal good things; each of these
Faith more or less experiments to be Divine.

As touching Temporal Promises Faith experiments them in every blessing which
the Believer has. Indeed outward things are but the nether-springs, and
blessings of the left hand, dispensed promiscuously as if they were ludibria
fortunae, the sports of chance. Providence is still ringing the changes; here
an Ishmael may have his portion and full cup; even Crowns and Kingdoms, which
lie at the upper end of the World, may come to the basest of men, Dan. 4.17.
All things come alike to all; the Sun of Prosperity shines on the Bramble as
well as on the Flower; the tempest of Adversity falls on the Garden as well as
on the Wilderness. Love or Hatred cannot be known by these things, not by them
as they are in themselves, or merely issuing out of Providence: But the
Believer has them by a singular Privilege, and in a way of Promise, and by
reflection may know that he has them so: When he does not arrogate ought to
himself, or like churlish Nabal, all in his Possessives say, My bread, my
water, and my flesh; but really confess God to be supreme Lord of all, and
himself but an accountable Steward of them; When he can cast his goods on the
waters, and as it were send them to Sea in a voyage of Charity, expecting no
return but in the other World, where these Corruptibles so used will rise in
the incorruption of eternal glory; When he can charge all outward things to
stand without in their own station, and not approach that heart which is a
facred Temple or holy place for God to dwell in; When he looks on all the World
as forfeited by Sin, and new founded by Christ the Mediator, and so tastes his
precious blood in every good thing, and gathers all his comforts from his
reconciling Cross; When upon a just call to Suffering he is willing to venture
all his part in this life upon the mere Promise of a better, and had rather
cast all his Mundane pearls over board than hazard a wrack of Faith or
Conscience; When the purest sweetest Comforts here below do not satisfic his
Soul, as smelling of the cask and chanel of Creature-vanity, but in the fullest
affluence of them he cries out, Dul^ius ex ipso font; a single God is
insinitely sweeter than all; and none but he can sill up the gaping chinks and
chasmes of my Hear; Deus meus and omnia, My God, and my all: Then undoubtedly
he has outward blessings not upon the common title of Providence only, but in
a way of Promise; and by reflection on such things as these he may know that he
has them so, and arrive at a sweet experience of Temporal Promises. Such an
experience multiplies the Loaves and wonderfully doubles and trebles the
sweetness and comfort of every Blessing. Some learned Men have observed a
difference between Jacobs Blessing and Esaus; Jacobs runs thus, God give thee
of the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the Earth, Genesis 27.28. Esaus thus, Thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the Earth, and of the dew of Heaven from
above, ver. 39. In Jacobs the name of God is mentioned not in Esaus: its true
all Blessings are from God, but his name is mentioned in the one not in the
other. The experienced Believer has more of God and his federal Love in every
Blessing than other Men. The Jews by a pious custom used to say over their
Bread, Blessed be God who brought Bread out of the Earth; over their Wine,
Blessed be God who created the fruit of the Wine; over their Fruits, Blessed be
God who created the Fruit of the Tree; nay, and over their Flowers, Blessed be
God who made the sweet smelling Herbs: and in general they added this,
Whosoever takes ought out of this World without a benediction is as it were a
robber of God. But the experienced Believer, as he has a sweeter title to
these things; so he may raise up his Praises for them to an higher strain than
other Men; not only saying, Blessed be God and his Providence for such and such
things, but blessed be God and his Promise also: All good things as well those
of this life, as those of the other issue out of the Covenant of Grace. You
will say, the Believer cannot yet make this experiment; for though he have some
of the Temporal Blessings mentioned in the Promises, yet often and ordinarily
he wants other of them. To which I answer, The Promises of Temporal Blessings
are not absolute, but carry a tacit limitation of expediency. The main design
of the Promises is Man's Salvation, and to this Temporals are not, as Spirituals
are, simply necessary; but only have a remote tendency thereunto, and that not
of themselves, but as they are overruled by God, who makes omnia cooperari in
bonum, all things work together for good to them that love him. And hence the
Believer expects from the Promises no other measure or proportion of outward
things than what may conduce to his Salvation; and because he knows not what
that measure or proportion is, he refers himself to the Wisdom and Faithfulness
of God to order all for his good: and hence God does not fulfill Promises of
Temporals as he does those of Spirituals: Promises of Spirituals he fulfils in
specie, because they cannot otherwise be made good, a drop of Grace being more
worth than a World; but those of Temporals he fulfils disjunctively, either in
the Blessing it self, or in that which is equivalent by inward contentation and
supportation, compensating the absence of the thing it self. These things being
so, the Believer in what he has may experience the Promise in the true
proportion and meaning of it; and not withstanding his wants, may know, That in
Christ he is so far heir of all things, that if he could want a world he should
have it.

As touching Spiritual Promises, these are either Promises of Grace, or
Promises to Grace. As touching Promises of Grace, Faith may know these
experimentally. The Believer reads in his Bible, That God has promised to give
an heart of flesh, to make a new heart, and a new spirit, to write his Law in
the heart, to give an heart to know him, to circumcise the heart that it may
love him; and many more suchlike: and afterward reading over his own Heart,
he may find these precious Graces all there, and be able experimentally to say
of these Promises, as Joshua did of those made to Israel, Not one thing has
failed of all the good things which the Lord has spoken, all are come to pass,
Josh. 23.14. In every holy melting he finds the heart of flesh; in every holy
frame the new heart and spirit; in every holy inclination the inward engraven
Law; in every holy beam the Divine Teaching; in every holy affection the
Spiritual Circumcision; all the Promises are scaled and really exemplified in
his Heart; and what an admirable experiment is this? To see a Work within
answering to the Promise in the Word, is a greater sight than if a Man could
have stood by and seen the light start forth into Being upon the Almighty fiat
spoken by God in the Creation; unto which the Apostle alludeth in setting forth
the Divine light shining into the Heart in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. The
Magnalia of Grace are more wonderful than those of nature. Hence St. Chrysostom
upon those words of the Apostle, We are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. says of Regeneration, That it is (...), really a Creation,
and more noble than the old one; as adding a been vivere to that life which
came from the old one. The experienced Believer has cause to say, what has
God wrought? how fearfully is the New Creature made? all its Graces were
written in the Promise, and now are fashioned in the Heart, where before there
were none of them; How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God? how great is the
sum of them? This Experiment was notably typed out in Isaac; he was by Promise;
and as soon as he was born, the Promise was experimented notwithstanding the
dead body and dead womb. The Believer the child of Promise is as Isaac was,
says the Apostle, Gal. 4.28. All the regenerating Graces are by Promise; and
when these are brought forth, the Promise is made good maugre all the deadness
of nature. By the Promises we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, says
St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. that is, we have those Divine Graces which as the
Creature-module will admit, resemble the Holy One, and so we have the Promises
sealed up to us in Graces.

As touching Promises made to Grace, such as are fulfilled in this life, Faith
also experiments them to be Divine. In the Scripture the Believer meets with
Promises of Pardon to such as repent and believe; of comfort to the mourner, of
filling to the hungry and thirsty, of the Divine secret to them that fear God,
of increase of Grace to the improver; and many more of the same nature. To
experiment these the Believer by perusing the Scripture, and his own Heart,
does two things; first, He clears it up to himself, that the Graces in his
Heart, to which such Promises are made, are true, through the irradiating
Spirit vouchsafed to him. He may discover them to be such by Scriptural Marks,
he may find that his Faith purifies and works by Love; That his Repentance and
Mourning are chiefly for Sin; That his Hunger and Thirst are humble and
industrious in the use of means, That his Fear is of God and his Goodness in a
filial way; That his improving of Talents is in a way of dependence and holy
diligence; and so certainly knows that these Graces in his Heart are real
things. This foundation being first laid, then he proceeds to a second review
of his Heart, and there he may find how Pardons have sensibly broke in upon him
in a way of Repenting and Believing, or how the Sheaves of Joy and Comfort have
followed his Tears, or how Satisfactions Manna-like have dropped down on his
hungry Soul, or how Divine illuminations have come in and Crowned his Holy
Fear, or how Talents have multiplied in the faithful using and actuating of
them: And the Experiment thereupon will be complete, every Grace sooner or
later being in some good measure answered by the Promises, which let out their
sweetness to it as God has ordained them to do. Thus the Believer sensibly
enters the Land of Promise, and eats of the Fruit thereof, lifting up his Soul
in The high Praises of him, who gave the Promises in the Scripture and fulfils
them in the Heart.

As touching Promises of eternal good things in Heaven, where there are
Plenitudes of Joy and Rivers of Pleasure in the Presence of Him who is All in
All, the completion of these is in another World; nevertheless the Believer
has an experimental taste thereof here. Whilst his Hope hangs upon them, he
finds strength and comfort come into his Heart; whilst the weary World is
tossing with troubles, O what a refreshing is it to look into Eternity! Hope,
Eatring within the vail, is an Anchor to the Soul; and so stablishes it, that
it does not roll about with the wheelings of this changeable World, nor center
its happiness in any or all the Creatures. Let the World come in all its
Fancies and glittering appearances of Good, it cannot call off the Believers
Heart from Heaven, but it will be ready to point that way; or let it come with
storms of terror and troubles, it cannot loosen the Anchorhold: the Believer
will rather part with all the World, and his Life too, then let go his hold of
Heaven: Ye took with joy the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves,
that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance, says the Apostle,
Hebr. 10.34. Or, as the Words are in the Original; Knowing that ye have in your
selves a better and abiding substance in Heaven. He speaks as if they had
carried Heaven in and about them, and in part they did so; for as Beza has it
on this place, Fide possidemus quod est in Coelis, By Faith we possess that
which is in Heaven. All our Graces are (...), Heb. 6.9. Things having or
containing Salvation; No parts or pieces of this World, but such as Heaven
dawns and begins here below. The holy Spirit is as the First Fruits to assure
us of the whole Crop in Heaven, and as the earnest of the total Sum of Glory
which shall be paid above. The Believer here has so much of Heaven as to make
him strive, wrestle, run, work, watch and wait with his Loins girt and Lamps
burning; and as the twelve Tribes to serve God instantly, Acts 26.7. (...);
running with full speed, and stretching out himself in the Race, that he may
come to the Crown of Life; and surely, his Hope, if fastened about a nullity,
would not put forth such strong and vigorous operations. Heaven must be a real
thing indeed, which so carries away the Heart from all the World and engages it
unto it self.

Another considerable part of Scripture stands in threatenings against Sinners.
Touching experimenting these, I need say very little: our Good God does not
give out Threatenings in the same manner as he does give out Promises; he gives
out Promises that they may be fulfilled and experimented; but he gives out
Threatenings that they may not be fulfilled and experimented, but rather that by
them Men may be warned in a way of Faith and Repentance To fly from the wrath
to come. The applying of a Promise in a right manner makes it to belong to us,
but the applying of a Threatening makes it not to belong to us: judging our
selves we prevent the Judgment of God. The Believer even before Conversion more
or less felt the Threatenings taking hold of him, and shutting of him up under
Wrath, till Jesus Christ opened the Prison-dores and made him Free indeed: And
if afte Conversion he forget the old Chains, and run into wilful Rebellion
again, he will feel them a second time; The bones will be broken and Comforts
lost, the Conscience will be wounded, and the Wounds will Stink and be corrupt
because of his foolishness. God may depart away, and leave the Graces
withering, and the poor Soul all in the dark with Terrors round about it: This
is a very sad Experiment; and yet undeniably proves that the Threatenings are
from God, his Justice appearing on the top of them like devouring Fire.

Passing over those three great Pillars of Scripture Precepts, Promises and
Threatenings; I now proceed to the Sacred Truths, which lie therein, as Rich
Veins of Gold and Silver do in a Mine: And to avoid Prolixity, I shall pick out
of them some supernatural Ones, such as cannot be known by the mere Light of
Nature, but drop down from Heaven in a way of pure Revelation; concluding with
my self, That if Faith can make an Experiment in these, it may much more do so
in others. I shall first instance in that Sacred Truth of The blessed Trinity
of Persons in Unity of the Godhead: This is, as one has it, Fundamentum
Fundamentorum, The Foundation of Foundations; unless this stand fast all
Evangelical Truths fall to the Ground; we are no longer Christians then we
acknowledge it. So sublime is this Mystery, that as Saint Bernard says,
Scrutari haec temeritas est, credere pietas est, nosse vero vita aeterna est.
And when Gregory Nazianzen was pressed to assign a disserence between those
words, Begotten and Proceeding, he made this answer, Dic mihi, quid sit
generatio, and ego dicam, quid sit processio, ut ambo insaniamus; distinguere
inter processionem and generationem nescio, non valeo, non sufficio. This Truth
is totally supernatural; it could never without a Revelation enter into our
Heart; humane reason; no, not that of Adam could not reach it. Indeed there are
strange passages touching it in Trismegistus and Plato: Trismegistus says, God
who is Mind begat (...), the Speech or Word which is another Mind, and with
that Speech another which is the Fiery God and Spirit of the Godhead. Plato
speaks of a (...), A most Divine Word, and of the begotten Son of the Good; and
the learned Grotius says. Apud Platonicos reperias, (...), three Persons in
one. But sure these men knew nothing of this Mystery; if they spoke somewhat
like, they spoke not the same; or if the same, they borrowed it from Moses.
Plato is called the Atticizing Moses; and his (...), one and many, is an old
Tradition derived from the Jews; and his (...), is taken from Jehovah, or I am.
Or, which is most probable, the notions of the Trinity in Plato and
Trismegistus were foisted into their Works. How many Books have been put out
under the names of the Apostles and ancient Fathers, which have not been truly
such? Such imposture in the Primitive times was very ordinary: And if Men would
be thus bold with Apostles and Fathers, what might they not do in Heathens?
Besides, some think there are clearer notions of a Trinity in some of the
Heathens, than in Moses's Books, and so by consequence the Heathens should know
more of it than Israel; which is contrary to the Scriptures, which tell us, In
Judah is God known, Ps. 76.1. and He has not dealt so with any Nation, Ps.
147.20. It is therefore likely that such passages in Heathens were inserted into
their Books, by Christians, in a way of Pious Fraud, such as was anciently
used. This Sacred Mystery was intimated in the Old Testament; Elohim in the
plural, Created, Genesis 1.1. Let us make Man, says God, Genesis 1.26. By the word
of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the Spirit of
his Mouth, Ps. 33.6. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, I say 6.3. The
ancient Jewish Rabbis (as Petrus Galatinus has showed) embraced this
Doctrine. Rabbi Simeon on that in the Prophet, says, Sanctus, hic est Pater,
Sanctus, hic est Filius, Sanctus, hic est Spiritus Sanctus: the three Middoth,
or Properties in Rabbinical Writers, are the three Persons in the Godhead. And
the Cabbalists have these words, Pater Deus, Filius Deus, Spiritus Sanctus
Deus, Tres in Vno, Vnus in Tribus. In the New Testament we have this Truth
clearly laid down; in the Baptisin of Christ we have all the three Persons
appearing, The Father in a Voice, the Son in the Flesh, the Holy Ghost in the
Dove, Mat. 3.16, 17. The Primitive Christians used to say to any that doubted
of the Trinity, Abi ad Jordanem and videbis, Go to Jordan and you will see it.
Christ Commands. That Baptism should be In the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Math. 28.19. Or, as the Greek Article imports, In
the Name of that Father, that Son, and that Holy Ghost, which discovered
themselves at Christ's Baptism. There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are One, 1 John 5.7. This
Truth has had many Opposites, as the Arrians, Samosatenians, Sabellians,
Photinians, and of late the Socinians, who have strained their subtle Wits to
undermine it if possible: tell them, That Baptism is in the Name of the
Trinity; They will reply, That The Israelites were Baptized into Moses, 1 Cor.
10.2. Tell them, That There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, 1 John 5.7.
They will say, These Words are not to be found in the Ancient Greek Copies; nor
in the Syriac; nor in the Ancient Latin Version,; but these are but Evasions.
As for the first, They were Baptized, (...), unto Moses, there (...) is put for
(...); as Acts 7.53. (...) is there put for (...), as appears by comparing that
place with Gal. 3.19. where Saint Paul of the same thing, says, (...), and so
To be Baptized unto Moses, is only to be Baptized by the Ministry of Moses, who
led them through the Red Sea: Hence in the Syriack it is (...) in the hand of
Moses. Again, it is one thing to be Baptized unto Moses, another to be Baptized
in the name of Moses: Paul Baptized, but none in his own name, 1 Cor. 1.13. And
again, the Israelites were improperly Baptized into Moses; they were not
aspersed or immerged in water, neither was Baptism then an Ordinance of God as
now it is. As for the second in St. John, that place undeniably proves the
Trinity. The learned Stephens says, That place is wanting in seven Greek
Copies, but it is found in nine more ancient. St. Cyprian de Vnitate Ecclesie,
alleges this place for the Trinity. Athanasius urged this place against Arrius
in the Council of Nice, and then no exception was made against it. Had it not
then been in St. John, Arrius would have easily rejected it. I believe in the
times of Constantius and Valens the Arrians blotted out these words as most
pregnant against them, out of diverse Copies. St. Jerome asserted the truth of
our reading from the Greek Copies which he had; publicly contesting, That in
those Copies where it was wanting, it was razed out by the fraud of Heretics.
And St. Ambrose says, That the Heretics did erade that place. This Truth
stands fast in Scripture for ever and ever; and Faith embraces it. And which is
more and to the Point in hand, Faith in its holy progress may, as I conceive,
experience it. My reason is, the Church in all Ages down from the Apostles have
worshipped the Sacred Trinity; Their Baptism has been in its Name; their
Doxology and (...) proclaim it; their Creeds all publish it; their Catechumeni
were trained up in the knowledge of it; they ever worshipped, as Athanasius has
it in his Creed, one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; and that uno
indiviso cultu, as Divines speak. This in all Ages has been the Christian
Worship; and upon this Worship answers and returns have come down from Heaven
in abundance of Glorious Spiritual Blessings, such as are comprised in that
Apostolical Prayer, The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14. The
whole Trinity is adored, and the whole Trinity vouchsafes Gracious returns;
Gratia quae datur, in Trinitate datur, says Athanasius. Every Believer so
worshipping has returns from Heaven; and the Progressive Believer may know
that he has them; and in the experience thereof may experience That there is a
Sacred Trinity of a truth. If the Trinity be a nullity, or as Servetus
blasphemously said, An Idol, or three-headed Cerberus; Or, as Socinus belched
out his impiety, A ridiculous invention of humane curiosity: Then the Christian
Worship is no other than strange fire, vain' Will Worship, and Idol-worship;
nay, it is no Worship at all; none, because the Trinity its supposed Object is
a nullity; none, because God looks on it as none. As when the Samaritans feared
the Lord and served their Idols, 2 King. 17.33. The Text says in the very next
ver. That they feared not the Lord; their fear was as none, because of the
mixture of Idol-worship: So when Christians worship one God, and a Trinity
which is not, their Worship is as none at all. Upon such a Worship God will not
open his eyes unless to punish it, nor make any returns but those of Wrath.
When the Israelites worshipped the Golden Calf, Gods Wrath waxed hot, and was
ready to consume them; much more may it do so, if Christians worship a Trinity
which is not. In that of the Calf, as they meant it, there was only error in
modo, for they intended not to terminate their Worship in the Calf but in God,
as appears by their own words, To marrow is a feast to Jehovah, Exodus 32.5. But
in this of a Supposititious Trinity, there is error in objectio ultimo, which
is more provoking to God. If the Trinity be but the Idol of the brain, God will
no more be enquired of by its Worshippers than he would by those who set up
their Idols in their heart. Ezekiel. 14.3. no gracious returns are found in such a
salfe way. A Believer therefore, who in Worshipping one God in Trinity, finds
returns srequently and successively after Duties from the Mercy-scat, carries
an inward seal and proof in his bosom, that there is a Trinity. This
experimental proof of a Trinity seems to me evident in many places of
Scripture. St. John says, Truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. He says not barely, Our fellowship is with God,
but with the Father and the Son; neither does he say it at peradventures, but
as a sure known thing, such as has the joy of the holy Spirit with it. St.
Paul would have the Colossians to be knit together in love, and unto all riches
of the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgment of the Mystery of
God, and of the Father and of Christ, Col. 2.2. Here is a Plerophory of
understanding, nay, riches, and all riches of it: Here is (...), which is, as
one says, Illustrior notitia rei prius cognitae; A further knowledge
orpractical acknowledgment of a thing before known; and these must needs import
somewhat of experience. Our Savior says, If a man love me and keep my words,
my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him,
Joh. 14.23. In the 21. ver. he told them, That he would manifest himself to the
obedient; (...), says he, conspicuum meipsum exhibebo, I will exhibit my self
though Spiritually, yet clearly as it were to eye, palam and in media luce, as
Beza has it. Hereupon Judas asks him, Lord how is it that thou will manifest
thy self to us? unto which our Savior answers, That the Father and himself
would come and make their abode in such an one, ver. 23. The Abode of the
Father and the Son in such an one is in a glorious manifestative way, such as
gives an experience of their being there; and where the Father and the Son are,
there also is the holy Spirit. Thus our Savior in the 16. and 17. verses of
that Chapter says, That the Spirit should abide in them; and abide in them in
a manifestative way: Ye know him, for he dwells with you, says he. And in
the 20th. verse he says, At that day, that is, the day of the Spirits
in-dwelling, Ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in
you. Oh what rich glorious Experiences of the Sacred Trinity are here! and how
happy the Faith and Obedience which arrives at them! Godly Men should labor to
perfect Holiness, to walk (...), that is, (...) (...), to get to the top of
Godliness, and (...), as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.14. to be Masters and
eminent Presidents in good Works, that they may arrive at this great Experiment.

Thus far touching that center of Divinity, the Sacred Trinity.

In the next place I proceed to the rare Supernatural Truths touching Jesus
Christ; all which Faith may experiment. And here I shall begin with his
Incarnation. Venit universitatis Creator, venit ad homines, venit propter
homines, venit homo, says St. Bernard. He was Immanuel, God with us; (...),
God and Man in one Person; The Eternal Word was made flesh, 1 John 1.14. God
was manifest in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. And what say the Socinian Rebels to
this Truth? Rationi sanae repugnat; duae substantiae proprietatibus adversae
coire in unam personam nequeunt, ut sunt mortalem and immortalem esse,
principium habere and principie carere, mutabilem and immutabilem existere,
says the Racovian Catechism: One and the same Person cannot be Mortal and
Immortal, have a Beginning and no Beginning, or be Mutable and Immutable. But
reason it self, though too low a bar for this Truth to appear at, will absolve
this truth from repugnancy: Body and Soul meet in one Person, adverse in
Properties; the one being Corporal, the other Spiritual; the one Visible, the
other Invisible; the one Rational, the other Irrational; the one Mortal, the
other Immortal. This is done naturally, how much more may it be done
Supernaturally? It would be against reason to say, That Christ were Secundum
idem, Mortal and Immortal, having a Beginning and none; Mutable and Immutable;
But it is not repugnant to say, That he is so in respect of the two Natures
Humane and Divine. Had not Christ been Man, he could not have suffered; had he
not been God, he could not have satisfied: The Blood was from the Humane
Nature, and the excellent Merit from the Divine. He that disbelieves either,
must cast away Scripture which asserts both. This Truth stands firm in
Scripture, as might be showed at large; but for the Point in hand, Faith may
experiment it. The Believer may find in himself such fruits of Christ's
Incarnation, as carry a resemblance thereunto, and are a kind of inward Seal
thereof. The humane Nature of Christ was not brought forth of the blessed
Virgin generatione sed jussione, not in an ordinary way by knowing a man, but
in an extraordinary, by the power of the highest and overshadowing of the Holy
Ghost: Answerably in the Believer, the new Creature is not born of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13. He
that is such has not known man nor his power in this great Work, but has had
the holy Spirit and its gracious overshadowings on the heart. They that dwell
(...) in his shadow shall return, says the Prophet, Hos. 14.7. Unless the
mighty Power of God come upon us we shall have no hearts to return to him. This
resemblance is excellently set forth by Fulgentius; Forma praecessit in carne
Christi, quam in nostra side spiritualiter agnoseamus; De Incarnat. Christi
cap. 20.
ex eodem spiritu renati sumus, ex quo natus est Christas; eodem Spiritu
Christus formatur secundum fidem in cord uniuscujusque credentis, quo Spiritu
secundum carnem formatus est in utero Virginis; The very same Spirit which
formed Christ in the womb, forms him in the heart. The Humane nature in Christ
was united to the Divine in an Hypostatical Union; God and Man met in one
Person, that they might meet in the Covenant of Grace: Answerably the Believer
is united unto God in a spiritual Mystical Union, He is made one Spirit with
the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17. Christ was one flesh with us, and we are one Spirit with
him; God is at one with us in Christ, and we may approach to God with holy
boldness. The Humane Nature of Christ had no natural Subsistence, but subsisted
in the eternal Word; sutably the new Creature has no spiritual Subsistence in
it self, but subsists in God and his Grace; By the grace of God I am what I am,
1 Cor. 15.10. St. Paul looked on his spiritual Being to be only by Grace. In
Christ God was manifested in the flesh, and tabernacled in it; nay, the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt in it, Col. 2.10. As low abject a thing as Humane nature
is, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in it, and will dwell in it for ever;
sutably in Believers the Tabernacle of God is with men, he dwells and walks in
them, and they may be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. that is,
have abundance of his gracious Presence with them. A Believer may find that he
has these resembling fruits in himself, and withal that, unless the Son of God
had been incarnate, none of them would have been; no new Creature, but all men
lying in the old rubbish of the Fall; no Union, but an unpassable gulf such as
is between Heaven and Hell; no spiritual Subsistence, but a corrupt one upon
the dregs of Free Will; no heavenly Fullness, but a vacuity of all Grace: And
from hence he may have an experimental proof of Christ's Incarnation, the
Mystical Union being a proof of the Hypostatical, and God manifest in the
Spirit of God manifest in the Flesh. St. John lays down this as a glorious
Truth, That Jesus Christ is the Son of God, 1 John 5.5. and for proof of it he
produces six Witnesses; Three in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, ver. 7. and Three on earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood,
ver. 8. By the Spirit we may understand the holy Spirit breathing in the
Scripture, and witnessing in the heart; by the Water the sanctifying Graces and
those sealed in Baptism; and by the Blood the precious Sufferings of Christ
which pacify the Conscience: A Believer may experience all these three
Witnesses on Earth, and so may experience the Incarnation of Christ. But to go
on unto this of the Incarnation, I shall add two instances more touching
Christ; the one is his Death, and the other is his Resurrection: The experiment
of both is emphatically set forth by St. Paul, That I may know him, and the
power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made
conformable to his Death, Phil. 3.10. Tune recte cognoscitur Christus, says
Calvin, dum sentimus quid valeat Mors ejus and Resurrectio; Then we truly know
Christ, when we feel the power of his Death and Resurrection in our own hearts.
Jesus Christ died for us, His Soul was an offering for Sin, his Life (...), a
Ransom for many; He satisfied Gods Justice, opened a door of Mercy, and
procured the effusion of the holy Spirit; and all this Faith may experiment. In
the calms of Conscience the Believer may feel the atoning Blood of Christ,
purging his heart from dead works to serve the living God; In the mortifying of
Lusts he may find a secret virtue from Christ crucified, enabling him for the
work; In all the sweet gales and operations of the holy Spirit he has a proof
of that meritorious Passion which procured them; and when he stumbles and falls
into sin and drives away that Spirit for a time, in its return he has a proof,
that Christ is a Priest after the Power of an endless life. The vexed grieved
Spirit might utterly forsake such faultring backsliding Creatures as we are,
and leave us desolate for an habitation of Devils and unclean spirits for ever;
but the endless life of Merit in Christ causes it to return to us again, and
thereby gives us a most precious experiment thereof. At Swerin in Germany,
there was a little drop of Blood included in a Jasper-stone, given out to be
the very Blood of Christ: This every Friday at a certain hour was shown, and
upon view seemed to open and draw out it self, as it were in three parts, and
then to go together again: It was followed by great concourses of people, and
esteemed very Sacred for 300 years. Had this Toy been true and genuine, I might
yet say as Maius the German Divine did to one, who asked him, If it would not
be a great Consolation to a poor Thief ready to die, to be told, That Christ
according to the Flesh is so near him, that even in fune he may have him? At
melius in cord, it is better having the Blood of Christ in the heart than any
other way; such an having produces the glorious Experiments before spoken of.
And as the Death of Christ is experimented, so is his Resurrection. In the
Peace of God the Believer may read that the Debt is fully paid, and the Surety
out of the prison of the Grave; In the inward spiritual Resurrecton he may find
that Almighty power which raised up Jesus from the dead; In heavenly elevations
and affections he may feel holy touches from Christ sitting at Gods right hand,
and attracting his Heart into the upper world: In the excellent ministerial
Gifts in the Church he may know that Christ is above, and lets drop these for
the perfecting of the Saints; and in his lively hope of the incorruptible
Inheritance, he may prove the Resurrection of Christ by which he is begotten
again unto it. Such Experiments as these wonderfully ratify the Faith of
Believers, oil their Obedience, and multiply their Joy and Peace in Believing;
and make each of them able to say in particular, Christ died for me, and Christ
rose again for me; and lo here are the Witnesses of it in my heart.

Unto these faced Truths of the Trinity and Christ, I shall only add one
Instance more touching the efficacy of Grace in the hearts of men. The
Pelagians, those Inimici gratiae, ascribe almost all to Free will, and little
or nothing to Free Grace; making Grace rather to consist in the external
Doctrine than in internal Operations: or if they admit any thing internal, it
is rather in the illumination of the Understanding than in the change of the
Will. But the Scriptures tells us clean contrary, of opening the heart and
new-making it; of working the Will, and a day of power causing it; of raising
the spiritually dead and creating us again in Christ; of putting his Spirit
into us, and causing us to walk in his Statutes: These and many more Scriptures
loudly proclaim the power of Grace, and the Believer may experience it. This is
the clearer, because the sensus communis of Christians has in all Ages run
this way. David upon the willing Offering utters his experience of Grace in a
way of admiration; Who am I and what is my people, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort! For all things come of thee, 1 Chronicles.
29.14. All things come of thee, even willingness and All: In so Offering we do
but give of thine own, as the Greek Christians use to say in their Oblations,
(...), thine from thine. St. Paul upon his experience ascribes all to Grace; I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: And I labor, yet not I, but the
Grace of God which was with me. He acknowledges no I-ness, but ascribes all his
Spiritual Being to Grace; By the Grace of God I am what I am, says he. St.
Cyprian might find in himself what he so excellently said, In nullo nobis
gloriandum, quando nostrum nihil est. St. Ambrose speaking of Cain and Abel,
says; Cain, as his name is Possession, acquires and arrogates all to himself;
but Abel who knew his own Vanity, and that he had nothing de suo nisi mendacium
and peccatuni, referred all to God. The former he calls improbum dogma, the
latter bonum dogma; the good opinion which the just Abels are of and experience
in themselves. And in the last Chapter of that Book he says, Quicquid sancium
cogitaveris, hoc Dei munus est, Dei inspiratio, Dei gratia; which I suppose was
his own experience. Blessed St. Austin that noble assertor of Free Grace (of
whom Prosper said, Dum nulla sibi tribuit bona, sit Deus illi omnia; Whilst he
attributed no good to himself, God became all things to him,) could never have
wrote so magniticently of Grace, had he not had great experience of it. In his
Book De Peccatorum Meritis, he gives a caution, Ne putemus nastrum esse quod
Dei; and adds, Qui error multum est Religioni pietatique contrarius; To
attribute that to our selves which is Gods is an error much contrary to
Religion and Piety: Christian sense is against it. Prosper who came after St.
Austin has this passage, Non est devotionis dedisse prope totum Deo, sed
fraudis retinuisse vel minimum; gratia Dei repellitur tota, nisi tota
recipiatur; To give 999 parts to Grace, and reserve one only to Man's Will is
too much; true Devotion will not bear it. Tutius vivimus si totum Deo damus.
Gotteschalcus preaching up the Doctrine of Grace according to St. Austin and
Prosper, suffered a close Imprisonment for above twenty years together for that
Truth; and no question he experimented the power of Grace whilst he suffered
for it. Bonaventura has a notable passage, Hoc piarum mentium est, ut nihil
sibi tribuant, sed totum Dei gratiae; It is the true genius of Believers to
attribute nothing to themselves but all to Grace. And in the same place he
says, That holy Men know the influences of Grace; Potius experiendo quam
ratiocinando; rather by experience than argument. The profound Bradwardine
confesses, That at first Pelagius seemed to be in the right; it was more
grateful to him to hear of Man's power in the Schools of Philosophers than of
Gods Grace in the Church; But afterward Gratiae radio visitatus, being visited
by a beam of Grace from Heaven, What a second Austin and Champion for Grace did
he prove? His Book de Causa Dei, against Pelagius is a sufficient witness
thereof. After all, the great Luther says in plain terms, That Liberum
arbitrium est merum mendacium; Man's Free Will is but a lie. And if any of the
Fathers have predicated it, certe ex carne ut fuerunt homines, non ex Spiritu
Dei sunt locuti; they spoke according to the flesh as Men, not from the Spirit
of God; and says of himself, That he would not have any thing of Salvation
left in his own hand; and glories in this, Deus salutem meam, extra meum
arbitrium tollens, in suum receperit; All is in the hand of Free Grace: And a
little after concludes, Hec est gloriatio omnium Sanctorum in Deo suo. After
this manner do all the Saints glory in their God, crying out over every. good
thing in themselves, Grace, Grace. Many Books have been wrote touching Will and
Grace: But were the experiences of Saints written and visible, there would
appear such Magnalia or wonderful works of Grace, that every unbyassed person
would say, Conclusum est contra Pelagianos; There is no doubt but the efficacy
of Grace is very great and glorious in the Hearts of men.

Thus much for a taste may sussice touching the experience of Scriptural
Truths; Supernatural Truths may be experimented; much more such as fall in with
the Light of Nature.

CHAP. XII.
The Divine Experiments of Faith in Scripture-Ordinances, Baptism, Preaching of
the Word, Prayer, and the Lords Supper; and lastly in the great Works of Power
recorded in Scripture.

IN the next place I proceed to the Divine Ordinances in Scripture: These the
Believer may experience to be Divine. God bare such a Testimony to the Typical
Ordinances under the Law, that his People experimentally knew that they were
from him. In Circumcision God set his Seal and Love-mark on his ancient People,
and at the doing of it they blessed him, that a Child was brought into
Covenant. In their Burnt-offerings fire from Heaven consumed them as a witness
of their acceptance. Hence the Psalmist prays, The Lord accept thy
Burnt-sacrisice, Psalm. 20.3. (...), in cinerem vertat; let him turn it to
ashes, thereby testifying his acceptance thereof. In their first Temple they
had many Symbols of Gods Presence, as the Ark with the Tables in it, and
Propitiatory or Mercy-seat; by the Vrim and Thummin they could ask Counsel of
God; the Shechinab, the Glory or Majesty of God dwelt between the Cherubims;
and acceptance in their Services and Sacrifices offered unto God. But
pretermitting these as being but Shadows, and by Christians experimented in
Jesus Christ the substance of them; I shall instance in the four great standing
Ordinances in the Christian Church; and show how the Believer may experience
them to be from God, and in that experience prove the Scripture, which appoints
them, to be from him also.

The first Ordinance I shall instance in is that of Baptism: This by the
Ancients was styled (...), Illumination, as ushering in the Evangelical light.
St. Basil calls it Vestimentum candidum and signaculum sancium, the white
garment and holy sign. It is by St. Austin named Porta Gratiae, the door of
Grace, and first entrance into the Church. And by St. Bernard, Christianismi
investitura, the first putting on Christianity. In Luther it is, Aqua non
Creatoris sed Dei salvatoris, the water not of the Creator but of God the
Savior. Among the Jews the Proselyte of the Gates was only tied to the seven
Precepts of Noah, but the Proselyte of Righteousness was bound to all the
Mosaical Ordinances, and was initiated into Judaisin by Circumcision and
Baptism, and the blood of Oblation. The Jewish Rabbis built this Baptism of
Proselytes on that Command of God, Exodus 19.10. That the people should
sanctify themselves, and wash their clothes, in order to the reception of the
Law. Such as were Baptized they called, Renati, newborn, or regenerate; and
reputed them to be Subalis Divinae Majestatis, under the wings of the Divine
Majesty. But as yet Baptism was no Divine Ordinance but only a Jewish custom.
Afterward this custom was turned into a sacred Ordinance in John's Baptism,
which was not of Men but from Heaven: He says of himself, That he was sent to
Baptize, Joh. 1.33. And by whom St. Luke tells us, The word of the Lord came
(...), upon John, Luke 3.2. as a Divine Warrant for the Work. His Baptism is
called, The Counsel of God, Luke 7.30. And was sealed from Heaven by a
wonderful Theophany, the whole Sacred Trinity manifesting themselves at Christ's
Baptism by him. Afterward Christ gave a solemn charge about it, Go teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. and adds a sweet Promise thereunto, Lo I am with you
always even to the end of the world, ver. 20. Thus Baptism is firmly established
in Scripture, and the Believer may experience it to be of God: He, though
Baptized an Infant, wanting the use of Reason, and incapable in himself to make
any formal Vow or Covenant; yet finds a secret bond or obligation lying upon
his Conscience, which remembers him of his Baptism in some such words as those
of an Ancient; Abrenunciasti Diabolo and operibus suis, abrenunciasti seculo
and voluptatibus ejus; Thou have renounced the Devil and his works, the World
and its pleasures, forget not thy Baptism. And the reason of this bond is,
because Baptism is an Ordinance of Stipulation, called by St. Peter (...), the
stipulation or interrogation of a good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. It
is an entry into Covenant with God, and binds the Conscience. Were it no
Ordinance of God, there would be no Stipulation, and so no Obligation upon
Conscience. But when the Believer finds his Baptismal Vow pressing there, he
knows that Baptism is of God. Again, he knows it by the inward strength and
power which he receives from thence. The virtue of Baptism follows the
Believer, as the water of the Rock did the Israelites, in all the travels of
this World even to his dying hour; at which the oldest highest Saint may
refresh himself by running back to his Baptism. When temptations come and
assault the Believer, when Satan casts in his fiery darts to inflame the
Corruption of the Heart, the Believer is the stronger to repulse them, because
of Baptism. A pious Virgin, as Luther relates, used to oppose this to every
Temptation, Baptizata sum, mhil facis Satan; I am Baptized, O Satan, thou can
do nothing. In the African Persecution under Hunericus, one Majoricus a fine
young Man, being brought forth to suffer for the Truth, was thus confirmed
therein by his Mother Dionysia; Memento, mi sili, nos in nomine Sacro-sanciae
Triadis in Ecclesia esse Baptizatos; ah! ne perdamus illud preciosissimum
indumentum, ne veniens, qui ad nuptias nos vocavit, non reperiat vestem
nuptialem, and in tenebras exteriores ejiciamur; Remember, O my Son, that we
were Baptized in the Name of the Sacred Trinity; let us not lose this precious
Garment, lest when he comes who called us to the Wedding, he find no Wedding
garment, and we be cast into utter darkness. This so strengthened the Young
Man, that he suffered as a glorious Martyr for the Truth.

In Baptism we are listed land enrolled into Christ's Militia, and so go not to
war at our own charge; but the great Captain of Salvation is with us, and
strengthens us against Temptation. About the year of our Lord 433, the
Burgundiuns were grievously afflicted by the Huns and finding no relief among
Mortals, they applied themselves to the gods; and there being a great crond of
Numens, at last they pitched on the God of the Christians, as most potent and
present in Perils, and were Baptized, giving up themselves to Christ; after
their Baptism they went to fight with the Huns, and with a few overcome many
thousands of them: And I suppose they fought as well and were as good Soldiers
against inward Temptations as against outward Enemies; for the Story says, Ab
eo tempore ardenti amore flagrabant in conservando Christianismo; From that
time they burned with ardent love to Christianity. Thus they had a double
signal proof of their Baptism, in the strength and Divine assistance afforded
them against outward and in ward Enemies. Moreover the Believer may find in
himself those Divine Blessings which are sealed up in Baptism, and so prove it
to be of God. Baptism seals up Regeneration, and is therefore called by the
Apostle the Laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. And the Believer may find the
New Birth in himself, We know that we are of God, says St. John, 1 John 5.19.
Baptism seals our Union with Christ; and hence we are said therein To put on
Christ, Gal. 3 27. and To be buried with Christ, and risen with Christ, Col.
2.12. Which two are notably adumbrated in the Baptismal Immersion into the
water, and Eduction out of it. And the Believer may know his Union with Christ;
he may not only believe, That Christ is come in carne Mariae, but show that he
is come in carne sua, as Origin speaks; he may not only believe, That Christ
died and rose again in the flesh which he took of Mary, but show that he is
dead and risen in the Believer; that is, Christ's Death and Resurrection are
selt in his Mortification and Vivification. Baptism seals Remission and divine
Favor; hence we read of Baptising for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38. and
the Believer may be able to read his Pardon, and see Heaven as it were open to
him in the gracious favor of God. Thus by experiencing the Divine Blessings
sealed in Baptism, he may satisfactorily prove to himself, That Baptism is an
Ordinance of God.

In the next place I shall instance in the Preaching of the Word. This (however
slighted of late, some Papists calling the Protestant Ministers in a scoff,
Praedicantici; and some Protestants, such as they are, calling Preaching
Prating,) is yet a great Ordinance of God such as has had a standing in the
Church in all Ages. God himself was the first Preacher, first promulgating to
Man his solemn Command touching the forbidden fruit; and after the Fall, that
Protevangelium in the Promise of the seed of the woman, that is, the Messiah.
Adam (as Franzius probably conjectures) was wont at his Sacrifices for nine
hundred years to preach of the Messiah promised. Enoch as early as he was in
the World preached of the last day, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands
of his Saints, Jude v. 14. Noah was a preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5.
and without doubt told them of the approaching Deluge. Abraham had his (...)
his Incipients or initiated Ones, whom he taught in the Divine Law as well as
in arms. Afterward in Moses's time there were Priests and Levites to expound
the Law to the people. In Samuel's time there were Colleges of Prophets, and
there the Word was preached to the people: In these Colleges was the first
rise of Synagogues, and that of Naioth in Ramah, 1 Samuel 19.18, 20. is
translated by the Chaldee Paraphrast, Domus Doctrinae, the House of Learning,
because there the Word of God was taught. The Great Solomon was a Coheleth or
Preacher; his Ecclesiastes is a Penitential Sermon of the Vanity of all things.
The Prophets were Preachers of the Word, and so were the Scribes, who were
therefore called Text-Men or Masters of the Text; and said to sit in Moses's
Chair, because they expounded the Law. Also in the Jewish Church they did by
the Imposition of hands called Semiea, ordain Presbyters; some of whom were for
Judicature, and others for Teaching the Law: Thus Preaching came down
successively to the Times of the Gospel, in which we have a solemn Command To
Preach to every Creature; To be instant in season out of season, To labor in
the Word and Doctrine; nay, To travail in birth till Christ be formed in men.
The Apostles, after their Master Jesus Christ who was the greatest of all
Preachers, dispersed themselves up and down the world to propagate the Gospel.
Paul went Preaching from Jerusalem to Illyricum, Mark was in Egypt, Matthew in
Ethiopia, Thomas in India, Simon Zelotes in Britam, and others in other places,
all laboring in the same Work. After the Death of the Apostles, this Ordinance
was much esteemed in succeeding ages. Anciently the very Bishops of Rome were
wont to Preach; and in the supposed Epistle of Clement to James the Brother of
the Lord, mention is made of quotidiana Praedicatio. Tertullian speaks of
feeding the peoples Faith Sanctis Vocibus, with holy Words; And Origin says,
Omnes Episcapi erudiunt, all the Bishops Preach. In the Old, though not, as
they are called, Apostolical Canons, we have this; Episcopus non docens
deponatur, Let the not-preaching Bishop be deposed: and in the Old, though not,
as named, Apostolical Constitutions; the manner was, first one Presbyter
preached, then another, and last of all the Bishop. At this time there was good
store of Preaching. Damasus the First, Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle de
Chorepiscopis, shows how unlike Christ they are who preach not; Ipse enim
docuit, ipse ovem perditam quaesivit, ipse propriis humeris reportavit; Christ
did all himself. St. Austin and St. Chrysostom preached every day; ye heard
yesterday, ye shall hear to morrow, is common in their Homilies. Many of the
Writings of Ambrose, Nazianzen, Basil and Cyril, were only their Sermons to the
People; and therefore in Concilio Vasensi held about the Year of our Lord 440,
it was ordered, That if the Presbyter were sick and unable to Preach, Sanctorum
Patrum Homiliae a Diaconis recitentur; The Deacons should read the Homilies of
the holy Fathers. Gregory the Great in his Pastoral, says, Qui verbum
praedicationis subtrabunt, animabus morientibus vitae remedia abscondunt; The
unpreaching Minister hides the Bread of Life from dying souls. The fourth
Toletan Council, which was a little after Gregory, says, Omne opus Sacerdotum
in praedicatione consistit, Preaching is a Ministers All. In the Council of
Mentz under Charles the Great, It was Ordered, Can. 25. Nunquam desit diebus
Dominicis qui Verbum Dei Praedicet; On Sabbath days a Preacher must not be
wanting; No, though the Bisliop be sick it must not, as that Can. says. In the
Oxford Constitutions made by Archbishop Stephen, Preaching is enjoined, ne
canes muti merito judicentur. Nay, the very Council of Trent, says, that
Preaching is praecipuum munus Episcopi, the chief work of a Bishop. Such an
Ordinance is this, and so highly esteemed in all Ages, no wonder if Bishop
Morton said, The custom of not-Preaching is but a Babe in Christianity, and the
defense thereof a new point of Learning in Christ's School. But to return to the
Point in hand after this long digression; the Believer may experience this
Ordinance to be of God. That it is so, is in part expermented before
Conversion. Whilst St. Paul but a Prisoner preached of Righteousness,
Temperance and Judgment to come, Felix though a Judge trembled, feeling moral
bonds cast on his Conscience by the Power of that Word which is never bound. It
is yet more fully experimented in Conversion, in which there is a wonderful
change wrought; the dead being raised, new Creatures formed, Lions turned into
Lambs, and hearts of Stone into Flesh; all proclaiming that the Finger of God
is in it of a Truth. Johannes Speicerus, as Scultetus relates, Preached so
powerfully, That the very Strumpets, leaving their lewdness, returned home unto
God. After Conversion the Experiment is yet more complete; the Word works
effectually in them that believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. The glory of the Divine
Attributes break forth in this Ordinance; out of the seeming weakness a Majesty
appears in some sort, much as Christ's Deity sparkled out of his Humane Flesh.
It is not the mere Voice of Man but of God, coming with an Authority more than
Humane, and setting the heart, made like Josiah's tender by Faith, into an holy
trembling at it, as a signal proof, that the Lord is the Speaker; One who has
the Keys of Heaven and Hell in his own hand, and upon Obedience or Rebellion is
able to save or destroy. The Believer by the command and reverential awe put
upon his Conscience, finds That there is a Divine Presence and Grandeur in it,
which to oppose, is to strive and make War with God himself.

Again, out of the seeming foolishness wisdom discovers it self. Whilst but a
man is teaching outwardly to the ear, there is an inward Teacher in the heart:
The Spirit of Revelation uncovers the holy things, and brings forth this or
that sacred Mystery to the View, Intus datur, intus coruscat, intus revelatur,
as St. Austin expresses it. The Father of Lights shows himself there in sacred
Revelations; Christ seals up the Ordinance by the dropping of the holy Unction.
A Believer meets with such illuminations as are far more precious than all the
Lights in Nature. Hence St. Chrysostom's Auditors, when he was like to be
silenced, cried out, Satius est ut Sol non luceat, quam ut Chrysostomus non
doceat; It were better to lose the Sun, than such a burning shining light as he
was. The entrance or opening of thy words gives Light, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 119.130. When the Word preached is admitted into the heart by Faith, and
there opened by the Holy Spirit, a celestial Light rises up, and bears Witness
to the Ordinance. Again, in the midst of plainness Divine Omniscience shows
forth it self; the Minister stands without, but the Word enters in and
anatomizes the heart. Elisha proved himself a Prophet, in telling what the King
of Syria spoke in his Bedchamber. Our Savior manifested his Deity in
answering to the thoughts of Men. When the Word preached penetrates into the
retiring-rooms and inmost chambers of the heart, and there rifles the very
thoughts and unriddles the purposes and inclinations; It is an infallible Sign
that the Great Searcher of hearts has sent a Beam of Omniscience along with
it. The Believer, who above all other men studies himself most, desires much to
know two things, viz. What of secret sin there is in him, and what of truth of
Grace. And under this searching Ordinance he comes to see many a mote or black
spot in his heart, such as he never dreamed of; and withal some marks and
characters which to his comfort show him his uprightness: and in such
Discoveries he sees the Great Revealer of Secrets cooperating with the Word.
Moreover, whilst the Minister is unfolding the Gospel, such are the ravishing
savours of Christ and Grace, as if a box of Heavenly Spikenard were broken in
the Believers Heart: Pardon and Peace smell out of the odours of Christ's
Merits, and Heaven it self out of his pure Righteousness: Through this lattice
(how contemptible soever it be to carnal Men) Christ shows his all-desirable
self and full treasures; Free Grace communicates pardons and lovetokens; the
Divine Spirit breaths life and power into Believers, quickening and awakening to
answer the pure Commands with Obedience; and this and that Promise lets out its
sweetness, and flows as a Conduit of Celestial Wine, with admirable Suavities
and Consolations. In such things as these Faith has sweet Communion with God,
and a sure seal set to this Ordinance. In the Preaching of the Gospel the
Kingdom of Heaven comes nigh, even to rejecters, Luke 10.11. Much more does it
do so unto Believers, who take the holy Mysteries and Promises into the bosom
and complex of Faith, and thereby inflame their Hearts with the Love of Christ
and Grace, as a sure witness that this Ordinance which carries so much of
Heaven in it, is from thence.

Next to the Preaching of the Word I shall set the Ordinance of Prayer: This is
the ascent of the Soul unto God as the fountain of all Good. As in every lust
there is a depression of the Heart to one Creature or other; so in every right
Prayer there is an holy elevation of it to God. This gives great Glory to God;
as it is humble, it reveres his Majesty; as upright, it owns his Omniscience;
as believing, it glorifies his condescending Grace; and as importunate, it
overcomes the Almighty, and takes the Kingdom of Heaven by violence; opening a
door to that infinite mass or treasure of Grace which is laid up for those that
strive and wrestle with him for supplies out of it. This is a Catholic Duty,
good in all places. The Jews prayed in or toward the Temple, but now the whole
World is consecrated for it; every where holy hands are to be lifted up; fit
for all times, praying always, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.18. Not that we are
to do nothing else, as the Euchitae or Messaliani of old dreamed; but that
there is no time wherein the Mercy-seat is shut, or Christ not interceding
above, or the holy Spirit not ready in some measure to assist Believers:
Neither is there any time in which we should not carry about with us a virtual
confession in our sense of Sin, or a virtual Prayer in our sense of Wants, or a
virtual Praise in our sense of Mercies. Continuum desiderium est continua
oration, as St. Austin has it. Vita hominis, says Luther, nibil aliud est,
nisi oration, gemitus, desiderium, suspirium ad misericordiam Dei; Man's life
should be a perpetual breathing after God. And withal it is incumbent on all
Men; the first Adam in Innocence probably addressed himself to God in Prayer;
and Jesus Christ the second Adam was much in it; the Ethnicks by the light of
Nature used it. It was an old Gentile-Law, Ad divos adeunto, go to the gods.
Socrates prayed that he might be Intus pulcher, inwardly fair with virtue.
Plato says, Every one who is compos mentis, will in the beginning of any work
invoke the gods. How much more must Christians pray, who have before their eyes
a Gospel, a Mercy-Seat, and an open way into the Holy of Holies through the
Veil of Christ's flesh! Unregencrate persons are bound to this Duty, as we see
in the Command to Simon Magus, being in the gall of bitterness and bond of
iniquity, Act. 8.22; Much more Believers. Prayer is the breath of the
new creature, and badg of Christians; who are thus deciphered by the Apostle,
All that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. Such and so great is
this Ordinance, that the Jews (who prayed standing, and therefore called Prayer
Gnammuda, or Standing) used to say, Sine stationibus non staret mundus, The
world would not stand without Standing or Prayer. That this is an Ordinance of
God, the Believer experiments many ways:

First, He experiments it in the Assistances of the Holy Spirit; which is as
Gales to the Sails of Prayer in its Voyage to Heaven; and as holy Fire to the
Incense of it, causing it to ascend to the Throne of Grace. The Spirit helps
our infirmities, Romans 8.26. (...), It lifts over against us, or helps us to
lift up a Prayer, which else would be too heavy for us. Whilst the Believer is
a-praying, O what heavenly meltings are there! The Believer is like Ephraim,
bemoaning himself; or as the Children of Israel at Mizpeh, lamenting after the
Lord, and pouring out water, as if their eyes were turned into Fountains of
penitential tears; or as the man in the Gospel, crying out with tears, Lord, I
believe, help thou mine unbelief; Catching at Mercy with an hand trembling at
his own Infirmity. Such meltings and spiritual mournings over Sin, plainly
show, That the Spirit of Grace and Supplication is poured out upon the Prayer;
making it, like the bruised Incense, sull of fragrancy, breathing out from a
broken heart, dissolved into tears by the beams of Gods Love. And in this
Evangelical thaw, What Divine enlargements are there! The heart is no longer in
the Straits of Sin and Earth, but opened and expanded toward Heaven. E're the
praying Believer is a ware, his Soul sets him on the wheels, and his lips drop
as the honeycomb; if not in the very entrance of the Duty, yet in the progress
of it. The Psalmist in the beginning of the 38th Psalm, seems cold and frozen
in Unbelief; Gods arrows stick fast in him, his hand presses him sore, the
iniquities are too heavy, the wounds stink and are corrupt; There are nothing
but bowings, breaches, and miserable roarings: But before he has done praying,
his heart recovers again, In thee, O Lord, do I hope; thou will hear, O Lord my
God, ver. 15. Sometimes at first there is a Cloud and dark Eclipse upon the
Prayer; and yet a little after, Grace breaks forth with its Sunny beams, and
draws out the heart toward God, They looked unto him and were lightened, as
David speaks, Psalm. 34.5; or as the words may be read, they looked unto him and
flowed; their hearts were as a River running out with spiritual fluency and
enlargments; such as are a real proof that the free Spirit is in the Prayer;
and withal, What an heavenly ardor is there? While I was musing the fire
burned, says David, Psalm. 39.3. While the Believer is a-praying, the Holy
Spirit is as fire upon the heart, inflaming it into religious ascents toward
God. The Believer stirs up himself, and takes hold on God by some Promise or
other; and Jacoblike wrestles with him for Mercy, and will not let him go till
there be a dawn or daybreak of Grace. He prays in his Prayer, and urges the
Attributes of God upon him, and presses hard upon him with an holy immodesty or
impudence, as the expression is, Luke 11.8; and will not be said Nay. Much like
Gorgonia, the pious Sister of Nazianzen, who lay at the Altar with Tears and
Prayers, and said, That she would not depart, till she had her request; and
accordingly obtained it of God. This is the (...). Jam. 5.16, the inwrought
Prayer, or Prayer wrought by Gods Spirit in ours, and from thence poured out in
an agony, or vehemence of holy Assections, panting and breaking with longings
after God and his Grace. Luther having prayed with great fervency, said, Vtinam
eodem ardore orare possem, Would to God I could always pray with the like
ardor; then should I always have this answer, Fiat quod velis, Be it unto thee
as thou will. After this manuer does the Holy Spirit come down on the Believers
Prayer, and bear witness to this Ordinance.

Secondly, He experiments it in his Access to God. The Devils, who are in
Chains of Darkness, can make no approaches to God; there is an unpassable gulf
between them and him. It is storied of a German Nobleman, that there was acted
before him a Play of the five Wise and five Foolish Virgins; the Wise were St.
Mary, St. Catbarine, St. Barbara, St. Dorothy, St. Margaret, to these came the
Foolish for Oil; that is, as the Actor interpreted it, That they would
intercede with God for their admission into Heaven; They knocked, and wept, and
instantly prayed, but the Wise denied, and bid them be gone: At this sight the
Nobleman was astonished, crying out, What is the Christian Religion, if none of
the Saints will hear and intercede for us? And soon after he died of an
Apoplexy. It Is sad being shut out from the presence of God. The Believer is, as
they say of the Rhodians, in sole positus. He is nigh unto God, and has his
Religion proved to him, in that he has (...), access or manuduction unto God.
The way into the Holy of Holies is open through the veil of Christ's flesh; and
the Holy Spirit does conduct him in thither. He may come (...), with boldness
unto the throne of Grace; and there utter all his mind, as a Child does to his
Father. David, in the 13th Psalm, begins as if God were totally absent, How
long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy face
from me? But a little after we have him in the joy and triumph of Faith; I have
trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation, says he, ver.
5. The door of Mercy, which for a little time was shut up, soon opened again,
and gave him a free access unto God.

Thirdly, He experiments it in the returns of Prayer; the Promises, by which
God binds his own bowels above, are let down here below in the Gospel. And as
the Believer takes hold of them by Prayer, so God is touched with a
compassionate feeling thereof. Whilst Ephraim was bemoaning himself in his
Supplication, Gods bowels are troubled and fall a-sounding at it, Jer. 31.18,
20. Coelum tundimus and misericordiam extorquemus, says Tertullian; We knock
at Heaven, and fetch down mercy from God. Prayer has done Wonders in the
world. At Abraham's Prayer. God stoops to such low terms, that he would have
saved Sodom for ten righteous persons: Jacob by Prayer wrestles, and becomes a
Prince with God; which is more than to have all the Monarchies of the World.
Moses by it binds as it were the Almighty, and will not let him alone to
consume Israel: Joshua stopped the Chariot of the Sun, and so made a long day for
the improvement of his Victory: Elias locked up Heaven, and till he turned the
Key of Prayer the contrary way there was no rain upon the Earth. In the time of
Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, the Christian Legion by their Prayers,
procured Water for the Roman Army, and a scattering Tempest against their
Enemies; and were therefore called Legio fulminatrix, The thundering Legion.
Prayer has a kind of Omnipotence in it, and can do every thing. Sometimes the
Prayer is returned in Specie, in the very thing desired, as Hannah's was in a
Son; whom therefore she called Samuel; that is, Asked of God. In this case the
Believer has a double Blessing in one; over and above the common Providence he
has a pregnant proof of his Prayer in it. A Blessing, which is a mere
Providence, comes up, as the Corn does, with the husk or chaff of one vanity or
other, as a Memento of that blast which Sin brought upon the World: But that,
which is a Fruit of Prayer, is as Manna from Heaven, pure and unmixt; a
Blessing and no sorrow added to it; as being the Birth of the Promise and
Covenant. The Blessings of the former sort are gathered up by Men as Acorns are
by Swine without looking up to that Grace, which as a Tree of Life bears all
the good Fruit: But the latter raises up the Heart in the admirations and
high-praises of the great Donor, as we see in Hannah, who returned back her
Son, as soon as received, unto God in Praise and Dedicacation. Critics have
observed an elegant Paranomasia in those words (...); therefore I have lent him
to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.28. Samuel was first Shaiil meel, Asked of God; and then
Shaiil leel, lent or returned to God. Those Blessings, which are drawn down by
Prayer, lie not dead here below, but are sent back again in Praise. Sometimes
the Prayer returns another way, though it be not heard ad voluntatem, it is ad
utilitatem: The answer is in some thing that profits us, though not to the
express desire of our Hearts; it may be it is in the sweet composure of the
Heart. Upon Prayer God comes in, and rebukes the Winds and Seas of Passion, and
there is a calm and Divine serenity in the Soul. Hannab before Prayer was a
Woman of a sorrowful spirit; but her Soul being poured out unto God, returned
with a Divine sweetness; Her countenance was no more sad, 1 Samuel 1.18. It may
be there is an inward support which is tantamount to the Blessing desired. Our
Saviors Prayer against the Cup of Wrath was heard, in that he was enabled to
drink and overcome it. And St. Paul's against the Thorn in the Flesh, in that
he had sufficient Grace to withstand it. Preclare nobiscum agitur, dum adest
Dei Gratia quae nobis subveniat, says Reverend Calvin. In the Supports of
Grace there is a signal answer of Prayer; it may be, over and above the
Support, the Beams of Gods Love break in upon the heart: This is a little
Heaven here below, and richly transcends all this world. Bellarmin tells us a
Story of an old Man, who used to rise from Duty with these words; Claudimini,
Oculi mei, claudimini; nihil enim pulchrius jam videbitis: Be shut, O my Eyes,
be shut; for I shall never behold a fairer Object than Gods Face, which I have
now beheld. The Love of God irradiating a Prayer is a ravishing sight, far
better than life and all its comforts. It may be there is a transmutation of
the Blessing into another; such as God, who improves the stock of Prayer to the
best advantage, knows to be better for us. David prayed earnestly for his sick
Child, and the return of it was in a Solomon, a Jedidiah beloved of God. One
way or other the Believers Prayer returns into his bosom, being answered at
least secundum cardinem, according to the main hinge and scope of it, which is
Gods glory and Man's comfort or happiness. Thus Moses's Prayer to go into Canaan
was answered according to the ground of it. Instead of the type God takes him
up to Heaven the true Canaan, which was most for Mases's comfort; And instead
of Moses a type of the Law, Joshua a type of Christ leads the people into
Canaan, which was most for Gods Glory. Which way soever the Prayer returns to
the Believer, it seals up the Ordinance for Divine.

In the last Place I come to the Ordinance of the Lord Supper: The outward
Elements of this Sacrament our Lord Christ took (as Learned Men conceive) from
a custom observed among the Jews at the Passover, at the end of the
Celebration whereof, the Father of the Family was wont to take a Cake of Bread,
and after the blessing thereof to break and distribute it to the Communicants;
and also after that a Cup of Wine in like sort, unto which some refer that Cup
of Salvation, Psalm. 116.13. The Bread and Wine among the Jews were but a
Customary Rite, but Christ consecrated them into a Sacrament; saying of the
Bread, This is my Body; and of the Wine, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood, which could not before be said of them. In the Paschal Rite, it was only
said of the Bread, This is (...), the bread of affliction; and of the Cup, This
is (...) the Cup of the Hymn: But now, This is my Body, and this is my Blood.
In this great Ordinance the Body and Blood of Christ are evidently figured out,
and set forth before our eyes, as if he were Crucified among us. The seventh
General Council at Constantinople, who knocked down all other Images, says of
this Sacrament, That it is Vera Christi Imago, the only true Crucifix or Image
of Christ. And which is much more than an Image, the very Body and Blood of
Christ are here truly and really, though Spiritually present to our Faith,
being exhibited ut epulum faederale, as a Covenant-feast, or Love-banquet,
chearing the heart of God and Man. The same Body and Blood, which in the
Sacrifice on the Cross were a sweet savor unto God, and satisfied his Justice,
are set forth in the Sacrament as meat and drink for our Faith, feeding us to
Life Eternal. Here is Epitome Evangelti, a compend of the Gospel, the whole
Covenant and Contrivance of Salvation is sealed in a bit of Bread and drop of
Wine: Here the Believer meets with many rich Experiments, he feeds and lives
upon a Crucified Christ, eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood; and what a
Feast is this! it is much that our Bodies may live upon the Body and Blood of
Creatures; but Oh incomparable Grace! Our Souls may live on the Body and Blood
of God. One drop whereof, says Luther, is more worth than Heaven and Earth.
Cruci haeremus, sanguinem sugimus, and intra ipsa Redemptoris nostri vulnera
figimus linguam, says St. Cyprian. Haustu interiori in a Spiritual Mystical
way, we do in this Ordinance cleave to Christ's. Cross, suck his precious Blood,
and as it were fasten our Tongues within his healing Wounds. Whilst the Bread
and Wine are Physically and Carnally united to us, we are Mystically and
Hyperphysically united to Christ, becoming Members of his Body, of his Flesh,
and of his Bones; Spiritually dwelling in him and he in us, The same holy
Spirit, which is upon him in Heaven, falling down upon us on Earth; and the
Faith which is in us here below, ascending up to clasp and embrace him. In sinu
Christi recumbimus, in cor Christi introspicimus, says Luther; We lie in his
bosom, and look into his heart. In our Pardon sealed we taste the sweetness of
his atoning Blood, and in the effusion of the holy Spirit we drink at the
sountainhead of Grace sprung up in his Humane Nature. We have here the whole
Covenant or Charter of Grace sealed to us, and may believe not only ex promisso
but ex pignore: Over and above the Promise we have a pawn or pledge of the Truth
thereof. We saw not the inspired Prophets and Apostles penning down the
Promises, but Ecce Signum, lo here is a visible sign and seal set thereunto;
and sense leads in Faith to claim and possess them for its own: Hence our
Savior calls the Cup, the New Testament in his Blood, Luke 22.20. The Cup
(says Luther) contains the Wine, the Wine exhibits the Blood of Christ, the
Blood of Christ natifies the New Govenant, and the New Covenant promises
remission of Sins, and with it a vast treasure of Blessings. Again, we have
here the rich anointings of the holy Spirit. Among the Oriental Nations, and in
particular among the Jews, there was Vnctio convivalis, a Feastival Unction,
which they used as a token of welcome to pour on the head of their Guests: Thus
there came unto Christ a Woman having an Atabaster box of very precious
Ointment, and poured it on his head as he sat at meat, Mat. 26.7. Whilst we
are at the Lords-Table, we are anointed with fresh Oil; the holy Spirit is
poured out in richer measures of Grace and Comfort, than it was at first. As a
Spirit of Grace and Supplication it melts the Heart into godly sorrows at the
sight of a Crucisied Christ: Sin being indeed the Jew and Judas, the betrayer
and murderer of the Son of God; the Nails in his Cross, and Spear in his Side;
the Gall and Wormwood in the Cup of Wrath which made him sweat drops of Blood,
and under an horrid Eclipse of Gods favor to cry out of forsaking. To look
upon a groaning World traveling under an universal vanity, would stir up
sorrow in any that had a sense of it; much more to look upon a Christ, a
Creator bleeding and dying upon a Cross; to the least drop of whose Passion the
dashing down of a World is a poor inconsiderable nothing. To look upon the
broken Tables of a Law dearer to God than Heaven and Earth is very grievous;
but to stand and see God for our Sin bruising and breaking his own Son and
Effential Image in our assumed Nature, is matter of amazing sorrow. Never was
Sin set forth. in such bloody Colors as in his Passion; never do repentant
tears flow more purely than at such a spectacle. Here the Heart breaks in its
closing with a broken Christ, and bleeds afresh over his Wounds, and turns the
Sacrament of the Supper into a Baptism of Tears; and out of an holy hatred and
revenge would have the violence done to Christ be put upon Sin the great
Crucifier of him in the true Mortification thereof. As a Spirit of Faith it
causes us to live upon Christ: Having no Righteousness of our own to answer the
Law with, we feast and satisfy our selves in the Righteousness of Christ; as
in that which satisfied the heart of God, and is here made over to satisfy
ours. We may surely say, The Righteousness of God is upon us; and as it has no
spot or wrinkle in it self, so it leaves no ground of scruple or jealousy in
our Hearts in the midst of our Sins, which have Death and Hell virtually in
them. We yet live upon the atoning Sacrifice of Christ. His Blood which was
offered up to God through the Eternal Spirit, and by him accepted as a plenary
Satisfaction for Sin, is now put into Promises and Sacraments, as into so many
Basins, and from thence sprinkled on our Conscience to purge away all our
guilt; our Sins are pardoned, and our Pardon passed under the Seal of Heaven.
In the midst of our Wants, Faith can triumph in the immense Treasures of Grace
in Christ set open in this Ordinance to all comers. Here Is Eye Salve for our
Blindness; Strength for our Weakness; Melting for the hard Heart; Cordials for
Fainting-fits; quenching Grace against the fiery darts of Satan; and Healing
for the bloody issues of Sin. From this Table we go, says Chrysostom, as
Lions breathing fire terrible to the Devils themselves. Ante faciem Vnctionis
Christi nullus omnino stare potest morbus animae, quamvis inveteratus, says
Bernard; Before the Unction of Christ the most inveterate disease of the Soul
will vanish away. When once the Venetians were boasting of their great
Treasures, a Spanish Ambassador told them, That his Masters Treasure had a root
in the Mines of America. However worldly Men may boast of outward things, the
Believers joy is, That his Graces have a sure root in the Mines and rich
Treasures of Christ; in whom dwells all fullness of abundance and redundance
running over in shares and measures upon all that are in him. As a spirit of
Love it inflames the Heart toward Christ; Oh! what manner of Love is here set
before us! the Fathers own Son and Image, passing by Angels, assumed our frail
Flesh, and in it stood in our room: Having, though the Holy One, the Sin of the
World cast on him by a wonderful Imputation; and though the beloved Son, the
Wrath of God bruising and pressing him into a bloody Agony and Passion on our
behalf. The Fathers Eternal Joy and Splendour lay for a time in a dark Eclipse
of Sorrow and Desertion, as one forsaken of God, that we might not be cast out
into utter darkness; and bled and died on a Cross as one accursed of God, to
keep us from bleeding in eternal flames, and to purchase a place in Glory for
us. And all this in outward Elements is not only limmed out and figured to our
senses, but sealed to our hearts, as that which we have a real share and
interest in. And what attractives and inflammatives are here? Now, if ever, our
Heart will breath out it self in holy Raptures after Christ, and faint and
swoon away in Lovesick desires, till it can catch hold and embrace him, and so
taste the rare Delights and Complacencies of an Union with Him: And the greater
those Complacencies are, the higher are the Desires, and reciprocally the
higher the Desires, the greater the Complacencies; till at last the Believing
Soul in rapes of Love breaks forth into Hosanna's and Hallelujahs, touching its
great Redeemer. Such Experiments as these prove this Ordinance to be Divine.

Thus much touching the Ordinances in Scripture, and the Experimenting their
Divinity.

In the last Place I shall mention The great Works of Power Recorded in
Scripture: many of these are Types of the Magnalia or Spiritual Wonders wrought
in or for the Souls of Men. Thus the Ark which saved from the Deluge was a Type
of Salvation from Wrath in and through Christ; Isaac, born of a dead Body and
Womb, a Type of the New Creature brought forth by supernatural Grace; and The
bringing Israel out of Egypt, a Type of the great Redemption wrought by Christ.
These a Believer may Experiment in their Spiritual Imports and Mysteries, which
are more great and glorious than the Things themselves. Not to be prolix in
this; I shall only instance in two Things, viz. The Creation of the World,
Historically set forth, Genesis 1. and The Miracles wrought by Christ, related in
the Gospel. As touching Creation, as clear a Glass as it is of the Eternal
Power and Godhead, the Philosophers were much mistaken about it: Aristotle
asserting, That the World was Eternal; as if it were possible, That there
should be an infinite orderly Succession of Things, or a third, fourth, fifth,
etc. without a first; or as if a World, a Creature, could be made as the Son of
God was Begotten, or join Eternities with its Creator. The Stoics dreaming at
least of an Eternal Matter or Chaos; as if that Axiom, ex nihilo nihil fit,
which runs true in Nature, did reach God himself; or as if He, like our
Mechanics on Earth, could not work without Tools or Materials: Or, as if the
Gulf between Nothing and Being were so great, that Infinite Power could not
fill it up, and setch over a Creature from Nullity into Being. The Epicureans
fancying the World to be made by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms luckily
meeting together in the framing of it; as if the blind Particles of Matter
could range themselves into a World full of delicate Order and Harmony; or as
if the various parts, regular motions, and orderly dispositions in the great
Universe could be but a chance; or as if the admirable consent and
confederation of all the parts therein, in which contraries conspire and agree
together for the good of the whole, were but a fortunate casualty. Such were
the dreams of the Sophi; but the Believer by Faith understands, That the Worlds
were framed by the Word of God, Hebr. 11.3. And over and above may experience a
Creation, a precious New Creation in his own Heart; We are his workmanship
created in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.10. In this Creation
Almighty Power is as much laid out as in the Old; and the Products of it are
much more excellent than the other. Spiritual Light excels Natural; and the
Firmament of Faith the outward One. The Living Water within exceeds the great
Ocean; and Christ in the Heart, the Sun in the Heavens. Graces are transcendent
Creatures, and surpass even the Immortal Soul, which yet outweighs a World. The
Believer may look upon his Holy Faith, Fear, Love, Joy, Hope and Patience,
which make up the New Creature; and say, All these were created out of Nothing,
and called into Being, when they were not: Here is dextra excelsi, The right
hand of the most High, the very same which made the World, and Vestigia
Spiritus Sancti, The footsteps of that Holy Spirit which of old moved on the
Face of the Waters: Now I know, That God is a Creator indeed, and have a
practical proof of it in my own Heart; every part of the New Creature bearing
witness thereunto. As to the Miracles of Christ related in the Gospel, these
were so famous, That Josephus mentions them; Celsus and Julian in their
Writings against Christians durst not deny them; Grot. de Ver. Relig. 44.
Camero de Verbo 441. Petr. Gal. de Arranis 447.
The Jews in their Talmudical Books, nay, and the Mahometans in their Alchoran
confess them: And the Heathens moved with envy at them, caused the life of
Apollonius Thyanaeus and his lying Miracles, to be described in mere opposition
to Christ and his true ones. When John sent his Disciples on that errand, Art
thou he that should come? that is, the Messiah: Christ returns this answer, Go
and tell John, the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up: As much as to say, In such
Wonders as these is my Glory manifested. For the right understanding of these
we must note; Christ did not come only or chiefly to cure the Bodies of Men,
no, those Miracles, which in transitu cured their Bodies, Miracula christi,
corporaliter facta, Spiritaliter intelligenda snut.
were ultimately levelled at their Souls, that by Outward Cures they might be
led to seek Inward ones from Christ. Neither did he do all his Miracles on
Earth; no, being Ascended and Sitting at the Right Hand of Majesty in Heaven he
works (...), those Spiritual Miracles on the Souls of Men, which are
incomparably greater than those on their Bodies. How many blind Hearts (and
those worse than blind Eyes) has he cured by a Touch, as he passed by them in
the Ordinances, causing them to see himself, the True light and Sun of
Righteousness, together with all the Heavenly Mysteries which stream as so many
Beams or Rays from him? How many deaf Souls have upon his Divine Ephatha been
obedientially opened to the Commands of God; and though lame before, have Rose
up, walked holily, and praised God? what Spiritual Lepers has he by a Touch of
his Spirit and Word cleansed? Quae enim immunditia, quae incredulitas, quae
duritia, quod peccatum ad hunc contactum Christi consistere poterit? says
Ferus; No uncleanness, unbelief, hardness, sinfulness can stand against the
Touch of Christ. What Sinners of all forts dead in Sins and Trespasses has he
raised up to a Divine Life? Saint Austin reciting that Christ had raised up
three Persons, viz. The Maid in her Fathers House; the Young Man carried out
upon the Bier, and Lazarus four days dead and stinking in the Grave; adds, Ista
tria genera mortuorum sunt tria genera peccatorum quos suscitat Christus; these
three dead ones are three sorts of Sinners raised up by Christ. As the Maid in
the house, so is the secret Sinner raised up intra latebras conscientiae,
within the doors of his own Heart. As the young Man carried out upon the Bier,
so is the open Sinner raised up out of known Sins: And as Lazarus dead and
stinking in the grave, so is the customary Sinner raised up out of his old
putrified Sins. At the voice of Christ the strongest bonds of custom are
broken, and the poor Sinner comes forth into an holy life. These things being
so, it appears, That the Believer may experiment the Spiritual Miracles of
Christ; and from thence gather a proof in his own Heart, That the very same
hand wrought the Corporal ones; especially seeing these latter are but types
and shadows of the other, which he finds verified in himself.

Thus much touching this Fundamental Experiment of the Scriptures: A Believer
may experiment the Laws, Promises, Threatenings, Supernatural Truths, Sacred
Ordinances, and Great Works in Scripture to be Divine, and so have a Practical
proof that the Scripture is of God.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the top and highest stature of Faith, the Believers Assurance of his good
estate of Pardon and Salvation. That this Assurance is attainable, many ways
demonstrated.

HAving passed over the Believers Experiment touching the Scripture; I shall
now proceed to another touching his own Estate. He may certainly know, (...),
as Dionysius speaks, That it is well with him, That he is in a good state of
Pardon and Salvation. This is apex fidei, the top and highest stature of Faith;
a Privilege which transcends Earth, and antedates Heaven to us. Here are those
three things, Lumen, Laetitia, and Pax, Light, Joy, and Peace, which (as the
Schoolman Halensis says) render the experiment of Grace in the Soul truly
certain. Here are Celestial Beams, unspeakable Joys, admirable Serenities,
Sabbaths of Rest, Seas of Sweetness, and Beatitudes too great for the tongue of
Men and Angels to express. Before the Believer walked only with the single
staff of Recumbency and Resignation; but now he has bands and troops of
Comfort following after him from the Promises: His darling Soul is now richly
provided for to all Eternity; Eternal Beanty is in his Eye, Infinite Goodness
at hand for his Embraces; the lines are fallen in a kind of Paradise; his
Portion is no less than God himself; all his Blessings are dipped in Love: The
World may brand him, but the Spirit seals; In the midst of sweeping Judgments
he is still one of Gods Jewels; and as soon as Death dissolves him, Heaven
receives him.

Touching this great Experiment, I shall first prove, That it is attainable by
a Believer; and then show in what ways it is to be attained. The Romanists
hold, That no Man without special Revelation can be certain of his Pardon and
Salvation; not with a certainty of Faith, Bellar. de Juslif. lib. 3.
which is infallible, but only with a certainty of Hope which is conjectural.
The Promises indeed are sure, say they, but our Dispositions are uncertain: The
Promises run Conditionally, If they return to thee with all their heart, 2 Chronicles. 6.38. and who can be sure that he does so? Who can say, I have made my
heart clean? says the Wiseman, Prove. 20.9. Who can understand his errors?
says David, Psalm. 19.12. Some Scriptures put a peradventure upon Remission,
Who can tell if God will turn and repent? Jon. 3.9. Repent, if perhaps the
thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee, Act. 8.22. And the reason is,
because of the uncertainty of our Dispositions: Faith is not Faith unless it
lean on the Divine Word; and no Word says, Such or such an one has true Faith
and Repentance, or is truly pardoned; Happy is the man that fears always,
Prove. 28.14. The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it?
Jer. 17.9. Assurance if vouchsafed, would but puss up Pride, and open a door to
Licentiousness. Thus the Pontisicians. Their Divinity in this great Point is
much like the Philosophy of the old Scepticks, those Patrons of all
Uncertainty; who used to say, (...), Reason against Reason puts all
Propositions in aequilibrio; the Balance hangs even without Declension, this or
that way, after all debates imaginable; still (...), perhaps it is so, perhaps
not: It may be they do see and hear, it may be not; at least they doubt,
whether they do it distinctly or no. After the same sort the Romanists do what
they can to persuade Believers out of their Spiritual sense, out of which
Assurance arises. It may be (will they say) thou repentest and believe, it
may be not; or if thou do them, it may be not sicut oportet, in such a manner
as they ought to be done. Hence the Council of Trent Can. 9^^ calls the
certainty of Remission, vain and remote from all Piety. This is that Doctrine
of theirs which Luther calls, Monstrum dubitationis, the monster of doubting;
and withal asserts, That if they erred only in this, it were a just eause for
us to separate from such an Infidel-Church. Learned Pareus styles it,
Desperationis ossicina, the shop of desperation. Adding moreover, That it is
Antichrists proper work to weaken the Faith and Hope of Christians. Indeed this
Doctrine does dispirit and emasculate Religion, turn Faith and Hope into mere
Meteors, and set the Consciences of Men a-fluctuating in perpetual doubts and
labyrinths. But let us see what they say for it, first distinguishing between
the certainty of Faith, and the certainty of Hope; they allow the latter to
Believers: And what manner of Hope is this? Is it a fallible conjectural Hope
only? such a Spiders web may be found in an Hypocrite, who has no lot or part
in this matter: Or is it a true Divine Hope suitable to a real Believer? This
even the School-man Durandus will confess to be such, That non potest non
evenire, it cannot but come to pass, this will not make ashamed, Romans 5.5. by
disappointing the Soul where it lodges. It is the Believers anchor, pure and
steadfast, Heb. 6.19. Such as will never leave him to the courtesy of a wave or
rock, for it enters in within the Veil, and is fastened in Heaven. Faith and
Hope, which they here vainly distinguish, are coupled so together in a
Believer, that Hope cannot fluctuate unless Faith do so; neither is Faith
certain without an Hope congruous thereunto. Faith is the Hypostasis or
Subsistence of things hoped for, says the Apostle, Heb 11.1. And Hope (as an
Ancient has it) is (...), The very Blood of Faith. They say indeed, That the
Promises are sure and infallible; but withal, they put such an uncertainty upon
our Dispositions, as to evacuate the very drift and scope of the Promises;
which is, That Believers might have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. Streaming
out from those two immutable Things, The Word and Oath of God who cannot lie.
But if the Believer must still be in doubt whether he have true Faith and
Repentance; O how weak must his Comforts be, and how cold the Promises! He does
as it were but Tantalize at the pure fountain of Joy and Consolation. It Is
true, the Promises are Conditional; But are not those Conditions found in true
Believers? May they not know that they turn unto God with all their heart, that
is, seriously and sincerely? Remission and Salvation hang not on the degree of
Faith and Repentance; but on the truth thereof: They cannot say, their Heart is
clean with a sinless Sanctity; but they may, that it is so with a true
Integrity, such as has all the Promises entailed on it. A true Believer (says
St. Austin) may say, Sanctus sum, I am holy; and to say so, is not Pride but
Gratitude: They cannot understand all the errors lying in the deep of the
Heart; but they may the Graces brought in there by a new Creation. That J^m. 3.
Who can tell if God will turn? Non tam dubitantis quam been sperantis est; It
speaks not so much doubting as hoping, that God would avert the imminent
Judgment. That Acts 8. Perhaps thy thoughts may be forgiven, puts not a scruple
on Gods Mercy toward Penitents; but upon Simons Repentance, whether he would
truly repent or not. Happy is the man that fears always, says the Wiseman;
Not he that fears with a servile Fear, for the Spirit of Bondage makes not
happy; but with a filial: And that well consists with Assurance; for we may
rejoice with trembling, as the Psalmist has it, Psalm. 2.11. Nay, it is
advanced thereby; For it fears the Lord and his Goodness. The heart of man is
deceitful, even the Believer's, so far as it is leavened with the relics of
Sin; but as it is renewed with Principles of Grace, it is a true heart, as the
Apostle calls it, Heb. 10.22. and so may pass a true judgment on its own
estate: Though it cannot know all that is in its own abyss, yet it may know the
general frame and byas of it self; and thereby discover its Sincerity. Hence
the Apostle says, If our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God, 1 John 3.21. If natural Conscience be a thousand witnesses,
enlightened is ten thousand. Faith (say the Romanists) leans on the Word; and
there is no Word That such or such an one has true Faith and Repentance, or
that his sins are pardoned and remitted: Unto which I answer, As to that, That
no Word says, that such an one has true Faith and Repentance; it is to be
considered, That when one Proposition stands upon the Word, and another upon
natural light or experience; The Conclusion is de Fide. When in the 6. General
Council the Fathers proceeded against the Monothelites by this Argument:

Whosoever is true God and true Man bath two Wills: But Christ is true God and
true Man; Ergo he has two Wills. The Major stood on the Light of Nature, and
the Minor only on the Word; yet the Conclusion was de Fide. And when the
Believer thus communes with his own heart in a practical Syllogism:

Whosoever believes and repents bath his Sins pardoned: But I believe and
repent; Ergo I have my Sins pardoned. The Major stands on the Word, and the
Minor on Experience; but the Conclusion is de Fide. If a Conclusion drawn from
two Propositions, one standing on the Word, and another on other Evidence, be
not de Fide, What will the Romanists do for their darling the Popes Supremacy?
To prove that such or such a Pope, suppose Gregory or Innocent were Supreme in
the Church, They must argue thus:

Whoever is Peter's Successor is Supreme in the Church; But Gregory or Innocent
were Peter's Successors: Ergo, They were Supreme in the Church.

In which Argument, though they would fain set up the Major upon Scripture, yet
the Minor stands only on Election. No Scripture says, That Peter's Successor
must be a Gregory or an Innocent; nevertheless they would have the Conclusion
de fide. But if a Conclusion drawn from such Propositions be de fide, then may
the Believer, according to the practical Syllogism abovementioned, conclude in
Faith, That his sins are pardoned, though no Word tell him, That he has true
Faith and Repentance. It suffices, that Experience tells him so. But as a
further answer: Neither is the Word altogether wanting herein; for it sets out
Faith and Repentance by infallible marks and characters, as common touchstones
to try them by to the end of the World: And where those marks and characters
are, it pronounces those Graces to be of the right stamp, and virtually tells
Believers as much; and they being irradiated with the Holy Spirit, which shines
upon both Scriptures and Evidences, may receive the saying, and considently
say, as St. John does, (...), We know that we know him. This is the Faith, and
this the Repentance marked out in Scripture.

Again, as to that, That no Word says, That such or such an one in particular
has his sins pardoned. The answer is easy, Universals include Particulars:
That 1 John 4.3. Every spirit that confesses not that Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God, condemns the Mar^ionites as much as if they had been
named. That 1 Timothy 4.3, forbidding to marry, condemns the Eustathians as much
as if they had been named. That Threatening, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things, being general, speaks Wrath to every Transgressor as soon as
he is such. And so that Promise, Whosoever believes shall not perish, but have
eternal life, being general, speaks Pardon and Salvation to every Believer as
soon as he is such; All that believe are justified, Act. 13.39. No sooner does
this or that man believe, but the Promise speaks to him, Thy sins are forgiven
thee; God says to him, I am thy salvation. It may be he does not understand it
at first: However here is a sure groundwork for him to believe that it is so;
and so accordingly he does, as soon as Assurance comes in to him.

Moreover the Romanists urge, That the Doctrine of Assurance puffs up Pride,
and opens a gap to Licentiousness. Unto which my answer is a flat Denial: If
our Savior had thought, that Assurance would make men like Devils in Pride, or
Beasts in Licentiousness, he would never have said, as he did to the
Paralytick, Thy sins be forgiven thee, Mat. 9.2. Had they told us, That such a
Worm as Pride would breed out of the Doctrines of Merit and Supererogatory
Works, it might easily have been believed; but that it should drop from such an
Honeycomb of Free Grace, as the Doctrine of Assurance is, is not reasonably to
be imagined. Here Is nothing of Merit, nothing of our own, all is pure mere
Grace; the Believers Faith and Repentance is of Grace, and the Assurance of
Pardon and Salvation is Grace upon Grace, Sealing-Grace upon Sanctifying: And
whatever perverse abuse may be made of these, the natural tendency thereof is
not to Pride; for a man after such Graces to forget the great Fountain, and set
up an Idol of Self-excellency, is extremely unreasonable. Just as if he should
say, Now I am in the bosom of Grace, but I would be cast out, and be held afar
off; Now I have the warm Beams of Gods Favor, but I would fain be in the Dark
again; Who would argue thus? Will it not be much more proper, in an humble
admiration to say as David did, Who am I? and what is my house, that thou have
brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.18. Thy Love, O God, first made me a Vessel of
Faith, and then filled me with the Oil of Holy Joy; What am I to be such a
Receiver? All that I am is too small a return; nothing of self may remain for
an Idol. Had they said, That Licentiousness might have been fathered on the
Sale of Pardons and Indulgences, it had been veryright; These made Germany and
other parts groan with all manner of wickedness: But to lay it at the door of
Assurance, is abominable. Machiavel was out in his Politics, when he would
have Princes Rule by Fear; but he advised so, because he knew well enough, That
following his Rules they could not be Loved, and therefore he would persuade
them, that it was better to be feared. The true Obedience (for I look not on
that which a man is haled unto as such) springs out of Love, for that fulfils
the Law; and our Love springs out of Gods, for We love him, because he first
loved us, 1 Job. 4.19. And the more his Love is revealed, the more ours is
inflamed toward Obedience. In Heaven the blessed Angels, who see Gods Face in
Glory, are most intent upon the doing of his Will; on Earth holy men, who taste
of his favor, walk the more accurately for it. The joyful sound of Pardon
being in the Conscience makes the holy Walk easy, and a fair prospect of
Heaven, sweetens every step. Obedience stands nowhere so sure as in the Circle
of Love, which from Gods Love, as the first Point, is drawn through ours round
about into it self. Gods Love coming down in Assurance, and ours returning in
Obedience; his being inflammative to ours, and ours resignative to him: in such
circulations of Love their is no room for Licentiousness. It Is true Saints
after such Pleonasmes of Love may fall foully; but do they fall because
assured? Do they turn Enemies to God, because they know themselves Friends? Can
the Light of Gods Countenance dispose them to Works of Darkness? May the choice
Influences of Heaven make them earthly and sensual? Will the Prodigal once
returned, run away the sooner from his Fathers House, because of the Kiss, and
Robe, and Ring, and Fatted Calf freely bestowed upon him? Such things as these
do involve many Paradoxes and Repugnancies in them; and withal cast dirt upon
Heaven, and blaspheme the Witnessing Spirit: and therefore are justly
abominable to the Saints, who experience the contrary in their own Hearts.

Having thus far gone through the Enemies Camp, I come now to lay down my
Thesis to be proved, viz. That a Believer may be certainly and infallibly
assured of his Pardon and Salvation; I say a Believer may be assured: an
Unbeliever while such is not a subject capable of Assurance; he has
Plague-Sores and Tokens of Wrath upon him, but as yet never a Beam of Grace or
Love: the Justice and Holiness of God cannot suffer him to be shined on; none
of the Promises can speak kindly or comfortably to him; his stony Heart cannot
receive the Seal and Impress of the Holy Spirit. Hence the Apostle says, After
ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13.
after, and not before. First, there must be a new Creature, and then a new
Name. First, Gods Image is printed on the Heart, and then his Love. I say, a
Believer may be assured, but not that all Believers are so. A man may be a Babe
in Christ and not know it: a Child of Light, and yet walking in darkness. A
Believer may live in crepusculo, in the twilight or mixed condition of Hope and
Fear; and so, though sure of Heaven, not in his own sense assured of it: I mean
not that he may be assured by an Angel or Voice from Heaven or extraordinary
Revelation: This the Adversaries will admit, but in an ordinary way, in the
diligent use of such Helps and Means as are common to all Believers. Thus the
Apostle speaks in common to them all, These things have I written to you that
believe; that ye may know that ye have eternal Life, 1 John 5.13. He does not
say, some may know it in an extraordinary way, but speaks of it as knowable by
Believers in common: I mean not that he has this Assurance always or in every
point of time; perpetual Serenity is not here below: Earth is not as Heaven;
the Sun may be eclipsed, the Seal of the Spirit may be clouded, Evidences may
be blurred and hardly legible: It may be God in Sovereignty withdraws, or Satan
in envy buffets, or the Believer lets down his Spiritual Watch, or a due
estimate is not set on Heavenly Comforts, or there is some great Trausgression,
which as an accursed thing, causes the Lord to depart. In such cases, though
there be no intercision of Justification, yet there is an interruption of
Consolation. These Things premised, I proceed to prove the Point, viz. That a
Believer may attain Assurance of Pardon and Salvation.

In the first Place the Names and Titles given unto Faith in Scripture are
remarkable. It Is called (...), The subsistence of things hoped for; Glory and
Salvation are hoped for by us; but Faith maks them as certain, as if they were
present to us. The Hebrews have a Van conversivum, which turns the Future into
the Preter-tense; such a thing is Faith which presentiates future Things to the
Believer, That ye may know that ye have eternal life, says John: It is not
(...), ye shall have it, but (...), ye have it in praesenti, it already
subsists in your Faith. It Is called (...), the evidence of things not seen:
Eternal Life cannot be seen by corruptible Eyes, but Faith does so point out
and demonstrate it, as if it were visible or sensible; We know that we have
passed from Death to Life, 1 John 3.14. As if the Apostle had said, We are
indeed in the very Borders of Heaven, and we know it as it were sensibly, as we
do our passage from one Place to another. It Is set out by (...), a strong
persuasion or considence; and (...), a liberty or holy boldness with God. The
Apostle mentions both, In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by
the Faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12. Access to God imports that we are reconciled to
him; but access with boldness and confidence imports that we know it also:
Otherwise it would not be Faith, as the Apostle styles it, but mere rashness
and presumption; if we should do so upon Peradventures, Esther-like, not
knowing, whether the golden Scepter would be held out to us or not. Nay, it is
styled (...), a full Assurance, carrying out the Soul with full Sails to the
good things in the Promise. It is well observed by the acute Dr. Arrowsmith,
That in Scripture mention is made of a triple Plerophory, a Plerophory of
Knowledge, Col. 2.2. a Plerophory of Faith, Heb. 10.22. and a Plerophory of
Hope, Heb. 6.11. The Genius of each shows forth it self in the Believers
Practical Syllogism:

Whosoever believes shall be saved;
But I believe:
Ergo, I shall be saved.

In the Major we have a Plerophory of Knowledge: In the Minor a Plerophory of
Faith; And in the Conclusion flowing from the Premises, a Plerophory of Hope.

In the next place some Commands in the Gospel clearly import that Assurance is
attainable; there God would have us To work out our Salvation, Phil. 2.12. To
make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. To add to our Faith virtue,
one Grace upon another, and one degree of Grace upon another, That we may have
an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.5, and 11. To
walk by the Rule of the New Creature, that peace may be upon us, Galat. 6.16.
To prove our own state, whether we be in the Faith, whether Christ be in us or
not, 2 Corinthians. 13.5. To prove our own work, that we may have rejoicing in our
selves, and not in another, Gal. 6.4. If these things may be done Assurance is
attainable; if they cannot, to what purpose are these Precepts? how vain and
impossible are they? In that question, Whether we may perfectly fulfill the
Moral Law; the Pontificians urge thus for the Affirmative; If we cannot fulfill
it, the Law is impossible and void, De Justif. lib. 4. cap. 13.
Si praecepta essent impossibilia, neminem obligarent, ac per hoc praecepta non
essent praecepta, says Bellarmine, If the Commands were impossible, they would
oblige none, and so would become no Commands. But in the Point of Assurance we
may with much better reason say, if we cannot fulfill the Commands concerning
it, they are then impossible and vain; the Law is an exact Rule of
Righteousness, a Copy of the pure Law engraven on Man's Heart at first, in the
state of Innecency, unto which it was attemperated. It was not at all
impossible, and that it is so now is only from Man's Apostasy: And withal, the
very (...), the impossibility of the Law is admirably useful to drive us in a
deep sense of our Impotence, to Christ the Complement of it, that through his
holy Spirit we may in a way of sincere though imperfect Obedience at last
arrive at perfect Sanctity in Heaven. But if such Commands as are purely
Evangelical be impossible, what can be said to it? what tolerable answer made?
Were these at all accommodated to a state of Innocence? Was not their Original
scope to raise up fallen Man to Salvation? If the Commands of believing and
repenting were impossible, what room would there be for Salvation? And if the
Commands of proving and ensuring our state of Grace be impossible, what room is
left for the Joys of Faith, or the Sealings of the holy Spirit, or the
Suavities of a good Conscience? And there being no second Christ or Gospel to
fly to, whither does this Impossibility drive but into the black gulf of
Despair? Wherefore, as we would avoid such doleful consequences, we must
conclude those Precepts practicable, and so Assurance possible: And as a sure
seal thereof we have the sweet experience of Saints in all Ages. Holy Job,
though God multiplied his Wounds, and his Friends raked in them by a very sharp
charge of Hypocrisy, knew his own Integrity, and would not let it go, Job
27.5. And which reaches beyond his present state of Grace, as sure of future
Glory, he breaks out, I know that my Redeemer lives; and maugre all the
destructive worms, In my flesh and with these very eyes I shall see God, Job
19.25, 26. O how certain was his Faith! I know; How appropriative? My Redeemer
lives; and how sharpsighted? he could look through the dust to Immortality.
David knew the truth of his Grace, and proved it to himself by infallible
Marks; I have kept the ways of the Lord, I have not wickedly departed from my
God; I did not put away his statutes from me, I kept my self from mine
iniquity, Psalm. 18.21, 22, and 23. ver. And for future Happiness, he says
without scruple, That at his waking in the Resurrection he should be satisfied
with Gods likeness, Psalm. 17.15. St. Paul speaks as one full sure of his
present state and future hope, I have fought a good sight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. The Martyr Agatha, having her Breasts cruelly cut
off for Religion, told the Persecutor, That yet she had two Breasts remaining,
such as he could not touch, the one of Faith, and the other of Hope; which
afforded her great Comfort in her Torments. Caspar Olevian a German Divine,
being asked by one, Whether he were certain of his Salvation? answered just at
the brink of death, Certissimus, I am most sure of it. Mr. Bolton being near
death expressed himself thus, My whole heart is filled with joy, I feel nothing
within but Christ. Mr. Hieron said, His Soul was full of joy, as if be had seen
Heaven open to receive him. Such Paradises of Joy, Sabbatisines of Spirit, and
Prepossessions of Glory have the Saints found in their way to Heaven.

Again, there being an infallible Connection between truth of Grace and Pardon,
and also between Perseverance in Grace and Salvation, a Believer may be assured
of the truth of his Graces, and so of his Pardon; and again he may be assured
of his Perseverance in Grace, and so of his Salvation: These two demonstrated
will make good the Point. First I say, A Believer may be assured of the truth
of his Graces, and so of his Pardon, which cannot but be where those are. And
for the truth of Grace a double Testimony may be vouched, one from Conscience,
the other from the holy Spirit; the Apostle mentions both; The spirit it self
bears witness with our spirit, Romans 8.16. (...), it co-witnesseth with ours,
and in the mouth of two such Witnesses there must needs be establishment: Hence
St. Chrysostom on these words breaks out, (...)? What scruple can remain after
such a Testimony? I shall begin with the testimony of Conscience. Conscience is
a spy in our bosom, which marks every thing; a spiritual Echo, which returns
our actions, and makes them sound again after they are past and gone from us:
By it the Soul turns its eyes in ward, and becomes a Speculum or Looking-glass
to it self, representing to it self its own acts: By it it bends back the beams
of general Truths, and applys them to Particulars. That Righteousness and
Virtue should be followed is an universal Truth, but Conscience can reflect it
back upon us and bids us do so in particular; and if we indeed do it,
Conscience will say Euge, this or that is well done by us. The Testimony of
Conscience was of great repute among Pagans; Plato calls it his Demon, and
Menander a God, (...), says he, Conscience is a God to Mortals. And Seneca,
Deus in humano corpore hospitans, God dwelling in an humane body. Hence came
Pythagoras's (...), or self-reverence. And Sextius his parley with himself every
night, what Vice he had in the day resisted, and Virtue promoted. And the
Satyrists complaint touching the neglect of the reflexive faculty, Vt nemo in
sese tentat descendere, nemo, few or none would descend into themselves. Among
Christians the Testimony of Conseience must needs be sacred; their Consciences
not lying, as the Pagans, in their blood or natural pollution, but being
purified by the precious Blood and Spirit of Christ; their lamps of Reason not
lying as the others in the damp and darkness of the fall, but brought forth and
newlighted at the Scripture, and Sun of Righteousness shining therein as in its
orb. Conscience in a Believer is, as St. Bernard has it, Purum Religionis
speculum, a pure glass of Religion: And as another, Major pars clavium, the
greatest key in the Church; such an excellent Witness may well speak in this
Point. In David it speaks thus, O Lord, I have walked in my integrity, Psalm.
26.1. that is, in the exercise of Faith, Love, Obedience, and other Graces,
which as so many Pearls make up Sincerity. In Hezekiah it speaks much after the
same manner, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with
a perfect heart, Isa. 38.3. And it is the more to be noted, because Conscience
says so in a way of appeal even to God himself; and by a right (...), holds up
the truth of its Graces to so pure a Sun. This is such a Testimony as St. Paul
joys and glories in, 2 Cor. 1.12. Est quidam modus in Conscientia gloriandi, ut
noveris fidem tuam esse sinceram, spem tuam certam, caritatem tuam sine
simulatione, says St: Austin; There is a kind of glorying in conscience, when
thou know thy Faith sound, Hope certain, and Love undissembled. A Man that
repents, believes and loves, may by the pulse of Conscience, know that he does
so. True, says Bellarmine, he may know that he does them, but not that he does
them sicut oportet, as he ought to do them. Unto which I answer; Conscience
according to its Light and Line of Principles can bear Witness to Integrity;
natural Conscience to natural Integrity, and renewed Conscience to gracious
Integrity. An instance of the former we have in Abimelech, whose Conscience
told him, That he meant not to take away another man's Wise, Genesis 20.5. and of
the latter in St. Paul, whose Conscience told him, That his Conversation was in
simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. Conscience, which Witnesses
Integrity, must look beyond the mere matter of Acts into the modus; for
therein, Integrity,especially such as is gracious, consists more than in the
Acts themselves. Unless a man know that he repents, believes, and loves sicut
oportet, he cannot know his own Sincerity; and if he know his Sincerity, he
knows that he repents, believes, and loves aright, A Believer converses much
between Scripture and Conscience, fetching his Notions from the one, and his
Evidences from the other. In the Word he sees the Characters of Grace, and in
the Conscience the state of his Soul. True Repentance mourns over sin as sin,
hates it as the greatest evil, and casts it away as an accursed thing, says
the Word; and such is thy Repentance, says Conscience. True Faith prizes
Christ, overcomes the World and works by Love, says the Word; and such a Faith
is thine, says Conscience. True Love is inflamed from Gods, sweetly acquiesces
in him, and obedientially resignes to him, says the Word; and such a Love is
thine, says Conscience. Interroga cortuum, Ask thy heart, If Love be there,
says St. Austin: Ask again, If Faith and Repentance be there, thou have an
Oracle within, that can tell thee, what thou love most, trustest in most, and
grievest for most; that can show thee thy Uprightness, witness the Truth of thy
Graces, and feast thee with Divine Comforts, such as pass understanding. It was
a great Comfort to the Nobleman, when his Servants met him, and told him, Thy
Son lives, John 4.51. But oh! What is it to the Believer when such an one as
Conscience comes and says, Thy Faith lives, or thy Love burns toward God,
or thy Repentance is pure godly forrow? Then the Oil of Joy is upon every
Grace, and the Cup of Consolations runs over: Conscience becomes a
banqueting house, and Assurance, as Latimer calls it, is the Sweetmeats. We
have heard one Witness, but the Supreme, who drops all the Suavities, and
dictates all the comfortable words in conscience is the Holy Spirit: The Spirit
it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, says
the Apostle, Romans 8.16. (...), not the Gifts or Graces, but the very Spirit it
self bears witness; and that not only out wardly in the Word, but in wardly
in and with our spirit; and its Testimony is That we are the children of God:
And the import of that Testimony, over and above the title of Sonship, is, That
our Faith, which makes us his children, Gal. 3.26, is true; and our Love and
other Graces, which manifest us such, are so also. And what a Testimony is
this? To call it dubious, or opinionative, or conjectural is blasphemy.
Cornelius a Lapide, as one under a necessity, confesses this Testimony certain
in it self; but as a Salvo to the Doctrine of doubting, adds, That it is not
certain to us. But this is to forget the Apostles words, That the Spirit
witnesses it in and with our spirit; and withal absurdly to say, That the
Spirit indeed witnesses, but would not be believed; or rather, That it
witnesses, and witnesses not, because an unheard Testimony is as none.
Bellarmine says, The Spirit witnesses not by an express word, but by an
Experiment of internal peace and suavity, which begets but a conjectural
certainty. I answer, It Is true, that it is not by an express word; but, as
Learned Dr. Ward well observes, The Question is not de modo Testandi, but de
Re. It is certain, there is such a Testimony, and that proceeding from the
Spirit of Truth must be infallible; and being made to our spirit must be known
to us, and so beget a true certainty in our hearts. Nevertheless, to illustrate
this Point, I shall a little consider the Modus of it: The Spirit bears witness
to ours, partly by an application of the Promises to the heart, partly by an
irradiation of the Graces there: These two make up the sealing of the Spirit of
Promise given after believing, Ephesians. 1.13.

The Spirit applies the Promises to the Heart, that is, one part of the Seal.
As the spirit of bondage applies threatenings, and thereby makes a kind of Hell
in Conscience, so the Spirit of Adoption applies Promises, and by it makes a
kind of Heaven there. The same Spirit, which endited the Promises of Pardon,
and put them into Scripture; Seals and in a way of appropropriation puts them
upon the Heart; as if it should say; This and that Promise is thine; like that
in the Prophet, Speak to her heart, that her iniquity is pardoned, Isa. 40.2.
Now, when the Promises come so close and pour out their sweetness into the
heart, the Believer may not guess only, but know, that true Faith and
Repentance are there. God and his Promise speak peace only to Saints, and not a
comfortable Word to impenitent sinners. I have read of one, who apostatized
from his profession, and on his sickbed began to apply the Promises to
himself; but alas! after a little seeming ease, he cried out in despair, That
the Plaster would not stick. God only can make it do so; and he makes it do so
only to penitent Believers; and they may conclude the Truth of their Graces,
when the Gospel and its Promises come to them in the Holy Ghost and in much
Assurance, as the Expression is, 1 Thessal. 1.5.

Again, as another part of he Seal, The Holy Spirit irradiates the Graces in
the Heart: The same Spirit which formed them there at first, comes and owns
them as its own offspring, bringing in such a Divine light, and making such an
efficacious representation thereof, that the Believers Conscience may, as the
Apostle speaks in another case, Romans 9.1, Bear witness in the Holy Ghost, and
say, This is sound Repentance indeed, and that is Love undissembled, and the
other is Faith unfeigned; and so of other Graces in the new Creature. These
Graces carry in themselves a kind of heavenly light rendering them visible: But
when the Spirit comes, it puts such a gloss and oriency on them, that the
Believer may know them to be freely given to him of God, that this and that
Grace are so given, and such and such are the sure marks of the truth thereof.
Such a Testimony as this, made learned Rivet at his dying hour break forth into
these words, Expecto, credo, persevero, dimoveri nequeo, Dei Spiritus meo
spiritui testatur me esse ex filiis suis; O amorem ineffabilem! I expect,
believe, persevere, and cannot be moved, Gods Spirit witnesses to mine, That I
am one of his Children; Oh ineffable Love! This anointing is truth and no lie,
as St. John tells us, 1 John 2.27. It manifests its testimony and it self
together. The Believer cannot doubt who the Witness is, or what he speaks;
both are plain and satisfactory. Our Savior Christ, speaking of the Spirit of
Truth, tells his Disciples, Ye know him, for he dwells with you, Joh. 14.17.
If the Spirit do but pass by and drop in an holy motion into the heart, he may
be known in it; much more when he dwells and witnesses there. Cul. White-stone.
The eloquent Culverwell compares him to the Sun; The Sun (says he) by its
glorious Beams does Paraphrase and Comment upon its own glittering Essence; and
the Spirit Displays himself to the Soul, and gives a full Manifestation of his
Presence: And a man may sooner take a Glowworm for the Sun, than an
experienced Christian can take a false Delusion for the Light of the Spirit.

We have heard the two Witnesses, the Holy Spirit by an application of Promises
and irradiation of Graces witnessing to the Conscience, and the Conscience
ecchoing and resounding that Testimony to the Believer. And hence it appears,
That he may be assured of the truth of his Graces, and so of his Pardon.

It remains to treat of the second thing, that is, That he may be assured of
his perseverance in Grace, and so of his Salvation. He knows, That his Graces
are true, and withal, That they are (...), things having or containing
Salvation. Heaven buds, and Eternal Life begins in them, He that believes has
everlasting life, Joh. 5.24. He has it in the first fruits and irrevocable
earnest of it. The Seed of God in him, will grow up into Immortality; the Well
of living Water will spring up into everlasting Life. Only it may be alleged,
That these Graces may be lost: Unto which I answer, Abstractively and in their
mere creature-essence they may; but in their dependence they cannot. Their
Standing, if on man's Will only, might fail; but their Foundation on the
Covenant of Grace cannot. The Believer may not only see his own Graces, but
beyond them, that Eternal Election which is the great Fountain thereof.
Reflecting on the true Graces in his heart, he may say, Here is the Faith of
Gods Elect, and, Here is the Love and Patience of Gods Elect. Spiritual
Blessings are given according to Election, Ephesians. 1.3.4; and I have those
Blessings in me. Effectual Vocation hangs on Predestination, as the highest
Link in the Chain of Grace, Romans 8.30; and I am so called. This made St.
Bernard, Epst. 10.7.
speaking of effectual Vocation, say, Ad ortum solis justitiae Sacramentum
absconditum a seculis de praedestinatis beatificandis emergere quodammodo
incipit ex abysso aeternitatis; When the Sun of Righteousness rises upon the
Heart in an effectual Call, the secret mystery of Praedestination hid from
Ages, breaks forth out of the abyss of Eternity. Here the Great Counsel of
Eternal Love, which lay in Gods Bosom, shows forth it self to the Believer
through the Lattice of his Graces. Hence he may conclude on good grounds, That
his Graces shall never fail, so long as the Foundation of God stands sure in
Election. Continual supplies of Grace from the Fountain will keep his Lamp from
going out. Its observable, that when God expresses his fresh Mercies to his
People, he does it thus; I will yet choose Israel, Isa. 14.1. Election is from
all Eternity, but it buds and blossoms in time in fresh supplies of Grace; as
if he chose them again: When the Saints are droo^^^, and as it were dying away;
Election will give another visit, and make them live a second time. So
unspeakable are the comforts of this Point, that, as I have read, one under the
sweet sense of Electing Love, was for some days taken off from all the joys of
Nature; and in an holy ecstasy cried out, Laudetur Dominus, Laudetur Dominus,
as if he had been in Heaven already, bearing a part in the Church Triumphant.

Again, The Believer looks not to his Graces only, but to the indwelling
Spirit. Faith, and Love, and Obedience cannot fail in his Heart, whilst the
Spirit of Grace is there; and there it will always be, because it is an abiding
Unction, perpetually chearing every grace, and a well of water springing up
into everlasting life, Continua irrigatio coelestem in illis aeternitatem
fovet, says a judicious Divine on the place, a continual irrigation cherishes
an heavenly eternity in them. Upon this account the Spirit is called the
earnest of our Inheritance, not for a time, but until the redemption of the
Church be completed, Ephesians. 1.14; that is, till the whole Sum be paid in Glory.
The Earnest going along with the Believer to Heaven, his Graces cannot possibly
fail by the way. Our Savior told his Disciples, and in them all Believers,
That the Spirit should abide with them for ever, Joh. 14.16. And two things
will make it good to them, I mean, their Union with him, and his Intercession
for them. Their Union with him will do it, they being mystical parts and pieces
of him; the Holy Fourt will enliven them and their Graces; Because I live, ye
shall live also, says our Savior, Joh. 14.19. The Members cannot dye, as long
as there is life in the Head. But may not the Union cease? No, by no means; God
himself has established it; thus the Apostle, Now he which stablisheth us with
you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God; who has also sealed us, and given
us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Believers are
established in Christ, and to assure them of it the holy Spirit is an Unction,
a Seal and an Earnest in their Hearts. This establishment of Believers seems to
me exemplified in Christ's Humane Nature, that once assumed into the Word by an
Hypostatical Union was never separated from it, and those once taken into
Christ by a Mystical Union are never parted from him; the Apostle hints both to
us, The God of Peace who brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, make you
perfect, Heb. 13.20, 21. That God who would lose nothing of Christ's Humane
Nature; no, not in the grave, will perfect Believers as Mystical parts of him,
never suffering their Graces to see corruption in an utter decay, nor leaving
their Souls in the hell of final Apostasy. Besides, Christ's Intercession
ratifies it; he in his solemn Prayer. on Earth, which as Arminius himself
grants was the Canon and Pattern of his Intercession in Heaven, prays to his
Father for all Believers, That they may be kept from evil, Joh. 17.15. If they
are not kept, Christ's Intercession ceases or becomes powerless: Neither of
which can be; Cease it cannot, because be ever lives to make Intercession;
Become powerless it cannot, because he is a Priest after the power of an
endless life; what he interceeds for shall be done. I will pray the Father,
says our Savior, and what follows? The Comforter shall come and abide with
you for ever, Joh. 14.16. As long as Christ pleads at the right hand of Power
it must be so. This made St. Paul break out into that gallant Triumph, (...), I
am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature; No, not our own Wills unless more than Creatures. shall be able
to separate us from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.38, 39. from Gods Love to
us, or ours to him. (...), we over-overcome all things in our way to Heaven;
our Graces cannot fail below, as long as Christ is pleading above on our
behalf. Moreover, the Believer looks not only to his Graces, but to the
Promises, in which God is pleased to bind himself, that they shall be kept
alive to the end. St. Paul praying for the Thessalonians, That their whole
spirit and soul and body might be perserved blameless unto the coming of
Christ; immediately adds a sweet Promise, Faithful is he that calls you, who
also will do it, 1 These. 5.23, 24. Believers and their Graces are taken into
Gods own hand; And where can they be safer? But may they not be plucked from
thence? No, None shall pluck them out of mine or my Fathers hand, says our
Savior, Joh. 10.28, 29. But may they not of themselves fall out of it? No,
though they fall out, yet they shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth them with his hand, Psalm. 37.24. But will he always do so? Yes, He
will confirm them unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. And how will he do it? He will put
his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. He
will put his Spirit into them, and cause them to walk in his statutes, Ezekiel.
36.27. And what though their Fear and other Graces be defective, and want
filling up; yet He which did begin the good work in them, (...), will perform
it until the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. And what if temptations and fiery darts
fly about on all sides, they are in garrison in the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5.
and there shall be a way to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. In such Promises as these
every way securing the Believers state of Grace, the Covenant of Grace lifts up
it self in a transcendent excellency above that of Works, which had no Promise
of Perseverance annexed to it. Shall we now say, That all these Promises are
Conditional, if we will persevere, and not otherwise? Is not this to turn the
Covenant of Grace into that of Works, and a sure state in Christ into a
lubricous Adamical one? Is it not to evacuate all those glorious and
magnificent Promises touching Perseverance, as if God in them spoke only in
such cold Language as this, I will preserve you from all evils and dangers,
only for that greatest of all, which is in your own hearts and wills. I will
not undertake: or in such contradictory terms as these; if you persevere, I
will make you persevere; as if Perseverance could be the condition of it self?
After these Promises so interpreted Believers are but where they were before;
before these Promises it would have been true, that if Believers persevere and
continue in Grace, they do so; and after them so interpreted, What have they
more? What do they contribute to Believers, when the main stress of
Perseverance is laid on Man's Will, and not on Gods Grace? But this obiter. The
experienced Believer knows better how to use Promises, and from them communes
with his own Heart; Has God promised Perseverance, and will he not do it? is
not his Covenant (...) an Everlasting Covenant, and are not his Mercies sure
Mercies? Can his Faithfulness fail, or his words of Grace fall to the ground?
Shall I trust him for Pardon and Salvation, and not for Perseverance? Will he
give me Heaven, and shall I faint by the way? It cannot be; He will guide me
with his counsel, and then receive me to glory. Till I come there I shall be
supported by his hand, and supplied with his Spirit; Goodness and Mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life. In such sort may the Believer be assured of
his Perseverance in Grace, and so of his Salvation.

Again, the Believer may gather his Pardon and Salvation from that peace and
joy which he finds in his own heart. There is a kind of Peace and Joy springing
out of Moral Virtues, which because of their Congruity to Reason leave a
serenity on the Soul where they are lodged: Men's sibi conscia recti is a great
matter; a good Conscience is murus aheneus, a wall of brass to the owner.
Seneca says, Res severa est verum gaudium, True joy is in the severe
prosecution of Virtue. Hierocles tells us, That the pleasure of the Virtuous
(...), imitates the joy of the gods. And it was a Point of ancient Philosophy,
(...), Virtue is sufficient to Happiness. But the Peace and Joy in believing is
of an higher nature: Those in the Moralist come but from the face of Reason
smiling on the Congruity which is in Moral Virtues to it self; there is nothing
of Grace or Christ in them: But these in the Believer come from the reconciled
face of God shining upon the Heart in a Mediator. Those in the Moralist exceed
not their own sphere of Reason; but these in the Believer pass all
understanding, Phil. 4.7. and are full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Heaven comes down
in them, and puts a pure serenity on the Heart: The Believer now dwells in
Paradise; the light of Gods Countenance shining as a clear Sun; Christ as a
Tree of Life dropping down Pardons and Graces; the holy Spirit being as a
perpetual spring of Virtues and Comforts; the fragrant Promises breathing out
the odors of Love and Mercy; the sweet voice of Peace and Joy uttered from
Heaven, ecchoing and making melody in Conscience: Nothing here but green
pastures and still waters, and placid Heavens; not a cloud from the Law to
darken the light, not an ach in Conscience to break the rest, not a spot of
unremitted sin to stain the serenity. Oh what manner of Peace and Joy is here!
A Stranger, a Pagan Philosopher intermeddles not with them. These are to be
found in the Raptures of a Cyprian, or in the Consolations of an Austin or
Bernard. In such a state as this, what should the Believer do? May he not break
out in the proper Idiom of Faith, My Lord and my God? May he not sinely
conclude, My sins are forgiven me? Nay, Ought he not to do so, and with David,
call upon all that is within him, to bless the Lord for it? After such hansels
of Heaven and Glory, should he yet doubt and say, I cannot enter, when he is
there already in the beginnings and first fruits thereof? Nothing is more
unreasonable. He knows in himself, by the Graces and Comforts in his own heart,
That he has a part in Heaven and Salvation.

In the last place, The Nature of the Sacraments, which are Seals of the
Covenant, evinces this Truth. In the Gospel we have Gods Hand, but in the
Sacraments his Seal also. In the Gospel, Pardon and Salvation are set forth in
general Promises; but in the Sacraments, they are Sealed up to this and that
man in particular. Circumcision is called, The Seal of Righteousness, Romans
4.11; and by the Hebrew Doctors, The Seal of the holy God: And Baptism, which
succeeds, and as Evangelical transcends it, must be as much and more. So
Sealing Pardon and Salvation to Believers, that there follows the answer of a
good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21; or such a Conscience, as can with an
holy considence interrogate God himself in some such terms as these; Did not
Christ purchase Pardon and Salvation for me? Have I not a share and interest in
them? Yes assuredly, there is no doubt of it. The Passover figured out Christ
the true Lamb, who was reasted in the Fire of his Fathers Wrath to take away
Sin; and the sprinkling of the Blood on the Door-posts, pointed out the
Application of Christ's Blood to the Consciences of Believers in particular. The
Lords Supper, which rose out of the Ashes of the Paschal Supper, and took its
very Materials from thence, does eminently Seal Christ with all his Benefits
unto the Believer. Our Savior delivering it to his Disciples, said, This is my
body which is given for you; this is my blood which is shed for you, Luke
22.19, 20. Why for you, but to signify the particular Application of his
Passion to them? By the Elements of Bread and Wine, as by turf and twig, God
gives the Believer livery and seisin of Christ; as if he said to him expressly,
Christ is thing, Pardon and Salvation are thine, thou have my Seal for it, and
may be as sure of it, as of the Bread and Wine in thine Hand and Mouth.
Bellarmine himself confesses, De effect. Sacram. l. 1. c. 8.
That Sacraments were instituted, Vt nos certos reddant remissionis and gratie,
To make us certain of Pardon and Grace. Only he adds, It Is only a moral
certainty, not an infallible one. But how frivolous is this? What can make an
Infallible certainty, if Gods Seal cannot do it? Among all Nations Seals are
great Confirmatives. When Darius, but a man, Signed the Decree, though of
Iniquity, it was unalterable by the Law of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 6.12.
And what the Great God Seals in the Sacrament, in a way of Grace and Mercy,
must much more be so, by the Law of his own Truth and Faithfulness. The Jews
looking on the Rainbow, bless God who remembers his Covenant, and is faithful
in his Promises, as being sure that the World shall not be drowned again: Much
more may the Believer, looking on the Bread and Wine, do so, as sure of Pardon
and Salvation in and through Christ. But you will say, Gods Seal indeed is
sure, but our Disposition is uncertain; and how can we know that we are worthy
Receivers? I answer, Very well; The worthiness required, is not that of
condignity, but that of congruity. The least Grace, if true, though but a
bruised reed and smoking flax, amounts to a capacity. May we not know, That we
truly hunger and thirst after Christ, when we inwardly feel a pinching and
pressing necessity of him, equal to, or rather more than any want in Nature?
May we not find, That our Faith in God is right, when it assimilates us to his
Holiness, as well as rests in his Grace, and puts forth Obedience to his
Commands, as well as Affiance toward his Promises? May we not say, That we
love him indeed, when the main stream of our hearts runs toward him, when at
least in endeavor we obey him in every Command, seek him in every Ordinance,
glorify him in every Condition, and prize him in every Saint? Has he not bid
us welcome to the Sacrament? Has he not anointed us with fresh Oil of Grace and
Joy whilst we have sat at his Table? Have we not been clothed with Power
against our Corruptions? Have not our Hearts been enlarged and refreshed from
the Presence of God there? How many melting and ravishing Prospects of a
Crucified Christ have we there enjoyed? And what beams of Heaven and Eternity
have broke in upon us in the very Duty? These things to Believers, who have the
exercise of their spiritual Senses, are so obvious, that they may easily and
surely conclude, That God has indeed welcomed them to his Table, and there
Sealed Pardon and Salvation to them. In this rich estate a Believer may bid all
Scruples be gone, and in an holy manner say to his Soul, Soul, take thy ease,
thou have much goods laid up for eternity. Thou art now secure of Pardon and
Salvation. The Holy Spirit has Sealed them to thy Heart, and the Sacraments to
thy very Sense, and Conscience witnesses to both as True and Infallible, and
what can be more? Nothing remains, but to keep thy self in the Love of God,
till he take thee up to the pure bliss above.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Ways in which the Assurance of Faith is attained. With the Conclusion
of the whole.

THus much touching the first thing, That Assurance is attainable: I now
proceed to the other, viz. The ways in which it is attained. All which are as
so many further Arguments to prove it attainable. Were it not so, the All-wise
God would not set down ways for the attaining thereof. Impossibles are not to
be sought after. Assurance, however difficult, is not impossible: The Scripture
has chalked out a Method how to arrive at it; which I shall endeavor to open
in the ensuing Discourse.

In the first place: He who would attain Assurance, must give Grace and Christ
their due. All spiritual Blessings grow upon Grace as an eternal Root, and hang
upon Christ as the Tree of Life. In particular, Assurance is a Blessing proper
to the Covenant of Grace. In the Covenant of Works there was no Assurance or
Perseverance, because the whole managery was left to Man's Will: But in the
Covenant of Grace these are to be found in Believers, because God undertakes
the work. This is the rather to be marked, because man under the Covenant of
Works was in a state of Innocence and perfect Holiness, and under the Covenant
of Grace is in a state of Weakness and Imperfection; and yet there through
Faith he arrives at Assurance and Perseverance, which were never reached under
the First Covenant. Saint Paul, in the 10th Chapter to the Romans, notably
distinguishes between the Righteousness of the Law and the Righteousness of
Faith: The Righteousness of the Law, is, That the man which does those things
shall live in them; No Life or Peace, but upon perfect Obedience, which is
impossible, and beyond the line of man lapsed, nay, of man regenerate in this
life. Hence the Conscience of those, who would enter into Peace at this Door,
must needs be dubious, and full of trembling anxieties. But the Righteousness
of Faith speaks on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into
Heaven? Doubt not, whether thou shall have a part there; this is to bring
Christ down from above: He is gone to Heaven, and has carried his Merits
thither to prepare a place for thee there. Such a doubt denies his Ascension,
and so, as it were, brings him down again: Neither say in thine heart, Who
shall descend into the deep? Doubt not, as if thou should be turned into
Hell; this is to bring up Christ again from the dead: He is already risen, and
has triumphed over Death and Hell. Such a doubt denies his Death and
Resurrection; and does as it were bring him again from the dead. But what says
the Righteousness of Faith? The Word, the Promise of Pardon and Salvation is
nigh thee, O Believer, in thy mouth and in thy heart, confessing and believing
on the Lord Jesus thou shall be saved: Thou in particular, thy Soul shall dwell
at ease, thy Conscience shall enter into rest in the Covenant of Grace; To
doubt of it, is to deny the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ: He therefore,
who would have Assurance, must give Grace and Christ their due. One would think
that the Papists, who hold, That they may by perfect Obedience reach the apex
of the Law, and go beyond it in works of Supererogaton, and climb Heaven it
self by their own Merits, might arrive at Assurance much rather than
Protestants, who instead of exceeding the Law confess themselves much short of
it; and instead of meriting Heaven acknowledge all their Righteousnesses to be
but a filthy rag: But it is far otherwise, the Papists generally do not so much
as doctrinally hold it, save here and there a man among them; such as Antonius
Marinarius, who in the Council of Trent asserted it; concluding his Speech
thus; Si Coelum ruat, si Terra evanescat, si orbis illabatur praeceps, ego in
Deum erectus ero; Much-like the Prophet Habakkuk, who in an universal
languishment of nature would yet rejoice in the Lord the God of his Salvation:
much less do they practically arrive at it. Bellarmine himself after his fair
life, died not like a Bolton or a Rivet, not knowing whether he had a true
Virtue in him or no, but seeming afraid of the Judgment Seat; unto some who
begged his Prayers when in Heaven he made this Answer, The way thither is not
so easy, I should esteem it a great Blessing from God, if I might obtain
Purgatory for many years. Into such labyrinths do their Principles lead them:
The Reason whereof is; They espouse Hagar the Covenant of Works, and that
gendreth to bondage and servile fear: They corrupt the great Fountain of Peace
and Joy; I mean free Justification by Christ and Grace; and their Comforts
cannot run pure. They would compound those two incompatibles of Grace and
Merit, and patch together Christ's Righteousness and their own; which in the
Apostle is to fall from Grace and make Christ of none effect, Gal. 5.4. And
what Peace can follow? Whilst they look at the Law, Conscience will be still
murmuring, Non recte sacrificasti, non recte orasti, as Luther has it; This
and that was omitted or not well done; The Levite and the Priest pass by their
Wounds, the good Samaritan will not come, but alone, and without a co-partner,
to make a Cure. If therefore thou would have Assurance, thou must build on
the right Foundation, and lie at the true Fountain of Comfort: Thy Love and thy
Obedience are but Evidences, Christ and Grace are the only Foundation: Thy
Faith is but a receiver, an empty vessel; Christ and Grace are the Fountain of
Comfort: Expect no rest but in his bleeding Wounds; look for no comfortable
words but from the Mercy-Seat: Think not that thy Conscience shall be appeased,
unless by that Blood of Atonement which appeased God himself; or that thy heart
may be satisfied in a Righteousness less than that perfect one which satisfied
Gods: Conscience is his Deputy, and cannot go off at lower terms than he
himself does: Fix thy heart on Christ and Grace, lay the whole stress of thy
Soul and Salvation there; Lean on thy Beloved, appropriate his Merits and
Righteousness to thy self. Thus Luther tells the menacing Law, O Lex! Immergo
Conscientiam meam in Vulnera, Sanguinem, Mortem, Resurrectionem and Victoriam
Christi, praeter hunc nibil plane videre and audire volo; O Law! I drown my
Conscience in the Wounds, Blood, Death, Resurrection and Victory of Christ;
besides him will I see and hear nothing; This is the true way of Peace.
Jahannes a Berg a zealous Papist in his life, found it so at last by his own
experience. When a Protestant-Friend admonished him then lying on his sickbed,
That now he would by Faith apprehend the Merit of his Savior, and acquiesce in
the full Expiation by him made for sin, he immediately swallowed it as the
richest Comfort in the World, looking on those in Popery but as so many vain
Fig Leaves. When Assurance, which is the top-stone of Faith is laid in our
hearts, we have reason to cry out, Grace, Grace, Christ, Christ; These,
whatever our Duties and Works have been, are the Fundamental Reason of all
Peace and Comfort.

Again, He who would have Assurance, must not grieve or quench the Holy Spirit,
but cherish and follow it. It cannot but be a great and marvelous thing in his
eyes, that the holy Spirit should make his heart a Temple or Sanctuary for
himself. To grieve it is unnatural, and to grieve it expecting comfort a
contradiction. If thou would be assured, grieve it in nothing, indulg not any
lust: This is filthiness and to be carried out of the Sanctuary; this is an
Idol and must not stand in the Temple: Bury thy excrements, thy superfluity of
naughtiness, that the holy one may walk in the midst of thee; Take away the
accursed thing, lest his Presence depart: Away with thy vomits, thy sensual
sins, lest he complain that there is no place for him left in thy heart. Pride
not thy self in gifts or graces, this is as a smoke in his nose to force him
away from thee; grieve not him, whereby thou may be sealed to the day of
Redemption; He comes to seal Pardon, and Peace, and Heaven it self to thy Soul,
why should thou grieve him? If thou do so, How can thou expect to be
sealed by him? Instead of Sealing, he will turn to be thine Enemy, as he did to
those Rebels, Isa. 63.10. He will meet thee in some straits of Providence, and
by one threatening or other, as by a drawn Sword, stop thee in thy perverse way.
Oh! do not grieve him, gather out of thy heart and life every thing that
offends, and his Kingdom of Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy shall be in thee.
When an holy Truth appears to thee, smother it not for a World; it comes from
the pure Spirit to light thee to Heaven: Walk in the Light of it; Who knows but
that, whilst thou art in the way, the Spirit may drop some heavenly Cordials
upon thy Heart? Obedience is the true Road to Comfort. Excellent is that in the
Prophet, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, his going is
prepared as the morning, and he shall come to us as the rain, Hos. 6.3. Follow
him in his Truths and thou shall know him in his Comforts. Gods Face shall be
as an aurora or morning lighter and lighter on thy Soul; and his Spirit as the
dew or rain distilling Divine Consolations on it. Believe it, every ray of
Truth, if followed, leads to the Joy unspeakable. When an holy Motion comes,
remember who is the Speaker: That Spirit, who can seal the Promises and print
Gods Love on the Heart, now calls thee to one Duty or other; Hear and thy Soul
shall live; open thy Sails, and the Gales will blow thee to the fair Haven of
rest. I may say of the Spirits Motion, as he in the Prophet does of the Wine in
the Cluster; Destroy it not, for a Blessing; nay, the greatest of Blessings; a
Paraclete, a Divine Comforter is in it; Follow on, and thou shall come to the
Vintage and Wine-cellar of pure Consolations, such as Earth assords not. The
Holy Spirit can witness to thy Graces, and seal up Gods favor to thee, and be
to thee an earnest of Heaven and eternal Life. As thou would be assured,
welcome every motion, close with every dictate, cherish every illapse of this
blessed Monitor; let every inspiration find thee as the Seal does the Wax, and
the spark the Tinder; let thy Soul follow hard after him, pursuing him E
vestigio, step by step, as near and close as thou can possibly. This is the
true way to rest.

Again, if thou would have Assurance, first make Conscience pure, and then
walk after it: That Pardon and Salvation, which is founded in Christ's Blood,
and sealed by his Spirit, must be recorded and reported in Conscience, or else
there can be no Assurance; If our heart condemn us not then have we confidence
toward God, says the Apostle, 1 John 3.21. He allows what his Deputy does in
us; I say, make thy Conscience pure. Two things chiesly impure it; Ignorance is
as a cloud upon it, and Guilt as a wound in it. Make it as lightsome as thou
can from Scripture, that as a pure glass it may be fit to reflect the
Gospel-Comforts on thy Soul. Get a through cure of thy old Wounds, or else
sooner or later it will cry out against thee: Joseph started up in his
Brethrens mind a good while after their unnatural sale of him. John the Baptist
rose again in Herod's Conscience upon the fame of Christ's Miracles. Theodorick
having cruelly murdered Boethius and Symmachus, was affrighted at the great head
of a Fish at his own Table, as if it had been one of theirs whom he unjustly
put to death. Apply therefore Christ's Blood by Faith, that thy Wounds may be
healed. David after his great fall, prays first to be purged with hysop, and
then for the joy of Gods salvation, Psalm. 51. The Hysop which was used to
sprinkle the Blood under the Law, figured out the office of Faith in sprinkling
Christ's Blood on the Conscience; that is a sovereign Balm to heal thy Wounds,
and able to make Conscience give thee an answer of Peace.

I have read a notable story of a sick Man, who when Satan appeared and showed
him a long scrole of his Sins in writing, saying, Behold thy Virtues; replied,
True, Satan, but thou have not set down all, set down also, The Blood of Christ
cleanses us from all Sin. Such a purifier is this, that a Man may be able, as
is said of St. Austin, to think of his former Evils without fear, as having no
spot of unpardoned Sin in him; Thy Conscience being made pure, walk after it. A
recia Conscientia ne latum quidem unguem discedendum, said the Orator. Leave it
not, lest thou fall and wound thy self afresh. When Conscience summons thee to
this or that Duty, up, be doing, God calls thee to it by thine own Heart: when
it tells thee of such a snare in thy way, avoid it, pass by it as thou would
by Hell. God warns thee against it by thy self; Conscience will measure out
Comforts or Terrors to thee, according as thou behavest thy self well or ill
toward it. If like Saul thou force thy self, and rebel against light, and give
stabs to Conscience, what have thou to do with Peace? Thy Heart will reproach
thee, Conscience will strike again and give thee wound for wound, thou shall
doom thy self, and like the Devils carry thy Chains, and Hell about with thee.
Tiberius professed to the Senate, That he suffered death daily: he meant in the
torments of his accusing Conscience. On the other hand, if thou turn thine eyes
inward, and observe Conscience, and walk by the line and level of it, thy Heart
shall be at rest, Conscience shall be a thousand witnesses for thee, thou shall
be thine own Comforter, and like the Angels carry an Heaven and Paradise aboat
with thee; Paul's joy shall be thine, the testimony of Conscience, that thy
conversation has been in godly sincerity; and what is this but Assurance? That
Conscience which faith, That thou art sincere; tells thee also, That thy Sins
are pardoned: These two are inseparable companions, and never part the one from
the other.

Again, If thou would have Assurance, thou must be much in self-examination.
Commune with thy own Heart, dive into the abyss of it, reckon with thy self,
summon thy self to the Tribunal in thy own bosom. The Philosophers espied out
this Rule. Pythagoras would not have us sleep till we had reviewed the day,
asking our selves, (...), What have I transgressed, what done, and what
omitted? This, though done by the candlelight of Nature, much promoted Virtue,
and the comfort of it. Qual^s ille somnus post recognitionem sui sequitur, quam
tranquillus, altus, and liber? says Sencea. After a review of ones self, Oh
what manner of sleep is there, how still, deep, and free is it? Much more must
such a search into ones own Heart conduce to the Christians Graces and
Comforts, if done by the pure Sun-light of Scripture. Self-examination is a
root which bears Self-knowledg, and at the top of it grows Assurance, which is
the knowledge of gracious self. Awake therefore, O Believer, down into thy own
Heart, rifle the labyrinths, and break open the false bottoms there; see what
of Sin is in thee: Is there any darling Sin, such as cogs with thy complexion,
or falls in with thy calling, or any way steals away thy Heart and Affections
from God? Be sure that this is an accursed thing, a Deliah; as the word
imports, an exhauster of thy peace and joy. However fair it may look to sense,
it is virtually sorrow and wrath. See again, what of Grace is there in thee, do
thou repent of Sin, and believe on the Lord Jesus, and love God and his holy
Ways? Are thy Graces genuine, such as act thee in the power of the Spirit, and
square thee to the holy Canon of the Word, and level thy Thoughts and
Intentions at the Glory of God? If thou thus search into thy Heart. and do it
in truth and faithfulness to the holy Light; I dare say, thou art ready for the
sealing of the Spirit, and the very frame of thy Heart is a real prayer for it.
O how soon may the Spirit come, and by a Divine irradiation on thy Soul tell
thee, That thy Repentance is a Repentance unto Life, and thy Faith precious
Faith, and thy Love Love in Sincerity? How soon may it apply and seal the
Promises to thy Heart, as if it should say to thee, Thou repentest indeed, and
the Mercy in the Promise is thine; Thou believe indeed, and the Salvation in
the Promise is thine; Thou love indeed, and thine are the supersensual
superintellectual good things prepared for the lovers of God. And now thou
may say much better than Seneca, Qualis somnus? O how sweet is the rest and
repose which the self-searching Soul finds in the bosom of Christ and Grace? He
that comes to that sealing Ordinance of the Lords Supper must prepare himself
for the S^ul by Self-examination, (...), Let a man examine himself, faith the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28. Examine as a man would do Gold or Silver by the fire, or
by the Touchstone; in like manner must he do so, that he may fit himself for
the Seal of Assurance, of which the Sacramental Elements are Symbols.

Again, If thou would be assured, exercise thy Graces and grow therein. It
much conduces to Assurance to render thy Graces as visible as thou can.
Grace, however it always carry a Divine luster in it, is not so visible when
dormant in an habit or principle, as when it is put forth into act and
exercise; neither is it so visible in its Initials in the smoking flax or
bruised reed, as in its Progresses and statures in Christ. In point of Comfort
talents not used are as none, Comforts lie dead in Believers as their Graces
do; the holy sire raked up affords no light to them: Awake therefore, O
Believer, to the use of thy Talents; exercise thy self unto Godliness, that the
Divine Life now latent in Principles may show it self in acts; blow up the holy
fire in thy bosom, that what was buried under ashes may revive into a flame; Be
still a putting forth one Grace or other, melting in repenting tears, or
clasping thy Faith about Promises, or kneeling down in obedience to Commands;
or inflaming thy Love at Gods, or perfecting Patience under his hand, or
drawing out thy Soul in Charity: As the season is, let one Grace or other be
still a-budding and bearing holy fruit. Thy Graces thus exercised will become
radiant and visible; those which before lay hid like Saul among the stuff, as
if they had been upon the common level of nature, will now come forth in their
Supernatural statures, and appear as the virtues of God: Thou may now dsscern
in thy self that which is more than Humane, a Divine Nature, which sparkles out
of thy flesh in holy Operarations; Another, an higher Spirit than thy own which
follows God fully in holy walking: Thou may now sit down under Christ's
shadow, and reckon thy self in the very borders of Assurance, waiting the good
hour, when the irradiating Spirit shall take thee by the hand, and lead thee
into the full possession thereof. Moreover, unto the exercise of Grace add
growth as a fruit thereof; Grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, 2 Pet.
3.18. Abound more and more, 1 These. 4.1. Let thy Motto be Plus ultra, and thy
Christian Arms like Joseph's, a fruitful bough by a well. Thou have Faith, but
be strong in it, that thou may wrestle with God, and not let him go till he
bless thee with Assurance; be great in it, that he may condescend to thee, and
say, Be it unto thee even as thou will. Thou have a being in Christ, but be
rooted in him by a more close adherence, and intimate Union within him, grow up
into him in statures of Grace till thou come to the oylof gladness upon his
head. There is some holy Love in thee, but be rooted and grounded in it, that
thou may comprehend the breadth and length, and depth, and height, and know
the love of Christ which passes knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness
of God, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Through radicated and well-grown Graces, (as the
Apostles assures us in that place,) admirable and wonderful things may be
attained: In a sober sense we may take Infinity, know Transcendencies, and be
filled with a Deity. Labor to grow every way downward in Humility and
self-denial, upward in holy desires and raptures, inward in the vitals of Faith
and Love, and outward in all holy fruits and good works: fill up the (...),
that which is lacking in Faith and other Graces; let Patience and all other
Graces have (...), their perfect work, that thy path may be as the shining
light, shining more and more to the perfect day: As an Heavenly Pilgrim go from
faith to faith, and from strength to strength, traveling to meet the day
coming toward thee in the light of Gods Countenance. In such a growth as this
as in a clear glass thou may discover that thy Graces are vital and true
feeds of Immortality: Statues and Pictures, such as Hypocrites are, grow not,
Essentials and Vitals are Vltra penicillum: Sincerity and Divine Vitality
cannot be painted. Confider therefore with thy self how it has been with thee,
there was but a little dawn in thy Heart and now a pure morning. Thy Grace was
but a little grain of Mustardseed, and now it is become a Tree. Thou wast but a
little Embrio, a babe in Christ, and now a man of strength and spiritual
stature; And what does this argue but Life in thee? Confider again, thou have
an ocean of Corruption in thy Heart, and yet thy little spark of Grace has
grown; thou have stood in the midst of Satan's winds and withering blasts, and
yet thou growest; thou have had many a sharp frost from the World to nip thy
fruit in the bud, and yet thou growest: And what does this speak but a seed and
life of God in thee, such as will spring up into Life Eternal? Take this as an
Earnest from God. that maugre Satan and all the power of Darkness, thou shall
grow and grow on, till thou art transplanted into the Heavenly Paradise.

Again, If thou would have Assurance, be much in mortifying of Sin. This is
the great troubler. If thou indulg it, a cloud will come over thy Conscience
and darken thy Evidences; thy Graces will all droop, and like a Candle in the
socket, be ready to die, the Law will arm it self against thee, and from one
threatening or other will flash Hell in thy face: Satan will rake in thy old
wounds of Guilt, and put thee into fresh torments; the holy Spirit will be
gone, and carry away all his Cordials with him; the Promises will be as dry
Breasts, and let out never a drop of sweetness to thee; thy Duties will hang
the wing, and become dead and spiritless, and without comfort. In the end thou will experimentally find, That in crooked Paths Peace cannot be found. Awake
therefore, O Believer, to the work of Mortification. Look upon sin, as it is an
evil, an only evil, an hellish abomination, infinitely more loathsome than the
Dogs Vomit, or the Sow's Mire, or the menstruous Cloth, by which it is shadowed
out in Scripture. Arraign it as the greatest Malefactor that ever was. Call in
Death, and Hell, and a blasted World, and groaning Creatures, and the Ruins of
Angels, and Souls of Men, and the bloody Passion of Christ, and the horrible
Injuries done to God himself, To bear witness against it: Each of these can
tell sad stories about it; and all of them cry out, Crucify it, Crucify it,
It is worthy to dye. Pass therefore thy doom upon it, that it may do to. Strip
it of all its veils, and false covers, and bewitching appearances; pluck off
its Golden Profit, and Silken Pleasures, and Purple of false Honor, that it
may look as it is in its own ugly nakedness, sinful, out of measure sinful.
Nail it to the Cross by holy Restraints. if it start in a Thought, or creep in
at a Sense, or hide it self under thy Lawful things, have one holy Truth or
other as a Nail ready to fasten it, that it move no further in thee. Pierce it,
let out its vital blood, I mean the love and joy and delight of it. Surrender
up thy Affections to God and Christ, and heavenly things, that it may give up
the ghost; bury it out of thy sight; never give it a look or glance more;
converse no more with it, than thou would do with the dead; raise it not up
again into any fresh embraces; no, not so much as the picture of it in a sinful
thought or fancy. After this manner mortify sin, and above all thy darling
only one, which thy Heart has been tender of, and could wish that it were no
sin; spare it not, but cause it to dye, as a sure Pledge that all other sins
shall do so. Believe it, This is (...) the path of life, or of those two lines
of Holiness and Comfort. If ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live,
says the Apostle, Romans 8.13; an eternal life in Heaven, and a comfortable one
in the way thither. Who knows, but that whilst thou art mortifying thy sin, God
may come and speak to thee, much as he did to Abraham when he was offering up
his Isaac; Now I know that thou repentest indeed, and believe indeed, seeing
thou have not withheld thy Sin, thy Darling Sin from the work of Mortification:
Surely, blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee; Thy
Comforts shall be as the Stars, and as the Sand. When thou have been a-slaying
thy Lusts, Jesus Christ will meet thee (as Melchizedek did Abraham, when he
came from the slaughter of the Kings), Bringing forth Bread and Wine,
Supportations and Divine Consolations to thy Soul. Melchizedek's Bread and Wine
were to Abraham Pawns of Canaan, the Land of Promise; and Christ's Supports and
Comforts shall be to thee Earnests of Heaven. See what pure strains of Grace
flow in the precious Promises made to the Overcomer; To him that overcomes
will I give to eat of the hidden Manna; and will give him a white stone, and in
the stone a new name written, which no man knows, saving he which receives
it, Rev. 2.17. O what things are here! Comforts fall about the Overcomer, and
are preserved in his heart; as the Manna fell about the Camp, and was preserved
in the Golden Pot. Pardon is the white stone, and Adoption the new name; and
all these, though secret to others, are well known to himself. But you will say,
These are promised to the Overcomer; and who can say, that he is such? Is not
the Canaanite still in the land? Are there not relics of Corruption in the
best? Does not the flesh still lust against the spirit, and the body of Death
send out its stench and rottenness? And who may call himself an Overcomer? I
answer, The Canaanite is in the land; but subdued: Relics of Sin are in thee;
but they do gravitare, press and lie heavy, as a thing out of its proper place,
and force thee to groan and cry out, O wretched man! The flesh lusts against
the spirit, but thou opposest might and main; and if it be ready to prevail,
thou criest out, as the forced Damosel under the Law, for help against it, as
being too strong for thee. If there be in thee a nolle peccatum, a bent of
heart against Sin, and thou do in purpose and endeavor fight against it,
and thou would pursue it to death, and, if possible here, to utter
extirpation; then assure thy self, (not withstanding the indwelling sin), That
thou art an Overcomer in Gods account, who accepts the Will for the Deed; and
in the Gospels, all whose Promises are made not to sinless perfection, but
sincerity. To this purpose the Original in that famous place is remarkable, It
is not to him that overcomes, but (...), to him that is overcoming, to him
that is praying, striving, wrestling, fighting against Sin; to him that is in
an overcoming posture, though the enemy be not quite out of the field, to him
shall those great Comforts in the Promise be given. This made St. Paul (maugre
all the relics of Corruption) sound a Triumph to Free Grace, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7.25; as being sure of complete Victory at
last.

Again, If thou would have Assurance, Be much in the holy use of Ordinances.
These are vehicula Spiritus, the Chariots in which the Holy Spirit rides
Circuit to do good to Souls. These are canales Gratie, the Conduit-pipes
whereby Graces and Comforts are derived to us. There God records his Name, and
commands the Blessing, even Life for ever-more. There he meets those that work
righteousness, and remember him in his ways. David was so sensible of this,
that it was his one only desire to dwell in Gods house, and behold (...) the
beauties, or sweet Amenities, of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4. If ever thou meetest
with the Suavities and ravishing Beauties of Free Grace, it must be in the
Sanctuary of Ordinances. Christ, when here on Earth, was very ready to give a
comfortable Testimony to those that came to him and brought their Graces with
them; Seeing upright Nathanael, he said, Behold, an Israelite indeed, Joh.
1.47. Seeing their Faith, he said to the poor Paralytick, Son, thy sins be
forgiven thee, Mat. 9.2. Neither now, though in Heaven, is he wanting therein;
he has a secret way of testifying by his Spirit unto those who in an holy
manner approach to him in Ordinances; Seeing thy holy fear at an Ordinance, he
can tell thee, That thy Soul thall dwell at ease in the bosom of Mercy; Seeing
thy Faith there, he can tell thee, That as a true Believer thou have
everlasting life. Whatever Grace thou bring into his presence, he can make
one Promise or other drop sweetness upon it. Wait on him in his own ways, that
he may speak Peace to thee; more particularly, Converse much with the sacred
Word. In the Gospel great things are set before us; there is a Glass of Gods
Glory, The more thou look into it, the more thou will be transformed into
the Divine Likeness; there is a Mass, a Treasury of rich Grace; the more thou
searchest into it, the more thou will taste how gracious the Lord is, till thou
come to the highest gust of it in Assurance; there are the Breasts of
Consolation, suck on, and thou shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness;
there thou have the demonstration and ministration of the Spirit; get as much
as thou can of it that thou may be sealed by it: There the Righteousness of
God is revealed from Faith to Faith, from a Faith of Adherence to a Faith of
Assurance: There is the savor of Life unto Life, of a gracious Life unto a
comfortable and glorious One. Be much in reading and hearing the Word, but do
it in an holy manner, do it attentively; take heed to it, till the day dawn,
and the daystar arise in thy heart; do it desiring the Word as the Babe does
the Breast, that thou may grow into all the measures and statures of Christ;
do it in faith, that the Word may profit and effectually work unto all Graces
and Comforts; do it in love to Truth and Righteousness, that the oil of
gladness, which is upon Christ thy Head, may run down upon thee; do it
obedientially, hearken to the Commands, that thy Peace may be as a River
flowing in the joys of Faith: If thus thou will hear and open to Christ, who
stands and knocks at the door of thy heart, He will come in to thee, and sup
with thee, and thou with him, Revel. 3.20. He will come in to thee in intimate
Communion, and sup with thee in the acceptance of thy Graces, and thou shall
sup with him at a Banquet of Love: Thou may experimentally say, That the
Gospel is come to thee in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much Assurance,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. In Power in, the first work of Conversion;
in the holy Ghost, in the gracious indwelling of it after Faith; and in much
Assurance, in the Sealins of Truth and Love upon the heart. Next to that of the
Word, I recommend Prayer to thee; This is an excellent Ordinance, it wrestles
with God, and like a Prince prevails with him; It unlocks the Treasury of
Grace, and fetches down all Blessings; it has a king of Omnipotency in it;
and, if with reverence I may so allude, As God brought forth all things by the
breath of his mouth, so the Believer produces all Blessings by the breath of
Prayer. Apollonius (as Sozomen relates) never asked any thing of God but he
obtained it. And of Luther it was said, Iste vir potuit apud Deum quod voluit;
This man could do what he would with God. Ask, and thou shall have: Ask the
sealing Spirit, and thou shall have it; ask in the Name of Jesus Christ; His
Merits are as pure Incense able to perfume thy Prayers; and as a powerful
Orator to persuade the Comforter to come down to thee: Ask in the holy Spirit,
in the Grace and sweet Gales of it, That the Spirit may be an answer to it
self; the Spirit as sealing Gods Love an answer to it self as inspiring thy
Prayers: Ask in Faith; Has not God told thee of a witnessing Spirit? Has he
not said, That he will speak peace to his Saints? Are not his Promises as so
many Bonds upon his Truth to make the things promised good? Prove him by
Prayer, if he will be as good as his Word; see, if he will not own his own hand
in the Promise; wrestle with him till the day break in the light of his
Countenance lifted up upon thy heart; Ask in fervency, that whilst thy heart is
burning with Love toward God, his Love which is the Fountain of thine, may
reveal it self to thee. The old Token of acceptance was firing the Sacrifice,
and it is still a pledge of success, when there is warmth in Prayer. Ask in
sincerity, in a pure intention, not for self-ease, not that thou may fare
deliciously upon the Love of God; but that thy Spirit may be the freer to his
service, that thy Zeal may be more inflamed toward his Glory; The prayer of
the upright is his delight; in so praying. thou shall meet the favor of God.
It is very remarkable what posture Paul was in, when Ananias was sent to
comfort him, Behold, he prays, says God; go, let him be filled with the Holy
Ghost. In the beginning of Psalm. 13. David's Faith run very low, How long will thou forget me O Lord for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? ver.
1. A while after it lifts up it self a little, Consider and hear me, O Lord my
God, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death, ver. 3. but praying
on, it is in the altitudes; I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice
in thy Salvation, ver. 5. Prayer is one of Gods sealing times; in it thou
approachest and drawest nigh to him who is the fountain of Life and Joy.
Whilst thou art opening and pouring out thy Heart to him, Who knows but he may
open his Heart and incomparable Love to thee? the holy Spirit may come and tell
thee, as the Angel Gabriel did Daniel in the same posture, That thou art
greatly beloved, a man of desires with God.

In the last place make use of the Lords Supper. There God makes a Royal feast,
a feast of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well resined; he
sets forth Christ crucified, whose flesh is meat indeed, whose blood is drink
indeed. Come, eat his flesh and drink his blood, that you may live for ever;
Eat and let thy Soul delight it self in fatness; drink, yea, drink abundantly,
O beloved Soul, or as the Original Text may be read, Be drunk or happily
inebriated with the sweet Love of Christ; the same crucified Christ, which in
the Sacrifice on the Cross satisfied Gods heart, at this Sacrament can satisfy
thine. Never any Feast like this, which chears the Heart of God and Man; How
will God manifest his Love here in Salutations, Kisses, and Unctions The Jews
at their Feasts used many demonstrations of Love; such as Salutations, faying
to their Guests, Peace be unto thee; Kisses; from whence afterward Christians
derived their Kiss of Charity; or as Tertullian calls it, Oscuculum Pacis, A
Kifs of Peace; and Oil poured out upon the Head, called therefore Oleum
laetitiae, The Oil of gladness: And cannot God do much more at his Table?
Cannot he salute thee, and say, Peace, Peace, to thee, because thou trustest in
him? Cannot he kiss thee with the kisses of his mouth, and cause one Promise or
other to drop sweetness into thy heart? Cannot he give thee the rich anointings
of the holy Spirit, and sill thee with all joy and peace in believing? Let thy
Spikenard, thy Faith, and Love, and other Graces send forth their smell, that
he may break a Box of Spikenard in thy heart, and fill, and perfume it with the
sweet odours of his Love: Wait upon him in this Ordinance, there he does by
outward and visible Elements, seal Pardon and Salvation to thee; and believe
it, he that puts one Seal to thy Sense, can put another to thy Heart; unto the
Seal of Elements, he can add the Seal of the Holy Spirit; with the outward
Bread and Wine, thou may have the hidden Manna, and heavenly refreshments
from Christ. Whilst thou art renewing thy Covenant, and avouching the Lord to
be thy God, he can own thee, and avouch thee to be one of his Children, and
this will be more to thee than a World.

Again, If thou would be assured, walk in Vprightness, this is
Gospel-perfection; the Believers Beauty, the soundness of all his Graces, the
desire and delight of God himself, as being a Beam from his own Truth and
Simplicity. In Scripture he seldom mentions an upright man without setting some
mark of Honor upon him. Enoch walked with God, as one familiar with him, Genesis
5.22; and as the Septuagint, and after them the Apostle, Heb. 11, has it,
(...), he pleased God; and how great a Character is this? Caleb followed God
fully, and he is styled a man of another Spirit, such as is above the rate of
common Souls. Job was a perfect and upright man, and God calls him a none such
in the Earth. The Jews say, That the Seventy Souls that went with Jacob into
Egypt were worth as much as all the Seventy Nations in the World: I am sure,
the upright, the Israelites indeed, are the Pearls and Excellent ones in the
Earth. Now here I recommend three things to thee, To walk as in Gods presence,
To have an universal respect to his Commands, and To carry a pure intention
toward his Glory. All these have a great tendency to Assurance. Walk as in
Gods Presence. Remember, that he is everywhere. Thou need not a Vision, or
Jacobs Ladder; wherever thou art, thy Faith can tell thee, that God is in the
place, and it is too dreadful to sin in. His Presence besets thee behind and
before, and thou can not break away from it; thy ways are all before him, nay
thy very heart; He knows the make of it, and stands by the inward Frame and
secret Springs thereof, seeing what is a forming there upon the Wheel, and what
thoughts are taking their flight from thence. All is naked and open as in an
Anatomy before his Face. He is intimior intimo tuo, nearer to thee than thou
art to thy self. Walk as in his Presence. Live as under his all-seeing Eye.
Seneca would have us set a Cato or a Laelius before our eyes, and to compose
our Lives as in their Presence; Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis
testis assistat, says he; A present witness would prevent a great deal of sin.
Think thus with thy self, Cave, Spectat Deus; Take heed, God sees. Keep fresh
apprehensions of him in thy thoughts. Think, purpose, speak, act, do every
thing (...), worthy of, and in an holy congruity to his Presence. Walk with
him, that thou may be translated, though not as Enoch, corporally into
Heaven, yet as a sincere Believer, mentally into the Suburbs of it, in the
Manifestations of Gods Favor. Look steadfastly, constantly unto him, that thou
may have sweet Aspects and Love-glances from him. Thou may have his
Favorable Presence, whilst thou live under his Awful one. The upright shall
dwell in thy presence, Psalm. 140; that is, in thy gracious Presence. They set
him before them, and he causes his Grace and Love to pass before them.

In the next place, Have an universal respect to his Commands. It is a vulgar
Rule among the Jewish Doctors, That men should single out some one Command out
of the Law, and exercise themselves therein, that God may be their Frsend, and
bear with them other things. But this is to Indent and Article with God upon
our own Terms. The Hypocrite, (as one elegantly expresses it), like a globous
body, touches the Law in some one point, in some particular Command; but the
Upright, at least in desire and endeavor, lies close and level to all the Will
of God. The Pharisees seemed to be very much for the First Table; but after all
their Fasting and Prayer they could swallow down Widows Houses, and so give the
lie to all their Devotions. The Moralist seems to be as much for the Second
Table; but, as fair as his Life is toward Man, he is very unjust to God,
stealing away that heart which is infinitely more due to him, than the justest
of Debts can be to our Neighbor. If thou would be assured, thou must have an
universal respect to his Command; do not pick and choose among them, but as
David, be for (...), all the Wills of God; as Zachary and Elizabeth, walk in
all his Commandments. Wherever the Divine stamp is, there let thy Obedience be,
that thou may have a great Reward: Light is sown for the Righteous, and
gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. Upon sincere Obedience a crop
of Comfort comes up; and, because by Promise, much surer than that of the
Husbandman which is under Providence only: The righteous Lord loves
righteousness; his countenance does behold the upright, Psalm. 11.7. In the
Original it is (...); Their faces behold the upright; the (...), the Three
Persons in the Sacred Trinity do all look with a loving Aspect upon such an
one. Our Savior has told us as much, If a man sincerely keep the holy Words,
The Father and the Son will come to him, and make their abode with him, John
14.23. And a little after follows a Promise of the Holy Spirit as a Comforter,
verse 26. Walk uprightly, and thou art in a posture to receive sweet
manifestations of Love from the whole Sacred Trinity.

In the last place carry a pure Intention toward Gods Glory. This is the
single eye in the Body of Duties, all our good Works lie in the dark without
it: the want of this was as a black line drawn over Amaziah's virtue; He did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Jehu was anointed and appointed by God to destroy Ahabs House; and
yet for want of a pure Intention, was reckoned as a Murderer for doing so, Hos.
1.4. That which is true Prayer when it comes from Zeal, may be but howling when
it comes from Lust, Hos. 7.14. Those Moral Virtues, which are very glossie in
the Matter, may in the End be no better than splendid sins. The End is the
purest offspring of a rational Spirit, and a cardinal circumstance in every
Action. The Soul conceives all its Thoughts before the End, as Labans Ewes did
their young before the Rods. As the End is earthly or heavenly, so is the Man
and his Acting. Remember, O Believer, that thou wast not made a Man or a Saint;
Thy Lamp of Reason was not set up at first or new-lighted afterward by Grace
that thou should center on any thing less than God himself, or take thy aim
lower than his Glory. Set thy heart on that great End; look right on it with a
single eye; whether thou eatest or drinkest, or prayest, or hear, or
whatever good work thou art about, carry on the great Design, That God in all
may be glorified. How taking this is with Christ, He himself has told us; Thou
have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse; thou have ravished my heart with
one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck, faith he to his Church, Cant.
4.9. A pure Intention is that single eye, and Obedience that chain of the neck;
which in Believers does excordiate and ravish the heart of Christ himself; And
what sweet returns will he make upon such taking Graces? Their Graces ravish
his Heart, and his Comforts will ravish theirs: Their thoughts are upon Gods
Glory, and Gods are upon their Peace. With the upright he will show himself
upright; with the pure he will show himself pure. They are upright in Duties,
and he will be upright in Promises; They give him pure Intention, and he will
give them pure Mercy; such as is the sealing of his Love upon their Hearts. The
pure in heart shall see him, not in the blissmaking Vision only, but before in
those Loveglances, which are the First Fruits of Heaven here below.

Again, If thou would be assured, be much in charity and doing good; As the
Elect of God put on bowels of Mercy. Open thy heart to the poor in Pity, and
thy hand in Charity; draw out thy Alms, and with them thy Soul; give outward
Things, and which is more, thy Self in real compassion; Cast thy Bread upon the
Waters, upon the Tears of the Poor, that it may be carried into the Ocean of
Eternity, and there found again in a glorious Reward. When an Object of Charity
meets thee, Say not, Go and come again; pass not by as the Priest and Levite
did, but, as the good Samaritan, immediately pour in thy Wine and Oil into the
Wounds of thy Brother; omit no Season of Charity: Now is thy Seed-time, scatter
thy good Works, Sow upon Blessings, as the Phrase is, 2 Cor. 9.6. Now Christ's
Bank is open, put in thy Money upon holy Usury, and God himself will be thy
Play Master; Be still a-doing of good, that in thy little sphere thou may
resemble him who does good in the great sphere of Nature: His Sun shines and
Rain falls everywhere; Be as like him as thou can, shining in good Works,
and dropping in Charities upon all occasions. Give a Portion to seven and also
to eight, says the Preacher, Eccles. 11.2. From this Text the Jews ground a
Custom to give an Alms to seven or eight poor people every day. However that
be, we should be much in Charity: Look on the Poor as Gods Altars erected on
purpose, That upon their Backs and Bellies thou may offer up thy Charity as
an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God. Be
rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up a
good Foundation against the time to come. This is the way to Assurance: Works
of Mercy and Charity make Faith visible, and withal put the Believer into a
nearer capacity to have the Love of God manifested to him. They make Faith
visible; no Assurance can be had, unless that Query, Whether we be in the
Faith? be resolved in the Affirmative: That cannot be done, unless Faith become
visible; and more visible it cannot be than in such good Works; which as the
holy Blossoms of it prove that there is Life at the root. The Mercy and
Charity, which hang upon it, may tell thee, That thou have indeed closed by
Faith with the infinite Love and Grace above, and from thence brought down all
those drops and models of Goodness which thou sheddest forth in thy
Conversation: The Fruit may prove thy standing in Christ the true Root of
fatness and sweetness. The Image of Goodness limmed and drawn out upon thy
Life, shows it self to be from the pure Spirit. St. John exhorting the little
children to a real practical Love, adds this as a singular Comfort, (...), In
this Love we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our hearts before
him, 1 John 3.18, 19. It thou love thy Brother in Deed and in Truth, assure thy
self, that thou art of the Truth; That the holy truth of the Gospel is mixed
with faith in thy Heart, and there grows up into the Divine life and likeness:
Say not, That thy Faith is dead or idle, as long as it can show forth the Coats
and Garments, the Alms and good Works which it has done; these show the life
and labor of it: Nay further, these put thee into a nearer capacity to have
the Love of God manifested to thee. God in the Prophet commands them to deal
their bread to the hungry, to cover the naked not to hide themselves from their
own flesh; and immediately after lets out himself in sweet Promises to them,
Thy righteousness shall then go before thee, Isa. 58.8. that is, thy Graces
shall visibly appear to thee. And again, Thou shall call, and the Lord shall
answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here am I, ver. 9. that is, He will
be very near and ready at hand to reveal himself to thee. And which is more, as
St. John tells us, he will dwell in thee, He that dwells in love, dwells in
God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. He dwells in the Divine Life, and the Divine
Presence dwells in him: He has a Shechinah, nay, and an Oracle in his own
bosom. God will speak peace to his Saints, Psalm. 85.8. (...) to his merciful
ones, with them he will show himself merciful; to them he will speak from the
Mercy-seat; they give but ordinary Bread, but receive from him hidden Manna;
they draw out their Souls to their Brethren, and he draws out his Soul to them.

In the last place, if thou would be assured, set thy heart on God, and
Christ, and Heaven; stay no longer in the straits of this lower World, take thy
flight by Faith and Love into the sphere of Infinity, where thy Soul may open
and dilate it self for ever. Hang no longer about the drops and little
particles of Being, put forth thy Soul might and main into the great ocean of
Sweetness and Perfection, which is able to fill up thy two vast Capacities of
Mind and Will with its unmeasurable Truth and Goodness. Warm thy Heart no more
among the little sparks of Good here below; soar up upon the wings of Desire
and ardent Affection to that pure immutable Sun of Love and Goodness; one of
whose golden rays of favor will be more to thee than a World. Thou have, O
Believer, a Soul twice Heaven-born; once as it is in its own nature an immortal
spark from above, and again as it bears the impress of Heaven in its Graces.
And answerably thou have a double impetus after Happiness; one in the instinct
of nature thirsting after it, and another in the more Divine impulses of Grace
pressing toward it as its Center. Think not that such a Soul shall ever find
rest, till it come back to the first point from whence it issued, and resign up
it self to its Original in the bosom of God. Inflame thy Heart with Love to
Jesus Christ who is altogether lovely, and wholly desirable. In his
Righteousness thou may stand and look up to the sweet reconciled face of God;
In his bleeding wounds thou have a passage into the infinite bowels of Mercy;
through the veil of his flesh the way is open to the Holy of Holies; The oil
upon his head can fill thee with joy unspeakable and glorious. Lift up thine
eyes, O Believer, to that wonder of wonders, God manifested in the flesh; from
whence come all the admirable indwellings of God in the spirits of Men. Set thy
Heart upon that Infinite Mass and Treasure of Merit, which paid off all the
scores to Divine Justice, and over and above bought all the Glory of Heaven for
poor worms. Ravish thy Soul in the rich redundancies and overmeasures of the
Spirit upon him, which overflow and fill so many thousand precious Souls with
Grace. Look steadfastly upon that pure mirror of Love, Holiness, Meekness,
Goodness, Obedience, Patience, which is in his flesh; look till thou shine with
the same image or spiritual Idea of Grace; look till thou art captivated in
raptures and flames of Love toward him; count the whole World dross and dung
for him; espouse him in the dearest and sweetest affections.

Again, set thy heart upon Heaven; call back thy Affections from this vain
World, where they have been scattered a-gathering up stubble, unto Heaven thy
native Country, that thou may have a pregnant proof in thy self, that thou
art born from thence, and a-going thither. Follow those attractions, which
Heaven the great Center of Grace and Holiness put upon thy Faith and Love to
draw thee up to it self. Long to be up in that pure region of Bliss where God
is All in All: There are sinless Perfections, and tearless Comforts, rivers of
Pleasures, and plenitudes of Joy for ever. Thou may there read all Truths in
the Original, and satiate thy self at the fountain of Goodness. Have thy
Conversation above, drive on a constant trade there by Prayers and good Works,
that thou may have rich returns of Grace and Love from thence. This is the
true way to Assurance. A notable instance we have in the Psalmist, O God, thou
art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh
longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land where no water is, Psalm. 63.1. and
what is the issue of it? his Soul which had so emptied out it self in holy
Pantings and Anhelations after God, was soon satisfied with the marrow and
fatness of his love, ver. 5. No sooner was the Spouse sick of love to Christ,
Cant. 2.5. but his left hand is under her head in Supports, and his right hand
embraces her, in the sweet manifestations of his Love to her, ver. 6. The more
Heavenly the Believer is, the sitter he is for Assurance; which serves as a
lesser Heaven for him till he come to the great one which is above.

Thus much touching the second thing, the ways in which Assurance is attained.

To conclude all, the Believer having arrived at Assurance, which is the
highest step on this side Heaven, may sit down with joy upon his head, and
begin that Song of Free Grace and the Lamb; which is sung above, though in an
higher tune, in the Heavenly quire of Angels and glorified Saints for ever and
ever. Well may he say, Oh! what has God wrought? what was he, a lump of dust
and sin, to be brought hither? How did he lie in blood and death, till Grace
came by and put in the breath of Spiritual life into him? Was not his Reason
the lightest part in him, veiled and covered over with gross darkness, when the
rosy morn and dayspring of Grace first broke out upon him in Spiritual
illuminations? Was not his Will, though a free Principle, fast shut up in
Hardness and Unbelief, when Grace opened the Iron-gate, and made him free to
his own Happiness? What a poor broken Man, and under what innumerable debts was
he, when Grace came and paid off all by the Blood of the Covenant? How much of
Earth and Hell was upon him before Grace made him a Son, and limmed out the
Divine Image upon his Heart? What swarms and legions of Lusts kept possession
in his Heart, when Grace set up its standard and drove them out to make room
for the holy seed there? And after he became a Saint, what an hand had Grace
with him to cure his many weaknesses, and nurse up his infant-Graces? What a
vast charge was it at in fresh anointings and supplies of the Spirit, to keep
the holy lamp and fire from going out? And at last, how rich and glorious is
Grace toward him, when it carries him up into the mount of Assurance, and
there shows him the great things which it has done, and will do for him; the
true Graces and blossoms of Glory in his Heart, and a fair Heaven that lies
beyond them, where Crowns and Robes of Happiness wait for his coming? Oh!
Grace! infinite Grace! thou art the Origin of all Graces, and Center of all
Praises. All the Saints owe their birth and safe conduct to Heaven to thee; and
to every step of thine, from the first beams and drops of Mercy to the
Bliss-making Vision and rivers of Pleasures above, Hosannabs and Halielujahs
must be sung for ever and ever.

FINIS.
The TABLE.
A
ADam Preached of Christ. Page 376 Adoption a fruit of Faith, 241. Its
Privilege, 242, to 249, hereby a greater Glory than in Adam. Page 244 Adriatic
Sea, a Popish Fable about the calming of it. Page 104, 105. Albertus Magnus his
Statue speaking articulately. Page 164 Ambrose's saying of Cain and Abel. Page
367 Armas Burgus his Prayer at his Martyrdom. 176 His Patience. Page 318
Andelots brave answer when questioned, to Henry 2d. of France. Page 315
Anselm's Interrogatory and Counsel to a Man at the point of death. Page 80
Antinomians Error about Sin and the Law. Page 121 Assurance and Faith how
differ. 137, to 149 That it is attainable 397. Of our good estate is
attainable, 387. Names given to Faith show it, 399, 410. Another ground, 404.
Examples of it, 403: Popish error about it, 388. Like the Sceptick
Philosophers herein, 389. It puffs not up, 395, 396, Assurance of Pardon, 397.
Of Perseverance, 412. Ways by which it is attained, 424. It begins the Song of
Free Grace here. Page 460 Athanasius his saying when Banished by the Emperor.
Page 198 Augustin's mistake about Faith retracted. 6 Struggling against Sin in
his own strength, he heard a voice, 279. His Spiritual application of Christ's
raising up three from the dead. Page 385, 386
B
Baptism, several Names given it by the Ancients, 371. How a Jewish Custom then
a Divine Ordinance, 372. Though received in Infancy, yet has a bond on
Conscience, ibid. and 373. One confirmed in Martyrdom by it by his Mother,
ibid. Burgundians Baptism, Page 374 Bellarmine died in doubt. Page 426, 427
Belief of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, of what kind, 37 to 41. What
the consequences of it in order to Resignation, 69, to 75. A Believer keeps to
the Written Word in all things, 122, to 126. The only wise man, 170. His
knowledge of the Invisible God, 171, 172. The Presentiality of Things future,
186. Understands seeming Contradictions, 187. Its spiritual extraction the best
Chemist, 192, to 201. What he desires to know of himself. Page 381 Belial a son
of Belial, what it imports. Page 160 Bernards reflection on himself when he saw
another Sin. Page 313 Bishop, no non-preaching Bishops of old. Page 377, 378
Blessing of Jacob and Esan differ, 344. Promise of Temporal Blessings not
absolute. Page 345 Blood, a little drop given out to be the Blood of Jesus
Christ. Page 364, 365
C
Cardinal Cajetan's Commentaries on the Master of the Sentences extold by
Papists above Luther, yet 200 Errors in it. Page 156 Christ and earthly things
often in competition. 159 His Conception in the Womb and the Heart, compared,
288, 361, 362. He is the Samplar of our Graces, 291. How he died in his person,
and in the Believer. Page 373 Conditions of the Promises really in Believers.
Page 391 Conflict, the Natural and Spiritual differenced. Page 261, 262, 263.
Conscience its testimony of great repute among Pagans, 405. Witnesses
integrity, 406. Believers converse with Scripture and Conscience. Page 407
Conviction of Sin manifold, 70, 71, 72. Several things ensue thereupon, to Page
75 Creation, the Philosophers misguess about it, 17, 18. New Creation in the
Heart. Page 383, 384. Credere Deo, and in Deum. Page 131, 132 Cruciger, his
Deathbed Prayer, and Faith. Page 138 Covenant of Grace and Works, difference
of Men under them. Page 278
D
Dr. Dees impostures by Spirits. Page 326 Delilah, the import of the word in
Hebr. Page 150 Dragon poisonous shut up by Sylvester the Bishops Prayers. Page
266
E
Election though from eternity, yet buds in time. Page 413 Evagrius his gift to
the poor to be paid in another world. Page 113 Evidences confirm Assurance.
Page 394 Experiments all learned men are for them. 326 Experiments of Faith, of
Scripture-truth. 325, to 370. Where of Scripture Ordinances and great Works, to
Page 386 Examination of our selves espied by the Philosophers. Page 433, 434
Faith, the several acceptions of the word in Scripture, 1, 2. Considered in its
measures, and in its lowest measure described, ibid. Wherein it exceeds Moral
Virtues, 8, 9. The difference between that and Reason alone, 12, 19. And Reason
with Scripture, 19, 30. Faith explicit required in Fundamentals, 41, 46. It
disciples the Soul to Christ, 86, 87. Yields to be ruled by Christ in all
actings, 109. Aspires after Heaven, and looks for pay there, 113. Where the
seat of Faith is disputed between Protestants and Papists, 126. Though seems
dead, yet may be alive, 129, 130. More than a waked assent, 131, to 136. Less
than Assurance, to 149. Why former Divines desine it by a full persuasion, 136.
Difference between Assurance and Faith justifying us, 140. Hangs on God in all
its actings, 191. Fruits of Faith and several Conceptions of these, 270, 271.
It is before all other Graces, 283 to 288. Sets them all on work, 289. Its
foundation and infusion, 328. It wars against all enticement to Sin, 276. Steps
by which Faith goes in mortifying it. Page 280 Fall of man total. Page 7
Father, its efficacy in Prayer. Page 245 Fear of God to be in all actions, 303.
Servile and Filial showed. Page 304 Mr. Fox never denied any that asked for
Jesus sake. Page 301 Free Grace, its presumption in unholy persons to expect
it, 119, 120. Free Will has no Harmony with it, 190. Abused by Pelagians. Page
366
G
God most glorious in his Word, 12. Confessed by all Nations, 13. Cardinal Perron
one day proved a God, the next would have proved the contrary, 171. Discovery
of God in Grace, and in the Creatures how differs. Page 175 Good, 288. Sets
about the chief good. Page 4 Graces spiritual are Creations, 8. All act in
union with Christ, 295. All rooted in Christ's Mines. Page 380
H
Happiness all desire it, few hit it, 3, 4. What Aristotle makes it to be. Page
253 Heart, it includes Understanding and Will. Page 126, 127 Hungarians
Tradition. Page 92
I
Jews, though they reject the Sacrifice of the Messiah, yet offer a real one,
and why, 97. Their answer to the Question, where believe to be saved by Christ's
Righteousness, with their pious saying over Bread, Wine, Herbs, 344. Their
saying of the seventy Souls that went down into Egypt, 449. A vulgar rule among
them, 450. A custom of others about Alms. Page 454, 455 Illumination
Supernatural described, 11. Wherein it excels Natural Reason, 12, 19. It Is
requisite to Faith. Page 30 31, 32. Images how at first crept in, 16. When cast
out the people triumphed, 309. Their return again. Page 331, 332 Ingrossers of
Corn, sore Judgments on them. Page 184 Instruction the true and false way of
finding it. Page 118 Intercession of Christ powerful. Page 415 Johannes Seneca
his Deathbed moan. Page 210 Israelites, the Men go not into Canaan but the
little ones, its misery. Page 128, 129 Justification three acts required to it,
94, 98. Bellarmines. Conclusion about it, 102. How the ungodly may and may not
be justified, 165. Its great importance. 201. It Is not from eternity 202, 206.
It is double, 207. How by Faith, 213, to 219. Not complete till the day of
Judgment, Page 227, to 231
K
Kingdom, the Primitive Christians talk so much of it that the Pagan Emperors
were jealous of them, though without cause. Page 176 Kohathites, the derivation
of the word. Page 5
L
Law of God demands of us two things, 209. Enough in Christ to answer both,
210. Its writing in the heart by Nature and Grace differ, 338. Impossible to be
fulfilled; but by the fiu't of man. Page 401 Legio fulminatrix. Page 373 Our
life how tremendous every way. Page 305 Light natural improved to the utmost
engaged not God to give Grace. Page 14 Love to God and our Neighbor has but
one root. Page 301 Luthers Method in Reformation, 274. An example of Faith in
Mortification, his saying of Free Will, 368, 369. His answer to the menacing
Law. Page 428
M
Mahalath, a title of some Psalms interpreted. Page 194 Mahomets Heart una
child cut open. Page 193 Meris Bishop of Chalcedons Discourse with Julian. Page
308 Martyrs refusing Pardon. Page 276 Meekness Natural, Moral, Spiritual, 311.
Examples. ib. and Page 312 Mortification, a Believer yields to Christ for it in
a threefold respect, 103. Resemblance between it and Christ's death, 104. False
ways of seeking it, and the true pointed at, 117, 118. The fruit of Faith, 250.
Degrees of Mortification, of Original Sin, 260, 267. And of actual. ibid.
Motions holy precious to a Believer. Page 88 Musculus's Distich in straits.
Page 248
N
Nazianzens saying about the difference between begotten and proceeding. Page
352
O
Obedience actuated by Faith, 314, 315, 316. Obedience of the Law fulfilled in
Christ, and of the Gospel by the Spirit in a Believer. Page 212 Ordination used
by the Jews. Page 377 Origens saying of some Scriptures that did affect him.
Page 144
P
Papists and Hypocrites how they agree, 122. All points in Popery additions to
the Word, 123. Its sandy foundation drawn from Bellarmine himself, 147. Natural
Popery in every man's heart. Page 158 Paracelsus his proud boast of himself.
Page 192 Patience its excellency, acted by Faith. Page 318 Pelagians put
Free Will for Grace, 6. Place Infants in the same state as Adam. Page 257
Perfection sinless not attainable in this life. Page 125, 126 Perseverance no
condition of it self. Page 417 Philip Lantgrave's comfort in Imprisonment. Page
321, 322 Plague-sores looked upon by Munster as Love Tokens. Page 193 Plerophory
of three things in Scripture. Page 400 Pollio's dying-saying. Page 115
Polemenia her wish to be cast into a Vessel of burning-Pitch. Page 319
Providence, Reasons mistake about it. Page 18, 19 Popes blasphemous speech
about the loss of a Peacock. Page 310 Promises of Grace, and to Grace. Page 346
Prayer, its continuance, 383. Its returns, 372. How heard and not heard. Page
374 Predicantici a nickname for Preachers by Papists and some Protestants.
Page 376 Preaching its efficacy. Page 379, 380, 381 Proving our estate not
impossible, therefore Assurance not impossible. Page 402
Q
Quakers Light within confuted. Page 67, 68, 69 Quirinus Reuteras his saying on
his Deathbed. Page 249
R
Rabbis saying of Grace and Judgment. Page 319 Reason and Divine Mysteries
compared together, and how far these exceed that, 50. Its fallibility compared
with infallibility of the Scriptures. Page 52 Remit, whether God may remit Sin
without a Satisfaction? the Question may be spared, 116. It is granted before
assurance of it is manifested. Page 139 Revelation to Apostles and Prophets,
and to ordinary Believers how differ. Page 58 Resignation to Jesus Christ the
third thing in Faith, and what it is, 79. Three things opened about it, 81.
Made to Christ as Mediator, 82, 83. To the whole Trinity, 84. To the Word, 85.
What the purposes of it, to 115. Adjuncis and properties of it to 131. In it is
the Essential nature of Faith, to 16. It is a middle thing between Faith and
Assurance, 149, to 155. How called in Old and New Testament, 154. Acts of
Resignation made by Faith. Page 161, 162 Righteousness imputative justified and
vindicated. Page 99, 100 Dr. Rivets Deathbed Experiences. Page 327
S
Sacrament of the Supper set out livelily. Page 375, 376 Sacrifices by Gods
appointment ever since the Fall, 42. And foreshewed the Messiah. Page 43 Samuel
asked of and lent to God. Page 373 School Divinity censured, 29. Schoolmens
saying about Worship. Page 124 Scripture, inward marks whereby known to be the
Word of God, 32, to 36. Several Sectaries that reject it mentioned, 55. Argued
with, to 64. Their Allegations refuted, to 69. That it is a dead letter
refuted, 65. Discerned by Faith without the Church, 328, 329. It is Principium
scientificum. Page 330 Seculum spiritus sancti, refuted. Page 66 Self-denial as
it precedes a Believers Resignation consists in diverse things, 75, to 79. The
Moralists and the Believers differ. Page 161, 162. Sick godly Woman would have
God choose health or sickness for her, 183. Story of a sick-man to whom Satan
appeared. Page 432 Sin, distinctions about it, 154. Diverse senses of Original
Sin with the true, 252, to 256. It hinders Faith, 157. How far they do not
hinder Resignation, 155, to 161. Not Justification. Page 221 Socinus and
Servetus their blasphemy about the Trinity, 357. Socinians mistake about
Original Sin, 6. The irrationality of their Faith, 47. And nullity, 53. Grace
they speak of is a fancy. Page 117 Sokneus his dying-saying. Page 114 Son
Natural and Adopted, their resemblance. Page 241, 242 Spirit and Word go
together, 52. To say the Spirits Testimony is dubious is blasphemy, 408. It
applys Promises, 409. Abides for ever with a Believer, two grounds of it. Page
414 Sulpitius Severus his Loquacity. Page 278 Sultan Achmet his proud
arrogance. Page 243 Synagogue their first use. Page 376
T
Talmud of the Jews magnified by them. Page 93 Taught of God, all ambitious of
so great a privilege. Page 91, 93 Trinity of persons and unity of essence, the
mystery of it not known by Human Reason, 352, 353. Acknowledged by Jewish
Rabbis and Cabbalists with the Primitive Christians saying to them that doubt
of it, 354. Enemies of it, 355. Worshipped by the Church in all Ages. Page 356
Fruebern's Deathbed saying. Page 126
V
Vanity how described. Page 183 Virgins a Play acted about the five wise and
five foolish. Page 371 Vivification, Faith yields up the Soul to Christ for it,
and how. Page 105, 106, 107 Unction Festival. Page 378 Union Hypostatical and
Mystical. Page 241 Universal Promises and Threats include Particulars, Page
394. Vprightness is Gospel-perfection, 448. Upright persons mentioned always
with some mark of honor, 419. How God is upright with the upright. Page 453
W
Walking in all Places as in Gods Presence. Page 449, 450 Will, Christ as God
and Man has two Wills. Page 392 Wisdom, why Christ called the Wisdom of God,
89. A great stir in the World about Wisdom. Page 170 World, Epicureans fancy of
the making of it, 383. The Believer understands better, ibid.
Z
Zeal what, 307. Examples of it for the truth. Page 308, 309 Zeno's Wife
Ariadne would not suffer him to be taken up when buried in a sit of the
Falling Sickness. Page 167 Zuinglius his answer suggested in a Dream. Page 94
Scriptures explained in this Treatise.
1 Samuel 15.25. 160 2 King. 17.33. 357 Job 19.25, 26. 402 Psalm. 11.7. 421 Psalm.
34.5. 369 Psalm. 39.5. 320 Psalm. 55.22. 107, 108 Psalm. 62.1. 152 Psalm. 63.1, 5.
459 Psalm. 119, 160. 112 Prove. 3.21. 24, 25 and 9.1, 2, 3. 197 Cant. 4.9. 453
Isa. 57.17, 18. 195 Ezekiel. 43.2. 116 Dan. 4.27. 277 Hos. 2.13, 14. 195 Mat.
15.26, 27. 196 Mark 14.72. 223 Luke 9.55. 61 Job. 3.12. 22, 23. and 14.23. 359
and 16.14. 120 Acts 5.41. 273 and 26.7. 350 1 Cor. 2.14. 20, 21 2 Cor. 9.6. 454
Gal. 6.1. 313 Ephesians. 1.13. 144 and 5.10. 107 Col. 2.5. 28, 324 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
445 Heb. 12.1. 270 1 Job. 2.4. 25 1 Job. 3.6. 160 1 Job. 5.5, 7, 8. 363
Books Sold by Tho. Cockerill at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange.
THe Morning-Exercise at Cripplegate, or several Cases of Conscience
practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4to.

The Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several more Cases
of Conscience practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4to.

Precious Faith, considered in its Nature, Working and Growth. By Edward
Polhill of Barwash in Sussex, Esquire in 8 o.

The Faithfulness of God considered and cleared in the great Events of his
Word, 8 o.

The Nature, Power, Deceit and Prevalency of the remainder of In-dwelling-Sin
in Believers, together with the ways of its working and means of Prevention. By
John Owen D. D. in 8 o.

An Antidote against Distraction, or an endeavor to serve the Church in the
daily Case of Wandering in the Worship of God. By Richard Steel, M. A. in 8 o.

The Reuniting of Christianity, or the Manner how to Rejoyn all Christians
under one Confession of Faith, in 8 o.

God a Christians Choice, completed by particular Covenanting with God, etc.
in pursuit of a Design proposed by Mr. R. A. in his Book Entitled, The
Vindication of Godliness. And by Mr. Tho. Vincent in his Book called, Words
whereby we may be saved. By Samuel Winney.

FINIS.

