Evangelical Worship IS Spiritual Worship, As it was Discussed in a SERMON
Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, At Paul's Church, Aug. 26.
1660.

BY Matthew Poole Minister of the Gospel at Michael Quern in London.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Sa. Thomson at the Bishops-head in Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To the Ingenuous Reader.
THat this Sermon is brought to light, it is not from my own choice and
inclination, but by constraint, not only in respect of the importunities of
many that pressed me to it, but in regard of the mis-constructions, censures,
and scandalous aspersions of others, that forced me to it: It has fared with
me as it did with David, They laid to my charge things that I knew not, Psalm.
35. 11. and fastened such reports upon my Sermon, as never entered into my
thoughts, being it seems, well instructed in that Diabolical Lesson, calumniare
fortiter, adhaerebit aliquid: For my part, I thank the Lord, who has taught me
that it is a small matter to be judged of man or of man's judgment: I could not
expect better measure than my Savior had, of whom we read, John 7. 12. Some
said he is a good man, others said nay, but he deceives the people: It is
sufficient to me that I have the Conscience of mine own integrity, and the
uprightness of my aims, that whatever was said, was not spoken out of a spirit
of contention or bitterness, or opposition, nor with any other design that I
know of (God is my witness) but from a Conscience of my duty, and an abhorrency
of that unchristian and antichristian spirit which breaths after the ruin of
all those who cannot stretch to the length of their bed, and consent to them in
every punctilio: To which I was the more encouraged, because his Majesty has
frequently expressed his dislike of that furious spirit, and his resolution
that the affairs of the Church should be managed in a moderate way.

I intended not to meddle with Common Prayer (of which I spoke not one word,
however I am traduced) nor Ceremonies considered in themselves, but only as
some endeavor that they may be pressed with an Egyptian rigor, and violently
imposed upon the Consciences of their Brethren: I supposed that there were
diverse of the Episcopal persuasion, of more sedate and peaceable dispositions,
who were unconcerned in my Discourse, and I must needs do them that right, that
some of that opinion (and those of considerable esteem in the world for
Learning and Goodness) were pleased to pass a favorable construction upon my
Sermon, and to acknowledge that I had reason for what I said. I spoke no more
for substance than what some of the Bishops of England, however overborn by a
more potent Party, have said in their Speeches and Writings, that have declared
their dislike of those tyrannical proceedings whereby Learned and honest men
were forced to forgo the exercise of their Ministry for some Ceremonies: As
much was said by the B. of St. David's, in a Convocation, An. 1604. as it is
cited in a Treatise called Beams of former Light, printed this year, p. 205.
Which is worthy of the perusal of all those that would not have the Ministers
and people of England to bite and devour one another, and thereby make sport
for the common Adversary. I thought it was an hard case if a man should be
accounted violent for dehorting men from violence, and immoderate for pressing
them to moderation: I concluded that I could not do his Majesty better Service
than by endeavoring to dissuade men from those practices which might occasion
the dividing, distracting and unsetling of his Realms, and to persuade unto
such a temper in which the generality of the people of the Land seem prepared
to acquiesce, if they be not turned out of the way by the Pride, Cruelty and
Tyranny of some exorbitant Persons. As for what some have fastened upon me, that
I had seditious passages, and Reflections upon his Majesty, it is well that
beside the witness of my own Conscience, I have so many hundred Compurgators: I
desire always to abhor that sinful practice of speaking evil of Dignities: I
have learned to fear God and honor the King, I am instructed in that Lesson
that I must not curse the King, no not in my Bedchamber, much less defame him
in a public Assembly. And other Sedition I am resolved by the Grace of God not
to be guilty of than this, to offer up my most hearty and fervent Prayers
public and private for his Majesty's long and happy Reign here and in Heaven,
and that God would guide him to those counsels which conduce most to his own
and the Nations Peace.

Amongst other Calumnies which have been cast upon me, one is this, that I
wished their fingers might rot that played upon the Organs; where I must not
only condemn the falsehood and impudence of those that raised and propagated so
abominable a Lie, but also I must blame the imprudence and uncharitableness of
such as were ready to receive and believe so improbable a report. The Reader
will see that I only declared my dislike of Organs in our Churches, and therein
I think I have better Authority than those that are of another mind, forasmuch
as in the Homily of the Place and time of Prayer (a Book established and
enjoined by the Laws of the Land) p. 131. they bring in some superstitious
Persons, complaining that they could not hear the like Piping, Singing,
Chaunting and Playing upon the Organs, that they could before: To this is
immediately answered thus; But (Dearly Beloved) We ought greatly to rejoice and
to give thanks to God, that our Churches are delivered out of those things
which displeased God so sore, and filthily defiled his holy House, etc. Which,
how our great Zealots for these things, who pretend to be the only genuine sons
of the Church of England, can reconcile with their Principle and Practice, let
themselves consider, and let the Indifferent judge.

I shall add no more but this, that to the best of my knowledge and
remembrance, this Sermon is printed as it was preached, without either omission
or alteration of any one material word; and so I commend thee to the Guidance
of the great Counselor of his Church; Begging that the God of Truth would
lead us all into every Truth, but especially that which concerns his Worship,
wherein he is so jealous; which is the Prayer of

Thy Servant in the Gospel, M. P.

JOHN 4. 23, 24. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him.

God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and
truth.


IN this Chapter you have an holy conference between Christ and a Samaritan
woman, who at first entertains his discourse with scoffs, but afterward began
to be more seriously affected; and upon the occasion of his strange discovery
of her secret wickedness, she says, ver. 19. Sir, I perceive thou art a
Prophet: And hereupon makes her address to him, and seeks resolution from him
in one of the great and weighty cases of those times.

It is a Christians duty especially to labor for satisfaction and
establishment against the errors, and in the questions of the times they live
in.

Verse. 20. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and you say that in
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worcester ship. She falls not into curious
and unprofitable questions, in which she might have looked for satisfaction
from a Prophet, about the length of her days, number of her children,
condition of life; but about things of another nature.

Obs. That Soul which is under the influence of Gods Grace, is most inquisitive
about Religious concernments. And it is one of the first steps and works of
Grace to direct a man's thoughts and enquiries to these things. This is that
which (at first conversion especially) most fills head and heart, Acts 16. 30.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And it is a sign of a desperate state, to be
careless and contentedly ignorant in the concernments of the soul.

To proceed: Our Fathers (says she) are of this opinion, and you of another:
What say thou?

Differences in Religion should not make a man reject all religion, but search
after the true Religion. So it does here; so it does in all other things. In
Philosophy some say the earth moves; others it stands still: It were now a
strange kind of folly and pettishness, if a man should say he would believe
neither; No, but this makes him search for the truth with greater diligence.
The differences amongst Physicians do not make any discreet man reject all the
rules and Principles of his Art, nor would it have such an effect in Religion,
had not men an hatred of it.

Again; It is about the Worship of God that she enquires.

Obs. A Gracious person is very solicitous and exact about the Worship of God.

An hypocrite neither cares much to know, nor regards to do as he ought; so the
work be done, he cares for no more.

A Gracious person 1. Is careful to know what worship will please God. 2.
Conscientious to offer up such worship.

Again, Our Fathers.] The opinions and practices of our Fathers in the Worship
of God, is no rule to their children. This has been a common stumbling stone,
though none more absurd and unreasonable. Men love to tread in their Fathers
steps. The Indian hearing his Ancestors were in hell, said, then he would go
thither. This was the (...) of the Jews, which led them into many miscarriages,
Jet. 44. 17. We will bake cakes to the Queen of Heaven -- as we have done, we
and our Fathers. The Pharisees were great Zealots for their (...), a vain
conversation received -- by tradition from your Fathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18. And he
that shall follow this ignis fatuus, must go to Popery, Samaritanism,
Heathenism, Hell it self. The Prophet Jeremy, when he speaks of the conversion
of the Gentiles, he tells you they shall relinquish the opinions of their
Ancestors, Jer. 16. 19. -- The Gentiles shall come unto thee -- and shall say,
Our Fathers inherited lies. God himself gives a caution in this point, Ezekiel.
20. 18. But I said unto their children -- walk ye not in the statutes of your
Fathers. You are not to pin your faith upon your Fathers sleeve. Isaiah sends
them to the Law and Testimony, not to Fathers, Isa. 8. 20. Your Fathers were
men, Humanum est errare; Forsake not Fountains for Cisterns. Not that you are
to slight your Fathers, no, but to reverence them, yet to avoid extremes,
neither to Defy them, nor Deifie them; neither to make them Ciphers, nor yet
principal figures, to be followers of them as they are followers of Christ.

The Question was about the place of Worship, whether in this Mount, and that
was the Mount of Gerizim, where the Samaritans Temple had stood for a long
time, the Mount where her Ancestors used to worship God, and the Mount where
Jacob had worshipped God, or in Jerusalem? This was her Question: To which he
answers, ver. 21, 22, 23, 24.

His Answer refers, 1. To the place of Worship.

2. The Worship it self.

1. As to the place, The hour comes when neither in this Mountain, nor yet in
Jerusalem shall men worship the Father. All places shall be alike as to
holiness, (though not as to convenience for meeting together) It is an Aphorism
of some men, that time and place are circumstances of the same consideration in
the Worship of God: But that appears plainly to be a mistake. Those are not
equal and alike Circumstances in which God makes a difference: For time, the
holiness of times, that continues, one day in seven, sanct fied by Christ,
observed by the Apostles, followed by all Ages. For place, you see here an
abrogation: And there is no substitution of any place or places in the room of
it, no Precept nor example to that purpose in the New Testament.

2. As to the Worship it self. He infers,

1. More Generally. 2. More Particularly.

1. Generally, Ye worship ye know not what, You follow an uncertain Rule, and
not the Word of God; so that hereby are condemned those things which some men
make the Rule of Worship, Custom of Ancestors, Light of Reason. We know what we
worship, for salvation is of the Jews. The way and doctrine of salvation is
revealed to them by the Author of Salvation; You grope in the dark.

2. Particularly, and so he expresses what is the kind and quality of Gods
Worship, q. d. The time is coming, when Gods Worship shall be neither your
false and Idolatrous Worship, nor the Jews Ceremonial and carnal Worship, but
there shall be a more spiritual way of Worship. And as v. 22. he gave the
Jewish Worship the precedence before the Samaritan; so here he prefers another
kind of Worship before both: And as before he disclaimed both places of
Worship, so here both those kinds of worship are rejected. In these words you
may observe 2 parts.

I. A Doctrine concerning Gods Worship asserted, v. 23. And amplified, 1. By
the Subject of this worship, true worshippers. 2. The Object of it, the Father.
3. The manner of it, in spirit and truth. 4. The time of it, the hour comes,
and now is. And this Doctrine is repeated, v. 24. They that worship him, must
worship him in spirit and truth.


II. The Reasons to enforce it, which are two.

1. A Voluntate Dei, From Gods Will. The Father seeks such to worship him.

2. A Natura Dei, From the Nature of God. God is a Spirit.

The hour comes, and now is; It is at the doors, and that is the hour of
Christ's Passion, of which you read, that his hour was not yet come: For that
was the time when the Vail of the Temple was rent, and when the shadows were to
vanish, and those carnal Sacrifices to expire, the substance being come, and
the true Sacrifice offered.

When Christ spoke, he was bound to the carnal worship of the Jews, etc. but
that was to be terminated in his death, when he abolished the Law of
Commandments, Ephesians. 2.

But I will not spend more time in the opening of the words, I shall do that in
the Doctrine: Only one thing needs opening; What is meant by in Spirit, and in
Truth?

First, In Spirit is taken three ways in Scripture.

1. For an extraordinary motion of the Spirit, such as the Prophets had, Rev.
1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, i. e. in an extatical motion and
rupture of soul, whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell. But
this is not meant here.

2. In spirit is opposed unto a bodily or carnal worship of God: But that is
twofold.

The 1. respects the subject of worship, and that is opposed unto those who
worship God only with their bodies, whose hearts and souls do not concur with
them, who draw nigh to God with their lips, when their hearts are far from him:
Thus Romans 1. 9. God is my witness whom I serve in my Spirit. Neither is this
intended in these words; for in this sense the Jews were to worship God in
spirit before.

2. This therefore may respect the manner or means of worship, and thus in
spirit is not opposed to our bodies, but to the body of worship, or to a bodily
and carnal way of worship, called bodily exercise, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Bodily exercise
profits little: And this is that which is here intended, q. d. The time was
when the worship of God did consist, in a great measure, in external Rites and
Ceremonies. It stood in meats and drinks and diverse washings, and carnal
ordinances imposed on them, until the time of Reformation, Heb. 9. 10. But now
that time of Reformation comes, and now is, when you shall have a more
spiritual way of worship.

Secondly, In Truth may be opposed to two things.

1. Truth is opposed to Lying or Dissembling, Phil. 1. 18. Whether in pretense
or in truth, Christ is preached. Josh. 24. 19. Serve him in sincerity and truth.

2. It is opposed to Types; thus John 1. 17. The Law was given by Moses, but
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. The Law, the Ceremonial Law, the Type of
the Grace of God in Christ was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth, or the
Grace of God in Truth (it is (...)) in substance, not in shadow, it was not
only typified and shadowed as that which should be given hereafter) some
foretasts whereof they only had by drops) but really and plentifully exhibited:
And thus not to distract your heads with the various Interpretations of others,
you see the plain meaning in spirit, in opposition to corporeal and carnal
Sacrifices: and in Truth, in opposition to Ceremonial Types and Legal shadows.

So that now way being made, I shall come to that one Doctrine which I intend
to discourse of (omitting others which might be pertinently and profitably
raised; and that is this:

Doct. Evangelical worship must be spiritual worship.

In the Prosecution of this Point, I shall observe this Order, 1. Open. 2.
Prove, 3. Apply the Point.

1. For the Opening of it; 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.

1. Negatively, you must not understand either the Text or Doctrine so as if
all external Worship were excluded, as some dangerously mistake.

There are two things allowed and required in the Gospel; something external.

1. In Worship. 2. In the Worshipper.
1. In the Worship there is something external; even in that which Christ
instituted, not only Prayer, but bodily Fasting is an Ordinance: In the
Sacrament, there is a visible part as well as a spiritual: In the hearing of
the Word there must be an external attention of the ear, as well as the inward
obedience of the heart: On Sabbaths, a rest from worldly works, as well as from
sin.

2. In the Worshipper there must be a concurrence of the outward man, even in
the spiritual Worship of God; though the Spirit and heart be the chief: And so
it was of old, my Son give me thy heart; yet the body also is not exempted from
the Worship of God, Glorify God with your souls and with your bodies, for both
are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Our bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost here, the
Vessels of Glory hereafter, and thefore it is but meet they should be
Instruments of Gods Worship here. And therefore not only in the Old, but in the
New Testament too, a regard has been had unto the gesture of the body: Christ
kneeled down and prayed, Luke 22. 41. Peter kneeled, Acts 9 40. Paul kneeled
down and prayed, Acts 20. 36. This for the Negative.

2. Positively, In what respects must Evangelical Worship be spiritual Worship?

I Answer four ways.

1. Subjective, It must be offered up by a spiritual person; The first thing
God looks at, is the person of the Worshipper, etc. God had respect unto Abel
(first) and to his offering, Genesis 4. (...), A carnal persons Worship is never
accepted, They that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 9. where being
in the flesh is opposed unto being in the Spirit, or being a spiritually minded
person: Therefore St Peter tells the Jews, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye also as lively stones
are built up a Spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices. Paul blames the Corinthians for this in hearing, 1 Cor. 3. 1. I
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal. A man must be
translated from darkness to light, he must be a spiritual person, partaker of
the holy Ghost, filled with the fruits of the Spirit, under the conduct and
command of Gods Spirit, if he hope to offer up Evangelical Service in an
acceptable manner.

2. Instrumentaliter, this Worship must be done principally with our Spirit,
not with our body only, nor chiefly, etc. This God expects in all things: In
Preaching, Acts 18. 25. Apollos being fervent in Spirit, spoke and taught. In
Praying, 1 Cor. 14. 14. My Spirit prays. Ephesians. 6. 18. -- Praying in the
Spirit, unless that be meant of the Spirit of God. Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw
near with a true heart. How lamentably are those mistaken that think they
worship God when they come to a public assembly, and there sit and sleep, or
talk, or think of other things; Surely these men think they are worshipping one
of David's Idols, that has eyes, but sees not, and not that God who is a
Spirit. Mark how sharply our Savior takes up such persons, Mat. 15. 8. Ye
hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, this people draws nigh
unto me with their mouth, but their heart is far from me. Ezekiel. 33. 31. They
sit before thee, -- but their heart goes after their covetousness.

3. Finaliter, A man's designs and aims in the Worship of God must be
spiritual, the getting and improving of spiritual Blessings and Graces, and
Privileges, etc. A man's end must not be,

I. Sinful and Devilish, that he may have the greater advantage to do
mischief, Mat. 23. 14. You devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long
Prayers.

II. Nor worldly and carnal, to procure some worldly good: As they in Hosea 7.
14. That cried unto God, and howled upon their beds for their Corn and wine. Or
like the Pharisees, that loved to pray standing in the Synagogues and in the
corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men, Mat. 6. 5.

III. Nor vain and none at all; Some have no certain end at all: They hear,
come to Prayer, etc. Ask them why? They can tell you no reason, but they are
like men in a Crowd, carried away by the torrent of the multitude, so are these
carried to Ordinances, by the custom of the place, and the examples of their
neighbors, fitly compared unto the waves of the Sea, James 1. which have no
certain order, nor determinate end, but reel now hither, now thither, till they
dash themselves upon a Rock.

IV. But it must be a spiritual end, God being a Spirit, looks to the end and
design of our spirits, and that must be spiritual, such as the pleasing of God,
and the filling of your selves with Grace, and fitting for Glory.

4. It must be spiritual formaliter, formally; it must not be a Carnal,
Ceremonial way of worship, not by Types and shadows, as of old, but now it must
be a more spiritual way. And this is that which is principally intended by
Christ. The time is coming, when neither the false Worship of the Samaritans,
nor the Ceremonial Worship of the Jews, shall be used, but a worship of another
kind, nature and complexion. Thus much for the Explication.

2. For the Proof of it; I shall only offer two Arguments (I would rather
stablish and settle you with the weight, than confound and overwhelm you with
the number of Arguments.)

1. Ab Authore Cultus. 2. A Fine Cultus.
First, From the Author of Worship, and this is the Argument of the Text,
which is distributed into two Parcels.

1. A Natura Dei. 2. A Voluntale Dei.

1. A Natura Dei, From the Nature of God: God is a Spirit. If any desire to
understand the Consequence, that will appear thus,

1. Because Conformity with God (so far as we can, as our nature and state will
bear) is our Duty. Likeness to God, Scripture every where presses us to. Be
you perfect as God is perfect, Mat. 6. You shall be holy, for I am holy, Levit.
19. 2. Now the more spiritual any Worship is, the liker God.

2. Because the pleasing of God is our business, it is the (...), or great
work of a sincere Christian, Heb, 11. 5. He had this Testimony that he pleased
God. Now that which pleases God, must be that which is suitable to him, God is
not pleased with carnal Services, but spiritual Worship. Nay even in the time
of the Law, see how sleightingly God speaks of Ceremonial Worship (which the
Jews did so highly magnify) Psalm. 69. 30, 31. I will praise the Name of God
with a Song, -- This also shall please the Lord better than an Ox or Bullock.
Psalm. 40. 6. Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire, mine ear have thou
opened, to hear instruction, to obey, etc. or bored to be thy faithful Servant.
God speaks like one that thought the time long (as I may say) for the duration
of Ceremonial worship, and breathed after the time appointed for the abolition
of that, and the introduction of a more spiritual way.

3. Because spiritual worship is the most perfect worship: We owe to God the
most perfect worship, Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be that deceiver that having in his
flock a Male, sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. And if God be a
Spirit, the more spiritual any thing is, the more perfect and excellent is it,
and so due to God.

Thus you see the force of our Saviors Argument, God is a Spirit, etc.

You will say, But was not God a Spirit under the Old Testament, as well as
now? And therefore by this Argument it should have been as much spiritual then,
and so may be as carnal and ceremonial now. For Answer.

1. I might say as the Apostle, Romans 9. Nay but O man, who art thou that
reply against God? against Christ? If Christ urge this Argument for a more
spiritual worship under the Gospel than that was under the Law, surely we owe
this respect to Christ, as to believe him upon his word, and though we saw no
reason for it, yet to believe that he being the wisdom of the Father, faw
further than we do.

2. Although the nature of God did then require spiritual worship (and that he
had under the Law, to obey is better than Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.) yet he was
pleased to make an allowance and indulgence of a ceremonial worship in
condescension to the weakness of the Jews, and the Infant-state of the Church,
who else would have been very prone to a compliance with Idolaters, if God had
not diverted and contented them with some pompous Ceremonies suitable to the
state and disposition of children: As also he saw it then expedient to appoint
such Rites and Ceremonies as might be Schoolmasters to lead them to Christ, and
might show him that was to come; and to reserve the honor of a more perfect
and spiritual way of worship to the coming of his Son, the Sun of
righteousness, by whom those shadows were to be scattered: But now when these
reasons were ceased, Christ reduces them to the original rule of worship, viz.
the Nature of God, etc. Even as in the case of Marriage, notwithstanding the
first Institution, Genesis 2. God was pleased to dispense with, or rather wink at
the Jewish Divorces; yet at last Christ recals them to the primitive
Institution, Mat. 19. 8. Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered
you to put away your wives, but from the beginning it was not so. So formerly
God permitted and appointed a more carnal way of worship because of their
childishness, but now when they are grown to man's estate, and the Church is
coming to maturity, they must put away those childish things, and must think of
a more manlike way of worship, of a more rational and spiritual way than that
they had used, remembering their former worship was not such as God desired, but
such as they needed.

II. A Voluntate Dei, From the Will of God. This is the other Reason: For the
Father seeks such to worship him. God requires such worship and worshippers.
The Foundation of this Reason is this; The Rule of worship is not man's fancy,
but Gods Will: Men's Fancies and wills are infinitely various, and therefore
those that have gone that way, have been divided into a thousand varieties;
they worship they know not what, as v. 22. Only Gods will is the stable Rule:
None knows the mind of God but the Spirit of God: Now this is the worship God
requires in Gospel times.

Arg. Second, From the End of worship. Look what the ends of worship are, such
must the worship be: And that was the reason why the Jewish worship was so much
Typical, because the end of it was to represent Christ; And that end being now
attained, and Christ exhibited, we must consider what were and are the further
ends of worship. Now the Ends are of two sorts.

1. In reference to God. 2. In reference to men. And both will show us that the
worship must be spiritual.
I. In relation to God; so it is double.

1. To please God: This is Finis operis and operantis too, (if a man be
sincere) Psalm. 19. 14. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart
be acceptable in thy sight. Now it is only spiritual worship that can please
God: That man does but little consider the nature of God, that thinks God is
pleased with the bowing of the knee to an Altar, no, it is the bending of the
heart that God respects. It is not an Organ in a Church, but the Organ of a
gracious heart, and melody in the heart that pleases God.

2. To exalt God amongst men, to render him glorious in the eyes of the world:
Now how is that done? Do you think that it makes God glorious, when men seek to
honor him with bodily and external Services? No, you cannot dishonor God
more, than by giving him such a worship as begets a carnal representation of
God, etc. And when God would set himself forth in his Glory, he represents
himself in a spiritual manner, and he takes them off from all corporeal
thoughts and fancies, God is a Spirit. To whom will ye liken me? You saw no
shape. God dwells not in Temples made with hands.

II. In reference to men; so the ends of worship are purely spiritual: such as
these (for I can but name them) the elevation of the soul to God, and its
assimilation to him, the union of man with his Creator, the supply of the
souls spiritual necessities, and the conduct of a sinner to Glory, and all
these are spiritual works, and to be done by spiritual helps, and therefore
Evangelical worship must be spiritual worship.

Use 1. This may serve for Reprehension to two sorts of men:

Such as offend against this Doctrine, 1. In Principle. 2. In Practice.

1. In Principle. Such as plead for a carnal or ceremonial way of worship in
Gospel Times: I know very well that what I say may possibly displease many: But
I remember that tremendous saying of the Apostle Paul's, Gal. 1. 10. If I please
men I am not the Servant of Christ. And if our Adversaries in this point, had
been of this spirit and carriage, as calmly to assert their own Opinions, and
heartily to bear with such as modestly and peaceably dissented from them, I had
held my peace: And for such as are of moderate spirits and Principles, that can
retain their own Principles without the ruin of all that differ from them, I
speak not a word to them: But when a man shall look abroad and observe the
Speeches, Writings and Carriages of many men, and shall see such a weight by
diverse laid upon these lesser matters; when a man shall see a sort of men among
us that contend with greater eagerness for a Cross and a Surplice, than ever
they did for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints: When Ministers
and Christians shall be judged and measured by this Standard, not by the
brokennesse of their hearts, nor the blamelessenesse of their lives, nor their
abilities for Service, but by their approbation and observation of some
ceremonial niceties; when men shall show more zeal for the observation of an
holiday instituted by the Church, than of the Lords day; when more respect
shall be showed unto a material Temple of dead stones, than to the spiritual
and living Temple of the holy Ghost; when it shall be more criminal for a
Minister not to have a Girdle upon his outward garments, than not to have his
Loins girt with truth; when a canonical garment shall be more respected by many
than a canonical life; and when more Religion is placed in having the sign of
the Cross upon our forehead, than the power of the Cross in our lives; I say,
when things are thus, if I should be silent, the stones would speak: And
therefore give me leave to speak; I hope I may say as the Apostle, I speak to
wise men, judge you what I say. I hope I am not speaking to that sort of men
that have neither patience to hear, nor wit to understand any thing that
differs from their pre-conceived opinions.

In the first place I shall appeal to the Text; let that umpire the business:
God is a Spirit, and God will be worshipped. I am not ignorant that it is
frequently said by Papists and others, that this Text is impertinently urged
against Ceremonies in Christian Churches: And it is soon said; but if you mark
the reason they give for it, that is sufficient to confute what they say: For
they allege, that Christ's purpose is only to condemn Judaical Worship, which
was wholly void of internal and spiritual worship; so a Papist. And another, a
late Protestant Interpreter, That we are here taught that the Christian worship
must differ both from the Jewish and Samaritan, and that in it we are taught to
join the soul with external performances: So that all their Evasion is built
upon this most false supposition, that the Jews were not taught to join the
soul and spiritual worship with external and Ceremonial, contrary to 1 Samuel 15.
Has the Lord any pleasure in Sacrifice? Behold to obey is better than
Sacrifice. And that, Micah 6. I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. And what
does thy God require of thee, but to do judgment and show mercy, and walk
humbly with thy God? It is therefore a most gross mistake to fancy that the
Jews were not taught to join the soul with their external performances.

And therefore seeing in the Jewish worship there was a Conjunction of
Spiritual worship and Ceremonial, and the Christian must differ from it in this
particular, it is clearly implied that that shall be free from such ceremonial
Institutions wherewith the other was loaded, and shall be managed with
simplicity and spirituality.

To this Argument of the Text, give me leave to add four or five considerable
Inconveniences, which follow from the Introduction, affectation and imposition
of a Ceremonial way of worship under the Gospel.

1. There is a Reduction of such things as have been cast out of the Church for
their unprofitablenesse: I shall offer only one place to your perusal, Heb. 7.
18. For there is verily a disanulling of the former Commandment going before
(that is of the Ceremonial Law) for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof,
i. e. without respect to Christ they were altogether useless, and the typical
use being gone, therefore were they laid aside, etc. And shall we go and set up
other things equally unprofitable? Shall we lay aside Gods Ordinances because
they were unprofitable, and set up men's devices that are as unprofitable? What
I beseech you! Is not an Altar in our Churches as unprofitable as that of the
Jews, and more too, for theirs was useful for sacrifice, ours for nothing,
unless to be an Apple of contention, and a wall of partition amongst Ministers
and Christians.

2. There is a great obstruction to edification and the salvation of souls:
Beloved, that man understands little of the worth of a Soul, that does not
value the salvation of one Soul, before ten thousand of those unnecessary
Ceremonies. Better all the Organs in the world broken, all material Temples
levelled with the ground, all sacred Garments (as they are accounted) of
Ministers, cast into a fire, than one soul lost. Now this I am persuaded most
ingenuous men will agree with me in, that the loss of many a soul may be
charged upon, or at least was occasioned by these things: For if an able and
powerful Ministry be the great means of the salvation of souls, and the removal
of such be a taking away of the means of salvation; and many such Ministers
(such I say in the judgment even of their enemies) have been removed, because
their Consciences could not comply with such Impositions: Then I think the
Conclusion is plain enough, that they have been the occasion, if not the cause
of the ruin of many a precious soul: And I should not speak of this now, but
that I see the same spirit at work again, and we have too many among us that
give us cause to think, they had rather people should have no Ministers, than
no Ceremonies; and rather a sottish unlearned, debauched Ministry, than not a
ceremonious and superstitious Ministry. Now I beseech you mark how much this
differs from the Apostolical Precept and Practice, Romans 15. 2. Let no man
please himself, but let every one please his Neighbor for his good to
edification. 2 Cor. 13. 10. -- According to the power which the Lord has given
me for edification, not to destruction: What! had not the Apostles such power?
much less have those that are or pretend to be their Successors. They speak of
the power the Church has to make Canons, etc. Be it so, yet have they no power
to destruction. And although it be a truth that all things in the Church must
be done decently and in order, yet I am sure the order of the Church must give
place to edification; and we must not deperdere substantiam propter accidentia.

3. There is a disturbance of the peace of the Church: I know such men use to
condemn those that cannot comply with their Ceremonies, as disturbers of the
Peace: But as we say to the Romanists, they charge us with schism, but are
themselves guilty, by imposing such heavy and unnecessary burdens as forced us
to depart, and by not allowing of us to continue with them, unless we yield
and concur with them in all things; even so do our Adversaries with us, first,
impose these unnecessary burdens, which they know many thousands cannot bear,
and then blame them for withdrawing their shoulders from them: It was prudently
advised to K. James, that he should do with Ceremonies as Possio did with his
Cupboard of curious Glasses, which he broke, lest his Servants breaking them,
it should occasion much contention and trouble: So surely men that prize the
Churches peace as they ought, should rather break those in pieces, than lay a
foundation for such bitter and innumerable contests, as will certainly follow,
to the grief of good men, and the rejoicing of our enemies. The peace of the
Church should be highly prized: How earnestly and frequently does the Apostle
conjure us to this; Follow peace with all men. Seek peace and ensue it. God
has called us to peace. And forasmuch as it is confessed that these Ceremonies
are indifferent in themselves, and no further necessary, than as the Church
imposes them: I submit this Query to all ingenuous and judicious men, Whether
it were not more prudent and pious for the Church, to lay such Ceremonies
aside, which will be a wall of partition between us and other Churches, and a
stone of stumbling, and occasion of quarrel among our selves, than continue
them upon such dangerous and uncomfortable terms? In things indifferent the
Apostle exceedingly presses a yielding to weak brethren, not offending,
grieving one of those for whom Christ died: So Christ, not to offend one of
these little ones, etc. Now it is certain many thousands of sincere Christians
are grieved and stumbled at these things: And say it is their weakness; You
then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please your selves, Rom 15. 1. And it is strange to see that this is made an
Argument for Ceremonies, because else we shall offend the Papists (a sort of
obstinate and hardened enemies, who will be offended whatever you do, who are
the more hardened by our compliance with them in worship, but no way pleased,
unless you receive their Doctrines too) and that they make this no Argument
against them, because they will offend so many Protestant Churches and Brethren.

4. Distraction in spiritual worship, which ought to be done without
distraction: The more Inveaglements there are to sense, the more disadvantage
to the Spirit. To instance in one thing, I appeal to the experience of any
ingenuous person, whether curiosity of voice, or musical sounds in Churches,
does not tickle the fancy with a carnal delight, and engage a man's ear and most
diligent attention unto those sensible motions and audible sounds, and
therefore must necessarily in great measure recall him from spiritual communion
with God; seeing the mind of man cannot attend to two things at once with all
its might, and when we serve God, we must do it with all our might. And hence
it is that the Ancients have some of them given this rule, that even vocal
singing should not be too curious, but legenti similior quam canenti: And Paul
himself gives it a wipe, Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and
Hymns and spiritual Songs, making melody in your hearts to the Lord.

5. Affectation of carnal and ceremonial worship begets oft-times an enmity
against spiritual worshippers. Look abroad in the Old Testament, and so in the
New, etc. you will find none were more bitter Adversaries to the Prophets, to
Christ, to the Apostles, than those that were the greatest Zealots for
ceremonial Institutions and their own Inventions in Gods worship: They were
devout women that raised persecution against Paul, Acts 13. 48. Mistake not; I
do not say that all that use ceremonies are such: No, I know some such that are
(...), that are better born, and better bred Christians, that show more
ingenuity and piety, and that sincerely love all humble close walking
Christians, however dissenting from them in those matters: yet I wish I could
not say, there are a great many that have so furious a zeal for these lesser
matters of the Law, that where a man differs from them therein, no merit can
expiate his crime, no Parts, no Learning, no Piety, no Industry can reconcile
them to that Minister that dissents from them.

2. It reproves those who practically offend against this Doctrine; though they
own the Principle, that God is a Spirit, and must have a spiritual worship, yet
worship him carnally; in words they own Gods spirituality, but in deed deny it.
God not only regards your worship, but the manner of it, Deus delectatur
adverbiis. A good man is spiritual in his carnal work, etc. And it is a very
bad sign to be carnal in spiritual work, a sign the heart is carnal, and much
carnal too: And you know, the carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7.

Quest. But how shall I know that I am guilty in this Point?

Answ. You may know it by these Characters.

1. Then you are carnal, when your heart concurs not with your body, your
spirit works not, when vain thoughts lodge within you, when you draw nigh to
God with your lips, and your hearts are far from God.

2. When a man's heart is not warm in the Worship of God. A man's mind and heart
may be upon it, yet with so much coldness and indifferency, as if he did it
not. Many pray as if they prayed not, and hear as if they heard not: You must
be servent in Spirit.

3. When a man can rest in the work done: This is the case of most, if they
come to a Church, especially if they have so far supererogated, as to hear two
Sermons, receive a Sacrament, run over a Prayer, they have done enough, their
Conscience rests, and heart is quiet, etc. But a spiritual man looks further,
he rests not unless he has done it with all his might, and met with God in it.

4. When a man is drawn to spiritual Worship upon carnal grounds, applause of
men, quieting of Conscience, pleasing of Friends, Parents, Master, etc. A
spiritual man does it in obedience to Gods Commands, desire of Gods Presence
and Grace, and honor.

5. When a man affects that which is carnal, and disrelisheth what is spiritual
in worship: When a man comes to a Sermon, What is most pleasing to you, what do
you like best, and hear with greatest attention? Is it some florid and eloquent
Expression, some high and unusual Notion, some historical passage, some acute
sentence, etc. Or is it a spiritual discourse, a sin-discovering and
soul-affecting and heart breaking passage? What Prayer is it that your hearts
do most favor? etc.

Use 2. And last Exhortation. Let the consideration of this keep you from the
affectation of a carnal and ceremonial way of worship, and oblige you to
worship God in spirit and truth: Let spiritual worship be your chief care.

Mot. 1. This is the most excellent worship, it is the worship of Angels, of
Heaven, most suitable to the most excellent Being.

2. It is the most Evangelical Worship, so the Text; God perfects his Worship
by degrees. Under the Law, there were many ceremonies, some substance, some
thing spiritual. Under the Gospel most spiritual, only some very few external
observances. In Heaven, all spiritual; simplicity and spirituality and
plainness, are the characters of the Gospel.

3. It is the most acceptable worship to God: Even in the time of Ceremonies,
God speaks sleightingly of them, Has God any pleasure in Sacrifice? Sacrifice
and Offering thou would not. But spiritual worship as he preferred in those
times, so now it is spiritual worship only upon the matter which he requires.

4. It is the most proper worship of a gracious person. Alas! a carnal
ceremonial way of worship is easily practical by any person; the labor of the
lip, the bowing of the knee, the tuning of the voice, the wearing of such and
such Garments, these any are capable of: Nay, ofttimes the worst of men are the
greatest Zealots in these things, yea, Christ makes it the Character of an
hypocrite, to be violent in these things: When the Pharisees urged that none
should eat meat with unwashen hands, as a Type of that inward purity, etc. as a
significant Ceremony which they had devised, and imposed upon others, and fell
soul upon Christ and his Disciples for neglecting it, see what he says, Mark
7. 6, 7. Well has Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This
people honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. --
Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
men. But now spiritual worship, none can give, but a spiritual man, one that
has the Spirit.

5. Spiritual worship is the most opposite to the Devil, and men's corrupt
hearts, which are confederate with him. The Devil patiently suffers a carnal
Worship, etc. He knows Missa non mordet: The Devil never hindered, but furthered
the superstitious Pharisees, and Papists; but spiritual worship he opposes: He
cannot endure spiritual Praying, Preaching; If there be any Ministers that Pray
and Preach, and transact the worship of God more spiritually than others, these
are the men that the Devil owes a spite, and he will endeavor to put these out
of service, and out of the Ministry, here he engages all his interest; the
Superstitious and Profane, both like Sampsons Foxes, tied together by the
tails, must burn these up.

6. Lastly, (To conclude all) Spiritual worship is the safest worship. A carnal
ceremonial way under the Gospel, is at best a doubtful and uncertain way, there
are many dangers in it, danger of abridging Christian liberty, and bringing our
selves under a yoke of bondage, danger of superstition and will worship (which
however men may devise to please God, yet nothing displeases him more, as you
heard just now that dreadful place, In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrine the Commandments of men) God will not bear little errors in his
worship, Levit. 10. dangerous to the souls of men, to the peace of the Church,
as you have heard: But a spiritual way of worship is undoubtedly safe, you may
offer it boldly to God by Christ. Everyone agree in this: Both Jews and
Gentiles, both Christians and Heathens do unanimously agree in the lawfulness
and acceptablenesse of Spiritual Worship.

FINIS.

