ENGLAND AND EAST INDIA Inconsistent in Their Manufactures.

BEING AN ANSWER TO A TREATISE, ENTITLED, An Essay on the East India Trade. By
the Author of, The Essay of Ways and Means.

London, Printed in the Year, 1697.

Some Considerations upon Reading a Treatise, Entitled, An Essay on the
East India Trade. By the Author of the Essay on Ways and Means.
THE many Objections formerly made against the East India Trade, because was
carried on by the Exportation of our Coin or Bullion, and by the Importation of
Manufactured Goods and Toys, were usually answered by the Advocates for that
Trade, that such Goods could not be injurious, because were not spent in
England, but Transported to Foreign Markets, and thereby occasioned the
Importation of more Bullion than ever was Exported: But the Truth (which was
formerly denied) being now owned by this Treatise, that one half of the said
Goods are consumed at Home, and that those Manufactured Goods do hinder the
Consumption of what are Fabrickt by our own People. The Landed Men have now
Reason to conclude, that they are more concerned in this Contest, than the
Weavers, as well for their particular Interest as the public good: And
therefore the Considerations here Offered are thought necessary, that these new
Maxims and Arguments may be Examined; because the Rents of Land as well as
Preservation of our Coin, Consumption of our Manufactures, and the Employment
of our People, does much depend upon what Resolutions may be taken for the
settling of this Trade.

The General Notions about Trade from Page the First to Page the Eleventh are
postponed, to be considered at the end of this Treatise.

Page the Twelfth asserts, 1. That the East India Trade is beneficial to
England. 2. That to Prohibit the Wearing of India Wrought Silks, Bengals, etc.
will be destructive to the Trade of England.


To justify the first Proposition, it is said, That we Export but 400000 l.
per Annum, of which to is in our Home made Goods, and that the produce of
200000 l. brought home and spent in England, being the one half, yields us
800000 l. and the produce of the other 200000 l. being in Goods sent Abroad to
Foreign Markets, yields us another sum of 800000 l.: And therefore that England
gains by this Trade 1200000 l. per Annum clear. Page 16, 53.

Instead of offering Vouchers to prove this Account, it is said, That it must
be clear Gains, because the half spent in England prevents the Exportation of
treble that sum in Money, which would otherwise be carried out for the
purchasing of Silks and Linnens in Foreign Parts, and that the other half must
be clear Gains, because no one versed in Merchandise will deny it. Page 16.

And for a further confirmation, the Author tells us Page 17, That he has
cogent Reasons to believe this Nation did increase in Riches from Anno 1656 to
Anno 1688, 2 Millions per Annum; and that after much study and thought did
find, that the said increase did arise 900000 l. by our Plantation Trades,
500000 l. by our Products and Manufactures, and 600000 l. from the East India
Trade; which we must believe, because he says the matter is not capable of any
clear demonstration to the contrary. Page 18.

It is thought convenient to answer this Account with an Account much
different, and yet probably as true, viz. That there has been Exported for
India Annually ever since Anno 1673. when the Trade in Manufactured Goods from
thence begun first to increase till Anno 1690, about 600000 l. per Annum in
Bullion by the Company, Private Traders or Interlopers, from England or Spain,
and that the Goods brought from thence never brought back into England, nor
saved the going out of 200000 l. per Annum in Bullion: And therefore that this
Trade, instead of being profitable to us, has exhausted about 400000 l. per
Annum of our Treasure, and done us much Mischief by the Importation of such
Goods; and that our Riches have not Increased ever since Anno 1666, but have
Annually Decreased very much by Trade.

But before any Argument should be entered upon, which of these Accounts is
most Justifiable, it is requisite to agree upon matter of Fact and Principles,
particularly what may properly be called the Riches or Treasure of a Nation? Or
what may be esteemed the most Useful, after what is absolutely Necessary, to
supply the Necessities of Nature? Some being of Opinion that nothing does
deserve that Name, or to be so esteemed, but Gold and Silver; because no other
Metal is so lasting and durable, or so fit to receive the Royal Stamp, nor to
be ascertained in Value, and divided into several Denominations, nor so
convenient to pay Fleets and Armies; and because has a general esteem in all
parts of Europe, as fit for such uses, and to be the Standard for the carrying
on of Commerce, and to be Bartered off for all other Commodities.

That Jewels, Lead, Tin or Iron, though durable, yet having not those other
qualifications, do not so well deserve to be esteemed Treasure.

That Silks, Woollen Goods, Wines, etc. may be esteemed Riches between Man and
Man, because may be converted into Gold and Silver, yet do not deserve to be
esteemed the Riches of the Nation, till by Exportation to Foreign Countries are
converted into Gold and Silver, and that brought hither, because are subject to
corruption, and in a short course of Years will consume to nothing, and then of
no value.

This being stated, if agreed, whoever will undertake to make out, that we have
either by the East India Trade gained 1200000 l. per Annum, as asserted, Page
15, 16. Or that the Nation did increase in Riches from Anno 1656 to Anno 1688,
two Millions per Annum, must make out that so much was Imported in Bullion,
over and above what was Exported: Which is so sar from being generally
believed, that many are of opinion, we have had our Treasure Annually exhausted
ever since 1666, not only by the East India Trade, but also by the great
Exportation of our Coin to the Northern Kingdoms to purchase Naval Stores, and
Deals, Timber and Iron, used in the Rebuilding of London, and a greater number
of Houses since erected elsewhere, and to other places and Countries for
supplying the many losses of Goods that were burnt by the Fire, or spoiled in
removing, for the purchasing of Foreign Commodities for the furnishing of the
new built Houses, and to carry on the French Trade.

From Anno 1656 to 1688 is 32 Years, which at 2 Millions per Annum is 64
Millions. All that remember how plenty Money was in this Nation Anno 1656, may
find reason to conclude that we have not now in the Nation as much Gold and
Silver as we had then. So that either the 64 Millions has been spent since
1688, (which no Man can believe) or else was never gotten; which is most likely
to be true: Because, according to the best computation that can be made, it is
concluded there has not been Imported into Europe from Africa and America
(from whence only any quantity of Gold and Silver comes) since the Year 1656,
much above 2 Millions per Annum, and it cannot well be imagined that we have
got all to our shares: But if the Author had spent more thoughts, and study, to
have found out where the 64 Millions he mentions to be gotten, are now to be
found, would have done the Nation a great kindness at this time.

In justification of what has been said, that we lose by the East India Trade,
as it has of late Years been managed, these particulars are offered.

1. That it appears by the Custom-House Books, that there was Entered in the
Companies Name, Shipped out from Anno 1675 to Anno 1685, above 4 Millions, which
is above 400000 l. per Annum: And though it be difficult to make out exactly
what was carried out, those Years, by Interlopers or particular Persons from
England and Spain, to carry on Private Trade, yet it may be computed at 200000
l. per Annum.

2. Of the Goods brought from India and Exported, it does not appear by such
Observations and Estimates that have been made, that 200000 l. worth per Annum
were ever Exported to Spain, or any Country from whence we usually Import
Bullion.

3. That from France, Holland, Turkey, Italy, no returns usually come in
Bullion; what being brought in from Holland against any Sale, usually going out
again by the Course of Trade, seldom stays long, because it is not supposed
the balance of that Trade has for many years stood long in our favor, nor
till we apply our selves more to good Husbandry in the Consumption of Foreign
Commodities, can well be expected ever will.

4. That no rational account can be given of any Gold and Silver imported into
this Kingdom to continue here, but what comes from Africa, Spain, and formerly
Portugal, and some small Parcels sometimes from Jamaica, and that from all
those places we seldom have imported according to the best Calculations above
600000 l. communibus annis for 30 years last past, and if of that be allowed to
be for East India Goods, it is the most that can well be reckoned; and that
whatever we have Exported more in Bullion annually has been lost by that
Trade; for what comes back in Goods to be consumed here, makes us no amends for
the Treasure Exported, and Trades that cannot be balanced with our own
Products, ought to be rectified some other way, and not by sending our Money to
India to buy Goods for that purpose.

Till these Objections be removed, we must be very credulous if we believe that
the India Goods Exported bring us back as much Treasure, as that Trade carries
from us in Bullion, and if not brought in by the Goods sold abroad, cannot
possibly be brought in by the other half of those Goods spent at home. But to
salve that, it is argued in this Treatise, that nothing can be a clearer Gain
than 600000 l. per Annum by the Goods spent at home, because so much would
otherwise have been Exported to purchase Foreign Silks and Linnens.

But this Argument will appear to have no ground if our Course of Trade in
Silks and Linnens from the European Nations be looked into, and how and for
what uses those Silks and Linnens, and these from India are consumed, that will
make it plainly appear that these Goods from India do us no such Service, and
are so far from being a clear gains, upon any such Account, that do not save us
any thing material, but are pernicious in the highest degree.

It is well known by all Traders, that the Silks imported from France were most
Lustrings and Alamodes which have been computed to amount to 400000 l. per
Annum, what other Silks came thence, were esteemed for their being of some new
fashion, and were usually high prized Rich Silks. The promoting of the Lustring
Company to Manufacture Lustrings and Alamodes here, and encouragement to our
Weavers to make such Rich Silks may prevent their coming from France, but which
sort of these Silks from India are spent in the room of Alamodes or Lustrings
or of any other Silks, that did usually come from France, is unknown to those
skilled in that Trade. The Silks that usually came from Holland were Velvets,
Alamodes and Lustrings; and from Italy, Velvets, Damasks and Taffaties; though
it be not doubted but the Silks from India do hinder the Consumption of some
Damasks, Taffaties and Sarsenets, yet being those were all, or most, purchased
by the Products of our Manufactures, we had better have them, then send our
Money to the Indies to purchase these.

Diaper, Dowlas, Canvas and Lockrams, which were four sorts of Cloth that
composed the vast quantity of Linnens formerly imported from France, which as
well as other Linnens taken from Hamburgh, Germany, etc. were most used for
Sheeting, Shifting, Tabling, and such other uses in Families as have not
hitherto, nor is it likely will ever be supplied by these Linnens from India.
The Muzlings and fine Linnens from India, it may be observed, are consumed for
long Cravats, Nightrails, Commodes and Window Curtains, (an Expense not known
in England till within these 20 years) also for Aprons, and thus do hinder the
Consumption of Cambricks, and Lawnes, and the course Callicoes, of some course
Clothes. But if Cambricks and Lawnes, and most of such course Linnens were all
purchased with our Woollen Manufactures; then we shall find reason to conclude
we did ill to introduce the Expense of these Linnens from India, which are so
far from being a clear gain to England, as asserted Page the 16, that they are
costly and mischievous upon several Considerations.

As it does not appear upon these Examinations that the East India Trade is
beneficial by bringing in more Bullion than carries out or by hindering the
Exportation of any of our Coin for Silks or Linnens; so it may be affirmed,
that the Silks do us a further Mischief by being spent directly in the room of
our Stuffs made of Wool, Hair, and mixed with Silk, and Worsted, and that no
other silk made abroad, did ever serve for those uses, and therefore most
dangerous.

The Arguments derived from the great Gains made by that Trade, as by several
Accounts in that Tract, ought to be looked on, as blinds or baits for
unthinking men; for if the accounts be not true, then the Arguments grounded
thereon cannot be good. It is well known the Company does not export the Goods
they bring, but sell them at a public Sale, and that in the most flourishing
times seldom got clear 50 per C. by such Sales, the Merchants or Shopkeepers
who buy of them, get 10 to 20 per C. more, either by sending abroad or
retailing them here, adding to this what is paid for Customs and Charges, yet
all will fall much short of this Computation, and that part which is thus
gotten by Sales at home, is gotten by their being a Monopoly, and cannot be
reckoned as gains to the Nation; and taking the Stock from Anno 1657. when
first Incorporated to this day, there has not been divided, (the Author owns
Page 52,) not 20 per C. others think not 10 per C. per Annum, amongst the
Adventurers in that Company; and the Crown, Capt. Dorrel, who went an
Interloper, was thought to make an extraordinary Voyage, because divided 50 per
C. and few others ever made the like. So that without better Vouchers then are
produced in that Tract, these Accounts ought not to pass, neither ought we to
believe that what is pretended to be gotten by the East India Trade was so in
Fact; no such Gains having been divided amongst the Adventurers, much less to
the Nation, which may appear by their Books to be true, whatever Gains have
been made by some particular Persons; but if 300 per C. then must be hid as
part of 64 Millions gotten by Trade since An. 1656.

And it cannot be denied, but that this Trade has the Worst Foundation of all
the Trades we drive, because carries from us Gold and Silver, which we cannot
well spare, and brings us back Toys, Handicraft and manufactured goods, which
we least want, not only to the hindrance of the Consumption of our Wool, but
the employment of our people (from whence only Riches can have their original)
and being the foundation is so bad, it will happily be found impossible to make
the superstructure good. Measures taken of Trades, by the Gains made by the
Traders, will always prove Erroneous; from a due consideration of what sorts
of Commodities are Exported, and Imported, a true Judgment can only being
made, whether the Trade to any Country be good or bad.

As it has been made out, that it is not probable that the Bullion Exported to
India has brought us back by the Goods transported to Foreign Markets, and
that the Goods sold here do us any considerable service, by hindering the
Importation of Foreign Silks and Linnens; so it is plain, that the pretended
Gains made by that Trade on the Goods sold here is not Gains to the Nation, but
gotten out of our own Peoples Pockets, by the Sales of such Goods to the
Gentlemen and Landed men, or others, who are the Consumers, but not concerned
in the Stock, by making them give great Rates for what they buy. The Nation by
any such Sales to our own People cannot be imbursed of the Treasure sent out,
in Gold or Silver, or get more than they would by taking away an Estate from A.
to give to B. But if this be a good way to bring Gains to the Nation, to carry
on Trade by Joynt-Stocks, then certainly we have been very imprudent, not to
set up more Monopolies for Trade; there being several Trades, as well as
Commodities, that might be named, of which if any Persons could get a Monopoly,
or the privilege of the sole Buying and Selling, would as probably make four
for one, or as much as can be made by these Goods from India. Those that argue
against this, have forgotten the Arguments amongst others which have been
always given by the Advocates for this Trade, for its being carried on in a
Company with a Joynt-Stock, that when the Trade was Free and Open, before
Incorporated Anno 1657, that all the Traders lost by it; and it was the chief
Reason given for obtaining that Charter, and what have since weighed very much
for the supporting of this now in being.

When Persons that have a Trade Incorporated sell their Goods at extravagant
Rates to Foreign Countries, what may be gotten by selling them dear may in some
cases be advantageous to a Nation; but extraordinary Gains made by any such
Persons on Goods sold to our own People to be spent at Home, will appear to be
Gains made by working upon the Nation, not for the Nation; to the advantage of
some by the prejudice of others.

If it be said, that this Trade has a good foundation, because Materials are
plenty, and Labor cheap in India; it being agreed that these Manufactured
Goods are spent both Abroad and at Home, in the room of our own. This instead
of being an Argument for recommending this Trade, will appear the most
dangerous part of it: For unless our Wool fall to nothing, and the Wages of
those that work it up to 2d. per Day, and Raw Silk and Silk Weavers Labor
proportionable, the India Goods will occasion a stop to the Consumption of
them; because those from India must otherwise be Cheapest, and all People will
go to the Cheapest Markets, which will affect the Rents of Land, and bring our
Working People to Poverty, and force them either to fly to Foreign parts, or to
be maintained by the Parishes: And therefore how the Landed men are concerned
in the Contest about this Trade, they may do well to consider.

By what has been said in answer to this Proposition, it may appear that as
long as we manage the East India Trade as we have of late Years, we shall lose
by it: That Gold and Silver is the only or most useful Treasure of a Nation:
That we have not increased in Riches since Anno 1666: That the Consumption of
East India Silks and Linnens at Home do us no service, by hindering the expense
of any Foreign Silks or Linnens: That the India Goods Transported do not bring
us in near the quantity of Gold and Silver Exported to carry on that Trade:
That the East India Trade has a bad foundation: And that the great Gains made
by Merchants, or Traders that carry on that Trade, is because the Trade is
confined to some few Persons, who are but as one Buyer and one Seller: And that
nothing but Bullion Imported, can make amends for Bullion Exported. Which if
not observed we may Trade away our Riches, but not get Riches by Trade.

The second Proposition is, That to Prohibit the Wearing of Indian Silks, etc.
will be destructive to the Trade of England. Considered under three Heads.

I. As relates to the Woollen Manufacture. II. As relates to the Silk and
Linen Manufactures. III. As to the effects such a Prohibition will have.
I. As relates to the Woollen Manufacture.
By what is said under this Head relating to the Woollen Manufacture it plainly
appears, that the Author of this Treatise is of Opinion, that our Nobility,
Gentry, and Landed Men, make too much of their Estates by selling their Wool
too dear; and that after many thoughts about it, had found out an effectual way
to remedy this evil, by endeavoring to persuade them, that it is advantageous
for us to send our Money to the Indies to buy Manufactured Goods there, to be
spent at Home, as well as Abroad, in the room of our Woollen Goods, which he
endeavors to prove is their true Interest to do, as well as the Interest of
England, and that therefore it is their best way to sell their Wool very
Cheap, and to get little by it, that it may be Exported: And for their Comfort
tells them, that though they may thus make but little of their Wool, yet that
those that drive the India Trade at the same time may make 400 l. of 100 l. Pa.
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

That our Woollen Goods consumed at Home do not enrich the Nation, and that a
high Price on our Woollen Manufactures may hinder the Sale of them, is agreed;
but that we must therefore send our Money to India to purchase the Manufactured
Goods made in those parts to be spent at Home, and Abroad, in the room of our
own, in order to bring down the Price of them, by making Wool and Labor
cheap, are false Conclusions drawn from true Principles. If after we have used
our best endeavors to keep up the Price of Wool, and the Expense of our
Woollen Goods, it should be our misfortune to be disappointed by the increase
of such Fabrics in other places, or disuse in the Expense of them, we should
and ought to submit with Patience; but it would be unanswerable to be so
zealous to have it done, as to give the first blow our selves by discouraging
the Expense of them at Home.

The Author of this Treatise might have done well to have told us to what price
he would have Wool fall, and in what places we can Consume more Woollen Goods
abroad, many Landed Men have for many Years past found Wool already so Cheap,
that cannot without great difficulty make their usually Rents of Sheep ground
now, and the generality of Merchants will own, that have not got by Trading in
Woollen Goods for these 30 Years last past 6 per C. per Annum, the insurance of
Adventures paid; and if it be considered how the Manufactures of Wool are
increased in Ireland, Holland, France, Germany, Spain and Portugal, and what a
Drugg our Manufactured Goods are become beyond the Sea, and that have been
Export ed of late Years, rather out of Necessity to provide effects, then out
of choice in hopes of Gains; no Reason will appear for bringing Home, or
encouraging the Expense of these Goods, if not in order totally to Ruin the
Manufactury, unless we could be assured that the Falling of Wool and
Manufactures to a low Price, would first Ruin those other Manufactures, and
then that ours would certainly Advance in Price again; or that it could not be
done by opening the East India Trade, and making those Goods Cheap, as well as
by running down our own. And we should also have been told how the Landed Men
and Poor should subsist whilst the Experiment was making, and how in case this
Project should not take, we should retrieve what we may Lose by trying it, and
how we should regain the Expense of them at Home, after the East India Goods
have gotten Possession by an unterrupted usage: Unless these things be plainly
made out, there will not appear any great Reason why we should permit the India
Goods to jostle out the Expense of our own, and thereby occasion the Falling of
Wool, from 8 d. to 4 d. per Pound; For if the Landed Men should be
disappointed in their expectations, would then conclude that were Cullied out
of their Money by being persuaded to part which a Bird in Hand, in hopes to get
another out of the Bush from an unknown Country.

What Woollens, Silks, Linnens, and other Goods of our own Make we spend at
Home, are for the supply of our Necessities; and hitherto has been thought
very advantageous, to save the Expense of such or the like Goods from abroad,
as well as to employ our People; and that the expense of such have always
proved not only most Secure for our advantange, but the Cheapest: If we should
reject our own, and prefer the Consumption of those from India amongst us, we
may reasonably expect that other Nations should by our Example do the same, and
so by our own endeavors destroy what we ought to be industrious to preserve.

It might as well have been argued that the best way for a Country Gentleman,
that has all Conveniences about his House of his own, should instead of using
them for himself and Family, send his Money to Market to buy, and then send his
Products abroad in hopes of making of Money of them, though he do not know of
any Market or Buyer for them; or that we should not employ our own Ships from
Newcastle, or from Port to Port on our Coast; but the Dutch, who Sail Cheaper,
to force our own to seek employment abroad, in hopes might thereby bring Money
to the Nation.

But if it should be understood that notwithstanding what has been said it is
our Interest to spend these Indian Goods at Home, that we may save our Woollen
Goods to have the more for Exportation; if no stop must be put to spending
them, either at Home or abroad, seeing the 150000 l. worth, which were brought
by the last three Ships will appear to be more, then it may be presumed were
brought here from the Year 1600, to Anno. 1670. though then a Trade was
constantly driven to India: If such great Gains be made on them, why may not
the East India Merchants be tempted to go on increasing this Trade, till bring
sufficient quantities to supply all Markets abroad as well as at Home. This is
so far from being a groundless Supposition, if the Gains be so Great as
represented, (or but 50 per C.) that according to the usual Course of Trade, we
may presume that if this Trade be approved by authority may increase very fast.
For what Merchants will employ their Stock, or their care to carry on the Trade
in our Manufactures, when can have no hopes of more Gains then 6 per C. If by
getting into the East India Trade and Dealings in those Goods, may have such
great Profit as the Author has Suggested: Therefore we should have been told
what we should do with our Wool, and our People too, if that Trade should thus
increase upon us, which is more probable then that the Expense of our Woollen
Manufactures will increase, if the Consumption of those Goods from India be
continued.

But least these and such like Arguments given in that Treatise to persuade us
that it is our interest to Consume these Goods at Home, should not be
sufficient: At last the old Bugbears the Dutch, are called upon to frighten us
into it, who, as upon all occasions when any contest has happened about this
Trade, are usually Summoned for that purpose; and therefore it is said Page the
33 d. that if the English were forbid to bring India Goods into Europe, the
Dutch would; and thereby hurt abroad the vent and Consumption of our English
Cloth: But this needs no answer here, it being not proposed that the English
shall be Prohibited from bringing these Goods into Europe; but only the
Consumption of them in England; and the Consumption of our English Cloth were
never understood to be much prejudiced by these Goods.

This Head cannot be concluded better then with the Authors own Words, Page the
9th. As Bread is called the Staff of Life, so the Woollen Manufactures is truly
the principal Nourishment of our Body Politic; which being an undoubted Truth,
the Arguments in favor of East India Goods, that they should be Consumed,
either at Home or abroad in the room of them, are the more to be admired,
because looks as contradictory as to affirm that the best way for a Man to
preserve his Life, were to Cut his own Throat: And as much against prudence in
the Carrying on of Trade, as that we should Discourage the Expense of our own
Corn at Home, on a Supposition that by sending our Money abroad, we may get
Cheaper, and so force the Exportation of it; or that by Selling our own Cheap
here, we may introduce the Exportation of it; or by having Woollen Goods from
Ireland, to be spent here instead of our own, we may make great advantages by
Exporting ours.

II. As to the Silk and Linen Manufactures.
Upon this Subject the Author labors to make out that Silk and Linen are not
the Genuine offspring of this Kingdom, nor the Manufacturing of them
Calculated for our Meridian: That though some of the Materials may be had from
our own Soil, yet most from abroad: That our Wages are so high we can never
expect any good from these Manufactures; and that therefore our People must be
employed upon our Wool, that we may purchase Silks and Linnens from abroad, in
Exchange of our Woollen Goods; and if we do not take that Course we shall Lose
our Trade to Silezia, Saxony, Bohemia and Poland; and that it is the prudence
of a State to see that industry and Stock be not diverted from things
profitable, and turned upon Objects unprofitable.

How Silks or Linnens perfectly Manufactur'd in India, bought with our Money
should be esteemed more the Genuine offspring of this Kingdom, or better
Calculated for this Meridian, then our Silks and Linnens Manufactured at Home
by our own People, is not apparent to all Men's understanding; especially being
the Linnens are Fabrickt with Materials of our own growth, and the Raw Silk we
generally have, is purchased by the Product of our own Manufactures, and but of
a small value in proportion to the Labor bestowed in making it up, (which must
be owned to be all our own) and that we cannot spend our Goods in Turkey or
Italy, without taking their Silk in return: Upon all which the proper Question
is, whether we had best run the Adventure of Losing or discouraging such
Manufactures at Home, and those Trades abroad, rather then put any stop to the
Consumption of these beloved Goods from India.

As the Author has sufficiently by such Arguments discovered his Transports of
zeal for the East India Trade; so how much prefers the Welfare of the Moguls
Subjects, the advancing of his Lands, and the employing of his People before
those of his own Country. Though many young Gentlemen have been prevailed with
by Tradesmen, or those that serve them, to despise their own Products, and to
spend in the room, what imposed upon them by such Traders; which has too often
ended in the destruction of their Estates; yet it may be said to be a bold
attempt to endeavor to persuade the whole Body of the Nation, that it is their
Interest to do so also; and to employ none of their People on Silk and Linen,
because all hands may be employed on the Woollen Manufacture, that all such
Goods may thereby be Sold Cheap: But if Selling Cheap be so advantageous, and
the true Interest of our Landed Men, that the Livelyhoods of so many People as
live by the Silk and Linneen Manufactury, must be Sacrificed to effect it: Why
has he not given also some Arguments to have persuaded our East India
Merchants, or other Traders (who seldom think they get too much) to have given
a good Example by Selling Cheap also? For without some such, though the Landed
Men should sink their Price of Wool, and the Poor Weavers should be taken off
from the Silk and Linen, that the Wool might be Wrought up and Sold Cheap
here to the Merchants, yet they may keep up the Price abroad, and Sell as dear
as ever; and then this Project would occasion a Loss to the Landed Men, and
disappointment to these Weavers; only to give a good opportunity to those that
send such Goods abroad, to Gain the more by them: And if the Author be of
opinion that the Expense of Manufactured Goods from the India be so
advantageous, and that Selling Cheap is the way to increase Consumption; Why
has he not proposed the opening of that Trade, that it may not be any longer a
Monopoly, that those Goods may also Fall in Price? For if there be 300 per C.
gotten by them as he affirms, though should Fall 200 per C. yet would afford
more Gains to the East India Merchants then the Wool or Woollen Goods to the
Landed Men, or Clothiers at the present Prizes; and be the occasion of so great
an increase of that Trade, that in a short time we should see no great need of
taking of the Weavers from the Silk and Linen Manufacture to be employed on
the Woollen: For the Goods from India would Supply the Markets in the room of
them both abroad and at Home; that so there might not be any great need of many
of them, especially if none must be Spent at Home, as the Author would have it.

But we are told Page 42. that some of the Materials for Linnens may be had
from our own Soil, though too dear, and not enough: But the Author has had the
ill fortune to be misinformed in that also; for the Bishopric of Durham alone,
will afford as much Flax (if encouragement were given for the Manufacturing of
Linen) as to make sufficient to furnish all England; and the County of
Somerset, as well as others, would be found capable to supply any defect; and
that there are many poor People in Durham that work for 3 d. per Day; and that
they make a Thread so fine as to be worth 12 s. per Pound; and that there is
Linen of 7 s. per Ell made at Malton in Yorkshire; and that we could make
sorts fit for Tabling, Sheeting and Shifting, upon which the great expense of
Linen depends, very good and sufficient for such uses, to furnish the Nation:
If cannot well be afforded so Cheap as to contest with what comes from Foreign
Parts, yet should not be discouraged upon a supposition, that it is not the
genuine offspring of this Kingdom; for many Manufactures in this and several
Countries, from a small beginning, have come to great Perfection, and therefore
ought to have all encouragement given to it. That it is not come to more
Perfection may happily, upon Examination, be found our own fault.

If the original, or chief cause or means of Riches must be from the Labor of
our People, how do such Arguments, as are used in this Tract, consist with that
Maxim? Our Woollen Manufactures must be reduced to near one half by not
spending them at Home, Silk and Linen Manufactures not convenient, and if
Paper and Shoes, etc. had stood in the way of East India Goods, it is probable
that by the same way of arguing, those would have been cried down also: And
being about 40000 Fans came in the last Ships from India, with some Handicrafts
Wares, as usual in all Ships, if they should be permitted to increase, with the
Silks and Linnens from those parts, being purchased with Bullion, how shall the
State employ the People upon Profitable Objects, or prevent Poverty from
growing upon us, unless could find out Mines of Gold and Silver: And therefore
we should have been told, how our Industry and Stock could have been better
employed then in such Manufactures, before such advice should be given for the
discouragement of Woollen, Silks and Linen.

But upon the conclusion of this matter, the Author seems to be of Opinion that
Silk and Linen may do well in process of time, when England shall come to be
more Peopled, and when a long Peace has increased our Stock and Wealth; but
the Author does not tell us how the People we have shall live in the mean time,
nor of any probability how our Stock or Wealth shall increase, nor how we shall
then set up again, promote or encourage such Manufactures, if we should now
permit them to be destroyed, being our being in War is an advantage to the Sale
of some of those Commodities; neither does he tell us by what we shall get
Money to carry on this East India Trade in the mean time: For some are of
Opinion, that our Trade to India has been carried on by Money arising from the
Labor of our People employed in other Trades, and not by the Gains or Returns
we make by it; neither does he tell us how we shall get Money to purchase the
Linen and Silk he would have us take from Abroad, nor what encouragement will
be left for the increasing of People if these Manufactures be destroyed.

Page 28. and 34. having well argued how it is our Interest to employ the
People we now have, and that we want more; it looks like a Contradiction to
argue, that we should not employ any in fabricking Silk or Linen, nor on
Woollen Goods to be spent at Home. All to the Plow and Cart may be too many;
and such as have been bred in Inland Countries have not a Genious, Spirit, or
Inclination to the Fishing Trades.

If the Author of this Tract had gone as often to Spittle-Fields or Canterbury,
as it may be presumed he has to the India-House, and had informed himself what
vast numbers of both Sexes, and of all Sizes, are employed in that Manufactury,
and had their sole dependence thereon, would probably have received such
impressions as to have induced him to have forborne giving the Opinions he has
about that Manufacture, and have been convinced, that our English Weavers, even
in that Manufacture, have showed themselves able to contest with the French,
Dutch and Italian, both as to Price and Goodness, notwithstanding the great
Misfortune we lie under, of having so many of our Gentry fond of no Silks but
what come from Abroad. That this Manufacture has increased very much in this
last Age, notwithstanding these difficulties, is an undeniable Proof against
what is assented, that this Manufactury cannot thrive in England. Men being so
apt to mind their particular Interest in matters of Trade, that it is to
believe a great Contradiction, that it should so much increase if it could have
been outdone by the French, Dutch or Italian Silks, so as to have prevented
the Makers or Master Weavers from making Profit by them; and how they have
improved, to make them as good (if not better) than any made beyond Sea, may be
evident to any person that will make an inquiry, examine or compare them, with
what come from Abroad.

III. As to the Effect such a Prohibition would have upon the East India Trade
in General.
Upon this Head it is argued, that it will endanger the loss of half that
Trade. If he mean that part of the Trade which is carried on by the Importation
of Manufactured Goods, Handicraft Wares, China, Lacquer'd Ware and Toys; and
would have it understood, that a stop to the going out of our Money to purchase
these Commodities, would occasion any Loss to England, would have done well,
First, to have made out that ever we gained by those Commodities; otherwise
there be many that would not be much troubled to have that part of the Trade
lost; it being supposed that the Saltpeter, Druggs, Spices, and Course
Callicoes, are all the Commodities we ever had from thence, that were necessary
for us; and there can be no great danger the Mogul will deny us those, though we
should leave him these for his own use; because till about the Year 1670, we
did not usually take any others from him: And it may be difficult to find out
any way to make that Trade Profitable, but by confining our selves to those
Commodities, that we may send out little Money, and by Trading from Port to
Port, and making Gains there in Trafficking with the Indians.

His Arguments against any such Prohibition, because no such Law would be
observed, may be made against any new Law, and supposes a strange Weakness in
our Legislative Power; and that being one half of the Goods from India are
spent at Home, there will be no encouragement for the Merchants to engage in
this Trade to India. If must singly depend on the Markets Abroad, is contrary
to what has been practiced; for there was an East India Trade long before we
engaged in these Manufactured Goods, and against his own Opinion in reference
to our own Goods; having a little before argued that our Woollen Manufactures
should all be sent Abroad; which may be as great a discouragement to Merchants,
Clothiers or Weavers, to engage in those, as for the India Merchants in these:
And if it be agreed (as it is) that either our Woollen Goods, or those Silks,
must travel, Why should we not rather put that difficulty upon these Goods,
than upon our own? But at last would not have the present time good for such an
Alteration, nor have it done rashly, nor without contemplating the Universal
Trade of the Nation, whereas this Matter has been already under Consideration
Fifteen Years, and without much time in Contemplation, we might be satisfied
that our Coin grows scarce, and that this Trade has for several Years carried
out near as much Bullion as we have Imported from all parts of the World.

But least all this should not prevail to have this Trade continued, the Dutch,
as usual, are again mustered up; though upon a due Consideration of their Trade
to India, and how it is carried on, no well grounded Argument can be brought
for the continuance of this branch of that Trade from any thing relating to
that Nation.

The Dutch having had the sole possession of the Island of Ceylon, the chief
Islands in India for Cloves, Cinnamon and Nutmegs, for about Forty Years, and
got the Command of Bantam, where Pepper is Plenty, and of other places where
Spices are to be had: By that Commodity, and by Trading with their Ships,
Spices and Goods, in those parts, and bringing Home what thus got, for the
European Markets, no doubt have made it an Advantageous Trade to them; but they
never sent out any considerable parcel of Gold or Silver for India, till after
we had engaged in bringing Home these Silks and Fine Linnens; then the
East India Company in Holland, to make Gains for themselves, though with the
danger of destroying the Manufactures of their own Country, by our Example,
engaged also in these; but still carry on the Trade in them with a great
advantage to us; for though have brought many of these Goods, yet never sent
out one seventh part so much Bullion as we, and have always used their utmost
endeavors to discourage the Expense of these Goods in their own Territories,
and yet they are complained off there, as much as here, and stops and
restraints are often put upon the bringing of them from India: But if there
must not be a total Stop or Prohibition till both these East India Companies
Consent to it, we may expect it, but in vain, till Temptations arising from
Private Interest (however opposite to the Public) be extirpated. The Dutch
East India Company will always argue for the Continuance of this Trade,
because the English bring them; and the English East India Company for bringing
of them, because the Dutch do: But the Dutch having them upon much better terms
than we, may probably hold out longest. But the Trade being carried on there by
a Monopoly, as well as here, and great Men concerned, no Judgment can be made
by the Gains that Trade affords to the Companies, whether the Trade be good or
bad. As for Spices, Druggs and Saltpetre, the way to have more of them, is to
confine the Trade to such Commodities; these others not being made, by the
Indians, till the Factors bespeak them. Till some such Limitation be made,
these affording most Profit will be preferred, and we were not debarred the
having those when we did not engage in this Trade of Manufactured Goods, and
little Reason to fear we shall be now.

This Head is concluded with an Account of Pepper, which with the other
Accounts in this Tract, do not agree with other Men's Opinions, about the Gains
made by this Trade; for if the General Adventurers in the East India Stock in
Holland, computing from the Original of that Stock to this Day, have not made 5
per Cent. by their Money put in, as all Persons do agree that have any
Knowledge thereof, if this vast Gains be made by this Trade, who runs away with
it? The like Question may be properly put, as to this Trade here; If 100 l.
employed in this Trade have produced usually 400 l., as so often asserted in
this Treatise, it must be thought strange, that the Adventurers that underwrit
this Stock Anno 1657, if had continued their Shares to this Day would not have
received much above 10 per Cent. per Annum, notwithstanding the great
Advantages made for several Years, by confining their Stock (for making large
Dividends) to 375000 l. and Trading with other Peoples Money, taken up at 4 per
Cent. Unless this Mystery be explained, both as to Holland and here, there will
remain a Doubt, That if there be any such Gains, that it is swallowed up by
some particular Persons, under pretense of a Public Good, to carry on a
Private Interest; and that both Nations will in time find, that they have but
dreamt of making such Vast Gains by this Trade, in these Goods; and that the
Gains made in both Countries by Stock-Jobbing, and other indirect or private
ways, by such as have got into the Management, is the true Reason why there
has been so much struggling about this Trade more than about others, that upon
a true Calculation would be found more Beneficial.

The Author of this Tract having owned Page 12. as to the Trade to the
East Indies in General that it is naught, and that if all Europe would agree to
have no further Dealings to those Parts, would certainly save a great Expense
of Treasure, because Europe draws nothing from thence of solid use, only
perishable Commodities, and Materials to supply Luxury, in return of Gold and
Silver, which is there buried and never returns; but would have the Burden to
fall upon the Collective Body of Europe. It is concluded, that nothing could be
more fatal than this Assertion, to all the Arguments in this Discourse, to
render this Nation, in a manner, undone, if the Importation of Indian and
Persian Silk be Prohibited; upon which (it is said) the preservation of above
half of that Trade depends, and half our Foreign Business. Page 22.

It is well known that England and Holland drive the greatest Trades of all
European Nations, and that does depend much upon the Consumption of their own
Manufactures: If these Indian Silks be Consumed, as is owned Page the 31st. in
the room of our Stuffs, Anthorines, etc. and the Linnens, as well as the Silks
(as complained of in Holland) in the room of the Silks and Linnens Manufactured
there, and we spend half at home of what is brought from thence, and all
purchased with our Gold and Silver; why may not England and Holland be taken in
amongst the Collective Body of Europe, upon whom this Loss does Fall, and be
found to bear the greatest Share by the Loss that these Manufactured Goods
occasions, whatever Gains do or might make by the other Branches of that Trade?
For other Nations that Consume such Goods, because have none of their own
Fabric, cannot be at any Loss in so doing; do but Lay out their Money in these
Goods, instead of Laying it out in the Woollens made by us, or Linnens made by
the Dutch: All Nations not being so extravagant, as to spend so much the more
because these Goods are brought them: Therefore as may truly conclude with the
Author, that this Trade is Naught for Europe in general, so very particularly
for this Nation, which indeed suffers most by it, because we altered the
Management of it since the Year 1670. Of which some hints are given before, and
might be made apparent; but omitted for this time, least it should be thought
strange that the Author should not be in the Right, neither when Argues against
this Trade, nor for it.

But to conclude with some Observations upon what mentions of Cardinal
Richlieu, Page the 6th. that had left behind him an Evidence how much had made
Matters of Trade, his care and Study; and that thereby had laid the only
Foundation of a Solid and lasting greatness: If he had also taken Notice of the
Edicts, Tariffs and Orders made since, and of the Politics practiced in France
referring to Trade, particularly of the Edict made the 26th. of October, 1686.
for Burning and Destoying China Silks, Stuffs, etc. and other Goods from India,
would have found that they have proceeded quite contrary, to what proposed in
this Treatise, and that have found their end by it; For by encouraging the
Consumption of their own Manufactures both at Home and abroad, and their
Fishing Trades have increased their Riches, Seamen and Navigation, to such a
degree in 40 Years time, as has enabled them to maintain a long War with most
of the Princes of Europe, without much help from the East India Trade; and that
therefore we may conclude a Nation may Thrive by Trade, without that to the
East; and that they have been as much in the Right in the managing of their
Trade, as we have been in the Wrong in the Management of ours.

By what has been said, it may appear that the Manufactured Goods from India,
Spent and Consumed in England, cannot by any way be Instrumental to prevent the
going out of our Coin, nor to the bringing in of Gold and Silver to make amends
for what Exported to Carry on that Trade: And that unless it can be made out by
very good Proof or Demonstration that by the return of India Goods we Transport
to Foreign Countries, we bring Home in Gold and Silver more then we Export, for
the Carrying on of that Trade, that we ought to conclude that our Treasure has
been Exhausted by that Trade; and that it has been mischievous to us in the
highest degree, by hindering our Woollen Manufactures as well as the improvement
of those for Silk and Linen: All which is submitted to better Judgments.

Amongst the scattered Notions laid down in that Treatise referring to Trade,
the Author Observes, Page 11.

That in our great Assemblies it has never been sufficiently thought a matter
of State, but managed rather as a convenience, or accidental Ornament, then the
chief strength and support of the Kingdom.

That as it has never been greatly the care of our Ministers of State; so it
has not been enough the Study of Nobility and Gentry, who (give me leave to
say) for want of a right Knowledge in the general Notions of it, have been
frequently imposed upon by particular Merchants, and other interested Persons
to Enact Lwsa, so much to the prejudice of Trade in General.

And Page the 25th. That Trade is in its Nature free, finds its own Channel,
and best directs its own Course; and all Laws to give it Rules and directions,
and to Limit and Circumscribe it, may serve the particular ends of private Men,
but are seldom advantageous to the Public.

That Governments in Relation to it, are to take a Providential care of the
whole; but generally to let Second Causes work their own way; and Considering
all the Links and Chains by which they hang together, peradventure it may be
affirmed that in the main all Trafficks whatsoever, are Beneficial to a Country.

That few Laws in a State are an indication of Wisdom in a People; but it may
be truly said that few Laws Relating to Trade are the Mark of a Nation that
Thrives by Traffic.

What is said, Page the 11th. cannot easily be reconciled with what is said,
Page the 25th. For if Trade must be Free without being Limited or restrained by
any Laws, what need is there, that our Nobility and Gentry, who make our great
Assembly, should apply themselves to Study a right Knowledge of it? For
according to this Opinion, no Laws Relating to Trade should be Enacted, because
are seldom Advantageous to the Public; And that all Trade whatsoever is
Beneficial; and yet the Author is of Opinion, Page the 11th. that no Wisdom can
give the Public effectual help till we can mend the Condition and Posture of
Trade.

But taking it for Granted that what is said, Page the 11th. is but a
Complement to our Nobility and Gentry, and to save their time, that may not
spend it about what is unnecessary: and that what is said, Page 25. That Trade
ought to be Free, is the Authors Opinion, because best agrees with the whole
design of the Book: It being so Material a Point, that all Laws already made
and all Proposals for any Future Regulations depend upon the decision thereof;
should not be resolved without a due Examination of such Arguments and
Considerations as may be proper to lay Open the State of the Case: To which it
is hoped, being the ingenious Author tells us, has applied his Thoughts and
Study to matters of Trade, he will afford his assistance.

If Trade must be left to take its own Course, find out its own Channel, and
not be under any Restrictions or Limitations by Laws, on a Supposition that all
Trades Naturally afford Profit and Advantage to a Nation; then the Act of
Navigation and all other Laws Relating to Trade should be repealed, and all
Considerations for making any more for Future laid aside.

Though the Author seems to incline to this Opinion, and it be known that many
others agree with him in it, yet upon Examination it may appear a vulgar and
dangerous Error.

For the first Foundation that should be laid for the preserving or increasing
of Trade, is to have a Stock, which Stock should be in Money; then to use all
endeavors to preserve and increase it by Frugality in the Consumption of
Foreign Commodities and Labor and industry, for the increasing and promoting
the Consumption of our own.

So long as the Nation keeps to Frugality and industry Laws may not be
absolutely Necessary to Limit the Consumption of any Foreign Commodities, nor
to increase or promote our own Manufactures: But if there be an appearance,
that a Nation is running into a luxurious Prodigal Expense of Foreign
Commodities, and to a neglect in Manufacturing and promoting their own, and to
idleness, and spending of time in what is not profitable for the Nation, the
usual Consequences of Luxury, (which we fear is our Case at present) then Laws
will be necessary to put a stop to it, that the Treasure of the Nation may not
be Consumed thereby: For by the Course of Trade no stop can happen to any such
Consumptions nor Idleness, till want of Money occasion it. To omit making such
Laws upon any such occasion, would be to permit, that which is of the greatest
importance to run the last extremity, rather then agree that it should be
prevented by prudential Laws made by the State, or any endeavors used for that
purpose.

As it has been Suggested that Gold and Silver is the only, or at least most
useful and best deserving to be called the Treasure of a Nation, and so
necessary for the Carrying on of Commerce, that when ever plenty of that fails,
we may expect that Trade will in a great measure fail also; so it may be
affirmed that Bartering of Commodities cannot supply the want thereof, because
cannot make any quick Progress; neither can it be supplied by Credit, because
Credit must have its Original and existence from an expectation or assurance of
Money.

All Traders have Reason to make it their business to get Money by their
Trades, by sending out and bringing Home such Commodities as are most vendible,
and yield them most Profit: But whether send out Goods or Bullion, or whether
what bring back be necessary for the supply of our Necessities, or useful for a
further Manufacture, or be spent in Prodigality, Luxury, or Debauchery, or to
the hindrance of our Manufacture (so long as they get by it) they do not
generally take it to be their Province to mind: But for the good of the whole,
it may be presumed the State ought to mind it so far, as may be convenient to
prevent the Exportation of our Treasure; if not, the Stock of Gold and Silver,
which is absolutely necessary to Carry on Trade, as well as for our Defense,
will be Consumed; by which the Traders themselves as well as the generality
will in time be involved in Misery.

Though Riches cannot be gotten, but from Foreigners, by having our Ships
employed by them, or dealings with them, or by our Exporting and selling to
them, to a greater value, than we purchase and take from them, that the
overplus may be brought home in Bullion; yet no Trades carried on by the
Exportation of own Products, and Manufactures, or those from our Plantations,
though what brought back in return, be all perishable Commodities, can diminish
our Riches, for all such Goods of ours (unless some Objection be made as to Tin
and Lead) would have perished by time, if had been kept here; but a great
distinction ought to be made, between Trades carried on by the Exportation of
our Products, and Trades carried on by the Exportation of our Bullion, to
purchase perishable Commodities, because in such casewe Exchange what is
durable, and most useful, for what cannot long do us any Service.

Supposing Three Millions of Coin be at present the Stock of the Nation
Circulating for the carrying on of Trade, as long as it is laid out in our own
Products, and Manufactures, and such are Exported, though whatever be brought
in return of them perish in a short time, yet our Stock will be good, and so
long Trade will be carried on: But if instead of carrying on Trade by the
Exportation of our Goods, we should send out, a Million in Coin or Bullion to
the India, to purchase Silks, another Million to France to purchase Wines and
Brandies, and another Million to purchase Fruit, or Toys, and all be spent at
home, we may soon find the Treasure of the Nation consumed, our stock of Gold
and Silver which we had for the carrying on of Trade, in the hands of
Foreigners, and the Goods we had in return, in the Draynes, or on the Dunghill.

If this be obvious represented thus in gross, then lesser parcels of Money
sent out to purchase such Goods (by the Rule of Proportion) must have the same
Effect in some Degree; by all which it may appear that what is asserted, Page
the 25, That all Traffic is beneficial to a Country, cannot be true, as to
some Trades; that some Traders for their private Gains may be tempted to carry
on, who may get by Trade, and yet the Nation may lose at the same time by such
Trades.

And therefore if no Laws must be made to promote the Making or Consumption of
our own Goods, nor to hinder the Importation or Consumption of any from abroad,
it must inevitably follow, that when ever a Nation falls into Luxury, and the
People to Idleness, or to spend their Time in Employments unprofitable to a
Nation, such a Nation must be reduced to beggary by Trade, without any hopes or
prospect that it can be prevented, till their Treasure be Exhausted, and no
Money left to carry on such Trades, unless the Government interfere to hinder
the Consumption of such Commodities, as upon an exact inquiry may be found, do
carry out our Coin, either by Prohibitions, or rather by Example, or high
Impositions laid upon the Vending and Consuming of them at home; which happily
may be found most in offensive, as to Foreign States, and not difficult to be
contrived, and made effectual, and not prove any great hindrance to Trade, or
to many Trading Men, if will have respect to their Posterities, and Common
Good, as well as to their present Gain. For as the Consumption of some
Commodities may be hindered thereby so will make room for their Trading in
others; and prove but a taking them off from Vending Goods unprofitable to the
Nation, to Trade in Goods that may be more convenient.

It is agreed that the best way to encourage Trade, and make it advantageous to
a Nation and useful to afford a livelihood to the vast Number of People that
have their Sole dependence thereon, is in general to allow all the liberty
imaginable; but as most general Rules may be liable to some exceptions, so this
especially to these two: First, that no Trade ought to be encouraged that is
carried on by the Exportation of our Bullion, unless to purchase what we
absolutely want for our Defense, or Support of Life, and we cannot possibly
have on better Terms, or where we may have an undoubted indisputable assurance
that the Goods purchased with it will bring in more Bullion, in Bullion, by the
Sales of such Goods abroad, than was carried out. Secondly, that no Wool be
carried out raw and unwrought. Other Laws may be found necessary to prevent
abuses in the Manufacturing of Goods, keeping the People to Work, and for the
encouraging and increasing of Trade, which should be applied as Occasions and
Exigencies may require, but none appear necessary (upon these sudden thoughts)
contrary to the Freedom insisted on, but what may be Comprehended under these
two Exceptions here mentioned.

Where it appears plain that a Trade is carried on by the Exportation of our
Coin and Exhausting of our Treasure, no Arguments can be given that it must not
be prevented, because may hinder the Gains or Employments of some Persons, that
can have much more weight in that particular, than what might have been offered
against the wicked Trade of Clipping, for though the Livelihoods many got by
that Trade, were justly more obnoxious to the Law, because was a secret
Robbery, and upon many accounts endangered the Peace and Tranquillity and
welfare of the Nation; yet being what was so wickedly got, does not appear to
be sent out (unless to be exchanged from Silver to Gold,) the Nation did not
lose so much Treasure by it, as has and will, by Trades carried on by the
Exportation of our Coin, as long as permitted.

Whether Trade left at full Liberty to be carried on, by the Exportation of our
Products and Manufactures may produce Treasure, will much depend upon good
Sales to our Commodities abroad, and good Husbandry in the Consumption of
Foreign Commodities at home, but the having of many sorts of Manufactures of
our own is not only the best way to have Variety to send abroad, but to
prevent our being in want of such Commodities, that there may be no Temptation
for their being Imported; but no Trade more likely to bring us in a good
proportion of Bullion, then out Fishing Trades; not only because in is procured
by our Labor, without any great Cost by Foreign Materials, but being a
Commodity necessary abroad for the support of Life, seldom fails of Markets,
and ready Money, which is often brought home in Speaie from many places, and is
also a Commodity not likely ever to go out of Request; for which, and because
those Trades are also a Nursery for Seamen, it may be found our true Interest
to favor those Trades with the best Protection, and Encouragement. And thus
the Authors Maxim, Page the 38. That it is the Prudence of a State to see that
Industry and Stock be not diverted from things profitable to the whole, and
where a Nation is a certain known gainer, to be turned upon Objects
unprofitable, or new Inventions, in which it cannot be determined in many years
whether we get or lose, or how the Balance stands; may be put in practice with
all the certainty imaginable, as well as by the Fishing Trades as by the
Woollen Silk and Linen Manufacture, and happily upon Examination will be found
more Politic, then as the Author would have it applied, in favor of the
East India Trade.

But it being supposed that the Dutch will be here again brought upon the
Stage, and the Liberty they give in matters of Trade, and for the Exportation
of Money, objected against what is here argued; to make one answer for all,
which is supposed may be satisfactory, not only against all Arguments that can
be derived from the Practices of the Dutch, for an unlimited Freedom in Trade,
but as to what has been argued or may relate to the East India Trade also; Let
it be agreed that we shall live in England as Parsimonious as they do in
Holland, and be as Industrious in our Fishing, and some other Trades (that
might be named) as they are, and that we shall not send out more Bullion to the
India for the carrying on of that Trade, then they do, or that we shall have
great Impositions upon such Foreign Commodities as may be found to be the
occasion of the Exhausting of our Treasure or pernicious to our own
Manufactures, to secure us from such inconveniences as are feared from such
Liberty; then all disputes shall cease, as to all Prohibitions relating to
Trade: But if we must not be lead, nor take Example from them in Parsimony, and
Industry, we ought not to be lead by them in making of Laws relating to the
Exportation of our Coin, or Prohibitions of Goods; because whether such Laws be
good and necessary, or not, depends wholly upon the Genius and Inclination of
the People. If Parsimonious and Industrious, then no need of such Laws; but if
Luxurious and Idle, must be Ruined without them; and this is well known to
those States where such Liberty is granted which makes them very observant of
their old Customs and Fashions, and very diligent and careful to keep their
People to Work, as may be instanced in Holland.

Though it may be as difficult to give a true account of the Turnings,
Windings, Circulations, Steps, Degrees and Progress of Trade, and Drawing and
Redrawing by Exchange, as to give a certain account of all the Veins, Arteries,
Fibers, Circulation of the Blood, Causes of Diseases and Motions in a Body
Natural, yet there are some plain Cases relating to both, which may be agreed
without penetrating into the pretended Mysteries of either.

That we should send out to India about 600000 l. per Annum in Bullion, though
it has been never yet made out that those Goods bring us back again in
Bullion, the value of 200000 l. and much of it, to be there laid out, to
purchase Manufactured Goods to be spent in the room of our own, or that we
should send out Bullion to any place to buy Goods to be spent in Luxury, or in
the room of such as we can make by our own people, or that we should Export our
Wool Raw, to be Manufactured abroad, when the Advantage by Manufacturing it at
home would be near seven parts in Ten advantage, however may agree with some
Men's Interest, cannot well be for the Interest of the Nation, nor the best way
to gain or retain Riches; for no Gains made by particular Men, can make a
recompense for the loss the Nation will receive by having their Stock of Money
Consumed, and the Poor beaten out of their Employment.

Sufficient Care being taken by Prohibiting or Discouraging the Consumption of
such Goods as occasion the carrying out of our Coin, or Bullion, and for
encouraging the working of our Wool at home, no Liberty should be thought too
much to be given, for the carrying on of Trades by a permutation of
Commodities, not only by a free Exportation and Importation, but without being
Subject to the Payment of great Duties because will be found the best way to
increase Trade, and make it beneficial, for though it may be difficult to give
a particular account how, or what gains, may arise to a Nation, or particular
Men, by every distinct Trade, yet so long as carried on by the Exportation of
our Products, or what other Goods we may have, there can be no danger of
losing, for the particular Traders will take care not to carry on Trades by
which they do not get, and such Gains made by the Collective body of Traders,
may properly be said to be the Gains of the Nation, and Trade thus carried on
may be left to take its own Course, and find its own Channel, and to work by
Second Causes its own Way.

But the Author having Asserted, Page 11, That it will be found at last, when
all things come to be rightly understood, that no Plenty at Home, Victory
Abroad, Affection of the People, Conduct or Wisdom in other things, can give
the Public effectual help, till we mend the Condition or Posture of Trade. It
is hoped that as he has obliged the Public, with his Excellent Book of Ways
and Means, so if do not agree with such Notions as these, that he will
communicate his Thoughts how the Condition and Posture of Trade can be mended,
by pursuing any others, and how or which way a Nation can get by Trade; as long
as by a Prodigal Consumption of Foreign Commodities and neglecting and
discouraging of our own, we take in more than we send out, and then Export our
Gold and Silver to pay the Balance, which will be found to be our Case,
whatever specious pretenses may be made by those that make Profit by sending
out our Gold and Silver to hide the true reason from the Nobility and Gentry,
whose Application of Thoughts upon these Subjects, would no doubt be of great
Use, not only to the Public, but, to their particular Interests.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
LAtely Published a Book Entitled, A Discourse of Trade and Coin; in which
most of the Notions mentioned in this Tract referring to Trade are enlarged.
Sold by B. Alymer at the Three Pigeons against the Exchange in Cornhil.


