A Directory for Youth Through all the Difficulties attending that State of
Life. Or a Discourse of Youthful Lusts. IN WHICH The Nature and Kinds of them
are described, and Remedies against them laid down.

First Preached to Young People, and now Published at their Request.

By Samuel Pomfret, Minister of the Gospel.

For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
Iniquities of my Youth, Job 13. 26. His Bones are full of the Sins of his
Youth, which shall lie down with him in the Dust, Job 20. 11. Remember not
against me the Sins of my Youth, Psalm. 25. 7. I was ashamed, yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my Youth, Jer. 31. 19. Ad vos
juvenes mihi Sermo; flos aetatis periculum mentis. Aug. de temp. London,
Printed for John Dunton at the Black-Raven in the Poultry. 1693.

To the Young People that were Hearers of the following Sermons, and since have
been sollicitous for the Publishing of them, Grace and Peace, etc.
Beloved Friends,
THat sincere Affection, and Compassion, which God has wrought in me, to your
precious Souls, has prevailed with me (against my na^^ral inclination) to
yield to your Request, for the Printing those Sermons that I Preached from ^^
Tim. 2. 22. wherein is recommended to ^^ the weight and necessity of St. Paul's
Ad^^^ition to Timothy to Flee Youthful Lusts.

The Wise Man says, Prove. 25. 11. A lord spoken in season is like Apples of
^^ld in Pictures of Silver. And if so, then must be allowed me, that I have not
miscar^^d in my choice of such a Word spoken to you: O that I might not
miscarry in my wish for you, namely, that it may prove eventually, a Word
whereby you may be saved. The Word damned is hard, you would not have that to
be your lot. But pray permit me to tell you, (plainly and publicly without
Lisping and Whispering) that saved you cannot be, and damned you must be,
except by a true and timous Repentance you flee your Lusts; the infallible
truth of which is originated in and built upon his Word, who is Truth it self,
and cannot lie, as you may see in the 6. Gal. 7. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. 13. Luke 3. Except ye
Repent, ye shall perish. 8. Romans 13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye.
20. Job 11. His Bones are full of the Sin of his Youth, which shall lie down
with him in the Dust. 5. Prove. 11. And thou mourn at the last, and say, How
have I hated Instruction, etc. 11. Eccles. 9. Rejoice O young man, in thy youth
-- but know thou that for these things God will bring thee to Judgment.

O Young People, would you with due care apply these, things to your own Souls,
it were enough to rent the very Caul of a secure Heart. I know such is the
Depravation of our. Natures, that if there were, any possibility of escaping
Hell and Damnation, without fleeing our Lusts; we should never voluntarily
submit to this Godly Counsel given by St. Paul to young Timothy. I have read of
a Book that the Pope has called Taxa Camerae Apostolicae, wherein men may know
the Rate of any Sin, upon what terms men may keep a Whore, be Drunk, etc. As to
that it is a bundle of Lies. But the Inspired Scriptures may be truly called a
Rate Book, where any of you may know what a beloved Lust will cost without
Repeneance (viz.) the Wrath of God in Hell: and so everlastingly true is this,
that I beg you to despair of ever finding the least Jota of God's Word to fail,
or fall to the Ground unaccomplished.

I know you will be tempted to do as other Young People commonly do, namely, to
forget these things, and by the sloth and aversion of a wretched Heart in
conjunction with Satan's temptations, to be carried away to other trivial
matters; wherefore let me entreat you, as ever you would avoid the Curse of
Reuben [Unstable as Waters] to ballast your Hearts, by laying in strong and
powerful Convictions of the intolerable Evil of Sin, the indispensible
necessity of Christ, and holiness, the unconceiveable worth, and the
preciousness of your Souls, and Time, and the unavoidable approach of Death,
and Judgment. Look ye, you Young Folks, the Breasts of whose Virginity has not
yet been pressed, you are young, and want that, Experience that elder
Christians have; and therefore the greater allowance must be made; you must
allow your Souls more time to digest the great mysteries of Religion by
Meditation and Prayer: And you are more strongly bent to sensual Pleasures and
Sports, and to forget God and your Souls, Death and Judgment. And therefore you
must so much the more chastise the pregnancy of that Vanity and Folly that is
bound up in your Natures by a severer vigilance and abstinence. When I was
young, it pleased God of his infinite Mercy, to privilege me above thousands
with a Religious Education, and by his restraining Grace to preserve me from
open Profaneness (blessed be his holy Name) But yet notwithstanding this (to
my own just shame I mention it) in those early and wanton days of my Youth I
was miserably vain, foolish, and disobedient, serving diverse Lu^ts and
Pleasures: The bitter remembrance whereof has (for more than 20 Years past)
cost me Sighs and Groans unutterable: Oh! the time's not to be numbered that I
have wished I had been sick in Bed rather than sinning against so good a God;
the Remote parts of the World that I have been in, the Roads I have journeyed
in, the Fields I have watched in, the Nights I have watched on, the Houses I
have lived in, and the Beds I have lain on, can witness to my Tears and Sorrows
while I have recognized my Vanities and Folly.

And now forasmuch as it is utterly impossible for me to recall and recover
those past and misspent days of my Youth. I would on the bended Knee of
Importunity, for my own sake, as well as yours, beseech this one thing of you,
(as I have of God for you) (viz.) to take Warning, and to be effectually
persuaded (by the Terrors of the Lord which I have felt) to Flee that Youthful
Lust, and with that Godly young man Moses, rather choose any Affliction than
adventure to sin; it is a known Sentence felix quem faciunt, etc. It Is not
unknown to many of you, how unwilling I have been drawn to expose these my
homely thoughts to public view. But an extreme thirst after the present
Conversion, and Eternal Salvation of your Souls, has overswayed me herein: I
know God's Blessing upon it can make it effectual to reach this end, which is
all I aim at, or am ambitious of; and if it shall please Almighty God to make
me a poor weak Instrument successful herein, I shall go to my Grave with joy,
and esteem it so great a Recompense, as if I were young again, or had remembered
my Creator in the days of my Youth.

I am not ignorant of my own Infirmities, but I write not to you Fathers and
Mnasons, old Disciples; but to Children and Youth, who need not strong Meat,
but Milk. If any other should so far humble themselves, as to cast an Eye upon
so mean a Discourse, with whom its business is not, I would desire this of
them, that instead of loading this poor thing and its Author with harsh and
hasty Censures, they would lend it and him their help in their hearty Prayer to
God for a Blessing upon the one, and an increase of Gifts and Grace in the
other. I esteem my self obliged to acqudint you, that two of these Sermons were
Preached above a Year ago, and those Young Men that were not my Auditors then,
may be apt to think that I have made great alterations in the transcribing of
them, for as much as here they will meet with a great deal more than what they
heard in a single Sermon about six Weeks ago, wherein through the streights of
time I could do no more than just name many particulars, which formerly I was
large upon.

I shall detain you no longer, only add this hearty desire for you, That while
many of your Age are hastening the Wrath of God upon this poor Nation by their
Atheism and Immoralities that you may be frequenting your Closets, and on your
Knees mourning for your own and the Nations Sins, e're the Lord come upon us
with his fierce Anger, and there be no remedy, which is the hearty desire of
him, who is a willing, though weak and unworthy Servant of Christ,

Samuel Pomfret.

2 Timothy II. xxii. Flee also Youthful Lusts.
IN this Chapter Paul proceeds to direct Tim. in the right management of his
great Work, whereunto he was called; in order to which he instructs him, whence
he should derive strength for it, v. 1. then he exhorts him to propagate those
truths to others which he had heard, and received from him, v. 2. then he
encourages him to endure hardness in his Work, from a two fold Metaphor, viz.
that of a Soldier, and an Husbandman, who first strive and labor, and
afterward receive the reward, and reap the fruit of their pains; from ver. 3
d. to the 8th. There he minds him of the Example of Christ, who first suffered,
and died and afterward was raised to life again, and thence infers that all
the faithful who suffer with him, shall also live and reign with him for ever.
From v. 8. to the 14th. and then he gives other instructions, how he should
behave himself as a workman, that need not be ashamed, dehorting him from all
vain and profane Bablings, and Errors, that began to infest the Church of God;
adding an argument that if a man purge himself from these, he shall be a Vessel
of Honor, prepared for his Masters work, from 14. to the 24th. and so he
comes to the words in my Text, Flee also youthful Lusts.

Which admonition to Tim. one would have thought might have been omitted, and
that upon a two fold account, Tim. had an infirm, weak Body, and such sickly
people usually incline more to mind a Winding Sheet than wanton Lusts.

Tim. was a holy young Man, very temperate, for the most part drinking only
Water; and such cold Liquor was more likely to quench, than inflame the heat of
Lusts: and yet because Tim. was a young Man, Paul saw need to give him this
admonition. Well then may you young people need it: Besure it is written for
your admonition in these last and leude days, on whom the end of the World are
come: Wherefore attend thereunto as for your lives. Flee youthful lusts. In
which words there is no need of any Logical division, to detain you from this
following Theological proposition, which (without the least violence done to
the Text) naturally flows from it.

That it is a duty of special concernment, to young people, to flee youthful
lusts. In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall endeavor the resolution of
these following Questions.

Q. 1. What is the import of the word Flee?

Q. 2. What are those Youthful Lusts that you are so concerned to flee?

Q. 3. Why it as a duty of such special concernment for Youth to flee those
lusts?

Q. 4. How young people may best Practice this their especial duty to flee
youthful lusts?

Q. 1. What is the import of this word Flee?

Answ. Now to Flee imports the swiftest motion, as to run is more than to go,
so to flee is more then to run; Wings are nimbler than Legs. You know in all
motion, there is terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem, the terms from which,
and the terms to which So it is here flee from sin to God. Flee i. e. to the
farthest distance from sin, and to the nearest closure and union to God, 11.
Job 14 If iniquity be in thy hand put it far away, How far? so far as God puts
it away when he pardons sin, even as far as the East is from the West, 103.
Psalm. 12 So should you do in your Repentance for sin.

Object. But we can as soon, flee from our selves, as from our Lusts, in this
sense: the Law in our Members will abide.

Sol. Although there cannot be in this life a perfect freedom from, nor
destruction of sins, Being an existence, (this being only the priveledge of the
glorified Souls above) yet there may and must be a subversion of its Power and
Dominion, both in Heart and Life; so that the meaning is flee from thy youthful
lusts to the utmost distance, even as far as the East is from the West, in
respect of thy love, and affection to, and practice of these lusts: Tho sin is
and will remain in thee, yet maintain a continual alienation in thy heart and
endeavors in thy life against it, in a diligent use of all those sanctified
means, and spiritual remedies which God has appointed for the abandoning thy
youthful lusts. Such as these following.

1. Vehement desires and longings of soul after the mortification of them in
their habits as well as external acts. 7. Romans 24.

2. Deep humblings of soul, and loathings of self, for former yieldings to thy
Lusts, 73. Psalm. 22. So foolish and ignorant was I even as a Beast before thee.
31. Jer. 18 I have surely heard Ephraim bemoning himself thus, I was as a
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. Surely after I was instructed, I smete upon
my thigh, I repented; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear
the reproach of my youth.

3. Earnest cries to Heaven for Preventing, pardoning, and purging Grace, 19.
Psalm. 13. Keep back thy Servant from presumptuous sins; let them not have
dominion ever me. 51. Psalm. 1. 2, 7, 10. verses, Have mercy upon me, O God,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions,
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me,
and I shall be clean; create in me a clean heart O God.

4. Fixed resolutions in Christ's strength to obey your Youthful Lusts no more.
14. Hosea 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I any more to do with Idols? 34. Job
32. Lord what I know not, teach thou me, and wherein I have done iniquity, I
will do so no more.

5. Lively acting of faith on a crucified Christ, and the precious promises. 6.
Romans 6. Knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed; that hence forth we should not serve sin. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Having therefore these promises, (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit.

6. Daily watchings against all occasions of drawing out your youthful Lust and
Corruption. 31. Job. 1. I have made a Covenant with my eyes, that I will not
look upon a Maid* 18. Psalm. 23. I have kept my self from mine own iniquity, and
you may rank under this head that in 13. Romans 13. of making no provision for
the flesh, to fulfill it in its lusts.

7. And Lastly, Willingness to receive a Christian and Friendly reproof, for
your youthful sins, and follies. 141. Psalm. 5. Let the righteous smite me, it
shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil,
which shall not break my head. Now when you carefully use these, and such
like-means, which God in his holy word has appointed: then you comport with
this exeellent Rule, Flee Youthful Lusts, and so you have the import of that
Phrase, Flee, which will further receive an accession of light, if you read
with it those other Scriptures, where the word Flee is used in a good sense. I
shall only allude to them.

Flee youthful lusts, as Lot fled out of Sodom. 19. Genesis 17. Flee for thy life,
look not behind thee, stay, not thou in the plain: escape to the mountain,
least thou be consumed. Flee Young man thy Lusts, as Joseph fled from his
tempting Mistress. 39. Genesis 12. And she caught him by his garment, saying lie
with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out. Flee
as Jaocb fled from the face of his bloody Brother Esau. 35. Genesis 1. Flee as the
poor distressed Manslayer, fled from the avenger of Blood, to the City of
refuge. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. And thus I have endeavored the Resolution of the first
Question, what the import of the word Flee is?

Q. 2. What are those youthful lusts, that you are so concerned to Flee?

Ans. In the Division of our lives, there are peculiar, and predominant lusts,
incident to each division: Now in the general, Youth is obnoxious to most sins,
yet some more than others. Youth has its proper sins, that hang about, that
haunt, and dog that season of life; some whereof respect the temper of their
minds, and others the frame of their lives, which I shall give you in these
following Heads.

1. Aireness of Spirit, levity of Mind, vanity of thoughts. 2. Blind Boldness
in adventuring on desperately in dangerous ways. 3. Careless incogitancy, and
inconsiderateness about the most awful important matters of their Souls. 4.
Delaying Repentance, and turning to God, foolishly thinking it is time enough,
they are yet young. 5. Eager pursuits after sensual Pleasures, Games, etc.
Loving these more then God. 6. Flexibility to temptations, as dry Tinder to
receive the least spark, easily enticed. 7. Going down the Stream, and
following a multitude to do Evil; saying I do but as other young people do. 8.
Hating lustructions, Admonition and Reproof. 9. Intemperance in meats, and
Drinks. 10. Keeping of ill Company, that Soul runining snare of Hell. 11. Lying
and inventing Excuses. 12. Making little or no Conscience of relative Duties.
13. Nourishing vain hopes, and flattering themselves with the thoughts of long
Life, and putting far away the evil Day. 14. Omitting the holy Observation of
the Sabbath. 15. Pride of their parts, Beauty, Strength. 16. Quenching the
motions of the Holy Spirit. 17. Ridiculing serious Religion, as too strict, and
more than needs. 18. Time-wasting. 19. Uncleanness. 20. Woeful giddiness of
Spirit, ready to imbibe any kind of error. To begin with the first of these.
1. Aireness of Spirit, etc. It is observable what name the Hebrews give a
young Man, (viz.) Nagnar, which comes from a root, that signifies to be
tossed to and fro: Thereby setting forth the Levity, and Vanity of a young
Man's mind. Solomon tells us in the 10. Eccl. 11. that Childhood and Youth are
Vanity, light Spirited and Frothy. O how rare a sight is it to see young people
serious and staid in their minds. Ballasted, and Balanced in the matters of
Religion. Most are as the Apostle says of them, tossed easily to and fro with
every Wind: tho they are born with sinful corrupted Natures, and are every
moment liable to Death and Damnation, while they continue in a natural
condition: yet they are like the wild Ass in the Wilderness, that snuffeth up
the Wind at her pleasure, as the Prophet Jeremiah speaks: 2. Jer. 24. They are
become vain in their imagination, their minds are like that of the Poets, full
of vain fancies, and fictions: the Eye of their minds like that of their Body,
looks all outward, as if they had no Soul to mind. Hence it is that so many
thousands of Prayers, Tears, and Instructions of faithful Ministers and
Relations are defeated, and rendered unsuccessful, through the Instability and
Vanity of young peoples spirits.

B. Boistrous, and Bold, adventuring upon sinful, and pernicious Courses; of a
Jehu like temper, 2 Kings 9. 10. Furious, and Desperate: This is that young
people are prone to, in the heat of their Youth, to be venturous, as the Horse
that rusheth into the Battle. Now if you would see how the Horse rusheth into
the Battle, compare with that 8. Jer. 6. the 39. Job. 19. and there you have it
Now most elegantly, and lively expressed by God himself. Have thou given the
Horse strength? have thou clothed his neck with thunder? Can thou make him
afraid as a Grasshopper? his nostrils are terrible. He paweth in the valley, and
rejoices in his strength: he goes on to meet the armed men. He mocketh at
fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns he back from the Sword. The quiver
ratleth against him: he swalloweth the ground with firceness, he says among
the Trumpets, ha, ha; in which description, you may see how furiously and
dangerously he rusheth into the Battle for he rusheth upon the Pikes, and
deadly (...), prepared for destruction, and oftimes is suddenly slain. Thus
young people are apt, to rush on in sinful ways, Furiosus juvenibus animi
habitus. Tho God hedge in their way with Thorns, they break through all; as
Balaam would on, tho there was a drawn Sword in the way. So Youth is prone to
this mad fury, in venturing on, tho God has laid many bars in sins way, as
Majestracy, Ministry, Conscience, and the occular demonstrations of his
Judgments upon other impenitent sinners; these are all bars in their way, yet
how rare is it, to see young ones restrained, and kept b^ck, by any, by all of
them. You have an instance, in Ely's Sons, 1 Samuel 2. and for this cause in the
12 verse, they are called children of Belial, because no Yoke would hold them:
Also you read of two of Jacobs Sons, Simeon and Levi, of whose miscarriages of
this kind the good old man thus expresses himself, in the 49* Genesis 5. 6, 7.
Simeon and Levi are Brethren, instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations.
O my Soul come not thou into their Secret; unto their Assembly, mine Honor be
not thou united, for in their anger they Slew a man, and in their self will
they dug down a Wall. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce, and their
Wrath, for it was Cruel: It is to be observed, that the greater number of those
Malefactors that end their miserable lives at Tiburn, are the younger sort of
people, their boisterous lusts consume them, that they scares live out half
their days.

C. Careless incogitancy, and want of serious consideration, and laying to
heart the most awful important matters of their Souls. There are three things
(says a great Writer) that are chief ruiners, and destroyers of Souls. Namely,
1. want of consideration, and self reflection. 2. Infidelity, 3. Earthly
mindedness; but especially want of consideration. The first of these, which
Youth are exceeding guilty of: How seldom do young people retire, and soberly
inquire, what their State and Condition God wards is? whether it be a state of
Nature or Grace? whether God be reconciled, and sin pardoned, etc. Alas, young
people are generally led by sense, extending their thoughts no further, than
just what is before them, though they live, and move, and have their Being in
God: are always under his all-seeing Eye; yet he is not all their thoughts, tho
he will bring them to Judgment, for all they do, yet they think not of it: This
evidently appears in the advice the Holy Ghost gives young ones: in the 11. of
Eccles. 9. its true, all men naturally are inconsiderate about these things;
but young ones are averse to the thoughts of God, their Soul, Death and
Judgment: because the remembrance of these things, would damp their youthful
sensual Delights, and Pleasures, and administer trouble to their minds, against
which that age of life has an irreconcilable enmity; and hence it is, that
the vanities, and fooleries of this world, out way Christ, Heaven, and eternal
Life. O did young ones but seriously consider, and bend their thoughts close to
those rouzing Doctrines and truth, as they are represented in the word of God:
Their undone state by Nature, and the peril of Hell and Damnation, they are in
each moment, whilst they delay Conversion, and flying for refuge to a crucified
Jesus; surely it would render the temptations of fleshly pleasures, jejune, and
vain, and prove an excellent means to awaken them to Repentance, ere the day of
Gods Patience be ended: which brings me to the fourth and next sin young people
are prone to.

4. Delaying of Religion, saying, They are yet young, and its time enough,
though young People are often told, how much more dubious, and difficult their
Repentance, and turning to God will be hereafter, then now, supposing their
Lives should be continued to them. Yet (without the breach of Charity) one may
say, scarce one of many Hundreds, but delay and neglect a present compliance
with those repeated Calls of God to Conversion; when, in the mean time, their
Youthful Lusts, their Games, and Sports, call them, and find a quick and ready
Attendance, and Closure. David's great Care was to set about the Work of
Religion, while he was under the first, and early calls thereunto, 119 Psalm. 60
I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. But how rare is it to
see, young Persons (whom the Devil lays Siege to, endeavoring to persuade them
that it is time enough, when they are older, to sleep their thoughts in such a
melancholy Subject as Religion is) to follow his example.

5. Eager pursuits after Pleasures, Loving them more than God. Pleasure is that
which strangely carries it with the younger sort of People, (Modo P^tiar) says
the youngster, let me have Pleasure now, whatever ^^me on'^: as Esau parts with
his Birth^^ght, for a mess of red Potage: so young ones are ready to part with
Heaven for the pleasures of Sin, that are but for a season; they are joined to
pleasure, as Ephraim was to Idols; and O how difficult a task is it, to force
a divorce between them: Shall I be cloistred up, and manacled in the days of my
Youth, by the severities of Repentance, and Selfdenial, this is to bid me be no
more Naomi; but Marah? Thus the young man pleads, like the Figtree and
Olivetree you read of in the 9. of Judges and the 9. Should I leave my fatness,
and my sweetness, etc. so should I leave my youthful Pleasures to match with
Sighs, Groans, Tears, and a strict course of mortification? No, no, i will rather
rejoice in the days of my Youth, ere the days come wherein I can have no
Pleasure: Thus Youth are prone (like the Be that hovers about the Pot of
Honey, until at length it is drowned in it) to hanker after, yea, madly to ru^
full breast upon Pleasure, u^till like a da^^ it strikes into their very Liver.
Their mind are perpetually drunk with the love of Pleasure, till they fall down
Dead.

F. Flexibility to Temptation, as dry Tinde^ to the least spark, hence you read
in the Pr^verbs, frequently of the young Man's bei^^ easily enticed and drawn
away, Chap. 7. from the 7 Verse to the 23. And I beheld among ^^ simple Ones; I
discerned among the Youths, young Man void of Understanding, and he w^^ the way
to the Harlots House, etc. Verse 21. With her fair Speech she caused him to
yield, and he goes after her straightway, as an Ox goes to the Slaughter,
etc. hence in the 1st. Chap. 10. you Read, My Son, if Sinners entice thee,
consent thou not, etc. intimating, that impetous or vigorous Inclination and
Bias that is in Youth to consent to Temptations; young ones are easily drawn
by the smallest Temptations; they are ready to meet it half way, yea, to out go
it. Isa. 5. 18. We read of some that will Transgress for a piece of Bread. 28.
Prove. 21. Ahab sold himself to work Wickedness. Judas offered himself to sell
Christ. and Ephraim willingly walked after the Commandment of False Worship. 5.
Hosea 11. Thus young People are presently persuaded, the least Motion is bait
and hire enough; like soft Wax they readily receive the stamp of a Temptation.

G. Going down the Stream, and following ^ Multitude to do Evil, excusing all
with this, Namely, That there are Thousands, and Millions, that steer the
Course, and tread the Paths that I do; ducimur exemptis. If Ministers give
warning from God to avoid, and flee such and such youthful Sins, and cry out as
the Angel to Lot, Haste escape for thy Life, cito, citius citissime: Presently
in some ^^ch plausible manner as this they reply, If I never do worse. I hope I
shall do well enough, ^ave not others done the same or as bad? I have the
Examples of Thousands, a multitude on my side, both of Superiors, Equals, and
Inferiors. O the unspeakable deal of Poison that is thus conveyed in the
hearts of young Persons; and the innumerable Souls that go to Hell by Pattern!
How many Children have learned to Lie, Swear, break the Sabbath, and deride the
Godly, from their Graceless Fathers and Mothers, who have herein been special
Factors for the Devil and Hell.

8. Hating Instruction, and Admonition, and Reproof. This is another Sin that
Youth are guilty of. 5 Proverbs 11, 12. There you have the Rebellious Youth
brought in under strong Impressions of the Terrors of the Lord for this very
Sin. And thou Mourn at the last and say, How have I hated Instruction, and
would not obey the Voice of my Teachers. O how many sad Witnesses have we had
of this at Tyburne. Hence it is that we find Godly Parents often times abounding
in Tears, wringing their Hands, smiting their Breasts, and crying out, O
nothing will work upon my Chil^ Thousands of times have I prayed, wept, warned,
and after all as stubborn and disobedient a before! Alas, there is a secret
loathing of goo^ Council in Youth, Monitoribus Asper. Youn^ Men love to consult
with Flesh and Blood and to walk after the Imaginations of their own Hearts,
but they hate to comply wit^ the Sage and Serious Instructions of Religion.

9. Intemperance in Meats and Drinks, which stands in a voluntary eating and
drinking to excess, for the pleasing the Appetite; this is not so much the
Temptation of old and sickly People, as of our youth, to pamper, and glut their
vile Bodies; as if God had made them a kind of upright Bruits, that need not
stoop down to a Trough, or in resemblance of a Spring, or a Hogshead that are
of little use, save to contain Liquor. Alexandrinus calls this Sin the
Throat-Devil, and the Belly-Devil. And too true is it, that the Devil
destroys Multitudes of Youth by this Sin, who for the pleasing of their
Throats will sell him their Souls, as Esau his Birthright, for his Belly: O
this Canine, Eager, and Insatiable Appetite; where it Rules, it Ruins all.
Physicians say, That of those who outlive their Childhood, scarce one of many
that dye in their Prime, but by Intemperance; for generally in the younger
sort, ^eligion and Reason are weakest, and but underlings to their unruly
Appetites, and ^hen once this outrageous Lust has got the Ascendant, and Regal
Power, a blazing S^^r burning in the Heavens, is not so fatally ^^^inous of
Ruin, as this. Seneca says, E^^lo est Parochianus Diabolo. An Epicure is
Parishioner to the Devil; who then can ^^^ciently lament that Innundation of
Epicu^^m, Gluttony and Drunkenness that has ^^er-run the Youth of this Nation?
Ah, who can refrain Tears? To see how many born of pious Progenitors, and bred
up in Religious Families; again, How many born of Gruth Blood, descended from
Honorable Ancestors, and bred up at the Feet of Gamaliel at the Schools, and
of pregnant Capacities, and who might have been peculiar Blessings to the Land;
I say to see these (as well as others that are brought forth in a lower
Station, and brought up in a viler and a more irreligious way) to Sacrifice
their Youthful days to Bacchus, the God of Wine, and emasculate their Spirits
in Taverns, and Drunken Societies. We read in 1 Pet. 4. 3. of those who walked
in Lasciviousness, Lusts, excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings wherein they
think strange, that you run no^ with them to the same excess of Riot, speakin^
evil of you. I need not search into the Riotous Practice of other Nations, nor
lay m^ Scene abroad to make Application of thi^ Text: Alas, it holds too true
of us in th^^ Nation, who reckon that they have no^ made their Guests welcome,
if they have no^ made them Drunk, and deem it as a piece incivility and
rudeness, that deserves a stat^ if you will not go on to pledge them in their
Hellish Health to their Wits end. Goo^ Lord! that ever any that breaths within
the English Air, and that names the name ^^ Christ, should commence such
Wickednes^ Oh that our Head were Waters, etc.

10. Another Sin that youth is prone to, is keeping ill Company, that Soul
ruining snare of Satan's, which has slain its thousands, as being the
foundation and inlet to all manner of wickedness. O how many hopeful young ones
have been spoiled in the very bud, by the infectious influences of vile
Company; whence is that advice of the Wise-man's in the 1st. of Prove. 10. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. My Son if sinners entice thee, consent thou not, walk not
thou in the way with them, refrain thy feet from their Path. What Solomon says
elsewhere of the steps of the strange Woman, we may say of the steps of wicked
company, they take hold of Hell, it is a new link in the Chain that fasteneth
damnation to you, it is like tying a Millstone about your necks, that will pull
you both Soul and Body into the bottom of the Sea of Gods Wrath, from whence
there is no recovery. O young ones, you will find it one of the hardest things
that is, when once you are engaged in evil Company, to disenthral your selves
again: little do you know where it will lead you, it will insensibly harden you
and bring you to a reprobate mind, it will vastare conscientiam, lay wast your
Consciences, and so seat you in the Chair of the Scorners; and then the next
step is Hell. Ah! how many young ones, when first they have engaged in evil
company, and set out with them, have been a little startled and affrighted at
their interlocutory Oaths (for nemo repent fit turpissimus) as Juven. speaks:
yet after a while frequenting such company they find themselves almost
irrecoverably ingulfed into those prodigious sins, that themselves could not
have believed they should ever adventured on; such an Emblem of Hell is ill
company, that (without the breach of Charity) one may say that none continue in
the one while they live, but inevitably fall into the other when they dye, and
so their steps take hold of Hell, where the worm dies not, and fire is not
quenched; where their fellowshp in sin will be turned into a miserable
fellowship of flames, where an holy and just God will do that, viz. damn them,
which they in their merry meeting have so often called upon him to do; and the
Devil will take that, viz. their Souls, which they have so freely and
frequently given him.

11. Another sin whereunto youth are much addicted, is Lying, a sin that
seems to be contemporary with speech in young Children; that as soon as their
earthly Parents teach them to speak, their hellish father the Devil, learns
them to lie; that as soon as the one learns them to go on Earth, the other
learns them to go to Hell, hence these two are joined together, in that 58.
Psalm. 3. Speaking of young ones, they go astray from the Womb telling lies.
This is a sin, that all, but especially young ones are exceedingly prone to,
whereby Satan leads them captive at his will, to make them his Vassals: Look
there young people! there are several sins that are (as I may say) the very
offspring and Progeny of Satan, and in acting of them, a sinner resembles the
Devil, as a Child the Father: For instance, Pride, it is called their
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6. an angry passionate spirit it is styled
giving place to the Devil, 4. Ephesians. 26, 27. the like one may say of this sin of
Lying, in the 8. John, and the close of the 44. v. the Devil is called a liar,
and the Father of Lies, and in the 5. of the Acts 3. Satan is there said to
fill Ananias his heart to lie against God, which shows that where there is a
lie in the Tongue, there is the Devil filling of the Heart, ruling in Children
of disobedience; hence James says 4. chap. and the 6. v. that it sets all on
fire of Hell. O how great is the power that Satan acquireth in young people by
this sin, it gives him that which he so earnestly desires; namely, a spiritual
possession of Souls, as a man possesses and dwells in his House, and there it
is he learneth young ones that masterpiece in the Black Art, to call Evil
Good, and Good Evil, and to deny the fact when they have committed sin, as 2
Kings 5. 25. thy Servant (said lying Gehazi) went no whether; thus Jacobs Sons,
after they had wickedly sold their Brother, come with a plausible Tale (tho a
palpable lie) to their Father, we found this bloody Garment in the Field, but
whose it is we know not, 37. Genesis 32.

12. Another Sin, young ones are given to, is neglect of Relative duties, as
honoring and obeying their Parents and Masters, etc. this is a sin peculiar to
young people, and there are but few that escape the guilt of it. Hence have
Ministers Ecclesiastical Fathers, almost every Lordsday Bills of complaint,
like Ezekiels Roll, filled with lamentation, put into our hands, begging our
earnest Prayers for rebellious and disobedient Children and Servants: Though
the justice of God is ordinarily manifest in the execution of his threatened
Judgments upon Children of Belial even in this Life: yet alas, how seldom do
young people take and improve such awful, awakening warnings, to hear and fear
and do no more so wickedly? How common is it for Children, yea, when grown up,
and their Parents grown old, to set light by them, and to speak Sawcily and
Contemptuously of them, and to them, behaving themselves proudly, and rudely
before them, as if they were their equals; a practice most vile against the
light of Nature, and always (according to the Scripture) entaileth a Curse upon
such unnatural Children, 27. Deuteronomy. 16. Cursed be he that sets light by his
Father or his Mother: and all the people shall say, Amen. The punishment that
the Heathens inflicted on such, was, to few them in a Sack with a Dog, Cat,
Viper and Ape, (an Emblem of unnaturalness) and so drown them together, and the
punishment that the Law of God in the time of Moses did assign to a rebellious
Son, was to be stoned to Death: 21. Deuteronomy. 18. If a man have a stubborn and
rebellious Son, which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of
his Mother, then shall they lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders
of the City, and all the men of the City shall stone him with stones till he
dye. And it is observable, now under the Gospel, how the holy and wise
Povidence of God ordinarily sets a mark upon disobedient Children, either in
imbittering their lives with a succession of miseries and vexations here, or
suffering them to fall by an untimely Death.

13. Another Sin Youth is prone to, is Sabbath breaking; a day which usually
young people meet together upon, to walk abroad in the Fields, and take their
pleasure, and run into all excess of Riot, Chambering, acting their filthy
lusts, drinking Healths, playing at Cards, Dancing, Swearing, and sometimes
Quarrelling, Fighting, Thieving, Robbing of Orchards and Gardens, and thus
inverting that Day which God has sanctified, and appropriated to his own
Honor and Service, and the saving of souls; to the service of the Devil, and
damning their own souls; sure I am the whole Christian world at this day groans
under the tragical and bitter effects of this sin, and he is nothing worthy of
Eyes that weeps not to see whole droves running headlong to Hell through this
breach, viz. the Breach of the Sabbath. Verily the Devil has more service done
on this day than on all the six besides, and how deplorable is the serious
consideration hereof, that the day which should be Christ's, is the Devil's
great harvest of Souls, and that day which should make joy in Heaven, by an
addition to the Church, of such as shall be saved, should ever prove Satan's
triumph, and Hells enlarging it self beyond Measure, at the accession of so
vast a multitude of Sabbath Breakers into it.

14. Another sin that Youth is exceedingly prone to, is nourishing of vain
hope, and flattering themselves with the thought of long life, putting far away
from them the memorial of the evil Day. Young people account it, a kind of
death to think of Death; the meditations, or tidings of it, are (like those of
the Judges coming to the Bench, to Malefactors) entertained with great
reluctance; and when they cannot wholly banish the items of it, out of their
Consciences, they will be sure to set it a great way off: as those bold sinners
did the Prophets Vision, in the 12. of Ezekiel. 27. the Vision that he sees, is
for many days to come, and hence as that evil Servant, in the 24. Mat. 48. when
he says in his heart, my Lord de^ayeth his coming, he began to smite his
fellow Servant, and to eat, and drink with the drunken; so young people, when
they once drive off the thoughts of death, as far as they can from day to day,
then they run a whoring from God, lay aside Religious duties, let loose the
reins of their Lusts, laugh at the tremendous threatenings of the Almighty. It
is one of the greatest strengthners of temptations to Luxury, Pride, and almost
every sin in the World, when sinners are bold, to promise themselves many years
to come, as you may see in that 12. Luke 17, 18, 19. where our Savior brings
in that foolish rich man speaking to his soul, after this manner, Soul take
thine ease, eat, drink, be merry, thou have goods laid up for many years. O
young men, as you would escape the rebukes an angry God, and an exasperated
guilty Conscience, promise not your selves long life, it is the ready way to
Atheisin and Apostasy: whereas if you would always keep the eye of your mind
open, to behold the speedy approach of Death, and Judgment, as in rem
presentem, how admirably would it work, how serious in casting up your souls
accounts, and imploring of pardon and eternal Life would you be.

15. Another of these youthful sins is Pride, and vain Glory, which stands in
an overvaluing of our selves, with reference to the endowments of the Mind, or
Body; such as Wit, Parts, Beauty, Stature, Strength, Agility, etc. Young ones
have much darkness, and ignorance both of God, and themselves; and hence they
set themselves as among the Stars in their own thoughts: if they have Parts,
how prone are they to be proud of them, conceiting themselves to have much more
than indeed they have, and then above measure, admiring their own Wit, and
strength of parts, and expecting every one else should admire them too, not
considering that these mental gifts, without Grace, makes them more like the
Devil, that abounds with endowments of this kind, and to be more serviceable to
him (as malignant instrumentals) in promoting the ruin of men's souls; as Austin
told a great, but unsanctified Scholar, ornari a te diabolus quaerit, the Devil
seeks to be honored, and served by thee: And you read in 3. Genesis 1. Because
the Serpent was more subtle than any other beast, the Devil used that Creature
to destroy mankind. Now this Pride of Intellectuals, is never more dangerous,
than when it terminates upon Religion, and Souls affairs; and there are none
more obnoxious hereunto, than young people, a little knowledge makes them
think they are fit to be Preachers presently: whereas the old, and experienced
Christian, with trembling cries out, Lord, who is sufficient for these things.
Young ones, for want of acquaintance with, and experience of the wickedness,
and deceitfulness of their own hearts, are apt to think that they have
abundance of Grace; Paul, a young man, was highly conceited of his good estate
in Religion and spiritual matters, till the commandment came in the power of
it, and revived in him a sight and sense of his cursed and sinful estate by
nature. 7. Romans 9. And so the young man in the Gospel according to Matthew. 19.
chap. 20. All these have I done, what lack I yet. O young man remember, this
spiritual Pride, is like the fly in the pot of Ointment, make all to stink, if
you overvalue your selves in matters of Religion, you may soon undo your
selves, and fall into the snare, and condemnation of the Devil. This was the
reason why Paul forbids the choosing of a young beginner in Religion to the
work of the Ministry: Not a Novice, lest he should be lifted up with Pride. 1 Timothy 3. 6. Paul was a wise man, he well knew the subtilties of Satan, and the
want of experience, in young ones, would soon ensnare them, and betray them
into the hands of this sin. And then with respect to Pride in bodily
endowments, as Beauty, Strength, Stature, etc. Alas, how is the Youth of the
present Age grown monstrous herein? Never did Pride ride in such state, when it
went abroad in the Streets of Sodom, as at this day it does in this Nation,
wherein I was born, and in this City wherein I now breathe. Alas, what
wandering eyes, wanton dresses, foolish fashions, apish imitations, extravagant
washings, profane patching, in a word, a practical devotedness to the vile
Body, that is but a fine skin full of filth, Phlegm, Choler and Corruption,
abounds in this City: O the Arts, Studies, Pains, among us all for the
neatifying, priding, pampering this piece of earth, that e're long will be meat
for the Worms. O young people, what will a white skin, or strength of Limbs, or
a rosy Complexion signify, when God rebukes man for sin, his beauty will
consume as a Moth. 39. Psalm. 11. One fit of an Ague can alter thy beauty, or a
visitation with the Small Pox, can change it into its contrary.

16. Another sin Youth is ordinarily prone to is quenching and stifling the
holy motions of Gods Spirit: This more especially they are liable to, that are
the seed of the Righteous, and that dwell among those, whose chief scope and
aim is to promote your Conversion by their daily Prayers, Instructions, and
holy examples. Such young ones, as are thus educated in righteous Families, and
used to a constant attendance (through the care of their godly Parents or
Masters) on the means of Grace, both public and private; they do meet with
innumerable inward motions of the spirit of God, striving in, and with them,
they lie more obvious to the Lords grace; and I am persuaded that there is not
one to be found among these, that are come to years of understanding, but what
must own the truth of this. But oh, the woeful opposition, that is commonly made
by young ones against these holy suggestions, and illapses of the blessed
spirit; they are usually like the sparks falling into a Sea of water: when they
are at a Sermon, how many knocks, and secret jogs, touches of Heart, and
Conscience, do they meet with, to consider soberly about their spiritual and
everlasting state. But what through the subtilty of Satan and the love of
foolish mirth, and pleasures, and vain company, etc. presently as soon as they
return they lose all, quench those begun convictions, and just were it if the
abused spirit should depart for ever and strive no more. Be assured young
people, you cannot sin, at so cheap a rate, as an old sinner, that never had
the heavenly gales, breathings, operations, motions to conversion,
interruptions, and checks in sinful courses, as you have had. O it is this that
accents Gospel condemnation, that light is come, and men love darkness rather
than light. 3. John 19. When because light reproves, gauls the sinner,
therefore it is hated, this is dreadful indeed. O ponder a while what an
infinite mercy of God, it is to your poor miserable souls, to have the
strivings and negotiatings of the holy spirit of God. 147. Psalm. 19. he has
not dealt so with all of your ranks, and standing: How many thousands are let
alone, like young Dagons? now to resist these, and to sin against the light,
argues such a love to sin, and aversation to God, as justly may place you in
the forefront of desperate sinners.

17. The next sin Youth are prone to, is Atheism, etc. ridiculing serious
Religion. The holy Apostle distinctly foretold, by a spirit of Prophecy, this
very sin, in the 2 Peter 3. 3, 4. knowing this first, that there shall come in
the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the
promise of his coming; surely these are those last days, wherein we live; and
never did this sin of Atheism, and deriding at goodness, obtain such a vogue,
till of late, in this irreligious Age; wherein the main Articles of the
Christian Faith are shaken in the minds of multitudes of young people. Satan
has corrupted the minds of many, and diffused his venomous influence, not only
through the Pagan and Papal, but also through the Protestant and Reformed world
too. O! what a world of infidelity, and Atheism is to be found in our Cities,
and Countries, and would to God our Churches were free: but if we compare the
lives of abundance of Professors, with their pretended Creed, really their
profession will scarce cover their Hypocrisy, and Atheism; though you should
exercise the largest Charity. God, and Christ, the immortality of the Soul,
Death, and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, are in their Creed, and they would
condemn you for a rank Heretic, if you should deny any of these Doctrines; But
a little observation of their sensual lives will soon acquaint you with their
vile and odious Hypocrisy and Atheism; while you behold in their lives, the
great God disobeyed, Christ vilified, Heaven condemned, and the Worlds vanities
preferred before it, Hell ventured upon for the sake of a pleasing sin. And
among us there are a generation of young Wits sprang up, that (that albeit they
have had baptismal Water on their face, yet) arrived to that highth of sin, as
to tell the world, not only in their works but also in words, that Religion is
a mere fancy, nothing but the melancholy imagination of some poor spirited
men, that foolishly and fondly conceit of such a thing as God lives, and of a
Heaven prepared for those that have it, and Hell for those that want it, and
then they scare, and affright themselves with those buggbears, that their own
fancies represent. And thus as the judicious Gurnal sadly observes, (p. 298.)
Some among us have dared to make it their boast, and glorying, that they have
at last got from under the burden of that Tyrant Conscience, they can Swear
and Drink, Whore, and what not, without any check, or remorse. Time was when
they were under the wing of their Parents, that they trembled at the hearing of
such guilt: But now entering into those Atheistical Clubs, and imbibing their
principles, their Consciences are become silent, after they have been duck't so
often for scolding, that they are Sermon poof, and laugh at the Notion of
Damnation; and at Ministers, who in the name of God threaten impenitent sinners
with it, and look upon them, as the veriest fools, and mad Men in the World; --
but know, that these will prove the worst fools at last, yea, worse by far,
than David's Fool, Psalm. 14. 1. The food has said in his heart, there is no
God: That fool durst only whisper it, but these speak it boldly and openly:
These declare their Sin as Sodom, and hide it not. To go about to confute these
Sons of Belial, would be a vain thing; we have Moses and the Prophets, every
Leaf therein is sufficient. But these Sinners deride the Scriptures; and so
though one should arise from the Dead, and come from Hell with the Flames of that
burning Lake about his Ears, and tell them the Torments they endure; neither
would they believe. Surely that such a Generation not only of practical, but
professed Atheists should be found in a Land, that has enjoyed so much
Gospel Light, is a lamentation, and ought to be for a lamentation. I may say as
Jeremiah, 2. chap. 12. v. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be ye
horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord. Methinks it should make
our very Hearts to tremble, when we see such cursed Weeds spring up in such a
Garden, that God has taken such pains withal; he is more than blind that does
not see, and so say, Stultorum plena sunt omnia. Master Greenham feared rather
Atheism, than Popery, would be England's Ruin. The Lord affect your Heart, and
mine with this Abomination of the Day we live in, namely the ridiculing, and
deriding the power of Godliness, stiling it nothing but Fancy, or Faction,
Pride, or Singularity.

18. Another Sin the Youth of this Age, are much given to, is Swearing,
Cursing, and taking the Holy and Reverend Name of God in vain. A Sin for which
the Land mourns. There are two Kinds of it, both which young people are prone
to.

1. Using the Name of God unreverently in common talk, at every turn to say [O
Lord, O God, or, God bless me, or, take me] this is taking God's Name in vain;
and how many thousands of little Children, as well as others, are guilty in
this kind, almost at every word, tossing that awful and holy Name about in
their graceless mouths; which a world of Glorious Angels and glorified Spirits
are magnifying continually.

2. Horrid prodigious Oaths, not to be named without abhorrency, Romans 3. 13, 14
you read there that their Throat is an open Sepulcher, the poison of Asps is
under their Lips; whose Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness. And certainly
if ever the Youth of a Kingdom, were in danger of that dreadful Curse of the
Almighty, flaming out from the Mount Ebal of those Scriptures; the Swearing
Youth of this Kingdom is, Zech. 5* 2, 3, 4. And he said unto me, What see
thou* And I answered, I see a flying Roll, the leng^ thereof is twenty Cubits,
and the breadth there of two Cubits. Then said he unto me, This i^ the Curse
that goes forth over the who^^ Earth: for every one that swears shall b^ cut
off according to it. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, and it
shall enter into the House of him that swears falsely by my Name, and it shall
remain in the middle of his House, and it shall consume it, with the Timber,
and Stones thereof. Whence you may note, that so long as this Sin remains
unrepented of, this Curse remains and abides on them, till it bring utter ruin
upon them and their whole Estate. Mal. 3. chap. 5. And I will come near to you
in Judgment, and I will be a swift Witness against the Swearer, says the Lord
of Hosts. Exodus 20. 7. The Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his
Name in vain. Not guiltless (there is a Meiosis in those words) that is, the
Lord will be severely avenged on such. O the fearful estate, of not a few, but
multitudes, and whole troops of Children, and young ones, in this Land, in this
City, in our Armies, in our Fleets, by reason of this Sin! who can number the
Persons, much less able are we to number the Oaths, the horrid Imprecations
they use, that almost at every word call to God to Damn them, their Souls,
their Blood? Woe to us, the moral Heathen would be ashamed of us: Is it not time
to lament, to see a young Generation run with open Mouth upon Ruin, with their
Mouth set against Heaven in Blasphemies, and such prodigious Vices as hasten
their own Damnation, and threaten England's Destruction; may not we justly
fear, that the bloody Oaths of the Land of our Nativity, may turn it into an
Aceldama, i. e. a Field of Blood. In this Sin are wrapped both Parents and
Children, Masters and Servants, Officers and common Soldiers, Rich and Poor,
and too frequently Ministers with the People, the Buyer, and the Seller. Verily
if the Lord, who threatens to be a swift Witness against the Swearer, should
now come among us, with his deserved, as well as threatened Curse, what scudding
and crying to the Hills and Mountains to cover us, would there be! A Tree
loaded with Boughs is fit for lopping; a Sinner loaded with Oaths, is fit to be
hew'n down, and cast into Hell Fire. A Chimney furred with Soot, will take fire
at last; a Sinner's mouth furred with Oaths, will at last, without Repentance,
burn him with unquenchable Fire. O how little is this considered by our common
Swearers; O young ones take heed of this Sin: young Joseph when he was in a
Swearing Court, he learned to swear the Court-Oath; viz. by the Life of
Pharaoh, that was his Sin. But alas, in our Age it is become fashionable, and a
piece of Gentility to Swear by the Death, Wounds, Blood of Christ; Petty Oaths
of Mass, Faith, and Troth, which in former times were most severely condemned
by the good old Puritans: Now woe to us, we run to the highest form in the
Devil's School, and commence Masters of that Black Art of damme's, and
full-mouthed Blasphemies. Yea, and (the Lord be merciful to us) our little
Children have learned it as soon as they can speak or waddle about Streets; the
sound whereof, has often pierced my Heart, with my Ears: the good Lord of
Heaven and Earth banish it out of our Island, or it will (I fear) sink us. We
are encompassed about with two Oceans, says one, an Ocean of Waters, and an
Ocean of Mercies; And let me add a third, namely an Ocean of Oaths, which if
not reformed, will bring a fourth, viz. an Ocean of Miseries. Some say Words
are but Wind: it is true; but it is such a Wind as will blow a Soul to Hell, if
Grace prevent it not.

19. Another Sin that young people are notoriously given to, and guilty of, is
Idle, and Sinful squandring away their precious time; young People think that
they have such a profound, and full stock of time to come, that they have
enough to spare and spend profusely, and while away (as the Country Phrase is)
at present; and therefore they make little or nothing of lavishing out Hours
and Days. You know persons will spend prodigally out of a full Purse, who would
be very sparing, if they knew they had but a little, or were like to come to
Poverty. Thus Youth foolishly fancy that, because some have lived to see and
fulfill 70, or 80 Years, therefore they must do so too: and when they have been
thus kind to themselves, in making such a computation of many Years to come;
then they turn Prodigals of their time, and cast it away, as a thing of naught,
and with it cast away all care of their Souls, and loiter out their
Morning-Season, at that profuse rate, as if they were never to be called to
account for that, or that God only designed, and assigned the Evening of their
Life, that last, and worst part of time, to be redeemed, and carefully
improved, for their better part their precious Souls. But how miserably cheated
are young People herein, as appears by those many awakening instances, of our
Lord's coming to young Ones, in the Morning of their Life, a time, when they
least of all looked for him, and then how have they cried out; O precious time!
more worth than a World, when it comes to the last Sand at the bottom of the
Glass: O then what a mercy would they esteem it, if God would trust them once
again with Time. O young People, think of this the next Temptation to Idleness
or carnal Ease o^ Pleasures that returns, and frown upon it give it the same
entertainment, as you would a Thief that comes to kill, or rob you; remember
your Souls and Eternity are imbarqued in your youthful Seasons: and surely the
consideration of the worth of your Souls, and the astonishing nature of
Eternity, carries force enough to make the extravagant lavishers of time, to
become the most thrifty Husbands of it, as one of the most precious things in
the World. O young Man, thou have now a rich Price put into thy hands; do
thou want a Heart to improve it? Know thou, that ere long thou may have a
Heart, but no price of precious Time in thine Hand. We are fallen into a loose
and licentious Age.

20. Uncleanness is another Sin, that Youth is prone to, this is the breach of
the Seventh Commandment. In which Commandment there is a two fold Uncleanness
forbidden, first, mental, or the uncleanness of the Mind; secondly, corporal,
or that of the Body. Now Youth is commonly addicted to both these, and to
watch, and wait for opportunities to fulfill their impure Lusts; hence in the
7th of the Prove. 6, 7, 8, 9. you read: At the Window of my House, I looked
through the Casement, and behold among the Simple Ones, I discerned among the
Youths, a Young Man void of understanding, passing by the way to her House, and
he went near her Corner, in the twilight in the Evening, and behold there met
him a Woman with the attire of an Harlot, his Eye waited for the twilight, and
in the twilight he was taken by her; as you may see in the 23 verse. Peter
speaks 2 Epist. 2 chap 4. verse. of Eyes that are full of Adultery. It Is true
indeed, that this Sin has the same common principle as other Sins, viz. a
corrupt Nature; it is seated in the Heart, there is the Fountain of it, 15.
Matthew. 19. Out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, etc.
But yet the Eye is the Heart's chief agent to espy out objects, and to find out
and fetch in Fuel for this Sin: And as the Heart sometimes sets the Eye on work
to prole, and range about for a beautiful Bait; so the Eye sometimes meeting
with Objects, sets the Heart on work yea, all a fire, or in a flame of
adulterou^ Lustings: Youth is a hot Age, and exceedingly propense to be carried
away, with these lascivious and filthy Lustings (as hot an^ fat Grounds are
most ferti^^ and abounding with filthy Weeds) hence we find upon Record, 15.
Luke 13, 14. the Younger Brother called the Prodigal Son, who spent a upon
Harlots, his vicious and corrupt Afections were restless, and raging, till h^
had yielded his Members, as Instrument and Servants to this Sin of Uncleanness,
^ the Apostle phraseth it in the 6. Romans 13. and 1^. Not that I speak this as
if other Ages we^^ free from such inordinate Lusts: for Nature Corruption is
not idle in any Age; but of a Ages, Youth is most incessantly, and vi^lently
bent hereunto: So that it is to ^^ accounted a singular Mercy and Grace f^^ a
young Person to pass that season of Life chastely, as not to contract some such
notab^^ blot to cleave to him (like a Leprosy,) as shall be matter of just
shame, and humiliation before the Lord, so long as he lives. Sure I am the
success Satan has had in poisoning the Youth of this City with this sordid and
beasily Sin deserves to be lamented (were it possible) with Tears of Blood: O
how desirable a Mercy would it be if the Lord would please to touch the Hearts
of those who are fearfully guilty of this base Sin among us, and bring them to
cry out with the ^eper, 13. Lev. 45. I am unclean, I am unclean; and to make
that Confession as the Prophet does in 1. Isaiah 6. From the Sole of the Foot,
to the Head, nothing but putrefying Sores; and then to put up that Petition of
David's in 51. Psalm 10. Create in me a Clean Heart, O God. And that of Peter's
in the 13. John 9. Wash me, Lord, not my Feet only, but my Hands and Head, yea,
my whole Body, and my whole Soul also; as Paul prayed for the Thessalonians, 1
chap. 5. 23. That God would sanctify them wholly in Body, Soul and Spirit.

21. The next and last Sin of Youth that I shall mention is, A woeful giddiness
of Spirit to imbibe and receive any kind of loose and wild Errors that are
spread abroad. Indeed the Ringleaders and Broachers of Error oftentimes are
persons who have passed the flower of their Age: but usually they that run
after them and are proselyted by them, they are our raw, and unexperienced
Youth, and more especially such of them as have not been catechized, nor by the
care and endeavors of Parents and Masters, been well grounded in the
Principles of Religion, for want of which they have easily been seduced and led
into Errors by such as lie in wait to deceive. And woe to us, are we not
miserably overrun at this day with pernicious Errors? contending most
unchristianly for our own Devices, and Parties, crying out, Lo here is Christ,
and there is Christ, when more truly it may be said, Lo here is Satan, and
there is Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of Light, and through his
subtilty corrupting the minds of many among us from that simplicity which is in
Christ. 2 Cor. 11. 3. Hence the Apostle was filled with a Godly jealousy and
fear lest the Corinthians should be removed and carried away from Christ. The
good Lord humble us for our swervings from the end of the Commandment, which is
Love out of a pure Heart and of a good Conscience, and Faith unseigned, and for
our turning aside so much to vain Janglings. Error has got the Ascendant in
the Cockloft of some men's Brains, and there it so inebriates and infatuates
them, that (like the Gnostics of old, who under the pretense of New Light and
Revelation, fansied themselves admirably Holier than others, so) these conceit
themselves to be more Evangelical and refined, because more airy and notional,
and then they are strongly inclined to spend all their Zeal in a violent
obtruding their own starving and sleepy Opinions upon others, which indeed
serve for no other end, but to devour all the Life and Substance of Religion,
as the lean Kine, in Pharaoh's dream, did eat up the Fat. How audaciously have
some by their loose and lewd Pens, and Tongues, argued against the merit and
Deity of the Son of God, derided the Spirit of Prayer, advanced Morality, and
the works of the Law in the room of Christ, boasting of the sufficiency of
man's power to save himself: and then on the other hand, how industrious have
some been to contrive a smooth and easy way for corrupt Nature to come to
Heaven, without the toilsome labor of subduing our Lusts, and Sinful
Affections; as if now under the Gospel the holy Law of God was no Rule for us
to walk by, but laid flat (like an old Hedge) that Sinners may at their
pleasure trample on it, and walk over it: and that to be solicitous about
Sanctification and Inherent Holiness, is but a legal business, and not
influential to a Christian's Peace, nor Evidential of his Pardon; but that now
the main design of the Gospel at the first flight, is to mount Sinners so high
as to possess them with a gallant triumphant Confidence, and strong, gigantick
Persuasion of the Everlasting Decrees of God, that he has Elected, and loved
them, and that their Sins are pardoned, so that they need not trouble
themselves about Repentance, and the Law of God written or copied out on the
Table of their Hearts, and the Inhabitation of the Spirit of Grace in their
Souls, as a Principle of Spiritual Life. O how sad a sight is it to see the
Field of the Church thus overrun with Tares, and the House of God filled with
Smoke! it is enough to fill us with fear that the Fire of God's Judgment is
beginning there. Now this being the sad genius of our Times, there are none
more apt to take in the infection, than Youth, upon the account of that levity
and curiosity that usually possesses that Age. Young people have itching Ears,
and are very credulous, being rather willing to take what they hear on trust
than to trouble themselves and take pains to try what conformity such and such
Notions have to the unerring Rule, the Scriptures. Unstable Youth is given to
change, and like a Reed is soon shaken, or like young and fresh Meat in hot
weather, which is most in danger of being Fly-blown. And Satan he is that old
Serpent that is most busy to blast and poison their hopeful Spring; he is that
mystical Fox that is evermore endeavoring to spoil our Vine o^ its tender
Grapes, yea, when they begin to bud. Now when these two meet, a^ subtle Devil,
and a simple Youth, what danger is there, of an impure copulation, between the
young man's Mind and Error, especially when in the one there is a pleasing
Vagrancy and Vanity, like Dinah gadding abroad; and in the other a poisoning
Energy. And alas how is this abundantly verified by woeful experience at this
day; shoals have been perverted, insomuch that our Land is like a Lazar-House
or Hospital the Plague is begun among. O that there were some Aaron among us,
to take a Censer and put on Incense, and go in quickly, and make an atonement;
to allude to that 16 Numb. 46. And thus I have finished the second Query
proposed, viz. What those Sins are that Youth is here admonished to flee.

3d. Qu. Why is it a Duty of such special concernment for Youth to flee these
Sins?

A. In the resolution of this I shall give you these two Reasons.

1. It is a duty of special concernment for Youth to flee these Sins: 1st.
Because of the propriety of their Inherence. And

2 d. Because of the malignity of their Influence.

1. Because of the Propriety of their Inherence. The roots of all these
Youthful Lusts are deeply fixed in thy corrupt Nature. Hence they are here
styled Youthful Lusts, indeed Original Lust is one and the same specifically in
all (...); yet every Age has its particular, proper Lusts: this appropriation
cuts off young ones from all vain Excuses that ordinarily are made when they
sin: O such a one provoked me, or Satan tempted me: Alas these Lusts are from
thy self, they are inherent in thee; if it be enquired, Whence are all these
heaps of filthy Lusts in young ones? the Answer is easy: Out of the Heart
proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornication, Theft, false Witness,
Blasphemies, 15. Matthew. 19. This is that Dunghill in which the whole Serpentine
blood of all actual Sins is conceived, and brought forth: here is that ho^
Aetna which is within you (young ones) that never cease from sending forth
continual steams and fumes of vile Lusts. It true, the Devil, and the World,
are great enticers to Sin, but not like your inheren^ Lusts. 1 James 14. 15.
But every man ^ tempted, when he is drawn away of his ow^ Lust, and enticed:
That when Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin; and Sin when i^ is
finished, brings forth Death. Satan and the World can only tempt and entice you
Objectively, and Externally; but your youthful Lust tempts internally, and
therefore more dangerous. Now see the strength ^^ this 1st. Reason, viz. that
that gives me mo^^ danger, that must put me on more labou^ and diligence to
shun and escape. Besides whatever any of our spiritual Enemies should attempt
to draw you to Sin, it would be altogether ineffectual, were it not for these
Lusts within: These most endanger the Soul, and according to your mortifying
and fleeing these, you may estimate the true estate of your Soul, to be a state
of Grace 18. Psalm 23. I was also upright before him, and have kept my self
from mine Iniquity. Alas young ones, the propriety and inherence of your Lusts
is such as necessitates your continual Watchings, Strivings in Prayer at the
Throne of Grace; if a man had a Thief in his House, a Fire in his Chamber, he
had need to bestir himself, or he will be robbed and burned. Young man, thou
carriest Gunpowder about thy very Nature: O had thou not need to flee them, or
that which carries Fire. It Is dangerous yielding to thy youthful lust. It Is
like putting Fire to the Powder. It was the saying of a German Divine, when his
Friends were commending him, recounting his usefulness and serviceableness,
Auferte ignem, adhuc enim paleas habeo, Take away the Fire, for there is yet
Chaff in me. O what Guards do you young ones need, to keep you from being
ruined by so near domestic an Enemy. What sharp Winters of Frost and Snow, i.
e. Fasting, Weeping or Suffering, do thou need to kill these rank Weeds, i.
e. thy youthful Lusts, in the Garden of thy Soul: the consideration of this
Inherency of thy Lust, (young man) calls for both inward and outward Exercises;
Assistance internal; as Checks of Conscience, solicitousness of Thoughts,
earnestness of Desires, actings of Faith in Christ, the strivings, teachings,
strengthenings, quicknings of the blessed Spirit; External, as denying your
Senses that dangerous (though extremely delightful Flesh and Blood) liberty of a
guardless, careless, and needless converse with the world's Trinity, Honors,
Pleasures, Profits, and allowing your sinful and needy Soul a due proportion of
time in constant attendance upon God in all outward Ordinances, both public
and private, which he has appointed and instituted for thy help and assistance
to mortify and abandon thy youthful lusts. It Is upon this account and
consideration (namely that propriety of Sins inherence in thee) that renders
this duty of fleeing thy youthful Sins so very difficult, hence it is called 18.
Matthew. 9. a cutting off a righ^ Hand, a plucking out a right Eye; hence it is
that the Gate of entrance into Life, i^ by our blessed Savior called a strait
Gate; hence it is that if there were no Devil in the world to tempt you or
wicked Instruments to entice you, yet would you be carried out to commit all
Evil with greediness, i^ you close not with the Counsel here given you. Were it
not for this propriety of your Lusts inherence, you might no more fea^ that
roaring Lion, that goes about seeking whom he may devour; than the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, who said, The Prince of this World comes unto me, and finds
nothing in me, 14. John 30. But alas, your Lusts are within you, as the
Canaanite in the Land of Israel, and they easily beset you; there is a
naturality of Sin now since the Fall, as blackness to the Ethiopian, and like
a fretting Leprosy adheres to our Natures with so much pertinacy, that even
after conversion Sin remains while on this side the Grave* which truth is
verified by the sad experience of all believers in the world, that so they may
never put off their Christian Armor till they put off this earthly Tabernacle,
but be continually kept watching, fighting, running, wrestling, praying, etc.
after millions of Tears and Prayers still they are fain to send up their Cries
and Groans to Heaven for the abating, and destroying the remains of Pride,
Atheism, Unbelief, etc. And what hope can be left (O young ones) that ever you
will obtain a Victory, when your Enemy is so near you, nay, dwells in you, if
you lie idle? nay, how sure is it that you will be carried a miserable Captive
by your Lusts to Hell, if you take not this Advice, to flee your youthful
Lusts, especially if you consider how the Devil night and day is watching to
set Fire to thy Lusts? thou have a combustible Nature and Constitution, and he
is cunning and filled with Malice, and with all sorts of Wiles, Depths, Baits,
Snares for all tempers, and above all, he desires to have young ones; so that
to be secure and indifferent here, is in a sense equivalent to yield your Souls
to Sin and Satan: which brings me to the second Reason of this Doctrine.

Second Reason. That therefore it is a duty of special concernment to Youth, to
flee youthful Lusts, because of the malignity of their influence: this I shall
evidence to you more generally, and then more particularly. (1.) More
generally. Your youthful Lusts so far as they prevail, they destroy your Souls.
8. Romans 13. If you live after the Flesh you shall dye, (Mark it I pray) upon
what unalterable terms it runs. O the malignity of these Lusts, 7. Romans 21. and
the 23. What Fruit had you then in those things whereof yo^ are now ashamed,
for the end of those things is Death, v. 23. The wages of Sin is Death* But to
be more particular, there is a threefold evil influence these youthful Lusts
(if no^ abandoned) will certainly have upon you.

1. They will hinder your Conversion, o^ render it exceeding difficult. 2. They
will hurry you into most grievous Temptations and Perplexi^ies. 3. They will
hasten your utter Ruin an^ Destruction.
1. They will hinder your Conversion, or render it exceeding difficult, and
this they will do these two ways.

1. As they woefully indispose the Soul to it. 2. As they directly oppose the
means of it.
1. As they woefully indispose the Soul to it, this will appear, beyond the
least doubt, if you seriously consider what a polluting a pernicious influence
youthful Lusts have upon all the faculties of the Soul. These Lusts they
diffuse a blindness upon the Mind, they benum the Conscience, increase the
natural rebellion of the Will, exceedingly harden the Heart, and miserably
enthral and deprave the Affections; and so they woefully indispose the Soul to
conversion.

1st. They diffuse a blindness on the Mind, that noble faculty, the thinking,
discerning, and reasoning Power of the Soul, which some call (...), the leading
and directing Faculty, which is to the Soul what Eyes are to the Body,
therefore called 1. Ephesians. 18. the Eyes of the Understanding; these Eyes
youthful Lusts blind, so that they cannot see afar off to the end of a sinful
Life, how bitter and evil a thing Sin will prove at last, when God will bring
the young man to Judgment, for all his youthful Lusts; hence they fearlesly
chose a course of Vanity, and Sensuality, in serving diverse Lusts, and
Pleasures: Being blinded through their Lusts, they discern not the absolute
necessity of a Savior, they see no beauty in him that he should be desired;
and what more effectual bar can there be to their Conversion? Alas, while the
mind is blinded, though a poor Sinner hangs over Hell, every moment, under a just
sentence of Condemnation, at the very door of Eternity, yet all is at peace, the
Soul lies in a deep, and deadly Sleep: though a Minister come, and weep over
him, use the most rouzing Arguments with him, all is one, no^ a whit moved or
stirred, though you spea^ never so much Reason, or Scripture. ^^ Soul, thou
have an unholy Nature to be renewed, an offended God to be reconciled to* thou
have innumerable Sins, and not one o^ them pardoned: thou have Death and
Judgment to make ready for, thou have but a fe^ more days on Earth, yet while
the mind ^^ blinded they make light of all; a merry ta^^ will more affect them,
Romances, Play^ and Comedies, such Bubbles, and emp^^ Vanity are much more
pleasing, than the most powerful Heavenly Sermon. No^ whence is this? but from
the blindness young men's Minds? and whence is th^^ blindness, but from their
youthful Lust? a^ you may read in that apposite Scripture Ezekiel. 14. and 5. They
are all estranged from me through their Lusts. Lust in David blo^ted out the
impression, and remembrance of the Evil, and danger of sinning against God:
hence when he was recovered by effectual Grace, see how he rates himself in
Psalm. 73. 22. So foolish and ignorant was I, even as a Beast before thee. Lust
in toxicates the Mind, and then like a Drunkard, that through the vapors that
fume up into his Head, sleeps, and forgets all his dangers, his debts. So
it is here, and O how impossible is thy Conversion, while thy Mind is thus
darkened, the Mind, that is the Watchman of thy Soul, to keep off Sin, and
danger; and if the watchman be blind, how small hope of Conversion? By this
you see how youthful Lusts indispose the Soul to Conversion, as they blind the
mind.

2dly, They indispose the Soul for conversion as they stupifie Conscience, that
Spy in our Bosom, that Vicegerent of the supreme Judge, whose office is
various (1.) to record and register all we do, (2.) To bear witness, and give
in evidence. (3.) As a Judge to pass sentence, Conscience sits on the Throne as
God's Deputy in the Soul, to award out Life or Death. (4.) To be a Tormentor, a
never-dying Worm, it is to the damned ^n Hell, and an insupportable burden to
^ome on Earth, creating such internal Anxi^ties, and Tortures, that all the
Arts, Wits, Pleasure, and Diversions in the world cannot root out; as in
Belshazzar, Cain, Judas, Tiberius, Nero, Caligula, etc. of these diverse offices
and acts of Conscience, you read in Romans 2. 15. 1 John 3. 20, 21. Prove. 18. 14.
And that in order to Conversion, it is necessary, that this busy Faculty in
man be awakened, will appear, if you consider that 8 of Jer. 6. God hearkened
and heard, and no man repented him, saying, What have I done? but every one
turned to his course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. There you have
God's inquisition, and search, to find ou^ whether that People repented or no,
^ hearkened and heard (says God.) Then yo^ have God's evidence brought in, no
man repented, or converted; and then you have the Cause laid down of their not
repenting No man said, What have I done? q. d. Ha^ Conscience been awakened to
have done its office, to have dived into all their Villainies; had that
domestic Spy in the Bosom brought in a true account, concerning wha^ they had
done, they would certainly have repented ever this. Alas, the subtle Hea^ of a
Sinner, will endure, and bear all the historical notions of the evil of Sin, of
the ^erribleness of Hell (as one in Health can be^^ the names and notions of
Plague, Ston^ Colic, and the most tormenting disease and all but as Powder
shot, and scare-Crow^ until Conscience, like Peter, 2. Acts 36, 3^ closes
particularly with Sinners thus, Ye a^ they that with wicked Hands crucified
(...) Lord of Glory; and then they were pricked to the Heart: and as Nathan
closed with David, 2. Sam. 12. 7. He draws his Parable out of the Clouds, and
enters him with this arrest, Thou art the man; then he presently cries out, I
have sinned. O believe it, Sirs, when once Conscience meets with a desperate
Sinner, that has been ruffling it, in all manner of Riot for a time, drenching
himself in sensual pleasures, and Conscience in the name of the great God
arrests him, with an, O wretch! what have thou done? thus, and thus to provoke
the Great, the Holy, the Righteous, sin-revenging God; I have been privy to all
thy secret, as well as open Wickedness, and I have sad News to tell thee, that
the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against thee, etc. Thus when
Conscience finds out a Sinner, and spits as it were Hellfire in his Face,
believe me, it will eftsoon put the Soul upon the Rack, and cause it to break
forth with an, O Woe is me! the Sins which I now see, are bitter as Death; the
Wrath that I begin to feel at present, and that to come that I fear, makes a
kind of Tophet within me. O if I should dye in this case, what would become of
me? Lord! is there no mercy? What shall I do to be saved? Thus Conscience in
its efficacious working, is necessary to Humiliation, which is one great part
of Conversion: and then for hope of mercy, and pardon, and a fixed resolution
to forsake all known Sin, and teturning home to God, which makes up, and
compleats a Sinners conversion, you may easily discern, from what I have said,
as to the first part of Conversion, the necessity of a waking, working
Conscience, in order to Conversion: for it is the property of Conscience to
turn in upon the Soul, and debate matters discursively, in a kind of silent
reasoning with the Soul: it has both a directive, and reflexive power; i^
takes that light that lay cold and useles^ before in the mind, and brings it
down in ^way of home application to the Soul, 3. La^. 40. 119. Psalm. 59. And
now I come ^ make good what is proposed, namely, Tha^ Youthful Lusts stupefie,
and be^u^ this faculty of Conscience, and so indispo^^ the Soul to Conversion.
(Look you, Si^s although it is not in the power of young o^ old Sinners to raze
out, and expunge this Faculty out of their Breasts; for it is so esse^tial to
the Soul, as that the Soul cannot be Soul wirhout it: nothing can be more it
separable than this bosom Judge, which o^ calls sensus, and praejudicium
judicij divine Yet (though I say they cannot get rid on they may, and often do
by a love and life ^^ sin gag it, muzle and stifle it for the present they cast
Conscience into a deep sleep by yiel^ing to their Lusts. One calls the Love
^^ Sin the Devil's Opium, whereby he lu^^ Conscience asleep. Hence it is that
you read of its being past feeling, and seared as with an hot Iron Ephesians. 4.
19. and 1 Timothy 4. 2. defiled, polluted, 1. Tit. 15. not performing their
offices, being deaf to every holy suggestion of God's Spirit. O young people,
your lusts served, and obeyed, will make your Consciences to be like Lot, when
he was made drunk by his Daughters, of whom it is said, That in the Morning, he
knew nothing what he had done, in Gen 19. Thy Lusts will breed such
sottishness, and stupidity in thy Conscience, as will most certainly hinder thy
Conversion. Conscience is a Witness, but if that witness be dumb, who shall
tell thee of thy Sin, and danger? Conscience is a Schoolmaster, to direct, and
correct; but if that Schoolmaster be blind, or crazed, or lie like one stark
mad, or dead, who (I pray) shall admonish you, and administer reproof to you?
alas, we speak without you, it is Conscience that is as a thousand Witnesses
within you; and if that be like an Idol, what hope of Conversion? Conscience is
the Candle of the Lord within thee, and if this be put under a Bushel, how
easily may the Devil hurry thee blind fold to Hell and Damnation. Conscience is
appointed of God to be that to the Soul, as the Pilot is to the Ship amidst
Rocks, Sands; suppose now that the Pilot have either lost his Compass to steer
by, or has no supernal light to make an Observation by, how improbable is it,
that the Ship should ever come safe to Harbor! So if Conscience be stupefied,
how unlikely is it, that ever that Soul should be converted. It has been, and
still is to me, just ground of wonder, and astonishment, that when a Minister
comes in the Name, and by the Authority of the Great Jehovah, Maker of Heaven
and Earth, to a Congregation of sinful Worms, and there preach, and prove to
them, out of the infallible Scriptures, that they are born in Sin, and that in
their natural conditions, they are but a few steps off Eternal Damnation: and
that there is a blessed Jesus come to seek and save what is lost, and that he
is able, and willing to save to the uttermost all that come to him: and yet
after a Minister has done al^ this, not one (probably) of many Score^ in the
Auditory that brings the Doctrine preached, home to his own Soul, saying, Thi^
is my Condition, my Soul's portion, I am by Nature a Child of wrath, God's Law
has found me ou^, and convinced me o^ sin, that there are none more guilty
than I, and more worthy of Hell: I am the Man, the Woman, whom it curses, as
sure as if my Name was mentioned; but the generality detain the Truth in
Unrighteousness, they go away, and live as wickedly a^ before. Now (the Lord be
merciful to us) how could ever Dust and Ashes be thus unconcerned, did but
Conscience roundly, and soundly do its work, (viz.) to bear witness, to pass
sentence, etc. But here is the bane of all, and the true Cause of men's
Impenitency and Unconversion, they hearken and yield to their lusts, and
thereby Conscience is laid asleep. O young people, see the malignity of Sin's
influence, and say, Away ye cursed Lusts, it is high time, O my Soul, to flee
these. Awake, Conscience, awake, it is high time to regard thy message.

3dly. These youthful Lusts, they increase that natural rebellion that is in
the Will against turning to God; and so they indispose the Soul to Conversion:
the Will is an excellent part, or power of the reasonable Soul: it is compared,
by some, to the Primum Mobile in the Heavens, that carries all the inferior
Orbs away in its own motion; or like a Queen sitting upon its Throne,
exercising its dominion over the other parts of the Soul: And as Conscience
has several offices, and acts, so has the Will. The Schoolmen marshall up
several; as. Volition, and that either absolute, and efficacious, or more
languid, and imperfect: (2.) Fruition* (3.) Intention: (4.) Election: (5.)
Resolution and Consent, etc. but I shall only show you how impossible a saving
and found Conversion of the Soul can ever be, except the Will, this superior
faculty in the Soul, be brought into subjection and obedience to Christ: and
then show you how youthful Lusts not only hinder that subjection of the Will to
Christ, but strengthen its resistance and rebellion against it.

(1) How impossible a thing Conversion is without the Will be brought into
obedience to Christ. When God first created Man upon Earth, this noble part of
the Soul, the Will, was in a most perfect and holy conformity to the Will of
God; but since Sin entered, the Will is so far fallen from its primitive honor,
that Bernard says, voluntas tua infernus est tuus, that man's Will now is his
Hell; of a Virgin, she is now become like a polluted Whore; So that naturally
we will not come to Christ, John 5. 40. We will not be made clean, Jer. 13. 27.
We will walk after our own Devices, Jer. 18. 12. Now how impossible a thing is
it, that there should be a through Conversion, till this natural Rebellion of
the Will is slain, and removed; for the Will is the man, and it is everlastingly
true, and will be found so, That his you are whom you willingly obey, whether
it be of Sin unto Death, or Obedience unto Righteousness, Romans 6. 16.

(2.) Youthful Lusts yielded unto, strengthen that natural averseness and
obstinacy that is in our Will, and so it indisposeth the Soul to Conversion. We
read that Whoredom and Wine take away the Heart, in Hosea 4. 11. Why, may some
say, was the Heart set upon God before? No not at all, but by it is meant that
those Lusts do exceedingly augment that estrangedness to, and distance from
God. So here there is a natural rebellion in the Will against God: but these
youthful Lusts when fulfilled, do much more add to that resistance and
opposition, and further that wretched and vile aversion in the Will to God. And
they will introduce such a vile settled habitual enmity in the Will to the
blessed God, as that you will wish there were no God, with David's Fool in the
14. Psalm. 1. For you cannot but know that your Lusts are detestable to the holy
and pure Nature of God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, as the
Prophet speaks in the 1. Hab. 13. You have Items of this in your own Breasts,
you cannot plead ignorance herein, that when you obey your Lusts, you do that
abominable thing which his Soul hates and abhors; which (being done) most
certainly influenceth the Will to a dislike of, and regret at the holy Nature
of God, that you like not to retain him in your thoughts, but will account
thine own impure lusts more desirable, and better than God: and if so, you may
easily make an estimate how these youthful lusts indispose the Soul to
Conversion: it may as well stand with the life of a man to be cast into the
depth of the Sea with a Millstone about his neck, as it can stand with thy
Conversion whilst thou yieldest obedience to thy youthful Lusts; for these more
and more alienate thy Will from God and Christ, and swell thee with pride and
enmity against the holy Will and Word of God, that it will become a pleasing
thing to thee to shove God out of thy thoughts: 10. Psalm. 4. and to say to the
Almighty, Depart from me, I desire not the knowledge of thy ways: And can this
stand with Conversion* O see the malignity of the influence that thy youthful
Lusts have upon thy Will, to hinder thy Conversion: with what astonishment
should you bethink your selves, and say, What a wretch am I to yield to my
youthful lusts, which set my Will against my bountiful and blessed Maker, the
Author of my Life and Being. O the complete and comprehensive Wickedness of
this, enough to make me tremble; what to hate God, and love my lusts that will
damn me! O horrid temper, how can thou hold up thy Head before him whose Eyes
are as a Flame of Fire, if there be found in thee an obstinate downright
aversation in thy Will! surely, O my Soul, if thou were to live here a thousand
years, and had no other business than to bewail this, it would not be
sufficient: O young ones think of this. O that God would set it home upon your
Hearts; methinks it should cast yo^ down with amazement, and compel you t^ say,
when tempted to yield to your youthful Lusts, with that excellent young man in
the 39. Genesis 1. How can I do so great Wickedness and sin against God.

4thly. These youthful lusts indispose the Soul to Conversion, as they
exceedingly harden the heart: hence have you that admonition in the 3. Heb. 13.
Take heed lest you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. There is a
threefold hardness incident to the heart of man: (1.) Natural: (2.) Habitual or
contracted: (3.) Judicial or penal. (1.) the Natural is found in all men, as
they come into the world in their several Ages and Generations; it is derived
to us from Adam, and it is part of that wretched corrupt nature that we receive
from him by our immediate Parents. (2.) the Contracted or acquired hardness is
that which we bring upon our hearts by a course of Sin: we read of it in Prove.
29. 1. Ezekiel. 3. 7. and Romans 20. 5, 6. (3.) the Judicial hardness is a
tradition, or being given up to our own hearts lusts, by a justly provoked God,
not that God infuseth any evil disposition into the heart, but withdraws his
gracious Spirit, Deuteronomy. 29. 9. and moreover he leaves the stubborn Sinner to his
own natural and contracted hardness, whereby he becomes more blind, dead,
refractory, and obstinate than ever: of this we read in the 9 of Exodus and the
12. in the instance of the Lord's hardening Pharaoh's Heart. Isa. 6. 9, 10. Go
and tell this People, hear you indeed, but understand not; and see you indeed,
but perceive not; make the Heart of this People fat, lest they be converted. It
is a tremendous Text, and is quoted six times in the New Testament, Math. 13.
14. Mark 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. John 12. 40. Acts 28. 26. Romans 11. 8. Now it is
principally the second and third (viz.) Contracted and Judicial hardness that
youthful lusts yielded to, do miserably bring upon the Heart. These make the
Heart like the Leviathan's scales, as Job speaks: these do as it were bury
their Heart in the Grave, and roll a great Stone over it; and so they indispose
the Soul to Conversion: for what fruit can ever be expected from a Rock, o^ a
Stone: let the Rain come down from Heaven upon it, let the Sun shine with its
Beam^ upon it; let the Seed's-man cast his Seeds on it, yet the Rock is a Rock
still: So it is with a stony rocky Heart, let there be line upon line, and
precept upon precept, alas there is no impression made, neither can there be,
until there be a removal of its hardness; and that can never be till the cause
of that hardness be removed, which is a going on in the practice of these vile
Lusts. O the malignity of their influence, they stop the Ears tha^ the Heart
becomes like the deaf Adder, they shut the Eyes, they fold up the Arms, the^
make the Heart like an Adamant, regardle^^ under threatenings, and all other
administrations used by God to awaken, convince, and convert Sinners; let one
Minister come after another and cry aloud, lift up their Voices like Trumpets
in the shrillest manner as Boanerges; yet as Zephaniah tells us in 3. Chap.
5. They know no shame: let God speak to them in their Prosperity, they will not
hearken, 22. Jer. 21. let him multiply upon them the Fruits and Expressions of
his Goodness, in daily Preservations, Deliverances, etc. yet they despise the
Riches of his Goodness, 2. Romans 4. and 32. Deuteronomy. 15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and
kicked: then he forsook God which made him. O the malignity of Sin 's
influence: Solomon says in 9. Eccles. 3. It fills the Heart with madness while
they live. O young man, thou art besides thy self, bereaved of the right use of
thy Reason, by following of thy lusts: had thou ever any fear, or tenderness,
any sense of Sin, any compunction of Heart. O if thou yieldest to thy Lusts,
how quickly will all be extinguished; and not only so, but those Lusts will
bring thee to such obduration as will lay thee naked and open to the
unexpressible Misery of having that Scripture fulfilled upon thee, 6. Isaiah,
and the 9. and 29 Chap. 10. The Lord has poured upon you the Spirit of a deep
sleep. We may stand amazed to see how Persons adorned with excellent Endowments
of Nature, that have great ability in natural things, men of great Sense, as we
say, when they hear how their unmortified Lusts war against their Souls, and
expose them to the Wrath of God, and Everlasting Burning; yet can go on in
their lusts without remorse, or any akings of Heart; nay that which made the
Son of God to bleed, an^ brought him to such bitter Agonies, and strong Cries
and Groans, and for which Vengeance is now tearing and tormenting thousand in
Hell. Alas, all is but as a Dream, while sin prevails it hardens the Heart
to ^ degree of spiritual Phrensy, Hosea 7. 9. 5. Jer. 3. 5. Isa. 12. and 1.
Chap. 5. lik^ Jonah, fast asleep in the sides of the Ship though ready to perish.
Young men, remember it, yielding to your Lusts will so insensibly harden you,
that you will be like ^ man that is seized with the dead Palsy, who^ though you
pinch and strike, he feels nothing or like Solomon's besotted Wretch, 7. Pr^^
14, 15. They have stricken and beaten me, b^ I felt it not. Or like the
Prophet's Aet^opian, 13. Jer. 23. Can the Ethiopian chan^^ his Skin, and the
Leopard his Spots? the^ may you change your accustomed Evi^ Bernard describing
the malignity of Sin's i^fluence as to its encroaching Nature, o^serves this
Gradation: At first, says he, S^ is importable, next time heavy, then ea^^
then light, then sweet, at last necessa^^ Wherefore flee youthful Lusts, as
ever y^^ would escape these Soul-ruining Evils, as blindness of Mind,
searedness of Conscience, incurable hardness of Heart: all which indispose the
Soul to Conversion; nay, they expose it to Damnation.

5thly, These youthful Lusts indispose the Soul to Conversion, as they
miserably enslave and defile the Affections, which are seated in the sensitive
apperite of a man: and they are such as these, Anger, Love, Joy, Fear, Sorrow;
these are planted in us to be subservient to our Souls in glorifying God, and
working out our own Salvation: But through these youthful Lusts they become
subservient to Satan, and predominant over the Soul, bringing it into miserable
bondage, and vile slavery, and so indispose it to Conversion. In Prayer, thy
affections should be fixed on God in Christ, as the sole object of thy Love,
Delight, and filial Fear: But are they so? do thou draw nigh to God as thy
exceeding joy? tell me, young man, where are thy Bethels? thy Penuels? I doubt,
upon a serious review, it will be found quite otherwise, that vain thoughts
have lodged in thy mind, and that swarms of noisome Lusts have been tumbling up
and down the dead Sea of thy Soul in time of Prayer. Ah, how little of love to
God, hatred of Sin, answerable to their nature, have possessed your Souls in
duty: if any pious stirrings of Affections have been, how short a stay have
they made; how many more ambitious, wanton, covetous or revengeful Thoughts
have been jumbled together, with them I appeal to you. Is it not enough to
change that Prayer into Sin, wherein thy God has been lodged with a crew of
viperous Lusts, or rather wherein thy Affections have been committing spiritual
Fornication with their Idols, or have been (Dinah like) gadding abroad with the
Fools Eyes to and fro to the ends of the Earth. Now upon enquiry whence this
comes about, if thou search impartially, and cast the lot right, it will appear
that the Arch-Agent of, and in all this is thy minion Lust, that Youth is under
the power of: some complain of continual distractions in Prayer, their Minds
are like the unquiet Waves of the Sea, up and down; their Affections unstable,
rambling up and down. Alas, the main reason of this woeful posture in Duty, is
their unmortified Lusts; and it is very observable that the more provision you
make for the Flesh, to fulfill it in its lusts, the more dominion and tyranny it
will have over your Thoughts and Affections in holy Duties: and is such a
Prayer ever like to issue in thy Conversion, wherein thy Affections have been
under the vile umpire and influence of thy Lusts? It may rather be called a
Service done to thy Lusts, than to God. There was Jehu, what ardent and zealous
affection did he seem to have in the Service and Cause of God, when he cried
out, Come see my Zeal for the Lord of Hosts. But what was it that influenced
and moved his affections? it was not the Glory of God, but the lust of
Vainglory and Self-advancement. Experience confirms this, that many in their
youth have had shows of great affection in their Profession of Godliness, who
have after a while fell away, and become at last as senseless and stupid about
Heavenly things as any profane one in the world.

O young People, those Lusts you serve, will have such an ill influence on your
Affections, as that they will become like wild Horses, to tear your Souls in
pieces. O cursed Lusts, how unspeakable is that thraldom they lay our
affectionate part under, that when thy Affections should be like Elijah's fiery
Chariot, to mount thy Soul up to Heaven, they should (through thy lust) be like
the Wheels of a Jehu's Chariot, furiously to hurry thy Soul to Hell. Our
affections were planted in us for this end, to facilitate, and make our access
to God, to become easy, pleasant, and delightful to our Soul; but, O miserable
change, they now are quite contrary, (through thy unmortified Lusts) they are
like Clogs, Chains, and Fetters, to hinder the Soul's approach to God. When at
any time the Ship of thy Soul should hoise fail for Heaven, thy Affections
(being defiled and led captive by thy Lusts) will (like a Sheet-Anchor) hold it
back: When thou should be loving the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with
all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind; which our Savior tells you, is that
first, and great Commandment, on which all depends: for (says Christ) on this
hang all the Law and the Prophets. O how deplorable a case is it! that instead
of this, my depraved Affections should terminate upon, and cleave to a Cup, or
a Whore, or a dunghill world! O monstrous wickedness! O young men bethink your
selves, what a pernicious temper this is; ought it no^ to cut you to the very
Heart, to find your selves convicted of such enmity, and aversion in your
affections to the blessed God and whence is it but from your youthfu^ Lusts? O
diseased Soul; if thy lusts had no^ corrupted, and perverted thy Affections
thou would have thought God as suitab^ an object for thy love, as meat to the
hungry, and drink to the thirsty. Is he not the chiefest, best, most excellent,
comprehensive purest, fullest, and most immutable, permanent Good? Should not
an object so admirably fit attract and allure thy superlati^^ love? Do you not
know, do n't your Consciences tell you, that your affections oug^^ to be placed
on God above all? and oug^^ it not to fill your Souls with horror, when you
find not your affections strongly be^^ and inclined to him? how much more then
should you loath your selves, when your Affections are sullenly averse to him?
Is not this a fearful pitch of malignity? would thou not think him a vile
Miscreant, and reckon the Earth too good to bear him, that should hate the
presence of his own Father, and abhor all converse with him? and can thou so
accuse, and condemn such a one, and not thy self for much greater degrees of
wickedness? better thy affections were disinclined to thy nearest Relations,
yea, to thy self, than to the blessed God, who is the spring of thy life and
being; and yet thus it is while thy Lusts are obeyed, instead of loving God,
thou love thy Pleasures more than God: instead of hating Sin, thou hate God
more than Sin. O then, possess thy Soul thoroughly with a due and deep sense of
this great Evil, that thy youthful Lusts do thy poor Soul in depraving thy
Affections; so that they seem to be in you, what the Devils were in the Herd of
Swine, violently carrying you from God, the fountain of living Waters, to lying
Vanities.

And thus I have showed you how these youthful Lusts do hinder Conversion, as
they indispose the Soul in all its parts, and faculties to Conversion. Which
brings me to the second thing, namely, to show how these Lusts do hinder
Conversion, as they directly oppose the means of it, and that both on God's
part and yours.

1. On God's part: These youthful Lusts provoke God to withdraw his Spirit and
Grace, and leave you to your own Hearts Lusts; and then what hope of Conversion
remains? It is God alone that can take away that Stony Heart, and give a Heart
of Flesh, that quickens the dead Soul. In Conversion we are said to be his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto goo^ Works, 2. Ephesians. 10. And St.
John says, 1. John 13. We are born again, not of Blood nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will ^^ man; that is, not by any natural power virtue, or
strength inherent in them; B^^ of the Will God, it is he that works both ^^
will and to do; and his people are said t^ be a willing People in the day of
his Power Psalm. 110. 3. The Metaphors that the holy Ghost uses in Scripture,
to set forth th^^ work of Conversion by, do plainly poi^^ out this, That no
less power than that Omnipotent Power of God, is required to the Conversion of
a Sinner: as for instance* (1.) That of the Resurrection from the dead 6. Romans
4. to raise the Dead, is the effect ^^ an Almighty Power. (2.) That of
Creation, 2. Ephesians. 10. And who can create b^ God? no Creature can, the
mightiest A^g^ cannot create the meanest Worm. The Conversion is set forth in
Scripture, to be the Lord's own workmanship. Hence you read, 2. Ephesians. 1. You
has he quickened, who were dead in Sins and Trespasses. And in 36. Ezekiel. 27. A
new Spirit also will I put within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and ye shall do them. And in 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from
another? and what have thou, that thou did not receive? And it was God that
opened Lydia's Heart: It is true that the Lord of Heaven, the God of all Grace,
who could work of himself, and without any means, is pleased to make use of
means; to wit, his Word; as in the 1. James 18. By the Word of Truth, of his
own Will begat he us, that we should be a kind of First Fruits of his
Creatures. Hence the Word is called the Incorruptible Seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. and
the Gospel is called the ministration of the Spirit. Hence the Lord has
appointed and instituted the great and honorable Office of the Ministry, and
bestows Gifts on his Ministers, to preach the everlasting Gospel to the World,
to open Sinners Eyes, and turn them from Darkness to Light. Hence Ministers are
called Spiritual Fathers; not that there is any inherent power in either the
Word it self, or him that preaches it, but from the Spirit of God, whose
Instruments we are, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The Weapons of our Warfare (says the
Apostle) are mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, etc. And
in 2 Cor. 4. 7. We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency
of the Power may be of God: So then says the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 7.
Neither is he that planteth, any thing, neither he that waters, but God that
gives the increase. Not any thing in a way of efficiency, only instrumentally;
as a Pen is the Instrument, but it is the Hand that writes: so the Word
preached, and the dispense^ of it, are Instruments of Conversion: but it is the
Spirit of God is the quickening Agent: for it must needs surpass the strength of
a Creature to change the Nature, and to cause a return from so miserable a
privation, and death, as by Nature we are in; unto so glorious and excellent a
participation of the divine Nature, and Life, as every converted Soul is put
into, when transformed into the Image of God.

Now then to raise the Argument, and build upon this Foundation that I have
laid; if the principal efficient Cause and means o^ Conversion on God's part,
be his own Almighty Arm revealed, and made bare, hi^ Spirit poured out, and
putting forth a quickening vital Energy; then there is little hope of Conversion,
where this Almighty Agent is provoked so far forth, as to withold his Spirit,
and to leave a Sinner to his own Hearts Lust. But youthful lusts yielded to,
and served, do most certainly thus provoke God to withdraw his Spirit, and
Grace; and therefore obstruct their Conversion, in a direct opposing the means
of it on God's part. That they do thus provoke God, is evident from these
Scriptures, 81. Psalm. 11, 12. But my People would not hearken to my Voice, and
Israel would none of me: So I gave them up unto their own Hearts Lusts, and
they walked in their own Counsels. 1. Romans 26. For this cause (says the
Apostle) God gave them up to vile Affections. This Text, it is true, speaks of
the Heathens, of whom the Apostle had been speaking before, in ver. 19, 20. he
had been showing what means they had to know God; they had not the Light of the
Gospel, as we have, only the Light of Nature: then he shows us, ver. 21. how
they had abused this Light; wherefore says he, For this cause God gave them
up. You see here what may befall poor Heathens, that have no more than a
Natural Light; yet even they, for not improving, and living up to that, may so
far provoke God, as to give them up. O what do you think, young people, that
are within the Pale of the Church, you have what the Heathen had, and you have
superadded a further and more excellent Light, the Light of Scripture; and many
of you have the enlightenings of the Spirit in manifold Convictions: I say what
do you think will become of you, who obey not the Gospel? you may read in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. what your Portion will be, without a speedy fleeing your
youthful Lusts. Did God give up the Heathens? O be afraid, young ones, that
have the Light of Scripture before your Eyes in this Text: flee youthfu^ lusts,
lest you by yielding to them provoke God to say, as once to Ephraim, He is
joyne^ to Idols, let him alone. q. d. Such a one knows better, but he hates
the Light; he must have his Lusts, let him have them, le^ his Heart be made
fat, that he never convert and turn. O fearful sign of Reprobation. You will
find your Soul (like: Bowl down hill) rolling to Hell amain* For if we sin
wilfully, after that we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains
no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and
fie^ Indignation, which shall devour the Sinner. 10. Heb. 26, 27. My Spirit,
says God, shall not always strive with man, 6. Genesis 3. young People, did you
never find the Spirit of God in this Text, or others, tending ^^ the same
thing, to abandon your Lusts, striving with you? Have you had no Motion
excited? have you had no Thoughts cast in that have had this aspect and
tendency which you have represt, and resisted through the indulgence of your
youthful Lusts Know it, young man, that herein you have provoked God to take
away his holy Spirit and it is a righteous thing that the Spirit of God should
retire, and desist as to further influences, and operations; which should make
you with awful thoughts retire into your own Soul, and smite upon the Thigh,
and say, What have I done? I have provoked the Most High God to withdraw his
Spirit: and can that Sin be small, that hazards the favor of God, and the life
of my Soul for ever? If once the abused Spirit of God depart, and leave thee to
thy youthful Lust, thou will be like Sampson, when his Locks (wherein his
strength lay) were cut, Judges 16. 20. It was told Sampson that the Philistines
were upon him, and he awoke out of sleep, and said, I will go out as at other
times before, and shake my self, and he wist not that the Lord was departed
from him: Or, like Esau, Heb. 12. 17. who afterward would have inherited the
Blessing, but was rejected, for he found no place for Repentance, though he
sought (it carefully with Tears: Or like those Mountains of Gilboa, upon which
neither the Rain, nor Dew falls. They say that nastiness in a Dove-house will
cause the Dove to leave that House: Sure I am that your youthful unclean Lusts
will in time drive away that mystical Dove, the holy Ghost, from thy Soul; and
then who shall quicken thy dead Soul? Alas, if that great Master of Assemblies
leave thee, never more to strive with thee: what can poor Ministers do? Suppose
there were a vast Assembly o^ Godly, able Divines met to consult about thy
Cure; they must all return (re infecta) i^ vain, and say, as the King of Israel
did i^ another case to the poor Woman, that crie^ to him in time of Famine,
Help, my Lord O King: And he said, If the Lord do ^^ help thee, whence shall I
help thee, out of the Barn-floor, or out of the Wine Press? 2 King. ^ 26, 27.
So here, if the Lord have do^^ with thee, and will not pity, and help whence
should we out of our barren So^^ and earthen Vessels? your case is dreadfu^ and
we can give you our Tears, but we ca^ not give you any Oil, not a drop of
savin^ Grace. If God have given you the Spir^^ of Slumber, and a deep Sleep,
Isa. 29. ^* 11. Romans 8. Can we open the Heart, God shut it up? Can we plow up
the Groun^ if God lay it Fallow? here is a judgment i^ deed! If a man sin
against God (says Eli) w^ shall entreat for him? So if God set him^e^^ against
a Soul, who can recover that So^^ Thus you see the malignity of that infl^ence
youthful Lusts have, in hindering of Coversion, as those lusts do oppose the
mea^ of it, on God's part, provoking him to t^^ judicial penal act, of
withdrawing his Grace and delivering up to their own hearts lust And therefore
it is a duty of special conce^^ to young ones, to flee their youthful lu^^ But
then in the second place, it will forth appear, if you consider, that these
youthful lusts do oppose the means of Conversion on the Soul's part.

2. Youthful Lusts oppose the means of Conversion on our own part, such as
Consideration, Prayer and attendance upon God in his holy Word, Resolution, and
Reformation.

But here (perhaps) you may object, and say, That Conversion is not in your
power, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God who
gives Grace, and shows Mercy, to whom he pleases, ex mero motu suo, and
beneplacito, and who can move him, or command it from it?

A. This is a point which very many young ones (through Satan's subtilty) are
greatly puzzled about: but the chief fault is themselves; let us endeavor to
set you to rights, and all these matters in clear light, that so much stumble
you, as to the use of means on your own part. And first (pray remember) by way
of Concession, that there is no man (without the mighty power of God, and his
effectual Grace) can convert, and change his own corrupt Nature; this is
granted. But then I say moreover, that where ever the Gospel comes, and is
preached, as it is now (blessed be God) among us (there is none that I know of
so much as question it) but that all those who enjoy it, and to whom it is
preached, have such a sufficiency of means, and aids for Conversion and
Salvation granted to them, a is abundantly sufficient to convict, condemn, and
leave wholly inexcusable all those that are disobedient to it, and remain
unconverted under it; that it was not so much their cannot, as their will not,
and obstinate refusal, that is the proximate and immediate cause of their
non-conversion and unbelief John 3. 19. This is the condemnation, Light i^ come
into the World, and men love Darknes^ rather than Light, because their Deeds
are evil. John 5. 4. And ye will not come unt^ me, that you might have Life.
Jer. 8. 5. They refuse to return. And it is upon this Hypothesis, that all
those melting, moving Expostulations, and pleadings with Sinners, in the Word
of God, are raised and built: as for instance, Turn, turn ye, why will you dye^
as I live, says the Lord, I desire not the Death of a Sinner. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Chap. 18. 23. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, wash you make ye clean: come
now let us reason together* says the Lord, though your Sins be as Scarlet*
they shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as
Wool. Jer. 13. 27. O Jerusalem will thou not be made clean ^^ when shall it
once be?

Thus having cleared what lay in our way as matter of Objection, and
discouragement, touching the means of Conversion on our part, I shall proceed
to consider (more particularly) those instituted means of Conversion; and then
show you how your Lusts oppose those means, and thereby hinder your Conversion.
For the Means, I shall begin with that of Consideration, and that because I
find the Holy Ghost in Scripture, beginning here with unconverted Sinners,
commanding, and commending this as an excellent means of Conversion in the 1
Kings 8. 47. If they shall bethink themselves, and repent, then hear thou their
Prayer, etc. where you see plainly that retiring into our own hearts by serious
thoughtfulness, and consideration, is a singular means to Repentance and
Conversion. Again in Hag. 1. 5. Now therefore thus says the Lord, Consider
your ways. Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my Feet unto thy
Testimonies: He first considered, and then he converted. So the prodigal Son
came first to himself by consideration, and then he came home to his Father by
sound Conversion. Luke 15. 17. Here the Lord complains of that People's
impenitence, in Jer. 8. 6. No man repented him: And in the next words relates
the Cause of it to be want of consideration, No man said, What have I done? O
would but young men retire from the Noise, and foolish Vanities of this world,
and allow their Souls leisure for the serious exercise of this important Duty;
to consider their sinful and woeful estate by Nature, in what posture they stand
God-wards with their apostate Natures; and how the Wrath of God that is
revealed from Heaven against all Unrighteousness; this wrath abides on them
every moment, during their unconverted state: and how fearful a thing it is to
carry ones doom in ones own bosom! to go up and down the world in a state of
enmity to the most high Jehovah, under his Cur^e and Wrath, as they most
certainly do i^ their state of Nature, and there to consider of their manifold
Omissions, and Commissions, how many thousand ways they have offended God; how
many checks of Conscience they have stifled; what Motions of the Spirit they
have resisted; what preciou^ seasons of Grace they have neglected; wha^ Light,
Love, Mercies, Engagements, Vow^ they have sinned against; what pains they have
taken to satisfy their Lusts, stopping their Ears at the holy Instructions,
Counsels Exhortations, entreaties of Parents and Ministers what estrangedness,
and separation their Sins have made between God and their Souls and then to
consider how short their time o^ Earth will be, how sure it is that their
youthful Sins will sooner or later find them out ^ how certain that God will
bring them ^^ Judgment for all thy Pleasures in the Flesh, all thy Thoughts,
Words and Deeds. Thu^ I say, would but young men take time ^^ commune with
their own Souls about the^^ tremendous matters, it would surely awake^ and call
them to fear, and enquire, What m^^^ I do to be saved? And so prepare them for
that other Head of Consideration, name^^ the rich, sovereign, and free Grace of
God in Christ, laid open in the Gospel; how God has so loved the World, as to
give his only Son to dye for us, when enemies; that whosoever believes, and
repents, shall not perish, but have everlasting Life: how able and willing
Christ is, to save, and receive all heavy laden weary Souls, that see
themselves lost, and ^aste the bitterness, and feel the burden of their Sin
that come to him; how lovingly he invites all such to come to him, and assures
them of a gracious reception, and a full remission of all their Sins, and
eternal Salvation, etc. and that it is not all the aggravations of their Sins,
however they have been multiplied, and committed against the Light of Natural
Conscience, or the Light of Supernatural Grace revealed in the Scriptures, that
shall be an impediment, or bar to their acceptance, and pardon upon their
return: If the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous man his Thoughts,
and turn unto the Lord, he will have mercy, and to our God, and he will
abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 7. or multiply to pardon. Again, there is nothing
but an unbelieving, impenitent Heart, resisting this Grace, can, or shall ever
deprive you of so great Salvation, as is offered to you in the Gospel: and though
you have refused in past seasons, when he has called; yet for all that he
will not refuse you. If you flee from your lusts to him, the only refuge for lost
Souls, the match shall not break on his part; and if you perish, and miss
Salvation at last, it shall not be long of him So that this is undeniable
(viz.) that Consideration on our part, is a most fit and apposite means of
Conversion. I have some time read of a Religious Father, that had rebellious
wicked Son, that was a great grie^ to him; when the Father was on his dea^^
bed, he called his Son to him, and laid hi^ under a solemn engagement and
promise* That he would every day retire alone, a^^ spend one quarter of an Hour
in seriou^ thinking. After the pious Father was dea^ the wild Son began to
consider of his promise to his Father, and accordingly once day retires; at
first he began to think of the Honors, and Pleasures of this World; bu^ after
a while he began to consider, what h^^ Father's design was, in obliging him
the^ once a day to retiredness and thoughtfulness and then he began to call to
mind his Sin^ and wicked Life that he had lived: and the good Spirit of God
concurring with thos^ thoughts, he became a new man. So tha^ Consideration is a
means of Conversion.

Now I come in the next place to show yo^ how youthful lusts directly oppose
this mea^ of Conversion: and that will appear, it yo^ consider the rage of
these Lusts, they wi^^ not give the judgment leave, or leisure ^^ animadvert,
and consider; they are imp^ruous, and tyrannical, hurrying poor Si^ners Hell
wards: this is obvious to our o^servation every day; how many young people do
we see, by one base pleasure or other, always led captive from the time they
awake in the Morning, till they lie down at Night, and never take time to
consider or ask themselves, What have I done? What must I do to be saved? Where
must I abide for ever? If a man rides through a Country full speed, he can
never draw a true Map of that Country: If you ^oile, and ruffle the Waters, you
can never see your face in them. Thus if a Soul be hurried with its Lusts, it
can never retire, and soberly debate matters in its own breast. Consideration
can find no place in such a Soul, as Christ told the malicious Jews, in the ^,
John, 36 37. My words can find no place in ^ou; because they were so enraged,
and blind^d with the lusts of Malice and Envy against ^im; that most pure,
peaceable, meek, and ^eavenly Doctrine of the Gospel, which Christ had taught
among them, could have ^o entertainment in, nor government over their Hearts,
to win them to him, because ^^eir hearts were engaged to their Lusts. So ^^ is
here, when God calls, and Ministers ^ll, and the dangers and miseries of thy
nee^^y Soul calls, O young man, consider thy ^ays, remember thy Creator, know
that ^ will bring thee to Judgment: alas, the^e ^usts deasen and drown all. O
wretched ^very, though Life and Death be set before thee, though thou art allured
with all the glorious promises of pardon, and Eternal Lif^ on the one hand: and
though thou art constrained with all the Terrors of the Lord, the Curses of the
Law, and the everlasting Flame of Hell on the other hand; yet these Lus^
slight, and make nothing of all these amazin^ and tremendous Truths, as if they
were n^ worthy of one quarter of an hours serio^^ Consideration: they do so
haunt, a^ shackle poor Sinners, as that they hold the^ Prisoners (arcta
custodia) in close bondag^ and will not allow them the liberty of
consideration, and bethinking themselv^^ Hence these Lusts are styled Snares,
Ne^ Bonds, Eccles. 7. 28. 2 Timothy 2. 26. and this respect are Sinners compared
to Ca^tives and Prisoners kept up. Isa. 61. 1. a^ Chap. 42. 7. Hence Simon
Magus by reason of his being under the dominion of the lust of Covetousness,
though he was also und^^ a Christian profession, and had been but j^ before
Baptized; yet you read Acts 8. 23. see (says Peter) that thou art in the Gall^
Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity. A^ so that young man, of whom you read
the 19. Matthew. he seemed to be near to ^^ Kingdom of Heaven, but he was chai^^
fast by the Love of Riches, and that set hi^ quite back again. O young men, yo^
Lusts, if you give way to them, will ^^ come so ravenous, outrageous, and
tyra^^ no^ (...) lusts malign Influences, what cause have you to Flee these
Lusts!

Another means, on our part, of Conversion, is Prayer; thus we read in Jer. 31.
18, 19. of Ephraim, when he was about turning, he prays to the God of all
Grace, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: In this respect Peter counsels
Simon Magus, Acts 822. Repent (says he) of this thy Wickedness, and Pray to
God, if perhaps the Thought of thine Heart may be forgiven thee. Pray mind this
Scripture. q. d. though thou art in the very Gall of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity; yet supposing there remains only a possibility, a perhaps of
Pardon and Salvation, yet thou art bound to Pray: I know there are many
deboist, lewd Youngsters in this Age, that imitate those profane Wretches, of
whose hellish Language you read in the 21. Job 14, 15. They say to the
Almighty, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy Ways: And what is
the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit is it if we Pray to him?
But there is little hopes of their Conversion. However this is most certain,
that Prayer is an Institution of God's, in order to Conversion, as you may see
in those two Scriptures, Hosea 14. 1, 2, 3. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy
God; for thou have fallen by thine Iniquities. In that Verse you have God's
Invitation to Conversion; and then in the second Verse you have his Direction
how to go about it, Take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, say unto him,
Take away all Iniquity, and receive u^ graciously. And then if you read tha^
36. Ezekiel. 26, 27. where you have God promising the Grace of Conversion, in
those words, A new Heart will I give unto you; and presently enjoining Prayer,
as a means on our part, ver. 27. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be
sought, by the House o^ Israel, to do it for them.

If you ask, What Prayer is?

I answer, Prayer is the offering up of ou^ Desires to God, for things
agreeable to hi^ Will, in the name of Christ. These Desire must proceed from an
Heart touched with the sense of our sin and misery, and the apprehension of
God's mercy in Christ: an^ they must be servent and constant; like the
Publican, God be merciful, or propitious, ^^ me a Sinner, Luke 18. and Genesis 32.
25. I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. Luke 18. 1. to this end our
Savior spoke that Parable to instruct us, that we ought to Pray, and not
faint: like that important Woman of Canaan, who would know no discouragements,
being once entered and engaged in this heavenly Exercise; It is not meet (says
our Lord) to take Childrens Bread, and give it to Dogs: she owneth it, Truth,
Lord, says she, Matthew. 15. 26. yet the Dogs may eat of the Crumbs that fall
from their Masters Table. O when a poor Sinner comes to God by Christ, and
knocks for converting Grace, out of a sense of its damned, undone condition:
if he prevail not, and cries out, O thou most patient (though provoked) God,
it is matter of admiration, that thou suffer such a Viper as I am to live and
breath in thy common Air: O pity me a Hell-deserving Sinner, for the sake of
thy dear Son, who made satisfaction by his bitter Death and Passion to thy
Justice, and grant me this favor in thy sight, the forgiveness of my Sins, and
the Spirit of Grace, to subdue the power of my lusts, and to renew me in Soul
and Body: O Father of Mercies, if thou do not show me this favor and mercy, I
shall live thine enemy, and shall, I know not how soon, dye miserably, to mine
own eternal undoing. O draw me into Union with thy blessed Son, unto whom none
can come except thou draw: O let me never rest, till it be out of doubt, that I
am converted, and that God in Christ is mine: let my Tears be my Meat night and
day, while I have a being, till I obtain Grace and Mercy to help my needy
miserable Soul. After this manner is this Exercise to be performed, and it
brings God's Institution, it is under a promised Blessing, and many can set to
their seals, that their labor herein has not been in vain, with reference to
Repentance and Conversion. Now giving way to youthful lust, directly opposes
Conversion, both as it withdraws you from it, and withers your Soul in the
performance of it. Alas, when your Lusts grow clamorous, and you obsequious to
them, they will breed in you an aversation and opposition to Prayer: you will
not find a Heart inclined to, but wretchedly dis-inclined from God, which is a
sad case indeed; and to have a hard Heart, that cannot Pray (was the note of an
Eminent Saint, and Servant of God now ascended) compleateth a Soul's misery; it
pulls down fury and destruction upon the Heads of such; as you may see in the
10. Jer. 25. O what care should you take to preserve your comfortable access to
God by Christ every day: our Life is a worthless thing without it; hence in 1
Pet. 3. 7. the Apostle does so earnestly press Husbands and Wives to exemplary
walking, that your Prayers (says he) be not hindered. Now there is nothing so
much hinders Prayer, as giving way to your Lusts; for by these you provoke
God to stop his Ear, and withdraw and stand at a distance from you, and by
these you irritate the Rebellion of your own Hearts against God, and cause it
to stand at a greater distance from God: as Adam when he yielded to eat of the
forbidden Fruit, he grew shy of God. Woeful experience evinceth this, when
Persons have given way to Pride, or Passion, or Lust, or sinful Pleasures in
the day, they cannot tell how to go and pray to God at night, or look him in the
Face, with any comfort or confidence: when Conscience upbraideth, do thou
pray, O vile Hypocrite! have thou been kindling the Fire of his Wrath all day,
and do thou think to obtain his favor all of a sudden? When thou have been
grieving his Spirit, and tearing open the wounds of the blessed Jesus, by thy
wilful sinning against Light, and Convictions, how can thou expect the
Comforter should come to thee? If a man were to plead for his Life at the Bar,
would he be so mad as to distemper himself with strong Drink before hand; this
were the ready way to lose him his Life: and so it is the ready way to lose
your Conversion, wherein stands the Life of your Souls, if you intoxicate them
with the stupefying Vapors, that arise from your fulfilled Lusts. It was holy
Mr. Dod's saying, That either Praying would make us leave off Sinning, or
Sinning would make us leave off Praying. And then pray observe, your Lusts tend
to the manifest withering, cripling your Souls in the performance of this duty:
It cuts and clips the Soul's wings in Prayer, and then down you fall, and sink
as a dead thing in Prayer. O therefore flee youthful Lust, or they will render
Prayer no more than a dead empty Formality; and how waste and desolate a thing
is that? it will be like some Disease in the Body, that converts all the Food,
that should nourish Nature, to the feeding themselves, and so macerate, and
miserably consume the Body; or like some Thief, or Thieves in a House, the
Master's Goods and Stock continually waste and consume: and no wonder, the
Viper is in their own Bosoms. Thus, young men, your Lusts will bring leanness
into your Souls in Prayer. O young man, do thou find the Lord gone in Prayer,
no discoveries of himself, but a great estrangedness: would thou know the
cause? read that in Ezekiel. 14. 5. They were estranged through their Lusts. Be
assured of this, there is a Heart-league, and some youthful Lust or other,
which lays an embargo upon the Soul, and arrests the profit of all thy Prayers
Suppose a man did know, and see his own Wife loving and cleaving to some other
man; would not this spoil the comfort of their communion? as we that are
reasonable Creatures, don't love to be among unreasonable Brutes in the
Wilderness, or the Living to be among the Tombs and the Dead: So a holy God
regards not the Prayers, will not be enquired of, nor spoke with, by those who
regard their Lusts in their Hearts, Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3, 4. Why have we fasted,
and thou regardest not? You took pleasure* says the Lord, and brake not the
Bonds of Wickedness. So some complain, Alas! we have prayed for Pardon, and
Peace, and the Manifestations of God's Love, but have received no answer, find
no return; now whence is this? Oh young man, sure there is some betwitching
Lust or other sucks thee. As if I saw a Plant or Tree that is daily watered,
and has no want of outward means of flourishing, and bearing Fruit; yet
withers, and dies away, be sure there is some Worm in the Root corroding it.
I have heard of late many young People pouring out their Complaints after this
manner, Alas, I have been seeking, and knocking at the door of Ordinances,
Prayer, Word, Sacrament, etc. but have not, find not, feel not supplies come
in: I am like those that had been toiling all Night, and catch nothing. Oh
never was my Heart so dead in Duty, says one: so straightened, and shut up, says
another! And hence some cry out, To what purpose should we wait any longer?
What profit is there in Praying to the Almighty? What sweetness in Ordinances?
What is Christ more than another? Now, I pray whence is this? What is Christ a
barren Wilderness? a Land of Darkness? a broken Cistern? a Field without a
Treasure? a Well without Water? a Cloud without Rain? What is the Lord
unwilling to hear? and pity a poor distressed Sinner, that comes and makes its
moan to him? And is it in vain to seek him? Oh no! Christ is precious, God is
gracious, the hearer of Prayers, the rewarder of such as diligently seek him.
But here is the true cause of all, a man comes to God with his Idol in his
Heart, and then God will not speak with him; can you ever imagine that so pure*
Majesty should match with your Lusts? no no, for then should the Father of
Light have communion with the darkest Darkness: sooner will he leave thee,
while tho^ live to be a Shrub, or Heath in the Dese^^ that sees not when Good
comes, and to b^ a magor Missabib when thou die; than eve^ let thee in to
acquaintance with himself, ti^^ the league and power of thy youthful Lus^ be
broke. Can two walk together that an^ not agreed? No man can serve two Masters
but either he will love the one, and hate the other* etc. Matthew. 6. 24. O be
not deceive^, God is not mocked: if you regard Iniqui^y in your hearts, God
will not hear you^ Prayer. Possibly thou art pinched, through the power of a
natural Conscience flying thy face, telling thee that such Lusts will sit thee
at last; and this sends thee to the Knees, and then thou criest, Lord, Lord
there be these, and these youthful Lusts of min^ that wring my Conscience, that
I can have ^^ quiet; O ease me of them. And thus tho^ seek out to pacify
and stop the Mouth ^^ Conscience, and that is all: never come up to practice
this Rule, to flee these Lusts* but ever likest, love, and live them never
sell all, part with all, and so ru^ divorced from them all, to Christ, taking
his blessed Yoke upon thee, saying, He, an^ he alone shall rule and reign in
them, and over them. Oh that such would ponder that Text, James 1. 7, 8. Let
not a double-minded man think to receive any thing at the hands of the Lord;
and that other place in 1. Isaiah 10 to 14. I am weary (says the Lord there)
of your New Mons, and your very Assembling is provoking to me, while your
Hands and Hearts are unclean, and full of sin: wash ye, make ye clean, etc. The
truth is, your youthful Lusts in Prayer, do render you most abominable and
odious in the sight of God: for they do (as it were) challenge, and bid
defiance to God; whence else are those thunders of his provoked Majesty? in 1.
Mala. 14. 7. Jer. 9, 15, 16. 33. Ezekiel. 31, 32, 33. Chap. 14. from the 1 st.
verse to the 9. To go and Pray with the Idol of my Lust in my heart, is a
mocking God, and God will not be mocked; nay, let me tell you, God's anger is
increased by such Prayers, and then I appeal to you what Good can be looked for
from such Prayers? alas, rather Confusion, than Conversion. O young People,
pray remember it, your Lusts will not only blunt, and take off the edge of
Prayer, that it shall never do any execution; but they turn thy very Prayers
into sin, and how likely that is to turn thy heart God wards, judge ye.

Thus I have showed you how your youthful Lusts hinder Conversion, as they
oppose the means of it. Were there a demand made, why Consideration, and
Prayer, and other Godly means should be so irksome, and bu^ densom? Is God so
undelightful an obje^^ to approach unto, that you cannot endu^^ his presence,
or are so soon weary in hol^ Exercises, like a man under a heavy loa^ Oh no, to
draw nigh to God in Prayer, is the joy of holy Souls; but they are those Lu^^
within that make it (to our corrupt Nature so unpleasant, and tedious. And thus
have showed you, how they oppose the means of Conversion on our part; and
therefore it is a duty of such special concern me^ for young men to flee
youthful Lusts, becau^^ of the malignity of their influence, express first in
that they hinder Conversion. No^ I come to the second Head, to show yo^ the
malignity of their influence as they hu^ry Youth into grievous Temptations.

2. A second particular of the maligni^^ of youthful Lusts inflence lies in
this, vi^* In that they hurry Youth into grievo^^ Temptations.

There are two sorts of Temptations th^^ we read of in Scripture, the Apostle
Jam^^ treats of both, in the 1. chap. ver. 2. and ^^ 14. The former sort are no
other than Affl^ctions, which are for the probation an^ trial of the
Christian's Faith and Patience and with respect to these the Apostle says My
Brethren count it all Joy, when you f^^ into diverse Temptations, ver. 2. And
Mos^^ says, that God tempted Abraham, 22. Genesis 1. That is God proved, and
tried his Servant Abraham's Faith. But now the other sort of Temptations, are
no other than solicitations and seducements to Sin; and with respect to these,
the Apostle says in the 13. and 14. verses. Let no man say when he is tempted,
I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he
any man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and
enticed; then when Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin, and Sin when it
is finished, brings forth Death. And hence our blessed Lord teaches us to
watch and pray, that we enter not into Temptation; that is to sin; for in this
sense is the word used in Scripture, as (...), or to try, is the proper word
for the other temptation; so (...) is the proper word for temptation to sin.
And of this sort of temptation it is that youthful Lusts are both the Fons, and
Fomes, the breeder, and feeder, the food and fuel, the mother and nurse, they
do both by force and fraud, violently hale, and hurry, and cunningly entice,
and draw young ones to sin. The Devil may flatter you, but he cannot force you:
it is your Lust that opens the Door, or temptation could never enter. It has
been an old practice of Sinners, when they fall into sin, to accuse and lay all
the blame either upon the Devil, or the instrument that provoked them. Oh, sa^
they, the Devil owed them a spite, and no^ he has paid it; not considering
that the true procreating cause of Sin, is a man's ow^ Lust. It must be owned
that this World full of Snares and Temptations, to with draw Youth from God's
house, to the Al^ houses, and there provoke them to Intemp^rance: and to Gaming
houses, and the^ provoke them to consume their Estates, an^ precious time: and
to filthy houses, an^ there provoke them to destroy themselv^^ for the sake of
brutish pleasures. In this sen^^ it is true, homo homini demon: One is a Devil
to another, i. e. tempters to Sin. But a these are but external movers, the
princip^^ Agent is thy own Lust within. As one says Temptation is a Siege,
Satan is the Enem^ without the Walls, laboring to force a^ entrance; our Lusts
are the Traitors with in, that hold correspondency with t^^ Enemy without, and
open the Gate of the Soul to receive him. They are our ow^ Lusts that go over
to Satan, in the day ^^ battle, and fight against our Souls, 1 Pet. 2. O young
men, your Lusts are like the me^^ of Keilah to David, in the day of temptation,
1 Samuel 23. 11. Poor David was hate^ and hunted up and down by Saul, who sough^
his Life: at length he comes to Keilah presently it was told Saul, that David
w^^ come to Keilah. David enquireth of the Lord Whether the men of Keilah would
deliver him up into the hands of his Enemy Saul? And the Lord said, They will
deliver thee up. Whereupon David presently fled, and so escaped. Thus if you
follow not this counsel, to flee your youthful lusts, they will certainly
deliver you up in the hour of temptation, that you will not be able to deliver
your own Soul: they will betray you, as Dalilah did Sampson, and let in the
uncircumcised Philistines upon you. When Judas his heart was set upon the lust
of Covetousness, how miserably was he overcome, with many desperate
Temptations, he will betray the precious Life, and Blood of the Son of God, for
thirty pieces of Silver, and afterward you know what became of him; so true is
that in the 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. They that will be rich (says the Apostle) whose
Hearts run after their Covetousness, fall into Temptation, and a Snare, into
many foolish and hurtful Lusts. So when Balaam's Heart was set upon this Lust,
he will rise early, run, and ride till he is weary, that he might Curse Israel;
at length he becomes (through his Lust) more desperate, and senseless of God's
fury, than the dumb Ass, he dissembles his Conscience, coins cunning Evasions.
O the malignity of lusts influence! Suppose it be the Lust of Uncleanness, what
pernicious temptation does this cast many young men upon? frequenting Satan's
Seminaries, those Chapels of Hell, Stews and Plays, where oftentimes are
Challenges, Stabs, Comba^^ Blood, and Murder: thus have many ventured as deep
as Hell, to gratify their filthy Lusts. Hence they are said to draw Iniqui^^
as with Cart-ropes, Isa. 5. 8. and that the wearied themselves to commit
Iniquity, Jer. 9. ^ and compared to fed Horses, every one neig^ed after his
Neighbors Wife, Jer. 5. 8. an^ carried on with a brutish rage, against a^
reason, without any counsel, or consideration; this is that which the Apostle
callet^ (...) the eagerness of Lust, notes a raging eagerness. 1 These. 4. 5. ^
that, where it is consented to, it carries a^ before it, breaks all sorts of
Bonds, the La^ of God, the Law of Nature; all are but as the new Cords,
wherewith Sampson was boun^ as soon as he awoke from Sleep, he bra^^ all like
so many twine Threads. An i^stance hereof holy Providence, while I a^ writing,
affords me, of a young man, the through yielding to the Lust of Concup^scence,
has plunged himself into such drea^ful Temptations, and consuming Misery that
he moves like a Shadow, and pin^ away under the malignity of his Lusts
i^fluence, to the grief of them that behol^ him. The holy Apostle tells us,
Th^^ when Lust has conceived, it brings forth S^^ that is the outward act of
Sin, and when S^ is finished, it brings forth Death. The Metaphor there used,
is taken from a teeming Mother: now a Mother conceives first inwardly, and
after the revolution of so many Months, brings forth the Fruit of her Womb
visibly to others; thus here, according to that noted place, Matthew. 15. 19. Out
of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
false Witness, Blasphemies. So in 2 Peter 1. 4. all the actual Corruptions and
Abominations that are in the world, are through Lust. Oh there is a vast
difference between our Lord Jesus his being tempted, and ours; when Satan came
to tempt him, he found nothing in him, John 14. 13. nothing to comply with him,
there was no internal temper, no indwelling lust, no corrupt matter to fasten
on: but it is otherwise with us, A man's Enemies (says Christ) are they of his
own House. O remember it, young man, the principal Cause of all thy misery, is
the Lust of thy own Heart, if all outward obstacles were removed, thou may
yet be an Adulterer, a Thief, etc. in the sight and account of God, as one has
it,

Omnia si claudas, intus adulter erit. Moreover, consider the malignity of
these Lusts, as they have a sly, subtle, enticing property, you will see a
necessity of fleeing them. O young man, thy Lusts are as deceitful to betray
you with Smiles, and Kisses, as they are violent, and desperate to stab you
with temptations to bold and bloody perpetrations of sin. Your Lusts not only
tempt by haling, and hurrying you o^ to sin in an imperuous manner, but they
also tempt you by flattery, and putting Tricks and Cheats upon you; insomuch
that it is next to impossible, that you should ever flee, and avoid the Cheats,
except you flee your Lusts that are the cheaters. Ah how many thousand of young
ones has Lust slain this way; fitly may that be applied here that is spoken of
the Harlot in Prove. 7. 26. She has cast down many wounded. Solomon was a wise
man, yet Lust made a fool of him; Lust has much of the subtilty of the old
Serpent in its blinding Sinners minds, i^ draws young men to sin, by drawing
a vail over their Consciences; thus enticing them on with fair and flattering
Promises, one while pleading the sweetness and pleasure of yielding, and giving
way to its desires and solicitations; at other times arguing ab utili, the
profit, and gain, the honor, and preferment. Hence the voluptuous, and unwary
Youth are ensnared, as you read frequently in the Proverbs 1. Chap. and the 7.
Chap. promising themselves abundance of satisfaction, in yielding to their
Lusts 18. ver. of that 7. of the Prove. Come let ^^ take our fill, and solace
our selves with Loves Stolen Waters are sweet, and Bread eaten in secret is
pleasant, Prove. 9. 17. Does Ahab sell himself to his Lusts to work wickedness?
what gratis? Oh no, his lusts promise him a brave Vineyard. So Gehazi, what
will he frame and utter a Lie for nothing? Oh no, he should have Sheep, and
Oxen, and change of Raiment, etc. So Achan, what will he sin for nothing? Oh
no, there is a Wedge of Gold. So Judas, what will he betray innocent Blood for
nothing? Oh no, he shall have thirty Pieces of Silver. Thus does Lust tempt by
flattery and fraud, and all is a mere Cheat; for, pray, what got Ahab by his
Vineyard? was it not the ruin of him and his? oh it brought forth Grapes of
Gall. And what got Gehazi by his Lie, but a Leprosy entailed upon him, and his
Heirs for ever? And what got Achan by his Wedge? It is the notion of one upon
it, That it was a wedge to cleave asunder his Soul from God: And I may add, to
cleave asunder his Soul from his Body too. So Judas his thirty pieces purchased
him an Halter. Thus for a lusts pleasure, multitudes of Youth are tempted into
it by mere flattery, as you may see in the 20. Job 12. 14. Though Wickedness be
sweet in the Mouth, yet the Meat thereof will turn to the Gall of Asps within.
And in Prove. 9. 17. Stolen Waters are sweet, etc. but they consider not, that
the Dead are there, and that her Guests are in the Depths of Hell. I have read
a Story ^ a Roman Soldier, who was by a Cou^^ Marshal condemned to dye for
breaking hi^ rank, to steal a Bunch of Grapes; and ^^ he was going to
execution, some of the Soldiers envied him, that he had Grapes and they had
none, (says he) Do ye em^ me my Grapes, I must pay dear for them. S^ may we
say of all the pleasure of your Lust^ its last act is always Tragical, it
serves the young man as Absalom did Amnon, when his Heart was merry with Wine,
then h^ killed him, 2 Sum. 13. 28. Or as Jael, ^^ enticed him into her Tent,
and gave hi^ Milk, and lays him to sleep; and then S^^ put her Hand to the
Nail, and with the Hamme she smote Sisera, she smote off his Head, wh^^ she had
pierced, and stricken through h^ Temples, Judge. 5. 26. O young men, fle^ your
Lusts, yield not to their enticement when they would draw, and tempt yo^ with
the bait of pleasure; remember the^ is no truth in all its promises. Oh
practis^ that 3 Heb. 13. O venture not upon the forbidden Cup, when it
sparkleth with pleasure. Your Lusts will promise you a Paradise, and pay you
with a bryary and tho^ny Wilderness, where if you have a min^ to be torn with
Bushes, fed with Ashe^ stung with Serpents, scorched with Burning and that
everlasting, you may credit their youthful Lusts. And this brings me to the
third and last Particular, expressive of the malignity of youthful Lusts
influence, viz. That they hasten your Destruction.

3. Flee youthful Lusts, because of the malignity of their influence, in that
they not only hinder your Conversion, hurry you into Temptation; but in the
last place, in that they hasten your destruction, as you may read in these
following Scriptures, Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things, for
the en^ of them is Death? And in verse 23. The Wages of Sin is Death. 1 Pet. 1.
11. Abstain from Fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul. Romans 8. 13. If ye
live after the Flesh, ye shall dye. Matthew. 18. 8, 9. If thy right Hand offend
thee, cut it off, etc. or no entering into Life eternal, Isa. 3. 10. Now in vain
were all these Revelations of the determined and immutable Will of God in his
Word, if continuance in your Lusts, could stand with impunity, and escaping
destruction. I know that the vain hopes of escaping, is a mighty encouragement
to the voluptuous Youth, whose Heart stands bent upon his Lusts; but if once
his Conscience comes to be thoroughly convinced, that his lusts will most surely
find him out, that his Damnation lingreth not, slumbreth not, but is hastening
a pace toward him; so that he may as well hope not to dye, as not to be thrown
into Hell when he dies: oh then what trembling surpriseth the guilty Sinner.
Now in order to the awakening the Conscience of wild and wanton Youth, to flee
their youthful Lusts, let them but weigh this Argument taken out of God's Word,
who has peremptorily declared, that he will by no means clear the Guilty; but
is angry with them every day, and has revealed his Wrath from Heaven, against
all that persist in their Lusts, let them steep their thoughts in such terrible
and tremendous Scriptures, as Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20. Lest there should be any
among you, whose Heart turns away from the Lord, and it comes to pass that
when he hears (or reads) the Words of this Curse, that he bless himself in
his Heart, saying, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine
Heart to add sin to sin. What then? O pray mind, and lay to heart what
follows in the 20. verse. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of
the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the Curses
that are written in this Book shall lie upon him: Also in Job 5. 3, 4. Eliphaz
says, I have seen the Foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed his
Habitation: and in the 27. Chap. and 13. you read, this is the Portion of a
wicked man with God: and in 17. Chap. 5. Their triumphing is but short, and
their joy but for a moment. So that as soon should God cease to be God, as the
Sinner that goes on in his Trespasses, should go unpunished, the certainty of
whose destruction depends upon the irrevocable Will of God: God has said it,
the Lord has spoken it, and it shall come to pass. Alas we that dwell at ease,
and enjoy our health, are not able fully to conceive, what the power of the
Lord's anger and wrath is, which he has revealed against Sin, and Sinners.
Some indeed as they have been drawing near, and launching out into the Ocean of
Eternity, have had such sights and views of it, as has scared, and affrighted
them with such amazements, that they have cried out (inducias usque ad mane)
truce but till the Morning: Others, O that I had never been born, call time
again: Others, O Lord, let me live on Earth, though it be but the life of a
Toad. I have also read of one, who saw Hell, but in a Dream, or Vision, and the
terror was so great, that he would have chosen ten times to dye, rather than
see and feel so great horror again. But as to our Youth that look at a
Deathbed many years off, they can scarce imagine what an aspect this will have
at a dying hour. Now at present it shows its fairest side, but when all Masks
are pulled off, it will be quite another thing; you may see its stinging
efficacy in the 33. Isa. and 14. Now in the days of your vanity and pleasure,
this Argument and Reason is wrapped up like a Flag about the Staff: Hell and
Damnation are but as it were in semine, and your persisting in Si^ is called a
treasuring up of Wrath against that great and terrible Day of Wrath that is
approaching; and hence you are secure, careless, and all quiet. But oh that
young people would but think what a dreadfu^ sight it will have, when they come
to lie down with their Bones full of the Sins o^ their youth, and their Souls
brought dow^ to the sides of the Pit, as low as Hell, by their youthful lusts.
O with what unexpressible rage and fury will their Consciences then reflect on
their fore-past Sins You read in James, that when Lust is consummate, it
brings forth Death, and the sting of Death is Sin unmortified, unpardoned,
and this brings to a terrible Bar, Judge, and Sentence, Depart ye cursed, etc.
So that here in the final issue of your youthful lusts, they will (if you flee
them not) cast you into the Fire of Hell, with an utter destruction from the
presence of the Lord. See here how God has hedged up your sin^ul wa^ with
thorns to stop you, and restrain yo^ from yielding to your filthy and forbidden
Lusts; and also to spur you on to b^ea^ through all the difficulties and
objectio^ that lie in your way to Repen^ance and Conversion; that so when the
Devil, o^ the Lusts of the Flesh object against the Severities, pains and
labor o^ ^b^ndoning, and forsaking your Dalilah-corruptions, (...) might have
it in readiness to answer, Avoid Satan, what tell you me of pains in parting
with, or departing from Sin; do not you see here in the Scripture, is it not
written, that Eternal Pains will be my Portion, if I flee not my youthful
lusts? and what are the pains of parting with my lusts now, compared with the
pains of parting with God, Christ, and Heaven, and the undergoing the pains of
Hell's torments, the Fire that is never quenched, the Worm that never dies? O
Devil, that would tempt me to sin; O vile Lust that would entice me, and
draw me to fulfill your unreasonable request, is it easy to dwell with
everlasting Burning? If I dwell with you, and hearken to you, if I flee you
not, I must dwell and lodge for ever and ever in Tophet. Is it not better to
dwell with Lions, Bears, Serpents, Adders, here in a Wilderness all my Life on
Earth, than abide with you an hour longer? seeing that I run the hazard of an
Eternity of Torments in that hour, and the only way to provoke God to shor^en
my Life on Earth, is to yield to my lusts. What if I should gain a little
beastly pleasure, or perishing earthly treasure, by obeying my youthful lust?
what then? when God takes away my Soul, Job 27. 7, 8. and in Matthew. 16. 25, 26.
What is a man profited though he should gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul? What can a man give in exchange for his Soul? Wherefore as Moses spoke
unto the Congregation of Israel in the case of Korah, Dathan, and Abaram,
saying, Depart I pray you from the Tents of wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their Sins. So I say to you, young people,
flee your wicked lusts, touch nothing of them, lest you be consumed. It was
good counsel the Angel gave Lot, Flee out of Sodom, escape for thy Life, look
not behind thee, lest thou be consumed in her Flames. But it is more merciful
counsel to you to flee your youthful lusts, inasmuch as it is better the Body
were swallowed up in the Earth, or burnt to Ashes in Flames, than that your
Souls and Bodies should be swallowed up in Tophet, and burnt in the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, world without end, as most certainly if you flee not your
lusts, they must be. O young people, if you stay with your lusts, they will
undo you, Soul and Body, for ever. Who would not flee from Plague, Fire, Sword,
Famine, etc* Alas your Lusts are worse than all these; while you abide in them,
the Wrath of God abides on you, John 3. 36. its all being within the reach of
the Wrath of God* within the ^ail of his storm. O what is it then to be just
under it? Amos 2. 14. How much more desirable were it to lie open to famine,
Pestilence, Bloodsheds, etc. than to be exposed to the Storms, and strokes of
God's vengeance. Oh what is there in your Lusts, that should so bewitch you, as
to venture your eternal ruin and destruction for them? and judge ye, whether it
be possible for any one of you, to do any thing more directly to the ruin of
himself, (though you should study for it seven years) than to go on impenitently
in the fulfilling thy Lusts. That judgment that in it self is slow, and your
living in a course of Sin, most certainly hasteneth its execution. It Is true,
God may grant you further patience, but you cannot promise your selves an hours
patience, you are not sure of being out of Hell one hour longer. But if God
should spare thee some years, as is the Case proposed by Solomon, in that of
Eccles. 8. 12. Though a Sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet what then? shall it go well? Oh no, as it follows, surely it
shall not go well with him. The Iniquity of Ephraim (says the Lord) is bound
up, Hos. 13. 12. And in Psalm. 50. I held my peace (says God) and thou
thoughtest me such an one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set thy sin
in order before thee. This is enough to make a Sinner's Loins to tremble, to
consider, that in the day of God's patience, while he continues impenitent, it
is no other than a treasuring up wrath against the great and terrible day of
wrath. Oh! how many of our brisk and jovial Youngsters fancy they shall hear no
more of their Vanities and Sensualities; because God has born with them i^
their past Follies, they conclude all is over* and done with: But be it known to
you^ God has (as Job speaks) sealed up you^ youthful Sins in a Bag against
the day ^^ Judgment, in which day God will recko^ with you for all, even from
the Sin tha^ clave to you in your Mothers womb, to the last Sin you commit in
this World. If yo^ fly not your Lusts by Repentance, there i^ no flying Divine
Vengeance. If you adve^ture to cry Peace, Peace, behold swift a^ sudden
destruction is coming upon you, according to the unalterable Law of the great
God, Psalm. 68. 21. But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy
scalp ^^ every one that goes on in his trespasses: an^ in Luke 19. 27. O the
malign influence ^^ their Lusts! there is no flying future wrat^ except you
fly your present Lusts. Future ^^ I say, alas it is in part come; for God is
(as I to you) angry every day, and his wrath ab^deth on you in the threathing
every m^ment; how soon execution may be who knows? methinks it is like a
Ma^^factor's being upon the ^adder, there wa^ nothing but turning off, and he
is go^ Consider, What a fearful thing it is to ^. into the hands of a living
God? Hebr. 10. ^. Then how glad would you be to fly out ^ his hands if you
could? as you read ^ Job 27. 22. yea, how fain would such flee to the Rocks,
Mountains, Hills, and there be glad if they would but fall upon them, to cover
and hide them from the wrath of a Sin-revenging God? Rev. 6. 15, 16. Now God
commands you to flee Sin, and so make an escape from the fullness of wrath to
come: But if you be contentious and disobedient, why then he himself will not
let you escape, Hebr. 2. 3. That Is a startling Question in Isa. 10. 3. And what
will you do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come
from far? to whom will you flee for help? and where will you leave your glory?
methinks that other Scripture in Job 5. 1. might put you in fear; Call now, and
see if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou
turn? Alas! the Wise Virgins could not help the Foolish to a drop of Oil; no,
no, Saints and Angels have but enough for themselves, they be sure cannot help
you, and be sure God will not, he has positively told you so, in Prove. 1. 28.
Then shall they call, and cry, and seek, but I will not hear, because I called,
and they refused. From the 20th. verse, to the 24th. of that Chapter, you have
the Riches of Grace displayed on God's part, in calling prodigal Youth to
Repentance. And from the 24th. to the 26th. verses, you have on the Sinners
part, the malignity and poison of youthful Lusts expressed in their refusal.
And then from the 26th. to the 33 d. you have the Epitomy of all Misery; Then
shall you call on me, but I will not answer, etc. O that young Men did but see
the Truth of this, viz. the certain and sure destruction that they are pulling
down upon their own heads, while they embrace their Lusts When the Disciples
saw themselves in danger of drowning, they earnestly solicited their Lord and
Master Christ to save them, Matthew. 8. 25. But do you hear young Men* you are in
greater danger than drowning, you are in danger of damning. When Jo^ was under
some fearful apprehensions o^ this, see how pathetically he takes on, in Job
10. 1, 2. I am weary of my life, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. I
will say unto God, Do not condemn me. When Nimveh heard this Argument of
destruction hastening within 40 days, O how were they concerned; they proclaim
a Fast, and cloth themselves in Sackcloth, confess and forsake their Sins,
etc. O Young Men, Are you tempted by the delights of Sense then place these
Terrors of the Lord against those sensual Joys. Let me ask you, Could you be
content to be cast into scalding Lead for a Banquet of Wine? Or for a drop ^^
Pleasure upon Earth, to have an Ocean o^ Torment in Hell? See Luke 16. 25. Son
remember thou in thy lifetime had thy good things, and Lazarus his evil
things; now he ^^ comforted, and thou art tormented. So that hence you see the
Reasons why it is a Duty of such special Concernment, for young People to flee
their youthful Lusts, because of the propriety of their inherence, and the
malignity of their influence; and that particularly as they hinder their
Conversion, hurry them into grievous Temptations, and hasten their destruction,
which brings me to the last Question.

Quest. 4. and last: How young People may best practice this their special
Duty, viz. To flee youthful Lusts.

Answ. Before I proceed to the consideration of distinct Rules and Remedies
suitable to each particular Sin that Youth stands inclined to, I shall, by way
of Premise, lay down one general Rule, which will be of unanswerable advantage
to you, if it be duly attended unto: And I do beseech you in the Bowels of
Christ, as you will answer the denial of so reasonable a Request, at the
Judgment Seat of Christ, before the great God and Sovereign Judge both of quick
and dead, that you will make a Stand, and deliberately bethink your selves
about it, allowing your poor Souls therein some due proportion of time, as the
weight and importance of this Rule requires, which is as follows, viz.

See that in the first place, there be the ground work of Regeneration, and
sound Conversion of your Souls to God. The success o^ all other means will
depend on this; an^ the fatal miscarriages of both young and o^ in the matters
of Religion, principally a^^ from a Non-attendency to this: For want ^^ this it
is, that there suddenly spring up ^^ many rotten Professors, so many almost an^
half-Christians, such multitudes that after ^^ season fall from their
Profession, and gro^ loose and vain, turning the grace of God i^ wantonness,
and returning with the dog to ^^ vomit, and with the swine to the wallowi^^
again in the mire; twice dead, plucked up ^^ the roots, as Jude speaks, ver.
12. To ^^ it has been a most startling Spectacle; in ^^ time I have seen some
young ones awake^ed, and galled in their Consciences, ins^much that they have
not been able to refra^ crying out, and under the efficacy an^ strength of
these Convictious, they have ^^gorously gone to work, making Vows an^ Promises,
O what they would be and do ^^ time to come, etc. That one would ha^^ thought,
they would never have been Slav^ and Drudges to their Lusts any more. A^ I
verily believe, at that time, if any should have told them, that within a few
mont^ they would become such Apostates from, as Enemies, to the ways of God,
they would certainly have said with Hazael, Are we D^^ that we should ever do
so? Yet I have seen it, all their early Goodness has proved but as an early
Dew, and a morning Cloud. Now whence is this? Or to what can it be more
reasonably and truly imputed, than to this grand Error in the Foundation? viz.
Their Natures were never changed by converting Grace, there never had been the
implantation of a Principle of saving Faith, in grafting them into Christ: Can
the rush grow without mire? or the flag without water? says Bildad, in Job 8.
11. So here: Can it ever be expected that Convictions should be maintained and
improved to a right, regular, and constant abandoning your Sins, without a
Principle of sound Conversion? As soon may the Bird sly without Wings, or a
Man run without Legs, or move up and down without Life, as you can aright flee
your Lusts without a Principle of Grace. Fleeing, I told you, (in the opening
the words) imported a spiritual motion from Sin, to God; now, in all spiritual
motion, there must be a spiritual life. Besides, this is God's Order, as you
may see in Ezekiel. 36. 26, etc. first it runs, I will give you a new heart, and I
will put a new spirit within you, there is the Principle of renewing Grace; and
then it follows, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, there is the
heavenly motion. The truth is, all other helps will in the issue prove
helpless; and all attempts to subdue their Lusts, on less and lower Principles
tha^ those of Regeneration, and Faith closin^ with the person of Christ, so as
to unite the Soul to him, will all, sooner or later, bewray their Vanity, like
those that labor in the very Fire, and there is no profit in all the^ labor;
or like those silly People, that a^ ever learning, but never come to the
knowledge of the Truth, remaining in the very gall ^ bitterness, and bond of
iniquity. Hence ou^ Savior first expostulates, and asks the Question in Matthew.
6. 16. Can Men gather Grape on Thorns? And in Matthew. 12. 33. and the he answers
it, and determines; Make, sai^^ he, the Tree good, and the Fruit will ^^ good.

I have often thought, what pity it is, the so many Prayings, Fastings, Solemn
Assemblings, Tears, etc. should all be in vain, an^ fruitless, and never reach
the end, viz. Eternal Life, but end in the loss of the Soul, an^ of God for
ever. O young People, if in an^thing you need a light to guide your Feet i^ the
way of Life, it is here, to see the utte^ impossibility of ever being
effectually divorced from Sin, without Union to and wit^ Christ, and the
Inhabitation of the Spirit o^ Grace, transforming and renewing you i^ your
minds. An imperfect work, havin^ some apprehension of Sin and Misery, an^ some
fears and affections for a season, an^ then some apprehensions and hopes of
Mercy, and all these without being humbled thoroughly, and to purpose; so as
that Sin be such an intolerable evil and insupportable burden, as that the poor
Soul cannot bear, is not able to live without freedom and deliverance, but is
constrained to fly for Refuge to Christ, that blessed Hope, set forth for poor
Sinners. I say, an imperfect work in these things, is the baneful misery and
ruin of Souls in our time. Alas! until there be a deep radication of Grace,
all your seize in spiritual things will be but like Paint and Pageants,
Shells and Shadows; and you know a painted Sword or Fire, will never cut nor
burn: neither will all the circumstantials, and semi*persuasions in
Soul-matters, ever lay the Ax to the root of your Lusts, to fetch out the core
of Sin there, and slay the Enmity that is ingrav'd in your carnal minds against
God and Godliness; there must be a deep, inward, powerful work, such as may
carry the Soul through the pangs and struglings of the New Birth, out of it
self both as to Sin, and its own Righteousness, quite over to Christ; or else,
in a short time, your Lusts will regain their strength, and become more
mischievous than ever, like the Man in the Gospel, Mat. 12 43, 44, 45. When the
unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking
rest, but finds none. Then he says, I will return into my house from whence
I came out, and when he is come, he finds it empty, swe^^ and garnished. Then
goes he, and takes w^^ himself seven other spirits, more wicked th^^ himself,
and they enter in, and dwell there, an^ the last state of that man is worse
than the f^^mer. So in Hebr. 6. 4. and 10. 26. a^^ 2 Pet. 2. 20. O then above
all, You^^ Ones, see to this, that there be a sound Conversion, as the
groundwork of all, for upon this the very hinges of your Souls salv^tion turn.
Hence our blessed Savior i^ John 3. 3. pronounces, Except a man be bo^^
again, he cannot see the kingdom of Go^ Wherefore again and again, I advise
Young Ones to see to their Foundation: it were, ^ conceive, much better for a
Man to be deceived in thinking himself unregenerate when he is regenerate; than
on the other hand, to deem himself regenerate, when h^ is not. The former
mistake indeed is afflicting, but the last is damning. If a condemned
Malefactor conceit he has a Pardon, an^ has none, he may go pleasantly to the
Gallows, but he will not be able to hold it when he comes there: The Lord open
your eye^ and hearts, and cause you to see and feel the truth and power of this
first general Rule, o^ Means, in order to the fleeing your youthful Lusts.

Now I shall proceed to lay down th^se distinct Remedies, suitable to each
particular Lust that young People stand bent unto: And here again I must
entreat you, as you have any regard to the glory of God, and your own
Salvation, and would not be condemned with ungodly and impenitent Sinners at
last, that you do not refuse to put in practice what shall be taught you in the
following Rules, how to flee each particular Sin that you are so prone to; and
now I shall begin with that which so early appears, even in your very
Childhood, and woefully grows up with you to riper years: Namely that
airiness, vain rashness, and carelessness of spirit and conversation; all
which, I at large and distinctly treated on under the first Enquiry, viz. What
were those Sins that might be more especially called youthful Sins? Now
forasmuch as these three border so near and close upon each other, I shall, for
the Cure of these, prescribe this Remedy.

Remedy or Means against youthful Vanity, Rashness, and Inconsiderateness.
The First Remedy.
Endeavor to get, and keep an awful impression upon thy heart all day long, of
God's Omnipresence and Omniscience: that you cannot fly from him, because he
is every where, and that you cannot hide or conceal any thing from him, because
all things are naked and open to his All-seeing Eye. At what time thou art
ready to pour out thy heart in Vanity and Froth, catechize and chastise thy
feathery and light spirit, after this manner: Do thou now remember thy
Creator? Art thou aware of his holy Eye and Presence? Can thou blear and
blin^ the pure piercing flaming Eye of Heaven* What, will thou dare to pilfer,
steal, be undutiful, and lie, while the jealous sin-revenging God stands by?
Thus would but Young Men presentiate the Majesty, Prescience, and Omniscience
of God to themselves, in the midst of their juvenile Extravagancies, how would
it a we and fill their Souls with trembling? one Aspect of this Eye of God, ^^
able to make the whole Earth tremble, Psalm. 104. 32. He looks on the Earth,
and it trembles. And Job speaks of some Sinner^ the Murderer, the Thief,
the Adultere^ that to be seen in their Sins, is to them the greatest terror
imaginable. Job 24. 17. ^^ a man (says he) see them, they are in the terrors
of the Shadow of Death. Now then young People, I appeal to you, what fear and
holy seriousness would this work i^ you, did you always thus set the Lord
before you, as David speaks in the 16. Psalm 8. and at your right hand, then
would you? could you? durst you be so vain, fickle, unstable, tossed up and
down with every puff of windy pleasures? Oh no, and here let me add this, viz.
represent to thy Soul, what an Eye it is that sees thee? It may be you may
fancy, that God sees as man sees. Scripture speaks of Sinners thinking that God
is such a one as themselves, in 50. Psalm. 22. Alas man may see, and not see, as
we say, i. e. wink, and connive at thy youthful Sins, and not be at all
displeased with thee: But God's Eye is, (1.) an holy, pure, strict, observing
Eye; there is nothing can escape his knowledge, wheresoever you are, whatsoever
you are doing, you are still under his observation. Psalm. 11. 4. His Eyes
behold, his Eyelids try the Children of men. Hab. 1. 13. Thou art (says the
Prophet) of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and can not look upon Iniquity.
That is, can not with the least approbation, nay, can not without great
indignation look upon evil. O vain Youth, remember that an angry, holy Eye is
upon thee, in all thy irreligious and vicious Courses, in all thy furious and
precipitate Evil Ways. And then (2.) consider it is an infinite Eye,
comprehending all things past, present, and to come at once, (uno intuitu.)
Many things confound us, we can be intent upon nothing, but in a successive way
things done many years ago elapse; and slip our remembrance; but it is not so
with God, with whom a thousand years are but as one day. See that 139. Psalm. v.
Thou compassest my Path, says David, and o^ lying down, and art acquainted
with my Way v. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? whither shall I flee from
thy Presence? If ascend up to Heaven, thou art there: If make my Bed in Hell,
behold thou art there* If I take the Wings of the Morning, and dwe^^ in the
uttermost parts of the Sea, even the shall thy Hand lead me, etc. Sure, you^
men, this would call in your vain, an^ straggling thoughts, and unite your
carele^^ Spirits to the fear of God's holy name, di^ you believe and remember
God's infi^^ Presence. There is a Story, of a pious man, have met with, who
being desirous to reclai^ an unchaste Woman, from her lewd a^ vile
Conversation, took this course wi^^ her, he came to her, pretending to ha^ some
wanton dalliances with her, provide it might be done with all privacy; she the^
upon led him from Room to Room, ^^ he still made many scruples, lest at the
Window, or that Keyhole, this crevis, ^^ that cranny, some or other might
chance ^^ peep in, and espy them together; at leng^^ she brought him to the
inwardest Room ^^ the House, where, says she, I am confide^^ that none can
possibly pry in to discove^ what we do. Whereupon he told her wi^^ weeping
Eyes, No bolts not bars can kee^ out God; no walls nor doors can binde^ his
piercing Eye; and what will it profit us to shun the Eye of man, when the Eye
of God is still upon us? Methinks this consideration should change thy youthful
froth and fury into a serious gravity and sobriety; that God's Eye upon thee is
never shut: the most waking Eye among men is at times closed, but the Lord
never slumbereth, nor sleeps, Psalm. 121. 4. It was excellent advice, that a
Rabbi gave to one of his young Pupils, Three things, says he, I would have
thee remember all day long; an Eye that sees thee, an Ear that hears thee, an
Hand that reg^sters all thy Actions. So would I commend this to you, young
people, to cure that natural Levity, and Precipitancy, that your age is so
incident unto. O remember, and often repeat it to your self, that God is in all
places, and not only without you, but in your very Breasts and Bosom, viewing
all your vain Thoughts and Imaginations, and all your vile Lusts and
Inclinations: So that if you have a mind to be merry and jolly for the space of
an hour, or two, with that Mirth which the Wise Man calls Madness; I beseech
you before you adventure upon it, first try if you can find out such an hour
wherein God's Eye is not on you, and then you have my consent, to take that
hour for that mirth: But sure I am, no such hour can be found out. And then
(3.) consider that this Eye of God, that is thus holy, pure, observing, and
infinite, is also an Eye of jealousy and justice. If a Husband have a jealous
Eye over a Wife, or a Master over his Servant, what a curb and bridle is it, to
restrain the one from filthiness? and the other from falseness? and if so, how
much more should the consideration of his Eye, who has styled himself in the
20. Exodus 5. the Jealous God* abate, and tame the wild fierceness an^
wantonness of Youth, especially if yo^ possess your Soul with the deep
apprehensions, that his Eye is an Eye of Justic^ too, that is, to bring you to
Judgment, for all your youthful Vanities and Follies. I^ this sense, the
Prophet Jeremiah explainet^ it, Jer. 32. 19. Thine Eyes are upon all the Ways
of the Sons of men, to give every o^^ according to his Ways, and according to
the Fruit of his d^ings. For God now observe you, in order to bring forth all
into the la^ Judgment; the serious thoughts of which made such deep impressions
on the Heart ^^ Augustine, that in his 8th Sermon concerning the coming of
Christ to Judgment, h^ says, Ecce in quo periculo incessanter conside^ etc.
Behold in what danger I stand continually, though I do not continually thin^ of
it; and the more wretched I, that I ca^ forget it: for God always sees me, and
a^^ my Sins: a strict sentence always awai^ me; in this condition I am, when I
wake* and when I sleep; when I laugh, and when I am sad; when I am proud, and
passionate, sic semper and ubique thus I am always, and every where. O would
but young people, when they are in their brisk and careless moods, with this
holy man, represent it to themselves, that they are thus in the presence, and
under the Eye of God, who has appointed a day, wherein he will judge both
qu^ck and dead, surely it would create a trembling in them. Wherefore in the
close of this Rule, let me present you with a collection of choice Scriptures,
that may be as a continual guide for youth to direct their Paths in the good
Old way, how they may be all the day long in the fear of the Lord, and also
that may be as an Angel with a drawn Sword in their evil ways to restrain their
steps therein. Job 13. 27. Thou look narrowly to all my Paths. thou set
a print upon the Heels of my Feet. Job 24. 21, 22. For his Eyes are upon the
ways of man, and he sees all his goings: there is no darkness nor shadow of
death, where the workers of Iniquity may hide themselves. Job 31. 41. Does he
not see my Ways? and count all my Steps? Psalm. 11. 14. The Lord's Throne is in
the Heavens, his Eyes behold, his Eye lids try the Children of men, and the
139. Psalm throughout. Prove. 5. 21. The ways of man are before the Lord, and he
pondereth all his goings. Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the Evi^ and the Good: And in the 11. v. Hell an^ Destruction are
before the Lord, how much more then the hearts of the Sons of men: Jer. 23. 24.
Can any man hide himself ^^ secret places, that I shall not see him, sai^^ the
Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Eart^ says the Lord? Darkness hides not from
him, but the Night shines as the Day. And in the 27. verse. I have seen thine
Adulteries, and thy Neighings, woe unto thee, will thou not ^^ made clean? when
shall it once be? Heb. 4. ^. But all things are naked and open unto ^^ Eyes of
him with whom we have to do. The you see what abundance of Scriptures the^ are
of this kind, and there are multitude more, t^nding to the same purpose; sure^^
it intimates to us, that we are not easi^ persuaded of this truth, that God is
alwa^ present with us, and beholding of us: su^^ly the Lord would never urge
this ma^^ so often upon the Children of men, ^^ that he knows how prone we
are to qu^stion it; O there is a world of Arheism a^ unbelief in our Heart
about it. Hence y^^ ^^ad Psalm 50. 22. Thou thoughtest I was such one as thy
self. Job 22. 13. How does G^ know? can he judge through the dark Clo^^. so
Psalm. 64. 7. They say the Lord shall not s^ And Ezekiel. 9. 9. The Lord has for
saken ^^ Earth, he sees not: And they say to ^^ Almighty, Depart from us, etc.
O the ho^rible, hellish Atheism, that reigns in the hearts of thousands: Else
whence is it that a Servant shall be afraid of his Master's eye, a Sinner of
his Minister's, a Child of his Father's, and a man of his Child's eye and
presence, more than of the great Jehovah's? O how many declare their Sin as
Sodom, neither are they ashamed; I appeal to you, can you believe that these
consider that the most high God has a piercing Eye to espy, and a powerful
Hand to punish the workers of Iniquity? Would Achan have stole the Wedge of
Gold? or Gehazi took the Reward? or Annanias and Saphira contrived, and told
the ^ye to the Apostle? had they seen the Eye of God that saw them. O young
men, durst you leave, and neglect your sinful and miserable Souls to perish for
ever at that rate you do, did you but live always as in the presence of God,
and as under his all seeing jealous Eye? Wherefore I beseech you practice this
Rule, if ever you would be delivered from a vain Spirit and Conversation. I
have been the longer upon this, because it will be of use through all the rest,
which I hope I may dispatch with a quicker hand.

Means, or Remedies against that Epidemical Sin of youthful delaying
Repentance, and Conversion, etc.
YOung People are (as you have heard exceedingly prone to put off God, and
their Souls, with saying in themselves, I a^ young enough, and have time enough
to repent hereafter, etc. these are the usual pleas that young people make for
delaying their Conversion; and this is indeed the usual, an^ beaten Road to
Hell, and the common Snare, in which Satan entangles multitudes of unwary
Youth, persuading the^ that it is too soon to repent, that it is too ea^ly to
fully, and sadden the briskness, an^ beauty of their Youth, with the melancholy
apprehensions of Religion: but ala^ while silly Youth listens to these charm^
the fatal hour of death often steals on, an^ cuts them down, e're they are
aware, o^ awake. Wherefore for the Cure and Remedy hereof, I shall offer these
following Considerations.

First, Consider the danger of Delays.

Young People make little or nothing o^ putting off the important matters of
th^^ Souls, a day, a week, a month, a year, not considering what an infinite
prejudice it may be to their everlasting Happiness to neglect the looking after
these matters, though it were no more, than for one hour, or one day: and that
will appear,

1. In regard of the utter uncertainty of their time, and that both of their
time of Life, and time of Grace. Alas you know not what a day, an hour may
bring forth; the very next hour may find thee alive, and leave thee dead. This
is that which Youth are not easily persuaded of; they foolishly dream of years,
and then they entertain so good an opinion of the truth of their Dream, that
they grow as peremptory in it, as if they had an Inheritance settled upon them
for perpetuity. But O vain Youth, where ever dwelt the man, wh^t was his Name,
that could ever assure thee of another day, nay, that thou shall see the end of
this day? Is not thy Flesh grass, as well as others? view the weekly Bills of
Mortality; and see there whether young ones are priviledg'd above others from
Sickness, and Death. Let it therefore be seriously thought upon by young
people, that their time of Life is utterly uncertain, that they are but one
breaths distance from Death and Eternity; and though it is possible that they
may live till to morrow, or next Year, yet it is equally possible that they may
dye before; others have been surprised, who have had the same reason to hope
for a longer time, a^ themselves; and therefore they cannot delay, and put off
their Conversion, and turning to God, without notorious or manifest danger.

O be not deceived, you whose consultations have wont to be with Flesh and
Blood, and whose conclusions use to be, that you are young, and healthy, and
have many Year^ to come; and therefore it is time enough hereafter to repent.
Piety is too grave for your green head, the caput mortuum of your old Age, will
serve well enough to serve God with. I say, be not deceived, a sudden death may
snatch you hence, and send you^ guilty Soul to Hell, before your Body be
carried to the dust; for the great God is the sole and sovereign Lord of your
life and time, and pray see how he rebukes the presumption of such Sparks, who
boast of their years to come, 12. Luke 19, 20. I will say t^ my Soul, Soul thou
have much Goods laid up for many Years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be
merry. This Prodigal was neither sick, nor possessed with any fears of Sickne^^
and Death, yet see what follows, v. 20. But God said unto him, Thou fool this
Night thy Soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall these things be? So
in the 28. Isa. 18. you read of some Desperadoes that had made ^ Covenant with
Death, and were at an agreement with Hell; But what says the Lord? why he
tells them that the one should be disannulled, and the other should not
stand; nay, he calls them a refuge of Lies: and that the overflowing Scourge
and Storm of his wrath should rend down all their lying refuges: And in the 58.
Psalm. 9. you read that such as are taken away living, and in his wrath, before
the Pots can feel the Thorns, i. e. suddenly, and in so short a breath, that
elsewhere they are said to go down into the Pit in a moment: and that these
rebukes may particularly intend young ones, you may see in the 36. of Job 14.
They dye in Youth, etc. Hence the Holy Ghost often makes use of that Metaphor
Grass in the 40. Isa. 6. and 90. Psalm. 6. In the Morning it flourishes, and
grows up, in the Evening it is cut down and withers. The grass is growing
in the field, and, as our Savior notes, to morrow cast into the Oven, Matthew.
6. 30. Such is the condition of Youth, you may be in good health, in a
flourishing condition, in mirth and jollity one day, and be burning in Hell the
next. Therefore flee this Sin of delaying your Repentance, etc. it was the
counsel of Solomon, who was inspited, 27. Prove. 1. Boast not thy self of to
morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. q. d. This day God in
mercy affords thee to repent in, etc. but trust not upon a to morrow, that is
utterly uncertain whether it come or no? or if it do, whether thy Conversion or
thy Condemnation in it shall be brought forth or no? If it was thy own, and
thou could certainly kno^ it would be in thy possession, etc. the^ might be
some little pretense for thy present delaying: but when it is another's, and ^^
is utterly hid and concealed from thee, whether thou shall live to it or no,
how can yo^ without certain danger delay till another day. He that will
adventure to build o^ Ground that is none of his own, must loo^ to have all
undone, or overturned at the pleasure or displeasure of another. T^us you
delay, and profusely waste the prese^ season and space of Repentance, which
merciful God indulgeth you with, a^ boldly entrench upon the future, which Go^
has reserved in his own power: how haza^dous an adventure do you run, for it is
a ru^^ in the civil Law, no Person can promi^^ that which is another. Now the
own and proprietor of your time is God, and ^^ has concealed the day, the
hour, the m^ment of Death's arrest from us, that so yo^ should never delay, but
work out your Salvation to day, while it is called to day: the command of God
takes hold of you at the present; the counsel of God concerning the future, is
kept hid from you: alas for a t^ morrow, whose is it, Seneca the Heathen could
see this, and say solum tempus praese^ nostrum: No time is ours but the present
to count upon a to morrow, is as the Proverb runs, To count your Chickens
before the be hatched. It is reported of Caesar, that he would never let his
Soldiers know when or where he meant to march next. So here it is altogether
uncertain, at whose door God may knock next by a sudden Death; he does not
always send out the Scouts and forerunners of a lingering sickness, as warnings
of our approaching change. But sometimes in a moment, in the midst of youthful
security and jolligy, he lops down the strong and healthful, while he spares
the more infirm and sickly. There is no condition of Life, but we have
instances how it has been embittered by sudden deaths occasioned, and
sometimes by falls, either of a House, or Horse, or else by falls off a House
or Horse; and sometimes by Fire kindling upon Persons when asleep, and
sometimes by Water, persons falling into it when awake. Again, sometimes by
preternatural Heats and Colds, some burnt up with Fevers, others drowned with
Humors, some choked with Quinsies, others snatched away with Apoplexies, in
so short a breath, that they have not time to cry out for help. Innumerable are
these Casualties that you young ones lie open to, and how dangerous then is it
to delay, though you are now free from pain, and in good health: may not the
same be said of many others, who died suddenly, and it may be delayed their
Repentance on the like grounds as you do. O foolish and unwise, who has
bewitched you! Moreover it is to be considered that your present delaying to
fl^ your Lusts does exceedingly provoke the Lord of your Life and Time, to cut
sho^ your Life; for how can you reasonably expect that the Almighty, in whom ye
live and move, and have your being, should prolong the days of such Rebels, who
mak^ no other use of their time but to affront an^ dishonor him? O young
people, ho^ righteous a thing would it be for God ^ cut you off, and deny you a
longer con^^nuance on Earth, while you put him o^ and delay your Repentance and
Return ^ him. Surely if thou resolvest upon a pr^sent league with thy Youthful
Lusts, refusing a divorce as yet between them and the Soul, it is most just
with God to resolve up on a present divorce between thy Soul an^ Body, and to
refuse thee an hours patien^ more. Wherefore O mortal Youth, ^ minute Dust and
Ashes, represent to the self thy danger, if thou delay; the time ^ thy delay,
is a time full of danger upon the account, viz. the uncertainty of thy time o^
Life. But then,

2. It is dangerous in regard of the uncertainty of thy time of Grace. So the
suppose thou had an assurance ^^ the continuance of thy time of Life s^ many
Years, as Hezekiah had, yet wh^ would that avail thee, while thou art at utter
uncertainty about thy time of Grace. If you enquire what I mean by time of
Grace. I Answer, it stands in the enjoyments of the usual means of Salvation,
which are two fold; first, the outward preaching of the Word; secondly, the
inward strivings and motions of the Spirit: these make up a time of Grace,
which is called an acceptable time, a time wherein God may be found, a day of
Salvation, in Psalm. 32. 6. and 2 Cor. 6. 2. Now such a time much differs from
that which the Greeks call (...) i. e. the time of our Life which lasts as
long as our Lives last. Alas there is many a man out-lives his time of Grace:
hence Luke 19. O that thou had known in this thy day the things that belong
to thy Peace; but now they are hid from thine Eyes. The time of Grace is tempus
labile a transient thing: delay but one quarter of an hour longer, and thou
may with Esau be rejected, and find no more any place for an acceptable
Repentance; post est occasio calva. Ah how did Esau weep and take on after he
had lost his time of Grace: he might once have had the time of Blessing without
those bitter Agonies, but he delayed and loiter'd away his season. Great is the
mercy of God to allow man a time of Grace on Earth; but great is the misery of
man, as Solomon says, Eccles. 8. 6. because he discerns not his time, who can
give a due estimate of enjoying the Gospel, wherein so great Salvation i^
offered to Sinners, Behold I stand at the Door and knock, etc* Rev. 3. 20.
Though thou ha^ played the Herlot with many Lovers, yet return unto me, says
the Lord. Jer. 3. 1. O Israel thou ha^t destroyed thy self, but in me ^^ thy
help found. As I live says the Lord, I desire not the death of a Sinner, etc.
Ezekiel. 33. 11. As though God did be seech you by us, we pray you in Christ's
stead, that you be reconciled ^^ God, 2 Cor. 5. 19. In the Gospel we have the
love of God commended to us, in the when we were Enemies, Christ died for u^ we
have his admirable Condescension, hi^ manifold Invitations, his precious
Overtures, his strange and wonderful Reasoning^ Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye
dye? His rei^^ rated Calls, Isa. 55. 1. Come, come, come three times in one
verse. O the incomparable love and kindness that is displayed i^ the Gospel to
poor Sinners. O that the^ was in young People a Heart to understan^ these
things that concern their Peace in thi^ their day, before they are for ever hid
from their Eyes. Sure you would not shuffle an^ shift off these blessed offers
of Grace wit^ dilatory excuses, did you but consider ho^ soon the Market will
be over and gone, ho^ soon your plenty may be turned into penu^y a Famine may
arise of hearing the Wor^ of the Lord, and thy Soul perish for want ^^ Vision,
thy Teachers may be removed by Death, natural or civil; or God may send the
Gospel one way, and thee another. O young man, now thou have the Lord's Voice
in the public Ministry of his Servants, crying to thee, Flee, flee thy
youthful Lusts to day, while called to day: O hear his Voice this day, this
hour of the day, without any longer delay, for you are wholly uncertain whether
(if you should live till a to morrow) ever you shall have another Call; you are
not the disposer of his Offers and Calls: sometimes God has been quick with
Sinners, he has invited them to come in, and they not regarding, he has
immediately rejected them, Luke 14. 24. For I say unto you, that none of the
men that were bidden, shall taste of my Supper. Therefore take heed, it is
dangerous deferring; that which the Lord spoke of Judgment, and Affliction, in
the 1. of Nahum 9. I will make an utter end: Affliction shall not rise up the
second time, may be fulfilled concerning his gracious offers and invitations in
the Gospel; possibly the Lord will make an utter end of speaking, you may never
hear more from him, be sure he will at last come to an end of calling, and you
are not sure but the present Call may be his last. And O how deplorable is a
Sinner's case when the Lord shall say, Because I have called, and you have
refused, I will call no more for ever, he that is unjust, let him be unjust
still; a^ he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Rev. 2^ 21. Which brings
me to speak of the second Branch, wherein thy time of Gra^^ consists, and
whereof it is constituted, namely the inward strivings and motions of the
Spirit of God, how uncertain these a^ So that suppose thou had an assurance
o^ the continuance of the outward Calls of the Word, yet what assurance have
thou of the inward strivings and operations of the Sprit, without which all the
outward mea^ will be ineffectual. Alas! how long m^ we poor Ministers stand at
your Doors, an^ knock and call, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
Dead; er'e one Si^ner will stir, until that omnipotent Age^ put forth his
virtue and influence. As the Waters of Bethesda had no sanative heali^^ Virtue
in them, till the Angel at a certai^ time of the day moved and troubled the
Waters: So let Minister's abilities an^ gifts be what they will, they do but
ploug^ upon the Rocks, as it were, until the Spi^ concur to take away the stony
Heart, an^ open those Iron Gates of the Soul, as h^ did Lydia's. Now this
blessed Spirit do^^ ordinarily in time of hearing the Wor^ afford to men,
especially to young one, many good Motions and Excitations to repentance, in
Enlightnings, Awakenings, setting their Sins before them, in their bloody guilt
and condemning nature; bringing them into straits of Conscience, stirring up
affections and good purposes of leaving their Sins, putting them upon Prayer,
and coming to Christ, etc. All which precious Motions and workings of the
Spirit with the Word, in the Souls of young persons, are choice Mercies; and if
they were wise without delay incontinently, and presently to comply with the
same, it might be as much as their eternal Happiness is worth: whereas on the
contrary, if they quench these blessed motions, by delays and prorogations, as
Felix did, it may amount to the damage of Damnation, and who can tell what that
amounts to. God may be provoked to withdraw his Spirit, and say, My Spirit
shall strive no more with them. For there is nothing more uncertain than the
strivings and motions of the Spirit of God, it is compared to the Wind that
blows where it lists, John 3. 8. It is not like our Tides that come at
certain and (...) times, so that if you miss the Morning Tide, you may ^ake the
Evening; no, no, but it is like the Wind which sometimes rises, as we say, and
then all of a sudden falls and lies still; sometimes it ^loweth cut of one
corner, and then the quite contrary way, so are the workings of the Spirit, he
may deal with thy Soul to day, and afterward withdraw from thee; move in your
Hearts now, and for hereafter be for ever silent: and therefore thou should
do as the Mariner, who k^owing that he has not the Wind at his own command,
and that he cannot make his Voyage without its gales, what does he do? why he
lies by and watches for the season, when the Wind makes for him, and when
such a season comes, he is careful to lay hold of it, and to hoise up Sail and
be gone. So should thou do, young man, never imagine that thou have the
Spirit of God at thy command, or that ever thou can sail to Heaven without
his gracious Gales, but diligently lie by the Waters of the Sanctuary, waiting
and watching for his sacred Movings thereon, and when thou have them, then
immediately and obedientially open the surled Sails of thy Soul, and say,
Adored be thy heavenly Majesty, for this gracious Visitation of thine to me a
wretched Sinner: Welcome, welcome to my blind and hard Heart, are these
Convictions and Pulsations of thine. O let me not miscarry and perish between
Convictions and Conversions; but perfect thy work, dear Lord, now thou have me
on the Wheel: O defist not thy operation, till thou have formed me a Vessel of
Mercy and brought me out a new Creature in forming Christ in me. Thus be thou
kind to thy own Soul, in being careful to close with the present advantages,
which are vouchsafed to thee in this thy time of Grace, and encourage thy self
in this, the Spirit of God will be with you. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is with
you, while you are with him: if you seek him, he will be found of you, but if
you forsake him, he will cast you off. O consider the danger you run, when you
put off all with this hereafter, hereafter you will obey his Motions, and
receive his Instructions: This is the ready way to be for ever deserted and
cast off by him. It is reported of Hannibal, that bewailing the loss of his
opportunity that he once had to take Rome, he should say, When I could, I had
no mind to take Rome: When I would, I had no power. There will be, I fear,
innumerable, and incurable instances in the other world, that will confess to
all Eternity, that when the Spirit in their time of Grace, wooed them to
repent, and be converted, that their Sins might be blotted out, they had no
mind to it; but when they would, after their desertion and rejection upon a Bed
of Death, they had no power. O young men, who now put it off, it is never
enough considered by you, what infinite hazards you run, of perishing for ever;
a while longer, and a while longer, had almost ruined Augustine, when he was
young, as himself owneth, in his 8th Book of Conseience when he would not
answer the Convictions of the necessity of Repentance, he craved Forbearance
not to do it yet; I know not (says he) what to answer Non erat quod
responderem veritate convictus, nisi tantum verba lenta and somnolenta. Modo
ecce modo sine paululum, sed modo and modo non habet modum and sine paululum in
longum ibat. Aug. in Confess.
being convinced o^ the truth, but onl^ sluggish and sleep words, anon, behol^
anon, suffer me little: but anon, an^ anon had no measure, and bear with m^ a
little, held long afterward. In chap. 1^ of that Book, he finding the Devil
flattering his Soul with persuasions to dela^ his Repentance, at last he
violently brea^ out usque quo Domine, quamdiu? quam ^^ cras, and cras? quare
non modo? quare ^^ haec hora est finis turpitudinis me^? O m^ God (says he)
how long will thou suffe^ me thus? How long shall I say to morrow and to
morrow? Why should I not do now, and this hour end that filthiness ^ Life,
which otherwise will ruin me -- It is pleasing to Satan to steal away our
p^^cious seasons of Grace one after another until we have not one more
remaini^^ O young man, who is it, think you, the suggests that Corvina Cras as
Augustine ca^ it, cras, cras, if you have been ignora^^ hitherto, know it from
this day for a m^ certain truth, it is no other than that liar ^ Hell, the
Devil, and sure I am he has ^ way so plausible and politic to circumv^^ thee,
as by hanging these weights of dela^ upon thy Soul, and thereby letting and
bindering thy present flight from Sin to Christ with an hereafter is time
enough; so that thou may conclude upon this, that more perish this way than
any other, for Satan can prevail upon few, to say peremptorily they will not
repent; but this is the common snare and bait wherein, and whereby he takes
multitudes, I will turn to God hereafter; for these delays provoke the God of
Grace to take away his Spirit, and then what can the miserable Sinner do. It
was the saying of an Eminent Person, The Spirit of God is a tender thing,
grieve it once, and you may drive it away for ever, and then it is not your
crying, Lord, Lord, that will fetch him back again. Thou may entreat (to use
the words of that blessed Soul-converting Preacher) for Mr. Fenner's danger of
deferring Repentance.
one dram of that Mercy that has been offered, but thou have rejected; but it
shall never be granted to thee: God may clap that fearful sentence upon thee,
Now henceforth never Fruit grow on thee more, never Repentance come into thy
Heart more. If now thou will not repent, and be converted, the Lord may set it
down in his decree, that from this day forward thou may sumble about thy
Sins, but shall never get victory over them; thou may blunder about
Repentance, but never do the work; what is the reason? why because I would have
purged thee, and thou would not, therefore thou shall not be purged any more.
O young men there is a time wherein God will not be found; he will not always
wait your leisure, your pleasure; how long or how sho^^ your time of Grace will
last, is hid from you: Repentance is God's gift, and Gi^^ are given according
to the good pleasure of the giver: It is a great mistake to think that it is at
your pleasure to call it down from Heaven at your need, to convey you to
Heaven, when you feel your selves falling into Earth; bitter Experience has
taught multitudes of shuffling delaying Sinners, the delusions of such
conceits, while it their immoderate pursuit of their Lusts they have
endeavovred to stop the mouth o^ Conscience with promises that e're long they
would take time to consider and recollect themselves, and return to God, in the
mean while, stifling and slighting the merciful motions of the Spirit of Grace,
o^ a sudden, e're they are aware, a silent and secret decree passes against
them, Let the^ alone, they are joined to their Lusts, which though it make no
noise in their Heads, yet it effectually seals up their Heart to an incurable
obduration and hardness. And now I appeal to you upon this consideration, viz.
the uncertainty of the time of Grace, whether Delays are not unspeakably
dangerous, since no man knows whether the next day will afford him so much as a
possibility of Repentance, if he put off and defer it this day. Wherefore, O
young man, as ever thou would not be forsaken of God, and have the things of
thy Peace for ever hid from thine Eyes, and the dreadful guilt of innumerable
Sins sealed upon thy Soul, O flee this youthful Sin of delaying Repentance a
moment longer.

2. Consider the Impiety and Wickedness of Delaying, for it does in effect
speak thus to God, The real love and delight of my Soul is in my Lusts, I
desire thee therefore to stay for my Repentance till hereafter, and by no means
to punish me while I shall be provoking and dishonouring thee in the tract of
my youthful days; give me leave to be a faithful Servant to diverse Lusts and
Pleasures while I have strength and spirits, and then when I grow impotent, and
my Lusts turn me off, I pray thee to accept me, and grant me Heaven. O what
monstrous Blasphemy and Impiety is there in such a vile deportment toward the
Blessed God, and pray is there not something of this in every delay; it shows
evidently that thou preferrest thy Lusts before him, yea, the Devil's service
before his. O transcendent horrid Wickedness, that ever a reasonable Creature
should choose to be employed in the Devil's work and drudgery, before that most
gracious, noble, honorable service of God. O young man, let Conscience speak,
is the Devil so real a Friend, so good a Master, or is there so much pleasure
in being a slave to thy Lusts, as that the Lo^^ of Heaven and Earth, the Author
of thy Life and Breath, should stand by and stay till they are in the first
place served, and then when the Devil and thy Lusts will dismiss thee, God
shall have their leaving I beseech you let Conscience judge in the case,
whether Hell it self can exceed suc^ Ungodliness. Suppose your dear Father that
begat you, or your tender Mother tha^ bare you, should knock at your Door, an^
entreat an admission, and you should say That at present they must excuse you,
the^^ are a company of Thieves, Murderers an^ Adulterers that you must first
attend an^ entertain, etc. Would not this be condemned as a piece of vile
Inhumanity And can it be deemed (in the present cas^ a less piece of Impiety to
put such an hig^ affront and indignity upon the Great God as when he graciously
invites you to bre^^ off your Sins by Repentance, that he might show you Mercy,
to put him off, as Fe^^ did Paul, Go thy way for this time her^ after
(possibly) I may attend, but for ^^ present, there is the Devil and a train ^^
youthful Lusts stay for me, and I must give entertainment to them in the first
place. This without an Hyperbole, may be styled the Masterpiece of Wickedness,
the Mother of Abominations: it is a plain contradiction of, and direct
opposition to the sovereign command of our Maker, who says, Eccles. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, before the Evil days come, etc.
God says, To Day while it is called to Day, repent: And you say, No, to day
while it is called to day, I must rejoice and follow my youthful pleasures and
delights. And so you put the lie upon God, and credit the Devil, who is the
Father of Lies. O this Sin of Delays has a world of rebellion in it, and
Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft. Moreover the impiety of this Sin will
further appear, if you consider what a Scorn it casts upon the admirable Grace
of all the three glorious Persons of the Trinity, as if not worthy of
acceptance, the Father's Love and Wisdom to and for a lost World of Sinners, in
decreeing and revealing of Jesus Christ his blessed Son, to seek and to save
what was lost, opening a Fountain, and sealing a new and everlasting Covenant
of Grace in his Blood, that whosoever believes, and repents, shall not
perish, but have Ever lasting Life. O astonishing Love; was there any need for
God to stoop to offer undone man a Covenant of Grace; but his ways are not as
ours, etc Now this youthful Sin of Delays spurneth at this Bowel and Bosom,
Mercy and Love of God the Father: And can this be thought to be a little Sin? O
unparrallel'd Wickedness, of what a Scarle^ tincture and bloody nature is this
Sin O young man, consider it, take he^^ of shuffling; here thou will be apt ^^
think within thy self, that sure this is not so: What I guilty of trampling on
the bowle^ of Go'ds mercy, which I venture to pu^ off, turning to him a little
longer; far be^ it from me to do so great wickedness, I never intended any such
thing. O delude^ Youth, come see thy guiltiness e're it ^^ too late to remedy
thy self. The Go^ and Father of our Lord Jesus reveals an^ publishes his
eternal thoughts of love t^ poor Sinners, that had destroyed themselves
allows them a day of Salvation, and acceptable time to come in, and be saved
without exception, though he was the offende^ party, yet he proclaims fury is
not in me* I have no pleasure in the death of Sinners. I am willing to be
reconciled, lo I have found out a Ransom, I have bruised my own Son, and slain
my own Lamb, to be a sacrifice for Sin, and a Savior for Sinners: him have I
sealed and set forth to be the only propitiation for Sin through Faith i^ his
Blood: sure they will reverence my Son, and admire my Grace in offering him,
and strive who shall first receive him: sure every Knee will bow to him, and
every Mouth confess to him, what less could be expected. Now then instead of
this, to crave with Solomon's sluggard, a little longer, and a little longer to
embrace and enjoy our vile Lusts, which according to the tenor of the Gospel,
cannot one moment be regarded and loved without a manifest rejection of Christ:
I appeal to you whether your present delays are not a notorious despising the
Riches of God's Goodness, which Sin is a most bitter provocation of Almighty
God, who could every moment confound such despisers of his Grace. What think
you, will an earthly King bear it, that his descending below himself to spare
and show mercy to obstinate Traitors, should be despised. It is also to be
considered how wickedly these delays do vilify the Grace of our dear Redeemer,
who though he was rich with the Riches of the Deity, he thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, yet such was his amazing Grace, that for our sakes he
became poor with the poverty of our humanity; he took upon him the form of a
Servant, he was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs, and here in the
days of his Flesh endured the contradiction of Sinners, the temptations of
Satan, the curse of the Law, the bitter wrath of God, and the accursed death of
the Cross, and all this for Rebels, Enemies. O infinite condescension; and
after all this is done, he comes a wooing to our Doors, and follows us up and
down with the sweet motions of his Spirit, and with the strong motives of his
Love, in dying for us: pleading, O Sinners, why will you dye? I am Jesus who
dyed for you, turn unto me, my Heart is toward you; what could I have done
more for you to win you, to redeem you, than I have done. O remember how I was
wounded for your Sins, Behold my Hands and Feet, reach hither thine Hand, put
it into the hole in my side, look upon me in the Garden, and on the Cross, and
trace me there, when my Blood trickled down my weary Body, and see how I loved
you, and whether ever love was like mine to you. O that the Lord would please
to make you sensible, young people, and cause you to apprehend the truth of
this, that Christ does really thus plead with you, to know the things of your
Peace, now in this your day, and to flee your youthful Lusts without delay. And
here I pray give me leave, without the least prevarication, to represent to you
the impious nature of this Sin of delaying, as it is a despising and contemning
all this rich Grace and Love of blessed Jesus. O young man, while thou
delayest, thou tramplest on Christ's precious Blood, thou embracest and openest
to thy vile Lusts, and Christ is made to serve, to stand without in the mean
while; is it not enough to provoke him in fury to be gone, and never return
more till he come to sentence thee, to go accursed into everlasting Fire? Young
man, has not Christ's Blood a cry? does it not cry to Heaven for Mercy to poor
Sinners? and does it not cry on Earth to Sinners, O cease your enmity, throw
down your weapons of hostility: O repent, repent, and I will appease and quench
the Flames of divine Wrath, that your Sins have kindled, etc. Now delays, so
long as they last, are a direct opposition hereunto, it is equivalent with
waging war against crucified Christ; it is interpretatively a conspiracy with
the Devil against Christ. Young man, were you aware of this, O be assured the
hand of Joab is in this, there is a peculiar enmity in Satan against the Blood
of Christ, as it is a Sinner's ransom, while himself is left bound with eternal
Chains; hence he subtly endeavors to strengthen the confederacy with thy
youthful Lusts by present delays, which if he can effect, he knows it to be a
direct compliance with him, to vilify that healing Plaster of Christ's
precious Blood; and how does he insult when he can prevail herein, to keep out
Christ, notwithstanding all his wooings, pleadings, and to keep up the present
leag^^ between thee and thy Lusts, as he mo^^ certainly does whilst thou
delays. O you^^ man, never forget this argument against this Sin of delaying:
it is a Sin directl^ against the bleeding dying love of Christ And then it is a
sin against the blessed Spirit, the third Person of the sacred Trinity who
proceeds from the Father and the S^^ and comes in the ministry of the Word
inwardly to strive with you, to convince yo^ of Sin and Misery, in order to a
revealing ^ Christ and his Righteousness to you for vo^^ Salvation. O admirable
Grace! that the H^^ Ghost, that heavenly Messenger should vouc^ safe to come
under a Sinner's roof upon su^^ a design so advantageous to a self-destroyi^^
Creature. O with what humble thank^^ Hearts should we receive such a messeng^^
that leaves thee probably many ninety nin^ better then thou art, and comes to
the secretly whispering and breathing. O ^^ thy youthful Lusts to day, while it
is ca^^ed to day, return, return, O prodigal you^^ there is Bread enough, and
to spare in the Father's house: if you stay here in this ^^ Country you perish,
if you live after ^^ Flesh, you must dye.

O young ones, your Delays must nee^ provoke and highly affront the blessed
Spirit, they cast a Scorn upon him, to see ^^ his melting Persuasions and
Motions set ^^ naught, and at the same time the charms and hissings of Satan,
that hellish Charmer and Serpent entertained. O how cutting, and bitterly
provoking would it be, to a compassionate Father, to see a rebellious Son
stopping his Ear to all his loving and good Advice and Counsel, and opening it
to the vile inticements and seducements of base fellows. How was Jacob
troubled, when his Sons Simeon and Levi rebelled, Genesis 34. 30. Ye have troubled
me (says their Father) and made me stink among the Inhabitants of the Land,
the Canaanites, etc. O young man, when the two Spirits, that of Heaven, and
that of Hell, come to thy Soul, and knock for entrance, and thou openest to
Satan, and shuttest out the Spirit of God by delays; this cannot be done
without an high hand of rebellion, there is abundance of impiety in it: for
herein thou castest a contempt on the Spirit: if it be a deprecating thing, to
set one person lower, and in a meaner place in my House than another of meaner
quality, how much more to shut the door against a person that is a Friend,
while an Enemy is let in; surely comparisons are too short in the present case;
the good and gracious Spirit of God comes wooing, and arguing. Be entreated, O
young man, to open, Christ's yoke is easy, one day of a repenting Sinner's
Spirit in strict watching, and holy walking, is better than a thousand days
elsewhere, etc. And Sinners delay and neglect attendance hereunto, making the
urgings of Sin and Satan an excuse for their present put-off^ these do not only
rob the Spirit of tha^ honor and glory due to him, but highly expose him to
contempt. And it is very remarkable, that ordinarily such persons are left of
God, to run into such heights o^ wickedness, that deservedly brings them to
some shameful and despicable end: ^^ must be confessed, sometimes God has
overcome such by his Grace, after much ado (if I may so express it) striving on
his pa^^ and rebelling on theirs; but then it must be granted also, that such
have usually been exceedingly wounded, and woefully distressed in their Souls,
for their so long standing, and stouting it out; but where it end^ not in
Conversion, there not only the blackness of darkness is reserved for them in
the other world, after that direful Sentence, of Go ye Cursed; but even in th^^
Life, they become notorious to all for their Ungodliness and Impiety. O let
this consideration, young ones, prevail with you^ no longer to delay your
Repentance an^ turning to God, viz. the Impiety of i^ which I might farther
show you, from the direct opposition that delays carry against your Baptismal
Covenant, and all those holy Institutions of Christ in the Gospel, usually
styled, the means of Grace, whereby you are obliged everlastingly to the
earliest Conversion and Repentance, all which I might have easily formed up
into Arguments, to set forth the impiety of Delays: but I shall not insist on
these, only shall sum up the strength of what has been offered, that Delays
are impious and wicked, as they trespass against the bowel-mercy of God the
Father, the bleeding wounds of God the Son, the blessed Inspirations of God the
holy Ghost, which Sin is enough to break our Hearts and Eyes with grief and
tears: It is a Sin of such a Scarlet tincture, as that it must needs make us
ashamed, if there be any shame in us; for the mercies of God are all as so many
messages of Love and Kindness; and every drop of the Blood of Christ is as a
Sermon of Love and Grace, and every illapse of that sweet and heavenly Dove, is
as a sacred Band, and Cord of Love and Mercy, and all to win us, to draw us, to
save us, Romans 12. 1. 2 Cor 7. 1. O wonderful love of God, who ever heard of
such kindness, that the offended Majesty of Heaven and Earth, who has all
Power and Might in himself, and is infinitely removed from all possibility of
want; that he should condescend to us Rebels, to send his own dear Son in the
likeness of sinful Flesh, deliver him up to the accursed Death of the Cross,
open an everlasting Fountain of Grace, enter his Protestations, yea his Oath,
that he has no pleasure in a Sinner's death and for as much as our Sin had
procured a malediction, and heavy wrath upon us and a woeful separation of our
Souls from the blessed God; That it should ever enter into the Heart of God (to
the end that such as we might go free, and be delivered from that Curse and
Wrath, and be restored to the favor of God) to bruise his own Son, and put his
Soul and Body to grief and make him an Offering for Sin; and O how wonderful
was the Love of Christ, tha^ he should be content, and willing to come under
the obligation to this Oblation, to the bearing of this Curse and Wrath in ou^
stead; was there ever Love l^ke to this that when we were Enemies, spitting o^^
our venom and enmity against God, h^ should dye for us, pay our Debts, have hi^
Hands and Feet nailed for us, etc. And ^ how wondrous is the Grace and
Condescension of the third Glorious Person, the blessed Spirit that ever he
should strive with Sinners; in order to their Conversion, when he might have
stood at an everlasting distance from them. O the rare humility ^^ the whole
Trinity, expressed in these Mysteries of Love and Grace. Now for any of Adam's
undoue posterity, condemned Creatures, poor Worms, Hell-deservin^ Sinners, to
abuse all this Grace and rich Mercy, how impious, and monstrously vile a thing
this is, I have largely proved to you, and showed you in particular that this
Sin of Delays, is an high affront, and indignity offered to all this Mercy and
Grace, the consideration whereof should make you lift up your Voice, and weep
bitterly. A stubborn Saul wept, upon the reflection of his abuse, and ill
requital of poor David's kindness, in 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17, 18. The Lord open your
Eyes and Hearts this day, young ones, that you may with grief and shame flee
from this Sin, that carries such transcendent wickedness in it. It Is a known
rule, corruption optimi, est pessima. The best things abused, prove the worst of
all. O remember it, young ones, Delays under these Circumstances, put very
great aggravations upon all your Sins. O think of it, what melting Arguments
these three Names have in them, Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, to a present
Conversion, and then think what a Soul confounding thing it is, to contradict,
oppose the Power and Authority, and to abuse and contemn the Grace and Mercy of
each Person. See that in Isa. 1. 2. Hear O Heavens, and give Far O Earth, I
have nourished and brought up Children, but they have rebelled, etc. O what
Paleness would gather upon your Faces, were you cited to appear before the Bar
of God, and your Consciences should give testimony against you herein?

The next Consideration I shall offer for your help, against this youthful Sin
of Delays shall be as follows.

3. Consider the egregious folly and madness of Delaying thy Repentance, and
return to God, wherein (as in the former Consideration thou abusest the Grace
of God so here) thou abusest the very Reason of a Man, and most foolishly
cheatest thy self, as is evident in these following particulars.

Thou will turn to God hereafter, which is (as has been largely proved)
utterly uncertain, and at present thou will embrace thy sinful Pleasures; now
is not this notorious folly, to put all to the desperate adventure of an
hereafter, when thousand have perished, and found no place for Repentance, in
all their after Times and Seasons.

Suppose at last you should come to g^ Christ, and pardon, and God would pleas^
to wait upon you (though this is rare, the is a miracle of Grace) yet what a
wounding will it be to you, to remember how you have spent your youth and
strength in Sin O the bitter Outcries, and Accusations o^ such! Now how
foolish a thing is it, to Delay at present, upon hopes of hereafter Repentance,
that is, in plain English, in hopes of hereafter-Grief, next door to Despair,
in hopes of being wounded a thousand times deeper, and being more confounded,
and ashamed, and drinking larger draughts of the Wormwood, and the Gall, than
early Converts do. Is not this Folly?

Again, how unreasonable, and mad a thing is it, to expect that God should
presently open to me, when I call for Mercy, in my last extremity, after I have
most wickedly put him off, and sacrificed the Male of my Flock, my best Years
to the Devil, and my Lusts. Can it seem reasonable, that an holy and jealous
God should regard such presumption.

Again, what Folly is it, to defer a work till hereafter, that may be done now
at present with ease, since should I live a thousand years, each day, yea
hour's delay, would add something more to the hardness of my Heart, and
difficulty to my Conversion, qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. All acts
of Sin strengthen the habits within, they engage the heart more to the love of
sin; and the more resistance, always the more impenitence and hardness. O
foolish Youth, have thou not enough already to sink thee? what folly is it to
add more weight of guilt: if a man had received one stab, it were dangerous;
but suppose he had a hundred, how hard would be his cure. Oh young man, woe to
thee, if thou make thy Conversion thus hazardous by Delays. As in bodily
affairs, in case of Sickness, is it not folly to defer sending for the
Physician, or, in case of Poison received into the Body, is it not folly to
defer the Remedy till to morrow? or in case of a Wound received, never to
regard the means of healing till it fester, and turn to a Gangreen? pray what
would you say, or think of a man, that when Sickness or Distempers come, should
say, I am not at leisure to be sick; go, and come at a more convenient time;
would you not conclude, that the Disease had already seized the man's
Intellectuals. Alas, the madness and folly in saying so to Repentance, is much
more, and much greater, unless a man could command the Grace of Repentance at
his pleasure; I remember the Advice one gave to young men, in imitation of
Solomon, in the 11. Eccles. 9. Rejoice, O young man, etc. q. d. Walk after the
sight of your own Eyes now, and look after the Duty of Repentance when you are
blind, and cannot see. Work not while it is Day, but when the Night comes; mind
matters of less moment, while you can do any thing, and your main interest,
when you are fit for nothing. Defer your Repentance till hereafter, though you
know not but you may dye to Night; put it off to a sick Bed, though you cannot
tell but sudden Death may prevent your lying sick at all. Run as far as you can
out of the way to Life, even till out of breath, and then return. First let
your time be spent, and then improve it. Increase your Debts to purpose, and be
sure that you have a good long Score, and then pay. Provoke God as much as you
can, and then appease him. Be sure you treasure up as much Wrath as you can,
and then confidently expect Heaven. O the folly of delaying our Repentance; Sin
is so fortified, and strengthened by delays, that every hour drives the Nail in
farther, till it is very difficult removing it. Sin takes the deeper rooting by
delays, and requires much more strength and violence to pluck it up, and the
heart is in danger of growing to that (...) that you read of, Romans 2. 5. an
irrepentable heart; and although God is able to give Repentance, yet there is an
infinite peradventure, whether he will or no; for, as Augustine says Qui enim
poenitenti promisit indulgentiam, dilatori diem crastinum non promisit. Aug. in
Psalm. 145. 8.
, That God who promises Pardon to the Penitent, has not promised to morrow to
the Sinner that puts off his Repentance. O the folly of delays, when every
moment the Devil will be nearer, and God farther off; when the next closure
with Lust, may ensnare and enslave thee for ever! O Young Man, is this thy
Prudence, to promise to thy self a more convenient Season hereafter, when thou will have less time, less strength, less aid and assistance, less tenderness of
Conscience, less influence of the Spirit; and when thou will have more love to
thy Lust, more blindness in thy Mind, more hardness of Heart, more aversness in
thy Will to turn to God, more unsensibleness and searedness in thy Conscience;
or else more in danger of downright and absolute despair? O miserable folly of
delays!

Besides, if you consider the suspicion of an hereafter-Repentance; true
Repentance is never too late, but late Repentance is seldom true; which might
be abundantly argued, from the usual experience of Sinners when they are sick,
O what Protestations do they then make of their Repentance and Amendment, but
commonly return to Sin, as the Dog to the Vomit, when restored to health again:
So that there is usually great unsoundness in Men's Sickbed Repentances, by no
means is it to be depended on. Surely it would be (compared with this) a
pardonable folly for a Man to adventure upon Poison, because he has heard
there is a certain Antidote in the World to expel it, though he cannot tell
whether he can get that Remedy or no; To what this is in the present Case: It
would be a piece of madness, that would be deservedly unpardonable, to run the
risque and adventure of a deathbed Repentance; when you are told of the
multitudes that perish, to a very few that are saved, pray examine carefully
what such a Repentance is made up of; usually it consists in the passionate
awakenings of natural Conscience, upon the Sinner's Alarm to appear before that
God to whom he has been a long time estranged, and against whom he has
maintained a long and old Enmity; hereupon there springs up in his Breast a
servile fear and dread of this holy and just God; hence the Sinner being stripped
of all Creature comforts and help, flies and cries to God for pardon of his
Sins, and deliverance from Hell, in great affrightment of Spirit, and O if God
will spare, what manner of person he will be, and the like. Now pray judge
righteous Judgment, and make a true estimate herein, many ignorant Wretches
call this true Repentance, whereas all this is but nature in misery, crying for
ease, which the veriest Reprobate in the World may do, nay, cannot but do, if
Conscience be awakened: here is no change of their hearts from darkness to
light, and the power and love of sin, to God and holiness. Alas! let but these
Men be put into their former state of health and temptation again, and they
would be the very same; a Balaam may come thus far to cry out, O that I might
dye the death of the Righteous, and my last end be like his. There is the same
love of Sin, and hatred of strict Godliness within as ever, which would soon
appear, if they might but still enjoy their former Vanities: but alas all is
under a force, they are launching out into the eternal World, and judgment
seems to them just at hand, now they cry aloud for mercy, and desire pardon,
bewail their abuse of time, make large offers of Reformation, and yet all this
is but as an Iron in the Fire, or a Mariner in a Storm: Well said Quale bonum
hoc ^st quod melius est poena, etc. Tertull.
Tertullian, What a mean sort of good is this, that only excels punishment. It
is good to repent and be saved, because who can dwell with everlasting burning?
All this is good just when a Man's a dying. O young man, is this consistent
with Reason, to venture thy All to all Eternity, upon so rotten a foundation?
thou would not venture to put out to Sea in a leak^ Vessel, and will thou be
so mad as to venture thy Soul upon such a bold Presumption as this? What if (O
Youth) after your mad and long Rambles in the ways of Sin, after thou have
tried these desperate Conclusions, and thou at last begins to come to thy self,
and attempts to come to Christ, what if he should remand thee, and send thee
back again, to find Relief among the Husks and Swine thou so lately left? if
when you (in your distress and calamity) supplicate with the most mournful Note
his mercy and compassion, he shall return you back with this greeting, and
ungrateful answer, It is now too late, thou should have remembered me in the
days of thy youth, depart, my patience and compassions are at an end, because
you refused when I called, I will now reject you. O what if God should conclude
his day of grace and mercy, just as thy time of Religion commenceth? If he end
his Patience, as thou beginnest thy Repentance? If his Ear be stopped, just as
thy cry for mercy is opening? pray, what then will you do? what say you young
ones? will you enquire, return, and come now or no? to allude to that of the
Prophet, Isa. 21. 11, 12. Watchman, what of the night? what of the night? if
you will enquire, enquire, return and come. How many expressions are here to
show the vehemence of the Call. What say you Youth? will thou dare to run the
venture of the loss of God's acceptance, of Heaven and eternal glory, for a
year, a month, a week, a day? shall the blessed Trinity stay till your Lust
will release you? Why then be it known to you, and remember hereafter, that I
this day give you notice of it, that as you sow, so you shall reap. If you
sow a deaf Ear to God's call to day, while it is called to day, you shall reap
a deaf Ear to your calls and cries for mercy, when your calamity and desolation
comes as a whirlwind upon you. O young Men I beseech you, and O that God would
persuade you by his Spirit this day, to practice this advice here exhibited to
you; Flee this youthful Sin of delaying. The sooner you come in, the more
acceptable it will be to God, the more comfortable to your own Souls, and the
more useful and beneficial to others. I might enlarge upon all these, but I
have been long already in other Considerations against this Sin of delaying;
and therefore I shall only tell you, That no Tongue can relate, no Pen can
describe all the advantages of an early Conversion. One days sweet communion
that you will have with a reconciled God in a state of grace, will be more
comfortable than a thousand years of impenitent Sinners, who are or may be in
continual fears of death and judgment. But O the blessed state of an early
Convert, that is a^ peace with God, his Soul may dwell at ease, let what will
come that can, in life or death, Sin is pardoned, the sting of all is removed,
Christ's yoke is easy, there is no condemnation to such an one. O the sweet
peace and tranquillity of such a Life, what should trouble or disturb him, that
has good grounds to believe, That he shall be for ever with the Lord, when he
shall go bence, and be seen no more. Young People are apt to th^nk, that there
is no contentment in the ways of God, but they must lead sad and uncomfortable
Lives; whereas it is most manifest, that there is nothing tends to free them
from discontent and uncomfortableness, like an early conversion to God. The
Kingdom of God consists in joy and peace; and there is a day at hand, when the
proudest despiser of an holy life shall be convinced of it. O therefore make a
trial of it, and if you do not find it so, take your own course, I have no more
to say, but to pray that God would circumcise your hearts, and give you wisdom
to take the present opportunity, and to admire his mercy that it is not too
late.

The next Sin that I shall direct Young Ones to flee, is, An eager pursuit of
sensual and sinful Pleasures, their loving these more than God, etc.
I Have showed you already, how strongly Youth is bent upon Pleasures, Sports,
Games, Feasts, Pastimes. O! Young Men love these as their Lives, and some will
as soon part with their Lives, as with their youthful Pleasures; they have had
Threatenings, Promises, Commands, Entreaties, Mercies, Afflictions, yet nothing
to this day could prevail with them. What Solomon says of the Fool, Prove. 27.
22. Though thou bray a Fool in a Mortar, yet will not his foolishness depart from
him; may be applied here, to that excess of affection that is found in young
Folks to vain and sinful pleasures: there is it is true a great unwillingness in
others to forgo the pleasures of Sin, but it strangely tyrannizes over Youth;
wherefore I shall lay down some Arguments, to persuade you to be willing to
flee this Youthful Lust.

First, Consider the Lord Jesus Christ, (young People) he was not a Man of
Pleasures, but a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs, and how unsuitable
are you to him, while you pant after vain Pleasures. I remember I have read of
five Men met together, that asked one another, What means they used to abstain
and flee from Sin?

The first answered, That he continually thought upon the Certainty of Death,
and the Uncertainty of the Time of it, and that made him live every day as his
last.

The Second, Meditated on the severe Account he was to give at the day of
judgment, and of the everlasting Torments of Hell, and this kept him from Sin.

The Third, Of the vileness and loathsomness of Sin, and of the excellency and
beauty of Grace and this made him abhor Sin.

The Fourth, Of the everlasting Rewards and Pleasures provided for those that
did abstain from Sin, and this prevailed with him.

The Fifth and last, Continually meditated on the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his
Love to poor ainners, in dying an accursed death for them, Snd this made him
ashamed to sin.

And truly this last is the greatest of all: O what an Argument is this, to
constrain you Young Ones to flee sinful Pleasures; I beseech you, for Christ's
sake, to flee them. Methinks if Christ should come and demand your Life and
Blood, they should freely go, and will you not part with your brutish Pleasures
for him? You are certainly Enemies to the Cross of Christ, while you mind
earthly Pleasures; he lived a self denying life, mortified to all the Vanities
of this World, to set you an Example; he died also to redeem you from a vain
Conversation.

O Young Man, view thy Pattern, and imitate your Self-denying Savior, or you
are ^one of his. If a Father or Mother come in competition with his Name and
Interest, you are bound to hate them, Luke 14. 16. much more your youthful
Lusts of vile Pleasure. The Pleasure of our dear Lord, was to do the Will of
his heavenly Father, Joh. 4. 34. Now says the Apostle, in Phil. 2. 5. Let the
same mind be in you, as was in Christ. And in Luke 14. 27. Our Savior says,
Whosoever does not come after me, cannot be my Disciple. You are not to come
after us Ministers one step, but as we conform to Christ. O look unto Jesus,
Young Ones, did he affect Sports and Games? Did he use to spend hours at Cards
or Dice, etc? You read of whole Nights he redeemed for, and spent in, Prayer,
and how he went up and down always doing good. O what a blessed way would this
be, to recover the licentious Youth of this Age, to the gravity and purity of
Religion, if they would write after, and draw each line of their Lives
according to this holy Pattern. I have read of an Earl called Elzearus, that
was given much to immoderate anger, and the means he used to cure this
disordered affection, was by studying Christ and his patience, in suffering the
Injuries and Affronts that were offered to him; and he never suffered this
Meditation to pass from him, till he found his heart transformed into the
similitude of Jesus Christ. O Young Men, you are all distempered with the
immoderate love of vain pleasure; O flee to Mount Calvary, to a crucified
Jesus, and there represent to thy Soul his Sorrows and Agonies, till thou find
this Lust crucified. Argue thus with thy self, what did so dear so great and
glorious a Person as the Son of God, deny himself those ineffable pleasures
above, that he had in his Father's bosom, and come down here on earth. and took
to himself an house of Clay, our Flesh, which proved to him an house of
mourning all the days of his flesh, and then dyed an ignominious, painful,
accursed death, and all this for me, to redeem me from the pleasures of Sin,
and destroy these works of the Devil: And shall I think much of denying my self
a few draughts of vain delight for him, who drank of the bitter Cup of God's
wrath, and the gall and vinegar for me? And then,

Secondly, Consider that either you must forsake these sinful pleasures for a
time here, or your sweet Savior for ever hereafter: For ^n Man can serve two
Masters, he will either love and live to the one, and hate and leave the other,
or else e contra. Therefore what Christ said to the Jews concerning his
Disciples, John 18. 8. If ye seek me, let these go their way. That may I say,
to you Young Folk, concerning your sinful pleasures, if ye seek an interest in
the blessed Jesus, you must let these go; it is made the Badge of a graceless,
christless Man, in that of 2 Timothy 3. 4. A lover of pleasure, more than of God.
And our Savior, in Luke 18. 14. tells you, That pleasures choke the seed of
God's Word; they nourish the heart, and fatten it into a senseless stupidity.
And 1 Timothy 5. 6. the Apostle describes the unconverted Widow thus, She that
lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. And then,

Thirdly, Consider Young Man, Tbat God will bring thee to judgment for all thy
sinful pleasures. Is it not enough to embitter all thy pleasures in the flesh,
to read in Faith that one Scripture, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young Man, etc.
but know that God will bring thee to judgment. You are apt to think that you
shall hear of them no more, but be you assured all must come into the Judgment.
O Young Men, how many are now under wrath, that when on Earth, were eager in
their pursuit of Games and Sports, etc. O Youth, consider, the Feet of them
that have carried multitudes of your Age to Perdition, stand ready waiting for
the word of Commission to carry you away also. Hence it was, that the primitive
Christians used to pray, Domine hic ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum parcas. Lord,
burn here, cut here, that thou may spare hereafter. O remember Abraham's
words to him that lived in pleasure while on Earth, and at last dying, and
lifting up his eyes in Hell, and calling for a drop of water to cool his
tormented tongue, Remember (says Abraham) thou had thy pleasures in thy
life-tme, and Lazarus his sorrows, Luke 16. 25. O that this were more thought
on by our jolly Youngsters! Paul saw need of using this tremendous Argument in
2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
etc. And then it follows, Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade Men: To
what? why to Self-judging, and Godly-sorrowing and mourning for Sin, that so
they may not be condemned of the Lord, at that great and terrible day. Hence
Paul himself beat down his Body, denied himself fleshly pleasures, lest at that
day he should be a Castaway. Hence Peter interrogates, Seeing all these things
shall be dissolved at that day of judgment, what manner of persons ought we to
be, in all holy conversation and godliness; not in chambering and wantonness, 2
Pet. 3. 11. Hence also is the force of that great Command to a present
Repentance without delay, Acts 17. 30. Because God has appointed a day wherein
he will judge the world by Christ. It was this that made voluptuous Felix
tremble. O Young Man, had thou but a lively impression of this upon thy heart,
O how soon would it wither all thy pleasures at the root? and instead of Ease,
it would fill thee with Remorse and Bitterness. O therefore when this thy
Youthful Lust grows boistrous, then ^se this Goad to awaken thee, and oppose
^his strong and terrible Argument for the ^ooling and quelling thy Lust after
pleasure, viz. That God will bring thee to Judgment. You read of Moses when
young, and the ^emptation of pleasure strong, yet he chose ^ather to suffer
Affliction, than to enjoy Sins ^leasures, that are but for a season. And why?
because he by Faith saw a day of final and further recompenses at hand, Hebr.
11. 25. And then,

Fourthly, Consider, That all thy youthfu^ pleasures are but for a season, Heb.
11. 25. And you read in Job 21. 13, 14. They spen^ their days in mirth, and in
a moment they g^ down to the grave, or hell. Who do? why all your Pleasure
mongers from one Age to another. Look ye, were it possible for yo^ to have a
sight of the damned in Hell, ther^ would you find the many thousands tha^ spent
their few days on earth in the pleasure^ of Sin. And it is but a while, but you,
an^ all of your complexion and temper, that love Pleasures more than God, must
vanish away, and never laugh more; never jest it, ga^^ it more; O the doleful
hour is at hand! The stolen waters of Si^'^ pleasure are sweet, bu^ short, like
Naboth's Vineyard, which Ah^^ so ^^gerly thirsted after; he got it, (it is true)
bu^ he could not keep it. Sins pleasures ar^ compared to the crackling of
thorns under ^ pot. If any should ask, Why they should be ^^ short? I would
have such to bethink them selves, Why they should be at all? I am sure the All
wise God'^ thoughts are not as you^ and those whose distempered Souls (th^^
grace) are begun to be cured, think otherwise. Ask a converted Soul, What
pleasure there is in Sin, and he will tell you, it i^ the very gall of
bitterness. Alas! Young Man, it is a disease upon thee, that make^ thee think
of any pleasure at all in Sin; bu^ yet that mistaken Pleasure of thy sick and
diseased mind is but momentary, and a ^ery Shadow. Why then art thou so ea^^r
after Pleasure? O the great Cheats poor ^inners put upon themselves. Hence
plea^ant Sins are called Lying Vanities.

O young man, remember thy time on Earth ^ but short, 1 Cor. 7. 29. and
therefore thy ^leasures in Sin cannot be long: O how small distance is there
between the Sports and ^ames of Youth, and the mortal Pangs and ^ains of Death?
how soon will thy clear ^orning be overcast with evening Clouds? ^e pleasures
of Sin will be quickly over, ^^t the pain will be for ever; as Job says ^ man's
Life on Earth, Job 14. 1. His days ^^ few, but his Troubles are many; So may
^ay of Sin, its pleasures are few, but its Ter^^s are many, like a short Feast,
but a ^ng reckoning; therefore when you are in anger of being enticed with
Sin's pleasures, beseech you to endeavor and (O that God ^ould teach you) to
improve this Consi^eration, that they are but for a season. ^here is a notable
Story that I meet with ^ Mr Burrough's Moses his choice, concern^g one
Theodorus a young man, who at a ^ne of great Festivity and Jollity in Egypt ^
his Fathers House withdrew from all the ^^mpany, and got alone, and fell a
medita^^g thus, Here is delight, and content in the ^est, I may have what I
will desire, but how long will it last? And upon this Meditation, thinking with
himself, this will not hol^ long, he withdrew himself into a privat^ Room, and
fell down upon the Earth, an^ with many Tears cried out thus unto Go^ in
Prayer; O Lord (says he) my Heart i^ open unto thee, I indeed know not what to
ask but only this, Lord let me not dye eternally; Lord, thou know I love
thee, O let me li^^ eternally to praise thee! And when his Mother came to him,
and would have h^^ him come to the rest of the company the were bidden, he made
an excuse, an^ would not, only upon this meditation, because he saw these
things were but for a se^son, and would not last. O that it might please the
Lord, to give you young o^^ Wisdom, and a Heart, alike to know ^^ brevity and
vanity of all fleshly pleasures, as to draw off your Hearts from them, a^ to
make your choice of those pleasures the are for ever, at the right hand of Go^
And then,

Fifthly, Consider youthful and sens^ Pleasures are vile in their nature. Cic^
(though a Heathen) thought not that m^ worthy of the name of a man, that sp^^
one day in sensual Pleasures: And T^^ accounted a Life of Pleasure, a Life of
Bea^ And what does God say in the Script^^^ of the Person that lives in
pleasure? y^ may see 1 Timothy 5. 6. Such a one is dead while be lives. And in
the 21. Job 11, 12, 13. Such say to the Almighty, depart from us. Pleasures
they alienate, and take away the Heart from God, and the things of God, they
stuff the heart with manifold Evils, they deaden it with security, they harden
it in Sin, and swell it with Vanity, and ^our it with an enmity against the
severi^^es and strictness of Religion; in a word Pleasures dispose a Person to
all manner of ^mpieties, and expose a person to all manner of miseries.
Aristotle makes mention of a parcel of Ground in Sicily that sends forth such
a strong smell of fragrant Flowers ^o all the Fields thereabouts, that no Hound
^n hunt there, the scent is so confounded with the smell of those Flowers: thus
in our ^icentious Age, Pleasures hinder us in our spiritual chase, they take
away all scent, and sense too of Heaven, and heavenly things. Who is fit for
any holy excrcise, that has been immersing himself in sensual pleasures? Can
the Heart, that but just now ^ath been enlarged and let out, or poured ^ut in
vain and youthful pleasures, be prepared for the holy presence of God in Pray^r
or Meditation? What think you? does Chambering and Wantonness, does Ga^ning and
Sportfulness, fit you for commu^ion with God? O how much sooner do they ripen
you for Hell and Destruction. Wherefore, O young man, flee these vai^
pleasures, that brutifie and vilify thy Soul, that resemble thee to a Beast,
and ripen the^ for the Devil, that cannot stand with the infinite Love, but
hatred of God. O flee these. And then,

Sixthly, Consider youthful, sensual pleasures, are not only short of their
time, and vile in their nature, but most bitter and pernicious in their end.
Stolen Waters are sweet, and Bread eaten in secret, says Solomon, Prove. 9 17.
But in the end it bites like a Serpent, Prove. 32. 27. and st^ngeth like a^
Adder. O Youth, such are all Sin's pleasure, whether you believe it or no, y^^
shall be sure to feel it after a season, for your pleasures are all but for a
season, and the^ follows the Curse of the Law, the wrath of God, the terrors
of Conscience, the guilt of Sin, and these are enough to drow^ thy pleasue, and
distract thy Spirits; like to that kind of Honey, that Historians te^^ us of in
Africa, lusciously sweet, but affect, all that eat of it with a mortal
Madness, and Frenz^, and the reason they assign is that the Bees gather it from
poysonou^ Weeds; thus sensual sinful Pleasures, a^ Solomon says, Eccles. 2. 2.
affect with madness. Hence in the 7 Eccles. 2. he affirms, that it is better
to go to the House of Mourning than Feasting: You have a Scripture very full
and apposite to this purpose in that in 20. Job 16. where Zophar speaking of
the wicked Pleasure-monger, says, He shall suck the p^ison of Asps. There is
an old Interpreter Xantus Pagninus.
I have met with, that reads it, He shall suck the Head of Asps. The Hebrew
word [Rosh] signifying both c^put, and veneum, Head and Poison. Now what is it
to suck the Head of Asps? Pliny in his Natural History, tells us that the Asp,
or she Viper, engendring with the Male, takes his Head in her mouth, and being
overcome with the pleasure of the act, bites it off, whereby he perishes:
after which she conceiving, the young within her become impatient of staying
their full time, and they eat out through her side; whereby she perishes. And
so it is with the Sensualist that is all for pleasure in Sin, as if you lo^k
back to the 12. ver. of this 20. of Job, you shall find though wickedness be
sweet in the mouth, yet it is but as the sucking of the Head of Asps, they
shall perish by it. In the close of the 12. ver. it is said, to be Gall of
Asps, by which is meant, both the bitterness, and destructiveness of sinful
Pleasures: His Wickedness (says Zophar) though sweet and delicious in his
Mouth, that is the act of committing it; yet when its turned in his Bowels,
that is after the commission of it, it is the Gall of Asps. O its grievous to
him, he wishes he had never done it. So Prove. 5. 4. speaking of the end of
Sin's pleasure, he tells you, its bitter as Wormwood. It is like a Pill, wrapped
up in Sugar, which when the Sugar (which was over it) is melted, then the
bitterness of the Pill shows it self: So when the pleasure of Sin is wasted,
then the sorrow appears. I have read of a most pleasant and luscious sort of
Fruit in the West Indies, but withal that these dainties are so sauced with the
intolerable scorching heat of the Sun by day, and a multitude of stinging
Creatures by night, that the People that dwell in those parts, expose
themselves to danger to gather them; which made the Spaniards to call them, the
Comfits of Hell; and truly what are the pleasures of Sin but such Comfits of
Hell? there is some carnal pleasure that delights a rank, unhallowed Palate;
but here is the misery of it, they are served in with the scorching fiery wrath
of God, and the stinging of a guilty restless Conscience, so that the fears of
the one, and the anguish of the other, are surely able to melt away that little
pleasure they afford. O that young ones would seriously consider how bitter
Sin's pleasures will be in the end, brevis est voluptas peccati, sed perpetua
paena peccatoris. And Bernard says momentarium est quod delectat, aeternum
quod cruciat. O commune with thine own Heart, enter the Closet within thy own
Breast, and say, What shall I be taken with a little seeming sweetness, and
pleasure in Sin, when within a moment or two, this will be turned into the
Gall, yea Poison of Asps. O young men, evermore keep your Eye on the ending of
Sin, how it goes off at last, you may see in Cain, and Spira, with hideous
groans, and consuming griefs; it comes on like an Harlot very Comically, Come,
let us take our fill of Pleasure; but it goes off like Rachel, weeping and
bitterly lamenting. Solomon says, in Prove. 23. 17, 18. My Son, envy not
Sinners, for surely there is an end; and a sad and woeful end too, envy them
not, they are rather objects of Compassion and Pity, to see a Sinner merrily
for a minute, swallowing the bait of pleasure, and then to consider his end is
to be torn for ever with the hook of Vengeance; and after a little gigling, and
foolish mirth, to be cast into a Lake of ^ire and Brimstone for ever; O sad
end! O happy is he that foreseeth the bitter end of Sin at last, and shunneth
it, by forgoing, and fleeing the bewitching pleasure of Sin at present, and
wise is he that takes up (out of the Word of God) the same thoughts of Sin, now
amidst all temptations and allurements to it; as the worst, at last will be
forced to take up, out of their own experience and feeling, amidst all the
torments of Hell. Sure it is better to go to Heaven with labor, than to Hell
with pleasure, and to be preserved in Brine, than to rot in Honey (as one
says) to be fed upon salt Marshes, and short Commons, and to live, than to be
glutted in rank Pastures, and so fatted up for destruction. Wherefore, O youth,
call not, choose not that pleasure now, that thousands are suffering the wrath
of God for in Hell. All you that have adventured, and took the sweet Bait, my
advice to such is, let them vomit up their Morsels again, and smite on their
Breast, and lament with penitent remorse, that ever they should be such fools,
as to delight in that which has grieved God, and wounded their own Souls, and
never any more return with the Dog to the Vomit. And then,

Seventhly, Consider youthful sensual Pleasures are deceitful, they mock thee,
and make a Fool of thee, and then thou make a mock and sport of Sin. Sin
sm^l^ with enticing blandishments, as Satan on our first Parents, Gen 3 5. O Ye
shall be as Gods; So here Sin promises, O ye shall be thus, and thus advanced,
and advantaged: But were our first Parents as Gods, by hea^kening to Satan, and
eating of the forbidden Fruit? or were they not cheated, and instead of being
like God, they became like Satan. It is observed by the Mythohgists, that
Pleasure went out at first on occasion to Bathe her self, and having stripped off
her Clothes, laid them by the Water side; but Sorrow having hid her self in the
Covert as unseen, steals the Clothes away, puts them on, and so departs. Hence
multitudes are cheated, they run, and ride, court, and woo Pleasure; which they
have no sooner obtained, but they perceive their Error, alas it is nothing but
Sorrow got in Pleasures Clothes. O young man, that art so eager after
Pleasures, you know not what you so earnestly reach after, do but enquire of
those that have detected the Cheat, and they will tell you, there is nothing in
all the world so deceitful as Sin: it deceived Angels above, and Man beneath,
it promises credit, and pays with shame; it promises ease, and pays with
pain; it promises Bread, and pays with Stones; it promises a Paradise of
pleasure, and pays with a Wilderness of Sorrows; it promises Liberty, and pays
with Bondage; it promises Satisfaction and Content, and pays with nothing but
vexation and disappointment. O young man, enquire e're thou venturest, enquire
cui bon^? to what purpose? What shall I gain by Pleasures? Shall I be more free
for, and cheerful in the Service of God? will my Soul be more heavenly? or my
Body more healthy? what will come of this pleasure? will it forward me in the
way to Heaven? or Hell? will it pay charges at last? This hunting after Sensual
Pleasures, and neglecting God, and my precious Soul what aspect will it have in
its final review? Alas young men, if you would bring things to a close trial
and scrutiny, the vail of Sins pretenses is so thin, that you might presently
detect its falsehood, and in unmasking and discovering it Lies, you would
rcceive much advantage, in fortifying you against its Allurements. I end this
with St. Paul's Exhortation, Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily lest you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. And then,

Eighthly, and Lastly, Consider in order to the fleeing of this youthful Sin,
of an eager pursuit of vain Pleasure, that you shall not loose, but gain true
pleasure, and by abandoning the spurious and pernicious Pleasures of Sin, a
sound Conversion of thy Heart and Life to God, will but exchange thy Pleasures,
and exchange is no robbery, Sure it would be a great favor and kindness to
take from thee the filthy, muddy ditch-waters of Sin, and present thee with the
pure and precious Waters of Life. Were that man hurt that should have a glass
of Poison took out of his Hand, and a Cup of Sack put in? O youth, I must not
spare to tell thee, that thou will never taste one drop of true Delight and
Pleasure, till thou art converted, and become seriously Relious: It is no part
of God's meaning, when we enter his sweet Service, that we should be debarred
of Pleasures, for the Ways of Wisdom are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her
Paths are Paths of Peace, Prove. 3. 17. But only that we should exchange the
Onions and Garlic of Egypt, for the Milk and Honey of Canaan; Isaac must not
be sacrificed, but the Ram; So here, all ramish, and rank Pleasures must, but
not the Soulravishing, and refreshing pleasures at God's right hand, Psalm. 16.
11. O that you would but make Experiment hereof, you will find One Hour's
praying, better than a thousand of profane fudling; (as Mr. An. Burg. says)
thou will find one hours enjoyment of Christ, as thy Husband by Faith, better
then all the wanton Dalliances, and unchaste imbracements of unlawful objects.
So that, young man, thou fleest from true Pleasures, when thou fleest not thy
youthful sensual Pleasures: the Lord bless these Considerations to thee. Now
this brings me to lay down some Rules to direct Youth how they may flee the
next youthful Sins.

Remedies against those Youthful Sins of Flexibility in yielding to
Temptations, and readily going down the stream, following a multitude to do
evil, and keeping ill Company, etc.
THese Sins I have showed you before, are especially the Sins of Youth, to be
easily drawn and enticed to do as others do, etc. Now I shall very briefly
offer you some Considerations for the fleeing of them.

1. Consider Christ's Flock is but a little Flock, and the Gate and Way to Life
eternal is straight and narrow, and they are but few that walk therein. If you
will not be content to go to Heaven with a few, you are never like to come
there. The beaten Path is the common Road to Hell, which has used in all Ages
to be thronged with Troops; but Heaven's straight way, from the time of the old
World to this day, has at best had but a paucity of Walkers, and sometimes a
singularity, as Noah in his day was singular, and Elijah in his day left alone,
when there were 400 false Prophe^s of Baal; and Jeremiah, was fain to weep in
secret. I confes^ this is a shrewd temptation to ^oung People, and of all Ages,
that age of Youth is most in danger of stumbling at it; but O Youth, is it not
better to be ^aved alone, or with a few, than to perish with millions? Had you
lived in Noah's time when the Flood came, would you not have rather chose to
have been preserved with Noah's Family alone, than drowned with the rest, though
you had all the world to keep you company? I remember the learned Breerwood
divides the World into 30 parts, and after a diligent pondering of it, tells
us, that 19 of the 30 are Paganish; and of the 11 parts that remain, he says
Mahumetism takes up six, so that there remains but five for Christianism. O
that the Desire of all Nations might come, and accomplish that Prophecy, Isa.
2. 1, 2. When the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be exalted on the top
of the mountains, and all Nations shall flow into it. So that you may see by
this, O Youth, that thou must either renounce all hopes of Heaven, and lay
aside thy Christianity, or else be willing to be singular to the World that
lies in wickedness; it is the World's fashion to be prayerless and graceless:
but will you read Romans 12. 1. with Jam. 1. 17. And then with these Scriptures,
see 1 John 2. 15, 16. But it may be objected, That you are come out of the
Pagan and Mahumetan World, you go with the Christian World; and therefore that
can be said against you, but that you may do as other Christians do? I answer,
with the Apostle that spoke expressly of our times, in that of 2 Timothy 1. and the
five first Verses: This know, that in the last days perilous times shall come;
Men shall be so and so, even in the Church of God, having a form of godliness,
but denying the power. Well, what Advice does he give as to these nominal
Christians? why, in the very next words, he says, From such turn away. Alas!
in the Christian World the number of sound Believers is but small, indeed if
all that name the Name of Christ, might pass for true Christians, the number
would be great; but if no more must be accounted true Christians, than such as
are born again, and all old things are done away, and all things become new,
being dead to sin, who once were dead in sin, etc. O then the number is but
small! It Is amazing to me, that strange blindness and heavy judgment that is
fallen upon thousands of titular Christians at this day, they will severely
condemn a Man that he is no good Christian, that does not profess his Faith in
Christ, and come to Church, and the like; and yet will hug themselves with
this, that they are good Protestants and Christians, althe' they will make
nothing of omission of Closet and Family Prayer; they will many of them swear
and curse, and live in Rioting and Drunkenness, yet if they but come to Church,
etc. all is well. It were impossible to reckon up here the thousands of ways
how Satan and Sin blind poor Sinners in the Christian World to their
everlasting destruction. Now ^en, O young Man, consult not with flesh ^^d
blood, it may be there are many about ^ee, carnal Friends and Neighbors, that
^^ve no fear of God, and these are seeking to ^^w you off: O remember this
advice, ^^t it is infinitely better to be saved with a ^^, than be damned with a
multitude.

2. Consider ill Company, whereunto ^^uth is exceedingly prone, is a
Self-destroy^^^ Evil; nothing more emboldens Sinners ^ wickedness. A company of
wanton, loose ^^ths met together, is like a Pesthouse for ^ection; they do a
world of mischief in ^milies, Churches, Kingdoms; here it is ^t so many of
England's, London's Youth ^train'd up for Hell, they soon ascend the ^^t of the
Scorner, and so are quickly ripe ^ a Descent down to Hell. Here they sow ^ows
under one another Elbows, and stu^usly argue one another to damnation; ^^ they
let fly against Religion, deriding ^ Godliness, jeering at others, saying,
What ^ grow precise? You turn Fool? Thus as ^^od sought the death of Christ,
and de^oyed the young Babes in Bethlehem; so ^e seek the destruction of any
hopeful ^^nings and good motions that are at any ^^ found in persons of tender
years: And ^^ to be lamented exceedingly, the sad Suc^^ this has had in this
City, O the innumerable Tears and Groans of godly Parents that this has cost!
And, after all, no recovery of their prodigal Children out of this Snare of the
Devil's ill Company. The Lord be merciful to us, and convince the Youth (into
whose hands this Book shall fall) of this Nation, of this City, of the truth of
this, and cause them to keep at the utmost distance from this Pit of
destruction. It is upon this account that wise Solomon so frequently calls upon
the young Man, No^ to come near the borders of this temptation, not to pass on
that side of the way, or near the threshold of the house where this bait is
laid. O young Man, be watchful of your Company, the greatest danger is when you
are among vain and carnal Friends, and Acquaintance; these are the great
Impediment^ in your way to Heaven. In all probability many had been converted,
if they had associated with gracious persons. The Man after God's own heart,
begins his first Psalm, with, Blessed is the Man that walks not in the
company of the ungodly. O it is an excellen^ means to the saving of Souls to be
there, where there is continual helps to Conversion and Holiness, as Prayers,
and heavenly Instructions, and godly Examples: whereas among the ungodly, there
are continual temptations to Sin; wicked Society is the Devil's Boat, wherein
he ferrieth over multitudes to Hell. O young Man, as you would not be gathered
with the ungodly at ^^st, take heed of joining with them now. It ^as the Prayer
of a godly Person under ^ouble, on a dying Bed, O Lord, let me not ^^ to Hell,
where the wicked are; for, Lord, ^^ou know, I never loved their Company
here? O it is a Soul-destroying Evil to keep com^any with those whose nearness
will set me ^^ther off from God, to be there where Worldliness, Profaneness,
and Wantonness, and Sensuality reign, what is this, but the ^ery Suburbs of
Hell? And then

3. Consider what an Honor and Commendation it is to resist Temptation while
^ou are Young, and the solicitations of vain ^ersons are strong, O then, to
flee their en^^cements, how excellent and laudable is it? ^^ was Lot's
unhappiness to dwell in Sodom, ^ut it was high honor to be righteous there. ^^
showed (says an ingenious Writer) that ^^ holiness was of a strong complexion,
to retain ^^ healthfulness in so corrupt an Air. It Is a ^reat Sin to be bad
among the good, but it is ^^ high Honor to be good among the bad. O remember,
Young Man, how well God ^akes it, when evil Company do strongly and ^iolently
draw and entice thee to the service ^f the Devil, the Flesh and the World, then
^o break through all those hellish importuni^^es as Joseph did, and cleave to
the Lord with ^o invincible and holy resolution. See the honor of this in that
sacred and sweet portion of Scripture, 2 Cor. 6. 14. to the end: I will dwell
in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people; wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father
to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. If
therefore you flee, and withdraw from evil Company, you shall be honored with
God's Company and Acquaintance, and what can you desire more? See how David
triumphs in this Privilege, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, yet will I fear none ill: why? because thou art with me.
Hence Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the water, I will be with thee,
fear not drowning. When flesh and heart fails, God will never.

4. Consider, That yielding to the enticements of the ungodly, and joining with
them, is not only a foul Sin, but a fearful sign of a graceless person; for
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? and what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Now this Argument should mightily
move you to abhor and flee the company of the wicked, as you would a house
marked out for the Plague. It was the saying of an Heathen, That Company is of
an assimulating nature. See thou a Person choosing commu^ion with one that is
carnal, that lives after the flesh, etc. You may be sure that that Man is so
too; for as Face answers to Face, so do Men's Hearts and Lives to one another
after their kind. They that are after the Spirit, do all savor and choose a
spi^itual Conversation; so they that are after the Flesh, do choose a carnal
Conversation. Hence David, who was a gracious Man, pro^eth it by this ma^k,
Psalm. 16. 3. speaking of the Saints, the excellent ones of the earth, says he)
in whom is all my delight. And ^he heavenly Apostle John gives you this very
ma^k of true godliness, in 1 John 3. 14. And, on the other hand, a keeping and
lo^ing the company of ungodly persons, is made the badge of an unconverted
person, Hos. 7. 8. Ephraim he has mixed himself among the People. What People?
why, the ^dolatrous Heathens. And what is this a sign of? why, that he was but
an Hypocrite, elegantly expressed in that Metaphor that follows, Ephraim is a
Lake not turned. O therefore, as you would escape the mark of an Enemy to God
and Godliness: Flee this youthful Lust of ill Company, have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5. 11. Company
^^t with him that is a Fornicator, 1 Cor. 5. 9. Walk not in the way, enter not
into the path of evil Men, Prove. 1. 1. and 4. 14. And this brings me to lay
down Remedies against the next Sin that Youth are prone to, viz. The Sin of
Intemperance.

Remedies against the Youthful Lust of Intemperance.
THis is a Sin Youth is much given to, as I have in the beginning showed, now
in order to the fleeing of it.

First, Labor after a distinct and clear knowledge what it is? wherein it
stands? The Schoolmen say, a person is guilty of this Sin these five ways when
he eats and drinks: 1. Praepropere, too hastily. 2. Laute, too daintily. 3.
Nimis, too much. 4. Ardenter, too vehemently. 5. Studiose, too carefully.

1. If he eat too soon or hastily, before the proper Season, Isa. 5. 11. Woe to
them that rise up early, that they may follow strong drink. And Eccl. 10. 17.
Woe to the Land whose Princes eat in the morning. A time wherein the Soul is to
be feasted at the Throne of Grace, and in the word of God's Grace, Prayer, and
reading the Scripture, according to that excellent Rule in Matthew. 6. 33. First
seek the kingdom of God. And then a person may be said to eat too soon or
hastily, when he falls on without Prayer, or craving of a Blessing; it was the
continual practice of our dear Savior, who is out Example, to look up to his
Father for a Blessing, e're he would partake of the Creature.

2. If a person eat and drink too daintily, when there is an excess in point of
Costliness and Curiosity; Manna had been better for the Israelites, than
Quails. Holy Jacob's sanctified desires extended no farther, than if thou will
give me Bread to eat; mark it, not sumptuous delicate Fare, but Bread, Genesis 28.
20. And Elijah was content with a Cruise of Water, and a Cake on the Coals,
while Jezabe^'s 400 Prophets were pampered at her full Table. Christ has taught
us herein in that Petition, how to regulate our desires, Give us this day our
daily Bread. Pray observe it, no more than plain Bread. And the Apostle says,
Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content, 1 Timothy 6. 8. Raiment, not
Ornament: So that when we (without cause) crave delicate Fare, and lash out
beyond that proportion our Estates and Incomes will bear, we are guilty of this
Sin: And then when we are too curious about the Sorts of Meat and Drink, and
their Dressing and Sawces, we herein generally send in Ammunition to the
sensual Appetite, to rebel against Reason and Grace.

3. We offend, and are guilty of this Sin of Intemperance, when we exceed as to
the quantity, eating and drinking more than what fits us for our general, and
particular calling; as we must not neglect our Bodies, so on the other hand we
must not pamper them; Take heed (says our Savior) lest at any time your
Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting, etc. and so that Day come upon you at
unawares. This was the Sin of the Old World, and Sodom; and it is England's and
London's Sin, especially the younger sort, at this day.

4. We offend, and are guilty of this Sin, when we seed eagerly, and greedily,
or as St. Jude speaks in the 12. ver. They feed without fear, not regarding
God's awful Dispensations in the world, as you have it set forth in that 6.
Amos, Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, ver. 1. That lie upon Beds of Ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the Flock,
and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall, ver. 4. That drink Wine in Bowls,
but are not grieved at the Afflictions of Joseph, ver. 6. When the Church of
God is drinking Blood and Tears, it is unseasonable to drink Wine in Bowls:
Daniel would eat no pleasant Bread, nor drink Wine, when it went ill with the
poor People of God.

5. We offend, and are guilty of this Sin, when we eat studiously, when we
study to pamper, and make provision for the Flesh, and to please our Appetite,
as if we were Debtors to the Flesh to live to it, and ca^er for it.

6. We offend herein, when we make the pleasing of our Appetite our main end,
in Eating and Drinking; and not the glorifying of God, and preparing us for his
Service. The All-wise God never gave us our Appetites, to be our rule, or our
end, in eating and drinking; but to be governed by Grace and Reason, to an
higher end than pleasing the Flesh.

Now having shown you wherein this Sin stands, the next direction in order to
^lee it, is as follows.

Secondly, Study how hateful this Sin is to God, and how hurtful it is to your
selves, and others; it is hateful to God, as it takes the heart off from him,
and Idolatrously sets it upon the Throat, and the Belly: hence you have it
described, in that 3. Phil. 19. Whose end is destruction, whose God is their
Belly, being enemies to the Cross of Christ. Hence Gluttons are commonly called
Belly-Gods. And you may further see how odious it is to God in that thundering
Scripture, Isa. 22. 14. In that day did the Lord call for Weeping, and
Mourning, and behold eating of Flesh, and drinking of Wine, saying, Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall dye -- Surely this Iniquity shall not be
purged away, till you dye, says the Lord of Hosts. Again, it is hateful to
God, as it is a notorious Transgression of his holy Law, Ephesians. 5. 18. Luke 21.
34. Prove. 23 20. It is a Sin so expressly against the command of God, that
Gluttons and Drunkards cannot plead ignorance, especially such as live under the
Gospel: So that it must needs be hateful to God, seeing it is Rebellion against
the Light, Job 24. 13 hence David expostulates in Psalm. 10. 13. Wherefore does
the Wicked contemn God? Again, it must needs be hateful to God, as it carries
in it a hatred of God; if the Friendship of this World is enmity with God, as
St. James affirms, in the 4. Jam. 4. What is then friendship with the Lusts
of the Flesh. O young men, think of it seriously, when you are tempted to Riot,
and Excess, this is direct enmity to God, and therefore most hateful to him*
and can your seeble Hands grasp, and make your part good with Omnipotency? I^^
a terrible thing to renounce the Heaven of God's love and favor, for the
pleasing of my Throat; but directly to run into the Hell of his hatred, O what
madness is this? It were much better a thousand ^imes, that thou should never
eat bit, or ^rink drop more, than do so. And then ^^ it is thus hateful to God,
so it is hurtful ^o your selves, and others. (1.) To your ^elves, and that both
as to your Bodies and ^ouls. Intemperance is the bane of the Body, as it fills
it with Diseases, and oppresses Nature, consuming its animal and ^ital
Spirits, and so is a degree of self mur^er. Who has Woe? who has Sorrow? but
^he Glutton and Drunkard, Prove. 23. 29. Hence are those proverbial Sayings,
Meat ^^lls as many as the Musket, and the Board as ^^e Sword, and much Meat,
much Malady. Plures pereunt crapula, quam capula, etc. It ^rings ruin to a
man's Estate. Prove. 23. 21. ^he Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty.
Many a man has become by ^ntemperance, worse than an Infidel, in wa^ing that
Provision, that he was bound to preserve for Wife and Children. Thus
Intemperance is hurtful to the Body. And then it is hurtful to the Soul, as it
wages War against it. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, ^l beseech you, abstain
from fleshly ^usts, which ^ar against the Soul. Fullness breeds forgetfulness of
God. Deuteronomy. 6. 11, 12. When thou ^halt have eaten, and art full, then beware
(...) thou forget the Lord. So Prove. 30. 9. Feed me with Food convenient for
me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? It unfits the Soul
for all holy Exercises, a full Belly, and a lean Soul usually go together: When
the great enquiry is, What shall we eat? what shall we drink? There is a deep
silence about the Soul, no such voice heard as, What shall I do to be saved? A
full Belly (says one) neither studies well, nor prays well; and St. Paul
says, in Romans 16. 10. That they serve not the Lord Christ, that serve their
own Bellies.

In a word, Intemperance is so hurtful to your selves, as that without timely
repentance, and fleeing it, it will most certainly exclude Soul and Body out of
Heaven, and plunge both into Hell for evermore. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not (says
the Apostle) that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; be not
deceived, neither Drunkards, etc. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Now the works of the
Flesh are manifest; Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of which I have
told you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And in the 12. of Luke 45. If
that Servant shall begin to eat and drunk, and be dru^k^n, the Lord of that
Servant will out him ^sunder, and will appoint him his p^rt on with the
Unbeliever. And that is Hell.

And then this Sin of Intemperance is hurtful to others, its injurious to the
Poor, coathing and feeding them. Many have ^ot Money for such uses, because they
have ^ast it away, and prodigally consumed it upon their Lusts of Gluttony and
Drunken^ess. And it is a Sin highly aggravated by ^he Miseries and Afflictions
of the Church of God at this day, wherein God calls for mourning: Now at such a
time to say with them in Isa. 56. 12. We will fetch Wine, and ^e will fill our
selves with strong Drink, and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more
^bundant. O what an aggravation is this. And would to God that I could not
apply ^his Text to our present times: the Lord be merciful to us! What an
incongruity is it ^o hear and see some Christians ready to ^tarve, and cry out
for a bit of Bread, in one place; and others, Jesuran like waxing fat, and
kicking for Wantonness; some, rolling in Blood, and others in Vomit; some
feeding on Ashes, and drinking of Tears, while others fare deliciously every
day; some like Dives, other like Lazarus. O young men, study the heinous nature
of this Sin of Intemperance, as it is hateful to God, and hurtful to your
selves and others. And then

Thirdly, Study thy self, both the state of thy Soul and Body: enquire and
commune with your own Hearts about it, whether thy Soul be in a state of Grace,
and Peace with God, or of Sin and Enmity? be sure one of them it is: O labor
after a true sight of it, which it is? if a state of Sin and Enmity, then
fasting and abstinence, become one in thy condition, much more than eating and
drinking. Alas, a poor Sinner, unreconciled to God, ready to drop into Hell,
and hanker after dainties, and delicacies of Meats and Drinks, how absurd! But
if it be a state of Grace, and Peace, why then Grace will be content with less
than Nature, and Nature will be content with little. It is Lust that is so
outrageous, but they that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh with its
Affections, and Lusts. And then study the state of thy Body too, is it not
mortal? must it not be e're long Worms meat? and then do but soberly judge how
far such a thing should be pampered, and at what rates. O methinks a sight of
your state, should make you abhor Gluttony and Epicurism. O youth, attend
hereunto, remember Esau was called profane, for parting with his Birth right,
for one Morsel of Meat: and when ever you feel your Appetite eager and craving,
remember these three directions I have now given you, to flee this Sin; which
brings me to lay down Rules and Remedies against the next youthful Lust.

Remedies against that Youthful Sin of Lying.
THis is a Sin I have showed, that Youth are especially prone to, I shall very
briefly lay down some Directions to flee it.

1. Awaken thy Soul, young man, to consider the danger of this Sin of Lying,
and that in these two particulars, (1.) Its a Badge of a graceless Child. And
(2.) it is a Bar to endless glory: It Is a badge of one that is graceless; pray
ponder on these Scriptures, Isa. 63. 8. For he said, Surely they ^re my People,
Children that will not lie. And so he was their Savior. And John ^. 44. when
our Savior told the wicked Jews, they were of their Father the Devil, who was
a L^ar, and the Father of it. And then (2.) it is a Bar to Life eternal, Rev.
21. 27. ver. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever makes a Lie. But in the 8. ver. of that Chap. it is
affirmed, That all Liars shall have their part in that Lake that burns with
Fire for evermore. O this Sin has been the bane of multitudes, it ruined
Ananias and Sapphira, in the 5. of the Acts. It is one of those seven things
the Lord hates, Prove. 6. 17. Moreover, it is the ruin of all humane Society and
Commerce: for where there is no Truth, there can be no Trust; and where there
is no Trust, there can be no thriving Trade, Truth being the Bond of all human
Society. In a word, Lying is the very Image of the Devil.

2. Arm your selves before hand with forcible Scripture Arguments, and
Antidotes against it, that whenever the Temptation returns, it may not catch
you unprovided. As for instance, if hopes of Profit tempt thee to Lie, have it
in readiness, O Satan, what is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul? or what can a man give in exchange for his Soul? What tell
ye me of a little Pelf and Profit that Thieves can steal suddenly, and that
Death will strip me of shortly: is this worth the losing my Soul for, and those
unsearchable Riches of Christ, and Heaven, that Crown of Life? If a little fear
of mortal srowns, and displeasure from thy Superiors, prompts thee to Lve,
provide thy self, and beat back the Tempter with an, It is written, Who art
thou that art afraid of a man that is Grass? Fear not them that can kill the
Body, and no more; but fear him that can destroy both Body and Soul, and cast
both into Hell. O Satan! man cannot damn me, but God can, and will, if I make a
Lve. O how much more tolerable is the wrath of a man, that is but a breathing
clod of Clay, and is ready to dye, and turn to Dust; than the wrath of the
living God, that is every moment ready to seize the Liar. Once more; ^f the
Temptation to lie, receive force from hopes of concealment, or that it is not
^ikely ever to be discovered, etc. say, O Devil, can it be concealed from, or
lie un^iscovered to the Eye of Heaven? While ^here is a God above, and a
Conscience within me, can I and my Lie (if I should ^enture) lie hid long, be
sure it would find ^e out, to gripe and torment me. Where^ore avoid, avoid
Satan. Truth of Speech, ^^d Peace of Conscience, cannot be too ^uch prized, nor
too carefully preserved, according to that old Rule,

^^re to be true, nothing can need a Lie,
^ Fault that needs it most grows two thereby.
3. and Lastly, Beg hard of God, to purge ^y Heart; for out of the evil
treasure of ^y heart proceeds Lying, and all Evil, the ^incipal work must be
about thy Heart, ^sal. 12. 2. They speak Lies (says the Psal^ist) with
flattering Lips, and with a double Heart do they speak. Genesis 17. 9. The Heart ^
deceitful above all things. Now if ever ^ou would flee this Sin of Lying, O get
^^ Heart-Cure, or this Evil will break out ^^ the Lips again, though you should
for a time bridle your Tongues: As a Spring will have its Course, though you
should dam up the Stream a while, it will after a while break through all your
Banks, and run into the old Channel again: So here it will be even so, For out
of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks; and the old Heart is a kin to
the old Serpent for Lying; it is only the New Heart, that is the true Heart; and
until the Heart be renewed, the Tongue cannot be aright reformed. How can ye
that are evil (says out Savior) speak good things? How can you match a double
Heart, and a single Tongue together? a Lying Heart, and a true Tongue? Since
there is such a near relation between the one, and the other, as between the
Cause, and its effect. Now young man, who can create a new and true Heart in
thee but God? Whither then should thou go but to him? this was David's
practice; how frequently do we find him on his Knees, sometimes praying that
God would make his Heart sound in his Statutes; sometimes that God would create
in him a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within him; again, sometimes he
prays, Remove from me the way of Lying: and was it in vain? Oh no; he was a man
after God's own Heart, he would not endure a Liar in his sight, in his House.

The next Sin I shall direct you to flee, is neglect of Relative Duties; as
Obedience to Parents and Masters, etc.

Remedies against that Youthful Sin of Disobedience to Parents and Masters.
THis is a Sin peculiar to that state of Life, O Young Man, if you would flee
it.

1. Study these Scriptures, Ephesians. 5. 1. Col. ^. 20. Children obey your
Parents, etc. for this ^s the first Command with promise, and it is
well-pleasing to God: here is a double Argument to enforce Obedience to
Parents. First, ^^ has a promise of long Life annexed, That ^hy days may be
long in the Land. Is not this ^o be reckoned a singular Blessing, especially ^s
it comes in by the way of a precious Promise? O flee Disobedience, as you would
flee immature Death, or being cut off, and ^ut down, in the flower of your Age;
for there is nothing more directly tends to cut short your life, than this Sin
of Disobedience ^o Parent^, as in the Instance of Abs^lon. And then the 2^
Argum^nt is, That Obedience to Parents is well-pleasing to God. O powerful
Motive, it wants nothing of strength to move you, only a due Application, and
then

2. Consider how the Sin of Disobedience to Superiors, entails God's Curse upon
you; see for this these Scriptures, Prove. 30. 17. 1 Samuel 4. 11. Lev. 24. 14.
Deuteronomy. 21. 18. Deuteronomy. 27. 16.

3. Consider how subject and obedient Christ was to his Parents, Luke 2. 51.
and should not you be subject to yours? Christ hearkened to his, and wont you to
yours? O write after this blessed Copy.

4. Consider how unnatural a thing it is, not to love, honor, and obey your
Parents; you have your being from them, and come out of their loins; you have
cost them many thousand of Cares and Fears, and Tears, and will you rebel
against them? I have observed that there is in Youth, when grown up, usually
such headiness and pride in their behavior toward their Parents, that when
they should have most comfort in them, they have most heartbreaking grief and
sorrow. O Youth thinks, they are wise enough now to govern, rule, and to
dispose of themselves, without advising with their Parents. But be it known to
thee, O foolish Youth, God does not think as thou do, and long experience
has instructed us of the Errors of unexperienced Youth herein, in those many
fatal and ruining miscarriages that have followed upon the evil choice they
have made. O young People, pray consider how much you are the Goods and
Possessions of your Parents; That you cannot without a kind of Theft (as one
says) dispose of your selves, without the consent of your Parents. And I have
also made this Observation, That God does seldom (of all Acts of Disobedience)
^uffer that of marrying against the consent of Parents, go off the stage of
this Life unpunished.

And then for Servants that are under the Yoke, who are in great danger of
miscarry^ng in that Relation, let me prevail with them to treasure up these
following Scri^^ures, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. Col. 3. 22, 23, 24, ^5. 1 Timothy 6. 1,
2. And especially study that, Titus 2. 9, 10. and 1 Pet. 2. 18. Exhort Servants
to be obedient to their own Masters, and to please them well in all things; not
answering again, not purloining, but showing all ^ood fidelity, that they may
adorn the Doctrine ^f God our Savior in all things. O remember, that in
serving your Masters after the flesh, in singleness of Spirit, you herein serve
the Lord Christ.

Remedies against that Youthful Sin of Sabbath-breaking.
I Have showed you how prone Youth is to this Sin, and those that are afraid of
pilfering from Man, and robbing their Masters of their Goods, yet make no
Conscience of pilfering, and robbing God of his time. O what multitudes of
Youth make this day to be the day of finding their carnal pleasures, and
recreating themselves; wherefore to direct you how you may flee this Sin.

1. Consider God has sanctified and blessed this day, not only as a day for
his own Worship, but for his own Workmanship, in a new creating us in Christ
Jesus; it is a special day for dispensing of Grace and Pardon to undone,
condemned Sinners, and should we not then sanctify it, and keep it holy? On
this day, the golden Scepter of Grace and Mercy is held forth, and Proclamation
is made of an Act of Oblivion to all rebellious Sinners that shall throw down
their Weapons of Enmity, and come in, and subject themselves to the Lord Jesus,
that their Sins and Iniquities (however aggravated) shall be pardoned, and be
remembered no more for ever: and not only so, but a Marriage Feast is on this
day instituted to be celebrated, a Feast of fat things, wherein the returning
Prodigal is crowned with all the expressions of joy and honor. Bring forth the
fatted Calf, the best Robe, the Ring, let Heaven rejoice, and make merry, etc.
O Youth! what are thy Esau-like morsels abroad in the Field, but as the husks
that Swine do eat, to the dainties of a Father's house? O the time is at hand,
when the crumbs that fall from the Lord's Table, will be more desirable than
all the sweet meats of Sin, and the Flesh that thou meetest with in thy rambles
on God's Holy day: Thou gainest a little fleshly content and merriment, but
losest the blessednesses promised in Isa. 56. 2. Blessed [Ashre there is the
plural number] is the man that does this, that keeps the Sabbath from
polluting it. The blessedness of gracious communion and fellowship with the
Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus, etc. And who can express the heavenly
comfort of that! O would you ever be drunk with Wine? or bewitched with the
sordid pleasures of the Flesh? If you had once drank of this high Country Wine,
the Wine of Heaven's consolations. Hark, Young Man, to those that have tried
it, Psalm. 84. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, etc. And so the Psalm runs on,
One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. I sat down under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste, 2 Cant. 3. But
I must not enlarge.

2. Meditate upon this, how woeful a Sin-Sabbath-breaking is, and how woeful a
condition Sabbath Breakers are in. To profane the Sabbath, is a Sin of an high
nature, it is a vile despising the Riches of God's goodness. Alas! You could
not have a Sabbath, but from his astonishing mercy. Be sure then, to profane a
Sabbath, is a surpassing Provocation, beyond the Sin of the Devil, who never
had the mercy of one day of the Son of Man's afforded him. Moreover it
indicates, and shows that you have no delight in God, in his Service, who
have no delight in his day, and is thy want of Love to God a small Sin? When it
is (as one says) the very heart of the old Man, the badge of Devils, and
damned Spirits. And then consider how woeful the condition of Sabbath Breakers
is, they carry about them the mark of Death and Hell (as 'twere) in their
Foreheads, wherever they go; for it is past all doubt, that Sabbath Breakers are
under the wrath of God, and in a state of alienation to him, and will certainly
perish if they continue in that state.

O Young Man, strongly impress this on thy heart, and say, Is this a tolerable
condition? Is it wisdom to continue it an hour longer? O think with your
selves, what if I had dyed in this Case? what had become of me? how exceedingly
thou art beholden to the patience of God, that he has not cast thee into Hell?
The Lord open your eyes, and imprint this Meditation upon your hearts, then you
would admire the mercy of a Sabbath, and the provisions of grace in the
Ordinances, and you would loath and detest the Tempter, that would entice you
to waste a Moment of so blessed a Day. Wherefore to close this, I shall recite
the Testimony of a wise and learned Person J. Hales.
of this Nation, who was (as is noted of him) natus ad exemplar, born to be an
Example to others; This Excellent Person writing to his Children, (of whom he
travailed in Birth, that Christ might be formed in them) he freely opens his
mind in these following Words. I now write something to you (says he) touching
the Observation of the Lord's day; because I find in the World much Looseness
and Apostasy from this Duty. People begin to be cold, and careless in it,
allowing themselves Sports and Recreations, and secular Employments in it,
without any necessity; which is an ill presage, and a sad Spectacle. He there
makes this profession and declaration to them. I have found (says he) by a
strict and diligent observation, that a due observation of the Duties of this
Day, has ever had joined to it a Blessing upon the ^est of my time, and the
Week that has been so begun, has been blessed and prosperous to me: And on the
other side, when I have been negligent in and of the Duties of this Day, the
rest of the Week has been unsuccesful, and unhappy to my own secular
Employment: and this I do not write lightly, or inconsiderately, but upon long
and sound Experience.

Here I thought to have given you a quotation of many Instances, very
remarkable of God's punishing the breakers of this Holy Day; but it would swell
this Treatise too big for the Poor to purchase it: and there are indeed few
Months that pass, but you have sad memorials hereof at ^yburn of Malefactors,
crying out of this Sin, as introductory to all others, and the source and
spring of all their Miseries.

The next Sin that Youth is addicted to, is Pride.

Remedies against that Youthful Sin of Pride.
THat Youth is apt to admire themselves, for their supposed Excellences, as
Beauty, Parts, Wit, Strength, etc. I have showed before, Man is a proud piece
of Dust, and a little thing will puff him up, a R^bbon, a Feather, a Wire, a
black spot, a bag full of Dirt, a Shop full of Goods, or the Excrements of
Beasts; this is that old Leaven of Corruption, that has leavened the whole
humane nature: hence young Absalon swells, O that I might be Judge of Israel.
Wherefore I shall lay down some directions in order to your fleeing this Sin.

1. Represent to thy self how odious and abominable this Sin is to God, as will
evidently appear, if thou study these Scriptures. 1 Peter 5. God resists the
Pruod, (...) the Word signifies, Sets himself in battle array against such a
person. Proverbs 6. 16, 17. it is there placed in the front of those six things
the Lord hates, A proud look, etc. Proverbs 16. 5. Every one that is Proud in
Heart, is abomination to the Lord; and though Hand join in Hand, yet shall he
not go unpunished. Isaiah 23. 8. Surely the Lord of Hosts has purposed to
stain the Pride of all Glory. And in Isaiah 2. 11. The Day of the Lord shall be
upon every one that is Proud, whose Heart is lifted up. O young People, when
ever you are affecting a Glory, and a kind of Supremacy to your selves,
consider these Scriptures, and remember what a God he is, that has thus
expressed his hatred of this Sin: he is a God of infinite Greatness, and
Majesty, that might in his Sovereignty have left thee in the Womb of Nothing,
had he pleased; or might have crushed thee into nothing in the Cradle. When he
did but let out of his Glory a little to Job, and Isaiah, one cries ou^, Woe is
me! I am an undone man, I have seen the Lord, Isaiah 6. The other breaks forth,
Behold I am vile, I abhor my self in Dust and Ashes, for mine Eyes have seen
the Lord of Host. And in Heaven, where he fully shines forth in his Glory, the
Elders fall down, and cast down their Crowns before him that sits on the
Throne. O proud Dust, one glimpse of the high and lofty One would make thee
quake and tremble.

Secondly, Get thy Heart well seasoned with deep Convictions of what a poor
sinful mortal Creature thou art; it is ignorance of your selv^s, that makes you
proud. Hence you read Rev. 3. 17. Thou say I am rich, and increased with
Goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Here you see the different judgment
of God and man; Whence is it, but from man's ignorance of himself? O proud
Youth, were you brought but once to understand what a leprous, deformed,
diseased Soul lodges in thy dunghill Body, let Conscience answer whether thou
could be Proud or no? a Soul so ignorant of, and averse unto the blessed God,
so unbelieving, unholy, universally miserable and wretched, so like to the
Devil, and yet be proud? a Soul so unreconciled to God, so unready for the
coming of Christ, in such danger of the damnation of Hell, one would think here
should be no more room for Pride than there is reason for it, and that is none
at all, but the quite contrary, namely, lying in Tears, and abasement before
the Lord, and begging of Mercy, better becomes such a Soul. And then for thy
Body, wherein this miserable Soul lodges for a few days, one would think thou
should have little mind to be proud of that, were it only for the sake of so
wretched a Tenant that dwells within: but as wisely consider it, and see
whether there be any thing in it, or no, to be proud of; first then, O young
man, do thou not know it to be a poor, vain, frail, perishing thing; the
Heathen can tell you this without the Book of Scripture: have thou now a
juvenile verdure, and freshness of Complexion, or briskness of Spirits, or
quickness of Parts, or strength of Body? and art thou tempted to Pride by any,
or all of these? Alas, let but a Fever, or an Apoplexy seize you, as they may
within the space of an hour, and then where are all these? Indeed if thou
could by thy youthful strength and ability, hinder any of these; and were so
considerable a Creature, as to beat back Sickness and Death, when they come,
thou might have some pretense for thy boasting; but if thy young Flesh be
but as Grass, that can no ways defend it self from the Sithe, then be ashamed
and abased in the Dust. Have you no^ seen? or at least have you not heard? ^^w
suddenly many of your Age have d^^p'd into the P^^; go to the Churchyard, and
look among the Graves, and see it there be not shorter Graves than would fit
you, and learn humility.

Thirdly, S^udy an humbled Christ, and abhor Pride for ever. Mat. 11. 29. Learn
of me (says Christ) for I am meek an^ lowly. And will you be proud and
haughty? Psalm. 22. 6. I am a Worm, and no Man, it is spoken of Christ. O when
you are tempted to be high-minded, and to over-valuing conceits of your selves,
to think I am some body, and deserve respect and esteem, then look an humbled
Christ in the face, and loath thy self, and say, O proud heart, do thou stand
upon thy Pantofles and Terms, and thy Savior stoop and step down into the form
of a Servant? Dismount, dismount, proud Dust, and come down, and let the same
mind be in you as was in Christ, 2 Phil. 6.

The next Sin Youth is prone unto, is quenching the Spirit.

Remedies against that Youthful Sin of Quenching the Spirit.
I Have showed you how prone Youth is to quench the Motions of the Spirit of
God, stifling those inward Convictions that are wrought in them of their lost
and undone estate by Nature, of the necessity of Conversion, and the New Birth,
and of their indispensible Duty to use the means both public and private, that
God has appointed in order to their Conversion; there are not a few of
London's Youth that are guilty in a high degree of this Sin. Wherefore to
prevent it for time to come, attend to these following directions.

First, Understand wherein this Sin of Quenching the Spirit stands, and that is
the first step to Reformation in this point. Quenching is a metaphorical part
of Speech, it is borrowed from a Fire or Lamp, that uses to give light and
heat; now this applied to the Spirit, it must follow that the Spirit is a Fire
heating, and Light enlightening the Soul; and therefore in reference hereunto,
the Apostle in the 1. These. 5. 19. says, Quench not the Spirit: how that is
done, may be gathered from the metaphor thus, a Fire or Light is two manner of
ways quenched, (1.) By withdrawing of Fuel from it: (2.) By casting of Water
upon it. So it is here with this heavenly Fire, (1.) When we withdraw from the
means, as Prayer, and the Word, and Holy Watchfulness, these are as materials
to keep in the Fire; and when we decline, or restrain these, we quench the
Spirit in his Influences, they decay and dye away within us: Miscarriages of
this kind Divines call Omissions. (2.) When (though we do not decline
Ordinances) we adventure upon commissions of Sin; this now extinguisheth, and
directly quenches the Spirit's light and heat; this is as water cast on, it
presently puts out the Fire.

O that young ones would attend hereunto, for want of regarding these things
many perish, and go to Hell. If ever any thing was to be deplored in this
world, this is to be deplored, that the Spirit of God, when he comes with his
Light and Heat to sanctify and save us, we grieve him, resist him, tempt him,
vex him, quench him, these are all Scripture expressions. O Lord, what account
shall there be at that great and terrible Day for these things! Learn hence
young ones, that when you have this blessed Spirit, either in Sermon-time, or
other times, like a Sun rising and shining into your dark Soul's, showing you
as clear as Noonday, that your Courses have been naught, that thus, and thus,
have thou done; and that without the New Creature, Faith, Repentance, etc. thou
art undone for ever; and showing thee farther, that thou have before thee a
blessed offer of Christ, and the great Salvation, purchased with his Blood,
asuring thee if thou cast away thy Trangressions, and come in, and accept the
Grace offered, thou shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life; and probably
this blessed Spirit goes on further, awakening thy Conscience, stirring up thy
Affections, that thou go from the Sermon smitten, wounded as with an Arrow
sticking within thee; so that thou have some Light and Heat too: (a mercy thou
can never enough value.) If now thou triflest, and growest careless of means,
and through neglect of Prayer, and omission of other Duties, suffer these
Sparks to dye in the Embers; then thou art verily guilty of this horrible Sin,
of quenching the Spirit: much more if (instead of calling for the Bellows, and
blowing while there is a Fire) thou adventurest to cast on Water, i. e. to run
into Evil Company, to yield to thy vile Corruptions, to drink the poisoned Cup,
and eat of the forbidden murdering Morsels; then be suit with an high hand,
with a witness, you are guilty of quenching the Spirit. O the unspeakable
misery this brings! O that ever you can hear these things without Trembling!
This is the first direction, to get a true Knowledge what this Sin is.

2. When you know it, study the grievous and heinous nature of it, that your
wanton Hearts may be awed, and affrighted from the lest approaches toward it
for time to come. O young people, is it now a time of the Spirit's striving in
you, stirring of you* and striving with you? O take heed, for now is Satan most
conversant, and instant to pick out your Eyes, to blow out the Light, And this
he can never do without thy own agency, and compliance with him; though he is a
Creature full of Malice, Subtilty, and of great Power, yet (blessed be God, he
cannot force you; oppose you he will, you must expect it now more than ever,
for now he is afraid of losing you. Luke 11. 42. therefore look for your share:
but though he has an opposing Power, yet he has not an enforcing Power. Hence
in James 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee. But now if instead of
resisting the evil Spirit, you should resist the Good Spirit, for both may be
resisted; O the grievous and heinous Nature of this Sin, words cannot express
it: without all question it is greatly influential toward the filling up the
Measure of Sin, and the Vials of God's Wrath. And it may be said of such, as
the Apostle has it in 2 Pet. 2. 21. It had been better they had never known
the Way of Righteousness, than having known it, to turn away from the Holy
Commandment given to them. They are in danger of these threatened Judgments,
John 12. 40. and Prove. 1. 28. and Psalm. 81. 12. and Hos. 4. 17. and Ezekiel. 24.
13. and Heb. 3. 11. and Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. O that young ones, would read and
tremble at these Scriptures, to deter them from quenching the Spirit, as they
would ever escape having their lot and portion, in such dreadful and tremendous
Judgments, as are contained in those places. O take warning, Young Men, lest
you be hardened to destruction: God has removed many a one of your Equals
already; neglected Talents have been taken away from many Drones and Dallyers,
according to that 13. Matthew. 12. Whosoever has not, (i. e. improves not,) from
him shall be taken away, that which he seems to have. There is no prevention of
this Judgment, but by improving your Talents, and knowing the things of your
Peace in your day.

3. Never rest in Convictions, till they bring you to rest in Christ. Many,
when under some sense of Sin and Misery, and some apprehensions of Mercy, they
will go and pray, and may be weep too; and upon this (without real union to and
application of Christ and his Blood) they grow well again, and think now all
the danger is over, I am a new man; I was Prayerless, now I Pray; I was a
careless wretch, careless of God, and my Soul; but now I bless God things are
quite otherwise with me, and my House is swept and garnished, and the unclean
Spirit that is gone, will return no more, etc. Here multitudes take up their
Rest short of Christ, patching up a Righteousness of their own, hoping by their
pedling Wares to maintain themselves, and all this while ignorant of Christ,
and his Righteousness, or at least see no such absolute necessity of him; so
that the Peace and Rest they get, is not from Christ's Blood, but their own
Prayers and Tears; not from his atonement, but their own amendment, etc. And
as multitdes take up their stand here, so from hence may they date their fatal
fall. Wherefore I beseech you rest not in any thing of your own, short of
Christ; and to the end you may not, I add in the next place,

4. Study that great Scripture, in Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood: and what follows, pray mark, twice
it is expressed, to declare his Righteousness in Remission of Sins: and in the
close of the 26. verse, That God might be just, in justifying the Sinner that
believes in Christ. For the opening of this a little, I beseech you consider,
the case between God and man stood thus, God made man upright, man sins, falls
under the sanction of that Law he broke, viz. In the Day thou eatest thereof
thou shall dye. Now such is the Holiness of God's Nature, that he cannot but
hate Sin, and such is the Impartiality of his Justice and Righteousness, that
Heaven and Earth may sooner pass away, than the least Jot or Tittle of his Law
pass away unaccomplished, though foolish Sinners make nothing of breaking it:
Well then, the great case is, How shall Sin be pardoned, and the Sinner saved?
If Justice come upon the Sinner for satisfaction, it will swallow him up in the
Gulf of eternal misery: Therefore had this question been put to the innumerable
Host of Angels in Heaven, what way sinful man could be saved, and yet Justice
satisfied, and the Law fulfilled? They would have been everlastingly puzzled and
posed; no less then the infinite Wisdom of God could ever have found it out,
which is called Wisdom in a Mystery. Now that Mystery is revealed in this
glorious Text, God the Father has sent, and set forth his own Son in our
Natures, to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his
Righteousness and Justice, as well as his Grace and Mercy, in pardoning and
saving such, and only such as believe in Jesus. So that if you neglect Christ,
and Faith in his Blood, do what you will, you will be still under the Curse of
the Law, and the Wrath of God, you can never escape Condemnation, it is
impossible it should be otherwise: without the shedding of Blood, there can be
no Remission, Heb. 9. 22. It cannot be the Blood of a mere Creature that can
take away Sin; it must be the Blood of that Immaculate Lamb of God: And when
all this is understood, there is another great Truth you must know, and that
is, that there must be Faith in this Blood, or there can be no actual Remission
of your Sins: and therefore in vain do Sinners support their hopes of pardon in
Heaven, with their own Righteousness, saying, We have sinned, but God is
merciful, and we now repent and reform, and turn to God, etc. Alas poor Soul,
can these make Satisfaction, and make up a Ransom and Price for a Sinner's
Redemption; what need Christ have shed his Blood then? It Is true, these Duties
are excellent in their due place, and must be performed: but will you put them
in Christ's room, and make Saviors of them, then you put an undoing Cheat upon
your poor Souls, and will miscarry for ever under your Convictions, and amidst
all your Performances; for he that believes not, the Wrath of God abides on
him, and he shall not see Life. And therefore if you would not quench the
blessed Spirit, and perish after all his strivings with you, and showing you
your Sin and Misery. I add in the next Direction.

5. Prayer, this is an excellent means, to prevent miscarrying under the
operations, and workings of the Spirit of God. O let nothing be able to keep
God, and your Souls asunder: Are you under the Convictions of the Spirit, and
don't know what course to take for Peace with God, and freedom from
Condemnation? Away to the Throne of Grace, and there pour out thy Complaints
into the Bosom of God, and say,

O Lord! I am a sinful wretched vile miserable Creature, I have destroyed my
self; time was I was ignorant, and knew it not, but now thy Spirit has awakened
my Conscience, and opened my blind Eyes to see my Sin and Misery; so that I am
now convinced, that I must be damned without Faith in a crucified Christ; but
alas, Lord, I have such a cursed base deceitful hard and unbelieving Heart in
me, that I cannot tell what in the world to do for an Interest in Christ. Lord,
I am without strength, I beseech thee to pity a poor undone Sinner, that is now
driven to thy Door by want and misery. And here plead hard, and make
Supplication for an Heart to believe, and that in spite of all Discouragements;
first tell him, what thou have heard of his Benignity and tender Compassion,
That the King of Israel is a merciful King, and that thou have heard of an
Eternal Design of Grace to poor Sinners, and how in the Fullness of Time he sent
his Son to seek and to save what was lost, and opened a Fountain of Grace, and
established an everlasting Covenant of Grace in the Blood of Christ, and now
has set forth in the Gospel his Son to be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, and has made proclamation to all rebellious Sinners to come in, and
accept of Mercy through Christ, and commanded upon pain of Damnation to take
Christ, and with him all saving good. Then plead thy compliance with the
Gospel-Call, and say, O blessed Lord! in obedience to thy Call, lo I am come
here, a poor trembling starving Beggar, that of all that ever came in, and
knocked at thy Door; none more in need of a Savior and Salvation than I.

Now here suggest thy Wants, and say, Lord I want Faith, I have (through thy
Mercy) awakenings of Conscience, but I want to be in Christ, that my Nature may
be renewed: I see my undone state without him, but I want union with him. Lord!
while I am without Christ, I am without strength. O draw me, O let it be the
Day of thy Power; have thou not said, no man can come except thou draw? and
dear Lord, I find the impotency of my own cannot; O let me find the Efficacy of
thy own Power, and feel the virtue of thy Almighty Arm drawing me to Christ.
Lord, persuade me; make my Heart to stoop, subdue my strong Corruptions,
dispossess and disarm that malignant party in my Soul, demolish those strong
Holds of Sin and Hell there. O Lord! this is a sad condition, to be
unreconciled to thee, and unespoused to Christ. O pity and help one that sees
reason enough to believe, but has not strength enough; my Insufficiencies are
equal with my Necessities, though I can never get to Heaven without Faith and
Holiness; and though I know I want both, yet Lord thou know, I am no more
able to change my sinful nature, and be the Author of Faith to my self, than I
am to create a World, or quicken and raise the Dead; but if thou will make bare
thy Arm, it will soon be done, my proud Heart shall soon be humble, my hard
Heart shall soon become soft, my unbelieving Heart be made believing: O speak
but the Word, and a poor Sinner that has feared burning in Hell hundreds of
times, shall sing thy Praise; O thou that command me to turn, Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned.

And here plead his Promise, and Christ's Purchase after some such manner as
this.

Blessed Lord! have thou not promised, that thou will not cast out him that
comes to thee; and that thou will give thy holy Spirit to him that asks, and
that it shall be opened to him that knocks; and that thou will take away the
Heart of Stone, and give a Heart of Flesh, and give a New Heart, and remember
Sin no more: Lord, if these be not thine own Promises, I Will be content to go
away empty. And are not all thy Promises yea, and Amen? Is it not one of thy
Titles, God who cannot lie has promised. And thou never yet did break thy
Word with any poor Sinner, nor suffer the Word that has gone out of thy Mouth
to fail, but art the same to day, yesterday, and for ever, in whom there is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning. O remember thy Word, wherein and whereon
thou have made me to hope; and remember me a poor Sinner now at thy Feet, laden
with Iniquity, groaning and laboring under a burden, too heavy for me to
bear: and O remember thy Son's Blood, and if that be not sufficient to
discharge all I owe, and procure all I want, then let Justice seize me. Tell
God, He will be better paid with Christ's Blood, than thy own, and that his
Justice will have more Glory in saving thee for the sake of Christ's Obedience,
than in damning thee for the sake of thy own disobedience; that if he throw
thee into the Prison of Hell, to pay what thou owe, he will never have a full
satisfaction; but if the save thee, and take thee up to Heaven, upon the
account of Christ's Blood, he will have all paid at one sum, and receive a
plenary satisfaction. And tell him, That thou art resolved never to leave him
to the last gasp, until he Bless thee with the Grace and Mercy thou need,
till it be out of doubt that thou art in Christ, and thoroughly converted, say,
This I must have, there is no enduring of it, I will mourn, and be in
bitterness, while I have a being, till I find this Grace in thy sight; O I will
never depart from thy Door, whither should I go, thou alone have the Words of
Eternal Life.

And know for thy Comfort, that when once it comes to this, never question it,
thou shall have an answer of Grace to thy comfort and content. God's bowels
will yern toward you, as they did to Ephraim, and the Prodigal Son at his
return.

And thus now I have done, and I know that e're long God will bring me and you
by Death to Judgment; but whether ever he will bring me to this place to speak
more, or you to hear more, I know not: I have endeavored to warn you, and woo
you, and win you to Christ; I have told you again, and again, this can never
be, except you flee your youthful Lusts: I have described them to you, and laid
down Directions how to Flee these Lusts, excepting the five last, Atheism, and
Ridiculing serious Godliness, Swearing, Time-wasting Uncleanness: and, which is
last, a Woeful giddiness and greediness of temper to drink down Errors. But
having not in public as yet insisted on these at large, I forbear the Printing
of them.

Wherefore in the conclusion, I demand of you, Young People, what is your
resolution? Dare any of you maintain a league and friendship with your Lusts,
in rebellion against the express Command and Call of God; to flee them; if so,
O remember these Truths once Preached, and now Printed (as despised as they are
now) will be a swift and fearful Witness against you another day, and confound
you, like as the appearance of the Fingers of a man's Hand on the Wall, did
that stout Sinner Belshazar. For who ever hardened himself against God and
prospered?

Well, once more, and may be no more for ever, I ask you, in the Name of him
that made you, and will judge you, will you flee your Lusts or no? Will you lay
down these Weapons, and take Jesus, and be ruled by him or no? O let thy Voice
be with the Prodigal, I will arise and go to my Father, and say, I have sinned.
Or with Ephraim, What have I any more to do with Idols? Behold thou art the
Lord our God, we come, we come. O that God would make me the happy Instrument
of converting Grace, this day, while it is called to day. O who can endure to
see Satan get Souls to Hell from under our Pulpit. O awake, awake, up and be
doing, it may be the last knock Christ by me will give: I am wounded to think
of leaving any of you in Hell's way: The Lord give you understanding in all
things.

FINIS.

